THE WHOLE TREATISE OF THE CASES OF CONSCIENCE, DISTINGVISHED INTO THREE
Books: The first whereof is revised and corrected in sundry places, and the
other two annexed. Taught and delivered by M. W. Perkins in his Holy Day
Lectures, carefully examined by his own briefes, and now published together
for the common good, by T. Pickering Batchelour of Divinity. Whereunto is
adjoined a twofold Table: one of the Heads and Number of the Questions
propounded and resolved; another of the principal Texts of Scripture which
are either explaned, or vindicated from corrupt interpretation.

Romans 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA

ALMA MATTER CANTABRIGIA



PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge, 1606.

And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crown by Simon
Waterson.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD Lord Dennie, Baron of Waltham, etc.
RIght Honorable: There is no one Doctrine, revealed in the Word of God, or
dispensed by the Prophets and Apostles, of greater use and consequence in the
life of man, then is that, which prescribes a Form of releeuing and
rectifying the Conscience.

The benefit, which from hence issues unto the Church of God, is unspeakable.
For first, it serves to discover the cure of the dangerousest sore that can
be, the wound of the Spirit. Which how great a cross it is, the Wise man
reports out of true experience, when he says, that the Spirit of a man will
sustain Prou. 18. 14.
his infirmity, but a wounded Spirit who can bear it? And his meaning is,
that no outward grief, can fall into the nature of man, which will not be with
patience endured, to the utmost, so long as the mind is not troubled, or
dismayed. But when once the Spirit is touched, and the heart, (which being
well apaied, is the very fountain of peace to the whole man,) smitten with
fear of the wrath of God for sin; the grief is so great, the burden so
intolerable, that it will not by any outward means, be eased or assuaged.

Secondly, it gives for all particular Cases, special and sound direction;
whether man be to walk with God, in the immediate performance of the duties of
his Service; or to converse with man, according to the state and condition of
his life, in the Family, Church, or Commonwealth. The want of which
direction, of what force it is, to turn the actions of men, which are good in
themselves, to sins in regard of the agents, S. Paul affirms in that
general Conclusion, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Wherein he Romans 14.
23.
would teach us, that whatsoever is done, or undertaken by men in this life,
whether it concern the knowledge and worship of God, or any particular duty
to be performed, by virtue of their Callings, for the common good; whereof they
have not sufficient warrant, and assurance in Conscience, grounded upon the
Word, that it is to be done, or not to be done; to them it is a sin.

Thirdly, it is of all other Doctrines, (being rightly used) the most
comfortable. For it is not founded in the opinions, and variable conceits of
men, neither does it consist, of Conclusions and Positions, which are only
probable and coniecturall: (for the Conscience of the doubting or distressed
party, can not be established and rectified by the^:) but it rests upon most
sufficient and certain Grounds, collected and drawn out of the very Word of
God, which, as it is mighty Hebr. 4. 12.
in operation, pearcing the heart, and discerning the thoughts and intents
thereof, so is it alone available and effectual to pacify the mind, and to
give full satisfaction to the Conscience.

And as the benefit is great; so the want of this Doctrine, together with the
true manner of applying the same, is, and has been the cause, of many and
great inconveniences. For even of those that fear God, and have received to
believe, there be many, who in the time of their distresses, when they have
considered the weight and desert of their sins, and withal apprehended the
wrath of God, due unto them; have been brought unto hard exigents, mourning,
and wayling, and Psalm. 6. 6. and 22. 1, 2.
crying out, as if God had forsaken them, until they have been relieved by
the Spirit of Christ, in the meditation of the word, and promise Psalm. 119. v.
49, 50.
of God. But those especially, who have not been instructed in the knowledge
of the truth, nor acquainted with the course of Gods dealing, with his
distressed children, by reason of ignorance and blindness in matters of Religion
and piety, when the Lord has let loose the cord of their Consciences, and set
before their eyes, both the number of their sins committed, and the just
anger of God purchased thereby, what have they done? surely despairing of the
mercy of God, and their own salvation, they have either grown to frenzy,
and madness, or else sorted unto themselves fearful ends, some by hanging, some
by drowning, others by embruing their hands in their own blood. And if not in
regard of grief and trouble of mind; yet for want of better resolution in
particular cases, within the compass of their general or personal callings,
(though otherwise, men endued with some measure of knowledge and obedience,)
they have either abused, or else quite relinquished and forsaken their callings,
and thereby become scandalous, and offensive unto others.

Now then, as by these and sundry other Instances of proof, the matter it
self appears to be of great weight and importance, so it is most meet, that
the best and fittest course should be taken, in the teaching and enforcing of
the same. In which regard we have just cause, to challenge the Popish Church,
who in their Case-writings have erred, both in the substance and circumstances
of this Doctrine, as shall appear in the sequel.

First, because the duty of releeuing the Conscience, is by them commended to
the sacrificing Priest, which, though according to their own Canons Decret. de
poenit. did. 6. cap. 1. Caveat spiritual is iudex, vt sicut non commisit
crimen nequitiae, ita ^o^ careat munere scientiae.
he should be a man of knowledge, and free from imputation of wickedness, yet
often times it falls out that he is either unlearned, or else wicked and lewd of
conversation, and consequently unfit for such a purpose.

Secondly, they teach that their Priests appointed to be comforters and
releeuers of the distressed, are made by Christ himself Iudices in caufis
poenitentium. Bell. de poen. lib. 3. cap. 2. Council. Trid. sess. ^4. can. 9.
Prolog. in Sum Antonni. Archicpisc. Florentini. Mark. 2. 10. Reu. 3. 8.
judges of the Cases of conscience, having in their own hands a iudicarie
po^er and authority, truly and properly to bind or to loose, to remitte or to
retain sins, to open or to shut the kingdom of heaven. Whereas the
Scripture utters a contrary voice, that Christ only has the keys of
David, which properly and truly opens, and no man shuts, and properly and
truly shuts, and no man opens. And the Ministers of God are not called to
be absolute Judges of the Conscience, but only Messengers and Embassado^rs of
reconciliation; 2. Cor. 5. 20.
whereupon it follows, that they cannot be Theophl. comment. in Joan. 3. 34.
and Hieron. l. 3. comment. in Math. super verba. Tibi dabo claues.
the authors and gi^ers of remission of sins, but only the Ministers and
Dispensers of the same.

Thirdly, the Papists in their writings have scattered here and there, sundry
false and erroneous Grounds of Doctrine, much prejudicial to the direction or
resolution of the Emanuel Sa. in Aphor. co^^essar^orum. Summa Angelica. capit.
^ides. paragr. 6, 7.
Conscience in time of need, as namely, I. That a man in the course of his
life, may build himself upon the faith of his teachers, and for his salvation
rest, contented with an implicit and vn-expressed faith. Which doctrine, as it
is an only mean, to keep men in perpetual blindness and ignorance, so it
serves to no other purpose in the time of Temptation, but to plunge the heart
of man into the pit of despair, it being incapable of comfort, for want of
particular knowledge and understanding of the word and promise of God. I^. That
every man ought to stand in fear and doubt of the pardon of Council. Trid.
sess. 6. cap. 9.
his sins, and that no man can be assured by the certentie of faith, either
of the present favor of God, or of his own salvation. True it is, that in
respect of our own unworthiness and indisposition, we have just cause, not
only to doubt and fear, but to despair and be confounded before the
judgment seat of God. Yet that a man should not be certainly resolved by
faith of the mercy of God, in and for the merir of Christ, is a comfortless
doctrine to a distressed soul, and contrary unto the saving Matthew. 14. 31.
Iam. 1. 6. Romans (...). 20.
word of the Gospel, which teaches, that certentie flows from the nature of
faith, and not doubting. III. That every man is bound in conscience upon pain
of damnation, to make special confession of Council. Trid. ^ess. ^4. can. 7.
his mortal sins, with all the particular circumstances thereof once every
year to his Priest. This position and practice, besides that it has no warrant
of sacred writ, nor yet any ground of Orthodoxe antiquity, for 800. years,
more or less after Christ: it makes notably to the disturbing of the peace of
Conscience, in time of extremity, considering that is impossible, either to
understand or remember all, many being hidden and Psalm. 19. 12.
unknown. And the mind being in this case informed, that forgiveness
depends upon such an enumeration, may thus be brought into doubt and
distrust, and will not be able to rest by faith in the sole mercy of God, the
only sovereign medicine of the soul. Again, the grief of the mind, does
not always arise from all the sins that a man has committed, neither does
the Lord set before the sinners eyes, whatsoever evil has bin done by him;
but some one or more particulars. And these are they, that do lie heavy upon
the heart; and to be eased of them, will be work enough, though he does not
exhibit unto the Confessor, a Catalogue of all the rest. IV. That some sins
are venial, because they are only besides the Law of God, not against it,
and because Peceatum veniale, quod non tol^t ordinem ad vltimum finem, vnde non
meretur poena^ aeternam, sed temporalem. Jacob. de Graphiis: Decision. aurcar.
Cas. Consc. l. 1. cap. 6.
they bind over the sinner only to temporal, and not to eternal punishments.
This conclusion, first is false; For though it be granted, that some offenses
are greater, some lesser, some in a higher degree, others in a lower. Again,
that sins in regard of the event, being repented of, or in respect of the
person sinning, being in Christ, and therefore accounted just, are pardonable,
because they are not imputed to condemnation; yet there is no sin of what
degree soever, which is not simply, and of it self mortal, whether we respect
the nature of the sin, or the measure and proportion of divine justice. For
in nature it is an anomie, that is to say, an aberration from the perfect 1.
Ioh. 3. 4.
rule of righteousness, and therefore is subject to the curse, both of
temporary and eternal death. It is an offense against the highest Majesty,
and consequently, man stands by it engaged to everlasting torment. Secondly,
it is a weak and insufficient ground of resolution, to a troubled Conscience.
For whereas true and saving joy is the daughter of sorrow, and the heart of man
cannot be lifted up, in assurance of Gods favor, to the apprehensio^ and
conceit of heavenly comforts, unless it be first abased, and by true
humiliation, brought to nothing in it self; The remembrance of this, that the
offense committed is venial, may in some cases too much enlarge the heart, and
give occasion to presume, when happily there will be reason to the contrary. And
if not that, yet in case of falling by infirmity after grace received, the
mind being forestalled with this erroneous conceit, that the sin is less,
then it is indeed, because venial, may in the issue be less quieted, and
more perplexed. V. That a man may satisfy the justice of God, for the
temporal punishment Council. Trid. sess. 1^. can. 13.
of his sins committed. To omit the untruth of ^^is position; How it makes
to the casing of the heart, or the asswaging of the grief of mind in
temptation, I appeal to common experience. For when a man, being assured of
the pardon of his sins, shall yet consider, that there is something more
behind to be done on his part, how can he in probability, rely himself wholly
upon Christ's satisfaction? How can he reap unto himself from thence any
assurance of reconciliation to God, whom he formerly offended? If we may and
must do something in our own persons, whereby to appease the wrath of God,
why has our Savior taught us for our hearts releife, wholly and only to make
the plea of pardon for our sins? True it is indeed, that Popish Confessors
do teach their Penitents, when they feel the wrath of God upon them for
sin, to stop the mouth of Conscience, by performance of a formal
humiliation and repentance, yea to offer unto God some ceremonial duties in
way of satisfaction. But when sorrow seazeth upon the soul, and the man falls
into temptation, then it will appear that these directions were not current;
for notwithstanding them, he may want sound comfort in Gods mercy, and run
into despair without recovery. And for this cause, upon experience it has
bin proved, that even Papists themselves in the hour of death, have bin
content to renounce their own works, yea the whole body of humane
satisfactions, and to cleave only to the mercy of God in Christ for their
salvation.

By these instances, and many more that might be alleged to this purpose, it
is apparent, upon how weak and unstable Grounds the Case-diuinitie of the
Popish Church stands; and how indirect a course they take, for the resolution
and direction of the troubled Conscience.

Now by the benefit and abuse of this Doctrine, we see how necessary it is,
that in Churches which profess Christian religion, it should be more taught,
and further enlarged, then it is. And to this purpose it were to be wished,
that men of knowledge in the Ministry, that have by the grace of God attained
unto the Tongue of the learned, would employ their pains this way: not only
in searching into the depth of such points as stand in bare speculation, but in
annexing thereunto the grounds and conclusions of practice, whereby they might
both inform the judgment, and rectify the conscience of the hearers. By this
means it would come to pass, that the poor distressed soul might be
relieved, piety and devotion more practiced, the kingdom of Sin, Satan, and
Antichrist weakened, and impaired, and the contrary kingdom of Christ Jesus
more and more established.

What the Author and Contriuer of the Discourse ensuing has done in this
behalf, it is evident by the whole course of his writings, that he has left
behind him: all which, as they do openly show unto the world, how great a
measure of knowledge and understanding, with other endowments both of nature
and grace, the Lord had enriched him withal; so they do carry with them the
sweet savor of piety and sanctification, wherewith he approved his heart unto
God, and his life unto men. Wherein also upon occasion, he has propounded, and
explained sundry notable rules of direction and resolution of the Conscience,
as will appear to the view of the learned and well-advised Reader.

To let pass all the rest: this present Treatise gives very sufficient
testimony, of his knowledge and dexterity in that kind; which could not be
attained unto, without great pains, much observation, and long experience. A
labor which commends it self to the Church of God in two respects
principally. One, because his grounds and principles are drawn either
directly, or by just consequence out of the written Word, and so are of greater
force, to convince the conscience, and to give satisfaction to the mind, either
doubting, or distressed. The other, for that it is delivered with such
perspicuitie, and disposed in such order and Method, as fitteth best for the
understanding and memory of any, whosoever shall peruse it.

Now this whole Treatise of the Questions, I have made bold to present unto
your Lordsh, and to publish abroad under your protection. First, because God,
who vouchsafes special favor to them that honor him, has adorned your
estate with Honor, your person inwardly with many rich graces of his Spirit,
and outwardly with the profession and practice of true Religion; a thing
directly confirmed by your unfeigned love of the truth, and continual favors
to the Teachers of the same, the Ministers and Dispensers of the Gospel.
Secondly, because as the Author of these Cases, was himself in many respects,
bound unto your Hon. while he lived; so his wife and children for his sake,
have received much kindness at your hands, since his death; a manifest proof of
the truth and synceritie of your affection toward him in the Lord. And in the
last place, it was my desire, by setting them forth under your name, to give
some testimony of duty to your Hon. presuming that as you loved the Author,
so you will be pleased to patronize the Work, and favorably to interpret, of
the pains and good intention of the publisher. And thus craving pardon for my
boldness, I humbly take my leave, and commend your Lordsh, to the grace and
favor of God in Christ. From Emanuel College in Cambr. November. 20. 1606.

Your Hon. in all duty to be commanded, Tho. Pickering.

To the godly and wellaffected Reader whosoever.
I Do now at the length offer unto thy view (Christian Reader) the whole
Treatise of Case-divinitie, so far as the Author proceeded in the delivery
thereof before his death. If thou have bin longer held in expectation thereof,
then either thy self desiredst, or was meet, I must entreat thy favorable
interpretation of my forbearance, partly in regard of many private
distractions, and sundry occurrents wherewith I was detained from this duty,
and partly also in respect of my desire to publish it in such sort to thy
contentment, that it might afterward require no further filing or forbishing by
secondarie Corrections. Wherein, notwithstanding mine endeavor to the
contrary, my hope has been in part prejudiced, by reason of some faults
escaped in the Printing, through want of careful attendance on the Press in
my necessary absence. The principal I have noted in a Table before the first
Book, and the other of lesser moment, I commend to thy private pardon.

Touching the Treatise it self, I have dealt as faithfully as I could, keeping
close to the Preachers own words, without any material addition, detraction,
or amplification. His Method remains the same in the body of the discourse,
not admitting the least alteration. Only it was thought convenient to
distinguish it into Books according to the several distinct parts, the Books
into Chapters, the Chapters that were most capable of division into Sections;
and my meaning therein was, to help the memory of the Reader, and to avoid
tediousnes the daughter of longsome discourses.

Now if in the perusing, thou either find any thing amiss, or thy self happily
not fully satisfied in particular; then remember what is the Lot of learned
men's works which are Scripta posthuma (whereof these latter times have yielded
many examples) to be left after a sort, naked and imperfect, when the Authors
themselves are gone, who might have brought them to perfection. Consider
again, that in regard of the weight of this worthy Argument, it were much
better kindly and thankfully to accept and enjoy these labors, howsoever
imparted, then by their suppressing to be wholly deprived of such a benefit.
And withal rest with me in hope, that as himself has first In the Treat.
Page. 4.
traced the way, and walked by the banks of this maine Sea, so others upon
this occasion, will be encouraged to attempt the like course, or at least to
enlarge this work by addition of more particulars. Mean while, not doubting
of thy Christian acceptance of my pains for thy good, I commend them to thy
love, thy self unto God and the word of his grace. Eman. Coll. November. 20.
1606.

Thine in Christ Jesus, Tho. P.

A TABLE OF THE Sum or Contents of the whole Treatise, both for Heads and
Number of the Questions.
The first Book.
The Preface touching the ground and order of the Treatise. Page 1. CHAP. I. Of
Confession, and the degrees of Goodness. CHAP. II. Of the nature and
differences of Sin. CHAP. III. Of the subjection and power of Conscience.
CHAP. IV. Of the distinction of Questions, or Cases. CHAP. V. Of the first
maine Question touching Man simply considered, viz. What a man must do that he
may come into Gods favor, and be saved? 50 Concerning Humiliation.

Concerning Faith.

Concerning New-Obedience.


CHAP. VI. Of the Second maine Question, viz. CHAP. VII. Of the Third maine
Question, viz.
CHAP. VIII. Of the first Special distress arising of a Divine Tentation.
CHAP. IX. Of the second special Distress, arising from outward Afflictions.


CHAP. X. Of the third special Distress, arising of the Tentation of
Blasphemies.
CHAP. XI. Of the fourth Special Distress, arising from a man's own sins.
CHAP. XII. Of the fifth special Distress, arising from a man's own body.
Quest.


The Second Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Order of the Questions. CHAP. II. Of the Godhead. Quest.

CHAP. III. Of the Scriptures.
CHAP. IV. Of Religion, and the knowledge of God. Quest.

CHAP. V. Of the Inward worship of God. Quest.

CHAP. VI. Of the Outward worship of God, and first of Prayer Quest.
1. The voice.

2. The Gesture.

3. The place.

4. The time.


. CHAP. VII. Of the hearing of the Word preached. Quest.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Sacraments in general. Quest.

CHAP. IX. Of Baptism. Quest.
307


CHAP. X. Of the Lords Supper. Quest.
2. How a man may rightly use it to his comfort and salvation? 339 In
Preparation.
341
In Receiving.

After Receiving.
What is he to do, that after receiving finds no comfort?

CHAP. XI. Of Adoration. Quest.
What Adoration is due


CHAP. XII. Of Confession before the Adversary. Quest.


CHAP. XIII. Of an Oath. Quest.





CHAP. XIV. Of Vows. Quest.


CHAP. XV. Of Fasting. Quest.
Touching the manner of Fasting.


CHAP. XVI. Of the Sabbath day. Quest.



The third Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature and Differences of Virtue, and the Order of the
Questions. CHAP. II. Of Prudence. Quest.

CHAP. III. Of Clemency. Quest.


CHAP. IV. Of Temperance. In the use of Riches.

In the use of meat and drink.



In the use of Apparel.

In the use of pleasures and Recreations.
2. What kinds of Recreations are lawful and convenient, and what not? 584

CHAP. V. Of Liberality. Quest.




CHAP. VI. Of Justice. Quest.
How a man may with good conscience give Judgment of himself? 623
What honor is due
etc. etc. etc.


The Table of the Texts of Scripture.
Chapter. Verse. Page. Genesis. 1 16 234 4 23 243 6 15 239 19 1 355 21 9 241 42
25 388 43 8 242 49 18 149 Exodus. 4 25 28 6 14 254 7 19 243 9 6 244 10 22 245
16 29 439 20 7 390 35 3 440 Leviticus. 23 32 467 25 35 602 Numbers. 24 24 227
Deuteron. 8 10 556 10 20 257 15 4^ 414. 004 17 16. 17. 523 30 19 388 Judges. 11
1. etc. 408 16 29 245 Joshua. 8 5 486 Ruth. 1 17 683 I. Sam. 2 25 29 16 19 247
19 24 573 25 26 389 II. Sam. 1^ 16. and 20. 427 16 10 513 19 23 391 I. King. 2^
19 629 II. King. (...) 18. and 19. 368 10 18 365 II. Chron. 2^ 2 248 Ezra. 8 2
427 Psalms. 6 1 107 and 117 10 17 98. 286 15 1 78 2^ 616. etc. 19 13^ 22 76 11
404 8 77 1 etc. 117 26 11 404 30 11 587. 8 34 9 525 37 16 525 39 13 530 50 15
123 90 14 138 109 1 272. 507 112 9 532 Proverbs. 3 11 136 4 23 168 6 13 526 12
16 518 16 6 614 18 14 88 20 18 169. 506 Eccles. 3 1 129. 587 7 16 484
Canticles. 2 7 388 Esaias. 1 15 264 20 2 573 49 8 95 50 4 1 45 7 121 66 23 244
Jeremy. 3 4 588 4 2 384 and 383 30 11 121 35 1 etc. 422 31 4 588 Dan. 3 6 365
4 24 613 30 193 Zachariah. 2 8 35 Habbac. 2 4 116 Malachi. 1 11 280 3 17 184
Math. 4 23 245 10 352 5 34 388 4 144 25 496 21 and 22 513 6 28 564 33 478 9 12
and 13 176 15 433 10 23 368 28 258 39 530 12 9 534 18 36 593 15 30. 496 17 324
19 12 420 21 422. 534 23 527 23 3 340 Mark. 13 33 479 Luke. 2 37 431 3 11 67.
566. 609. 4 18 113 6 29 494 24 527 9 23 65 11 41 596 12 33 608. 533 14 14 614
33 532 26 527 16 9 614. 528 John. 1 48 249 3 5 312 8 4, and 15 149 9 49 490 31
264 16 20 144 Acts. 1 10 448 2 46 549 4 29 273 5 4 527 7 16 249 10 15 539 33
293 13 14 451 17 30 26. 94. 15 29 541 18 3. and 4. 452 20 7 465 21 24 366 23 12
14. 406 24 14 66 Romans. 5 1 80 3 127 7 18 21 19 166. and 184 1 27 30 74 16 75
28 130. 124 26 286. 277 1 20 204 11 15 95 12 3 480 13 12 417 10 ibid. 14 15 450
23 46 vlt. 70 16 26 95 5 541 13 14 581 1. Cor. 2 15 619 3 18 291 5 324 6 7 30
18 494 7 9 412 27 413 30 530 8 vlt. 69 9 27 427 11 26 340. 337 13 5 496 15 31
389 2. Cor. 1 23 384. 4 17 362 7 9 99 Galat. 3 26 82 4 10 449 5 1 414 12 272
Ephesians. 4 26 510 5 18 553 29 419 6 18 282 5 16 479 Philip. 1 10 531 4 8 634. 481
12 531 5 497 Coloss. 1 26 95 2 16 414 3 16 296 1 Thessalonians. 4 11 481 5 17 282 20
294 23 186 2. Thessal. 7 8 227 1. Tim. 1 1 19 2 4 94 15 362 4 8 404 5 544 22 32
5 12 420 24 33 19 622 21 389 23 537 6 8 564 9 524 17, 18, 19 615 2. Tim. 2 19
85 4 14 273 Titus. 1 15 544 Hebr. 3 11 383 5 7 288 12 11 126 James. 1 15 38 19
291 (...) 2 362 10 64 1 624 5 16 5 1. Peter. 2 1 292 3 15 360 2. Peter. 1 10 86
1. John. 3 2 81 14 9 5 11, 15 79. 289 Apocal. 19 10 355 21 6 98

THE FIRST BOOK of the Cases of Conscience, concerning Man simply considered
in himself without relation to an other.
The Preface declaring the Ground and Order of the Treatise following.
Isaiah, 50. 4. The Lord God has given me a tongue of the learned, that I
should know, to minister a word in due time, to him that is weary.
IN that part of the Prophecy which goes before, the holy Ghost sets down
and foretells the Calling of the Gentiles, which was to begin at the death
of Christ, and from thence to continue unto this day, and so consequently to
the end of the world. In the former verses of this Chapter, there is mention
made of the reiection of the Jews; I mean not a general, but a particular
rejection, namely then, when they were in affliction in the days of Isaiah.
Now in this, and so in all other Prophecies of the like kind, which entreat of
this point; Christ himself is brought in, speaking in his own person; and the
words of this Chapter from the beginning, to this present verse and the rest
that follow, are the words of Christ the Mediator.

In the verses going before, he disputes the case of their rejection, and and
the sum of the whole disputation is: that either he or they themselves were
the causes thereof; but he was not the cause, and therefore they themselves by
their sins. The reason, whereby he proves that they themselves were the
cause, is framed in this sort. You Jews cannot bring any writing or bill of
divorce, to show that I rejected you: therefore I appeal even to your own
consciences, whether you have not brought this judgment upon your selves, by
your iniquities. verse. 1. On the other side, the reason why God was not the
cause is: because he for his part called them in great mercy and jove: but
when he called they would not obey. ver. 2.

Now in the end of the second verse, is contained an answer to a secret reply,
that some obstinate Jew might make after this manner: God has not now the
like power in saving and delivering us, as he has had in form^r times:
therefore we cannot hope or expect any deliverance from him, and how then
shall we do in the mean while? To this the Lord himself makes answer, ver.
2, 3, 4. that his hand is not shortened, nor his power lessened in regard of
greater works, much less in respect of their deliverance; and though the
present affliction which they endured, was great and tedious, yet they were not
to be overmuch dismayed in themselves, but rather to be comforted: because God
had given him the tongue of the learned, to minister a word in season to the
weary and distressed, and consequently, that he had power to case and refresh
that their wearines and affliction.

In this text then, there is set down one principal duty of Christ's
prophetical office, by allusion to the practices of the Prophets in the old
Testament, especially those which belonged to the schools of Elias and
Elizeus, who are here termed, the learned. And out of the words thereof, one
special point of instruction may be gathered, namely, That there is a certain
knowledge or doctrine revealed in the word of God, whereby the consciences of
the weak may be rectified and pacified: I gather it thus. It was one special
duty of Christ's prophetical office, to give comfort to the consciences of
those that were distressed, as the Prophet here records. Now as Christ had
this power to execute and perform such a duty, so he has committed the
dispensation thereof to the Ministers of the Gospel. For we may not think that
Christ in his own person, ministered and spoke words of comfort to the weary,
in the times of the Prophets, because he was not then exhibited in our nature;
and yet he did then speak, but how? in the persons of the Prophets. So
likewise, because Christ now in the new Testament, speaks not unto the
afflicted in his own proper person, it remains therefore, that he performs
this great work in the Ministry of Pastors and Teachers upon earth, to whom
he has given knowledge, and other gifts to this end and purpose. There must
needs therefore be a certain and infallible doctrine, propounded and taught in
the Scriptures, whereby the consciences of men distressed, may be quieted and
relieved. And this doctrine is not attained unto by extraordinary revelation,
but must be drawn out of the written word of God.

The point therefore to be handled is, What this doctrine should be? It is not a
matter easy and at hand, but full of labor and difficulty: yea very large,
like unto the maine sea: I will only (as it were) walk by the banks of it,
and propound the heads of doctrine, that thereby I may, at least, occasion
others, to consider and handle the same more at large.

That I may proceed in order: First, I am to lay down certain Grounds or
Preambles, which may give light and direction to the things that follow: and in
the next place, I will propound and answer the maine and principal Questions
of Conscience.

CHAP. I.
Of the two first Grounds of Cases, Confession, and the degrees of Goodness.

THe Grounds or Preambles are especially four. The first, touching Confession.
The second, touching the degrees of Goodness in things and actions. The third,
touching the degrees of Sin. The fourth and last concerning the Subjection
and Power of conscience. Of these in order.

Sect. 1.
The first Ground is, That in the troubles of conscience, it is meet and
convenient, there should always be used a private Confession. For James says,
Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, Iam. 5. (...).
thereby signifying that Confession in this case, is to be used as a thing most
requisite. For in all reason, the Physician must first know the disease, before
he can apply the remedy: and the grief of the heart will not be discerned,
unless it be manifested by the confession of the party diseased; and for this
cause also in the grief of conscience, the scruple, that is, the thing that
troubles the conscience must be known.

Neaerthelesse in private confession, these caueats must be observed. First, it
must not be urged, as a thing simply or absolutely necessary, without which
there can be no salvation. Again, it is not fit that confession should be of
all sins, but only of the scruple it self, that is, of that or those sins
alone, which do trouble and molest the conscience. Thirdly, though confession
may be made to any kind of m^n, (Confess one to another, says James,) yet is
it especially to be made to the Prophets and Ministers of the Gospel. For they
in likelihood, of all other men, in respect of their places and gifts, are the
fittest and best able to instruct, correct, comfort, and en^orme the weak and
wounded conscience. Lastly, the person to whom it is made, must be a man of
trust and fidelity, able and willing to keep secret things that are reueiled,
yea to bury the^ (as it were) in the grave of oblivion, for Love covers a
multitudeof sins.

Sect. 2.
The next Ground is touching the degrees of Goodness in humane things and
actions. Goodness in things is twofold; uncreated and created. Uncreated is
God himself, who never had beginning, and who is Goodness it-selfe, because
his nature is absolutely and perfectly good, and because he is the author and
worker thereof, in all things created. Created goodness, is that whereby the
creature is made good; and it is nothing else, but the fruit of that goodness,
that is essentially in God. Now the degrees thereof are these. There is a
general or natural Goodness in creatures, and a more special or moral
Goodness.

General Goodness is that, whereby all creatures are accepted and approved
of God, by whom they were both created and ordained. Thus every creature is
good, partly by creation, and partly by ordination. By creation it is, that the
substance of each creature, as of the Sun, the Moon, the Earth, Water,
Meat, Drink, etc. is good, having the being thereof from God. Hence also the
essential properties, quantities, qualities, motions, actions and inclinations
of the creatures, in themselves considered, with all their events, are good. By
the same general goodness also, even the Devil himself and his actions, as
he is a substance, and as they are actions, having their being from God, are
good. Things again do take unto them the condition of Goodness, not only by
creation, but also by Gods ordination, whereby they are directed and appointed,
to some certain uses and ends. Thus the evil Conscience, Hell, and Deathare
good, because they are ordained of God, for the execution of his justice,
howsoever in themselves and to us they be evil.

Besides this general and natural goodness, there is also a special or
moral goodness properly so called: and it is that, which is agreeable to the
eternal and unchangeable wisdom of God, revealed in the Moral Law, wherein it
is commanded; and things as they are therein commanded to be done by God, are
good morally. Now of actions morally good, there be two degrees: for they are
either good in themselves alone, or good both in themselves, and in the doer.
In themselves alone some things be morally good: for example, when a wicked man
gives an alms, it is a good work only in it self, but not good in the doer,
because it is not done in faith, and from a good conscience: and so are all the
virtues of the Heathen, morally good in themselves, but they are not good in
heathen men: for in them they are but Splendida peccata.
beautiful sins. The next degree of goodness is, whereby things and actions
are both good in themselves, and in the doer also. Of this sort were the
prayers and alms of Cornelius good in themselves, and in him also, because
Act. 10.
he was a believer.

Now opposite to things and actions morally good or evil, are actions and
things of a middle nature, commonly termed Indifferent, which in themselves
being neither good nor evil, may be done or not done without sin; In
themselves I say, for in their circumstances, they are and may be made either
evil or good. And here we must remember, to put a difference between
conueniencie, and inconvenience, which arises from the nature of indifferent
things. Conueniencie is, when a thing or action is so fitted to the
circumstances, and the circumstances fitted to it, that thereby it becomes a
thing Convenient. On the other side, Inconvenience is, when the thing or action
is done in unmeet circumstances, which bring some hurt or loss to the outward
man, or stand not with decency: and therefore do make it to be Inconvenient.
And by this that has been said, we may discern, when an action is good,
evil, indifferent, convenient, or inconvenient.

CHAP. II.
Of the nature and differences of Sin.

THe third Ground, is touching the degrees or differences of Sin. And here we
must first of all search, what is Sin properly, and what is properly a Sinner.

Sect. 1.
Sin in his proper nature (as Saint John says) is an anomie, that is, a want
of conformity 1. Ioh. 3. 4.
to the law of God. For the better understanding whereof, we must know, that
there were in Adam before his fall, three things not to be severed one from the
other: the Substance of his body and soul: the Faculties and Powers of his
body and soul: and the Image of God consisting in a straightnes, and
conformity of all the affections, and powers of man to Gods will. Now when
Adam falls, and sins against God, what is his sin? Not the want of the two
former, (for they both remained,) but the very want, and absence of the third
thing, namely, of conformity to Gods will. I make it plain by this
resemblance; In a musical instrument, there is to be considered, not only the
instrument it self, and the sound of the instrument, but also the harmony in
the sound. Now the contrary to harmony, or the disorder in music, is none
of the two former, but the third, namely the discord, which is the want or
absence of harmony, which we call disharmonie. In the same manner, the sin
of Adam, is not the absence either of the substance, or of the faculties of the
soul and the body, but the want of the third thing before named, and that is,
conformity or correspondencie to the will of God, in regard of obedience. But
some may say: the want of conformity in the powers of the soul, is not sin
properly: because in sin, there must be not only an absence of goodness,
but (...)

be some twenty or thirty years: yet the party offending, does not
therefore cease to be a sinner. Now then I demand, what is the very thing, for
which he is named and termed still a sinner in the time present, the offense
being past? The answer is, that every actual sin, beside the three former,
must be considered with a fourth thing, to wit, a certain stain, or blotte,
which it imprints and 4. Macul^.
leaves in the offender as a fruit, and that is an inclination, or evil
disposition of the heart, whereby it becomes more apt and prone to the offense
done, or to any other sin. For look as the dropsy man, the more he drinks,
the drier he is, and the more he still desires to drink: even so a sinner, the
more he sins, the apter is he to sin, and more desirous to keep still a
course in wickedness. And as a man that looks upon the Sun, if he turn his
face away, remains turned until he turn himself again: so he that turns
from God by any sin, makes himself a sinner, and so remains, until he
turn himself again by repentance. Thus David was a sinner, not only in the
very act of his adultery and mur^ there: but even when the act was done^ past,
he remained still a murderer and (...) dulterer; because a new, or rather a
re^ pronenesse to these, and all oth^ took place in his heart by his fal^
strength, till he turned to God by^ upon the admonition of the Pro^ thing then,
whereby a sinner is termed a sinner, is the Fault together with the fruit
thereof, namely, the Blot imprinted in the soul, so often as men do actually
offend.

The Use of this doctrine touching sin, is twofold. First, by it we learn
and see what is Original sin, whereby an Infant in the first conception and
birth is indeed a sinner. Every Infant must be considered as a part of Adam,
proceeding of him and partaking of his nature: and thereby it is made a sinner,
not only by imputation of Adams offense, but also by propagation of an
apt^esse, and pronenes unto every evil, received together with nature from
Adam. And thus ought we to conceive Original sin, not to be the corruption
of nature alone, but Adams first offense imputed, with the fruit thereof the
corruption of nature, which is an inclination unto every evil, derived
together with nature from our first parents. Secondly; by this we are taught,
to take heed of all and every sin, whether it be in thought, word, or deed:
because the committing thereof, though in respect of the act it passes a^ in
the doing, yet it breeds and in^seth a wicked disposition in the heart, ^h
been said) to the offense done, or a^ sin. Men deceive themselves, that ^the
evil of sin, to be only in the ^ng and to go no further; whereas in^ offense
has a certain blot going with it, that corrupts the heart, and causes man to
delight and lie in his offense, which lying in sin is a greater cause of
damnation, then the very sin it self. This therefore must admonish us, to take
heed least we continue in any sin, and if it fall out, that through
infirmity we be overtaken by any tentation, we must labor to rise again, and
turn from our sin to God, by new and speedy repentance.

Sect. 3.
Thus much of Sin it self. Now follow the Differences thereof, which are
manifold. The first sort are to be gathered from the causes and beginnings of
sin in man, which are threefold, Reason, will, and Affection.

The differences of sin in respect of Reason are these, First, some are
sins of knowledge, some of ignorance. A sin of Knowledge is, when a man
offends against his knowledge, doing evil when he knows it to be evil: and
this is greater then a sin of ignorance, for he that knows his masters
will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. A sin of Ignorance
is, when a man does evil, not knowing it to be evil. Thus Paul was a
blasphemer, an oppressor, and persecuted the Church of Christ ignorantly, and
in a blind zeal, not knowing that which he did to be evil. Now by
ignorance here I mean, an ignorance of those things which ought to be known;
and this is twofold: simple, or affected. Simple ignorance is, when a man after
diligence and good pains taking, still remains ignorant: this ignorance will
not excuse any man, if it be of such things as he is bound to know: for it is
said, He that does not his masters will, by reason he knew it not, shall be
beaten with stripes, though fewer.

And in this regard, even the Heathen which knew not God, are inexcusable,
because they were bound to have known him. For Adam had the perfect knowledge
of God imprinted in his nature, and lost the same through his own default, for
himself and his posterity. And it is the commandment of God, whereunto every
man is bound to perform obedience, that man should know him, that is, his will
and word.

But some may say then, how can any man be saved, seeing every man is ignorant
of many things which he ought to know? An. If we know the grounds of religion,
and be careful to obey God according to our knowledge, having withal a care
and desire, to increase in the knowledge of God and his will, God will hold us
excused: for our desire and endeavor to obey, is accepted for obedience it
self. And the greater this simple ignorance is, the lesser is the sin. For
hereupon it was, that Peter lessened, and (in some sort) excused Act. 3. (...).
the sin of the Jews, in crucifying Christ, because they did it through
ignorance: and so does Paul his sin in persecuting the Church, when he
alleges, that it was done 1. Tim. 1. 13.
ignorantly in unbelief. But howsoever this sin by such means may be
lessened, yet remains it still a sin worthy condemnation. Affected
ignorance is, when a man takes delight in his ignorance, and will of purpose be
ignorant: not using, but contemning the means, whereby to get and increase
knowledge: and that carelessely and negligently, because he will not leave
sin which he loves, nor forsake the evil trade of life, wherein he
delights. This is the sin of those, whereof Job speaks, who say unto God,
Depart from us: for we desire not the knowledge Job 21. 14.
of thy ways. And of whom David complains, that they flatter themselves in
their own Psalm. 36. (...). 3.
eyes, and have left off to understand, and to do good. This ignorance is
damnable and deuilish: it excuses no man, but does rather aggrauate and
increase his sin: yea it is the mother of many grievous enormities.

Again, Ignorance is twofold: of the Ignorant^^ (...).
Law, or of the thing the Law requires. Ignorance of the Law is, when a man
knows not the Law of god written, nor the law of nature. This ignorance may
somewhat lessen the sin, but it excuses no man: because it is natural, and
every man is bound to know the Law. Ignorance of the thing the Law requires,
is the Ignorance of the Ignorantia facti.
fact: and that is either with the fault of the doer, or without the fault.

Faulty ignorance, is the ignorance of a fact, which he might have prevented.
As when a man in his drunke^nes kills another: in this fact, not knowing what
de does, he also knows not that he has offended: and yet because he might
have prevented his drunkenness, therefore he is faulty, and sins. Faultlesse
ignorance is, when a fact is done, which could not be either known, or avoided
before hand. For example: if a man be ^opping a tree, and his axe head fall
from the helve, out of his hand, and kills another passing by; here is indeed
manslaughter, but no voluntary murder: because it was a thing that could not
be avoided, and did not fall out through his default. And this ignorance is
excusable.

The second Fountain of Sin, is the Will, from whence arise these three
differences of sins: some are from the will immediately, some besides the
will, and some are mixed, partly with the will, and partly against the will.

Sins proceeding from the will, are properly termed voluntary; such as the
doer moved by his own will commits, though he know them to be evil. And here,
the more free the will is, the greater is the sin: for will added to knowledge,
makes the sin the greater. Under voluntary sins, are comprehended all
such, as proceed from stirred affections; as when a man tells a lie for fear,
or strikes another in anger: and the reason is because these offenses, though
they are not done upon deliberation, but arise from the violence of affection,
yet they do not exclude Consent. Hither also we may refer, sins committed
by compulsion: as when a man is forced to deny his religion, his offense in
deed and in truth is voluntary, (though some otherwise think it to be a mixed
action) For compulsion does not reach to the will, but to the outward man, and
serves to draw forth a consent: and and when consent is yielded, he denies his
religion voluntarily: for the will cannot be constrained. Voluntas n^^ cogitur.


In the next place, sins beside the will are such, as are neither directly
from the will, nor against it. Of this sort are the first sudden motions unto
sin, conceived in the heart with some inward pleasure and delight: and these
are truly sins, though in respect little sins, condemned in the last
commandment. And they are not from the will, because they go without and
before consent: neither yet are they against the will, because then the heart
would not take delight in them.

Here by the way, we are to note, against the doctrine of the Papists, that all
sins are not voluntary: for whatsoever wants conformity to the law of
God, is sin, whether it be with consent of will or no. But many such desires
and delights, arise suddenly in the heart of man, which are not according to
the law of God, and have no consent or approbation of will. In like manner,
when one man kills another, thinking that he kills a wild beast: if the same
man remembers afterward what he has done, and is not grieved for the fact:
in this case he has sinned, because his not grieuing, is offensive unto God,
though the fact were merely besides his will.

Mixed sins are partly from the will, partly against it. Of this sort are the
works of the man regenerate, which are done partly with his will, and partly
against his will being partly good, and partly evil. The reason hereof is
this. There are in man after regeneration, two contrary grounds or beginnings
of actions: to wit, natural corruption, or the inclination of the mind, will,
and affections, to that which is against the Law, called the Flesh; and a
created quality of holiness, wrought in the said faculties by the holy Ghost,
termed the Spirit. And these two are not severed, but joined and mingled
together, in all the faculties and powers of the soul. Now between these,
there is a continual combat, corruption fighting against grace, and grace
against corruption. Hence it is, that there being even in one and the same will
trarie inclinatio^s, there must necessarily flow from the man regenerate,
contrary actions; the flesh in every action, willing that which is evil, and
the Spirit on the otherside, that which is good. This Paul confessed and
acknowledged, upon his own experience, after his conversion, when he said, To
will is present with me, but I find no means [perfectly Romans 7. 18.
to do] that which is good. Again, I delight in and 22. 23.
the law of God, concerning the inner man, but I see an other law in my
members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive to the
law of sin, which is in my members.

The third Ground or fountain of sin in man, is Affection, from whence do
proceed two kinds, namely, sins of Infirmity, and sins of Presumption.

Sins of Infirmity are such, as proceed from the sudden passions of the
mind, and the strong affections of the heart: as from hatred, grief, anger,
sorrow, and such like. These sins are commonly thought to be in all men: but
the truth is, they are properly incident to the regenerate. For infirmity
cannot be said properly to be in them, in whom sin has firmitie or strength,
and where there is no power of grace at all. Again, the man that is
regenerate, sins not neither when he would, because he is restrained by the
grace of God that is in him: nor in what manner he would, partly because he
sins not with all his heart, the strength of his flesh being abated by the
Spirit; and partly, for that being fallen, he lies not still, but recouers
himself by speedy repentance. An evident argument, that the sins whereinto
he falls, are not presumptuous, but are ordinarily of weakness and infirmity.

Sins of Presumption are such, as proceed from pride, arrogance, wilfulnes,
and hautines of man's heart. Against these David prays, saying, Let not
presumptuous sins have dominion over me. And of them there be three Psalm. 19.
13.
degrees.

The first is: when a man wilfully goes on in his sins, upon an erroneous
persuasion of Gods mercy, and of his own future repentance; this is the sin
of most men.

The second is, when a man sins wilfully, in contempt of the law of God:
this is called by Moses, a sin with a high hand, and the punnishment thereof
was, by present death Number. 15. 30.
to be cut off from among the people.

The third, when a man sins, not only wilfully and contemptuouslly, but of
malice and spite against God himself, and Christ Jesus. And by this we may
conceive what is the sin against the holy Ghost: which is not every sin of
presumption, or against knowledge and conscience: but such a kind of
presumptuous offense, in which true religion is renounced: and that of set
purpose and resolved malice, against the very Majesty of God himself and
Christ. Heb. 10. 29.

Sect. 4.
Now follow other Differences of sin in regard of the object thereof, which
is the Law. In respect of of the Law, sin is two fold: either of Commission or
of Omission. I say, in respect of the Law, because God has revealed in his Law
two sorts of precepts: the one wherein some good thing is commanded to be done,
as to love God with all our hearts, and our neighbor as our selves: the other
wherein some evil is forbidden to be done, as the making of a graven Image, the
taking the name of God in vain, etc.

Now a sin of Commission is, when a man does any thing, that is flatly
forbidden in the Law and word of God: as when one man kills another contrary
to the Law, which says, Thou shall not kill. A sin of Omission is, when a
man leaves unperformed, some duty which the Law requires: as for example,
the preserving of his neighbors life, or good estate, when it lies in his
power so to do. These also are truly sins, and by them Math. 25. 42. 43.
as well as by the other, men shall be tried in the last judgment.

Sins of Omission have three degrees. First, when a man does nothing at all,
but omits the duty commanded, both in whole and in part; as when having
opportunity and ability, he does not move so much as one finger, for the
saving of his neighbors life.

Secondly, when a man performs the duty enjoined, but fails both in the
manner and measure thereof. Thus the Heathen failed in doing good works, in
that the things which they did, for substance and matter were good and
commendable, being done upon civil and honest respects, and referred to the
common good; yet in truth their actions were no better then sins of omission,
in as much as they issued from corrupted fountains, hearts void of faith: and
aimed not at the maine end, and scope of all humane actions, the honor and
glory of God.

Thirdly, when a man does things in a right manner, but fails in the measure
thereof. And thus the children of God do sin, in all the duties of the law.
For they do the good things the law comma^deth, in loving God and their
neighbor: but they cannot attain to that measure of love, which the law
requires. And thus the best men living, do sin in every good work they
do, so as if God should enter into judgment, deal with the^ in the rigor of
his justice, and examine them by the strict rule of the Law, he might justly
condemn them, even for their best actions. And in this regard, when we pray
daily for the pardon of our sins, the best works we do, must come in the
number of them: because we fail, if not in substance and manner, yet at the
least in the measure of goodness, that ought to be in the doing of them. We
must also have care to repent us, even of these our sins of Omission, as well
as of the other of Commission: because by leaving undone our duty, we do
oftener offend, then by sins committed: and the least Omission is enough to
condemn us, if it should be exacted at our hands.

Sect. 5.
The next difference of Sins may be this. Some are Crying sins, some are
sins of Toleration.

Crying sins I call those, which are so heinous, and in their kind so
grievous, that they hasten Gods judgments, and call down for (...)
speedy vengeance upon the sinner. Of this kind there are sundry examples in
the Scriptures, principally four. First, Cains sin in murdering his
innocent brother Abell; Genesis 4. (...)
whereof it was said, The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the
earth. The next is, the sin of Sodom and Gomorrha, which was pride, fulness
of bread, abundance of idleness: unmerciful dealing with the poor, and all
manner of uncleanness, Ezech. 16. and of this, The Lord said, that the cry of
Sodom Genesis (...). 20.
and Gomorrha wa^ great, and their sins exceeding grievous. The third, is the
sin of Oppression, endured by the Israelites in Egypt, at the hand of Pharao,
and his taskmasters. Exodus (...). 7. and alias Exodus ^2. 23. 27.
The fourth, is merciless Injustice in wrongful withholding, and detaining
Iam. 5. 4.
the laborers hire.

Now they are called Crying sins, for these causes. First, because they are
now come to their full measure and height; beyond which God will not suffer
them to pass, without due punishment. Again, the Lord takes more notice, and
inquires further into them, then into others, by reason that they exceed, and
are most eminent where they be committed. Thirdly, they call for present help
to the afflicted and wronged, and consequently, for speedy exequution of
vengeance, upon the authors and committers of them. And lastly, because God is
wont to give ^are unto the cries of those, that endure (...)
so heavy measure at the hands of others, and accordingly to help them, and
reward the other with deserved punishment.

Next unto these are sins of Toleration, lesser then the former: which though
in themselves they deserve death, yet God in his mercy shows his patience and
long suffera^ce, upon the committers thereof, either deferring the temporal
punishment, or pardoning both temporal and eternal to his Elect. Such a sin
was the ignorance of the Gentiles before Christ's coming: which God deferred to
punish, and (as we say) (...).
winked at Act. 17. 30.
it.

More especially, there be three sorts of sins of Toleratio^: the first is
Original sin, or concupiscence, in the regenerate after regeneration, and the
fruits thereof: for it is not quite abolished by regeneration, but remains
more or less molesting and tempting a man till death. And yet if we carry a
constant purpose not to sin, and endeavor our selves to resist all
tentations: this concupiscence of ours, shall not be imputed unto us, nor we
condemned for it. And to this purpose the holy Apostle says, There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ. Yet says Romans 8. (...).
he not, There is nothing worthy condemnation in them: for Original sin
remains till death, truly deserving damnation, though it be not imputed.

The second kind of sins of Toleration (...)
are secret, unknown, and hidden sins in the regenerate. For who can tell
how of^ he offends? Psalm. 10.
says David. When a man that is the child of God, shall examine his heart, and
humble himself even for all his particular sins, which he knows by
himself: there shall yet remain some unknown sins, of which he cannot have
a particular repentance: and yet they are not imputed, when there is repentance
for known sins. As for example, David repents of his murder and adultery,
and yet afterward (erring in judgment, by reason of the corruption of the
times,) he lived to his death in the sin of polygamie, without any particular
repentance, that we hear of. In like manner did the Patriarchs, who may not
altogether be excused: yet they were not condemned thereof: neither were they
saved without repentance for this sin, but God in mercy accepted a general
repentance for the same. And the like is the case of all the Elect, in regard
of their secret and hidden faults: for unless God should accept of a general
repentance for unknown sins, few or none at all should be saved. And herein
does the endless mercy of god notably appear, that he vouchsafes to accept of
our repentance when we repent, though not in particular as we ought to do.
Nevertheless, this must not incorage, or imbolden any man to live in his sins,
without turning unto God. For unless we repent in particular, of all the (...)
sin^ we know, not only our known offenses, but even our secret sins shall
condemn us. Many sins are committed by men, which afterward in process of
time are quite forgotten. Others are committed, which notwithstanding are not
known, whether they be sins or no. And in doing the best duties we can, we
offend often, and yet when we offend, we perceive it not: and all these in the
regenerate, through the mercy of God, are sins of Toleratio^, in respect of
particular repentance.

The third kind of sins of Toleration, are certain particular facts of men
not approved of in Scripture, and yet remitted in respect of punishment. Such
was the fact of Zipporah, in circumcising her child, in presence Exodus (...).
25.
of her husband, he being able to have done it himself, and she having no
calling, to do that which she did. For though the hand of God was against him,
yet was he not sick, (as some would excuse the matter) neither is there any
such thing in the text: but it is rather to be thought, that she her self
circumcised her son in have, to prevent her husband: for the deed was done
in some indignation, and she cast the foreskin at his feet. And yet because
this fact was some manner of obedience in that the thing was done which God
required, (though not in the manner that he required) God accepted the same,
and stayed his hand from killing Moses. Thus god accepted of Ahabs humility,
though it were in hypocrisy, because it was a show of 1. Kin. 21.
obedience: and for that deferred a temporal punishment, til the days of his
posterity. God sent Lions to destroy the Assyrians, that dwelt in Samaria, for
their Idolatry: yet so soon^ as 2. ^in. 17.
they had learned to fear the Lord after the manner of the god of Israel,
though they mingled the same with their own Idolatric, God for that half
obedience, suffered the^ to dwell in peace.

Sect. 6.
The Sixth distinction of Sins may be this. Some are sins against God, some
against men. This distinction is grounded upon a place in Samuel: If one man
sin against another, 1. Sam. (...). 25.
the Judge shall judge it: but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall plead
for him?

Sins against God are such as are directly and immediately committed against
the majesty of God. Such are Atheism, Idolatry, Blasphemy, Perjury,
Profanation of the Sabbath, and all the breaches of the first Table.

Sins against men, are injuries, hurts, losses, and damages; whereby our
neighbor is in his dignity, life, chastity, wealth, good name, or any other
way justly offended, or by us hindered. And such actions must be considered two
ways. First, as they are injuries and hurts done unto our neighbor: and
fecondly, as they are anomies, or breaches of Gods law, forbidding us to do
them: and in this second respect they are called sins, because sin is
properly against God: and therefore by sins against man, we are to
understand, injuries, losses, or damages done unto them. In this sense, must
that place in Matthew be expounded: If thy brother sin against thee, etc.
Matthew. (...).


Sect. 7.
The seventh Difference of sins, is noted by S. Paul, where he says, Every
sin that a man does, is without the body: but he that commits 1. Cor. 6.
(...).
fornication, sins against his own body. In which place it is employed that
some sins are without the body, and some against man's own body.

Sins without the body, are such sins as a man commits, his body
being the instrument of the sin, but not the thing abused. Such are Murder,
Theft, and Drunkenness: for in the committing of these sins, the body is
but a helper, and only a remote isntrumental cause, and the thing abused is
without the body. For example: in drunkenness, the thing abused by the
drunkard, is wine or strong drink: in theft, another man's goods: in murder,
the instrument whereby the fact is committed. The body indeed conferres his
help to these things, but the injury is directed to the creatures of God, to
the body and goods of our neighbor. And such are all sins, adultery only
excepted.

Sins against the body, are those in which it self, is not only the
instrument, but the thing abused also. Such a sin is Adultery only, and
those that are of that kind, properly against the body: first, because the
body of the sinner, is both a furthering cause of the sin, and also that
thing which he abuses against his own self. Secondly, by this offense, he
does not only hinder, but loose the right, power, and property of his body,
in that be makes it the member of an harlot. And lastly, though other sins in
their kind, do bring a shame and dishonor upon the body, yet there is none
that sits so nigh, or leaves a blot so deeply imprinted in it, as does the
sin of uncleanness.

Sect. 8.
The eight distinction of sins is grounded upon Paul's exhortation to
Timothy: Communicate not with other men's sins. Sins are either Other men's
sins, or Communicatio^ 1. Tim. (...). 2^.
with other men's sins. This distinction is the rather to be known and
remembered, because it serves to extenuate or aggrauate sins committed.

Communication with sin is done sundry ways. First, by counsel: thus
Ca^phas sinned when he gave counsel to put Christ to death. Secondly, by
commandment: so David sinned in the murder of Vrias. Thirdly, by consent, or
assistance, Romans 1. 31. thus Saul sinned in keeping the garments of them that
^^oned Steven, Act. 22. 20. and 7. 58. Fourthly, by provocation: thus they
sin that prouok^ others to sin, and hereof Paul speaks when he says,
Fathers must not provoke their children to wrath, Ephesians. 6. 4. Fifthly, by
negligence, or silence. This is the sin of the Minister, when men are called
to reprove sin and do not. Sixthly, by flattery, when men sooth up others
in sin. Seauenthly, by winking at sins, or passing them over by slight
reproof, Ephesians. 5. 11. Thus Eli sinned in rebuking his sons, and thereby
brought a temporal judgment upon himself, and his family, 1. Sam. 2. chap.
and 4. Eighthly, by participation, Ephesians. 5. 7. and thus they do sin, that are
receivers of the eues. Ninthely, by defending another man in his sin: for he
Prove. 17. ^5.
that justifies the wicked, and condemns the just, even they both are an
abomination to the Lord.

Sect. 9.
The Ninth distinction follows. Some men's sins (says Paul) are open before
hand, 1. Tim. 5. 24.
some follow after. Which place by some is expounded thus: Some men's sins are
kept secret, till the last judgment, and some are revealed in this life,
before that day. This I think is a truth, but not the meaning of the text. For
in the 23. verse the Apostle spoke of Ordination, giving charge to Timothy,
that he should not suddenly admit any into Ecclesiastical offices, least he
did partake with their sins. Now in this 24. verse, ^e rendereth a reason
thereof, saying, Some men's sins are open before hand: that i^, some men's
faults and wants are known, before their ordination to Ecclesiastical
offices, and of such the Church may know what to judge and say. But some again
follow after, that is, they are not revealed till after their Ordination: and
thus Judas his wickedness did not appear at the first, but was revealed after
he was called to be an Apostle.

And thus we see, what be the Differences of Sins: touching all which, this
must be held and remembered for a Ground, That every sin, in what degree
soever it be, is mortal of it self: and no sin is venial in it own
nature. For the wages of every sin is death. And, Cursed is every one, that
continues Romans 6. 23.
not in all things, that are written in the book of the Law, to do them. Gal.
3. 10. This Ground must be holde^ against the Church of Rome: who in her
Case-diuinitie, uses to pacify the conscience, by teaching men, that sundry
sins are venial.

Sect. 10.
Now though every sin of it self be mortal, yet all are not equally
mortal: but some more, some less. For the better understanding whereof, it is
to be remembered, that in Sin there be sundry steps and degrees, whereby
one and the same sin, may be lessened or increased, and so become more or
less heinous before God.

If it be asked, how can this be? I answer, that Sin may admit aggrauation,
or extenuation, sundry ways. First, by the Circumstances, which are
principally seven.

The first, is the subject, or person sinning. For example: The sin of a
public person, is more heinous, yea more mortal, then the sin of a private
man, because he is in eminent place, and his actions are more exemplarie and
scandalous, then the actions of inferior men. The servant, that knows his
masters will, if he does it not, is the greater sinner, and shall endure a
greater punishment, then he that neglects the same upon simple ignorance,
Matthew. 10. 15. The Minister and Dispenser of the Word, if he be unfaithful and
unprofitable, his offense, and consequently his punishment, is far greater
then other men's, Matthew. 5. 13.

The second is, the object or party which is offended. In this respect it was
that the Jews did more hainously sin in crucifying Christ the son of God,
the Lord of glory, then did their fathers which persequuted and killed the
Prophets. Again, the word of God teaches that the injury that is done unto
those whom God tenderly loves, is far more displeasing unto him, then if it
were done to others. He that touches you (says the Prophet, meaning the Jews
his chosen and beloved people) touches the apple of his eye, Zach. 3. 8. The
man that deuiseth mischief against his harmless brother that dwells
peaceably by him, commits a sin most odious unto God and man, Prove. 3. 29.
Psalm. 7. 4. He that is called and converted unto God and Christ, and makes not
honest provision for his own, which are of his family, is so notorious an
offender, that S. Paul holds him a de^ier of the faith, and worse then an
Insidel, 1. Tim. 5. 8. The person that shall ralle upon the Judge, or speak
evil of the Ruler of his people, is a greater transgressour of Gods
commandment, then he that reuileth, or abuses an ordinary man, Exodus 23. 28.

The third is, the Thing done in which the offense is committed. Thus, to
falsify the word of God, and to profane his worship and Service, is much more
abominable in his sight, then is the falsifying of the word of a man, or the
abuse of humane laws and ordinances. Thus again, the hurting and indamaging
of the person and life of our neighbor, is a more odious offense, then is the
diminishing of his goods and outward estate: and the hurt that redoundeth by
our default unto his soul, is more offensive every way, then the wrong that is
offered unto his body.

The fourth, is the Place where it is done. According to this Circumstance, if
a man shall either speak or do any thing, that comes under the name of a
breach of piety or justice, in public place, as in the congregation, in open
court, or general assembly, and that with public and general scandal: he
is a greater offendour, then if he spoke or did the same at home, in his house
or closet.

The fifth is the End. In regard hereof, he that steals from another, that
whereby he may satisfy his hunger, and save his life, being driven to
extreme necessity: offends in a lower and lesser degree, then the thief
that robs by the high way side, for this end, to enrich himself by the
losses of other men.

The sixth is the Manner how? Thus he that committeh uncleanness in the outward
act, does more grievously sin, and with greater scandal, then if he only
entertained an unclean thought into his heart. And he that sins of set
purpose and presumption, or of obstinate and resolved malice against God, has
proceeded unto a higher degree of iniquity, then if he had fallen upon
ignorance, infirmity, or disordered and distempered affection. In like manner,
the sin of the Jews, in forcing. Pilate by their threatening terms (as that
he was an enemy to Caesar, etc.) to the unjust condemnation of Christ Jesus,
was an higher degree, then the sin of Pilate himself, who yelding unto their
import^^nitie, pronounced sentence against him, Ioh. 19. 11. The last is the
Time, which also serves to aggrauate the sin. For ordinary disobedience in
the time of grace, and wilful neglect of gods calling, in the abundance of
means, is a great deal more damnable, then the commission of sin, in the
days of ignorance and blindness, when the like 2. Pet. 2. 21.
means are wanting.

The Second way to aggrauate sin, is by addition of sin to sin: and that is
done sundry ways: first, by committing one sin in the neck of an other; as
David sinned, when he added murder to adultery. Secondly, by doubling and
multiplying of sin, that is, by falling often into the same sin. Thirdly,
by lying in sin without repentance. And here it must be remembered, that men
of years living in the Church, are not simply condemned for their particular
sins; but for their continuance and residence in them. Sins committed make
men worthy of damnation; but living and abiding in them without repentance, is
the thing that brings damnation. For as in the militant Church, men are
excommunicate, not so much for their offense, as for their obstinacy; so shall
it be in the church triumphant; the kingdom of heaven shall be barred against
men, not so much for their sin committed, as for their lying therein without
repentance. And this is the manner of Gods dealing with those that have lived
within the precincts of the church; they shall be condemned for the very want
of true faith and repentance. This should admonish every one of us, to take
heed, least we lie in any sin: and that being any way overtaken, we should
speedily repent, least we aggrauate our sin by continuance therein, and so
bring upon our selves swift damnation.

Thirdly, the same sin is made greater or lesser four ways! according to
the number of degrees in the committing of a sin, noted by S. James,
Temptation, Conception, Birth, Iam. 1. 15.
and Perfection. Actual sin in the first degree of tentation, is when the
mind upon some sudden motion, is drawn away to think evil, and withal is
tickled with some delight thereof. For a bad motion cast into the mind, by the
flesh and the devil, is like unto the bait cast into the water, that allureth
and delights the fish, and causes it to bite. Sin in conception, is when
with the delight of the mind, there goes consent of will to do the evil
thought on. Sin in birth, is when it comes forth into an action or execution.
Sin in perfection, is when men are grown to a custom and habit in sin, upon
long practice. For the often committing of one and the same sin, leaves an
evil impression in the heart, that is, a strong or violent inclination, to
that or any other evil, as has bin taught before. And sin thus made
perfect, brings forth death: for custom in sinning brings hardness of heart:
hardness of heart, impenitencie: and impenitencie, condemnation. Now of these
degrees, the first is the least, and the last is the greatest. One and the same
sin, is lesser in tentation, then in conception: and less in conception, then
in birth: and greater in perfection, then in all the former.

Sect. 11.
Now from this doctrine of the increasing and lessening of Sin in these
respects, we may gather, that all sins are not alike or equal, as the Stoics
of ancient times, and their followers have falsely imagined. For it has bin
proved at large, by induction of sundry particulars, that there are degrees
of sins, some lesser, some greater: some more offensive and odious to God and
man, some less. And that the circumstances of time, place, person, and manner
of doing, do serve to enlarge or extenuate the sin committed.

If it be here alleged, that Sin is nothing but the doing of that, which is
unlawful to be done, and that this is equal in all men that sin: and
therefore by consequent, offenses are equal. I answer, that in every sin, me^
must not consider the unlawfulness thereof only, but the reason why it should
be unlawful: and that is properly, because it is a breach of Gods law, and
repugnant to his will revealed in his word. Now there is no breach of a divine
Law, but it is more or less repugnant unto the will of the Lawgiuer, God
himself. And many transgressions, are more repugnant thereunto then fewer: for
the more sin is increased, the more is the wrath of God in^lamed against the
sinner upon his due desert.

If it be said again, that the nature of Sin stands only in this, that the
sinner makes an aberration from the scope or mark that is set before him, and
does no more then pass the bonds of duty prescribed by God, and that all are
alike in this respect; The answer is, that it is a falsehood to affirm, that he
which makes the less aberration from the duty commanded, is equal in offense
to him that makes the greater. For the same sin for substance, has sundry
steps and degrees, in respect whereof, one man becomes a more heinous
offender then another. For example, in the seventh commandment when God
forbiddes the committing of Adultery, he forbids three degrees of the same
sin; to wit, adultery of the heart, consisting of inordinate and unclean
affections; adultery of the tongue in corrupt, dishonest, and unseemly
speeches; and the very act of uncleanness and filthiness committed by the
body. Now it cannot be said, that he which breaks this commandment only in
the first degree, is as great a transgressour, as he that has proceeded to the
second, and so to the third. And therefore it remains for an undoubted truth,
that Sins committed against the Law of God are not equal, but some lesser,
some greater.

Sundry other Distinctions there are of sins; as namely, That the main
sins of the first Table, are greater then the maine sins of the second Table.
And yet the maine sins of the second, are greater then the breach of
ceremonial duties, against the first table. But this which has been said
shall suffice.

The use of this doctrine is manifold. First, by it we learn, what the heart
of man is by nature: namely, a corrupt and unclean fountain, out of which
issues in the course of this life, the streams of corruptions infinite in
number, noisome in qualities, heinous in degrees, dangerous in effects. For
from thence do flow, all the differences of sins before named, with their
several branches, and infinite many more, that cannot be rehearsed. This must
move us humbly to sue unto God, and earnestly to entreat him, to wash us
thoroughly from our wickedness, and cleanse us from our sins: yea to purge and
to rinse the fountain thereof, our unclean and polluted hearts. And when by
Gods mercy in Christ, apprehended by faith, our hearts shall be purified, the^
to set watch and ward over them, Act. 15. 9.
and to keep them with all diligence. Secondly it teaches us, that miserable
mortal man, Pro^. 4. 23.
is not guilty of one or more sins, but of many and sundry corruptions,
both of heart and life. Who can understand his faults? says David. Now the
alowance of sin being Psalm. 19. 12.
death by gods ordinance, and God being justice it self: answerably to the
number of our offenses, must we needs be liable to many punishments, yea to
death it self, both of the body and of the soul. This being our woeful
estate, little cause is there, that any man should think himself to be in
good case, or presume of Gods mercy in regard of the small number of his
sins. And much less cause has he, falsely to imagine with the Popish sort,
that he can merit the favor of God by any work done by him, above that which
the Law requires; considering that it is impossible for him to know either the
number, or the nature, or the measure of his sins. Lastly, the consideration
of this point, must be a bar to keep us in, that we be not too secure or
presumptuous of our own estate: for as much as we learn out of the word of
god, that in respect of the multitude of our corruptions, this our life is full
of much evil, and many difficulties, that we have whole armies of enemies to
encounter with all, not only out of us in the world abroad, but within us,
lurking even in our own flesh. And upon this consideration, that we should be
at continual defiance with them, using all holy means to get the victory
over them, by the daily exercises of invocation and repentance, and by a
continual practice of new obedience, unto all the laws and commandments of
God, according to the measure of grace received. And so much of the third
Ground.

CHAP. III.
Of the subjection and power of Conscience.

THe fourth and last Ground, is touching the subjection and power of
Conscience. Wherein we are to remember two things: what Conscience is; and what
is the natural condition of it in every man. For the first; the name of
Conscience will give light to the thing it self. For it signifies a knowledge
joined with a knowledge; and it is so termed in two respects. First, because
when a man knows or thinks any thing, by means of Conscience, he knows what
he knows and thinks. Secondly, because by it, man knows that thing of
himself, which God also knows of him. Man has two witnesses of his
thoughts, God, and his own conscience; God is the first and chiefest; and
Conscience is the second subordinate unto God, bearing witness unto God either
with the man or against him. Therefore it is nothing else but a part of the
understanding, whereby a man knows what he thinks, what he wills and desires,
as also in what manner he knows, thinks, or wills, either good or evil.
Whereunto this must be added, that as conscience knows our thoughts, wills, and
actions, so it testifies thereof unto God, either with us, or against us.

In the second place, The natural condition or property of every man's
conscience is this; that in regard of authority and power, it is placed in the
middle between man and God, so as it is under God and yet above man. And this
natural condition has two parts: the first is the Subjection of conscience to
God and his word. Concerning which subjection we have this rule: That God alone
by his word does only bind the conscience, by causing it in every action
either to excuse for well doing, or accuse for sin. And this God does
properly. For first, he is the only Lord of the conscience, which created it,
and gouernes it. 2. Again, he is the only Lawgiver, that has power to save
or destroy the soul, for the keeping and breaking of his Laws, Iam. 4. 12. 3.
And further, man's conscience is known to none, besides himself, but to God:
What man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him?
1. Cor. 2. 11. And it is God only that gives liberty to the conscience, in
regard of his own laws. Upon this it follows, that no man's commandment or
Law can of it self, and by it own sovereign power bind conscience, but does
it only by the authority and virtue of the written word of God, or some part
thereof. And therefore if it be alleged, that subjection is due to the
Magistrate for conscience sake, Romans 13. 5. the Answer is at hand; that
subjection is indeed to be performed to civil authority ordained by God, and
obedience also to the Laws of the Magistrate for fear of wrath, and for
avoiding of punishment, but not for conscience of the said authority or laws
properly and directly, but for conscience of Gods commandment, which
appoints both Magistracy, and the authority thereof. This is it that binds
the conscience immediately; that by virtue of a superior Law, whereby it
stands in force, namely the Law of God.

The Second part of the natural condition of conscience, is the Power which it
has over man to accuse or excuse him in respect of things done. And this is
plain by Saint Paul's Conclusion, Whatsoever is not of faith, Romans 14. (...).
that is, whatsoever man does, whereof he is not certainly persuaded in
judgment and conscience, out of Gods word, that the thing may be done, it is
sin. More plainly: a thing may be said, not to be done of faith three ways.
First, when it is done with doubting, 1 Dubita^te conscientia^.
and unresolved conscience, as in those that are weak in knowledge. Of which
sort were some in the Primitive church, who notwithstanding they heard of the
doctrine of Christian liberty, yet they were of opinion, that after Christ's
ascension, there was a difference to be made of meats, and thereupon thought,
they might not eat of some kind of meats. Suppose now, that these persons (by
accident) should have been drawn to eat swines flesh, which themselves had
holden a thing forbidden. These men upon this very fact had sinned, because
that which they did, was upon an unresolved conscience. So says the Apostle,
Romans 14. 23. He that doubts, is condemned, if he eat, because he eats not
of faith. Secondly, when a thing is done upon an erroneous 2 ^rrante.
conscience, it is not of faith, and therefore it is a sin. Thus the
Mass Priest sins in saying Mass, though he think in his conscience, the
thing he does, is the ordinance of God. And thus Heretics do die Heretics,
though when they die, they be fully persuaded there opinions be the truth.
Again in the same manner; Put the case a man should be of opinion, that
fornication, or theft, were things arbitrarie and indifferent, and hereupon his
conscience should tell him he might take opportunity, and commit either of
these sins; whether is this action in the party thus persuaded, a sin or
no? I answer, the case is plain, that the fact is done upon an erroneous
conscience, and therefore must be a sin in the doer. For the error of the
judgment cannot take away the nature of that which is simply evil. Sin is
sin, and so remains notwithstanding any contrary persuasion of the
conscience. The reason is, because though the conscience erreth and is
misinformed, yet it binds so far forth, as that if a man judge a thing to
be evil, either simply or in some respect, (though falsely) and yet afterward
does it, he has sinned and offended the Majesty of God, as much as in him
lies. Thirdly, when a thing as done with a repugning 3 Repugnant^.
or gainsaying conscience, though upon error and false judgment of the
conscience, it is in the doer a sin. Thus an Anabaptist, that holds it
unlawful to swear, sins if he take an oath; not in swearing simply, for
that is Gods ordinance, but because he swears against the persuasion of his
Conscience.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the distinction of Cases.

THus much touching the Preambles, or Grounds of this doctrine. Now it
remains that we come to the Questions of Conscience.

These Questions may be fitly divided, according to the matter or subject of
them, which is Man. Now as Man is considered diverse ways, that is to say,
either a part ^y himself; or as he stands in relation to an other, and is a
member of a Society: so the Questions of Conscience are to be distinguished;
some concerning man simply considered by himself: some again, as he stands in
relation to an other.

Man stands in a twofold relation: to God, or to Man. As he stands in
relation to God, he bears the name of a Christian, that is, a member of
Christ, or a son of God, whose duty is to know and to worship God according
to his will revealed in his word. As he stands in relation to man, he is a part
of a body, and a member of some society. Now the Questions that concern him,
as a member of a society, are of three sorts, according to three distinct
kinds of societies. For every man is either a member of a Family, or of the
Church, or of the Commonwealth. And answerably, some Questions concern man as
a member of a family: some as he is a member of the Church: some as he is a
member of the Commonwealth.

In a word therefore, all Questions touching man, may be reduced to three
general heads. The first whereof is, concerning man simply considered as he is
a man. The second, touching man as he stands in relation to God. The third,
concerning man as he is a member of one of the three societies, that is, either
of the Family, or of the Church, or of the Commonwealth.

QVestions of the first sort, concerning man simply considered in himself as
he is a man, are especially three.

The first, What a man must do, that he may come into the favor of God, and
be saved?

The second, How he may be assured in conscience of his own salvation?

The third, How he may recover himself, when he is distressed or fallen? Of
these in order.

CHAP. V.
Of the first maine Question touching Man.

I. Question. What must a man do, that he may come into Gods favor, and be
saved?
FOR answer to this Question, some Grounds must be laid down beforehand. The
first is this; That we must consider and remember, how and by what means, God
brings any man to salvation. For look how God saves others; so he that would
know how to be saved, must use the means whereby God saves them.

Sect. 1.
In the working and effecting of Man's salvation, How God saves man.
ordinarily there are two special actions of God: the giving of the first
grace, and after that, the giving of the second. The former of these two works,
has X. several actions. I. God gives man the outward means of salvation,
specially the Ministry of the word: and with it, he sends some outward or
inward cross, to break and sub due the stubbornness of our nature, that it
may be made pliable to the will of God. This we may see in the example of the
Iaylour, Act. 16. and of the Jews that were converted at Peter's sermon, Act.
2. II. This done, God brings the mind of man to a consideration of the Law,
and therein generally to see what is good, and what is evil, what is sin,
and what is not sin. III. Upon a serious consideration of the Law, he makes a
man particularly to see and know, his own peculiar and proper sins, whereby
he offends God. IV. Upon the sight of sin, he smites the heart with a Legal
fear, whereby when man sees his sins, he makes him to fear punishment and
hell, and to despair of salvation, in regard of any thing in himself.

Now these four actions, are indeed no fruits of grace, for a Reprobate may
go thus far; but they are only works of preparation going before grace;
the other actions which follow, are effects of grace. V. The fifth action of
grace therefore is, to stir up the mind to a serious consideration, of the
promise of salvation propounded and published in the Gospel. VI. After this,
the sixth is, to kindle in the heart, some seeds or sparks of faith, that is, a
will and desire to believe, and grace to strive against doubting and despair.
Now at the same instant, when God begins to kindle in the heart, any sparks
of faith, then also he iustifies the sinner, and withal begins the work of
sanctification. VII. Then, so soon as faith is put into the heart, there is
presently a combat: for it fights with doubting, despair, and distrust. And
in this combat, faith shows it self, by fervent, constant, and earnest
invocation for pardon: and after invocation follows a strength and prevailing
of this desire. VIII. Furthermore, God in mercy quiets and settles the
Conscience, as touching the salvation of the soul, and the promise of life,
where upon it rests and staieth it self. IX. Next after this settled
assurance, and persuasion of mercy, follows a stirring up of the heart to
Evangelical sorrow, according to God, that is, a grief for sin, because it
is sin, and because God is offended: and then the Lord works repentance,
whereby the sanctified heart turns it self unto him. And though this
repentance be one of the last in order, yet it shows it self first: as when a
candle is brought into a room, we first see the light before we see the
candle, and yet the candle must needs be, before the light can be. X. Lastly,
God gives a man grace to endeavor, to obey his commandments by a new
obedience. And by these degrees, does the Lord give the first grace.

The second work of God tending to salvation, is the giving of the second
grace: which is nothing else, but the continuance of the first grace given. For
look as by creation, God gave a being to man and all other creatures, and
then by his providence continued the same being, which was as it were a second
creation; so in bringing a man to salvation, God gives the first grace, for
example, to believe and repent, and then in mercy gives the second, to
persevere and continue in faith and repentance to the end. And this, if we
regard man himself, is very necessary; For as fire without supply of matter,
whereby it is fed and continued, would soon go out; so unless God of his
goodness, should follow his children, and by new and daily supplies, continue
his first grace in the^, they would undoubtedly soon loose the same, and
finally fall away.

The second Ground for the answer of this Question, is taken from some
special places of Scripture, where the same is moved and resolved. The men
that were at Peter's sermon, being touched with the sense of their own misery,
upon the doctrine which had been delivered, as the Holy Ghost says, were
pricked in their hearts, and cried one to an other: Men and brethren, what
shall we do? Peter Act. 2. 38.
moved by the spirit of God answers them, Repent, and be baptized for the
remission of your sins. The like was the case of the Iaylor, who, after that
the stubbornness of his heart was beaten down, by fear of the departure of
the prisoners, he came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and
moved this question unto them; Sirs, what must I do Act. 16. 33.
to be saved? to whom they gave answer, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou
shall be saved, and thine household. The young man in the Gospel sues to Christ,
and asks him, What shall I Mar. 10. 17. etc.
do to be saved? Christ's answers him, Keep the Commandments. When he replied
that he had kept them from his youth, Christ tells him, that he must go yet
further, and sell all that he has, and give to the poor. And John tells the
Scribes and Pharisees, who came unto his Baptism, and confessed their sins,
that if they would fly from the wrath to come, they must repent, and bring
forth fruits Matthew. 3. 8.
worthy amendment of life. From these places then, I frame this answer to the
Question in hand. The man that would stand in the favor of God and be saved,
must do four things: first, humble himself before God: secondly, believe in
Christ: thirdly, repent of his sins: fourthly, perform new obedience unto
God.

Sect. 2.
For the first. Humiliation is indeode a Humiliation.
fruit of faith: yet I put it in place before faith, because in practice it is
first. Faith lies hid in the heart, and the first effect whereby it appears,
is the abasing and humbling of our selves. And here we are further to consider
three points: first, wherein stands humiliation: secondly, the excellency of
it: thirdly, the Questions of conscience that concern it.

Touching the first point, Humiliation stands in the practice of three things.
The first is, a sorrow of heart, whereby the sinner is displeased with himself,
and ashamed in respect of his sins. The second is, a confession to god,
wherein also three things are to be done: first, to acknowledge all our maine
sins original and actual: secondly, to acknowledge our guiltiness before
God: thirdly, to acknowledge our just damnation for sin. The third thing in
Humiliation, is supplication made to God for mercy, as earnestly as in a
matter of life and death: and of these three things we have in Scripture the
examples of Ezra, Daniel, and the prodigal son, Ezra 9. Dan. 9. Luke 15. 18.

The second point is, the excellency of Humiliation, which stands in this,
that it has the promises of life eternal annexed to it, Esa. 57. 15. I dwell
in the high and holy place: with him also that is of a contrite and humble
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to give life to them that are
of a contrite heart. Psalm. 51. 17. A contrite and a broken heart, O God, thou will not despise. Prove. 28. 13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper:
but he that confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy, 1. Ioh. 1. 9. If
we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just, to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. By all these and many other places,
it is manifest, that in the very instant, when a sinner begins truly in heart
and conscience to humble himself, he is then entered into the state of
salvation. So soon as David said, I have sinned, 2. Sam. 12, 13.
Nathan pronounces in the name of the Lord, that his sins were put away. And
David himself says, alluding to the former place, I said I will confess my
sin, and loc, Psalm. 32. 5.
thou forgauest the wickedness of my sin. When the Prodigal son had but
said, I will go to Luke 15. 18.
my father, etc. even then, before he humbled himself, his father meets him,
and receives him.

The third point, is touching the Questions of conscience, concerning
Humiliation, all which may be reduced to four principal Cases.

I. Case. What if it fall out, that a man in humbling himself, cannot call to
mind either all, or the most of his sins? I answer; A particular humiliation
indeed is required, for maine and known sins: but yet there are two cases,
wherein general repentance, will be accepted of God for unknown sins. One
is, when a man has searched himself diligently, and by a serious examination,
passed through all the commandments of God, and yet after such examination
and search made, his particular offenses are yet hidden and not revealed unto
him, so as he cannot call them to remembrance; then the general repentance is
accepted. For this is answerable to the practice of David, who after long
search, when he could not attain to the knowledge of his particular slippes,
then he addresseth himself to a general humiliation, saying, Who knows the
errors of Psalm. 19. 12.
this life? cleanse me, Lord, from my secret faults: and upon this, he was no
doubt accepted. Again, when a man humbles himself, and yet is prevented by
the time, so as he cannot search his heart and life, as he would: his general
repentance will be taken and accepted of God. The truth hereof appears in the
thief upon the cross, who having no time to search himself, made no special
humiliation, yet upon his general confession he was accepted. Now the ground
of this doctrine is this; He that truly repents of one sin, in this case when
he is prevented: is, as if he repented of all.

II. Case. What must a man do, that finds himself hard hearted, and of a
dead spirit, so as he cannot humble himself as he would? Answ. Such persons,
if they humble themselves, they must be content with that grace which they have
received. For if thou be truly and unfeignedly grieved for this, that thou can
not be grieved, thy humiliation shall be accepted. For that which Paul says of
alms, may be truly said in this case, that if there be a ready mind, a man
shall be accepted, according to that he has, and not 2. Cor. 8. 12.
according to that he has not.

III. Case. Whether the party that is more grieved for loss of his friend,
then for offense of God by his sin, does or can truly humble himself? Answ.
A man may have a greater grief for an earthly loss, then for the other, and
yet be truly greiued for his sins too. The reason is, because that is a
bodily, natural, and sensible loss, and accordingly sorrow for it is
natural. Now the sorrow for the offending of God, is no sensible thing, but
supernatural and spiritual; and sensible things do more affect and urge the
mind, then the other. David did notably humble himself for his sins, and he
did exceedingly mourn for the loss of his son Absalom, yea and more too
then for his sins, Would God I had died for thee Absalom, O 2. Sam. 18. 33.
Absalom my son, my son, etc. Again I answer, that the sorrow of the
mind, must be measured by the intention of the affection, and by the
estimation of the thing for which we sorrow. Now sorrow for sin, though it be
less in respect of the intention thereof; yet is it greater in respect of the
estimation of the mind, because they which truly mourn for their sins, grieve
for the offense of God, as the greatest evil of all; and for the loss of the
favor of God, as for loss of the most excellent and precious thing in the
world.

IV. Case. Whether it be necessary in Humiliation, that the heart should be
smitten with a sensible sorrow? Answer. I. In sorrow for sin, there are two
things: first, to be displeased for our sins; secondly, to have a bodily
moving of the heart, which causes crying and tears. The former of these is
necessary, namely, in heart to be deeply displeased with our selves: the
latter is not simply necessary, though it be commendable in whomsoever it is,
if it be in truth; for Lydia had the first, but not the second. II. It falls
out oftentimes, that the greatness of the grief, takes away the sensible pain,
and causes a mummednesse of the heart, so that the party grieueth not. III.
Sometimes the complexion will not affoard tears: and in such there may be true
humiliation, though with dric cheeks.

Sect. 3.
The Second thing to be done for the attaining Faith in Christ.
of Gods favor, and confequently of salvation, is to Believe in Christ. In the
practice of a Christian life, the duties of humiliation and faith cannot be
severed, yet for doctrines sake, I distinguish them. In Faith there are two
things required, and to be performed on our behalf. First, to know the points
of religion, and namely the sum of the Gospel, especially the promise of
righteousness and life eternal by Christ. Secondly, to apprehend and apply the
promise, and withal the thing promised, which is Christ, unto our selves; and
this is done, when a man upon the commandment of God, sets down this with
himself, that Christ and his merits belong unto him in particular, and that
Christ is his wisdom, justification, sanctification, and redemption. This
doctrine is plain out of the sixth of John: for Christ is there propounded unto
us, as the bread and the water of life. Therefore faith must not be idle in the
brain, but it must take Christ and apply him unto the soul and conscience,
even as meat is eaten.

The Questions of Conscience touching Faith are these. First, how we may truly
apply Christ, with all his benefits unto our selves? For wicked men apply
Christ unto themselves falsely, in presumption, but few do it truly, as they
ought to do. I answer, That this may be done, we must remember to do two
things. First, lay down a foundation of this action, and then practice upon
it. Our foundation must be laid in the word, or else we shall fail in our
application, and it consists of two principles. The one is; As God gives a
promise of life eternal by Christ, so he gives commandment, that every one in
particular, should apply the promise to himself. The next is, that the
Ministry of the word, is an ordinary means, wherein God does offer, and
apply Christ with all his benefits to the hearers, as if he called them by
their names; Peter, John, Cornelius, Believe in Christ, and thou shall be
saved. When we have rightly considered of our foundation: the Second thing is,
to practice upon it, and that is, to give our selves to the exercises of faith
and repentance; which stand in meditation of the Word, and prayer for mercy
and pardon: and when this is done, then God gives the sense and increase of his
grace. When Lydia was hearing the Sermon of Paul, then God opened her heart,
Act. 16. v. 12.

Secondly, it is demanded: When faith begins to breed in the heart, and
when a man begins to believe in Christ? Answ. When he begins to be touched
in conscience for his own sins, and withal hungers and thirsts after
Christ, and his righteousness, then begins faith. The reason is plain. As
faith is renewed, so it is begun; but it is renewed when a man is touched in
conscience for his sins, and begins a new to hunger after Christ; therefore
when these things first show themselves, then faith first begins. For these
were the things that were in David, when he renewed his repentance. Psalm. 51.


Sect. 4.
The third duty necessary to salvation, is Repentance.
Repentance. In which, two things are to be considered; the beginning, namely,
a godly Sorrow, which is the beginning of Repentance, 2. Corinthians. 7. and upon
this sorrow a Change, which is indeed Repentance it self. In Sorrow we
consider, first, the nature of it; secondly, the properties of it. Touching the
nature of sorrow, it is either inward or outward. The inward sorrow, is when a
man is displeased with himself for his sins. The outward, when the heart
declares the grief thereof by tears, or such like signs. And sorrow in this
case, called a godly sorrow, is more to be esteemed by the first of these, then
by the second. The property of this sorrow, is to make us to be displeased
with our selves, for our sins directly, because they are sins, and do
displease God. If there were no judge, no hell, nor death, yet we must be
grieved because we have offended, so merciful a God and loving father. And as
godly sorrow will make us thus to do, so is it the next cause of repentance,
and by this is repentance discerned.

The next thing in Repentance, is the Change of the mind and whole man in
affection, life, and conversation. And this stands in a constant purpose of
the mind, and resolution of the heart, not to sin, but in every thing to do
the will of God. Hereupon Paul exhorts them, to whom he wrote, to continue
in the love of God, and in the obedience Act. 11. 23.
of his word. Barnabas when he came to Antioch, and had seen the grace of God,
was glad, and exhorted all, that with purpose of heart they should cleave unto
God, or continue with the Lord. So the Prophet Ezckiel says, if the wicked
will turn from all his sins, Ezekiel. 18. 21.
and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall
surely live and shall not die. In this purpose stands the very nature of
repentance, and it must be joined with humiliation and faith, as a third thing
available to salvation, and not to be severed from them. For a man in show
may have many good things: as for example, he may be humbled, and seem to have
some strength of faith; yet if there be in the said man, a want of this
purpose and resolution not to sin, the other are but dead things, and
unprofitable, and for all them, he may come to eternal destruction.
Furthermore, we must distinguish this kind of purpose, from the mind and
purpose of carnal men, thieves, drunkards, harlots, usurers; for they will
confess their sins, and be sorry for them, yea and shed some tears, wishing
they had never sinned as they have. In these men, indeed there is a wishing
will for the time, but no settled purpose. And it is a property of nature to
avoid evil, but to have a constant resolution of not sinning, is a gift of
grace; and for this it is, that we must labor; otherwise our repentance, is no
true and sound repentance.

Sect. 5.
The fourth and last duty, is to perform New Obedience.
New obedience unto God in our life and conversation. In this new obedience,
three things are required. First, it must be a fruit of the spirit Ioh. 15. 5.
of Christ in us: for when we do any good thing, it is Christ that does it in
us. To this purpose David prays unto God, Psalm. 143. 10. Let thy good Spirit
lead me forth into the land of righteousness. And Paul exhorts the Galatians to
walk in the Spirit; and then mark what follows; and ye shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5. 16. Secondly, this new obedience must be the
keeping of every commandment of God: for as S. James says, He that breaks
one commandment, is guilty of all, Iam. 2. 10.
that is, he that does willingly and wittingly break any commandment, and
makes not conscience of some one, makes not conscience of any, and before God
he is as guilty of all, as if he had broken all. Thirdly, in new obedience,
the whole man must endeavor to keep the whole law in his mind, will,
affections, and all the faculties of soul and body. As it is said of Josiah,
that he turned to God, according to all the laws of Moses, with all 2. king.
23. 25.
his heart. This last point added to the rest is the very form and life of new
obedience, and from hence it follows; First, that therepentant person, must
not live in the practice of any outward sin. Secondly, that there must be in
him, an inward resisting and restraining of the corruption of nature, and of
the heart, that he may truly obey God, by the grace of the spirit of God. The
heart of Joseph was Genesis 39. 9. 10.
ready pressed, to resist the evil request of Potiphars wife. And David staid
his affection from 2. Sam. 1^. 1^.
revenging himself upon Shemei, when he cursed him. Thirdly, that he ought to
stir up and exercise the inward man, by all spiritual motions of Faith, Joy,
Love, Hope, and the praise of God.

Now touching this point, there are 2. principal Questions propounded. First,
How may a man frame his life to live in New-bedience?

Ans. Though all the books of the old and new Testament, are direction
sufficient for a good life; yet a more special answer may be made out of the
same, plainly and briefly. That, there are three maine grounds or rules of New
Obedience. The first is laid down by our Savior Christ, Luke 9. 23. If any
man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and
follow me. The meaning is this; Every one that will become a scholar in the
school of Christ, and learn obedience unto God, must deny himself, that is,
he must in the first place, exalt and magnify the grace of God, and become
nothing in himself, renouncing his own reason, will, and affections, and
subiecting them to the wisdom and will of God in all things; yea esteeming al
things in the earth, even those that are dearest unto him, as dross and dung
in regard of the kingdom of Christ. Again, he must take up his Cross, that
is, he ought always to make a forehand reckoning, even of private crosses and
particular afflictions, and when they come, to bear them with cheerfulness.
This done, he must follow Christ, by practicing the virtues of meekenes,
patience, love, and obedience, and by being conformable to his death, in
crucifying the body of sin in himself. The second rule is propounded by
Paul, Act. 24. 14. To believe all things that are written in the Law and the
Prophets; and that is, to hold and embrace the same faith, which was embraced
by the Saints and servants of God in ancient times, and which was written by
Moses and the Prophets. Again, in all reverence to subject himself, to the
true manner of worshipping and serving God, revealed in his word; and not to
depart from the same doctrine and worship, either to the right hand, or to the
left. The third and last rule, is to have and to keep faith and a good
conscience, 1. Tim. 1. 19. Now faith is preserved, by knowledge of the doctrine
of the Law and the Gospel, by yielding assent unto the same doctrine, believing
it to be true, and by a particular application of it unto a man's self,
specially of the promise of righteousness and life everlasting, in and by
Christ. Again, that a man may keep a good conscience, he must do three
things. First, in the course of his life, he must practice the duties of the
general Calling in the particular; so as though they be two distinct in
nature, yet they may be both one in use and practice. Secondly, in all events
that come to pass, evermore in patience and silence he must submit himself,
to the good will and pleasure of God. Thus it is said of Aaron, that when God
had destroyed his sons, for offering up strange fire before him, he held his
peace, Levit. 10. 3. And David shows that it was his practice, when being
afflicted, he says, I was as dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou,
Lord, did it, Psalm. 39. 9. Thirdly, if at any time he falls, either through
infirmity, the malice of Satan, or the violence of some temptation, he must
humble himself before God, labor to break off his sin, and recover
himself by repentance. And these three, be the principal and maine grounds of
New-obedience.

The Second Question. Considering that all good works, are the fruits of a
regenerate person, and are contained under New-obedience; How may a man do a
good work, that may be accepted of God, and please him?

For resolution whereof, it is to be carefully remembered, that to the doing of
a good work, sundry things are required: Whereof, some in nature do go
before the work to be done, some do accompany the doing thereof, and some
again do follow the work, being required to be done, when the work is done.

Before the work, there must go Reconciliation; whereby the person is
reconciled unto God in Christ, and made acceptable to him For it is a clear
case, that no work of man ca^ be accepted of God, unless the person of the
worker be approved of him. And the works of men of what dignity soever, are
not to be esteemed by the show, and outward appearance of them, but by the
mind and condition of the doer. Again, before we do any good work, we must
by prayer lift up our hearts unto God, and desire him to enable us by his
spirit to do it, and to guide us by the same, in the action, which we are
about to do. This did the Prophet David oftentimes, as we may read in the
Psalms, but especially in Psalm. 143. 10. when he says, Teach me to do thy
will, O God, for thou art my God, let thy good spirit l^^d me unto the land of
righteousness. And oftentimes in the 119. Psalm. Teach me, O Lord, the way of
thy statutes, verse. 33. Give me understanding. 34. Direct me in the path of thy
commandments. 35. Again, Teach me judgment and knowledge. 66. Let my heart
be upright in thy statutes. 80. Stablish me, according to thy promise, 116.
Direct my steps in thy word, and let none iniquity have dominion over me.
133.

In the doing of the work, we are to consider two things; the matter, and the
manner or form of doing it. For the matter, it must be a work commanded in
the word of God, either expressly or generally. For it is Gods revealed will
that gives the goodness to any work. Christ says of the Pharisees, that they
worshipped him in vain, teaching for doctrines, the commandments of men. He
therefore Mark. 7. 7.
that will do a work, tending to the worship of God, must do that which God
commands. Now actions expressly commanded, are the duties of the moral Law;
Actions generally commanded, are all such as serve to be helps and means, to
further the said moral duties. And here we must remember, that actions
indifferent in the case of offense, or edification, cease to be indifferent,
and come under some commandment of the moral Law. To which purpose Paul
says, If eating flesh will offend my brother, I will 1. Cor. 8. vlt.
eat no flesh while the world stands; his meaning is, that though his eating
of flesh, was a thing indifferent in it self; yet in case of offense, his
mind was to abstain from it, as much as from the breach of the Law of God.
Again, if an action indifferent, comes within the case, of furthering the good
of the Commonwealth, or Church, it cease to be indifferent, and comes under
commandment; and so all kind of callings and their works, though never so
base, may be the matter of good works. This point is to be remembered: for it
serves to encourage every man, of what condition soever he be, in the diligent
performance of the duties of his calling; as also to confute the doctrine of
the Popish church, which teaches that only alms deeds, and building or
maintaining of Churches and religious houses, are the matter of good works.

Now to the manner or Form of a good work, there is required Faith. For as
without faith, it is impossible to please God, Hebr. 11. 6. so whatsoever work
is undertaken without faith, cannot in any sort be acceptable unto him. What
faith then is required in this case? I answer. First a general faith, whereby
we are persuaded that the thing to be done, may lawfully be done; and of this
the Apostle speaks when he says, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.
Secondly, a particular or justifying Rom 14. vlt.
faith, which purifieth the heart, and makes it fit to bring forth a good
work: for it gives a beginning to the work, and also couers the wants and
defects thereof, by apprehending and applying unto us, Christ and his merits.
Again, a good work for the manner thereof, must be done in obedience. For
knowing that the thing to be done, is commanded of God, we must have a mind,
and intention to obey God in the thing we do, according to his commandment.
If it be here demanded, seeing works must be done in obedience, how, and to
what part of the word we must direct our obedience? I answer: to the Law. But
how? not considered in his rigor, but as it is qualified, mollified, and
te^pered by the gospel: for according to the rigor of the Law, which
commandes perfect obedience, no man can possibly do a good work.

Furthermore, touching the manner, it must be done to good and lawful ends. The
Ends of a good work are manifold: First, the honor and glory of God. Whether
ye eat or 2. Cor. 10. 3^.
drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. Secondly, the
testification of our thankfulness unto God, that has redeemed us by Christ. The
third is, to edify our neighbor, and to further him in the way to life
everlasting, Math. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven. The fourth is, to
exercise and increase our faith and repentance, both which be much strengthened
and confirmed, by the practice of good works. Fifthly, that we may escape the
punishment of sin, the destruction of the wicked: and obtain the reward of
the righteou^s, life everlasting. This was the end that Paul aimed at in the
course of his calling; to which purpose he says, From henceforth there is laid
up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day, 2. Tim. 4. 8. Sixthly, that we may be answerable to
our calling, in doing the duties thereof, and in walking as children of light,
redeemed by Christ Jesus. When David kept his fathers sheep, he behaved
himself as a shepherd; but when he was anointed King over Israel, God gave
him an heart and resolution, to carry himself as a King and governor of his
people. Look then as David did, so ought we even by our works to be
answerable to our callings. Seventhly, that we may pay the debt, which we owe
unto God. For we are debtors to him in sundry regardes; as we are his
creatures: as we are his servants: as we are his children: In a word, as we are
redeemed by Christ, and our whole debt is, our duty of praise and thanks
giving.

After the work is done, then comes the acceptance of it. God accepts of our
works diverse ways. First, in that he pardons the fault which comes from us.
Secondly, in that he approoues his own good work in us. Thirdly, in that he
does give unto the doers of them a crown of righteousness and glory, according
to his promise, 2. Tim. 4. 8. Rev. 2. 10. We then, after we have done the work,
must humble our selves, and entreat the Lord to pardon the wants of our works,
and say with David, Lord enter not into judgment with Psalm 143. 2.
thy servant: and with Daniel, Lord unto us belongs Dan. 9. 8, 9.
open shame and confusion, but to thee righteousness, compassion, and
forgiveness. And the reason is plain, because in us there is no goodness, no
holiness, no righteousness, nor any thing that may present us acceptable in his
sight: and for this cause Paul says, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not
thereby justified. Great reason then, that we should humble ourselves before
God, for our wants, and pray unto him, that he will in mercy accept our
endeavor, and confirm the good work begun in us, by his holy spirit.

CHAP. VI.
Of the second maine Question touching assurance of salvation.

II. Question. How a man may be in conscience assured, of his own salvation?
Before I come to the Question it self, this conclusion is to be laid down as
a main Ground; That Election, vocation, faith, adoption, justification,
sanctification, and eternal glorification, are never separated in the salvation
of any man, but like inseparable companions, go^ hand in hand; so as he that
can be assured of one of them, may infallibly conclude in his own heart, that
he has and shall have interest in all the other in his due time. This is
plain by the words of S. Paul, Romans 8. 30. Whom he predestinate, them also he
called; whom he called, them also he justified; whom he justified, them also
he glorified. In which place, the Apostle compares the causes of salvation, to
a chain of many linkes, whereof every one is so coupled to the other, that he
which takes hold of the highest, must needs carry all the rest with him.
Again, amongst these linkes Faith is one, a principal grace of God, whereby
man is ingrafted into Christ, and thereby becomes one with Christ, and Christ
one with him, Ephesians. 3. 17. Now whosoever is by faith united unto Christ, the
same is elected, called, justified, and sanctified. The reason is manifest. For
in a chain, the two extremes, are knit together, by the middle linkes; and in
the order of causes of happiness and salvation, faith has a middle place, and
by it has the child of God assured hold of his election, and effectual
vocation, and consequently of his glorification in the kingdom of heaven. To
this purpose says S. John, c. 3. v. 36. He that believes in the Son, has
everlasting life. And, c. 5. v. 24. He that believes in him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from
death to life. This is the Ground.

Now for answer to the Question, diverse places of Scripture are to be skanned;
wherein this case of Conscience is fully answered and resolved.

Sect. 1.
The first place is Romans 8. 16. And the spirit Romans 8. 16.
of God testifies together with our spirits, that we are the sons of God. In
these words are two testimonies of our adoption set down. The first is the
Spirit of God dwelling in us, and testifying unto us, that we are Gods
children. But some will happily demand, How Gods spirit gives witness, seeing
now there are no revelations? Answ. Extraordinary revelations are ceased; and
yet the holy Ghost in and by the word, reuealeth some things unto men: for
which cause he is called truly the Spirit of Revelation, Ephesians. 3. 5. Again, the
holy Ghost gives testimony, by applying the promise of remission of sins,
and life everlasting by Christ, particularly to the heart of man, when the same
is generally propounded, in the Ministry of the word. And because many are
ready presumptuously to say, they are the children of God, when they are not,
and that they have the witness of Gods Spirit; when in truth they want it:
therefore we are to put a difference between this carnal conceit, and the true
testimony of the Spirit. Now there be two things whereby they may be discerned
one from the other. The first is, by the means. For the true testimony of the
holy ghost, is wrought ordinarily by the preaching, reading, and meditation of
the word of God; as also by prayer, and the right use of the Sacraments. But
the presumptuous testimony, arises in the heart, and is framed in the brain,
out of the use of these means; or though in the use, yet with want of the
blessing of God concurring with the means. The second is, by the effects, and
fruits of the Spirit. For it stirrs up the heart, to prayer and invocation of
the name of God, Zach. 12. 10. yea it causes a man to cry and call earnestly
unto God, in the time of distress, with a sense and feeling of his own
miseries; and with deep sighs and groans, which cannot be uttered, to cra^e
mercy and grace at his hands, as of a loving father, Romans 8. 26. Thus did
Moses cry unto heaven in his heart, when he was in distress at the red sea,
Exodus 14. 15. And this gift of prayer, is an infallible testimony of Gods
Spirit; which cannot stand with carnal presumption.

The second Testimony of our Adoption, is our Spirit, that is, our conscience
sanctified and renewed by the Holy Ghost. And this also is known and
discerned; first, by the grief of the heart for offending God, called Godly
sorrow, 1. Cor. 7. 10. secondly, by a resolute purpose of the heart, and
endeavor of the whole man, in all things to obey God: thirdly, by sauouring
the things of the Spirit, Romans 8. 5. that is, by doing the works of the
Spirit, with joy and cheerfulness of heart, as in the presence of God, and as
his children and servants.

Now put the case, that the testimony of the Spirit be wanting: then I answer?
that the other testimony; the sanctification of the heart, will suffice to
assure us. We know it sufficiently to be true, and not painted fire, if there
be heat, though there be no flame.

Put the case again, that the testimony of the spirit be wanting, and our
sanctification be uncertain unto us, how then may we be assured? The answer
is, that we must the^ have recourse to the first beginnings, and motions of
sanctification, which are these. First, to feel our inward corruptions.
Secondly, to be displeased with our selves for them. Thirdly, to begin to
hate sin. Fourthly, to grieve so often as we fall and offend God. Fifthly, to
avoid the occasions of sin. Sixthly, to endeavor to do our duty, and to use
good means. Seventhly, to desire to sin no more. And lastly, to pray to God
for his grace. Where these and the like motions are, there is the spirit of
God, whence they proceed: and sanctification is begun. One apple is sufficient
to manifest the life of the tree, and one good and constant motion of grace, is
sufficient to manifest sanctification. Again, it may be demanded, what must be
done, if both be wanting? Answ. Men must not despair, but use good means, and
in time they shall be assured.

Sect. 2.
The Second place is, the 15. Psalm. In the Psalm. 15.
first verse whereof, this question is propounded, namely, Who of all the
members of the Church, shall have his habitation in heaven? The answer is made
in the verses following: and in the second verse, he sets down three general
notes of the said person. One is, to walk uprightly in sincerity, approving
his heart and life to God: the second is, to deal justly in all his doings: the
third is, for speech, to speak the truth from the heart, without guile or
flattery. And because we are easily deceived in general sins, in the 3, 4,
and 5. verses, there are set down seven more evident and sensible notes of
sincerity, justice and truth. One is in speech, not to take up or carry
abroad false reports and slanders. The second is, in our dealings not to do
wrong to our neighbor, more then to our selves. The third is in our company,
to contemn wicked persons worthy to be contemned. The fourth is in our
estimation we have of others, and that is, to honor them that fear God. The
fifth is in our words, to swear and not to change: that is, to make conscience
of our word and promise, especially if if it be confirmed by oath. The sixth is
in taking of gain, not to give money to usury; that is, not to take increase
for bare lending, but to lend freely to the poor. The last is, to give
testimony without briberie or partiality. In the fifth verse, is added a
reason of the answer: he that in his endeavor does al these things, shall
never be moved, that is, cut off from the Church as an hypocrite.

Sect. 3.
The third place of Scripture is the first Epistle S. John's 1. Epistle.
of John: the principal scope whereof, is to give a full resolution to the
conscience of man, touching the certainty of his salvation. And the principal
grounds of assurance, which are there laid down, may be reduced to three heads.

The first is this. He that has communion or 1. Ioh. 5 (...).
fellowship with God in Christ, may be undoubtedly assured of his salvation.
This conclusion is propounded, Chap. 1. v. 3, 4. Where the Apostle tells the
Church, that the end of the preaching of the Gospel unto them was, that they
might have fellowship, not only mutually among themselves, but also with God
the father, and with his son Jesus Christ. And further, that having both
knowledge, and assurance of this heavenly communion, to be begun in this life,
and perfected in the life to come, their joy might be full: that is, they might
thence reap, matter of true joy and sound comfort, unto their souls and
consciences. Now whereas it might be happily demanded by some believers, how
they should come to this assurance? S. John answers in this Epistle, that the
certainty thereof may be gathered by four infallible notes. The first is
Remission of sins. For though God be in himself, most holy and pure, and no
mortal man, being unclean and polluted by sin, can have fellowship with
him: yet God has showed his mercy, to those that believe in him, and has
accepted of the blood of Jesus Christ his son, whereby they are cleansed from
all their corruptions. v. 7. If here it be asked, how this pardon and
forgiveness may be known? It is answered, by two signs. One is Humble and
hearty Confession of our sins unto god; for so says the Apostle, If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all iniquity. v. 9. The other is the pacified Conscience; for
being justified by faith we have peace with God: and If our heart Romans 5. 1.
condemn us not: that is if our conscience in respect of sin does not accuse
us, then have we boldness toward God, Chap. 3. v. 21. The second note of
fellowship with God, is the sanctifying Spirit, whereby we are renewed in
holiness and righteousness: Hereby we know that he abides in us, even by the
Spirit which he has given us, Chap. 3. v. 24. The third is, holiness and
vprightnes of heart and life. To this end the Apostle says, If we say that we
have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie and do not truly: but
if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with an
other, etc. Chap. 1. 6, 7. The fourth is, perseverance in the knowledge and
obedience of the Gospel. So the same Apostle exhorts the Church: Let
therefore abide in you that same doctrine concerning Christ, which ye have
heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the beginning,
remain in you, that is, if ye believe and obey it; you also shall continue in
the same, and in the father. Chap. 2. 24.

The second Ground, He that is the adopted son of God, shall undoubtedly be
saved. This point the Apostle plainly declares, when he says: Be loved, now
are we the sons of God. Chap. 3. (...). 2.
-- And we know, that is, we are undoubtedly assured by faith, that when
Christ shall appear in glory, we shall be like unto him, for we shall see him
as he is. That the latter part of these words, is thus to be expounded, I
gather out of Chap. 2. 28. as also by comparing this text with that of S. Paul,
where he says, When Christ which is our life shall Col. 3. 26.
appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory. And again, If we be
sons, we Romans 8. 7.
are also heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, if so
be that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him. Now put
the case, that the conscience of the believer, will not rest in this, but
desires to be further resolved, touching the certainty of his adoption? Then I
answer, that he must have recourse unto the signs, whereby a son of God may
be discerned from a child of the devil: and these are principally three, First
is, truly to believe in the name of the son of God: for those that have God
for their father, are made the sons of God, by faith in Jesus Christ. And
this faith snewes Gal. 3. ^6.
it self by obedience. For hereby we are sure that we know Christ, that is,
that we believe in him, and apply him with all his benefits unto our souls, If
we keep his commandments. Nay further, He that says, I know him, and keeps
not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him, chap. 2, 3, 4.
The second sign is, a hearty desire, and earnest in deauour to be cleansed of
his corruptions. Every son of God that has this hope, purifieth himself,
even as Christ is pure, chap. 3. verse. 3. The third is, the love of a
Christian, because he is a Christian: for hereby says the Apostle, are the
children of God known from the children of the devil: because the sons of
Satan do hate their brethren, (as Cain did his brother Abel) even for the good
works which they do. On the other side, Gods adopted sons, may hereby know
themselves to be translated from death to life, because they love the brethren,
Chap. 3. 10, 11, 12, etc.

The third Ground. They that are assured, of the love of God to them in
particular, may also be certainly assured of their own salvation. This
doctrine follows necessarily upon the Apostles words, chap. 4. v. 9. For those
whom God has loved from all eternity, to them he has manifested his love,
by sending his only begotten Son into the world, that they might live
through him eternally. But how may a man be assured of Gods special love and
favor? The same Apostle answers, by two notes; The first is the love of our
brethren, and that according to Gods commandment, wherein it is commanded;
that he that loves God, should love his brother also, 4. 21. And if any man
say, I love God, and hate his brother, he is a liar. For how can he that loves
not his brother, whom he has seen, love God whom he has not seen? 4. 20.
Now that a man deceive not himself in the love of his brother, Saint John
gives three rules; One, that Christian brotherly love, should not be, for
outward respects or considerations, but principally; because they are the
sons of God, and members of Christ: Every one that loves him which did
beget: that is God the father, loves him also which is begotten of him. 5. 1.
Another is, that it must not be outward, in show only, but inward in the
heart. Let us not love in word or in tongue only, but in deed and in truth.
3. 18. Lastly, that it be not only in time of prosperity, but when he stands
in most need of our love. For whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his
brother have need, and shuts up the bowels of co^passio^ from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? 3. 17. The second note of Gods love unto us
is, our love of God. For those whom God loves in Christ, to them he gives his
grace, to love him again. And this loving of him again, is an evident token
of that love, wherewith he loves them. So says the Apostle, We love him
because he loved us first, 4. 19. If it be demanded, how a man may be assured
that he loves God? the answer is, he may know it by two things; First, by
his conformity to him in holiness. The child that loves his father, will be
willing to tread in the steps of his father, and so in like manner, he that
loves God, will endeavor even as he is, so to be in this world. 4. 17. But
how is that? not in equality and perfection, but in similitude and
conformity, striving to be holy, as he is holy, and indeauouring to do his
will in all things. Secondly, by the weaning of his affection from the things
of this world, yea from all pleasures and delights of this present life, so
far forth, as they are severed from the fear, and love of God, Love not this
world, nor the things that are in the world: if any man love this world, the
love of the father is not in him. 2. 15.

Sect. 4.
The Fourth place, is in the second of 2. Tim. 2. 19.
Timothy, 2. 19. The foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal,
The Lord knows who are his, and let every one that calls upon the name of
the Lord, depart from iniquity. In these words, Paul goes about to cut off
an offense, which the Church might take, by reason of the fall of Hymenaeus and
Philetus, who seemed to be pillars, and principal men in the Church. And to
confirm them against this offense, he says; The foundation of God, that is,
the decree of Gods election, stands firm and sure: so as those which are
elected of God, shall never fall away, as these two have done. And this he
declares by a double similitude; First of all he says, the election of God, is
like the foundation of an house, which stands fast, though all the building
be shaken. Secondly he says, that election has the seal of God, and
therefore may not be changed; because things which are sealed, are thereby made
sure and authentical. Now this seal has two parts: the first concerns God,
in that every man's salvation is written in the book of life, and God knows
who are his. And because it might be said, God indeed knows who shall be
saved, but what is that to us? we know not so much of our selves. Therefore
Saint Paul to answer this, sets down a second part of this seal, which
concerns man, and is imprinted in his heart and conscience; which also has two
branches: the gift of invocation, and a watchful care, to make conscience of
al and every sin, in these words, And let every one that calls upon the name
of the Lord, depart from iniquity. Whereby he signifies, that those that can
call upon God, and give him thanks for his benefits, and withal, in their lives
make conscience of sin, have the seal of Gods election imprinted in their
hearts, and may assure themseles they are the Lords.

Sect. 5.
A Fifth place of scripture, touching this 2. Pet. 1. 10.
question is, 2. Pet. 1. 10. Give all diligence to make your election sure, for
if you do these things you shall never fall. Which words contain two parts:
First, an exhortation, to make our election sure, not with God, for with him
both it, and all other things are unchangeable; but to ourselves, in our own
hearts and consciences. Secondly, the Means whereby to come to this assurance,
that is, by doing the things before named, in the 5. 6, and 7. verses; and
that is nothing else, but to practice the virtues of the moral Law, there set
down, which I will briefly show what they are, as they lie in the text.

To faith, add vertue] by faith, he means true religion, and that gift of
God, whereby we put our trust and confidence in Christ. By virtue, he means
no special virtue, but (as I take it) an honest and upright life before men,
shining in the virtues and works of the moral Law. By knowledge, he means a
gift of God, whereby a man may judge, how to carry himself warily, and
uprightly before men. By temperance, is understood a gift of God, whereby we
keep a moderation of our natural appetite, especially about meat, drink, and
attire. By Patience, is meant a virtue, whereby we moderate our sorrow, in
enduring affliction. Godliness, is an other virtue, whereby we worship God, in
the duties of the first table. Brotherly kindness, is also that virtue,
whereby we embrace the Church of God, and the members thereof with the bowels
of love. And in the last place, Love, is that virtue, whereby we are well
affected to all men, even to our enemies. Now having made a rehearsal of these
virtues: in the tenth verse he says, If ye do these things ye shall never
fall, that is to say, If ye exercise your selves in these things, you may
hereby be well assured and persuaded, of your election and salvation.

CHAP. VII.
Of the third maine Question, touching distress of mind; and generally of all
distresses, and their remedies.

III. Question. How a man being in distress of mind, may be comforted and
relieved?
Ans. Omitting all circumstances (considering that much might be spoken
touching this Question) I will only set down that which I take to be most
material to the doubt in hand.

Sect. 1.
Distress of mind (which Solomon calls a Distress of mind in general.
Prove. 18. 14.
broken or troubled spirit) is, when a man is disquieted and distempered in
conscience, and consequently in his affections, touching his estate before God.
This distress has two degrees; the less, and the greater. The less is a
single Fear, or grief, when a man stands in suspense and doubt, of his own
salvation, and in fear that he shall be condemned. The greater distress is
Despair, when a man is without all hope of salvation, in his own sense and
apprehension. I call Despair a greater distress, because it is not a distinct
kind of trouble of mind, (as some do think,) but the highest degree, in
every kind of distress. For every distress in the mind, is a fear of
condemnation, and comes at length to desperation, if it be not cured.

All distress of mind, arises from temptation, In special.
either begun or continued. For these two do so necessarily follow, and so
inseparably accompany each the other, that no distress, of what kind soever,
can be severed from temptation. And therefore according to the diverse sorts of
temptations, that do befall men, must the distresses of the mind be
distinguished.

Now Temptations be of two sorts; either of trial, or seducement. Temptations
of trial, are such as do befall men, for the trial and proof of the grace
of God which is in them. The Temptations of trial, are twofold: the first, is
a combat of the conscience directly and immediately with the wrath of God;
which being the most grievous temptation that can be, it causes the greatest
and deepest distress of conscience. The second is, the Trial of the Cross,
that is, of outward affliction, whereby God makes proof of the faith of his
children; and not only that, but of their hope, patience, and affiance in his
mercy for their deliverance.

Temptations of seducement be such, as wherein men are entised, to fall from God
and Christ, to any kind of evil. And these are of three kinds. The first is,
immediately from the Devil; and it is called the temptation of Blasphemies, or
the Blasphemous temptation. The second is, from a man's own sins, original
and actual; and this also has sundry branches, as we shall see afterward. The
third proceeds from Imagination corrupted and depraved. Now answerable to
these several kinds of Temptations, are the several kinds of Distresses. And
as all temptations may be reduced to those five, which have been before named;
so may all distresses be reduced to five heads, arising of the former
temptations.

Sect. 2.
Before I come to handle them in particular; The General Remedy of all
Distresses.
we are to consider in the first place, what is the best and most sure General
Remedy, which may serve for all these, or any other kind of temptation, that
is incident to man: and by this, the curing of any particular distress, will
be more easy and plain.

This general Remedy, is the Applying of the promise of life everlasting, in
and by the blood of Christ. For no physic, no art or skill of man, can cure
a wounded and distressed conscience, but only the blood of Christ. And that
this is the sovereign remedy of all other, no man doubts. The maine
difficulty is, touching the manner of proceeding, in the application of the
promise. Herein therefore, three things must be performed.

First of all, the party must disclose the cause of the particular distress,
that the remedy may the better be applied. For the truth is, that the very
opening of the cause, is a great ease to the mind, before any remedy be
applied. Yet by the way, this care must be had, that the thing to be revealed,
be not hurtful to the party, to whom it is made known. For the distress
may happily arise of some confederacy, in matters of Treason; by the
concealing whereof, the party to whom they are revealed, may entangle
himself in the same danger.

Secondly, if the cause may be known, (for sometime it is hid from the party
distressed) then trial must be made, whether the said party, be fit for
comfort yea or no? For if he be found to be unfit, the word of God shall be
misapplied, and consequently abused. His fitness for comfort, may be found
out, by searching whether he be humbled for his sins, or not: for men may be
in great distress, and yet not touched at all for their sins. This
humiliation stands in sorrow for sin, with confession of the same unto God,
and in earnest prayer for the pardon thereof, with an hearty desire of
amendment of life. But if on the otherside, the party be vnhumbled, then the
first and principal care must be, to work in him some beginning of
humiliation. This may be done in a friendly, and Christian talk and
conference, whereby he must first be brought to see, and well to consider his
own sins: secondly, to grieve, and to be sorry for them, at the least, for
some of the principal.

And touching this Sorrow, two things must be remembered: first, that the nature
of worldly sorrow must be altered, by being turned, and changed into sorrow
according to God. If a man be in some danger of his life, by bleeding at the
nose; experience teaches, the counsel of the Physician is, to open a vain,
and let the party blood in the arm, that the course thereof may be turned an
other way: The like order is to be taken with men, that are troubled with
worldly sorrow in their distress: and that is, to turn the course of their
grief, by causing them to grieve not for worldly respects, or only in
consideration of the punishment, due unto them for their sins, but
principally for the very offense of God, in, and by their sins committed.

This done, a second care must be had, that this sorrow for sin be not
confused, but a distinct sorrow. The man that is in sorrow, must not be grieved
only, because he is as other men are, a sinner; but more specially for this,
and that particular sin, by which it comes to pass, that he is such, or such
a sinner; that so his sorrow in respect of sin, may be distinct, and brought
as it were to some particular head. And men in this case, must deal with the
party distressed, as Surgeons are wont to do with a tumor, or swelling in
the body, whose manner is, first to apply drawing and ripening plasters to
the place affected, to bring the sore to an head, that the corruption may issue
out at some one place: and then afterward healing plasters which are of great
use to cure the same: Even so confused grief, must be reduced to some
particulars: and then, and not before, is a man fit for comfort, when his
conscience is touched in special, in regard of some one or more distinct and
several offenses. And he that is grieved for one sin truly, and unfeignedly,
from his heart; shall proportionally be grieved for all the sins, that he
knows to be in himself.

The third thing required in applying this remedy is, the ministering and
conuaying of comfort to the mind of him, that has confessed his sins, and
is truly humbled for the^: and it is a point of the greatest moment of all.
Where if the question be, how this comfort should be ministered? the answer is,
it may be done, by bringing the party troubled, within the compass of the
promise of life. And there be two ways of doing this: the one false, and the
other true.

Sect. 3.
Some think, that men may be brought The false way of ministering comfort.
within the Covenant, by the doctrine of Universal grace and redemption. But
this way of persuading a man that he has title in the Covenant of grace, is
both false, and unfit. False it is, because all the promises of the Gospel, are
limited with the condition of Faith, and Repentance, not being universal to
all, but made only to such persons, as repent and believe: therefore they are
indefinite in regard of whole mankind, and to believers only they are
universal.

It is objected, that God would have all men to be saved. Ans. The Apostle is
the best expounder of himself, and he says in the (...). Tim. 2. 4.
Acts to the same effect, The time of this ignorance God regarded not, but NOW
he admonishes all men every where to repent. In which Act. 17. 30.
words, Paul adds this circumstance of time [now] to limit this good will of
God, to the last age of the world, after the coming of Christ in the flesh,
and not to enlarge the same to all the posterity of Adam. And so must he be
understood in the place to Timothy, God would have all men to be saved, that
is, now in this last age of the world. And thus the same Apostle, 2. Cor. 6.
expoundes a certain prophecy of Isay, concerning the acceptable time of
grace. Now, says he, is the acceptable time: behold, [Now] is the day of
salvation, Esa. 49. 8.
meanig the time of the new Testament. And Coloss. 1. 26. The mystery hid from
the beginning, is now made manifest to the Saints. And, Romans 16. 26. The
revelation of the secret mystery is now opened. All which, and many other
places about the same matter, having this circumstance of time [Now,] must
needs be limited to this last age of the world. As for the note of
universality, All, it must not be understood of all particulars, but of all
kinds, sorts, conditions, and states of men, as may be gathered out of the
former words: I would that prayers be made for all men, not for every
particular man: (for there be some that sin unto death, for whom 1. Ioh. 5.
16.
we may not pray,) but for all states of men, as well Princes as subjects,
poor as rich, base as noble, unlearned as learned, etc.

But the saying of Paul is urged, 2. Cor. 5. 18. God was in Christ, reconciling
the World unto himself: therefore the promise in Christ, belongs to the whole
World, and consequently to every one. Ans. The saine Apostle shall again
answer for himself, Romans 11. 15. The casting away of the Jews, is
thereconciling of the world, that is, of the Gentiles in the last age of the
world: for so he said before more plainly, The falling away of the Jew, is the
riches of the world, and the diminishing of them, the riches of the Gentiles.
And so must that place to the Corinthes be understood, namely, not of all and
every man, that lived in all ages and times; but of them that were (by the
dispensation of the Gospel) to be called out of all kingdoms, and nations,
after the death and ascension of Christ.

Thus then the promise of salvation, is not universal, without exception, or
restraint: and therefore application made by the universality of the promise,
admits some falsehood.

Secondly, this way of applying, is also Unfit. For the reason must be framed
thus: Christ died for all men: but thou art a man: therefore Christ died for
thee. The party distressed will grant all, and say, Christ indeed died for
him, if he would have received Christ, but he by his sins has cut himself
off from his own Savior, and has forsaken him, so as the benefit of his
death will do him no good.

Sect. 4.
The right way of ministering Comfort to a party distressed follows. In the
handling The Grounds of Comfort.
whereof, first, I will lay down the Grounds, whereby any man that belongs to
God, may be brought within the Covenant. And then, I will show the Right Way,
how they must be used, and applied.

For the first Recourse must not be bad to all graces, or to all degrees and
measures of grace; but only such, as a troubled Conscience may feel and reach
unto. For those that be the true children of God, and have excellent measure of
grace; when they are in distress, feel little or no grace at all in
themselves. The graces then, that serve for this purpose, are three: Faith,
Repentance, and the true Love of God, which is the fruit of them both. And that
we may the more easily and truly discern of them, and not be deceived,
inquiry must be made, what be the Seeds and beginnings of them all.

The first Ground of grace is this: A desire to repent, and believe, in a
touched heart and conscience, is faith and repentance it self, though not in
nature, yet in Gods acceptance. I prove it thus. It is a principle granted
and confessed of all men; that in them which have grace, God accepts the will
for the deed. If there be a willing mind (says the Apostle) it is accepted
not according to that a man has 2. Cor. 8. 11.
not, but according to that he has. Again, God has annexed a promise of
blessedness, and life everlasting to the true and unfeigned desire of grace.
Whence it is, that they are in Scripture pronounced blessed, which hunger and
thirst after righteousness. And who are they Math. 5. 6.
but such, as feel themselves to want all righteousness, and do truly and
earnestly desire it in their hearts. For hunger and thirst argues both a want
of something, and a feeling of the want. And to this purpose the holy Ghost
says, To him that is a thirst will I give to drink of the water of life
freely. Now this Revel. 21. 6.
thirsty soul, is that man, which feels himself destitute of all grace, and
Gods favor in Christ, and withal does thirst after the blood of Christ, and
desires to be made partaker thereof. God is wont mercifully to accept of the
desire of any good thing, when a man is in necessity, and stands in want
thereof. The Lord (says David) hears the desire of Psalm. 10. 17.
the poor, that is, of them that are in distress, either of body or mind.
Yea, he will fulfill the desire of them that fear him.

It will be said, that the desire of good Psalm. 145. 19.
things is natural: and therefore God will not regard men's desires.

I answer, Desires be of two sorts; Some be of such things, as men by the mere
light of nature know to be good: for example; the desire of wisdom, of civil
virtue, of honor, of happiness, and such like: and all these nature can
desire. Others be above nature, as the desire of remission of sins,
reconciliation, and sanctification: and they which seriously desire these, have
a promise of blessedness and life everlasting. And hence it follows, that
desire of mercy, in the want of mercy, is mercy it self; and desire of
grace, in the want of grace, is grace it self.

A second Ground is this. A godly sorrow whereby a man is grieved for his
sins, because they are sins, is the beginning of repentance, and indeed for
substance is repentance it self. The Apostle Paul rejoiced that he had in the
work of his Ministry, wrought this godly sorrow in the hearts of the
Corinthians, calling 2. Cor. 7. 9.
it sorrow that causes repentance not to be repented of. This sorrow may be
discerned in this sort: The heart of him in whom it is, is so affected, that
though there were no conscience, nor devil to accuse, no hell for
condemnation; yet it would be grieved in it self, because God by sin is
displeased, and offended.

If it be alleged, that every one cannot reach to this beginning of
repentance, thus to sorrow for his sin; then I add further; If the party be
grieved for the hardness of his heart, whereby it comes to pass, that he cannot
grieve, he has undoubtedly received some portion of godly sorrow. For it is
not nature, that makes us to grieve for hardness of heart, but grace.

The third Ground is, that A settled purpose, and willing mind to forsake all
sin, and to turn unto God, (though as yet no outward conversion appear,) is
a good beginning of true conversion, and repentance. I thought (says David) I
will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Psalm. 32. 5.
Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin. And to this is added
(Selah,) which is not only a musical note, but, as some think, a note of
observation, to move us to mark the things that are set down, as being of
special weight and moment. And surely this is a matter of great consequence;
that upon the very unfeigned purpose of confession of sin, God should give a
pardon thereof. Take a further proof of this in the prodigal son, whom I
take not for one that was never called, or turned to God, (though some do so,
and seem to have warrant for their opinion^) but rather for him that is the
Child of God, and afterward falls away. Now this man being brought by some
outward crosses and afflictions, to see his own misery, purposes with
himself, to return to his father again, and to humble himself, and confess
his iniquity: and upon this very purpose, when he had said, I will go to my
father, and say unto him, father, I have Luke 15. 17. 18.
sinned, etc. at his return a far off, his father receives him as his child
again, and after acceptance follows his confession. The like is to be seen
in David, who being reproved by the Prophet Nathan, for his 2. Sam. 12. 13.
sins of adultery and murder, presently made confession of them, and at the
very same time, received by the prophet, sentence of absolution, even from the
Lord himself, wherein he could not err.

The fourth Ground. To love any man because he is a Christian, and a child of
God, is a sensible and certain note of a man that is partaker of the true love
of God in Christ. Hereby (says S. John) we know that we are translated 1.
John. 3. 14.
from death to life, because we love the brethren. Love here is not a cause but
only a sign of gods love to us. And our savior Christ says, He that
receives a Prophet in the name of a Matt. 10. 41.
Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward.

Now that we be not deceived in these grounds; it must be remembered, that
these beginnings of grace (be they never so weak) must not be ^littering and
fleeting, but constant and settled, not stopped or stayed in the way, but such
as daily grow and increase: and then they are indeed accepted of God. And he
that can find these beginnings, or any of them truly in himself, he may
assure himself thereby that he is the child of God.

Sect. 5.
Having thus laid down the Grounds of The true way of bringing a man within
the Covenant.
comfort: I come now to the Way, by which the party in distress, may be
brought within the compass of the promise of salvation. This way stands in
two things; in making Trial, and in Applying the promise.

First then, Trial must be made, whether the person distressed have in him as
yet, any of the forenamed grounds of grace or not. This trial may be made by
him that is the comforter, in the moving of certain Questions to the said
person. And first, let him ask whether he believe and repent? The distressed
party answers no, he cannot repent nor believe. Then he must further ask,
whether he desire to believe and repent? to this he will answer, he does desire
it with all his heart; in the same sort is he to make trial of the other
grounds. When a man is in the fit of tentation; he will say resolutely, he
is sure to be damned. Ask him in this fit, of his love to God, he will give
answer, he has none at all: but ask him further, whether he love a man
because he is a Christian, and a child of God, then will he say he does indeed.
Thus after trial made in this manner, some beginnings of faith and repentance
will appear, which at the first lay hid. For God uses out of the time of
prosperity, by, and in distress and affliction to work his grace.

The second point follows. After that by trial some of the foresaid
beginnings of grace, be found out, then comes the right Applying of the promise
of life everlasting to the party distressed. And that is done by a kind of
reasoning: the first part whereof, is taken from Gods word; the second from the
testimony of the distressed conscience; and the conclusion is the applying of
the promise, on this manner: He that has an vnfainod desire to repent and
believe, has remission of Mayor.
sins, and life everlasting: But thou have an earnest Minor.
desire to repent and believe in Christ. Therefore Conclusio.
remission of sins and life everlasting is thine.

And here remember, that it is most convenient, this Application be made by the
Minister of the Gospel, who in it, must use his ministerial authority given
him of God, to pronounce the pardon. For in distress, it is as hard a thing,
to make the conscience yield to the promise, as to make fire and water agree.
For though men have signs of grace and mercy in them, yet will they not
acknowledge it, by reason of the extremity of their distress. In this manner,
upon any of the former grounds, may the troubled and perplexed soul be
assured, that mercy belongs to it. And this I take to be, the only general
and right way, of comforting a distressed conscience.

Now that the promise thus applied, may have good success, these sixerules
must necessarily be observed.

I. One is, that the comfort which is ministered, be alaied with some mixture of
the Law; that is to say; the promise alone must not be applied, but withal
mention is to be made, of the sins of the party, and of the grievous
punishments, due unto him for the same. The reason is because there is much
guile in the heart of man; in so much, as oftentimes it falls out, that men
not thoroughly humbled, being comforted either too soon, or too much, do
afterward become the worst of all. In this respect, not unlike to the iron,
which being cast into the fire vehemently hot, and cooled again, is much more
hard, then it would have bin, if the heat had bin moderate. And hence it is,
that in the ministering of comfort, we must somewhat keep them down, and bring
them on by little and little to repentance. The sweetness of comfort is the
greater, if it be delaied with some ^artnesse of the Law.

II. An other rule is this: If the distressed party, be much possessed with
grief, of himself, he must not be left alone, but always attended with good
company. For it is an usual practice of the Devil, to take the vantage of
the place and time, when a man is solitary and deprived of that help, which
otherwise he might have in society with others. Thus he tempted Eve, when she
was apart from her husband. And in this regard, Solomon pronounces a woe to him
that is alone. But herein does Eccles. (...). 10.
his malice most appear, in that he is always readiest, when a man is in great
distress, and withal solitary, then upon the sudden to tempt him to
despair, and to the making away of himself.

III. Thirdly, the party in distress must be taught, not to rest upon his
own judgment, but always to submit himself, and be content to be advised by
others that are men of wisdom, judgment, and discretion. A thing to be
observed the rather, because the very neglect thereof, has caused sundry
persons, to remain vncomforted for many years.

IV. Fourthly, the party distressed, must never hear tell of any fearful
accidents, or of any that have bin in like, or worse case then himself is. For
upon the very report, the distressed conscience will fasten the accident upon
it self, and thereby commonly will be drawn to deeper grief or despair. The
mind afflicted is prone to imagine searefull things, and sometime, the very
bare naming of the Devil, will strike terror and fear into it.

V. Fifthly, the party that is to comfort, must bear with all the wants of the
distressed; as with their frowardnes, peeuishnes, rashness, and with their
distempered and disordered affections and actions: yea he must put upon him (as
it were) their persons, being affected with their misery, and touched with
compassion of their sorrows, as if they were his own, grieuing when he sees
them to grieve, weeping when they do weep and lament.

VI. Sixthly, he that is the comforter, must not be discouraged, though after
long labor and pains taking, there follow small comfort and ease, to the
party distressed. For men will often bewray their stiffenes in temptation, and
usually it is long before comfort can be received; and why? surely because God
has the greatest stroke in these distresses of mind, and brings men thorough
all the temptations, that he has appointed, even to the last and utmost,
before he opens the heart to receive comfort. The Church in the Canticles
seeks for her beloved; but before she can find him, she goes about in the
city, through the streets, and by open places, passing by the Watchmen
themselves, and after she has used all means without help or hope, at
length, and not before, she finds her beloved, him in whom'^ her soul
delights. Cant. 3. 4.


Thus much for the general Remedy of all Distresses: now I come to the
particular Distresses themselves.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the first Special Distress, arising of a divine temptation.

THE first distress arises of a divine Temptation, which is a combat with
God himself immediately. And this distress is, when the conscience speaks
some fearful things of God, and withal the party distressed, feels some
evident tokens of Gods wrath.

Sect. 1.
Examples hereof we shall find many in Examples.
the word of God. One is, the example of righteous Job, who having been long
in outward afflictions, was withal exercised with the apprehension of the
anger of God, and in that state he says, that the arrows of Job. 6. 4.
the Almighty were in him, that the venime thereof, did drink up his spirit,
that the terrors of God did fight against him. Yea further he adds, that God
was his enemy, and writ bitter things against him: and made him to possess
Job. 13. 26.
the sins of his youth. And at an other time he complains, that Gods wrath
had torn him, that he hated him, gnashed upon him with his Job. 16. 9.
teeth, and had sharpened his eyes against him: yea that he had taken him by
the neck and beaten him, and set him as a mark for himself. In all which,
and diverse other places, it appears that his conscience was exercised, with
the sense of the wrath of God, which had now even seized upon his soul.

Another example we have in David, who also was exercised with this temptation
and trouble of mind, as the first words of the 6. Psalm, and the whole tenor
thereof do evidently Psalm. 6.
show: For first, he desires the Lord, not to rebuke him in his wrath, and
afterward complains, that his grief was so great, that his very flesh
consumed, his bones were vexed, and his body brought to such a state, as no
sickness could have brought him unto. And it is not unlike, that the same
Prophet did often fall into the like kind of distress of mind, as may be
gathered out of Psalm 77. and sundry other places.

Now as it fared with these, and diverse other servants of God, in ancient
times, so are we not without some instances thereof in our days. Amongst many,
that worthy man Master Luther, writes of himself, that he was in this
particular temptation, and that he learned in it, the doctrine of the
Justification of a sinner, by the mere mercy of God, without any merit of
works: and upon the sense and experience of the nature and properties of this
distress, he wrote a notable exposition of the 6. Psalm of David, the scope
and intent whereof, he writes to be nothing else, but a sovereign remedy of
this and the like distresses of the mind and conscience.

Sect. 2.
If it be demanded, what is the Occasion The Occasion.
of this kind of temptation? I answer, that it arises sometimes, upon the
commission of some notorious sin, which does wound the conscience, as in
Cain, Judas, and Saul, who for their great and capital sins, that stinged
and wounded their consciences, grew to a fearful state, and consequently
perished in this temptation. Sometimes again it comes when there is no sin
committed, but obedience to God performed: and then there cannot be rendered
any reason of it, either in man, or out of man, save this, that God will have
it so to be. And the truth hereof is plain by the examples of Job and David
before mentioned.

Sect. 3.
The Effects of this Temptation are many, The Effects of the Temptation.
and very strange. For outwardly it works a change and alteration in the body,
as it were a burning ague, and it causes the entralls to rise, the liver to
roll in the body, and it sets a great heat in the bones, and consumes the
flesh, more then any sickness can do. And that it is so, as I say, beside
experience, it is clear in the word of God. David in this distress affirms,
that his eyes were eaten as it were with worms, and sunk into his head, Psalm.
6. 7. that his moisture became as the drought in summer. Psalm. 32. 4. and Job
says, that his skin was black upon him, his bones were burnt with Job. 30. 30.
heat: yea that by means of this distress he was now full of wrinkles, and
his leanenes did rise Job 16. 8.
upon him. It is a principle which Physicians do hold, that The mind follows
the temperature of the body, and is affected according to the good or evil
constitution thereof: which though it be true, yet withal it is as manifest on
the other side, that the body does often follow the state and condition of the
mind. For a distressed heart, must of necessity, make a fainting and a
languishing body.

Sect. 4.
But the principal thing to be sought for The Remedy.
in this temptation is the Remedie^ thereof: whereunto there be five things
required, which are to be practiced, as occasion shall be offered.

First, choice must be made of the most fit and present remedy, and that
must be used in the first place.

Now the most fit and present remedy is, to bring the party troubled to the
personal exercises of faith and repentance, by, and in himself. For this
end, he must examine his conscience most straightly and narrowly of all the
sins of his heart, and life. Secondly, he must humbly confess against
himself, all his known sins: and withal acknowledge the due condemnation,
that he thereby has deserved. Thirdly, he must cry to heaven for mercy,
entreating the Lord most instantly for pardon, and for the restraint of his
wrath due unto him for his sin. David being in this distress, performed all
these duties, as we may read in the 6. Psalm: and he says further of
himself, that whilst he concealed his sins, the hand of God was heavy upon
him: but Psalm. 3^.
upon his earnest confession, and deprecation, he received mercy. And if we
read the book of Job, we shall find that the principal scope thereof is
this; namely, to show unto us, that Job was thoroughly exercised with this
temptation, and that in the end having been rebuked both by his friends, and
by God himself, his recovery was made, by humbling himself, when he says,
Behold, I am vile: again, now I abhor my self, and repent in dust Job 39.
37.
and ashes.

Some may here demand, If it fall out, that the person himself, cannot
perform any good duty, of himself, by reason of his distraction in soul and
body, what must then be done? Ans. If the party can but sigh, and sobbe unto
God for mercy, and comfort: it is no doubt, a work of Gods spirit, and a
practice both of faith, and repentance. We know not (says Saint Paul) what to
pray as we Romans 8. 26.
ought, (namely, in our distresses) but the Spirit it self makes request for
us, with sighs that cannot be expressed: and therein lies our comfort. Thus
Moses at the red sea being in Exodus 14. 15.
great distress, and not knowing what to say, or do, sighed and groned
inwardly in his soul unto the Lord, for help and protection: and his very
desire was in stead of a loud cry in the ears of the Lord.

The second thing is, that trial must be made, whether the party has in him
any tokens of grace, or not?

These tokens are the small beginnings of grace, which before I have declared.
As for example: a grief because we cannot grieve for sin as we should: a
serious will and desire to believe, and repent: a purpose to sin no more, and
such like. If these be found in the party, then by them as by sure pledges, he
may be assured of the favor of God toward him: and where any of these be
found, the saying of God to Saint Paul must be urged, My grace is sufficient
for thee: and therewith must the distressed party stay his 2. Cor. 12. 9.
mind. Yea we are to be content with any condition in this life, be it never
so miserable, so long as we are in the favor of God, though he should lay upon
us even the pains of hell, till the time of our death. So did David, who when
he was pursued by his own son, uttered these words unto God, Behold, if I
please thee not, do with me what thou 2. (...). 15. 26.
wilt And the like was the mind of Paul, who being assured of the favor of
God, was content for his glory, and the salvation of the Israelits (if it had
been possible) to be separated Romans 9. 3.
(...) Christ, and to endure the very pangs of hell.

The third thing in this cure is, to Apply to the said distressed party, such
promises of God made unto afflicted persons, as are most large and comfortable.

For example, that The Lord is near to them that are of a contrite heart, and
will save such as be afflicted in spirit. Psalm. 34. 18. Again, I came not
(says our Savior Christ) but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
Matthew. 15. 24. He says not, to the straying sheep, but to such as are now in
the pit, ready to be drowned, or in the Lions mouth, ready to be devoured.
Again. The Spirit of the Lord is Luke 4. 18.
upon me, therefore he has anointed me that I should preach the Gospel to
the poor; that is, to such as are distressed in conscience, and poor in
spirit: he has sent me that I should heal the broken hearted, that I should
preach deliverance to the captives. These and many other such like promises,
are in this case to be urged, and the party moved to endeavor to believe
them, to hold to them, and rest himself upon them, though he loose all things
else.

Fourthly, the party must be brought to a serious consideration of his own
life past, and of Gods merciful dealing with him and others in his case in
former times, and therewith is he to be comforted for the time present. For if
aforehand he has received any tokens of the favor and love of God; by them he
is now to stay and to settle his mind. The reason is plain: the gifts of god
are without repentance; whom he loves once he loves to the end, and whom he
chooses he calls, justifies, and sanctifies, and will also in time
glorify. David being in such affliction, that he could hardly think upon
God, yet he took this course, prayed to the Lord for comfort, communed with
his own heart, and called to remembrance Psalm. 7. 7. 10.
how God had formerly dealt with him, and with this meditation of the
continual course of Gods mercy in his preservation, he confirmed his faith,
and stayed his heart in his greatest troubles.

Sect. 5.
The fifth and last thing to be done, is the Remoouall of Doubts.
remooueall of such reasons and doubts, as the party distressed usually makes
against himself, for his own overthrow. For it is the manner of those that
are troubled in mind, to dispute against themselves; and commonly they are
wont to allege three things.

First, being instructed how to humble themselves, and to depend on Gods
mercy, they will grant, that all these indeed are good things, but they
belong not to them: for they neither do, nor can feel any thing, but the
tokens of Gods anger, and that they are already entered, into some degrees of
condemnation.

This objection may be taken away, by informing them of the manner of Gods
dealing in all his works. For commonly he works all things in his creatures,
in, and by co^traries, if we could know the whole frame of them.

Thus in the Creation every creature had his being of that which had no
being, and something was made, not of something, but of nothing. After the
flood, the sign of Gods coueuant, for the preservation of the world from
destruction by rain, is the Rainbow, which indeed is a natural sign of
rain. When Elias was to prove the Lord to be the only true God, against the
Idolatrous priests of Baal, and that by burnt offerings; he powered water upon
the sacrifice, and fills a trench with water round about, and in this contrary
means was the sacrifice burnt up. Christ for the curing of a blind man, te^pers
spittle and clay together, which in all reason, is a fitter means to put out
the eyes, then to cause the blind to see.

Thus in the work of our Redemption, Christ gives life, not by life, but by
death, and he sendes men to heaven by the gates and suburbs of hell: he shows
his greatest power, in the greatest weakness; nay his power (...) Cor. 12. 9.
is made perfect through weakness. He will not build upon an old foundation,
but he pulls down and destroies all, that Man may have no hope at all in
himself, but that all the hope he has, may be in God. First he kills, and then
he makes alive, as Anna 1. Sam. 2.
speaks: first he wounds, and then he heals. He makes man to sow in
tears, that afterward he may reap in joy. And he that knows Gods dealing to
be this, must herewith rest content, and satisfied: because in wrath, God uses
to remember his mercy; yea his mercy is never sweet unto the palate of the
soul, until it be seasoned with some taste of his wrath. The Paschall Lamb
was eaten with sour herbs, to signify, that we can feel no sweetenes in the
blood of Christ, till we first feel the smart of our own sins, and
corruptions.

Secondly, these persons use to allege against themselves, that if they could
feel any comfort at al, then they would stay their minds, and yield to good
persuasions, and exhortations.

To this, the answer is; That there is a Rule of grace, (which we must follow)
gathered out of the word of God, and the experience of Gods Children, contrary
to the rule of nature, and above the light of reason: and it is this, that in
case of a^^liction, we must not live by feeling, but by faith.

This Rule is grounded upon the speech of the Lord by the Prophet, the just man
shall live Hab. 2. 4.
by his faith. When we have neither sight, nor sense, nor any taste of Gods
mercy, but only apprehend his wrath, even then we must labor to lay hold of
mercy in his word, and promise. Sense and feeling, are not always fit
directio^s for the time of this life: For he may be the dear child of God,
that in present feels nothing but his wrath and indignation. This indeed is
the true triail of our faith, when even above and against reason, we rely on
the mercy of God, in the apprehension of his anger. So did David. Out of the
deep, (says he) that is, being now deeply plunged into the pangs of a
distressed conscience, have I called upon thee, O Lord: Psalm. 130.
and Job in the like case. Lord, though thou kill me, yet will I trust in thee.
Abraham is commended by the holy Ghost, amongst other things, for this, that he
believed in God, above hope: that is, against all matter of hope, that might
possibly be conceived, upon the consideration of the strength of natural
causes. The thief upon the cross, feeling nothing but woe: and seeing nothing
in Christ but misery and contempt, yet he believed in Christ, and was saved. In
a word, Christ Romans 4. 18.
himself when he was sorsaken of all men, and void of all wordly comfort, and
felt nothing but the depth of the wrath God, in his agony and passion; yet by
the faith of his manhood, hestaied himself and said, My God, my God.

Thirdly they use to plead, that their case is desperate, that never any was in
such a state as they are, never any touched with the like distress of mind.

Answ. It is false: For the holy Ghost has penned three notable places of
Scripture, the book of Job, and two Psalms of David, Psalm. 6. and 77.
wherein are propounded unto us the examples of Job and David, Gods own dear
servants, who were in as great distress, as ever they, or any other have
been. And they may not think, that they ever could be able, to endure greater
pains then Christ, who notwithstanding in the anguish of his soul upon the
Cross, cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

And thus much touching the first kind of trouble of conscience, called the
divine temptation.

CHAP. IX.
Of the second Special Distress, arisi^g from outward afflictions.

THe second kind of Distress is that which arises from outward afflictions.
By Afflictions I understand, all manner of miseries and calamities in this
life, from the least to the greatest, from the pain of the little finger, to
the very pangs of death.

Now the Question is, how the Trouble of mind, arising by Afflictions, may
be remedied. For the answer of which question, two things are required of the
party distressed, Practice and Meditation.

Sect. 1.
The Practice is that, which is to be used, in Practice in case of Affliction.
all distresses of mind what soever. And it is a diligent examination of the
conscience in regard of sin; an earnest and hearty confession thereof unto
God: and deprecation, that is, earnest prayer unto him, for the pardon of the
same. These three things, being done truly and unfeignedly from the heart, are
a present remedy against this trouble, and bring with them much comfort.

Manasses the king of Judah, that had committed much wickedness: when he was
carried captive to Babel, and there put in chains, he humbled himself,
acknowledged 2 Chro. 33. 11. 12,
his sins, and prayed earnestly unto the Lord, and the issue was good; for
God was entreated of him, and gave him deliverance. Job being long in outward
affliction, humbled himself in like manner, and at length received comfort,
Daniel humbled himself before God, for his own sins, and for the sins of
Gods people, making request unto Dan. 9. 10. 11.
God earnestly for them, and even when he was in the act of praying, the Lord
sent his angel Gabriel, to give him notice of deliverance. Lastly, the Church
of God, under the cross, performed the like duty, Let us Lament 3. 40.
search and try our ways, and turn to the Lord, and God in mercy gave an
ear unto her mourning and lamentation. By all these places, it is apparent,
that there is no better remedy in the world, for the mind of man, grieved by
means of outward afflictions, then the practice of the duties before named.

Sect. 2.
The next thing unto Practice, is the Meditation of the comfortable doctrines
that are Meditations in case of Affliction.
set down in the word of God, touching afflictions. All which doctrines, may
be reduced to five principal and maine grounds of comfort, and shall be laid
down in their order.

The first Ground is, that All afflictions from Grounds. I. Gods providence.
the least to the greatest, do come to pass, not by accident, chance, or
fortune, but by the special providence of God. I explain it thus: In every
particular cross and affliction, there is the hand of Gods particular
providence, and that in three regards.

First, because God decrees, and foreappointeth every particular cross. Mark
the words of Paul, Whom God has foreknowne, them he Romans 8. 28.
has predestinate, to be made like unto the image of his s^^ne; and what is
this image? nothing else, but a conformity unto Christ in afflictions for this
life, and in glory for the life to come. Now if God has decreed, that those
whom he foreknew, should be conformable unto his Son in these respects, then
has he also decreed the afflictions themselves.

Secondly, God does not only barely permit afflictions to be, but also he
effects them, and brings them into execution, as they are crosses,
corrections, trialls, and punishments. I make peace (says the Lord) and I Esa.
45. 7.
create evil, that is, not the evil of sin, but of punishment, which is
evil in our sense and feeling. For things are termed evil two ways: some
are evil indeed, some are evil not indeed, but in regard of our sense,
apprehension, and estimation; and of this latter sort are afflictions, which
God is said to create. And to this purpose is the saying of the Prophet Amos,
Shall there be evil in the city, Amos 3. 6.
and the Lord has not done it?

Thirdly, as God causes afflictions, so he orders and disposes them, that
is, he limiteth and appoints the beginning, the end, the measure or
quantity, and the continuance thereof. Yea he also orders them to their
right ends, namely, his own glory, the good of his servants, and the benefit
of his Church. Thus God is said to correct his people in judgment, that is,
so Ierem 30. 11.
as he will have the whole ordering of the correction in his own hand. Joseph
tells his brethren, that when they intended evil against him, in selling him
to the Ishmaelites for silver, God disposed it for good. Genesis 50. 19, 20.
When Shemei cursed David, he forbade his servants, so much as to meddle with
him, and why? because (says he) the Lord 2. Sam. 16. 10.
bade him to curse, and who then dare say onto him, Why have thou done so? And
to this purpose the Prophet David says, I held my peace and said nothing: why?
because thou, Lord, have done it, Psalm. 39. 9.

Here some will say, if Afflictions did come only from God, it were somewhat,
but of^ent^^es they come from men, that bear us no good will, and therefore no
marvel though we be impatient. Answ. When crosses do come from men, God uses
them as instruments, to execute his judgments upon us; and in this work, God
is the chief doer, and they are as tools, in the hand of the workman. And the
Lord inflicteth them upon us by men, to try our patience under the cross.
Joseph, though he knew well, the badde dealing of his brethren toward him, yet
he looked not to them alone, but to an higher cause, namely, the Lord himself,
who executed his own good will by them: God (faith he) disposed it to good,
And again, God did send me before you into Egypt for your Genesis 45. 5. and 50.
20.
preservation.

The Second ground is, The commandment II. Gods commandment.
of God, touching the cross, and obedience unto him therein. This
commandment is expressed, Luke 9. 23. where we are commanded to take up our
cross every day, and follow Christ. Abraham was commanded, with his own hands
to sacrifice his only son Isaac; and to this commandment, (though otherwise
a great cross unto him) he addresseth himself to yield obedience. And in the
prophecy of Micah, the Church says, She will Mich. 7. 9.
boar the wrath of the Lord, that is, she will perform obedience to him in
the cross, because she had sinned against him. And Saint Peter says, that
God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble: therefore humble your
1. Pet. 5. 5, 6.
selves under the mighty hand of God. And this being the commandment of
God, that we should yield obedience to him, in every affliction, we ought to be
no less careful to obey it, then any one commandment of the moral Law.

The Third ground is, that God will be present III. Gods presence.
with his servants in their afflictions. Upon this ground, David comforts
himself, because God had promised to hear him, to be with Psalm. 91. ^5.
him in trouble, and to deliver him. And in an other place, Though I should
walk in the shadow of death, I would fear none ill, for thou art Psalm. 23. 4.
with me, etc.

Now that we may the better understand this doctrine, we are to consider what
be the Ends or Effects of Gods being with us in affliction, whereby he
testifies his presence, and they are three.

The first is, to work our deliverance from the cross: Call upon me (says
the Lord) in the Psalm. 50. 15.
time of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee. This promise must not be
understood simply, but with an exception, so far forth as it shall be for our
good. For all promises of temporal deliverance, are conditional, and must be
conceived, with this limitation of the cross and chastisement, if God please
to impose it.

Some may say, how if God will not deliver us, but leave us in the affliction,
what comfort shall we then have?

Answ. In the second place therefore we must remember* that God will temper and
moderate our afflictions, so as we may be able to bear them. Habbakuk prays
unto God, in the behalf of the Church, that he would in wrath remember mercy.
And Paul Hab. 3. 2.
says, that the Lord will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able
to bear, but will give 1. Cor. 10. 13.
an issue with the temptation.

Thirdly, put the case that God does not moderate our afflictions, but suffer
them to remain upon us, not only for some time of our life, but to the very
death: yet then will he testify his holy presence an other way, namely, by
giving the party distressed, power and strength to bear his affliction. Unto
you it is given (says Paul) for Christ, that not only ye should believe in
him, but also suffer Phil. 1. 29.
for his sake.

The Fourth ground of comfort in affliction is, that every affliction upon the
servants of IV. Goodness of Afflictions.
God, has some special goodness in it. Romans 8. 28. We know that all things,
work together for good unto them that love God. And in regard hereof, the
crosses which are endured by Gods children, are so far from being
prejudicial to their salvation, that they are rather helps and furtherances of
the same. Now this Goodness is perceived two ways. First, by the fruit and
effect of it, and then by the quality and condition thereof. In both which
respects, afflictions are good.

Touching the fruits of Afflictions, because Fruits of Affliction.
they are manifold, I will reduce them to seven principal heads.

I. Afflictions do make men to see and Consideration.
consider their sins. Joseph's brethren for twenty years together, were
little or not at all troubled for their wickedness, in selling their brother;
yet upon their affliction in Egypt, they began to consider what they had done.
We have (say they) verily sinned against Genesis 42. 21.
our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and
we would not hear him: therefore is this trouble come upon us. Manasses in the
time of his peace, gave himself to witchcraft, and the worshipping of strange
gods: but when he was captive in Babylon, then was he brought to the sight of
his sins, and moved to humble himself before God for them.

II. Afflictions serve to humble men in Humiliation.
their souls before God. The young unthrift in the Gospel, called the
Prodigal child, while his portion lasted he spent liberally, and was grieved
for nothing: but when he Luke 15. 17, etc.
came to be pinched with hunger, and that through his own folly, then he
humbled himself before his father, and returned home unto him. David says of
himself, that in his prosperi^te be thought he should never be moved, because
the Lord of his goodness had made his mountain to stand strong: but (says
he) thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled, then cried I unto the Lord.

III. They serve to work Amendment Amendment.
of life. No chastising (says the Author to the Hebrews) for the present
seems to be joyous, but afterward it brings the quiet fruit of
righteousness, Heb. 12. 11.
to them that are thereby exercised; that is, afflictions and chastisments that
seize upon Gods children, do leave after them amendment of life, as the needle
passes thorough the cloth, and leaves the thread behind it. When we are
judged (says the Apostle) we are nurtered of the Lord, that we might 1. Cor.
11. 31.
not be condemned with the world. And David confesses, Psalm. 119. It is good
for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. And the
good husbandman, purges and pruneth the vine, that it may bring forth Ioh. 15.
more and better fruit.

IIII. They cause men to deny themselves, and to rely wholly on the mercy of
Abnegation.
God. Thus Paul received the sentence of death (...). Cor. 1. 9.
in himself, that he should not trust in himself, but in God, that raises
the dead.

V. The fifth, is Invocation. For afflictions make us to cry heartily and
fervently unto Innosation.
God, to bring our selves into his presence, and there to abase our selves
before him. Thus the Lord said of the old Israelites, that when he slew them,
then they returned, and sought him early, Psalm. 78. 34. And else where he says
of his children, that in their affliction they will Hos. 5. 15.
seek him diligently.

VI. The sixth, is Patience. Affliction brings Patience. Romans 5. 3.
forth patience, patience experience, etc. As if he should say; because the
love of God is shed in our hearts, therefore in afflictions we are patient. Now
whilst we patiently hear the cross, we have experience of the mercy and love
of God toward us: and having once in some notable deliverance, tried and
tasted the mercy of God, we do by hope (as it were) promise to our selves,
the said favor and mercy, for time to come.

VII. The last fruit, is Obedience. This Obedience.
the holy Ghost teaches, to have been the fruit of the suffering of Christ,
when he says, Though he were the son, yet learned he obedience, Heb. 5. 8.
by the things which he suffered.

In the next place, Afflictions are good in regard of their quality and
condition, which is, that they are tokens and pledges of our adoption, when we
make the best use of them. If ye endure Heb. 12. 7.
chastening, (says the holy Ghost) God offers himself unto you as unto
sons, that is, he comes to you in the cross, not as a judge and revenger,
but as a kind and loving father; and the cross imposed, is as it were his
fatherly hand, wherewith the chastises us: and therefore Job praises God for
his affliction, saying, God has given, and God has taken away, blessed be the
name of the Lord. Job. 1. 2^.


The fifth Ground of comfort is, that the party distressed, has partners in
the cross. For V Partakers in the Cross.
first, he has Christ to be his partner, because he has fellowship with him,
in that he is afflicted, and is willing to obey God therein. Paul accounts it
happiness, to know the fellowship of Christ's afflictions, and to be made
conformable unto his death. Phil. 3. 10. And Saint Peter exhorts believers to
rejoice in as much as they are partakers of Christ's sufferings. 1. Pet. 4. 13.
Secondly, if the party afflicted repent, Christ communicates with him in all
his crosses, and accounts them as his own. The Apostle in this regard, would
have no man think it strange, no not when he is in the fiery trial; but
rather to rejoice because he is partaker of Christ's sufferings. 1. Pet. 4. 12.
And Christ says to Saul persecuting his Church, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? Thirdly, he that is afflicted, has other servants of God, partakers
with him in all his afflictions. The Apostle Peter wishes the Church of God to
resist Satan by faith, knowing, says he that the same afflictions are
accomplished, in your brothren that are in the world. 1. Pet. 5. 9.

Thus much generally of Afflictions, and of Comfort in them. It were a long and
tedious work to set all down in particular, together with their proper and
distinct Comforts: therefore I will pass them over, and speak only of three
kinds of Afflictions, with their Remedies.

Sect. 2.
The first is, the Deferring of deliverance: a Des^^ring of Deliverance.
great affliction, if it be considered. And touching it, I propound one
Question, namely, How the mind of the party distressed, may be stayed, when
as the Lord deferres deliverance.

For the answer hereof, three especial points are to be considered.

I. First, that God has in his wisdom, set down certain and unchangeable
times, for the accomplishment and issue of all things that are. There is a time
appointed to every thing under the sun, Eccl. 3. 1 The speech of Solomon is
general, and the meaning of it is this. Whatsoever there is in the world,
either done, or suffered, or enjoyed by man, whether it be of the number of
natural things, or of those which are voluntarily undertaken, or necessarily
endured; God has in his providence sorted unto them, a set time and season,
whereof depends the success of them all. And this time, himself most freely
orders and rules at his own good pleasure; which, as no man can hinder or
stay, so is it not in the power of any, to hasten, or prevent.

This point, the Holy Ghost in Scripture proves by two instances, of the
threatenings and promises of God, which himself accomplisheth, at some certain
and unchangeable times.

When the old world in the days of Noah, had grown to much impiety, and
wickedness, the Lord appointed a certain space of 120. years, for their
repentance and conversion; at the very end and term whereof, Genesis 6. 3.
he brought the flood upon them, and not before. For if we compare the
particular circumstances of time, noted in the 7. of Genesis, with that which
S. Peter writes, 1. Pet. 3. 20. ee shall find, that the inundation of waters
came upon the earth, at the very point of time before determined.

Again, God threatened by Jeremy, that the Jews for their sins, should be led
captive, and serve the king of Babel 70. years. Now if we take the just
computation of Ier. 25. 11.
time, it will appear, that so soon as ever those years were expired, the
foresaid threat was accomplished. And therefore Daniel, alluding to Ieremies
prophecy, exactly sets it down, when he says, The same night was
Belshazzarking of the Chaldeans slain, that is, Dan. 5. 30.
the very night wherein those 70. years came to their full period.

And as there are set times, allotted by God for the execution of his
threatening sentences; so also has he determined certainly, the accomplishment
of all and every of his promises.

An example hereof we have in the Israelites, of whom the Lord said to Abraham,
that Genesis 15. 13.
they should be in affliction in a strange land, 430. years, and then be
delivered. This promise of God was expressly fulfilled, as we read in the
book of Exodus. For before the end and term of these years, they had no
deliverance at all: but when that time was expired, even that self same day,
departed Exodus 12. 4^
all the hosts of Israel, out of the land of Egypt. And though Moses, forty
years before this time, took in hand the work of their deliverance; yet he
did it without success; Act. 7. 25.
and upon a certain accident, being himself constrained to fly into Madian,
he lived there as a stranger with Iethro his father in law, till the said time
of four hundred and thirty years was accomplished; toward the end whereof,
being called of God to that office, he prospered, and not before. And in the
same manner, has God set down a certain period of time, within which, he
will exercise his children more or less, and at the end whereof, and not
before, he will relieve and comfort them again.

Now as the certentie of the accomplishment of Gods threatening word, serves to
terrify all wicked livers from sin: so the unchangeable performance of his
promises, at the very time prefixed, and not before, teaches the children of
God sundry things.

First, that when they are in any distress, and have not present or speedy
deliverance, according to their desire, they should wait the Lords leisure,
and expect with patience till the time come, which is appointed by him for
their ease and relief: and in the mean while stay their hearts, by hope and
affiance in his mercy. Reason is plain. God is sure in his word, therefore
though heaviness may endure for a night, yet joy will return in the morning,
Psalm. 30. 5.

Thus the Lord comfort the Jews in a particular distress, as we may read
in the prophecy of Habbakuk, where the Prophet in the name of the Jews,
complains and H^b. 2. 2, 3.
expostulateth the matter with God, why his own people should be so lamentably
afflicted, by a terrible and furious nation, and why they should be led away
captives, by the Chaldeans the enemies of God? To this the Lord makes answer,
that as he had certainly determined, that judgment to come upon them, so
certainly had he appointed a set time, wherein they should be delivered. In the
mean while, he bids them to comfort themselves in this, that though the
affliction should rest upon them for a season, yet undoubtedly they should be
eased at the length: and therefore, that they should in patience wait for the
vision, that is, the acco^plishment of the vision touching their deliverance.

Secondly, hence we learn, that we must not only believe the promises of God
in general, that God is true and faithful in them, and that he is able and
willing to fulfill them, even as he made them: but we must believe them in
particular, that is with application to their proper and several
circumstances, which are the particular means, places, and times, whereby, and
wherein he has given his word, as touching our freedom and exemption from the
cross.

Take an instance hereof in the Prophet Daniel, who knew well by the spirit of
Prophecy, that the Lord had determined to bring upon the Jews 70. years
captivity in Babylon. He knew also, that God had promised to put an end to
that captivity, at the end and term of those years. Now what did Daniel in
this case? Upon knowledge of the will of God in that point, during the said
time, he prayed not unto the Lord for Dan. 9.
deliverance of his people: But when he understood that the time drew near,
wherein it was the will of God, that the Jews should v. 2.
return out of captivity, then by faith applying the promise of God to that
particular time: he besought the Lord in prayer and supplications, with
fasting, in sackcloth and ashes, and the Lord gave ear unto his prayers, and
yielded him a gracious answer.

II. The second point is, that God, when he deferres deliverance, does it upon
great and weighty causes and considerations, best known to himself.

The first whereof is, that thereby he might humble men thoroughly, and bring
them to an utter denial of themselves, and consequently cause them, to learn
patience in affliction; which they would not learn, if they might be their
own caruers, and have speedy deliverance from the cross, at their own wills
and pleasures.

Secondly, that being afflicted, they may acknowledge whence their deliverance
comes; yea, whence they do receive not only that, but every other good
benefit, which they enjoy; namely not from themselves, or any creature, but
only from the Lord; and accordingly may learn to value and prize his gifts,
at their deserved excellency. For it is a true saying, and often verified in
affliction and want, that benefits easily obtained, are lightly regarded, and
sooner forgotten.

Thirdly, that by the continuance of the cross without intermission, he may
make them to distaste the world, and consequently draw them to the meditation
of the life to come, wherein all matter of mourning shall cease, and all tears
shall be wiped from their eyes. Reu. 21. 4.


Fourthly, the Lord de^erreth deliverance from affliction, that he might
prevent greater evils and dangers, whereinto those that are afflicted might
run, if they had their hearts desire, and were eased not at his will but at
their own wishes. When the children of Israel came into Canaan, they were
informed, that they should dwell together with the Canaanites, and Moses
renders a reason thereof, Least (says he) the wild beasts Deuteronomy. (...). 22.
of the field multiply against thee. And for the preventing of this evil, the
Israelites must endure some annoyance by the Canaanites. Exodus 23. 28.
Even so the Lord keeps his servants under the cross, for the preventing of
greater sins and offenses. This should stay the minds of men, and make them
content to wait upon God for deliverance, when they are afflicted.

III. The third and last point is, that God always has and does exercise his
best servants, with long and continued crosses. Abraham was childlesse, till he
was 70. years of age, and at those years the Lord promised him issue. But
this promise was not accomplished til a long time after, when he was an hundred
years old. David had a promise to be king of Jerusalem, and Judah; but the Lord
exercised him by many and grievous afflictions, before he came to the crown,
in so much, that he says of himself, that his eyes failed with waiting upon
his God. Zachary and Psalm. 119. 82.
Elizabeth prayed to god, both of the^ in their youth, and many years after
for issue, but the Lord granted not their request til they were Luke 1. 13.
old.

To add no more examples; by these we see the Lords dealing, even with holy
men and women, his own dear servants, that he does not always grant their
requests, nor condescend to their desires at the first, but as it were holds
them off, and suspends his grace and favor for a time. And therefore if it
shall please him, thus to deal with any of us, we must from these examples be
taught, to possess our souls with patience, resting contented in his will,
and waiting on his good pleasure to the end.

To conclude this point. Suppose, that the condition of Gods servants be such,
as that they find no end of their afflictions, but that they do continue
even unto death, what shall they do in this case?

Ans. Besides that which has been said before, for the resolution of this
Question, I answer further, that first, they must still, even page ^24.
unto death, live by faith, and say with holy Job, Lord, though thou kill me,
yet will I trust in thee.

Secondly, they must stay and relieve their souls in the mean time, with
these and such like meditations.

I. That it is the will and pleasure of God, that we should through many
afflictions, enter into the kingdom of God. Act. 14. 22. Now it is the
property of a true child of God, to rest content in his fathers good will and
pleasure, even when he is afflicted. Prove. 3. 11. My son -- be not grieved at
my correction, that is, let it not be tedious unto thee, be content to bear
it. Our duty therefore is, meekely to subject our selves unto the hand of God,
as the child does unto the correction of his father.

II. That though afflictions be long and tedious, yet God will at length give a
joyful and comfortable issue. For so himself has promised, Math. 5. 4.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Psalm. 34. 19. Great
are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord will deliver him out of them
all, Psalm. 37. 73. Mark the upright man, and behold the just, for the end of
that man is peace.

III. Afflictions be they never so heavy, in regard of continuance, yet they
are in no sort comparable to those eternal joys, that God has prepared for
them that love him. This was Paul's meditation, who endured the cross, even to
his dying day. Our light affliction 2. Cor. 4. 17.
(says he) which is but for a moment, works unto us an excellent and
eternal weight of glory. And else where he professes, that he did not count
the afflictions of this present time, answerable in value to the glory, which
shall be revealed unto Gods children, Romans 8. 18. Saint Peter tells them to
whom he wrote, that in regard of their assured hope of eternal life, they
should rejoice, though now for a season, they were in heaviness through manifold
tentations, 1. Pet. 1. 6. Lastly, the Author to the Hebrews, comfort the
Church by this reason, because it is yet a very little while, and he Heb. 10.
37.
that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

IV. Though God withholdeth his hand, in respect of deliverance even to death,
yet his love is constant and unchangeable, and the cross which we undergo,
cannot separate us from that love, wherewith he has loved us in Jesus Christ,
Romans 8. 35. And thus much of the first particular distress of mind, arising
of outward afflictions.

Sect. 3.
The Second particular distres, is bodily and temporary Death, which
consists in the separation Temporary Death.
of the soul from the body. And touching this affliction, it is demanded, How
any servant of God, may be able to endure with comfort, the pangs of death?

For the answer hereof, two things are required: a preparation to death, and
helps in the time of death.

Concerning preparation, there are three I. Preparation to death.
duties to be performed.

The first and most principal, is commended unto us in the book of Psalms,
where David prays unto God, Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of
my days. And Psalm. 39. 4.
Moses in like manner, Lord, teach me to number my days, that I may apply my
heart unto wisdom. In which places, is remembered a Psalm. 90. 12.
notable duty of preparation: to wit, that a man should resolve himself of
death continually, and beforehand number his days. This is done, by esteeming
of every day, as the day of his death, and accordingly doing Account death
present.
always that, which he would do, if he were now to give up the ghost.

Secondly, in way of preparation, we must endeavor to disarme and weaken
death, who is as an armed man, that has his weapons, whereby he seeks to
destroy us. And in this case, we must deal with death, as the Philistims dealt
with Sampson. They saw by experience, that he was a mighty man, and by his
power and strength, had given them many foyles; and therefore they labored to
know, in what part of his body his strength did lie. And after inquiry,
finding it to be in the hair of his head, they never rested, till they had
spoiled him thereof. And questionless, the time will come, when we all must
encounter, with this strong and powerful Sampson, Death; In the mean while,
it is a point of wisdom, to inquire wherein his power and might consists.
When this search has bin made, we shall find that his weapons, are our
manifold sins, and corruptions, both of heart and life. For as Paul says,
The sting of death is sin. Therefore, that we may spoil him of this his
furniture, 1. Cor. ^5. 56.
we must exercise our selves in the practice of two duties.

First, use all means for the cutting off of the lock of our sins, whereby
alone Satan has the vantage of us; and these means are the duties of
humiliation, invocation, and true repentance. We must therefore humble our
selves before God, be instant in prayer, for the pardon of our sins past, and
present, and in this point give the Lord no rest, until we have obtained in
our consciences, the sweet certificate of his favor and mercy in Christ,
whereby our minds may be stayed and comforted.

This done, it stands us in hand to turn unto God, to be careful to leave
sin, to entertain in our hearts, a resolved purpose and intention of new
obedience, and conformity to the will, and commandment of God in all things.
And this is the only way in the world, to bereave this our enemy of his
armor, to pull the sting out of the mouth of this serpent, and consequently,
even in death to prevail against him.

Thirdly, in way of preparation, our duty is, even beforehand (while we live
in this world) to endeavor, to have some true taste of life everlasting, and
the joys of heaven. The due consideration whereof, will be of great use. For
it will stir up in our hearts, a desire and love of perfect happiness in
heaven, yea a fervent expectation of Christ's coming to judgment: and it will
further cause us to say with Simeon, Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace:
and with the Apostle, I desire to be dissolved, and be with Christ.

Touching this spiritual joy and comfort in the holy Ghost, these Questions of
Conscience are moved.

I. First, how may we in this life have and nourish in our hearts, a true taste
of eternal happiness, and of the joys of the world to come?

Ans. First, by a serious consideration of the evils that do hinder, or
prejudice our happiness: and they are principally four.

One is, the Misery of our lives, in respect of sin, and the consequents
thereof. For there is no man in the world, be he never so righteous, that can
truly say of himself, I am clean from my sin, Prove. 20. 9. Yea, ^uen the
regenerate, that have received grace to believe, to turn unto God, and to live
according to the Spirit, do find by experience, Romans (...). 14. 2^. etc.
corruption and rebellion in their minds, wills, and affections, which daily
affords matter of sinning against God: and on the otherside, hinders and
quenches, all the good motions of the Spirit, that are in them. Again, such
is the irreconciliable malice of Satan, that he takes vantage of man's
corruption, and neglectes no time or opportunity, to intrappeth^ children of
God, in the snares of his temptations. And hence it is that man, by reason of
his own corruption, and the wicked suggestions of the Devil, is at continual
strife with himself, has daily occasion of sorrow, works out his salvation
with fear and trembling, wading (as it were) even while he lives, in a sea of
many miseries.

The second evil, is the Vanity of all things that are in the world. For
whether we consider the world it self, or the things therein contained, done,
or suffered, there is nothing so sure and steadie, whereunto man having
attained, can possibly rest fully satisfied, and contented; or which in the
end, will not prove to be most vain vanity. And the truth hereof appears,
in the experience of Solomon himself; who (being king over Israel) wanted
neither authority, nor ability, and opportunity, to take knowledge and
trial, of all worldly things in all estates and conditions. And having even of
set purpose, carefully and earnestly searched into them all, at length he
concludes, that the issue of all was unprofitable vanity, and vexation o^
mind, as we may read in his Ecclesiastes.

The third evil is, the Changeable condition of our life in this world,
whereby it comes to pass, that we are always in a fleeting and transitory
state. For we are (as Saint Peter speaks) but strangers and Pilgrims, that
wander to and fro in the earth, as in a 1. Pet. (...). 11.
strange country, and still are making forward to our own home. We have here
no abiding city. The houses wherein we dwell, Heb. 13. ^4.
are but Innes, in which we sojourne for a time: yea the bodies which we have,
are but ^ents and ^abernacles, always ready to be shifted, and our selves to be
translated into another place.

Fourthly, by remembering, that Christ our Head, being now in heaven, and we
his members upon the earth; during our life, we are in presence separated from
our Head, and consequently, from that happy and glorious fellowship, which we
shall enjoy with him, and all the Saints our fellow members, in the kingdom of
heaven. This S. Paul notes, when he says, Whilst we are at home in the body,
we are absent from the Lord: and 2. Cor. 5. 6.
thereupon himself desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Phil. 1. 13.


Having thus entered into the due consideration of the aforesaid evils, we must
in the second place, exercise our selves in the frequent meditation, of the
blessed estate of Gods chosen, in the kingdom of glory: who being translated
out of this life, into the bosom of Abraham, are fully and perfectly freed
from sin, from Satan, from vanity and misery: have all tears wiped from
Apoc. (...). 4.
their eyes: do behold the face of God; are made like unto Christ in holiness
and honor: 1. Ioh. 3. (...).
and do with him inherit the kingdom, prepared for them, from the foundations
Math. 25. 34.
of the world.

In the third place, having thoroughly considered of these things, we must
Compare the estate of this present life, in the respects before-^amed, with the
estate of that, which is to come in the kingdom of heaven: and laying them in
a parallel together, we shall sinde the one, infinitely far to excel the
other in regard of true joy and comfort. And this will make us, though living
in the world, yet to use it, as if we used it not: to have our conversation in
heaven: to think, 1. Cor. 7. 31.
with Paul, that to be loosed, and be with Phil. 3. 20.
Christ, is best of all for us: to have a true and Phil. 1. 23.
lively taste of the joys of the world to come, and accordingly with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, to look for a city that has foundations, whose builder and
maker is God. Heb. 11. 10.


II. Secondly, it is demanded, how a man may truly discern, whether this joy
of the Spirit, be in him yea or no? For answer hereunto, it is to be remembered,
that there are sundry properties whereby it differs from carnal joy. And
these are principally five.

First, this joy is brought forth (as it were) of sorrow for sin, and for the
want of Christ. Ye shall sorrow, (says our Savior Christ to his Disciples,
meaning for his departure,) John. 1^. 20.
but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. These words, are not only meant of
his Disciples, but of all believers, who upon consideration of their sins,
and the spiritual want of Christ Jesus, do mourn and lament. For not only
they, but all true believers, are there opposed unto the World. Again, blessed
are they that mourn: that is, being touched with Matthew. 5. 4.
causes of exceeding grief, do withal mourn for their sins: for they shall
be comforted. On the other side, carnal joy, as it has his beginning from the
flesh, and arises of things pleasing thereunto, so it ends in sorrow and
heaviness. In the end, rejoicing is turned into mourning, says Solomon. And,
Woe ^e to you Prou. 14. 13.
that now laugh: for ye shall weep. Luke 6. 25.


Secondly, the joy of the Spirit, is a fruit of righteousness: that is, it
issues and flows from Christ known and believed, to be made unto us of God,
wisdom, righteousness, Romans 14. 17.
sanctification, and full redemption. For from hence, follows peace of
conscience, and from peace, comes joy in the Holy Ghost. Contrariwise, the joy
of the flesh, arises only from the sudden feeling of some worldly delight: and
therefore cannot bring any sound peace, unto the conscience of the man possessed
of it.

Thirdly, spiritual joy is founded in the holy use of the Word, Sacraments,
and Prayer: and in the practice of Christian duties of mercy, ^oue, justice,
etc. The other is not so. For the world conceiueth a joy besides the word, o^^
of the exercises of invocation and repentance: which stands in the practice of
cruelty, malice, oppression, injustice, and all manner of impiety. And hence
it is, that having spent their days in such matter of rejoicing, at length in
a moment they go down to hell. Job. ^1. 13, 14, ^5.


Fourthly, heavenly joy is so fixed and rooted in the heart, that it cannot be
removed thence. Your joy shall no man take from you, says Io^. 1^. (...).
Christ. It must needs therefore be true and sound, yea able to swallow up all
matter of grief, and heaviness: whereas the other is never sincere, but with
the sweetness thereof, has always mingled some bitterness. Even in laughter
(says Solomon, speaking thereof) the heart is heavy. When the face of the
wicked Prou. 14. 13.
man shines, and his countenance is pleasant, even then is he inwardly
sorrowful, and his mind is troubled.

Lastly, the joy of the Spirit is eternal: abiding in the mind of man, not
only for the term of this life, but for ever, in the world to come. So is not
the rejoicing of the world in earthly things: for it is fading and deceitful,
as the things themselves be, wherein it is placed: it has the beginning in
corruption, and ends with this present life. The Luke 12. 20. and 16. 22.
examples of the two rich men in the Gospel, do manifest this truth. And to
this purpose, is the speech of Zophar, in the book Job. 20. 5.
of Job, that the rejoicing of the wicked, is very short, and the joy of
hypocrites is but a moment, etc.

By these five properties, may we put a true difference, between earthly and
heavenly rejoicing, and consequently discern of them, even in our seleues. And
if we perceive this joy of the Spirit, (rightly con^ceiued and grounded in the
right use of the word, and Sacraments; as also in the exercises of invocation,
faith, and repentance,) to take place in our souls and consciences, we shall
find it of force, to moderate and alay the very terrors of death. And so much
for Preparation. II. Helps in time of Death.


Now the helps to be used in the time of death, are manifold: the sum of all
may be reduced to two heads; Meditations, and Practices.

Touching Meditations, we must in the first place, consider Death in a double
respect; one, as it is in it own nature, and another, as it is changed and
qualified by the death of Christ Death in it own nature, is a Curse, or fore
^er of comdemnation, the very gates and suburbs of Hell it self: but being
qualified by Christ, it is a blessing, an end of all miseries, a full freedom
from all dangers, a short passage unto joy, an entrance into everlasting life,
a quiet sleep, void of all annoyance, by dreams and fantasies. And the grave
a resting chamber, yea a bed perfumed by the death of Christ, for the bodies of
all the Elect, out of which when they awake, they shall be admitted and
received into the presence of God in heaven.

Secondly, we are to consider, that there be three degrees of eternal life.
The first whereof, is in this world before we die, and it is then, when we
begin to repent and believe in Christ, and to be assured in conscience that God
the father is our father, Christ our redeemer, and the holy Ghost our
comforter. For this is eternal life, to know God and him John 17. (...).
whom he has sent Jesus Christ. The next degree is in death: for death cuts
off al sin, original and actual: death frees us from al wordly miseries:
death prepares the body, that it may be fit to enter into eternal happiness
together with the soul, which is already in heaven. The last degree is, when
body and soul reunited, go both together into eternal and everlasting glory.

Our third meditation is, that that there is a mystical union and coniunctio^,
between Christ and every believer, and that not only in regard of soul, but
of body also; which being once knit, shall never be dissolved, but is
eternal. Whereupon the dying, dead rotten, and consumed body remains still
a member of Christ, abides within the covenant, and is and shall be ever, a
temple of the Holy Ghost. Thus Adam, and Abraham, which are dead, so many
thousand years ago, yea every true believer, from them to the end of the
world, shall arise at the last day in body to glory, by the power of their
conjunction with Christ. In the winter season, we see the most trees void of
leaves, buddes, and blossoms: so as they seem to us to be dead, and yet
nevertheless there is a sap in the root of them, which in the Spring will
ascend, and revive the decayed branches. Even so it is with our bodies, which
though they be corrupted, rotten, burnt or eaten with worms, or devoured by
wild beasts, so as they may seem to be utterly perished, yet there is (as it
were) a secret and hidden sap in them, (by reason of their union with Christ)
by which they shall be raised, revived, and quickened, being made like vntothe
glorious body of Christ their head, with whom they shall reign, and live for
evermore.

Helps in practice are two; First, he that will bear with comfort the pangs
of death, must labor that he may die in faith: and that is done, by laying
hold of the promise of God, touching forgiveness of sins and life everlasting
by Christ. All these (says the Heb. 1^. ^3.
holy Ghost) died in faith, namely, Abel, Enoch, No^, Abraham, and Sarah, all
laying hold of the promise of life by Christ. When Jacob on his deathbed, was
blessing of his children, he brake forth into this heavenly Genesis 49. 18.
speech, O Lord, I have waited for thy salvation. In which words it is plain,
that his faith rested on the mercy of God, and by hope he waited for his
salvation, and our Savior Christ says, As Moses lift up the serpent in the
wilderness, Ioh. 3. 14. 15.
so must the son of man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him, might
not perish, but have life everlasting. Out of which words the forenamed duty
may be learned, that look as the children of Israel, being stung with fiery
serpe^ts, and that unto death, we^ healed by looking up to the brase^ serpent
erected by Moses: so when we are stu^g with sin and death, we must ever
remember by faith to look upon Christ. But specially when we are dying, then
it is our part, to six the eyes of our souls, by faith upon him; and thereby
shall we escape death and be made partakers of eternal life and happiness.
Notable is the example of Christ, who as he was man; always fixed his trust
and considence in his fathers word, especially at his end. For when he was
dying, and the pangs of death seized upon him, he cries unto the Lord, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? and again, Father into thy hands I commend
my spirit: which words are full of faith, and do bewray what great affiance he
placed in his fathers love, etc. When David in an extremity, saw nothing
before his eyes but present death, the people in tending to stone him, at the
very instant (as the text says) he comforted himself in the Lord his God; but
how? by calling to mind 1. Sam. 30. 6.
the merciful promises, that God had made unto him, and by applying them unto
his heart by faith. And Paul says of himself, and the rest of the faithful,
that they received the sentence of death in themselves, that they might (...).
Cor. 1. 9.
not trust in themselves, but in God.

From these examples it follows, that they which desire with comfort to bear
the pangs of death, must die by faith; that is, they must set before their
eyes, the promise of remission of sins, and life everlasting, and depend upon
it, wrapping (as it were) and enfolding themselves in it, as in a close and
warm garment, that will keep them safe and sure, against the wind and weather
of temptation.

The second Practice in the time of death is, to die in obedience; which is
nothing else, but willingly, gladly, and readily, without murmuring, to submit
our selves unto Gods will, in bearing the pains of death. A most worthy
president of this obedience, we have in our Savior Christ, when he said unto
his father, Not my will, but thy will be done; thereby submitting his will, to
his Fathers will, touching the death which he then suffered. Yea when he was
dying, it is said of him, that he gave up the Ghost; that is, he did most
willingly surrender up his soul into the hands of God his father. And this his
example at the time of his departure, must be a rule of direction unto us, upon
the like occasion. Hence it is, that in the third petition of the Lords prayer,
amongst other things, we pray for obedience to the will of God in suffering
afflictions, yea even in the last and greatest, which is death it self. True it
is, that obedience to God in death, is against corrupt nature; and therefore
our duty is, the more to inure our selves, to the performing of it: and that
which the blessed Apostle said of himself, I die daily, ought to be
continually our resolution and practice.

If we shall inquire, how this may be done; the answer is, when God lays
afflictions upon us, in our life time, then by endeavoring to bear them with
patience, meeknes, and lowlines. For every affliction, is (as it were) a petty
death: and if we do in it, subject our selves to the hand of God, we shall
the better obey him, in the great death of all: and thus doing, whenever God
strikes us with death, we shall with comfort endure the same.

Sect. 4.
The Third particular Affliction or distress, is Satanicall molestation,
whereby both persons, Satanicall molestation.
and places of mansion, or abode, are either possessed, or otherwise molested
by the malice of the Devil.

I. Touching this Affliction, the Question of Conscience is, How such persons
as are possessed, or fear possession, or else endure molestations by the
Devil in their houses, may have their minds quieted and sta^ed, and
consequently, in that case be remedied!

And here two things are generally to be considered, in way of Answer.

First, it is to be remembered, that possession is known by two signs. The one
is, when the Devil is evidently present, either in the whole body, or in some
part of it. The other, when he has rule of the said body, either in whole or
in part: so as the party himself, has not that use of his body, which he
would. As for example: when the Devil possesses the instruments of the voice,
as the tongue, and makes a man to speak Latin, Greek, Italian, or other
tongues, which he understands not. Both these things were found in them that
were possessed, in the time of our Savior Christ.

Secondly, we must consider, it falls out oftentimes, that strange diseases
do seize upon men, arising from corrupt humors in the body; yea men and
women may have strange passions upon natural causes unknown; and these will
sometimes have strange and extraordinary effects in them, which the art of
Physic neither can search out, nor cure; and yet they are neither acts of
witchcraft, nor real possessions. As when God laid extraordinary diseases on
the Corinthians, for the contempt of his Word and Sacraments, 1. Cor. 11. 30.
Like unto which, he worthily inflicts upon men in these days, for the same and
other sins.

Now to stay the mind in this case, these Rules are carefully to be thought
upon.

First of all, it is to be remembered, that though Satan's malice and power, be
very great and large: yet he can not practice the same, against the children of
God, when, where, and how he lists. The malice which Satan bears to mankind,
and principally to the members of Christ, appears in this, because he is
said, to accuse them before God, day and Revel. 20. 2.
night. And, as a roaring lion, to walk about the world, seeking whom he may
devour, 1. Pet. 5. 8. Again, the Scripture notes him, to be a powerful
Spirit, whose strength far exceeds and surpasses the might of any man or
creature, that is not of an Angelical nature, as himself is. For he is termed
a Prince of the air, and the god of this world; his power reaches even to the
spirits and souls of men, whereby he works in the children of disobedience,
Ephesians. 2. 2. His principality is so great, that no strength, no defense of man
is able to withstand it, unless man take unto himself the whole armor of
God, Ephesians. 6. 10.

Now although the Devil be so malicious an enemy of mankind, that he cease
not to devise, whatsoever may be hurtful unto them; and withal so powerful
in his attempts, that no man by his o^ne proper strength, is able to resist
him: yet he cannot put the least part of his power in execution, in what time,
place, or manner he desires. The reason is, because God has determined his
power, by certain bounds and limits, which he cannot pass: and they are
especially two.

The one is, his own nature, whereby he is a creature, and therefore finite.
Hence it is, that he can neither know, nor do any thing that is beyond the
reach or capacity of his nature, or above the power and skill of a creature.
For example, he cannot directly and immediately know the deep things of God,
unless they be revealed unto him: nor yet the secrets of man's heart. None
knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man, which is in him: oven
so, the things of God knows none, but the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2. 11.
Again, he cannot do that which is truly and properly a miracle, the cause
whereof is hidden and utterly unknown, and which comes not within the power
and order of nature. For this is proper unto God, who only does things simply
wonderful, Psalm. 77. 14.

The second thing whereby Satan's power is restrained, is the will of God. For
look as the sea, being by nature, apt to ouerflow the whole earth, is kept
in, and shut up within the shore, (as it were) with doors or gates, that it
cannot break forth; and that by the Lord himself, who has established his
decree upon it, Job 38. So though Satan be by nature strong, and his malice
great, yet can he do nothing at all, no nor execute his natural power, to the
hurt and prejudice of any man, without the will and permission of God. Thus the
evil spirit, could not go forth to deceive Ahab, until the Lord had said
unto him, Go and thou shall prevail, 1. King. 22. 22. Thus the Devil could
not touch the body, children, goods, or friends of righteous Job, whilst he
was fenced and fortified, by the power and providence of God. But when the
Lord, in regard of Jobs outward estate, had given leave, and said, Lo all that
he has is in thine hand, then did he exercise his power, to the utmost: yet so
far only, as he was permitted, and no further. Job. 1. 12.

The consideration of this first point, that Satan's power is determined by God,
will serve to stay the minds of those, whose persons, houses, or friends are
molested by him. For hereupon it follows, that God, who has the Devil bound
up (as it were) in chains, will not suffer his power to be enlarged, against
his own children, to their destruction and confusion: but so far forth
alone, as shall be expedient for their good and salvation. Again, that God
being their father in Christ Jesus, they may in the time of such affliction,
have access unto him, and call upon him, for the restraint of Satan's power and
malice, and consequently, for the deliverance of them and theirs.

A second Rule is this. Such persons must have recourse to God in his word, in
which he promises his presence and protection, to his children, in their
greatest dangers. And namely, that there shall no evil come unto them, neither
any plague shall come near their dwelling: Psalm. 91. 10, 11.
because he will give his Angels charge over them, to keep them in all their
ways. Again, that he will be a wall of fire, round about his people. Zach. 2.
5. that he will extend peace over his Church, like a flood, Isa. 66. 12. And
that there shall be no sorcery against Jacob, nor soothsaying in rael, Numb. 23.
22. And yet if God sees it to be good for his children, to be tried by
possessions or witchcraft, in this case the promise frees them not. For all
temporal blessings are promised conditionally, so far forth as they may
stand with Gods good will and pleasure, and withal may make for the good of
his children. Howbeit herein lies the comfort, that though such calamities
befall them, yet they shall turn to their good, rather then to their hurt.
This point well considered by the way, bewraieth the great presumption of some,
who are not afraid to say, their faith is so strong, that the Devil cannot
touch them.

Thirdly, it must be considered, that the best servants of God, have been in
their times molested by the Devil. Christ in his Math. 4. 5.
second temptation, was carried by the Devil, from the wilderness, to a wing
of the Temple of Jerusalem. The children of Job, were destroyed by the Devil,
and he himself was filled with bo^ches, and sores. A certain woman, even a
daughter of Abraham, that is, one following the faith of Abraham, Luke 13. 16.
was troubled with a spirit of infirmity, eighteen years together. And the
daughter of the woman of Canaan, was grievously vexed with a Devil. Math. 15.
21, 22.

Fourthly, men in this case, ought by faith to lay fast hold upon the promise
of life everlasting, and wait the Lords leisure, not limiting him in respect of
time, or means of deliverance. This was the practice of Job, Though he kill
me, yet will I trust in him. And of Job 13.
holy Abraham, who did not limit God, but was content to do with Isaac, what
the Heb. 11 17.
Lord would: and though it was in likelihood, a mean to bereave him of all
posterity, yet still he kept himself to the promise.

Lastly, men must in this case, seek and sue unto God by prayer, either for
deliverance, if it may stand with his good will and pleasure, or else for
patience, that they may meekly and patiently bear that particular affliction.

II. In the molestation and annoyance of houses by spirits, two things are to
be remembered.

First, men must not consort together, and abide there, where it is certainly
known, that the Lord has given the Devil power and liberty; least in so
doing, they tempt the Lord. Our Savior Christ, did not of his own private
motion and will, betake himself into the wilderness, but by the direction of
the Holy Ghost, Math. 4. 1. Paul in like manner, did not of his own head go
to Jerusalem, but upon the motion of the Spirit, Act. 20. 22. In the light of
these examples men arc taught, not to cast themselves, into any places of
apparent danger: much less to frequent those, which God has delivered up,
into the power of Satan. And this condemns the rash, and headie conceits of
some persons, who upon confidence of their own strength, do put themselves
into needelesse dangers, having neither extraordinary calling from God, nor
any sufficient warrant out of his word.

If it be asked, what men are to do in this case? I answer, First, that they
ought rather to fly to God by prayer, and to draw near unto him in their
hearts: and he in mercy will draw near unto them.

Secondarily, that which we do in meats and drinks, is also to be done in the
houses and places where we dwell. And what is that? we must sanctify them to
our use, by the word and prayer. Noah at Gods commandment, went into the Arc,
abode in it, and came out again: and when he came forth of it, into the earth
afterward; it is said of him, that he built an Altar, gave thanks Gen 8. 20.
to God for his deliverance, and prayed the Lord, to vouch safe him the use of
the earth, as he had before. Though Abraham had a promise of the land of
Canaan, to him and his posterity for ever, yet he went not out of his country
toward it, till the Lord commanded Genesis 1^.
him: and when he was come thither, he built an Altar for the worship and Genesis
13. 3.
service of God. The like he did afterward at Genesis 59.
Bethel. And many years after, did Jacob offer sacrifice unto God, in the same
Bethel, when he came to dwell there. And for this very end, in the law, by a
special ordinance the first fruits of the harvest were offered to sanctify
the rest of the corn. And so much touching the second distress.

CHAP. X.
Of the third Special Distress, arising of the Tentation of Blasphemy.

THe third kind of trouble of mind, is that which arises of the Tentation of
Blasphemy, which in regard of the vileness and ugliness thereof: is not amiss
termed by some, the foul Tentation. And it is, when a Tentatio f^^a.
man is troubled in his mind, with blasphemous cogitations, and thoughts,
directly against the Majesty of God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. As for example: to think that God is not just, or merciful; that he
accepts men's persons: that he has not knowledge of things, that are done
here below, or at least that de does not regard them: that God cannot do this
or that: that he is injurious to some men, and partial to others, etc. These
and such like blasphemous thoughts there be, which are not fit to be uttered
amongst me^, forasmuch as they are most horrible, and execrable, as any can be
conceived.

Sect. 1.
That we may the better know this Temptation, The Cause and Danger.
let it be considered, what are the forerunners thereof, and by what means it
takes place in the heart possessed of it.

Sometimes it comes, merely and only of the suggestion of the Devil; which
troubles the fantasy, even of those which are in that regard innocent, and
casts into their hearts impure and ungodly thoughts. Sometimes again, it
comes upon men, by an evil custom: when as they willingly lend their ears,
to leude and cursed speeches, that immediately tend to the dishonor of God, or
the wilful abuse of his word, his judgments, and mercies; and upon the
hearing, either give their applause and approbation, though not expressly; or
do not hinder or stay them, as much as in them lies. Otherwhiles, it creepes
into the heart of man by degrees, when he begins to wax cold in Gods
service, to make little conscience of those duties, that immediately concern
his worship, and consequently inures himself, to the taking of the name of God
in vain, by often and causeless swearing, forswearing, cursing, etc. By these
and such like means, is this foul and horrible tentation conua^ed into the
mind of man.

Now the danger of it, whether it arises from these, or any other causes, is
exceeding grievous, specially to those, that have begun to choose the way of
truth, and to apply their hearts to serve God, and to fear his name. For it
brings forth strange and fearful effects; as namely, desperation, and
manifold horrors and troubles of mind. Yea diverse persons have hereupo^ bin
astonished in such sort, that they have bin moved to make dispatch of
themselves; being in their own judgment no better, then the very firebrands
of hell.

Sect. 2.
Now for the Curing of this wonderful trouble and distraction of Conscience,
two The Remedy.
things are to be done: to wit, Inquiry must be made into the next causes,
whence this Tentation should arise: and after that, the Remedy is to be
applied.

For the first. Inquiry is to be made, whether the present distress, had his
beginning from the thoughts of a man's own mind, or from the suggestion of the
Devil. For this is in all likelyhoode, the next way to minister Comfort, to
the afflicted party.

It may be said, How shall a man discern the thoughts that are from the
Devil, from his own thoughts? Ans. He shall know them by sundry notes.

First by the entrance of the^ into the mind. For those that come from the
Diuill, come speedily, as lightning into a house: and they are after a sort,
forced into the mind by violence, so as the party cannot avoid them; and
they come into the mind again and again, yea a thousand times in a day, so
as by their often coming, they weaken the memory, dull the senses, weary and
confound the brain. These are thoughts that come from the Devil, and by him
are co^uaied from without, into the mind of man. And if such cogitations, were
from a man's own self, they would not come with so great veheme^cie and
cel^ritie, but with leisure^ and they would rise with more moderation, and
less violence. Yea further, the frequent use of them would not produce so
many, and so fearful effects as it does.

Secondly, such thoughts may be discerned, to come from the Devil, by this
sign, because they are directly against the very light of nature, the sparks
whereof are not quite extinct in us by sin. For every man thinks reverently
of God by nature. But these cogitations are most wicked and deuilish, fastening
upon God, things that are most vile and monstrous: whereas commonly, the
thoughts that arise from our selves, are not against the light of nature,
though they be most corrupt.

The third sign is, that at the first conceiving of them, the party (...)
smitten with an extraordinary fear, his flesh is troubled; and oftentimes,
sickness and faintings do follow. But the thoughts that men conceive of
themselves, cause neither fear, nor fainting, nor sickness.

Fourthly, blasphemous thoughts cannot come ordinarily from the heart of any,
save of those alone, that are of reprobate minds. But the parties that are
thus distressed, are honest, civil, and such as profess the Gospel, at least
in show; yea sometime they befall such, as are the true members of Christ.
Therefore it is manifest, that they come from without, even from the Devil
casting them into the mind, and not from within a man's own self.

In the next place, Inquiry must be made, whether the party does approve,
love, and like these and such like thoughts, or no? To this he will answer, if
he be asked, that he abhors them as the Devil and Hell it self. Thus even
natural men will answer, and that truly.

After Inquiry thus made, the Remedy is to be applied. And the first and
principal remedy, pertaines to doctrine, and instruction: in which the party
is to be informed of his or her estate; namely, that the foresaid blasphemies,
are not his sins, but his crosses. For they are the Devils sins, and he
shall answer for them: and they are not ours, till we intertaine, receive,
approve, and give consent unto them.

For proof hereof, let this be considered, That unclean thoughts which have
their residence in the mind of man, are of two sorts: Inward, and Outward,
Inward are such, as have their original from the flesh, and arise of the
corruption of man's nature, though stirred up by the Devil. And these, at the
very first conceiving, are our sins, though they have no long abode in our
minds: and they are directly forbidden, in the tenth commandment Outward
thoughts are those, which have relation to an outward cause or beginning: of
which sort are those evil thoughts, that be conveyed into the mind by the
Devil: and if we take no pleasure in them, nor yield consent unto them, they
are not to be accounted our sins, but the Devils, by whom they are
suggested, The truth hereof appears in Christ's example; into whose mind the
devil cast this blasphemous tentation, thereby moving him to infidelity,
co^etousnes, and idolatry: which nevertheless were not his sins, because
his holy-heart gave not the least approbation to them, but abhorred and
repelled, them, and therefore was free from any taint of sin, in or by them.

This distinction of thoughts must be remembered. For hence it follows, that
blasphemous thoughts, not consented to by us, are not our sins, but the
Devils. Even as in like case, when one wickedly disposed, sollicites another
to treason, or murder: if the said party listen not, nor yield thereto, he
cannot be holden guilty of those crimes. Therefore, men must not fear those
kind of thoughts overmuch: at lest, if they please not themselves overmuch in
them: because, though they be indeed their crosses, yet are they not their
personal sins, for which they shall incur the wrath and displeasure of
God. Again, they must let them go as they come: they are not to strive
against them, for the more they labor to resist them, the more shall they be
entangled with them.

The second thing to be used in way of remedy, for the staying of the mind in
this tentation, is, that though it should be granted, that the foresaid evil
and blasphemous thoughts are our sins, yet we are to remember, that they may
through the mercy and goodness of God, be pardoned: if they be heartily and
unfeignedly repented of: yea further, that neither they, nor any other sins
(except that against the Holy Ghost) do condemn him, that prays against
them, and is heartily sorry for them.

It was Paul's complaint, Romans 7. 19. That he did not the good which he would
do, speaking of the inward endeavor of his heart: and again, that he did the
evil which he would not, meaning in respect of the corruption of his nature.
Now upon this, that he indeauoured to do that, which was agreeable to the will
of God, that he loathed and detested the contrary, and strove against his
corruptions, how did he comfort himself? Mark the words following, v. 20. If
I do that I would not: that is to say; if against my general purpose, I sin
against God; if I be sorry for it, if I be displeased with my self, because I
can not obey God, in that perfection I desire, It is no more I that do it, but
sin that dwells in me. From this example of Paul I gather, that if any man,
have in his mind evil thoughts, and does (as Paul did) grieve, because he
thereby offends God; if he do abhor them, and pray against them; he shall
not be condemned for them; they shall never be laid to his charge. The party
then that is troubled with with these thoughts, may upon these grounds, stay
his mind; and comfort himself. For if he shall not be condemned for them,
then let him not fear them above measure.

The third point to be remembered is, that the party must not be alone. For
this Tentation begins, and is confirmed and increased by solitariness; and
the parties thus distressed, love to be apart by themselves, from the society
of others. And for that cause, in case they be liable to this distress, they
must use to converse with such company, as may afford them matter of speech and
conference meet for them, and may exercise their minds with heavenly
meditations in the word, and singing of Psalms, and such like fit and
convenient recreations. Our first parent Eve was tempted by Satan, when she
was apart from Adam: and our Savior Christ, when he was alone out of company
and society, then did the Devil most maliciously assault him, with strong and
powerful tentations in the wilderness.

The fourth point, to be remembered of the party troubled is, that he must as
heartily and earnestly repent him, of those his evil thoughts, as of evil
words and deeds. For the truth is, because men are loose-minded, and have no
more care of their thoughts, then commonly they have; therefore the Lord justly
suffers the Devil to plague and torment them, by conuaying into their hearts,
most vile and damnable cogitations. Furthermore, the said party must labor to
be renewed in the spirit of his mind, that is, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24.
to have his mind enlightened by the spirit, whereby he may know and
understand the will of God in his word. After repentance for evil thoughts,
there must follow watchfulness, and a careful circumspection over all his
ways; but principally he must have an eye unto his heart, the fountain of
all. Keep thine heart with all diligence, says Solomon: that is, above all
things see that thou Prove. 4. 23.
countergard thy thoughts, desires, motions, and affections.

That the heart of a man may be guarded, two rules are to be observed. First,
that the word of God dwell plentifully in it, by daily meditation Coloss. 3. 16.
of the commandments, promises, and threatenings revealed in the same. It is
noted by David, as a property of a blessed man, that he exercises himself in
meditation of the Law of God, day and night, Psalm. 1. By this means the heart
will be cleansed, and purged from unclean and polluted motions, and so guided
and directed, that it swerve not from God. This rule is of special use. For
therefore do men hatch, and breed evil thoughts in their hearts, because they
are not taken up with holy meditations: and hence it is, that the heart of man,
is made even a pray unto the Devil, because the word of God is not lodged
therein. Excellent was the practice of David in this case, who kept the word of
God in his heart, that he might not Psalm. 119. 1^.
sin against him.

The second Rule of the keeping of the heart, is to establish our thoughts by
counsel. It is the wise man's advise in so many words, Prove. 20. 18. wherein he
would teach us, that it is the property of a worldly wise man, in matters of
weight, not to trust to his own wit, but to follow the direction and counsel
of wise and skillful men. And if this be a sound course in matters of the
world, much more ought it to be taken, in the maine matters of religion, and
conscience, concerning the heart and soul of man. And therefore by the law of
proportion, it gives us direction, not once to think or conceive, so much as a
thought, but upon advice and direction taken at God and his word. Thy
testimonies (says David) are Psalm. 119. 24.
my delight; and my counselors. And what benefit had he by taking such a
course? surely, by the word of God, which was his continual meditation, he gat
understanding, he became wiser then the ancient; it made him to hate all the
ways of falsehood: it kept him from declining from God, either to the right
hand, or to the left. The same rule must be practiced of us, in the use of our
senses, our speeches, and actions, and then shall the heart be kept clean, and
free from these temptations.

And seeing this temptation is so dangerous and fearful, as has been said,
and does often befall men; our duty is to make conscience, of practicing the
foresaid rules continually. And thus much concerning the third kind of
distress of Conscience.

CHAP. XI.
Of the fourth Special Distress, arising from a man's own sins.

THE Fourth Distress of mind is that, which arises from a man's own sins,
or rather, from some one special sin committed. And this kind of Tentation
is twofold: For either it is more violent, and less common; or less violent
and more common.

Sect. 1.
The violent Distress of mind, shows it The violent Distress.
self by fears and terrors of the Conscience, by doubtings of the mercy of
God, by lamentable and fearful complaints made to others.

Now Question is moved, How this violent distress of mind, arising from our
own sins, is to be cured? Answ. That it The Cure.
may be cured by the blessing of God, three things must be done.

First, that particular sin must be known, which is the cause of this violent
distress. And here we are to know, by the way; that it is an usual thing,
with the parties thus distressed, to dissemble and cloak their sins: and
therefore they will allege, that their trouble arises from some evil
thoughts, from wicked affections, and from the corruption of nature: whereas
commonly men are not distressed, in violent manner, for evil thoughts,
affections, etc. but the violent distress comes from so^e actual and odious
sin or sins done, which wound the conscience, and are the causes of great
distraction of mind: and they are many, which having bin upon occasion before
rehearsed, I will not now repeat them. Only this must be remembered, that the
greater sins against the third, sixth, and seventh commandments, are the maine
and proper causes of violent Quo occultins peccatum. co^: mai^s (...).
distresses: and the more secret the sin is, in regard of the practice
thereof, the greater horror of Conscience it brings; and open offenses do
not give so deep a wound unto it, as secret and hidden sins.

Secondly, the particular sin being known, Inquiry must be made, as much as
possibly may be, by signs, whether the party distressed repents, yea or no.
For except he has repented, he cannot be fitted to receive comfort: and
unless he be first fitted to receive comfort, he cannot be relieved in
Conscience. Now if it be found, that the party has repented, then care must
be had in the next place, that his repentance may be renewed, for the particular
sin committed.

Thirdly, having thus done, the comfort must be ministered, for the moderating,
or taking away of the distress. And here remember by the way, that the
comforts ministered, usually and ordinarily, must not go alone, but be mingled
and tempered, with some terrors of the Law: that being thereby feared, with
the consideration of sin, and of the wrath of God due unto the same, the
comfort may appear to be the sweeter. The ministering whereof, in case of this
distress, would not be direct and present, but by certain steps and
degrees: except only in the point of death: for then a directer course must be
used. These degrees are two.

First, the party is to be informed of a possibility of pardon, that is, that
his sins are pardonable, and though in themselves they be great, and heinous,
yet by the mercy of God in Christ, they may be remitted. Now put the case,
that the afflicted apprehends only the odiousness of his sins, and the
wrath of God due to the same, and in this fit puts off the pardon from
himself, and cannot be persuaded that his sin may be forgiven, what then is
to be done? Ans. Then for the effecting of this first degree, certain Grounds
are to be laid down, whereupon assurance in that case may be built up in his
heart.

The first Ground of possibility of pardon Grounds of possibility of pardon.
is, That the mercy of God is infinite, yea over all his works, Psalm. ^45. 9.
That the death of Christ is of infinite price, merit, and value before God.
That God is much in sparing, Isa. 55. 7. That with the Lord is mercy, and with
him is plenteous redemption, Psalm. 130. 7. That Christ's satisfaction is not
only a (...).
price, but a (...).
counterprice, 1. Tim. 2. 6. able to satisfy for the sins of all men, yea
for them that have sinned against the holy Ghost. For that sin, is not
therefore unpardonable, because the offense thereof is greater, then the merit
of Christ; but because the party offending, neither does, nor can apply the
merit of Christ unto himself. An ancient father upon Cains words, My
punishment is greater then I can bear, says, Thou lie Cain, for Gods mercy
is Augustine.
greater then the sins of all men. The mercy of God was very great to
Manasses, to Solomon, to Peter, and to many others, though 2. Chr. 33. 23. 2.
(...). 7. 14. 15.
they were great offenders.

The second Ground. Men of years, living in the Church of God, and knowing the
doctrine of salvation, shall not be condemned simply for their sins, but for
lying in their sins. Upon this ground, I say, that men distressed must be
grieved, not so much for committing of sin, as for lying and continuing in
sins committed.

A third Ground. It pleases God many times to leave men to themselves, and to
suffer them to commit some sin that wounds conscience. It is true and
cannot be denied. But we must withal remember, that sins committed, do not
utterly take away grace, but rather make it the more to shine and show it
self. For God in mercy turns all things, even sin it self, to the good
of them that be his: and therefore sin committed, cannot either waste, or
extinguish grace received, but by divine dispensation, serves to amplify and
enlarge the same; so as where sin abounds, there grace abounds much more,
Romans 5. 20. And the Lord said to Paul, being in great extremity, 2. Cor. 12.
9. My grace is sufficient for thee: for my power is made perfect through
weakness. Hence it appears, that the grace of God is not utterly lost, but
appears lively in the time of distress.

The fourth Ground is this. The promises of God touching remission of sins,
and life eternal, in respect of believers are general, and in regard of all
and every man indefinite: that is, they do not define, or exclude any person,
or any sinner, or any time; only they admit one exception, of final
impenitencie. Here a question may be moved, How long he that ministers
comfort, must stand upon the possibility of pardon? I answer, until he has
brought the party distressed, to some measure of true repentance: and this
being done, then he is to proceed to the second degree of comfort.

The Second degree of comfort is, to teach, that the sin, or sins of the
party distressed, are indeed pardoned. But it may be asked, upon what signs
may this comfort be applied? I answer, upon these two. First, if the party
distressed confess, that he or she is heartily grieved, that by their sin
or sins, they have offended so loving and so merciful a God. Secondly, if
they profess, that they desire with all their heart, to be reconciled unto God
in Christ: and at least do desire to repent for their sins; and withal do
carry in heart, a purpose to sin no more, but in all things, (as much as in
them lies) to perform new obedience unto god, Luc. 15. 11. etc. Now for the
better enforcing of this comfort, some textes of Scripture, fitting this
purpose must be rehearsed, a^ for example, Matthew. 9. 12, 13. I came not to call
the righteous, that is to say, those that judge themselves righteous, but
sinners, that is, those which are grieved, because in their own conscience,
they are vile and heinous offenders, to repentance. Again, Matthew, 11. 28. Come
unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and I will refresh you. And
Christ says, it was the end of his coming to preach deliverance to the
captives, and to set at liberty them that are bruised. Luke 4. 18.

To conclude this point, there remains yet a further question to be resolved,
and that is The Case of Re^idination.
this. A man after repentance, for some greiuous sin, falls into it again,
and is distressed more then before: It is a cause somewhat grievous. For we
know, that if a man be recovered of an ague, and through distemper in diet, or
otherwise, makes a relapse into it again, his case is often desperate, and he
hardly scapeth with his life. In the same manner it is a dangerous case, if
after repentance, men make a relapse into the same sin again. It may then be
asked, how such persons may be recovered after a relapse?

I answer, though we find not any one particular example in scripture, of any
one person, that was restored again after a relapse: yet nevertheless there
is some comfort for such persons. Upon what grounds may some say? Ans. Men that
have not so much as a drop of mercy, in comparison of God, must forgive there
brethren often and many times, yea as our Savior Christ says to Peter, till
seventy times seven times, if they return and say it repents them. Now god is
infinite in all his attributes. He is much in sparing: with him is plenteous
redemption: and therefore he will questionless, upon true repentance, often
forgive and forget, even the same sin iterated again and again.

Now these persons are to be releiued in this sort. First they must have their
Consciences settled in this point, that their relapse is pardonable, though very
dangerous. For proof hereof read Esaias, 2. 18. Where mention is made of diverse
Apostataes, that were by God called to repentance, with promise of don, if they
turned unto him. And in Luke 15. the prodigal child, (by whom I understand
one, that after grace received, fell from his repentance and obedience to God)
when he did but purpose in his heart to return again, was pardoned, and
received into favor. In the 2. Cor. 5. 20. Paul says to the Corinths, that
were fallen away, We pray you in Christ's stead that ye be reconciled unto God.

Secondly, being thus settled in conscience they must again repent them of
their sins.

Thirdly and lastly, they are to be comforted, with the promise of remission of
sins, after that some signs of renewed repentance for sins past, have
been given.

Sect. 2.
The Second kind of this Tentation or trouble of mind, which is more common
and The Moderate Distress.
less violent, befalls the Children of God: and it is a grief of heart, more
or less, whereby men are troubled, in respect of the want of grace in their
hearts, and defects of obedience in their lives. Paul the dear servant of God,
was possessed with this trouble of mind, as we may read, Romans 7. 23. And
indeed there is no child of God, but more or less, one time or other, he
feels the stings of sin, and the buffetings of Satan, which cause grief in
his heart. But this grief is a notable grace of God, and therefore they which
want it, must labor to have it, and they which have it, must not seek to put
it out, but to keep it in measure and order.

And the Grounds of comfort, whereby the heart may be sta^ed in this sorrow,
that it be not immoderate, may be these.

I. Ground. It is Gods will, that the work of sanctification, or regeneration,
should be imperfect in this life, and remain unfinished til death. This point
needs no proof, it is manifest both in the word of God, and in daily
experience. The reasons for which God will have it to be so, may be these.

First of all, God gives grace, according to the measure, and manner of our
receiving of it, which in this life is imperfect. Some gifts of God in Christ,
bestowed on his servants, as remission of sins by his death, and
justification by his obedience, are not put into us, but are only applied and
made ours by imputation. Some other gifts there be, which are infused and put
into us, as namely, sanctification, regeneration, the love of God and man: and
by one of these two means, to wit, either by imputation or infusion, are all
the gifts of God in Christ made ours. Yet before we can have them, we must
receive the^: and the means whereby we receive them is faith, which God has
ordained, to be the hand of our souls, to receive his benefits bestowed on us.
Which faith because it is weak and imperfect, in this life, therefore the
gifts which we receive thereby, are also imperfect. For though Gods benifits be
like a bottomless sea, yet the faith, whereby we lay hold of them, is like unto
a vessel with a narrow neck, which though it be cast into the great Ocean,
receives but a little water at once, and that by degrees, drop by drop,
according to the wideness of the mouth. And hence it is, that though the gifts
of God without us, which are ours by imputation, be perfect; yet all such
graces as are put into us, are weak and imperfect.

Secondly, if any servant of God, should be perfectly regenerate, and made
absolutely holy in this life: then he should fulfill the moral law, and so
become a Savior to himself: and by the tenor of the law have life: and so
should not Christ be a Savior properly, but only an instrument, to dispose us,
to the keeping of the law, whereby we might save our selves. But there is one
only all sufficient Savior, Christ Jesus: and the beginning, the middle, and
the accomplishme^t of our salvation, is to be ascribed to him alone.

Thirdly, it is the will God, that his own children, with whom he is well
pleased in Christ, should be brought to nothing in themselves that they might
be all in all out of themselves in Christ: being, as it were, emptied of
self-love, and of all confidence in their own goodness. But if
sanctification should be perfect at the first, then a man should not go out of
himself, but would rather stay as he is, and rest contented in his own
goodness. For this cause Paul, after his exaltation, was buffeted by Satan's
temptations, that he might not be exalted out of measure, 2 Cor. 12. 7. but
should content himself with this, that he was in the love and favor of God in
Christ.

II. Ground is; To consider, what makes a man professing Christ, accepted of
God, and how much he himself must do, for this end? The substance of all
things to be done of us for this end, that we may become the children of God,
may be reduced to three heads.

First of all, we must heartily bewail our sinful lives past, and seriously
humble our selves, in regard of our own sins, both of heart and life; and if
by occasion we fall into any sin, we must not lie therein, but by speedy
repentance, recover our former estate.

Secondly, in regard of the sinnefulnesse of our hearts and lives, in times
past, we must rest our selves on Gods mercy alone, ^lying to the throne of
mercy for the pardon of them all.

Thirdly, we must endeavor in the course of our lives afterward, to perform
obedience to God in all his commandments; that thereby we may show our selves
thankful to him for his mercy, and profit in our obedience.

For proof hereof, First, consider the examples of this practice in Gods
children. All that David that worthy servant of God could do, after his
sins committed, to bring himself again into the favor of God, whom he had
offended, consisted of these very heads, which have been named; Repentance,
Confidence, and Affiance in Gods mercy, and Performance of new obedience. And
this his practice was verified, amongst many other places, specially in the
119. Psalm, and in all the Psalms commonly called penitential. Again, the
Prophet Daniel was accepted of God only for the doing of these things, Dan. 9.
And in like manner was Paul, and the rest of the Apostles. Romans 7. 1. Tim. 1.
12. Again, for further proof, let it be considered; what it is that makes a
man to become a Christian, and servant of God: not this, that he is pure from
all sins, and never slides or swar^es from obedience unto God; but because
when he sins and falls, he is grieved with himself, and labors every
day, to mortify his corruptions, which are the matter of sin, in his heart,
and life; and suffers not sin to reign in his mortal body, but
crucifieth the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof.

Yet here remains a great difficulty. Many a good servant of God, may, and
does truly say of himself, I bewail my sins, and do in some sort rest on
Gods mercy, and withal I endeavor to perform new obedience: but alas! here
is my grief, I cannot do these things as I would. In matter of sorrow and
grief, I am troubled with hardness of heart: in occasions of boldness and
confidence, with doubtings: (...) endeavor to obey, with many slippes, and
sundry falls: For the staying and moderating of this grief, these rules may
further be remembre^.

The first Rule. If there be in the mind, a purpose not to sin; in the will,
a desire to please God; and in the whole man, ^n endeavor to perform the
purpose of the mind, and the desire of the will: mark what follows upon
this: God in mercy accepts the purpose and will to obey, for obedience it
self. Yea though a man fail in the very act, and do not so well as he should,
the Lord accepts the affection and endeavor for the thing done. Excellent is
the saying of an ancient Father, God accepts that Accipit suum, and remittit
tu^.
which is his, and forgiues that which is thine: his is the grace whereby we
are enabled to endeavor to obey in the want of obedience, and that he
accepts; ours i^ the sin and weakness in performance of the duty which he
requires, and that he does in mercy forgive. Herein appears the great
goodness of God unto us, and we can never be sufficiently thankful for the
same. But yet that we may not here delude our hearts with conceits, and bless^
our selves in vain: we must know, that God does not always accept the will
for the deed, unless there be a constant purpose in heart, a true desire in
will, and some resolved endeavor suitable in the life, Malac^. 3. ^7. God
spares them that fear him, ^s a father spares his own child. How is that?
though the sick or weak child being com^ed some business, goes about it very
vnhandsomly, and so the deed be done to little (...) no purpose: yet the
father accepts it as well done, if he see the child yoelde unto his
commandment, and do his endeavor, to the uttermost of his power. Even so
will God deal with those that be his children though sick and weak in
obedience.

^r how will some say, can God accept a work of ours that is imperfect? Ans.
So far forth, as the obedience is done in truth, so far forth God accepts
it, because it is his own work in us: and as it is ours, he pardons it unto
us, because we are in Christ.

A second Rule is laid down, Romans 7. 19. where Paul says to this purpose, the
good which I would do, I do not, and the evil which I would not, that do I.
In these words, is set down the state of all regenerate men in this life: and
the meaning is this. The good things which God has commanded, I do them, but
not as I would, and the evil forbidden I avoid, but not as I would. This we
shall see to be true by comparing the voices of three kinds of men together.
The carnal man says, I do not that which is good, neither will I do it, and
that which is evil I do, and I will do it. Contrariwise, the man glorified,
he says, That which is good I do, and will do it, and that which is evil I
do not, neither will I do it. The regenerate man, in a middle between them
both, he says; The good things commanded I do, but not as I would; the evil
things forbidden I avoid, but not as I would.

And this is the estate of the child of God in this life, who in this regard,
is like unto a diseased man, who loves his health, and therefore observes both
diet and physic: and yet he often falls into his fit again, (though he be
never so careful to observe the rules of the Physician) by reason of the
distemperature of his body: and hereupon is saine to go to the Physician the
second time for new counsel. In like manner, Gods children, have indeed in
their hearts, a care to please and obey God; but by reason of sin that
dwells in them, they ^aile often, and so are ^aine to humble themselves again
before him, by new repentance. Again, the servants of God are like to a man,
by some sudden accident cast into the sea, who in striving to save himself
from drowning, puts to all his strength, to swim to the shore, and being come
almost unto it, their meets him a wave or billow, which drives him clean
back again, it may be a mile or further, and then the former hope and joy
conceived of escape, is sore abated: yet he returns again, and still labors
to come to the land, and never rests till he attain unto it.

III. Ground. He that is indeed regenerate, has this privilege, that the
corruption of nature, is no part of him, neither does it belong to his person,
in respect of divine imputation. Paul says of himself, Romans 7. 17. It is no
more I, but sin that dwells in me. In which words, he distinguishes
between his own person, and sin that is in him. For in man regenerate,
there be three things, the body, the soul, and the gift of Gods image
restored again. Now touching the corruption of nature, that is in his person,
and so may be said to be his; but it belongs not to the man regenerate, it is
not his, because it is not imputed to him, and so indeed is, as though it were
not in him. The Apostle 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. prays for the Thessalonians, that God
would sanctify them throughout, and preserve their whole spirit, soul, and
body. Of which place (amongst many) this exposition may be given. The Apostle
speaking of men regenerate, and sanctified, makes three parts in them: body,
soul, and spirit: and by spirit, we are to understand, not the conscience, but
the gift of regeneration, and sanctification, which is the whole man body and
soul, opposed to the flesh, which in a natural man, is called the old man,
Romans 7. And the prayer which Paul makes in the behalf of the Thessalonians,
teaches us in effect thus much; that though corruption remain in the
regenerate, after regeneration; yet in respect of divine acceptance, he is
accounted as righteous, and so continues: his sin, (by the mercy of God in
Christ) not being imputed to him to condemnation. And so much for that point.

Now these Grounds of comfort, and others of the like nature, may serve to
sustain and uphold the hearts of the children of God, when they shall be
pressed and troubled, in consideration of their estate in this life, which
cannot till death, be fully freed, from much weakness and manifold
imperfections.

CHAP. XII.
Of the fifth Special Distress, arising from a man's own body.

THe fifth and last kind of Temptation or Trouble of mind, arises from a man's
own body.

Before I enter to speak thereof, one Question, in the mean time, must be
answered, namely, How the body being an earthly substance, should trouble or
annoie the mind, considering that the mind is not bodily out spiritual: for
nothing can work above it own power: and it is against reason, that that
which is bodily, should either alter or trouble a spirit. For answer hereunto,
these things must be considered.

Sect. 1.
First of all, the actions of man, though they be sundry, yet they all
proceed from How the body troubles the mind.
one only fountain, and common cause, the soul; and are done by the power
thereof. The body of it self, is not an agent in any work, but as it were a
dead instrument, in and by which the soul produces all actions and works.

Secondly, though all the actions of man come from the soul, yet the most of
them are such, as be performed by the body, and the parts thereof, and by the
spirits that are seated in the body, as by instruments. Indeed some actions
of the soul and mind, are done without the help of the body; but I say,
that the most of them, are wrought by the body, and spirits therein contained.
And yet notwithstanding the Spirits in themselves, are no agents at all: but
the only agent in any work, is the soul it self. For example: the using of
the outward senses, as of sight, hearing, tasting, touching, smelling, as also
of the inward, as imagination, memory, etc. all this is done by the brain,
and the parts of the brain, as proper instruments. All affections both good
and bad, come from the soul, but yet they are done and acted in, and by means
of the heart and vital spirits. So also the powers of life and nourishment
proceed from the soul; and yet they are done and wrought by the liver, and
other inward parts, as instruments whereby the soul nourishes the body. In a
word, there is no natural action in man, but for the effecting thereof, the
parts of the body are used as it were the hands and instruments of the soul;
and all this comes by reason of the union of the body with the soul, whereby
they make one person.

Hence it follows, that when the body is troubled, the soul is also
troubled. Now the body affects and hurts the soul and mind, not by
taking away, or diminishing any part thereof: for the soul is indivisible. Nor
by depriving it of any power or faculty given it of God: for as the soul it
self, and the parts thereof, so also all the faculties of the same, remain
whole and entire, without abating or diminishing. But by corrupting the action
of the mind, or more properly, by corrupting the next instrument whereby the
mind works, and consequently the action it self.

This may be conceived by a comparison. A skillful artificer in any science,
having an unfit tool to work withal, though his skill be good, and his
ability sufficient: yet his instrument wherewith he works being bad, the
work which he does must needs be an imperfect work. Howbeit the tool takes
not away the skill of his workmanship, nor his power of working, only it
hinders him from showing his skill, and doing that well, which otherwise he
should and could do well. In like manner, the body being corrupted, hinders
the work of the soul; not by taking away the work of the soul, or the
ability of working: but by making it to bring forth a corrupt work, because
the instrument which it uses is corrupt and faulty. And thus we must conceive
of all the annoyances of the soul by the body.

The Temptation follows. The body causes the trouble of mind two ways,
either by Melancholy, or by some strange alterations in the parts of the
body, which oftentimes befall men: in what sort we shall see afterward. For
troubles of mind thus caused, are more common, and as noisome as the most of
the former.

Sect. 2.
Touching that which comes by Melancholy, Melancholy.
sundry things are to be considered for our instruction, and for the Remedy
of that evil.

1. And first of all; if it be asked what Melancholy is? I answer, it is a
kind of earthie and black blood, specially in the spleen, corrupted and
distempered; which when the spleen is stopped, conuaies it self to the heart,
and the brain; and there partly by his corrupt substance, and contagious
quality, and partly by corrupt spirits, annoyeth both heart and brain, being
the seats and instruments of reason, and affections.

2. The second is, what are the effects and operations of Melancholy? Ans.
They are strange, and often fearful. There is no humor, yea nothing in man's
body, that has so strange effects, as this humor has, being once
distempeted. An ancient Divine calls it the Devils bait, because the Devil
Esca Diaboli. Balneum Diaboli.
being well acquainted with the complexion and temperature of man, by Gods
just permission, conueies himself into this humor and works strange
conceits. It is recorded in Scripture, that when the Lord took his good Spirit
from Saul, whereby he did carry himself well in the government of his people:
and an evil Spirit came upon him, he was in so fearful a case that he would
have slain him that was next unto him: how so? surely, because God in justice
withdrew his spirit from him, and suffered Satan, to enter into the humor of
choler, or melancholy, or both, and by this means caused him to offer
violence to David.

Now the effects thereof in particular, are of two sorts. The first, is in the
brain and head. For this humor being corrupted, it sends up noisome fumes as
clouds or mists; which do corrupt the imagination, and makes the instrument
of reason unfit for understanding and sense. Hence follows the first effect,
strange imaginations, conceits and opinions, framed in the mind: which are the
first work of this humor, not properly: but because it corrupts the
instrument, and the instrument being corrupted, the faculty cannot bring
forth good but corrupt actions.

Examples hereof are well known, I will only touch one or two. One is called
the Beastiall or Beastlike Melancholy; a disease in the brain whereby a man
thinks himself to be a beast of this or that kind, and carries himself
accordingly. And here with have all those been troubled, which have thought
themselves to be (...).
wolves, and have practiced woluish behavior. Again, it is said of
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 30. that he was driven from men, and did eat grass as
the oxen, that is, behaved himself, and fed as a beast. Now some are of
opinion that his humane shape was taken from him, and that he was transformed
into a beast; at least that he had the soul of a beast in stead of an humane
soul for a time. But they are deceived. For there is no such transportation of
souls into bodies, either of men or beasts. Others think, that Nebuchadnezzar
was smitten in the brain with this disease of beastlike Melancholy, whereby he
was so bereft of his right mind, that he carried himself as a beast. And this
interpretation is not against the text: for in the 31. verse of that chapter it
is said, that his mind came to him again: and therefore in the disease, his
understanding, and the right use of his reason was lost. And the like is true
in history, by diverse examples, though it were not true in Nebuchadnezzar.

Again, take another example, that is common and ordinary. Let a Melancholic
person upon the sudden, hear or see some fearful thing, the strength of his
imagination is such, that he will presently fasten the thing upon himself. As
if he see or hear that a man has hanged himself, or is possessed with a
Devil, it presently comes to his mind, that he must do so unto himself, or
that he is, or at least shall be possessed. In like manner upon relation of
fearful things, presently his fantasy works, and he imagines, that the
thing is already, or shall befall him. And this imagination, when it enters
once and takes place, it brings forth horrible and fearful effects.

The second effect or work of Melancholy, is upon the heart. For there is a
concord and consent between the heart and the brain, the thoughts and the
affections: the heart affecting nothing but that which the mind conceiueth.
Now when the mind has conceived, imagined, and framed within it self
fearful thoughts; then comes affection and is answerable to imagination. And
hence proceed exceeding horrors, fears, and despaires, even of salvation it
self, and yet the Conscience for all this untouched, and not troubled or
disquieted.

3. Thirdly, it may be demanded, whether there be any difference between the
trouble of Conscience and Melancholy? for many hold, that they are all one.
Ans. They are not all one, but differ much. Affliction of Conscience is one
thing, trouble by Melancholy is an other: and they are plainly distinguished
thus.

First, when the Conscience is troubled, the affliction it self is in the
Conscience, and so in the whole man. But in Melancholy, the imagination is
disturbed, and not the Conscience. Secondly, the Conscience afflicted, has a
true and certain cause, whereby it is troubled, namely, the sight of sin, and
the sense of Gods wrath; but in Melancholy, the imagination conceiueth a thing
to be so, which is not so: for it makes a man to fear and despair, upon:
supposed and fained causes. Thirdly, the man afflicted in Conscience, has
courage in many other matters: but the Melancholic man fears every man, every
creature, yea himself, and has no courage (...) all, but fears, when there
is no cause of fear. Fourthly, imaginations in the brain caused by
Melancholy, may be cured, taken away, and cut off by means of Physic: but
the distress of Conscience, cannot be cured by any thing in the world but one,
and that is the blood of Christ, and the assurance of Gods favor.

4. Fourthly, the way to cure Melancholy is this. First, the person troubled
must be brought to this; that he will content himself, to be advised and ruled
by the judgment of others, and cease to rest upon himself touching his own
estate: and by this shall he reap much quiet and contentation.

Secondly, search and trial must be made, whether he has in him any
beginnings of grace, as of faith and repentance, o^ no. If he be a carnal man,
and wants knowledge of his estate, then means must be used, to bring him to
some sight and sorrow for his sins, that his melancholy sorrow, may be turned
into a godly sorrow. If he want faith and true repentance, some good beginnings
thereof must be wrought in his heart.

Thirdly, when he is brought to faith in Gods mercy, and an honest purpose not
to sin any more; then, certain merciful promises of God, are to be laid
before him: and he must be exhorted, to rest upon these promises, and at no
time to admit any imagination or thought, that may cross the said promises.
Now the promises are these, and such like: Psalm. 34. 9. No good thing shall be
wanting to them that fear God. Psalm. 91. 10. No evil shall come near the
godly man. 2. Chr. 15. The Lord is with you, while you are with him, and if you
seek him, he will be found of you. Iam. 4. 8. Draw near to God, and he will
draw near to you. And the best means to cause any man thus diseased, to be at
peace with himself, is to hold, believe, and know the truth of these promises,
and not to suffer any bythought to enter into his heart, that may cross them.

Moreover, though the former promises may stay the mind, yet will they not take
away the humor, except further help be used. Therefore the fourth and last
help, is the art of Physic, which serves to correct and abate the humor,
because it is a means by the blessing of God, to restore the health, and to
cure the distemper of the body. And thus much touching the trouble of mind,
caused by Melancholy.

Sect. 3.
The Second means whereby the body Strange alterations besides Melancholy.
annoies the mind is, when it occasions trouble to the mind, by strange
alterations incident to the body. When a man begins to enter into a Frenzy,
if the brain admit never so little alteration; presently the mind is
troubled, the reason corrupted, the heart terrified, the man distracted in the
whole body. Thus from the trembling of the heart, come many fearful
imaginations and conceits, whereof a man knows not the cause. The same is
procured by the swelling of the spleen, by the rising of the entrals, by
strange crampes, convulsions, and such like.

The remedy hereof is this. First, it is still to be considered, whether the
party thus troubled, has the beginnings of true faith and repentance, or no.
If he has, it is so much the better. If he has not, (as usually such persons
are mere natural men,) then the first duty is, to use all means, to stir
up in him some godly sorrow for his sins, to bring him to the exercises of
invocation, and to some confidence in Gods mercy for pardon.

Secondly, this being done, means must be used to take away the opinion
conceived, which will be done by giving him information of the state of his
body, and what is the true and proper cause of the alteration thereof. This
being known the grief or fear conceived, will easily be stayed. For take
away the false opinion, and inform the judgment, and the whole man will be the
better.

Thirdly, the opinion being altered and reformed, it may be the alteration in
the body will remain: the party therefore in that case must be taught, that
it is a correction of God, and that God does not barely suffer the correction
to be inflicted, but is the very author of it, and therefore the party is to
be well pleased, and to rest himself in that will of God. For every present
estate, whether it be good or badde, is the best state for us, because it comes
by Gods will and appointment.

And thus much touching the distinct kinds of distresses of mind: whereunto I
add this one thing further, that if we make examination of the estate of
persons as are troubled with any of these five temptations we shall not usually
find them single, but mixed together, especially Melancholy, with terror of
Conscience or some other temptations.

For the distraction of the mind will often breed a distemper in the body, and
the distemper of the body likewise will sometimes cause distraction of mind.
Again, Melancholy will ofte^be an occasion, (though no direct cause) of terror
of Conscience; and in the same manner the conscience touched and terrified with
sense of the haynousnesse of sin, and the Heaviness of Gods wrath, will
bring distemper of body by sympathy, and cause Melancholy.

In this Case, if Question be made, what is to be done, I answer, that for
mixed distresses, we must have recourse to mixed Remedies, using in the first
place the best means for the rectifying of the mind the principal growndes
whereof have been before delivered; and then taking the seasonable advise of
the Physician, whose calling and service God has sanctified for the cure and
relief of the body in case of extremity.

And so much of the first Sort of Questions, concerning Man simply considered
in himself.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND AND THIRD BOOKS OF THE CASES OF CONSCIENCE, CONCERNING MAN
STANDING IN RELATION to God and Man.

Wherein are handled the Questions touching the worship of God, and the
practice of Christian virtue.

Now newly added unto the former, and carefully examined according to the
Authors own breefes, and published for the common good by T. P. Bachelour of
Divinity.

Romans 14. 23.

Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

ALMA MATTER CANTA BRIGIA


PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1606.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD LORD DENNIE, BARON of Waltham, etc.
RIght Honorable. It was not without special cause, that the famous Apostle
of the Gentiles, entering into a serious meditation of the Calling and vv^ke of
the Ministry, and growing at length to some issue of his thoughts, cries
^ut (as it were) in terms of Complaint; And who is sufficient for 2. Cor. 2.
16.
these things? For if ^nquirie be made into the reason of his demand, the
Scripture shall answer for him; That Ministers are the Angels of the Lord of
Hosts; the Interpreters Mal. 2. 7. Job 3^. 23. Math. 5. 13, 14.
of his will; the Salt of the earth; the Light of the World, And their Calling
is, to carry the Embassage of Reconciliation; to manifest unto man the
pleasure of the Highest; to season the corrupted heart instrumentally with
grace; to inlighten the darkened mind, by the dispensation of saving
knowledge, as the Sun does the Air by the brightness of his beams.

Now these high Ti^les and greatvvorkes, evidently declaring the weight and
vvorth of that Honorable Commission, are not either given or assigned, only
in respect of public and ordinary duties, wherein by Divine ordinance they
be made the mouth of God unto Man by preaching, Ierem. 15. 19. Nehem. 8. 7.
and again of Man unto God by prayer. For these are determined upon certain
times and places, when and where they are to be put in execution, according
to the laudable Constitutions and Canons of particular Churches: But in a
further regard, as they have received from God the Tongue of the Learned, and
are endued with knowledge and ability, to inform the Consciences of men
touching every action, whether personal appertaining to particular states, or
relative employed in the vvorshippe of God, and practice of Christian virtues,
A gift, as no less necessary, so of a far larger extent then the other, and
consequently performable without limitation of time or place, in season, out
of season, whensoever the mind requires resolution in Case of doubt, or
Comfort in distress. The light of this candle is therefore erected up on high,
and set in open vi^vv, that it may communicate it self not to all in gross,
but to every one in person. The Lords Interpreter in this sense, is to dispense
his will in every place and Matthew. 5. 15.
time, to the poor widow of Sarep^a at her own home; to the Noble ^uch of
Ethiopia in his travel; to David, 2. king. 17. 9. Act. 8. 30. 2. Sam. 12.
Math. 26. 75.
that he may be drawn to Confession of his sin; to Peter, for his restoring
after his fall; to the vveake, that they may be supported; to the strong, that
they may stand; to the Wavering mind for resolution; to the Troubled soul
for comfort and relief.

Hence it is apparent, that this Messenger of God must be (as Paul says) a
(...).
complete man, in every respect, armed 2. Tim. 3. 17.
and (...).
well appointed with necessaries appertaining, for all purposes, to the honor
of his Lord, and the credit of his Calling. He should be not only a learned
Text-man, mighty in the Scriptures; a positive Divine, established in the
truth; a man provided ad oppositum, to vvithstand and con^ the Adversary; but
a skillful Cas^ist, ready at all assaies upon good grounds of knowledge and
observation, to give a Rule, to yield a Reason, to speak a word in time to
him that is vvearie.

Which last property, to omit the rest, being so essential (as it is) to the
Calling and condition of a Minister; yea of that importance (as heretofore I
have declared to your Lords^.) it seems strange, at least in my poor
conceit, that among so many grave and learned discourses, published by way of
Definition and Disputation in matter of Religion, ^evv or none have been
framed and con^riued to this purpose; that in this flourishing estate both of
our Church and Commonwealth, none have employed their endeavors in the
unfolding and displaying of this Subject; yea, whereas they of the Popish
Church have been so plentiful, or rather lavish in their Ioannis de Thabia.
Angel de Clavasio. Raymundi, etc.
Sums, Martini Azpilcust. Navarri, etc.
Manuels, Emanuelis Sa. etc.
Aphorisms, Franci^. Tolet. etc.
Instructions, Iacobi de Graphii^ a Capua, etc.
Determinations, etc. for direction of their Confessors in Case-points; that
our Protestant Divines for the most part, have been so sparing and silent in
speaking or vvriting of this Argument.

Howbeit, the Lord in his most wise providence, has not wholy denied this
benefit unto our Church. For notvvithstanding so great silence and forbearance
in matter of Devotion, as touching the rectifying of the Conscience, there has
been of late years trained up to this end, a M. R. Green. ha^.
special Instrument of his glory, who being in time thoroughly grounded in
the principles of one part of the Coses; by many grave Counsels, and
comfortable directions, fetched from the word, and gathered by long
observation, has cured the vvounds of many a distressed soul. And those
divine Tracta^es of his, now gathered together since his death, and
communicated to the Church of God, are full of heavenly meditations to that
purpose. And as himself desired to leave unto posterity, some memory of his
knowledge in that kind, so the talent he received was not buried in his
grave, but again revived in the person of that faithful Minister of Christ,
the Author of this Book, a man both for learning and pi^tie deservedly
reverenced and renovv^ed in the judgments of all those that love and embrace
the Truth. Who happily attempting the same course, and referring the whole
body of his labors in preaching and vvriting thereunto principally; proceeded
with much advantage, added unto the Cases of Distress other Heads of
Questions, and in his latter time reduced them into such a Frame and Order, a^
might best serve for an Introduction of Case-diuinitie, for the help and
encouragement of others.

The first Part of which Frame being formerly commended by me to your Hon. I
have again emboldened my self to present you with the rest, that so the
whole may have the freer passage from you, to the common use of others.
Wherein I have taken up no new ^^shion, but kept my self to the commendable
custom of vvriters in auncient^r ti^es, who have betrusted the Church of God
with the fruits of their endeavors, under the patronage of Honorable and
virtuous Nobility. (...) namely of that renounned Coloss 4. 14. Hieron. pro.
log. in Lu^ and (...) Catalog. Scriptor. Ecclesiast. Nicep. l. 6. c. 16. Luc.
11. Act. 1. 1. 2. Io^. 1.
Physician of Antioche, and of S. (...) who dedicated their sacred vvritings,
the one to the Noble Theophilus, the other to the elect Lady and her children.

And that which moved these holy penmen of Scripture to this practice, has
also encouraged (...) upon the same respects, to offer this Treatise to your
Honorable favor: First, because your Lordship has been long So was Theoph.
with Lukes copies. Act. 1. 1.
acquainted with the person, life, and labors of this man, and well grounded
in t^^ truth of Religion, the maine subject of all his discourses. Secondly;
the Lord has enlarged your heart by his grace, to yield So did Theop. Luc. 1.
1. 4. and the Lad^ and ^ers. 2. Ioh. v. 4.
entertainment to that truth which he did teach and write: and the
manifestation of your vvilling mind to accept of any Treatise compiled by him,
gives sufficient proof of this point, ^uen i^ mine own knowledge. Thirdly,
you have not contented your self to be barely informed in the knowledge of
the truth, but have further desired This was also Theoph. his desire. Luke 1. 4.
confirmation and assurance in the same. One instance hereof I must needs
remember in this place: Tha^ sundry years since, it pleased you to set him a
special Task, the interpretation of that golden Text touching the Gain of
the greatest commodity in the world, (Phil. 3. 8.) for your further
understanding of the same, as himself reports to your great commendation:
And great reason, you should taste both of his former and Epist. dedicat. before
the True Gain.
Latter fruits, who by your motion was encouraged to take the pains, and no
doubt revvarded for his labor by a plentiful measure of your love.

Upon these motives, I have now at length exhibited unto your Lordship the
remainder of this present Introduction, my debt by bond of promise, and your
due, by special right of patronage. If I be happily challenged of slack payment
thereof to this time, I desire to be holden excused. First, for that the total
Sum which remained behind unpaid, was the greatest part, and thereupon
required further respite, that it might be more easily collected, and more
fully defraied. For though it be but one intir^ heap, yet it consists of
sundry particulars, all which were to be thoroughly examined, that upon the
Account, there might be a mutual agreement of the whole and the parts. And
further, it was my desire, that seeing the debt must needs be discharged, and
that to an Honorable person, it might be tendered in pure and Current Coin,
which might bear the trial of the touchstone: A thing necessary in these
times, wherein so much corrupt stuff in this kind, passes abroad from hand
to hand.

And thus heartily vvishing that these holy Rules of Religion and virtue, may
be perused at your Lordships best leisure, and entertained in practice for your
daily comfort and direction: cra^ing also your Honorable acceptance of my
careful endeavor in publishing them to the common veivve of the world, I
most humbly take my leave: Beseeching the Almighty, who has already graced
you with the true rewards of Virtue, Honor, and Nobility, to establish the
same both in your person and issue in this world, and after this life ended,
to give you that eternal inheritance of honor and happiness, in the kingdom
of glory. From Eman. Coll. in Cambridge. November. 20. 1606.

Your Honors in all Christian duty to be commanded, Thomas Pickering.

THE SECOND BOOK of the Cases of Conscience, concerning Man as he stands in
relation to God.
CHAP. I.
Of the order of the Questions.

HItherto I have spoken touching the first sort of Questions of the Conscience,
which concern Man simply considered in himself as he is a man.

In the next place come to be handled and resolved the Questions concerning
Man, as he stands in relation. Now man standing in a twofold relation; either
to God, or to man: according to this relation, the Questions come to be
considered in their several places. And first we are to treat of the Questions
of Conscience touching man standing in relation to God; to wit, as he is a
Christian. All which for order sake may be reduced to four heads.

I. Concerning the Godhead. II. Concerning the Scriptures. III. Concerning
religion, or the worship that is due unto God. IV. Concerning the time of the
worship of God, namely the Saboth.
CHAP. II.
Of the Godhead.

Touching the Godhead, there are two maine Questions.

I. Question. Whether there be a God?
BEfore we come to answer the Question, this one caveat must be remembered,
that it is a maine Ground and Principle in all Religions whatsoever, not to be
doubted of, or called into question, That there is a God. Heb. 11. 6. He that
comes to God, must believe that God is. As for those that are commonly
termed Atheists, which deny that there is a God, they are to be punished with
death, as not worthy to live in humane society; and the greatest torment that
can be devised by the wit of man, is too good for them. For if those be
holden as Traitors to an earthly Prince, and are most deservedly adjudged to
death, that revile his person, and deny his lawful authority: then they that
call into question the Godhead; are much more worthy to be esteemed traitors
to God, and consequently to bear the just punishment of their rebellion, death
it self.

For this cause I do not mean to dispute the question, whether there be a God
or no; and thereby minister occasion of doubting and deliberation in that which
is the only maine Ground and pillar of Christian religion: But rather my
purpose is, in showing that there is a God, to remove, or at least to help an
inward corruption of the soul that is great and dangerous, whereby the heart
and conscience by nature denies God and his providence. The wound in the body
that plucks out the heart, is the most dangerous wound that can be: and that
opinion that takes away the Godhead, does in effect rend and pluck out the
very heart of the soul. This Caveat premised, I come now to the point in hand,
to show that there is a God.

And for our better knowledge and assurance of this truth, we are to remember
thus much, that God has given unto man a threefold light: the one of nature,
the other of grace, and the third of glory. And by these, as by so many
degrees of knowledge, the mind being enlightened by God, receives direction
in the truth of the Godhead, both for this present life, and for that which is
to come.

(...) If it be demanded, in what order God has reveiled this light unto man:
I answer, that the light of nature serves to give a beginning and preparation
to this knowledge: the light of grace ministers the ground, and gives further
proof and evidence: and the light of glory, yields perfection of assurance,
making that perfectly and fully known, which by the former degrees was but
weakly and imperfectly comprehended. Of these three in order.

Sect. 1.
The light of nature is that light, which the Arguments from the light of
nature, and Creation.
view and consideration of the creatures both in general and particular,
affords unto man. From the light of nature, there are five distinct
arguments, to prove that there is a God: the consideration whereof will not be
unprofitable, even to him that is best settled in this point.

I. The first is taken from the creation and frame of the great body of the
world, and the things therein contained: Romans 1. 20. The invisible things of
him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead are known by the Creation of the
world being considered in his works. And out of this excellent frame of the
world, the truth of the Godhead may be sundry ways proved and maintained.

First, I would ask this question: This goodly frame of the world, had it a
beginning, or no beginning?

Let either part, or both be taken. Let it first be said, it had no beginning,
but is eternal, as the Atheist holds. Then I reason thus: If it had no
beginning, the world it self is God, and all the creatures that are therein,
from the greatest and highest, to the least and basest; yea, every drop of
water in the sea, and every corn of sand by the sea shore, are Gods. The
reason is, because according to this opinion, they have their being of
themselves without beginning; and that which is a substance of it self, and
has no beginning, is very God.

Again, if the world had no beginning, then it has also no ending. For that
which is without beginning, is without ending. Now all things in the world are
liable to corruption, and consequently are subject to an end. For whatsoever
is corruptible, the same is finite: therefore the world had a beginning.

Now if it had a beginning; then I demand, how it was made? did it make it
self? or was it made of nothing? If it be affirmed, that it made it self,
then the world was before it was. If it be said, it came from nothing: that
also cannot be. For nothing brings forth nothing: and that which is nothing in
it self, cannot bring forth something: therefore it is absurd in reason to
say, that nothing brought forth this world. And hereupon it must needs remain
for a truth, that there was some substance eternal and Almighty that framed
this goodly Creature the World, besides it self.

If a man comes into a large forest, and beholds therein goodly fair
buildings, and sundry kinds of herbs, and trees, and birds, and beasts, and
no man: he will presently reason thus with himself: these buildings are the
workmanship of some man, they were not from all eternity, they did not rear
themselves, neither did the herbs, the trees, the birds, or the beasts build
them: but of necessity they must have some first ^ounder, which is man. In
like manner, when we consider this world, so goodly a creature to behold,
though we see not the maker thereof, yet we cannot say that either it made it
self, or that the things therein contained made it, but that the Creator of
it, was some uncreated substance, most wise, most cunning, and everlasting, and
that is God.

Secondly, from this frame of the world and the consideration thereof, I reason
thus. In the world there are four sorts and kinds of creatures. The first
bare and naked substances, that have neither life, sense, nor reason in them:
as, the sun, the moon, the stars. The second that have substance and life,
but no sense nor reason: as, plants, trees, and herbs. The third that have no
reason, but both substance, life, sense, and power to move themselves: as, the
beasts of the land, and fishes of the sea. The fourth are such as have all,
namely substance, life, sense, and reason: as men.

Now these four sorts of creatures excel one another in properties and
degrees. For the first of them which are mere substances, do serve those that
have life, as the trees and the plants. The trees and the plants serve the
creatures that have sense and life, as the beasts and the fishes. The beasts
and the fishes serve man, that has substance, life, sense, and reason. And
amongst them all we see that those which have more gifts are served of those
which have less, as, the sun and moon serve the plants, the plants and
herbs serve the beasts, and the beasts serve man, and that creature that has
most gifts is served of all. Man therefore excelling all these must have
something to honor and serve, which must be more excellent then the other
creatures, yea then himself, and that is a substance uncreate, most holy, most
wise, eternal, infinite, and this is God.

Thirdly, all particular creatures whether in heaven or in earth are referred
to their certain particular and peculiar ends, wherein every one of them,
even the basest and meanest is employed, and which they do all accomplish in
their kind. And this is a plain proof, that there is one that excels in
wisdom, providence, and power, that created all these to such ends, and has
power to bring them thereunto: and who is this but God?

II. The second sort of arguments drawn Arguments from the government of the
world.
from the light of nature, are taken from the preservation and government of
the world created; and these are touched by the Holy Ghost, when he says, that
God left not himself Act. 14. 17.
without witness, in that in his providence he did good, and gave rain from
heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with joy and gladness.

The particulars drawn from the government of the world are these.

First, our food whereby we are nourished, is in it self, a dead food, void
of life, and yet it serves to maintain and preserve life: whereas in reason, it
is more fit to choke and stuff our bodies, then to feed them.

Secondly, our garments which we wear, are in themselves cold, and void of
heat, and yet they have this use to preserve heat, and to sustain life in
the extremity of cold. Therefore there must needs be an omnipotent and divine
power, that gives unto them both such a virtue, to feed and preserve the life
and health of man.

Thirdly, the rain falling, and the sun shining upon one and the same plot
of ground, causes it to bring forth in his season a hundred several kinds of
herbs and plants, whereof every one has a several, and distinct ^^ower,
color, form, and savor: whence comes this? Not from the rain, for it has
no life in it self, and besides it is in it self all one: nor from the sun,
or the earth: for these also in their kind are all one, having in them no such
power, whereby they should be the authors of life: therefore the differences of
plants in one ground, may convince our judgments and teach us thus much; that
there is a divine and heavenly power above, and beside the power of these
creatures.

Fourthly, take an example of the bird and the egg. The bird brings forth the
egg: the egg again brings forth the bird. This egg considered in it self,
has in it neither life nor soul, and the bird can give it neither; for all
that the bird can do is to give it heat, and no more. Within the shell of this
egg is made a goodly creature, which, when it comes to some perfection, it
breaks the shell. In the shell broken, we shall see the nibbe, the wing, the
leg, and all the parts and members of a bird. Now let this be considered,
that the egg brought not forth this goodly creature, nor yet the hen. For
the egg had no such power or virtue in it self; and the hen gave but her
heat; neither did man do it: for that which was done, was within the egg, and
within the shell. It therefore was some other wonderful power and wisdom that
made it, and brought it forth, that surpasses the power of a creature.

Again, consider the generation of the silkworme, one of the least of the
creatures, and from it we have a notable demonstration of a divine providence.
This little worm at the first, is but a small seed like unto linseed. The
same small seed breeds it and brings it forth. The worm brought forth, and
growing to some bigness, at length weaues the silk; having woven the silk,
it winds it self within it, as it were in a shell: there having lodged for a
time, it conceiues a creature of another form, which being within a short
space p^rfited, breaks the shell and comes forth a fly. The same fly, like a
dutiful creature, brings forth the seed again, and so continues the kind
thereof from year to year.

Here let it be remembered, that the fly having once brought forth the seed,
leaves it and dies immediately: and yet the seed it self, though exposed to
wind and weather, and utterly neglected of man, or any creature, at a certain
time within few months becomes a worm. Whence should all this proceed, but
from a creator infinitely powerful and wise, who by his admirable power and
providence, dispenses life, being, and propagation, even to the least things
in their particular sorts and kinds?

III. The third sort of Arguments from the light of nature, are taken from the
soul of man. This soul is endued with excellent gifts of understanding and
reason. The understanding has in it from the beginning certain principles,
whereby it knows and discernes good and bad, things to be done, and things to
be left undone. Now man cannot have this gift to discern between good and
evil, of, or from himself: but it must needs proceed from another cause,
which is power, wisdom, and understanding it self, and that is God.

Again, the conscience, another gift of the soul of man, has in it two
principal actions; testimony, and judgment: by both which the truth in hand
is evidently confirmed.

Touching the testimony of conscience: let it be demanded of the Atheist,
whereof does conscience bear witness? he cannot deny, but of all his
particular actions. I ask then, against whom, or with whom does it give
testimony? the answer will easily be made, by the heart of any man, that it is
with or against himself. Furthermore, to whom is it a witness? Neither to men,
nor to angels: for it is impossible that any man or angel, should either hear
the voice of conscience, or receive the testimony thereof, or yet discern
what is in the heart of man. Hereupon it follows, that there is a substance,
most wise, most powerful, most holy, that sees and knows all things, to whom
conscience bears record, and that is God himself.

And touching the judgment of conscience; let a man commit any trespass or
offense, though it be done in secret, and concealed from the knowledge of any
person living: yet Conscience, that knows it, will accuse him, terrify him,
cite him before God, and give him no rest. What or where is the reason? man
knows not the trespass committed: and if there be no God, whom shall he
fear? and yet he fears. This also necessarily proves, that there is a just
and mighty God, that will take vengeance upon him for his sin.

IV. The fourth argument from nature, is this: There is a ground or principle
written in every man's heart in the world, none excepted, that there is a God.
Reasons for proof hereof, may be these.

First, the Gentiles worshipping Idols, made of stocks and stones, do
acknowledge herein thus much, that there is something whereunto honor and
service is due. For man by nature is proud, and will never yield to bow the
knee of his body before a stock or a stone to adore it, unless he think and
acknowledge that there is in them a divine power, better then himself.

Secondly, the oath that is taken for Confirmation, commonly termed the
assertorie oath, is used in all countries. And it is, for the most part,
generally taken to be a lawful means of confirming a man's word, when it is
bound by the oath taken. Jacob and Laban being to make a covenant, Jacob
swears by the true God, Laban by his false gods, and by that both were bound
to stand to their agreement, and not to go back: therefore neither of them
did, or durst break their oath. And among the Gentiles themselves there are
few or none to be found, that will falsify their word given and auowed by
oath. Whereupon it is a clear case, that they acknowledged a Godhead, which
knows and discernes their hearts, yea that knows the truth, and can and will
plague them for disgracing the truth by lying.

Thirdly, we are not lightly to pass over the usual terms and ordinary
speech of all nations, who are wont upon occasion to say: it raines, it
thunders, it snowes, it hailes. For, saying this, one while they rejoice and
are thankful, otherwhiles they fear and are dismayed. They say not, nature
or heaven raines or thunders: for then they would neither rejoice nor tremble.
In that therefore they speak this commonly sometimes rejoicing, sometimes
fearing, it may probably be thought, that they acknowledge a divine power,
which causes the rain to fall, and the thunder to be so terrible.

Again, for better proof hereof, it is to be considered, that since the world
began, there could not yet be found, or brought forth; any man that ever wrote,
or published a discourse, more or less, to this purpose, that there was no God.

If it be said, that some histories do make mention of sundry, that have in
plain terms denied there is a God, and that this is no less dangerous,
then if a treatise of that subject should be written, and set forth to the open
view of all.

I answer, indeed in the writings of men, we do read of some that blasphemed
God, and lived as without God, and they have always been properly and
deservedly termed Atheists. Others have denied, that made and feigned gods,
that is, Idols, are gods. And amongst the heathen that lived only by the light
and direction of nature, all that can be brought is this, that some men in
their writings have doubted whether there were a God or no, but none did ever
positiuely set down reasons to prove that there was none.

V. The fifth and last argument from nature, is that which is used by all
Philosophers. In the world there is to be seen an excellent wise frame and
order of all things. One creature depends upon an other by a certain order of
causes: in which, some are first and above in higher place, some are next and
inferior, some are the basest and the lowest.

Now these lowest are moved of those that are superior to them, and always
the superior is the cause of the inferior, and that whereof the inferior
depends. Something then there must be that is the cause of all causes, that
must be caused by none, and must be the cause of all. For in things wherein
there is order, there is always some first and sovereign cause: and where there
is no first nor last, there the Creatures are infinite. But seeing all
creatures are finite, there must be somewhat first, as well as last. Now the
first and the last cause of all is God, which moves all, and to whom all
creatures do tend, as to their end, and which is moved of none.

Notwithstanding all these reasons grounded in nature it self, it may be some
man will say, I never saw God, how then shall I know that there is a God? Ans.
Why? will thou believe no more then thou see? Thou never saw the wind, or
the air, and yet thou beleeuest that there is both. Nay, thou never saw
thine own face but in a glass, and never out of a glass, and yet this
contenteth thee. Why then may not this content thy heart, and resolve thee of
the Godhead, in that thou see him in the glass of the creatures?

True it is, that God is a spirit invisible that cannot be discerned, by the
eye of flesh and blood, yet he has not left us without a means, whereby we
may behold him. For look as we are wont by degrees to go from the picture to
the painter, and in the picture to behold the painter himself: even so by the
image of God, written (as it were) in the face, and other parts of the
creatures in the world, may we take a view of the wisdom, power, and
providence of the Creator of them all, who is God himself. And these are the
principal proofs of the Godhead, which are revealed in the book of nature.

Sect. 2.
The second ground of proofs, is taken from the light of grace. And it is that
light Arguments fro the light of Grace.
which God affords to his Church in the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, and this gives a further confirmation then nature does. For the light
of nature, is only a way or preparation to faith. But this light serves to
beget faith, and causes us to believe there is a God.

Now in the scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, we shall see amongst the
rest three distinct proofs of this point.

First, express testimonies that do in plain terms, note unto us the
Godhead.

Secondly, express prophecies and revelations of things to come, even many
hundred and thousands of years, before they came to pass. Yea things that are
to come are foretold in the word of God, so and in that very manner, that they
shall be in the time, wherein they are to be fulfilled. Now there is no man
able of himself to know or foresee these things to come; therefore this
knowledge must rest in him alone, who is most wise, that perfectly
understands and beholds things that are not, and to whom all future things
are present, and therefore certain.

Thirdly, the word of God reuealeth many miracles, which do exceed and
surpass whole nature, yea all natural causes: the doing and working whereof,
is not in the power of any mere creature in the world. As for example: the
making of the sun against his natural course, to stand still in the
firmament; of the waters, which are naturally flowing, to stand as a wall, and
the bottom of the sea to be as dry land. The maine end whereof is, to show
that there is an absolute and almighty power: which is the author of nature it
self, and all natural things, and orders both it and them, according to his
pleasure.

Sect. 3.
The third ground of proofs, is fetched A^ments f^o the light of Glory.
from the light of glory. And this is that light which God affords unto his
servants after this life ended, in the kingdom of heaven, wherein all
imperfection of knowledge being taken away, they shall see God face to face, and
have a full and perfect knowledge of the Godhead.

To this purpose the Apostle says, that in the world we know in part, and we
see as it were in a glass. The comparison is worth the marking. (...). Cor. 13.
For there he compares our knowledge of God, that we have in this life, to a
dim sighted man, that can see either very little, or nothing at all, without
his spectacles. And such is our sight and comprehension of God, dark and
dim, in that we cannot behold him as he is, but only as he has manifested
himself unto us, in and through the glass of the word and Sacraments, and by
the spectacles of his creatures. But the time will come, when the skales of our
eyes shall be washed off, and they shall be made as clear as cristall, when
the imperfection and weakness of our understanding shall be clean removed, and
then we shall be enabled to see God clearly and fully face to face. Thus the
first Question is answered, that there is a God.

II. Question. Whether Jesus the son of Mary, be the son of God, and
Redeemer of the world?
BY propounding this Question (as in the former) I mean not to make a doubt
touching the godhead of Christ, which is one of the principal grounds of our
religion, but to take away, or at least, prevent an inward corruption of the
heart in the^, that are weak in knowledge; whereby they may be brought
sometimes to make doubt and question of the divinity of Christ, and therefore
have need to be resolved in the truth hereof.

Now for the proof of this point, that Christ is God, I will lay down these
grounds.

I. The sum and substance of the Bible is to conclude, that Jesus the son
of Mary, is the son of God, and the Redeemer of mankind; and it may be
concluded in this syllogism.

He that shall come of the seed of Abraham and David, and in time shall be
borne of a Virgin; that shall preach the gladtidings of the Gospel, satisfy
the law, offer up an oblation of himself for the sins of them that believe:
overcome death by his death and resurrection, ascend into heaven, and in
fullness of time come again to judge both the quick and the dead, is the true
Messiah and Savior of the world:

But Jesus of Nazareth the son of Marie is he in whom alone all these things
shall come to pass:

Therefore he only is the true Messiah and Savior of the world.

The proposition or first part of the argument, is laid down in the old
Testament: the assumption or second part, in the New. The conclusion is the
question in hand, the scope and drift of them both.

II. Ground. In Daniel 9. 24. it was prophesied, that after the time of 70.
weeks, that is, 490. years, the Messiah should be exhibited.

By which prophecy it is manifest, that the Messiah is already come into the
world. For from that time till now, there are at the least 2000. years, as may
plainly be seen by humane histories, and by the motions and course of the
heavens. It is also plain from hence, that having been exhibited and come in
the flesh, he has made satisfaction by his death to the wrath of God for
sin. Hence it follows, that he is the very true Messiah and Redeemer of the
world, because from that time there was never any to whom this title, and the
forenamed properties, might so truly agree, as to this Jesus the son of David.

III. Ground. Jesus the son of Mary did teach, profess, and dispute, that he
was God, that he and his father were one, and he took unto himself the honor
of God, Ioh. 7. and 8. An evident argument that he was so, as he professed and
preached himself to be. For never any creature challenged to himself the
honor of God falsely, but was discovered and confounded.

Adam for affecting and aspiring to it, was cast out of Paradise. And Herod for
it died miserably, Act. 12. And diverse Popes are recorded in Ecclesiastical
stories, to have taken this honor unto themselves: and there was never any
sort of men in the world, that had more fearful judgments upon them, then
they. But Christ challenged this to himself, and prospered: and God did most
severely revenge his death both upon Herod and Pilate, as also upon the Jews,
and Emperors of Rome, that persecuted the Church.

IV. Ground. Christ while he was on earth, before he ascended into heaven,
promised his Disciples to send his spirit unto them, so to assist them, that
they should be able to do greater works, then himself did, Ioh. 14. 12. etc.
Now when Christ was ascended, the event was strange, and yet fully answerable
to his promise. For the disciples were but few, twelve in number, and all
unlearned, and yet they preached in the name of Christ, and by bare preaching
(without humane eloquence, and the gifts of nature) converted many nations,
yea, the whole world. And though themselves were but weak men, and preached
things absurd to the corrupt reason of man: yet they won many souls to God,
and converted the world.

V. Ground, is borrowed from the testimony of the Heathen, who have recorded in
their writings, the very samethings touching Christ which are revealed in the
scriptures. Josephus a Jew, and an enemy to Christ, in his eight book of
antiquities, Chap. 4. speaks the same things of Christ, that Matthew does, that
he was a most worthy man, that he wrought many miracles, and that he rose from
the dead. Others affirm, that he was crucified under Pilate in the time of
Tiberius, and that Tiberius would have put him in the number of his gods.
Again, heathen writers Tacit. lib. 5. 20.
report, that at his death, under the reign of Tiberius, all the oracles of
the world ceased, Plutarch. de ^rit. ^^ac.
and the great god Pan (as they say) then died.

CHAP. III.
Of the Scriptures.

The second maine question, is touching the truth of scripture, Whether the
scriptures be the true word of God?
THe answer is, that they are. And the grounds of this assertion, may be
reduced to six heads.

Sect. 1.
The first, is taken from the causes, namely, the author and writers of the
scriptures.

Touching the Author, the scripture refers The Authors and penmen of
Scripture.
it self unto God. Therefore he alone is the true and undoubted author thereof,
and none but he. The sufficiency of this consequence, stands upon these
grounds.

First, if god were not the author of scriptures, there would be no one book
in the earth so fabulous and so full of error as it, which to say, is
blasphemy. For it speaks such things, as never any could speak, but God.

Secondly, if it were not the book of God, then all Gods will should be
hidden, and God should never yet have revealed his will to man.

Thirdly, if it had not been the word of God, the falsehood thereof would have
been detected long agone. For there has been nothing falsely said of God at
any time, which he himself has not at some time or other, opened and
revealed. Even as he did detect and discover the falsehood of the false prophet
Hanan^ Ier. 28. 16. and Gods heavy hand, no doubt; would long since have been
upon the Ministers and preachers of this word, if they had unjustly and
wrongfully fathered it upon him.

Again, for the writers and penmen of scripture, Moses, the Prophets, and
Apostles in their writings, do not set forth their own glory, nobility, or
virtues: but all with one consent, have acknowledged directly and plainly
their own errors, and faults; yea such faults as may be disgraceful to
themselves, and their posterity, and yet they have done it. A plain proof,
that they were not carried by policy, and natural reason, but were holy men,
guided by the Holy Ghost. For if they had been guided by reason, they would
never have written that, which would have tended to their own disgrace: but
would rather have commended themselves, their name, stock, and lineage. Again,
humane authors in their discourses, do commonly write of the praises and
virtues of men, of whom they write. But the penmen of scripture, with one
consent, give all to God; yea, when they speak of commendation due to men, thy
give it all to God in men. God is in their writings, the beginning, the end,
and all.

Sect. 2.
A second head of reasons, is taken from The Matter of Scripture.
the Matter, and Contents of the Scriptures, which are manifold. The principal
are these.

First, the Scripture does that, which no other books can do. For it sets out
the corruption of man's nature by sin; the fountain of this corruption; and
the punishment of the same, both in this life, and the life to come: it
discovers sinful man's particular thoughts, lusts, and affections, which
never any book has don beside it. No Philosopher was ever able to make so true
record, and so plain declaration of the thoughts, motions, and affections of
the heart. The reason of man cannot discern them by nature, unless it receive a
further light by grace, then it has naturally in it self. Yea the Scripture
sets down things, that no man's heart can imagine, and yet are true by
experience. For example: that it is an evil thought to think there is no God,
man by nature cannot imagine, but yet it is true in experience, and by the
light of the word. And therefore David says, The Psalm. 14.
fool has said in his heart, there is no God.

Secondly, the maine Contents of this book, are sundry articles of faith, all
which are far above the reach of humane reason, and yet they are not against
it; but at least some of them may be proved by it.

For example, that there is a Redeemer of the world, is an article of faith,
above reason: yet not against the same. For in natural understanding, God is
not all justice, and no mercy. But if there were no redeemer, then should God
be all justice, without mercy. Now because he has revealed himself to be as
well merciful, as he is just, reason concludes, there is a redeemer. Again,
that this Redeemer should be God and man, is above reason; yet not against it.
For reason teaches, he must be God, that he might satisfy the infinite
justice of God for sin; which none but God can do. Again, that he must be
man, because man having sinned, man must be punished for the sin of man.

Thirdly, in the scripture there are sundry predictions made before hand
particularly, which notwithstanding were not to come to pass till an 100, 200,
300 years after, and all these predictions in the same manner as they have bin
foretold, have bin fulfilled.

Jacob in his will foretold, that the scepter should not depart from Judah till
Shiloh, that is, the Messiah came. This was verified, even as it was foretold.
For a little before Christ's birth, the scepter was taken from the Jews, and
translated unto the Roman Empire. And Herod put the whole college of the
Jews, called their Sanedrim, to the sword, in which college was the heir
apparent of the Kings blood.

Again, Balaam Number. 24. 24. foretold that Kittim, that is, the Grecians and
the Romans, should subdue Eber, the people of the East, and that also was
afterward verified. For the Hebrews and Assyrians, were afterward overcome by
the Grecians, and Cilicians.

The Apostle Paul in his time foretold the destruction of the Roman Empire,
and the revealing of Antichrist, 2. These. 7, 8. etc. which prophecy was
shortly after fulfilled. For Antichrist grew from those times by little and
little, till at length he came to sit in the Emperors throne. Men indeed may
foretell things to come, but things foretold by them are present in their
causes, and so they know and foretell them, not otherwise. But God foretells
simply, and the scriptures foretell simply, therefore they are the word of God.

Fourthly, the law, a part of the scripture, is propounded most purely and
perfectly without exception or limitation. Whereas, in all men's laws some
sins are condemned, but some be tolerated and permitted. But in Gods law
every sin is condemned, and none either forborne or excused.

Lastly, the style and speech of the Scripture is plain and simple without
affectation, and yet full of grace and majesty. For in that simple style, it
commands the whole man, body and soul; it threatens everlasting death, and
promises everlasting life: and it does more affect the heart of man, then all
the writings in the world whatsoever.

Sect. 3.
The third reason to induce us to receive the scriptures, as the word of God,
is taken Effects of Scripture.
from the Effects: whereof I note only two.

I. The doctrine of Scripture in the Law, and specially in the Gospel, is
contrary to the corrupt nature of man. Whereupon Paul says, The wisdom of
the flesh, is enmity against (...). 8. (...).
God. And yet the same word, being preached by the Minister appointed by God,
conue^teth nature, and turns the heart of man unto it, in such sort, as in
this last age it has won a great part of the world, to the embracing
thereof. Now in reason this is impossible, that a thing which is so flat
against man's corrupt nature, should notwithstanding prevail with it so far,
as to cause man to live and die in the profession and maintenance thereof. We
are wont to reject the writings of men, if they please not our humors; whereas
this word of God, is of force to move and ^^cline our affections, though never
so much censured, crossed, and controlled by it. And this shows that God is
the author thereof, from whom the word of creation came, to which every thing
at the first yielded obedience.

II. The word of God has this effect, to be able to minister comfort and
relief, in all distresses of body or mind, yea in the greatest and most
desperate troubles, and vexations of the Conscience. And when the helps of
humane learning and Philosophy (which are of great use and force in other
cases) have done all that they can, to the very utmost, without effect or
success: even then the sweet promises of the Gospel, will revive and raise up
the heart, and give it full contentment and satisfaction. Expetience shows
this to be a confessed truth in particular cases: and it teaches, whence and
from whom this word proceeds, wherein these promises are contained, namely,
from God. For when he sets the Conscience upon the rack, the Word that
releeueth and refreshes the same, must needs proceed and come from him alone.

Sect. 4.
The fourth reason, is taken from the Properties Properties of Scripture.
of Scripture. I will name only two.

The first, is Antiquity, which most plainly appears in the history, though
the doctrine it self be as ancient. The Scripture contains a continued
history, from age to age, for the space of 4000 years before Christ, even
from the beginning. Humane histories, that are of any certentie or continuance,
begin only about the time of Ezra, and Nehemiah. As for those which were
written before, they are only fragments, and of no certentie.

The second property, is Consent with it self, in all parts, both for the
matter, scope, and end. The writings of men do dissent from themselves, by
reason of ignorance, and forgetfulness in the authors. But the word of God,
agrees with it self most exactly, and the places that seem to disagree, may
easily be reconciled; which shows that holy men, by whom it was penned, were
not guided therein by their own private judgment, but were directed by the
wisdom of the spirit of God.

Sect. 5.
The fifth reason, is drawn from the Contraries. The Devil and wicked men, are
in Contra^ies.
judgment and disposition, as contrary to scripture, as light is to darkness.
I prove it thus. Let a man read any book of Philosophy, and labor to be
resolved of any one point therein, he shall never be tempted to infidelity.
But if the same man, read the books of Scripture, and labor to understand
them; he shall have within himself, many motions and temptations, not to
believe, and obey it. Now what should be the cause thereof, but that these
books are the word of God, which the Devil labors to oppugn with might
and maine?

Again, consider the same in the practice of wicked men. They will not brook
the rebuke of their sins, namely, their Idolatry, blasphemy, and other
notorious crimes, by scripture; but will seek the blood and life of him, that
shall sharply tax, and reprove them. And hence it was, that wicked Kings so
persecuted the Lords Prophets. Yea further, let it be marked, that these wicked
men, that are tainted with these horrible crimes, and cannot abide the word,
nor teachers thereof to the death, have commonly fearful ends. Now the
opposition of Satan, and wicked men to the word shows the scriptures to be a
most holy word, and indeed the very word of God.

Sect. 6.
The sixth reason, is taken from sundry Testimonies.
testimonies.

First, of holy Martyrs, in the Old and New testament, who have given their
lives for the maintenance of this word, and sealed the same with their own
hearts blood; yea suffered the most horrible and exquisite torments, that the
wit of man could devise, and that most patiently and willingly, not being
daunted or dismayed. The stories of Martyrs in all ages, confirm this truth,
especially of those that suffered before, in, and after the times of the ten
bloody persecutions. And. unless they had been supported by a d^^ine power,
in so good a cause, they could never, so many of them, have suffered in such
manner, as they did.

The second, is the testimony and consent of Heathen men, who have recorded
the very same things, at l^ast many of the principal, that are set down in
the Bible. If this were not so, man should have some colorable excuse of his
unbelief. And these things which they record, were not all taken out of the
Scripture, but were registered to memory by Historiographers, that lived in the
times, when they were done. Such are the stories of the Creation, and Flood, of
the tower of Babel, of the Arc, of Abraham and his possessions, of
Circumcision, of the miracles of Moses, of the birth of Christ, and the
slaughter of the young children, of the miracles of Christ, of the death of
Herod, Agrippa, and such like. And these we take for true in humane stories:
much more then ought we to do it in the word of God.

The third testimony, is of Miracles. The ^octrine of scripture was confirmed
by miracles, wrought by the teachers thereof, the Prophets and Apostles, above
all power and strength of nature, and such as the Devil can not counterfeit;
as the staying of the sun, and the raising of the dead, etc.

The fourth, is the testimony of the Holy Ghost, which is the argument of all
arguments, to settle and resolve the Conscience, and to seal up the certainty
of the word of God.

If any shall ask, how this testimony of the Holy Ghost may be obtained, and
being obtained, how we may discern it to be the testimony of the Holy Ghost,
and not of man: I answer, by doing two things.

First, by resigning our selves to become truly obedient to the doctrine
taught. Ioh. 7. 17. If any man will do my fathers will, (says Christ) he
shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God. Secondly, by praying unto God
for his Spirit, to certify our consciences, that the doctrine reveiled, is the
doctrine of God. Ask (faith our Savior Christ) and it shall be given you
seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For he that
asks, rece^^eth. Mat. 7. 7, 8. Again, Your heavenly father will give the
Holy Ghost; to them that desire him, Luc. 11. 13. And, If any man lack
wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives to all men liberally, and
reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him. Iam. 1. 7.

Sect. 7.
Now having set down the proofs of this Objections against the Scriptures.
point, before I come to the next Question, some special Objections against
this doctrine, are to be answered, and resolved. For there have not been
wanting in all ages, both Atheists, and others, who have professedly excepted
against it, and of set purpose, have undertaken to call the written word of God
into Question. Such were Celsus, Lucian, Julian, Porpherie, Apelles, and
others. From whom some of latter times having received the poison of Atheism,
and profaneness, have not ceased as much as in them lies, to oppugn sundry
parts and portions of holy scripture. Their principal reasons and exceptions,
I will propound, and answer one by one.

And first, they except against that which is written, Genesis 1. 16. where it is
said, God Object. 1.
made the sun the fourth day. Now, say they, the sun is the cause of the
day; and therefore there could not be three days, before the sun was
created, considering that the effect is not before the cause, but the cause
before the effect.

I answer. First, we must put a difference between cause and cause. For of
causes, some be the highest, some subordinate unto them. The highest and first
cause, of all creatures, is God himself, from whom all things at the first
immediately flowed, without any relation to their causes in nature. And thus
were the first, second, and third days created and appointed immediately from
God, and distinguished from the night, by an intercourse of light, ordained by
him for that purpose.

But the subordinate and inferior cause of the day, in order of nature, was the
sun, and that by the same appointment of God: and this cause was not set in
nature, as the cause of the day, before the fourth day of creation; for then it
pleased him to make it his instrument, to distinguish the day from the night,
as also for other ends and uses. And therefore it is no marvel, though the day
was created before the sun, the isntrumental cause thereof: considering that
it was created before the sun was set in the heaven, by the Creator himself.

Secondly, we must distinguish of times: which are either of creation, or
government: and there is one regard to be had of things while they were in
making, and another after they were created. Now it is true, the sun is the
cause of the day and the night, in the time of the government of the world, but
it was not so in the time of the first making of all things. For in the three
first days of the world, there was day and night without the sun, by a
vici^^itude of light and darkness, which the Lord made, and nature could never
have found out, had not the word revealed it.

But since the creation, in the time of government, the sun is but an
instrument appointed by God to carry light, and he that made the light, can now
in the government of the world, if it pleased him, put down the sun from
this office, and by some other means distinguish the day from the night;
therefore no marvel though he did so in the beginning.

The second Objection, is touching the light of the Moon. Moses says, it is
one of Object. 2.
the great lights which God made. Now, say they, in all reason according to
humane learning, it is one of the least of the planets, and less then many
stars.

Answ. It is true which the holy Ghost says by Moses, and yet the Moon is
less then the Sun, yea then many of the stars. For one and the same
star, in a diverse and different respect, may be termed greater and lesser.
And in that place the Scripture speaks of the Moon, not in regard of other
stars greater then it: but in respect of our sense, because it appears
greater in quantity, and really communicates more light; yea, it is of more
operation and use to the earth, then any of the stars in the heaven, saving
the Sun.

The third Objection Moses says, Man and Object. 3.
Beast were made of the earth, and Fishes of the waters. But all humane
learning avouches, that the matter of every creature, consists of all the
four Elements, earth, water, fire, and ^^re.

Ans. Moses speaks only of two, which were the principal, and in them
includes the other; because they are impure, and mixed with the other since the
fall. Again, some learned avouch, that all creatures are made of earth and
water only, as being the two maine material principles of the all; and not of
air, nor of fire. And this accords with Moses, and is no doubt, a truth, that
he speaks only of the principal matter of these creatures: and yet the fire
and air, are and may be called elements, or beginnings, because they serve to
form, preserve, and cherish the creatures.

The fourth Objection. Genesis 3. it is said, that Object. (...).
Eve before her fall, was deceived by the Serpent. Now this, says the Atheist,
is absurd. For even in the estate of corruption, since the fall, there is no
woman so simple, that will either admit speech, or suffer her self to be
deceived by a Serpent; much less would Eve, in the estate of her innocence.

Answ. Though Adam and Eve in their innocence, had excellent knowledge, yet
they had not all knowledge. For then they should have been as God himself.
But in that estate, ignorance befell Eve in three things. For first, though
Adam himself was a Prophet, in the time of his innocence, yet both he and
she were ignorant of the issue of future things, which are contingent.
Secondly, they knew not the secrets of each others heart. For to know the
event of things contingent certainly, and the secrets of the heart, belongs to
God only. Thirdly, though Eve knew the kinds of creatures, yet she knew not
all particulars, and all things that were incident to every kind of creature,
but was to attain unto that knowledge, by experience and observation.

Neither may this seem strange: for Christ as he was man, had as much, yea
more knowledge then our first parents had in their innocence: and yet he knew
not all particulars, in all singular creatures. For, seeing a figtree by the
way as he went to Jerusalem, he thought it had borne fruit, and yet coming
toward it, he found none thereon. And in like manner, Eve might know the
serpentine kind, and yet be ignorant, whether a serpent could speak. Besides
that, the naming of the creatures, which argues knowledge of them, was not
given to Eve, but to Adam. And therefore it was not so strange, that Eve should
be deceived by a serpent, considering that to know that a serpent could speak,
or not speak, came by experience, which she then had not.

I^ will be said, that all ignorance is sin: but Eve had no sin: and
therefore she could not be ignorant. Answ. Ignorance is twofold; some
ignorance Ignorantia pravae dispositionis.
arises of an evil disposition, when as we are ignorant of those things which
we are bound to know, and this is sin properly. But there is another
ignorance, Ignorantia (...) privationis vel negationis p^^^.
which is no sin, when as we are ignorant of those things, which we are not
bound to know. And this was in Christ: for he was ignorant of the figtrees
bearing fruit: and he knew not the day of judgment as he was man. And this
also was in Eve, not the other.

The fifth objection; is about the Arc, Genesis Object. 5.
6. 15. God commanded Noah to make an Arc of 300 cubits long, of 50 cubits
broad and of 30 cubits high. This Arc, says the Atheist, being so small a
vessel, could not possibly contain two of every sort of creatures, with their
food, for the space of a year.

The first author of this cavil, was Apelles the heretic, that cauilled with
Christians about the Arc. And the answer is as ancient as the heresy: namely,
first, that the cubit of the arc must be understood of the Egyptian cubit,
which is with some, six foot, and with others, nine foot, by which measure
the Arc would be in length half a mile at the least. And by this means, any
man may see a possibility in reason, that the Arc might contain, and preserve
all creatures, with their fodder, and room to spare.

The second answer is, that as the Jews had a shekle of the sanctuary, which
was greater then the ordinary shekle, so they had beside the ordinary cubit, a
sacred cubit, the cubit of the sanctuary, where of mention is made in the
prophecy of Ezekiel, Chap. 40. and that was bigger by the half, then the
ordinary cubite. And by this measure, some say, the Arc was made. But both
these answers are only coniecturall, without good ground in the scripture.

To them therefore I add a third. In the days of Noah, the stature of man was
far bigger then it is at this day. And look as the stature of man was great
and large, so was the cubite proportional thereto; containing the length of the
arm, from the elbow to the longest fingers end. And this being considered,
that the Arc was built by that measure, and not by the ordinary cubit, as it
is now; it will appear, that the Atheist has greatly deceived himself, and
abused that part of Gods word that declares the story of the Arc.

Again, the length of this vessel, being 300. cubits, it is plain that it
was five times the length of Salomons temple, which contained only 60. cubits.
The breadth being 58. it was twice and a half the breadth of that, which was
but 20. broad.

Besides that, it is to be remembered, that in the Arc were three lofts or
stories, one above another, whereof each contained 10. cubits in height, and a
chamber or flore of square measure, 15000. cubits.

As for the creatures that were put into it: the Fowls of the air, though
they were of many sorts, yet the biggest fort of them, being the Eagle and his
kind, they could not take up any very large place for their residence. The
Water creatures, as some fowls, the fishes, etc. kept the waters, and were not
lodged in the Arc. And the beasts of the earth, such being excluded, as were
bredde either by accidental generation, as Mules; or by putrefaction, as
serpents, and other creeping things, which might afterward be restored in other
creatures that were preferued, though for multitude and greatness they excelled
the rest, yet (as some write) there are of them in all not above an 150
distinct kinds. And though there were as many more not known, yet in
probability, they could not be either many, or great. And of those that are
great, there are thought not to be above 40 kinds.

Now though it be granted, that there were in the Arc 300 distinct kinds of
beasts, yet this number compared with the room, it will easily appear, that
there might be allotted to every kind, in one only story 50 square cubits,
which in all likelihood might well suffice them all one with an other,
specially seeing all were not of an equal greatness: and therefore some might
have that or more space, and some less. All these things duly considered, the
vessel being of such capacity, might comprehend all those beasts, and many
more together with their provision for a longer time then a year. Other doubts
touching this history, of less moment, I omit, and pass to the next.

The sixth allegation, is out of Genesis 21. 9. Object. (...).
where Ismael is said to mock at Isaak when he was wained, at which time
Ismael was fifteen years of age at the least. For he was borne when Abraham
was 86 year old, Genesis 16. and Isaac was borne, when Abraham was about a
hundred, Genesis 21. 5. both which put together, make 14 years: whereto one year
being added, before Isaac was wained, makes up the age of Ismael, as before.
And yet afterward in that chapter, v. 14. Hagar is said, to carry the child
in her arms, and to cast him under a tree, when he and his mother were cast
out of Abraham's house, which argues him to have been but a little child:
whereas before he was said to be 15 years old.

Ans. A foolish cavil, which blind Atheists do draw from the error of some
translation. For the text is plain, that Ismael with his mother Hagar, by
reason of extreme heat, and drought, was almost dead, wandering in the
wilderness of Beersheba: and being in this extremity, she carried him not, but
v. 18. led him in her hand, and set him down under a tree, and there left him
to die. For in those cuntries, men for want of water, were at deaths door: as
we may see in the example of Sisera, Judge. 4. 19. and Sampson, chap. 15. 18.

The seventh Allegation. Genesis 43. 8. Judah Joseph's brother, calls his brother
Benjamin Object. 7.
a lad, or a boy, Send the boy with me, etc. and yet this lad (says the
Atheist) the year following, when he went down into Egypt, with Jacob his
father, is said to have ten children Genesis 46. 21. How can these two stand
together?

Ans. This cauili a^iseth from the gross ignorance of the Atheist, in the
original text. For Benjamin is called jeled, which word commonly signifies a
child; but sometimes also a young man. Thus Ismael that was 15 years old, is
called jeled, a lad, Genesis 20. 15. And so Genesis 4. 23. Lamech says, I will stay
a man in my wound, and [jeled] or a young man in my hurt: that is, If a man
should wound me, and a young man hurt me, I would slay him. Now it is not like,
that a child could hurt Laniech. Neither must this seem strange: for the most
valiant men that David and Ishbosheth had, are called hannegna^im, the boys of
Abner and Ioab, (...). Sam. 2. 14. And the like phrase is used in other
languages. For the Grecians do call young men by the name of [(...),] and the
Latins by the name of [pueri.] boys, or children.

The eight Allegation. Exodus 7. it is said Object. 8.
v. 19. that all the waters in Egypt were turned into blood, by Moses and
Aaron: and yet v. 22. it is said, that the Magitians of Egypt turned water
into blood also: which seems to imply an absurdity, considering that all the
waters were turned into blood before.

Ans. Some answer thus: that the water which the Magitians turned, was newly
dug out of new pits, and therefore they understand the former of all the
waters that were seen, and that they only were turned into blood. Others
answer more fitly, that the waters which the Magitians changed, were fetched
out of Goshen, from amongst the Israelites, where the waters remained pure, and
were not turned, as the other were. Either of these answers may satisfy, but
specially the latter.

The ^inth Allegation. Exodus 9. 6. Moses says, that all the beasts in Egypt
died of the Object 9.
mu^, and yet v. 25. in the seventh plague, it is said, the beasts were killed
with thunder, and hail, and lightening: both which cannot be true.

Ans. First, we must put a difference between a common plague, or judgment;
and an universal. A common plague is, when^^o sort or kind s^apeth, but all
sorts are smitten, and such was the murren. For no man's cattle were free, no
kind of cattle were saved. But the universal is, when no particular of any
kind is exempted, but all destroyed. Such was not this plague, but some
escaped, and were reserved for other judgments that followed. The ground of
this distinction, is this: The word [all] in Scripture is often taken
indefinitely for many. Thus the Prophet Esaias speaks, cap. 66. 23. From month
to month, and from Saboth to Saboth, shall all flesh come to worship before
me: that is, many or great multitudes. And so in the new Testament, Matthew. 4.
23. Christ healed all diseases, that is, many and of all kinds some. And in
like manner the text before alleged, must not be taken generally to include
all without exception, but indefinitely for many or the most part of the
cattle that were in the land of Egypt.

The tenth Allegation. Exodus 10. 22. we Object. 10.
read that one of the plagues was a palpable darkness, and so great, that for
three days together, no man either saw an other, or rose up from the place
where he sat. And yet v. 23. Moses is sent for, and called to come before
Pharaoh. How should this be, seeing no man could stir from his place, nor
have any light to go before him: for there was none to be had, the darkness
was so palpable, and the air was so thick.

Ans. I take it the word [Then] v. 24. is to be meant thus, that Pharaoh sent
for Moses after the darkness was ended, not by candle or or other light in the
time of darkness. And this answer may very well stand without further exception.

The eleventh Allegation. Judge. 16. 29. The Object. 11.
Atheists make a mock at the history of Sampson, as fabulous, where it is
said, that all the Philistims came together in one house, to make sport with
him, and on the roof sat about 3000 persons to behold him while he played,
and yet there were but two pillars whereupon the whole house stood, and those
also standing in the midst so near together that a man might reach them both
with his arms. This, say they, is most absurd and impossible.

Ans. Although the full resolution of this cavil, belongs to them that have
skill in Architecture; yet thus much may be faide in way of answer: That the
house might be capable of so many persons, and they also that stood above might
well see and behold Sampson. For first, the whole house was not sustained by
two pillars only, but by many more, whereof two were the principal. For in
likelihood the middle part whereon the whole building was knit together, from
the bottom to the top, being the weightiest of all, was supported by two
master-pillars. The other which was more outward, and less weighty might be
vpholden by lesser proppes, which Artificers in that kind call by the name of
false-pillars. Hence it appears, that the two maine ones standing so nigh
together, being shaken, the whole Joseph. Antiq. Iudaic. (...). 5. c. 10. fin^.
house together with them must needs fall. Neither will this seem strange,
that two pillars should bear up a building of such capacity; if we do but
consider what is recorded of Curio the Romance, who devised Plin. not. hist.
lib. 36. c. ^5.
the frame of a great Amphitheater, the two parts whereof were supported only
by two hinges, and yet was so large, that it contained the whole people of
Rome. Secondly, old buildings in those countries were made for the most part,
with open roof. Again, they were full of windows on every part like unto
great gates: and that they might be the more fit for sight from above, they
were reared up in some sort after the manner of the Egyptian Pyramides, wider
below, and narrower above toward the top. And by this means it is probable,
not only that they might contain a great company, but that all those which
stood about the sides, and upon the roof, might very well behold what Sampson
did below; specially considering that he stood in the midst of the Theater,
between the two middle pillars.

The twelfth Allegation. Sam. 16. 19. etc. it Object. 12.
is said that David played before Saul, and that Saul knew him. But chap. 17.
55. when he was to fight with Goliath, Saul knew him not. Here is a plain
contradiction in the Atheists judgment.

Ans. This sort of men do still bewray their gross ignorance, both in the
matter and in the order of Scripture. For the word of God does not always set
down things, as they follow in order of time just one after an other: but
sometime it does anticipate, putting such things in former histories, as are
already done and accomplished, which in regard of their event should be
related afterward. Sometime again it uses by recapitulation to declare things
as following in order of time, which do properly belong to a former narration.
An example of the latter (to omit many other that might be brought) is the text
alleged. For that part of the 16 chap. from the 19v. to the end, should by
order of history follow the 17, as will easily appear by comparing the place.
And the like displacing of things said and done is elsewhere to be found in
the Scriptures. Which being considered, the Atheists supposed Contradiction,
falls to the ground. For David was to fight with Goliath before he played before
Saul, and though he was then not known, yet Saul after that time took better
knowledge of him.

The thirteenth Allegation is out of 2. Chron. 21. 2. where the Papist plays
the Object. ^3.
right Atheist, in going about to improoue the original copies. There (says
he) Iehosaphat is called king of Israel, when as indeed he was king of Judah,
and so is he called in the former book of Chronicles. In like manner Ahaz is
termed king of Israel, 2. Chron. 28. 19. whereas the truth is, he was king of
Judah.

Answ. After the death of Solomon the kingdom was divided, and the ten tribes
were called Israel, and the other two Judah and Benjamin did bear the name of
Judah. Now after the division, for some time the name of Israel common to both
sides, was given to either, and both were named after it. And in this respect
Iehoshaphat and Ahaz may be termed kings of Israel. Again, the name of Israel
sundry times in Scripture, and namely in the prophets, is taken only for the
two Tribes, which bare the name of Judah after the defection. And thus also
might Ahaz have that name given unto him, though he were king of Judah.
Furthermore, the word Israel, is sometimes put for a true worshipper of God,
that is, for him that is a Jew not without but within, not in the letter, but
in the spirit, Romans 2. 29. Thus our Savior says of Nathaniel, Ioh. 1. 48.
Behold a true Israelite in whom is no guile, that is, a man of an upright
heart, that serves God in spirit and in truth. And in this sense Iehoshaphat
might be termed king of Israel, because he was a king and patron of all true
worshippers of God. For even then the Israelites sorted themselves together,
and the godly among them came to live under him in Judah, though the
distinction of the kingdoms did still remain.

The fourteenth Allegation is out of Act. Object 1^.
7. 16. where the Papists and Atheists allege the Scripture to be contrary to
it self: in that there it says, Abraham bought a field of Emor, when as Genesis
33. 19. the same field was bought by Jacob.

Ans. 1. Some say that there is a fault, because Abraham's name is put for
Jacob. Yet not a fault of the Bible, but of them that wrote out the Bible.
Neither does this diminish the authority of scripture, though the penmen did
err and slip in writing, so long as we may find out the truth by scripture.

2. Ans. That this field was bought twice: First by Abraham, and then afterward
recovered by Jacob, that he might maintain his fathers possession.

3. Answ. That Abraham's name is here put for his posterity, as Isreal's name is
otherwhere given to his children, yea not only to his children, but also to his
fathers Isaac, and and Abraham. For Exodus 12. 40. it is said, The abode of the
children of Israel while they dwelt in Egypt, was 430. years, which cannot be
true unless the abode of Abraham and Isaac be therein included. Now if the
name of the successor may be given to his ancestors, much more may the name
of the ancestors be given to the posterity.

CHAP. IV.
Of Religion.

THe third Question concerning man, as he stands in relation to God, is
touching Religion, where it is demanded, What is that Religion, that is due
unto the true God?

Answ. The name Religion, is not always taken in one and the same sense. For
sometime it is used, to signify the whole body of doctrine, revealed in the
written word, that teaches and prescribes, whatsoever is to be believed or
practiced, as necessary to salvation. Otherwhiles it is put for the inward
virtue of the mind, where the same doctirne is believed, and the duties therein
required, practiced, and performed to the Majesty of God. And being thus
taken, it is called by the name of Piety or Godliness, in the Scripture. And
in this second sense I take it in this place.

Now Religion or Piety, has two distinct parts. The first, is knowledge of
God; the second, the worship of God. These two are notably described by David,
in his last will and Testament, wherein he commends unto Solomon his son
before all other things, the care and jove of Religion and Piety; the sum
whereof, he reduces to these heads; the knowledge of God, and worship of God.
1. Chron. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my son KNOW thou the God of thy father,
and SERVE him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind.

According to this difference of heads, are the Questions concerning religion
to be distinguished, and these are principally two. First, how God is to be
known, and then how he is to be worshipped.

I. Question. How God is to be conceived in our minds, when we perform any
service or worship unto him?
FOr answer hereunto, this ground is first to be laid, that we must not,
neither can possibly know or conceive God as he is in himself. For God in
himself is infinite, and therefore incomprehensible in regard of us. But we
are to conceive him so, as he has and does reveal himself to us in his
creatures, principally in his word. The truth hereof may appear in this one
example, (to allege no more) when Moses desired to see the glory and Majesty
of God, for a further confirmation and assurance of his calling, answer was
made him by God, that he could not see his face, but he should see his back
parts, as he passed by him. The meaning of this answer is, that God would
manifest his glory unto him by his effects, by which as by a glympse or
imperfect representation, he might discern some part of his Majesty, so far
forth as he was able in the infirmity of flesh and blood, to behold the same.
But the perfect and full sight thereof, no creature was ever able to attain
unto, it being reserved for the life to come; when (and not before) they shall
see him as he is in himself face to face.

This Ground being laid, the full answer to the Question I propound in four
rules.

I. Rule. When we are to pray, or to worship God, we must not conceive him, in
the form of any earthly or heavenly, bodily, or spiritual creature
whatsoever: for thus not to conceive him, is a degree of conceiving him aright.

II. Rule. God must be conceived of us, not by his nature, but by his
attributes, and works. By his attributes, as that he is infinite in mercy,
justice, goodness, power, etc. By his works of creation, and government of the
world, of redemption, etc. Thus the Lord revealed himself to Moses, Exodus 6.
14. I AM has sent me unto you: that is, one which has his being in himself,
and of himsefe, that gives being to all creatures by creation, and continues
the same by his providence: one that gives a being and accomplishment, to all
his merciful promises. When the Lord appeared to Moses, he showed not his face
unto him, but passed by him with a voice, The Exodus 34. 6.
Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, long suffering, and plenteous
in goodness and truth. In which place, the Lord proclaims his name, by his
attributes. So in the prophecy of Jeremy, I am he that shows mercy,
judgment, Icr. 9. 24.
and justice in the land. The same, Daniel confesses in his prayer, when he
says, O Lord God, which art great and fearful, keeping Dan. 9. 4.
covenant and mercy toward the^ that love thee, and keep thy commandments.
And lastly, the author to the Hebrews, He that comes to God, must believe that
God is, and that he is a rewarder Heb. 11. 6.
of them that seek him.

III. Rule. God must not be conceived absolutely, that is, out of the Trinity:
but as he subsisieth in the person of the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost, so
he must be known and conceived of us. The ancient rule of the Church is, that
the unity must be worshipped in Trinity, and the Trinity in Unity.

By this do the protestant Churches, differ from all other assemblies of
worshippers. The Turk conceiues and worships a God, creator of heaven and
earth, but an abstracted God, which is neither Father, Son, nor Holy Ghost.
The Jew worshippeth God, but out of Christ, and therefore a feigned and Idol
God. The Papist in word acknowledges and so worshippeth God, but indeed makes
God an Idol, because he worships him not in a true but in a feigned Christ,
that sits at the right hand of the father in heaven, and is also in the hands
of every Mass Priest, after the words of consecration. But the Protestant
knows God as he will be known, and consequently worships him as he will be
worshipped, in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

IV. Rule. When we direct our prayers, or any worship to any one person, we
must include the rest in the same worship; yea further, we must retain in
mind the distinction and order of all the three persons, without severing or
sundring them; for so they are Matt. 28. 19. 1. Ioh. 5. 7.
named, and propounded in the Scriptures. The reason is, because as they are
not severed, but conjoined in nature, so they neither are, nor must be severed,
but conjoined in worship. For example the man that prays, to God the Father
for the forgiveness of his sins, must ask it of him for the merit of the son,
and by the assurance of the Holy Ghost. Again, he that prays for remission of
his sins, to God the Son, must pray that he would procure the Father to
grant his pardon, and withal assure it by his spirit. He also that prays for
the same to God the Holy Ghost, must pray that he would assure unto him the
remission of his sins, from the father, by, and for the merit of the Son.

CHAP. V.
Of the second part of Religion touching the worship of God, and first of the
inward worship.

II. Question. How God is to be worshipped and served.
FOr the full answer hereof, we must remember that the worship of God is
twofold; inward or outward. Inward is the worship of the mind, the heart, the
conscience, will, and affections; for man by all these jointly and severally
performs worship and service to his creator. The outward is that worship
whereby the inward is testified outwardly in the speech and actions. The former
of these two, is the spiritual worship of the inward man, and the very ground
and foundation of all true worship of God: for God is a spirit and therefore
must be worshipped in spirit, Ioh. 4. 24.
that is, in the the mind, conscience, will, and affections. Indeed all the
worship of God is spiritual, even that which we call outward; yet not of it
self, but by virtue of the inward, from which it proceeds.

Sect. 1.
The heads of Inward worship are two. Adoration.
Adoration of God, and cleaving to God. For as they are two different actions
of the heart, so they may fitly be termed two distinct parts of Gods worship.
This distinction is in some part propounded by Moses, where he exhorts the
Israelites, to fear Jehovah their Deuteronomy. 10. 20.
God, to adore him, to cleave unto him, and to swear by his name.

Adoration, is that part of Gods worship, whereby a man, upon a vile and base
estimation of himself, as being but dust and ashes, submits and subjects his
soul to the glory and Majesty of God.

This has two principal grounds in the heart, which if they be wanting, there
can be no true worship of God. The first is Abnegation or denial of our
selves, when we esteem our selves to be merely nothing. The second is
exaltation, or Advanceme^t of Gods majesty, above all the things in the world.
Examples of these we have many in the scriptures, as of Abraham, who called God
his Lord, Genesis 8. 27.
and himself dust and ashes: of the Angels, whom in a vision the Prophet saw
standing Esa. 6. (...),
before God, with one wing covering their feet, which signified the abasing of
themselves; and with another covering their faces, which betokened their
adoration of the majesty of God. Of Daniel, when he confesses, To thee, O
Lord, belongs righteousness Dan. 9. 7.
it self, but to us shame and confusion of face. Lastly, of the woman of
Canaan, who calls Christ Lord, and her self, a dog. Matthew. 15. 27.


Now in Adoration, there are four Virtues; Fear, Obedience, Patience,
Thankfulness.

Fear, is a great part of the worship of God, which I prove by two places
laid together. Esa. 29. 13. Matthew. 15. 8, 9. wherein Fear and Worship, are
taken for one and the same thing: for that which Esaias calls Fear, Matthew
calls Worship. Now in this fear, there be two things that serve to distinguish
it from all other fears.

First, it is absolute: for by it God is reverenced absolutely. Saint Paul
exhorts to yield tribute, fear, and honor to the Romans 13. 7.
Magistrate, not for himself, but for God, whose minister he is. And our
Savior says, Fear ye not them which kill the body, and are not Matthew. 10.
28.
able to kill the soul, but rather fear him which is able to destroy both
soul and body in hell. As if he should say, I allow and command you to fear
men, only for God, who has set them over you, but fear God for himself.

Secondly, it makes a man, first of all, to fear the offense of God, and then
the punishment and judgment. For it is not a fear of the offense alone, but
of the offense and punishment together, and of the offense in the first place:
Mal. 1. 6. If I be a Lord, where is my fear? And where it is said in Matthew,
but rather fear him that is able to cast body and Matthew. 10. 28.
soul into hell fire; there is commanded a fear of God, in regard of his
anger. We fear the sword of man, and that lawfully, why then Romans 13. 4.
may we not fear the punishment of God? If it be said, this is a servile
fear, to fear the punishment, and agrees not to Gods children: I answer,
slavish fear is, when a man only fears the punishment, and not the offense of
God, or at least the punishment more then the offense.

The second virtue of Adoration, is inward Obedience of the hidden man of the
heart. The Lord preferres this obedience before all sacrifice, 1. Sam. 15. 22.
This stands in two things. First, in yielding subjection of the Conscience to
the commandments, threatenings, and promises of God, so as we are willing,
that it should become bound unto them. Secondly, when the rest of the powers of
the soul, in their place and time, perform obedience unto God. And by this
means do we bring into captivity, every thought unto the obedience of
Christ, as Paul speaks, 2. Cor. 10. 5.

The third virtue of Adoration, is Patience; which is, when a man in his
afflictions, submits his will to the will of God, and quieteth his heart
therein, because God sends afflictions. This was David's counsel, Be silent
before the Lord, and always wait upon his pleasure. And his practice, when in
trouble he resigned Psalm. 37. 7.
himself into the hands of God, and said, Lord, if I please thee not, lo I am
here, do with me as seems good in thine eyes. This patience 1. Sam. 15. 26.
is a part of Gods worship, because it is a kind of obedience.

The fourth virtue of Adoration, is Thankfulness to God, which shows it self
in two things. First, in an acknowledgement of the heart, that our selves and
whatsoever we have, is Gods, and proceeds from his blessing alone. Secondly,
in a consecration of our bodies, souls, lives, callings, and labors to the
honor and service of God. Thus much of the first head of Inward worship, or
the first action of the heart, standing in Adoration.

Sect. 2.
The second Action of the heart in Inward Cleaving to God.
worship, or the second part thereof, is Cleaving unto God. Now we cleave unto
God by four things: by Faith, Hope, Love, and inward Invocation.

By Faith, I mean true justifying faith, whereby we rest upon Gods mercy for
the forgiveness of our sins, and life everlasting: and upon his providence,
for the things of this life. Thus Abraham, being strengthened in this faith,
and relying by it upon Gods promises made unto him, gave glory unto God, Romans
4. 20. This Saving faith, is the very root, and beginning of all true worship.
For Love, which is the fulfilling of the Law, must come from it. 1. Tim. 1. 5.

The second is Hope, which follows and dependes upon faith: and it is that
grace of God, whereby with patience we wait the Lords leisure, for the
performance of his promises, especially touching redemption, and life eternal.
If we hope (says Paul) for that we have not, we do with patience expect it,
Romans 8. 25.

The third, is Love of God; which has two effects in the heart. First, it
makes the heart to cleave unto God, and to be well pleased with him simply for
himself. In this manner God the father loving Christ, testifies that he was
well pleased in him, Matthew. 3. 17. Secondly, it mooues the heart to seek by
all means possible, to have true fellowship with God in Christ. This the
Church notably expresses in the Canticles.

The fourth, is Inward prayer, or Invocation of the heart; and it is nothing
else, but the lifting up of the heart unto God, according to his will, by
desires and groans unspeakable. Or, it is a work of the heart, whereby it
flies unto God for help in distress, and makes him a rock of defense. When
the children of Israel were afflicted, They remembered that God was their
strength, and the most high God their redeemer, Psalm. 78. 35. Of this kind of
prayer Paul speaks, when he says, pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. For
solemn prayer conceived, and uttered in form of words, cannot always be
used: but we are to lift up our hearts unto God, upon every occasion, that by
inward and holy motions and affections, they may be (as it were) knitte unto
him.

Now to conclude this point touching Inward worship, we must remember that it
alone is properly, simply, and of it self, the worship of God; and the Outward
is not simply the worship of God, but only so far forth as it is quickened by
the Inward, and grounded upon it. For God is a Spirit, and therefore the true
worship that is done unto him, must be performed in spirit and truth, Ioh. 4.
24.

CHAP. VI.
Of the outward worship of God, and the first head thereof, Prayer.

THus much of the Inward worship of God. The Outward is that, which is
performed by the body externally, eitherin word or deed. To this belong many
particulars, which I will reduce to eight several heads.

I. Prayer. II. The hearing of the word preached. III. The use of the
Sacraments. IV. Outward Adoration. V. Confession. VI. An Oath. VII. Vows.
VIII. Fasting.
Touching Prayer conceived and uttered by the voice, there are many Questions
of Conscience; the principal whereof are four.

I. Question. How shall a man make a Lawful prayer.
lawful and acceptable prayer to God?
Ans. The word of God requires many conditions in making prayer to God: they
may all be brought to three heads. Some of them go before the making of
prayer, some are to be performed in the act of prayer, some after prayer is
ended.

Sect. 1.
Conditions to be observed before prayer, are three. Conditions before prayer.


First, he that would make such a prayer as God may be pleased to hear, must
repent. Esa. 1. 15. God would not hear the prayers of the Jews, because their
hands were full of blood: that is, because they had not repented of their
oppression and cruelty. Ioh. 9. 31. God hears not sinners: that is, such as
live and lie in their sins, and turn not unto God by true repentance. 1.
Ioh. 3. 22. By this we know that God hears our prayers, if we keep his
commandments. I add further, that the man which has before-time repented,
must again renew his repentance, if he desire that his prayers should be
accepted. For the very particular sins of men, whereinto they fall after
their repentance, do hinder the course of their prayers, from having access
unto God, if they be not repented of. And for this cause, the worthy men of
God the Prophets in the old Testament, do usually in the beginning of their
prayers, still humble themselves, and confess their sins; as we may see in
the example of Daniel, chap. 9. v. 5, 6, etc. and of Ezra, chap. 9. v. 6. etc.

Secondly, before a man make a prayer, he must first (if need require) be
reconciled unto his brother. If thou bring thy gift to the altar and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thine offering
and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer
thy gift, Matt. 5. 23. When ye shall stand and pray, forgive, if ye have any
thing against any man, etc. Mark. 11. 25.

Thirdly, he that is to pray must prepare himself in heart and mind, as one
that is to speak familiarly with God.

In this preparation, four things are required. First, the mind is to be
emptied of all carnal and worldly thoughts. Secondly, there must be in the
mind, a consideration of the things to be asked. Thirdly, a lifting up of the
heart unto the Lord, Psalm. 25. 1. Fourthly, the heart must be touched, with a
reverence of the majesty of God, to whom we pray. Eccl. 5. 1. Be not rash
with thy mouth, nor let thy heart be hasty to utter a thing before God. For the
neglect hereof, the Lord threatens to bring a judgment upon the Israelites.
Esaias. 29. 13. 14.

Sect. 2.
The second sort of Conditions, are those that are required in prayer, and they
are in Conditions in prayer.
number eight.

I. Every petition must proceed from a lively sense, and feeling of our own
wants, and of our spiritual poverty. For without this, no prayer can be
earnest and hearty; and consequently become acceptable unto God. For example,
when we pray that Gods name may be hallowed, we must in making that petition,
have in our hearts a sense of the corruption of our nature, whereby we are prone
to dishonor the name of God.

II. Our prayer must proceed from an earnest desire of that grace which we
want: and this desire is indeed prayer it self. Moses uttering never a word,
but groaning in the spirit unto God, in the behalf of the Isralites, is said,
to cry unto the Lord. Exodus 14. 15. We know not (says Paul) what to pray as
we ought, but the Spirit it self makes request for us with sights, that
cannot be expressed. Romans 8. 26.

III. The petition must proceed from saving and true justifying faith. The
reason is, because without that faith, it is impossible that either our
persons, or our prayers, or any other action we do, should please God, Heb.
11. 6.

IV. Every petition must be grounded upon the word of God, and not framed
according to the carnal conceit and fancy of man's brain. And this is the
assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any thing ACCORDING TO HIS WILL,
he hears us. 1. Ioh. 5. 14. Now we have a double ground of our prayer in Gods
word; a commandment to make the prayer, either general or particular; and a
promise that our requests shall be granted.

Here we must remember two rules. First, Things to be asked are either
spiritual, or temporal. Spiritual are such, as concern God; whereof some
are more necessary to salvation, as remission of sins, faith, repentance,
and such like: some are less necessary, as hope, joy in the feeling of Gods
mercy in distress, etc. Temporal things are such, as belong to this life, as
meat, drink, clothing, preferment, and such like.

Now touching things spiritual, that are moore necessary to salvation, we are
to pray for them absolutely, without any exception or condition. But for things
less necessary to salvation, and for temporal blessings, we must ask them at
gods hand with this condition; if it be his will and pleasure, and so far
forth, as he in his wisdom shall judge to be most expedient for us. Herein we
must follow the example of Christ, who in his agony prayed to his father to
take that cup from him, yet with this condition, Not my will, but thy will be
done. The reason is this: Look how far sorth God commands us to ask, and
promises that we shall receive, so far forth are we warranted to ask, and may
hope to receive. Now God commands us to ask, and promises us the first sort
of spiritual things, freely and simply, without any condition or exception.
But the other sort of spiritual things, that are less necessary, and
temporal blessings, he promises us with condition; and therefore in like sort
ought we to ask them.

The second Rule is: We must not in our prayer; bind God to any circumstances
of time, place, or measure of that grace, or benefit, which we ask.

V. Our prayers being thus framed, (as has been said) are to be presented and
offered to God alone, and to none but him. For first, none else can hear all
men, in all places, at all times; and help all men, in all places and at all
times, but only he. Again the spirit of God makes us to pray, and in prayer
to call him Abba, father. Furthermore, all prayer must be grounded upon the
word; wherein we have not the least warrant, either expressly setdowne, or by
consequent employed, to prefer our suits and requests to any of the creatures.

VI. Prayer is to be presented to God, in the name, merit, and mediation of
Christ alone. For we our selves are not worthy of any thing, but shame and
confusion. Therefore we cannot pray in our own names, but must pray only in
the name of Christ. Our prayers are our sacrifices, and Christ alone is that
Altar, whereon we must offer them to God the father. For this Altar must
sanctific them, before they can be a sacrifice of a sweet smeiling savor unto
God. Hence it is, that not only our petitions, but all other things, as Paul
wishes, are to be done in the name of the Lord Jesus, Coloss. 3. 17. And
Christ himself says, Whatsoever you ask the Father in my name, he will give
it you, Ioh. 16. 23.

VII. There must be in prayer, Instancie and Perseverance. The heart must be
instant, not only in the act of prayer; but afterward till the thing asked,
be granted. This Instancie, is commended unto us in the parable of the widow,
and the unrighteous judge, Luke 18. 1. Hereunto the Prophet exhorts, when he
says, -- keep not silence, and give the Lord no rest, etc. Esa. 62. 7. And S.
Paul in like manner wishes the Romans, to strive with him by prayers to God
for him, Romans 15. 30.

VIII. Every true prayer, must have in it some thanksgiving unto God for his
benefits. In all things let your requests be showed unto God, in prayer and
supplication, with giving of thanks, Phil. 4. 6. Christ himself, gave direction
touching this, in that form of prayer which he taught his Disciples, For thine
is the kingdom power and glory.

Sect. 3.
The third sort of conditions, are those which are required after prayer; and
they are Conditions after prayer.
specially two.

The first is, a particular faith, whereby he that prays, must be assured
that his particular request shall be granted. Mark. 11. 24. Whatsoever ye
desire when ye pray, BELIEVE that ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto
you. And that he may have this particular faith, he must first have that whence
it arises, namly, true justifying faith, standing in a persuasion of his
reconciliation with God.

The second is, that a man must do and practice that, which he prays for; and
he is not only to pray for blessings, but also to use all lawful means that
he can, whereby the blessings he asks, may be obtained. For example. As thou
praiest for the pardon of thy sins, so thou must leave thy sins, and use all
good means, whereby the same may be mortified and crucified. And the like is
to be done in all other things, which we ask of God.

Thus we have the first Question of conscience resolved touching Prayer; that
then the prayer is acceptable to God, when he that prays observes, as much
as in him lies, all these conditions before, in, and after prayer.

II. Question. Whether may a man lawfully make Imprecations, that Of
Imprecations.
is to say, pray against his enemies? and how far forth is it lawful?
Sect. 1.
For answer to this, we must mark and observe sundry distinctions, and
differences.

First, we must distinguish between the cause, and the person that defends and
maintains the cause. The evil cause which an evil man defends, is to be
condemned of us; and we may always, and that lawfully, pray against it; but
we may not in like sort, condemn and pray against his person.

Secondly, we must distinguish of the persons of our enemies; Some be private
enemies, some public. Private, I call those, which be enemies of some
particular men, and are against them, in regard of this or that cause or
matter, and yet are not enemies of God, or of his truth. Public are those,
which are not only our enemies, but the enemies of God, of his kingdom, of his
truth, and relion. Now we may not pray against private enemies: we may (as
before) pray against their evil cause, but not against their persons; Math. 5.
44. Bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them which hurt you and persecute you. And we are commanded to love our
enemies, as our selves.

Again, public enemies of God and his truth, are also of two sorts, either
Curable or Incurable. Curable are such, as offend of ignorance, or some other
humane frailty, so as there is some hope of their conversion, and repentance.
We must not pray against the persons of these, but only against their dealings
and badde causes, and pray for their persons, and for their conversion. Thus
Christ prayed for those that crucified him; Father, forgive them: and Stephen,
Act. 7. for them that stoned him. Incurable, are those that sin obstinately,
and of malice, so as there is no hope of their amendment and conversion.

And further, for the better answering of this Question, we must mark another
distinction. There are two sorts of men, that are to make prayer unto God. Some
that have extraordinary gifts, as the Prophets and Apostles. Now he that is an
extraordinary man, has and must have these two gifts; namely, first a spirit
of Discerning, to discern and judge whether the person against whom he
prays, be incureable or no: and secondly a pure Zeal of Gods honor and
glory. The extraordinary man, that is qualified with these two gifts, may pray
not only against the cause of him, that is an enemy to God, but against his
person. Thus David did, especially in the 109. Psalm. which Psalm is full of
terrible curses, against his particular enemies, and typically, against Judas.
For he had the spirit of discerning, by which he knew that they were incurable
enemies, and a pure zeal of the glory of God, which made him break out into
such imprecations. So Paul prays, Gal. 5. 12. that they might be cut off which
troubled the Church, etc. 2. Tim. 4. 14. he prays directly against the person
of Alexander the coppersmith, that had don him much wrong, The Lord reward him
according to his works. Which must not seem strange: for Paul had in that
imprecation; the Spirit of prophecy, and consequently both the spirit of
discerning, and of pure zeal: and therefore he might pray against him as he
did.

But for Ordinary men, such as have nothing but ordinary gifts, and want the
spirit of discerning, and have also a zeal mingled with choler, stomach,
anger, and hatred; they may use no extraordinary prayer against the person of
any man. All that they may do, is to pray, that God would restrain their
malice, hinder their badde practices, and turn them to his glory, and the
good of his Church. Therefore Act. 4. 29. when there had been a Council
holden at Jerusalem, against the Apostles Peter, and John; in the first
beginning of the great persecution of Christians, in the primitive Church, it
is said, that they departed from the assembly, and prayed together with the
rest of the Church, in this manner; And now, O Lord, behold their threatenings,
etc. Wherein they prayed not against the Council, nor against the men that
sat in counsel, but against their proceedings, courses, devises, and
threatenings. And their practice, may be a pattern for ordinary men to follow.
In Luke 9. 54. the Disciples asking our Savior Christ, whether they should
call for fire from heaven, to destroy his enemies, he sharply reprooueth them,
for their intemperate heat against the Samaritans, and tells them, that they
had not that extraordinary Spirit, to effect such a thing, because they were
but ordinary men. Ordinary men therefore may not pray against the persons of
Gods enemies. The Pope at this day is a professed enemy to Christ, and his
Gospel, yet no man may pray against the person of the Pope, but only against
his state, kingdom, and regiment, which is Antichristian; whereby he sets
himself against God, and his kingdom.

Sect. 2.
Upon the answer to this question, there follows an other. Sundry Psalms of
David are Psalms of imprecation, wherein David curses his enemies fearfully,
especially in the 109. Psalm; now all these psalms were penned for our use:
It may therefore be demanded, how we may use these, and such like, when we read
or sing them?

Ans. I. We must not use them as David did, namely, as prayers against the
persons of our enemies, but only as prophecies against the enemies of God,
wherein the punishment of incurable men, that were enemies to God and his
truth, is foretold. For we have not, as David had, an extraordinary spirit,
or a pure zeal: therefore we cannot pray as he did.

II. I answer, whereas these Imprecations were directed against particular
enemies, we may use them in some sort as prayers, but how? as general prayers
against all the incureable enemies of God, not against any particulars among
the Jews, Turks, or Papists. As therefore as we may use these Imprecations as
prayers, so we must use them without any particular application, to the persons
of any particular men.

III. Question. What be the particular Circumstances Of the Circumstances of
Prayer.
of Prayer?
Ans. There are chiefly four. I. The voice, or speech. II. The gesture. III.
The place where. IV. The time when.

Sect. 1.
Concerning the Voice, this Question may Of the Voice in prayer.
be moved;

Whether a Voice or words, are ^o be used in prayer, or no?

Ans. Prayer is either Pub^cke, or Private. In public prayer, a form of
words must always be used, in a known, plain, and distinct voice. The
reasons are these. First, the Minister is the mouth of the whole Congregation
in prayer, as he is the mouth of God to the people in preaching. Now as the
Minister is their mouth to God in prayer, so the people must give their assent,
and approbation to his prayer, by the word, Amen. But there can be no professed
and public assent, without a voice. Secondly, God is the Creator, not only
of the soul of man, but also of his body; and we bless God, not only with
the heart, but also with the Iam. 5. 9.
tongue: therefore the whole man must pray in public.

Now in private prayer, made in private and secret places, by private persons,
the Voice is profitable, but not simply necessary. It is profitable, because
it stirs up the affections of the heart; it serves also to keep the
wandering mind in compass, to express the affection, and to procure
attention of the heart to the prayer. Yet it is not simply necessary. For a
man is not bound in co^^cience, to use a form of words, in all his prayers.
Moses prayed, he spoke never a word, and yet it was a prayer: for the Lord
says unto him, Exodus 12. 15. Why criest thou? Anna praying in the Temple, her
lips did move only, her voice was not heard, and yet she is said to pray,
1. Sam. 1. 13. Again, the Spirit is said to pray in the Elect, with groans
that cannot be uttered, and yet the Holy Ghost gives them the name of prayers,
Romans 8. Paul biddes us pray continually, which is not to be understood of a
continual use of a form of words, but of the groans and sighs of the heart,
which may be made at all times.

Out of this Question arises another;

Whether it be lawful, when we pray, to read a set Form of prayer? for some
think that to do so, is a sin.

Ans. It is no sin; but a man may lawfully, and with good conscience do it.

Reasons. First, the Psalms of David were delivered to the Church, to be used
and read in a set form of words, and yet the most of them are prayers.
Secondly, to conceive a form of prayer, requires gifts of memory, knowledge,
utterance, and the gifts of grace. Now every child and servant of God, though
he have an honest heart, yet has he not all these gifts: and therefore in the
want of them, may lawfully use a set form of prayer; as a man that has a
weak back, or a lame leg, may lean upon a crutch.

It is alleged, that set forms of prayer, do limit and bind the Holy Ghost.

Ans. If we had a perfect measure of grace, it were somewhat, but the graces of
God are weak and small in us. This is no binding of the Holy Ghost, but a
helping of the spirit, which is weak in us, by a crutch to lean upon:
therefore a man may with good conscience, upon defect of memory and utterance,
etc. use a set form of prayer.

Sect. 2.
The second Circumstance, is the Gesture. Of Gesture in prayer.
Concerning which it is demanded, what kind of gesture is to be used in prayer?
whether kneeling, standing, sitting, or the holding up the hands, or head to
heaven, or bowing the body to the earth?

Answ. God in his word has not prescribed any particular gesture of the body:
and therefore our consciences are not bound to any in particular. Besides that,
Religion stands not properly in bodily actions, and gestures. Yet touching
gesture, the word of God gives certain general rules to be observed in
prayers, both public and private.

In Public prayer, these rules of Gesture are prescribed. First, when
public prayer is made in the congregation, our gesture must always be
comely, modest, and decent. Secondly, all gesture used publickely, must serve
to express, as much as may be, the inward humility of the heart without
hypocrisy. Now these kinds are manifold. Some concern the whole body, as the
bowing thereof, the casting of it down upon the ground; some again concern
the parts of the body, as lifting up of the head, the eyes, the hands, bowing
the knees, etc. Touching these, the scripture has not bound us to any
particulars; but in them all, we must have regard, that they serve always to
express the humility of our hearts before God. Thus have the Holy men of God
behaved themselves; yea the Holy Angels standing before the Arc, do cover
their faces, in token of reverence of the majesty of God, Esaias. 6. 2. Thirdly,
we must in public prayer, content our selves to follow the laudable fashion,
and custom of that particular Church, where we are. For, to decline from
customs of particular Churches, in such cases, often causes scisme and
dissensions.

In private prayer, done in private and secret places, there is more liberty.
For in it we may use any gesture, so it be comely, and decent, and serve to
express the inward humility of our hearts. An ancient writer is of opinion,
that it is an vnreuerent, and unlawful thing, to pray sitting. But both the
learned before, in, and after his time, have judged his opinion superstitious;
specially considering that Religion stands not in the outward gesture of the
body, and it skills not much what that is, so the inward humility of a sincere
heart be expressed thereby.

Sect. 3.
The third Circumstance, is the place. Where The Place of prayer.
Question is made, In what place we must pray? Answ. In regard of conscience,
holiness, and religion, all places are equal, and alike in the New Testament,
since the coming of Christ. The house or the field, is as holy as the Church;
And if we pray in either of them, our prayer is as acceptable to God, as that
which is made in the Church. For now the days are come, that were foretold by
the Prophet, wherein. a clean, offering should be offered to God in every
place. Mal. 1. 11. which Paul expo^ds, 1. Tim. 2. 8. of pure and holy prayer,
offened to God in every place. To this purpose, Christ said to the woman of
Samaria, Ioh. 4. 25. that the time should come, when they (...) not worship in
Jerusalem, or in Samaria, but the true worshippers of God, should worship him
in spirit and in truth, wheresoever it be.

Yet nevertheless, for order, decency, and quietness sake, public prayer must
be made in public places; as Churches and Chapels, appointed for that use.
And private prayer, in private houses and clozets, Mat. 6. 5.

Now the opinion of the Papist is otherwise: For he thinks that in the new
Testament, hallowed Churches are more holy then other places are, or can be;
and do make the prayers offered to God in them, more acceptable to him then in
any other; and hereupon they teach, that private men must pray in Churches, and
private prayers must be made in Churches, if they will have them heard. For
proof hereof, they allege the practice of some particular persons in the
Scriptures. Of Anna, who prayed privately in the temple, Luke 2. 37. Of David,
who in his exile, desired greatly to have recourse unto the temple. And of
Daniel, who is said to look out at the window, toward the temple, and pray.
Dan. 6. 10.

Answ. These places are abused by the Popish Church. For there is great
difference between the temple at Jerusalem in the old Testament, and our
Churches in the new. That was built by particular commandment from God: so
were not our Churches. That was a type of the very body, and manhood of Christ.
Heb. 9. 11. And of his mystical body, Col. 2. 7. Again, the Arc in the
temple was a pledge, and signification of the covenant, a sign of gods
presence, a pledge of his mercy, and that by his own appointment: 1. Sam. 7.
for it was his will there to answer his people: but the like cannot be showed
of our Churches or Chappells.

It will be said, that the Sacrament is a sign of Gods presence, for in it
God is present after a sort. Ans. It is true, Christ is present in the
Sacrament, but when? not always, but then only when the Sacrament is
administered. And the Administration being once ended, Christ is no more
present in the Elements of bread and wine. And in the very act of celebration,
he is not carnally but spiritually present.

Sect. 4.
The fourth Circumstance, is the Time. The Time of prayer.


Quest. What are the times, in which men are to make prayers unto God?

For answer to this question, it is first to be considered, that there is a
twofold manner of praying, and consequently two kinds of prayer. The first, is
the secret and sudden lifting up of the heart to God, upon the present
occasion. The second, is set or solemn prayer. The first sort of prayers, have
of ancient time been called Eiaculations, or the darts of the heart. And the
time of this kind of prayer, is not determined, but is and may be used at any
time, without exception. This point I make plain by these reasons.

The first, is the commandment of God, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing.
Ephesians. 6. 18. Pray always, with all manner of prayer and supplication in the
Spirit, and watch thereunto with all perseverance -- for all Saints. In both
these places, by prayer and supplications, Paul understands the sudden
lifting up of the heart unto God.

Secondly, whatsoever we speak, think, or do, we must do all to the glory
of God. Now God is glorified, when we do in all things, from our hearts
acknowledge his power, wisdom, justice, mercy, providence, and goodness. And
these we do acknowledge, when we daily and howerly lift up our hearts to him,
in petition, for some blessings, and in thanksgiving for his mercies.

Thirdly, we are subject to innumerable infirmities, frailties, and wants, so
as we cannot of our selves, so much as think one good thought; therefore we
are every day and hour, to lift up our hearts to God, partly in prayer, partly
in giving of thanks, that he would make a daily supply by his grace.

Fourthly, Satan seeks by all means to overthrow our souls continually; and
in that regard it behooves us always and upon every occasion, to lift up our
hearts to God, for his merciful protection.

Fifthly, the gift of faith must grow and increase in us day by day. And the
means whereby it grows and thriueth in us, are the exercises of faith, not
seldom and rare, but daily and continually used. Now of all the exercises of
faith, none is more exceilent, then Invocation and Thanksgiving.

The Second kind of prayer, is set and solemn; when a man sets himself
apart, to pray unto God usually and fervently: or, when men come reverently and
solemnly together into the congregation, to call upon the name of the Lord.
The word of God appoints no set time for this kind, but leaves it to the
liberty, wisdom, and discretion of men. And the ground of this Liberty is
this; There is now no difference between time and time, in regard of
Conscience, for performing the worship of God, and the duties of religion, (the
Saboth only excepted:) but the principal and only difference, is in regard
of outward order and conueniencie, whereby one time may be thought fitter then
an other, and that must be discerned by the wisdom of men. In the New
testament, the distinction of days, and hours, is taken away. Paul was afraid
of the Galatians, because they made difference of days, times, months, and
years, in respect of holiness and religion, Gal. 4.

By this doctrine, we may see what to judge of the Roman religion, touching
set times of prayer. They prescribe certain hours, which they term
Canonical; and they distinguish them in this manner. The first, they call the
Matutine, before the sun rising. The second, the Prime, from the first hour
of the day, to the third. The third from thence to the sixth hour. The fourth
from the sixth to the ninth. The fifth from the ninth to the twelfth, which they
call the None. The fixed is in the evening about the Sunne-setting. The seventh
and last, is after the Sunne-setting, which they call the Completorie. Now in
these seven prescribed hours, by the doctrine delivered, I note three notable
abuses.

First, in that the Popish Church binds men in Conscience to observe them, upon
pain of mortal sin. Whereas in regard of Conscience, there is no
difference of times. Secondly they bind the Mass Priest, the Deacon,
Subdeacon, and the Beneficed man only, to Canonical hours, whereas those
hours differ not from others in regard of performance of Gods worship, neither
are these men more bound to pray in them then others. Thirdly, that a man may
say and read his Canonical hours this day for the morrow, and in the morning
or after dinner for the whole day; wherein we may see their gross superstition.

IV. Question touching prayer is, How their minds are to be pacified, which
are troubled by sundry accidents, that fall out in their prayers.
These Accidents are principally three.

First, when they should pray, they cannot frame or conceive a form of prayer,
as other men do.

For remoouing of which trouble, let them remember this one thing. That the
unfeigned desire of the touched heart, is a prayer in acceptance before God,
though knowledge, memory, and utterance, to frame and conceive a form of
prayer in words, be wanting. Ps. 10. 17. God hears the desire of the poor,
that is, of humbled persons, and them which are in distress. Psalm. 145. 19.
God will fulfill the desire of them that fear hi^: he also will hear their
cry and will save them. Romans 8. 26. We know not how to pray as we ought, but
the Spirit of God, that is, the spirit of adoption, makes requests for us by
groans and sighs, which cannot be uttered. Where we may observe, that the
prayer of the Holy Ghost which must needs be an excellent prayer, is made by
groans which cannot be uttered in words.

The second Accident is, that they find them selves full of heaviness and
deadnes of spirit, and their minds full of by-thoughts, and wandting
imaginations.

This trouble may be removed upon this ground; that the defects of our prayer
shall never condemn us, if we be heartily displeased with our selves for the
same; and by prayer and other good means, do struggle and strive against
them. Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them that be in Christ. In which
place it is not said, They do nothing worthy of co^dem^ation; but thus, There
is no condemnation to them being in Christ, though they deserve it never so
much.

The third accide^t is, that though they pray, they receive not the fruit of
their prayers. For the remooueall of this distress, we may consider these
four things.

I. The man that is thus troubled, is to examine himself, whether he has made
his prayer to God aright or no? For if he pray amiss, he may pray long, and
never be heard. Our Savior would not grant the request of the sonns of
Zebedeus, because they asked they knew not what. Matt. 20. 22. Iam. 4. 3. Ye
ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye might consume it on your
lusts. Paul prayed three times, and had the repulse, because he asked things
inconvenient for him to receive: therefore answer was made, My grace is
sufficient for thee, 2. Cor. 12. The man therefore that would make a prayer
aright, must have respect unto the matter and form thereof, as also to the
disposition of his own heart. If he fail in any of these, then God will not
hear; or if he does, he hears in justice.

II. Though men make lawful prayers unto God, and ask things that are to be
asked, and which God will grant, yet God will sometime deserre the
accomplishment of their prayers, and not give ear unto them at the first.
David prayed night and day, and yet was not heard. Psalm. 22. 2. Again, his
eyes failed, his throat was dry, while he waited for his God by prayer, Psalm.
69. 3. The Angel Gabriel said to Zachary, Luke 1. 13. Thy prayer is heard. Now
in all likelihood, that prayer of Zachary was made long before, even in his
youth, yet it was not granted him till he was old.

The Lord deferres the grant of our requests upon good reason. For hereby he
stirs up the dulnes of our hearts, and quickens our faith and hope.
Again, he makes us when we enjoy the blessings desired, to have them in higher
estimation, and to be more thankful unto him; yea in the want thereof, to
strive the more earnestly with him by prayer for them. The woman of Canaan, was
repulsed and called a dog, by our Savior Christ, not for that he intended to
reject her prayer, but to stir up her faith, to make her more earnest in
asking; as also more thankful for the benefit, when she had received it.

III. The Lord uses to grant our petitions, two manner of ways. First, by
giving the very thing we ask; Secondly, by giving something answerable thereto,
when he gra^teth not the thing it self. Thus Christ was heard in that, which
he feared. Heb. 5. 7. He prayed to be delivered from that cup, which
notwithstanding he drank of: How the^ was he heard? Though he had not that
which he asked, yet God granted him the thing which was proportionable to his
request, namely, strength and power, whereby he was enabled to overcome the
woeful pangs of that death.

IV. We must think this sufficient, that we can, and do pray unto God, though
we never have any request, in this world granted. For by whose grace have we
always continued in prayer, but by the gift and grace of God? Paul in the like
case, was answered by God, My grace is sufficient for thee: that is, thine
infirmity shall not be removed; content thy self in this, that thou art in
my favor, and have received my grace, by which thou do withstand this
Temptation. To this purpose S. John says, If we know that he hears us,
whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions granted which we
desired of him, 1. Ioh. 5. 15. His meaning is, if we can perceive, and discern
that God listneth to our prayers; hereby we may assure our selves that he
graunts our requests. Now by this we may perceive that he does listen, and give
ear to us, because the grace whereby we pray, is from him alone.

CHAP. VII.
Of the second head of Gods worship, the hearing of the word preached.

THus much touching the first head of Outward worship, namely, Prayer. Now
follows the next, which is the Hearing of the Word preached.

The Questions concerning this point, are of two sorts. Some concern the
Preachers of the word, and some the Hearers. The first sort I omit, and reserve
them, to a more proper place.

For the second sort, concerning Hearers, one Question may be moved;

How any man may profitably, to his own comfort and salvation, hear the word
of God?
The necessity of this Question appears, by that special Caveat, given by
our Savior Christ, Luke 8. 18. Take heed how ye hear.

Ans. To the profitable hearing of Gods word, three things are required;
Preparation before we hear, a Right disposition in hearing, and Duties to be
practiced afterward.

I. In Preparation, sundry Rules of direction are to be observed.

First Rule. We must be swift to hear, Iam. 1. 19. And this we shall do, by
disburdening our selves of all impediments, which may hinder the effectual
hearing of the word. These Impediments are especially three; all which are
named by the Apostle James, together with their several remedies.

The first, is Presumption; when the hearer presumes of his wisdom, knowledge,
and ability to teach, (if need were) his teachers. The remedy hereof is, to
be slow to speak: that is, not to presume of our own gifts, thinking our
selves better able to teach others, then to be taught by them. For so the
Apostle afterward expoundes himself, when he says, My brethren, be not many
masters, Iam. 3. 1. let not private persons take upon them to become
instructers of other men; but as Paul says, 1. Cor. 3. 18. If any man among
you seem to be wise, let him be a fool, that he may be wise: that is, let him
be willing to learn, even of his inferiors. And in this regard, let him
follow the practice of Naaman, who submitted himself to the advice and
counsel of his maid.

The second Impediment, is troubled affections, specially rash anger, either
against the Teacher, or others. The remedy of this also is laid down, in the
place before alleged, Be slow to wrath, v. 19. The third is, superfluity of
malitiousnes, that is, the abundance of evil corruptions and sins; which
hearers shall by experience find in their own hearts and lives. This
Impediment has many branches, principally three. 1. Hardness of heart, noted by
the stony ground, in the parable of the lower, Matthew. 13. 20. 2. The Cares of
the world, signified by the thornie ground, v. 22. 3. The itching ear, 2. Tim.
4. 3. when a man will hear no other doctrine, but that which is suitable to his
corrupt nature; not being willing to frame his heart to the word, but to have
the word framed to his wicked heart.

The remedies of this Impediment, are these. First, every hearer of the word,
must lay apart all supersluitie of malitiousnes, that is, cut off, as much as
in him lies, all corruptions both of heart and life. Hence it is, that God
speaks thus to the wicked man, Psalm. 50. 16. What have thou to do, to take
my word in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my words
behind thee? To this purpose, the Prophet Jeremy exhorts the Jews, to be
circumcised to the Lord, and to take away the foreskinnes of their hearts, etc.
Ier. 4. 4. And Moses by Gods commandment, was to sanctify the people three
days before they came to hear the Law delivered by himself in Mount Sinai,
Exodus 19. 11. Again, every man will and ought to have a care, to prepare
himself more or less, to the receiving of the Lords Supper: which duty is as
well to be performed, before the hearing of the word, considering that in
substance it differs not from the Sacraments, they being the visible, and
preaching the audible voice of God. Secondly, every hearer must receive the
word with meekenes, that is, with quietness subject himself to the word of God,
in all things. Esa. 57. 15. I dwell with him, that is of an humble spirit, to
revive the spirit of the humble, etc.

The second Rule of Preparation. We must lift up our hearts in prayer to God,
that he would give us the Hearing ear. This hearing ear, is a gift of God,
inabling the heart, when it hears, to conceive and understand the doctrine
taught, and to yield obedience thereunto.

The third Rule. The hearer must in hearing, set himself in the presence of
God. Now therefore (says Cornelius to Peter, Act. 10. 33.) are we all here
present before God, to hear all things commanded thee of God. The reason is,
because God is always in the congregation where the word is preached.

II. The second thing required to profitable hearing, is a right disposition.
Wherein two rules are to be observed.

First, when the word of God is in delivering, every hearer must hear with
judgment. But some will say, many preachers bewray faults and infirmities in
their preaching. To this Paul answers notwithstanding, Despise not prophecy,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 20. Yea but what if they deliver untruths? Paul answers again,
in the next verse, Try all things, and keep that which is good: and Saint John
to the like purpose, 1. Ioh. 4. 1. Believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits whether they be of God.

Her^ by the way, we must remember one cau^at. There be three kinds of
judgment. The one is a private, whereby every private person may judge of the
doctrine which is taught: For he must not hear, hand ouerhead, but judge of
that which he hears. Of this Saint Paul speaks to the Corinths, Judge ye what
I say. 1. Cor. 10. 15. The second is, the judgment of the Prophet or minister:
And this is a surer kind of judgment then the former, proceeding from a
greater measure of Gods grace. The third is the judgment of the Holy Ghost in
scripture; and this is sovereign and absolute. For the Holy Ghost judges all,
and is judged of none. These three kinds of judgment are set in this order. The
first depends upon the second, the second upon the third, and the third is
absolute and judged of none.

Upon this caveat, two things do follow; First, that a private hearer, though
he may judge of doctrine delivered, yet he may not censure the Teacher, or his
ministry. Ministers are to be judged; but their spirit is not subject to every
private man; but to the prophets. For the spirit of the prophet; that is, the
doctrine which the prophets bring, being inspired by the Holy Ghost, is
subject to the Prophets. 1. Cor. 14. 32. Secondly, a private man, is not to
publish or broach any point of doctrine, but that which is plainly propounded
in the word, and taught by the ministers thereof. This is a necessary rule;
and the want of observation thereof, is the cause of many scismes and haeresies
in the Church. The Lord commands the people, Mal. 2. 7. to require the law at
the mouth of the priest in all maine points of faith and manners.

The second Rule to be observed in hearing. Every hearer must have care that
the word of God be rooted, and grounded in his heart, like good feed, in good
ground: which Saint James expresses, Iam. 1. 21. Receive with meekenes the
ingrafted word. Here generally it is to be remembered, that not only ignorant
people, but even the most learned, ought to be hearers of the word preached.
For the preaching thereof serves not only for the increasing of knowledge, but
also for the reformation of the affection, which may be inordinate, where
knowledge does abound.

Now for the rooting of the word of God in our hearts, sundry things are
required.

First, a true and right understanding thereof.

Secondly, it must be mingled with faith, Heb. 4. 1. For the word is as wine,
or water of life: our faith is the sugar that sweetneth it, and gives it a
pleasant relish. The word therefore must be tempered, and mixed with our says,
that it may become profitable unto us. Now in this mixture, there is required a
double faith; the first general, whereby we believe the doctrine delivered to
be true, so as we never call the same into question; Our Gospel to you (says
Paul) was in much assurance, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. The second special, whereby we
apply the word preached unto our selves, for the humbling and comforting of our
hearts.

Thirdly, we must labor to be affected with the word. Thus Josiah his heart is
said to melt at the reading of the law, 2. Chro. 34. 27. And the people
rejoiced greatly, because they understood the word which the Levites had taught
them. Neh. 8. 12. The hearts of the two disciples that went to Emmaus, burned
within them when Christ opened unto them the scriptures, Luc. 24. 32. And the
Jews at Peter's sermon, were pricked in their hearts, and said, Men, and
brethren, what shall we do? Act. 2. 37.

Fourthly, the word of God must dwell plenteously in us, Coll. 3. 16. This is
does, when it rules, and bears the greatest sway in the heart, and is not
ouerruled by any corrupt affection.

III. The duties to be performed after hearing, are these.

First, the doctrine delivered, must be treasured up in the heart, and
practiced in life. Psalm. 119. 11. I have hid thy word in my heart, that I might
not sin against thee.

Secondly, a man must meditate on the word which he has heard, with lifting up
of his heart unto God. The beasts that were cloven footed, and chewed the
cudde, were fittest both for meat unto man, and for sacrifice to God, Levit.
11. It was the old and ancient opinion of the Church, that this chewing the
cudde, signified holy meditations. And he that hears the word, must do as the
beast does, fetch up the meat out of his belly again, and chewe it over a
new. The man that does so, is the fittest for the Lords use.

Thirdly, he must have experience of the word of God in himself. Psalm. 34. 8.
Taste and see how gracious the Lord is.

Fourthly, he is to examine himself after he has heard the word. Thus David
says of himself, Psalm. 119. 59. I have considered my ways, and turned my
feet unto thy testimonies.

Fifthly, he must be obedient unto it, and testify his obedience, though not at
all times, yet whenever occasion is offered. Iam. 1. 22. Be ye doers of the
word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.

II. Question touching hearers is, How are they to be comforted, who after long
hearing of the word, either profit very little, or not at all?
For resolution of this Question, the Causes of not profiting, are distinctly
to be considered. And they are of two sorts.

The first sort of Causes, are the sins of the hearers. And that sins are
the causes of not profiting, it will appear by this sign; if the memory,
understanding, and other parts of the mind in common matters, be strong and
pregnant, but dull and weak in apprehending, and retaining the doctrine
taught. Now these sins are principally two.

First, Hardness of heart, when a man is not inwardly moved and affected with
the word preached, but remains in the same state he was before. This is set
forth by the hard ground, that is by the high way side, and by the stony
ground, Math. 13. 4, 5. And such is the heart that is not moved nor affected
either with joy, sorrow, fear, or consolation. The hardness of heart, arises
from a custom in sinning and from that the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13.

Secondly, worldly Cares, that is, a heart possessed with desire of profits,
pleasures, honors, preferments, and such like; which be as thorns that choke
the seed of the word, and suffer it not to grow and fructify: yea that fill
the heart full of wandering imaginations, which steal away the mind from
attending to the word preached. Those that are thus hindered from profiting, are
rather to be reproved, then comforted: for that the cause of their
non-proficiencie, is in, and from themselves. They are therefore to use all
good means for the remooueall of their sins, that of hard hearted and
carnal, they may become good and profitable hearers of the word. The means
are these.

First, they must labor to be touched in heart, with sense and feeling, of
their spiritual poverty, and want of Gods favor and mercy in the pardon of
their sins. The reason is given of David, Psalm. 25. 9. The Lord teaches the
humble his ways. And by Marie, in her song, Luke 1. 35. He has filled the
hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty away. The second
means is, to hear the word of God with an honest heart, joined with a
constant purpose of not sinning. The third, to be as careful to bring good
affections, as a good understanding. For affections are the feet that carry
the heart, and Solomon biddes us to take heed to our feet, when we enter into
the house of God, Eccl. 4. 17. They are the very key of knowledge and memory;
and therefore David says, The secret of the Lord is revealed to those that
fear him, and his covenant is to give them understanding: Psalm. 25. 14. And
that which he says of Fear, may be said also of other good affections.

The second sort of Causes, are ordinary and usual defects of natural gifts;
as of capacity, or conceit, of memory, and understanding. For all men have not
the like gifts of nature, and therefore all men cannot reap benefit by the word
preached. These wants may be discerned thus; If the mind and memory be weak or
wanting, as well in common wordly matters, as in divine things that belong to
gods kingdom. And to this kind of men which are thus troubled for not
profiting, there belongs comfort; Yet not simply, but upon these conditions.
First, if they know the principal grounds of religion. Secondly, if they have
care to profit and increase in knowledge. Thirdly, if they live according to
the measure of their knowledge, in obedience to Gods will. These being
observed, such parties are to comfort themselves in this, that God in mercy
will accept of their endeavor, forgive their ignorance, and bear with their
infirmities. This is to be seen in the example of Peter, whose faith was
highly commended by Christ, when he said, the gates of hell should not prevail
against it. Matt. 16. 16. And yet at that very time, Peter was ignorant of many
maine points of Religion, as of the death, resurrection, and ascension of
Christ. And in his person, the other discisples are commended also for their
faith, because they held Christ to be the Messiah and Savior of the world,
though they were ignorant of the manner of his redemption, thinking he should
have been an earthly king. Act. 1. Again, the want of knowledge in such as
have natural defects, may be supplied by good affection, if they be not
wanting in an honest heart, and careful endeavor of godly life. Thus the
Church of the Jews in the old Testament, did far exceed the Church of the
new, in good affection, though it came far short of it in knowledge and
apprehension.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Sacraments in general, the reeeiuing, and use of them.

IN the next place, follow the Questions of conscience touching the third part
of Gods Outward worship, namely, the Sacraments; and these concern either the
administration, or the receiving of them. The Administration I will here let
pass, and handle those Questions only, that concern the receiving and use
thereof, both in general and in particular.

Touching the receiving of the Sacraments in general, there is one only
Question

Whether the Sacraments ministered by Heretics, Idolatours and insufficient
ministers be Sacraments or no?
For answer hereunto, we are to know there be three sorts of men that may
administer the Sacraments. Some are true and lawful ministers, lawfully called
by God and men to that function, keeping the right form of the Sacrament
according to the institution. Some again, are more private persons, that have
no authority at all to administer, whom we may oppose to the former sort as
contrary to them in this action. Others again be admitted to stand in the
room of lawful ministers by the acceptance and consent of men, or by
custom, though corrupt, and these are in a mean between the two former
sorts. Of the first there is no question. But the Sacrament administered by the
second is in truth a mere nullitie; because they have no calling thereto,
neither can they do it of faith: forasmuch as they have neither precept nor
example out of the word of God. Now for the third sort, though they be not
indeed lawful pastors; yet being in the place of such, by the consent,
allowance, and custom of men, though corrupt; their action is of force, and
the Sacrament which is administered by them, is in deed a true Sacrament; which
I prove by these Reasons.

First, the preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments are all
one in substance. For in the one the will of God is seen, in the other heard.
Now the word preached by Heretics, is the true word of God, and may have his
effect. The Scribes and Pharisees, great Doctors of the Jews, were not all of
the Tribe of Levi, but descended from other Tribes. Again, even the principal
of them lived by extortion and bribery, and were wicked men, yea Heretics and
Apostataes, deposed and excommunicated persons. And yet because they occupied
the places of good teachers, and sat in the chair of Moses, that is read the
doctrine of Moses Law, Christ bids his disciples to hear them. Matt. 23. 3.
Provided only that they took heed of the leaven of their false doctrine, and
wicked life. Now if the word taught by their ministry was powerful, why may
not the Sacraments ministered by the Heretics standing in the room of true
ministers be true Sacraments? In the days of Paul, Phillip. 1. 15. Some
preached Christ through envy and strife, and some of good will: what was the
Apostles judgment in this case? Himself answers, v. 18. What then? yet
Christ is preached all manner of ways, whether it be under a pretense or
sinceerely, and I therein joy, yea and will joy.

Secondly, this point is plain by examples. The Leviticall priests under the
Law, were Heretics, and taught after a sort the breach of the moral law.
Yea they held justification by works, Romans 10. 3. and yet Circumcision by them
administered, was in force; neither was the passover, celebrated by them, or
the sacrifices which they offered, any other then the true Passover and true
sacrifices. Judas was a very hypocrite, yea Christ calls him a Devil, Ioh. 6.
70. and yet he preached the word at Christ's commandment, and baptized with the
rest of his Disciples, Ioh. 4. 1, 2.

Thirdly, the Sacrament, if it be administered in the name, and by the power of
Christ, is the ordinance of God, being received by faith, yea a true Sacrament
of Christ; and the force and efficacy thereof, does not depend upon the
worthiness of the Minister, but upon Christ. The letters or epistle sent from
one man to an other, are authentical, and serve fully to express the mind of
the author, though the messenger or carier be a wicked or a naughty man. And
in like manner, the sin of any man that stands in the room of a lawful
Minister, does not nullify the Sacrament, and therefore not heresy, or
insufficiency. S. Cyprian who lived 300. years after Christ, was of this
opinion, that Sacraments administered by Heretics, were no Sacraments. But the
Churches of Africa in those times concluded the contrary against him,
according to the doctrine that has been delivered.

The Use. I. By this doctrine they are justly to be blamed, who would have
their children rebaptized, which were before baptized by Popish priests;
because the Sacrament, though administered by a Papist, if he stand in the room
of a true Pastor, and keep the form thereof, is a true Sacrament. II. Others
by this doctrine come to be reproved, that refuse to receive the Sacraments at
the hands of unpreaching ministers. For though the minister be vnsufficie^t,
and preach not, yet if he be called by the Church, he has the place of a
lawful Pastor, his administration is warrantable, and the Sacrament by him
administered a true Sacrament.

If it be said, that then the true Sacraments may be out of the true church, as
in the church of Rome at this day; because Heretics and such like Ministers
are not of the church. I answer, that there is in the church of Rome, the
hidden church of God, and the Sacraments are there used, not for the Romish
church, but for the hidden church which is in the midst of Papacy; like as the
lantern bears light not for it self, but for the passengers: yet hence it
follows not, that we should communicate with Idolaters, Heretics, and wicked
persons.

And so much of the Administration of the Sacraments in general. I come now to
the Particular Sacraments.

CHAP. IX.
Of Baptism.

THe first Sacrament in order, is Baptism. And the Questions touching it I
reduce to five heads.

I. Question. Whether Baptism be necessary to salvation, or no?
For answer to this Question, we must rightly distinguish of necessity. A
thing is said to be necessary two manner of ways; either absolutely and
simply, or in part. Absolutely necessary is that, which is in all respects
necessary, and the contrary whereof is utterly unnecessary. Necessary in
part is that, which in some respects, or upon certain causes and
considerations, is necessary. This distinction premised, I answer:

Sect. 1.
First, that Baptism is necessary the second How Baptism is necessary, and
why?
way, in part and respectively, that is, in diverse and sundry regards.

I. As the lawful use thereof is a note, whereby the true church of God is
discerned, and distinguished from the false church. Not that the church of God
cannot be a church, without this Sacrament. For it may want Baptism for a
time, and yet remain a true church; as well as the church of the Jews in
ancient times, wanted circumcision, for the space of forty years, Josh. 5.
6. and yet ceased not to be a true church, and loved of God.

II. As it serves for necessary uses and purposes, to men of years, that are
to be baptized: as first, to testify unto the church and themselves, that they
are received into the body of Christ, which is the company and society of
the faithful. Secondly, to testify their obedience to Gods commandment, and
their subjection to his ordinance appointed by him for their good. Thirdly, to
be a necessary proppe, to uphold their weakness, a seal to confirm their
faith in the covenant of grace, and an instrument to convey Christ unto them
with all his benefits.

III. It is necessary to Infants, as it serves to enter, and admit them into
the visible Church, and withal to signify their interest in the covenant of
grace, and consequently their right and title to Life everlasting.

Sect. 2.
Secondly, I answer that Baptism is not How Baptism is not necessary, and
why?
absolutely or simply necessary, so as the party that dies without it,
remains in the state of damnation, and cannot be saved. My reasons are these.

I. Baptism is appointed by God, to be no more, but a seal annexed unto, and
depending upon the covenant; therefore we must put a difference between it,
and the covenant.

The Covenant of grace, and our being in Christ is absolutely necessary: for
no man, woman, or child, can be saved, unless they have God for their God.
But the sign thereof is not. For look as to the essence of a bargain, the
consent and agreement of the parties alone, is of mere necessity required;
and this being yielded, the bargain is a bargen, though it be neither sealed,
subscribed, nor confirmed by witnesses; so likewise a man may be saved, if he
be within the covenant of grace, though he have not received the seal and
sign thereof, the Sacrament of Baptism.

II. The bare want or privation of Baptism (when it cannot be had) is
pardonable, and does not condemn the party vn-baptized. The thief upon the
cross was saved, though he was never baptized, Luke 23. And sundry Martyrs in
former times, who were Gods dear children, and died for the maintenance of his
truth, though they wanted the outward and visible baptism, yet by Gods mercy
they were not destitute of the inward, and consequently were not condemned but
saved. And so many children under the law died before the eight day,
uncircumcised. Yea when any among them were weak, and could not endure to have
the foreskinne of their flesh cut, in probability their circumcision was
deferred, and some of them died in the mean time, which nevertheless being
borne of believing parents, were undoubtedly saved, according to the promise of
God made to Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. For as Christ
says of the Sabbath, so may we say of Circumcision; It was made for man, and
not man for it. And it were a judgment both rash and uncharitable, to think
that all the males of the children of Israel that died before circumcision,
were condemned.

Yet on the other side, the wilful contempt, and careless neglect of this
ordinance, when it may conveniently be administered and received, is deadly and
damnable. And to them that are guilty of this sin, is the threat of God
justly denounced, Genesis 17. 14. Even that person shall be cut off from his
people.

III. The grace and mercy of God is free, and not tied or bound to the outward
elements. Ioh. 3. 8. The wind blows, where it lists, that is, God gives
grace, and vouchsafes favor, to whom, where, and when it pleases him. And
hence it is, that they, whom he would not have perish but come to eternal
life, shall be saved, though they be not partakers of this Sacrament.

IV. Infants, borne of believing parents, are holy before baptism, and
baptism is but a seal of that holiness, 1. Cor. 7. 14. The children of
believing parents are holy. Romans 11. 16. If the first fruits be holy, so is the
whole tumpe, and if the root be holy, so are the branches. Yea to them belongs
the kingdom of heaven as well as to others. Christ says, Suffer little
children, etc. for to them belongs the kingdom of heaven, Mark. 10. 14.

It is alleged, that those which are sanctified have faith, which infants have
not. Ans. God says, I will be thy God and the God of thy head. By virtue of
this promise, the parent lays hold on the covenant, for himself, and for his
child; and the child believes, because the father believes.

It is objected again, that infants are born in original sin, and therefore
cannot be borne holy and sanctified. Answ. Every believing parent sustaines a
double person. First, as he is a man, descending of Adam, by corrupted seed;
and thus, being himself corrupted and unclean, his children also are corrupt
and impure. Secondly, as he is a holy and believing man, ingraffed by faith
into Christ the second Adam. And thus by his faith, comes his child to be in
the covenant, and partaker of the benefits and privileges thereof: and by the
same faith he being a believer, the guilt of original corruption, which is in
the Infant newborn, is not imputed unto him to condemnation. And for these
causes, the Sacrament of Baptism, is not absolutely and precisely necessary
to salvation, but so, and in that sort, as has bin declared.

Against this Doctrine it is objected, that Christ says to Nicodemus, Except a
man be borne of water and the holy Ghost, he can not enter into the kingdom of
God, Ioh. 3. 5.

To this objection, sundry answers are given. First, if the place be
understood of Baptism, then the words may carry one of these two senses.
First, that our Savior directs this speech principally against Nicodemus, who
was a timorous professor; and remained ignorant, and had long neglected his
baptism. Secondly, that the kingdom of heaven, is here put, not for
everlasting happiness, but to signify the visible estate of the church of the
new Testament; and then the meaning is, No man can be admitted into the Church,
and made a visible member thereof, but by the water of baptism; neither can
any man be made a lively member of Christ Jesus, but by the spirit, that is, by
regeneration, which alone makes the party that is entered into the Church by
baptism, to be a living member of the body of Christ. Secondly, others
answer, that this place is to be understood not of Baptism, but simply of
regeneration, and that Christ alludes to the sayings of the Prophets, which
speak of clean water, and expounds the same in Exodus 36. 25.
this sort; Thou Nicodemus, art by profession a Pharisie, and use many
outward washings, but know this withal, that unless thou be washed inwardly
by clean water, that is, be regenerated and renewed by the holy Ghost, thou
can not enter into Gods kingdom. Lastly, it is answered, that the necessity
of salvation lies not in both, but only in the new birth by the holy Ghost; as
if Christ should say, Except ye be regenerate and borne a new of the spirit,
which as clean water, purges and cleanses you from your sins, ye cannot be
saved.

The Use. By this doctrine touching the necessity of Baptism, are justly
challenged two sorts of men.

The first is the Popish sort, who build the absolute necessity of Baptism
upon false and unstable grounds. For they teach in their writings, that all men
are borne in sin and corruption, and unless they be cleansed from it, they
can never be saved. Now Baptism (they say) is appointed by God, as the only
remedy and sole means whereby they may be purged from sin, and come to
salvation. And this they snew by a comparison of Baptism with the brazen
Serpent: which as it was the only remedy for the cure of those which were
stinged by serpents, so is this Sacrament the only means, set apart by God,
to keep them that are partakers thereof, from the sting of death and eternal
destruction.

But the answer is plain out of the former doctrine. That though all men be
conceived and borne in sin, and cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven,
except they be cleansed; yet baptism is not of absolute necessity for this
purpose. For it is not appointed by God, as the only remedy of this evil,
but only to be a sign and signification of the purging and clensing of sin,
by the blood of Christ. Now those that are within the covenant, may have their
sins remitted by the mercy of God, and that according to the form of the
covenant, though they receive not the sign thereof; so be it they do not
wilfully contemn or neglect the same when it may be had. Again, the serpent
lifted up by Moses, in it self, and by it own virtue was a bare sign, and
was no remedy to cure the diseased Israelites: but they were cured by their
faith in the word of Gods promise annexed unto the sign: according to which
David says, He sent his word and healed them, Psalm. 107. 20. And to the same
effect Augustine says, That the cure and health of the Israelites, came not
from the Serpent, Lib. de mirab. Script. cap. 33. Non in serpente, sed in
Domini imperio and promisso, etc.
but from Gods commandment obeyed, and his promise believed. And so is
Baptism a remedy, and no otherwise.

The second is, the common ignorant sort of people, who think that an Infant
dying without baptism, dies without christendom; and that it cannot possibly
be a christian, unless it be baptized. This their opinion is very erroneous.
For by it they make baptism, the seal of the covenant, to be as necessary,
as the covenant it self. Whereas on the contrary, baptism is not simply and
absolutely necessary, so as the party dying without it, can not be saved, but
only in part, as it serves to distinguish the true church from the false, to
be a necessary sign of our admission and entrance into the church, yea to
confirm our faith in the promise of God. Neither is baptism of force to make
a Christian, but only to signify and declare a man to be a Christian, by
being within the covenant of grace.

II. Question. Whether witnesses which we commonly call Godfathers and
Godmothers be necessary?
To this there are given two answers.

First, that the use of Godfathers and Godmothers, is not simply necessary to
the Sacrament of Baptism. For first, it seems that of ancient times, the
parents of Children which were Heathen, and newly converted to Christian
Religion, were either ignorant and could not, or careless and would not bring
up their children agreeably to the word of God, and the Religion which they
newly professed. And hence it was thought meet, that some persons of good
knowledge and life, should be called to witness the Baptism, and promise their
care for the childrens education. But now Parents amongst us being better
taught and qualified, the other is not of such necessity. Secondly, Christ
has instituted and ordained in his word, all things fit, convenient, and
necessary unto lawful Baptism amongst all which, he has not any where
expressly prescribed the use of Sureties. Thirdly, the whole congregation
assembled together at the administration of this Sacrament, do present the
child to the Lord, and are witnesses that the child is admitted into the
Church, and is externally in the Covenant. And therefore, I take it to be a
fault, when the Congregation does depart before the child be baptized.
Fourthly, that which is required of them to promise and perform, may, ye must
and ought to be performed of the parents of the baptized; who are by the word
of God to bring up their children in the fear of God.

The second answer is, that though such persons are not necessary to the
essence of Baptism, yet they are not simply to be rejected; this always
presupposed, that they be fit men and well qualified. Their fittenes stands
in four things.

First, that they be of years of discretion, sufficient to undertake such a
charge. And therefore it is a fault, when children are called to be Godfathers,
and Godmothers, which neither are come to years of discretion, nor able to
consider what they do or ought to do.

Secondly, that they have at least some knowledge and understanding not only
in general, of the principles and grounds of religion, but also of the nature
and end of the Sacrament, and of the substance of the promise wherewith they
bind themselves, in the behalf of their God-children. It was in ancient times,
required of such persons as were to be witnesses, that they should know and
understand the Creed and the Lords Prayer. Therefore those are justly to be
blamed, that call such persons to be witnesses to their children, which though
they have years sufficient, yet they have little or no knowledge of the
grounds of the Catechism, or of the bond whereby they oblige themselves for the
good and godly education of the infants in time to come.

Thirdly, they be known to be of an honest and reformed life, not justly
chargeable of impiety, incivilitie, or dishonesty, that by their example the
children may in time to come be drawn to holiness of life and conversation. For
how can he that is of a dissolute and wicked life, be able to bring others
committed to his charge to the embracing of true religion.

Fourthly, that they be careful to perform theirpromise made in the face of
the Church for the good education and instruction of the child in the fear of
God, specially when the parents be negligent and careless in that behalf.

Nor the reasons why these sureties are not to be simply rejected, if they be
qualified, as has been said, are these. I. Because this custom though it be
not directly grounded upon scripture, yet it is not repugnant thereunto. For
being righty used and kept, it tends to the furtherance of religion and
Godliness in particular families, and consequently to the edification of the
Church. II. It is no new thing but an ancient comendable practice, continued in
the Church of God above the space of 1200. years. III. Because these parties
do supply the defect of natural parents when they be wanting, either by death
or by negligence while they live; if they be answerable to their promise made
in the behalf of the children, touching the things that belong to their
salvation.

Yet further touching these persons three Questions are moved.

I. Q. What duty are they to do in the behalf of the party baptized?

Ans. Papists teach, that the principal and proper act of the surety is, the
taking of the infant baptized from the hands of the priest, into his own arms
and custody. But this, though it be an action neither good nor evil; yet
considering it may as well be done by another, as by him, and the doing of it
by another, is no whit prejudicial to the end, for which such persons were
first appointed in the Church; namely, the good education of infants baptized;
it cannot be the principal duty of the surety.

But the things required of them, are especially these.

I. To be special witnesses of the admission and entrance of the party
baptized, into the church of God.

II. To bind themselves by solemn promise, in the name of the child, before
the whole church assembled, that they will be careful so soon as he comes to
years of discretion that he be brought up in the fear and service of God, and
be instructed in the principles of faith and repentance, and acquainted with
the promise made by them in his behalf, that he may frame his life thereafter.

III. To have special care of the performance of their promise; that by all
good means which God has appointed, both public, as hearing the word, and
receiving the Sacraments; and private, as exhortations and admonitions, in time
to come he shall be moved and incited to forsake the Devil, etc. and to pay his
vows made at his Baptism.

II. Q. Whether children baptized, come to be of spiritual kindred with the
whole Church, by reason of their Godfathers and Godmothers?

The Papists answer yea, and they explane their answer in this manner. Look as
by carnal propagation, a man has a natural being; so by the Sacrament of
Baptism, he has a spiritual being in the state of grace, according to which
he is born again. Now, as by carnal propagation, arises a bond of kindred
between one man and an other: so by the receiving of Baptism, there arises a
bond of kindred between the members of the Church; by means whereof, the
sureties become as Fathers and Mothers to the parties baptized.

We on the other side answer negatiuely, that persons baptized, do not by
their Baptism become spiritually a-kinne to the Church. Now that this is the
truth, and the contrary doctrine of the Papist erroneous, will appear by these
reasons.

I. The Sacrament it self, does not give a spiritual being, to any man that
is partaker thereof: neither is it of force to make a man a Christian, or a
member of the invisible Church of God. But that which does this, is the
Covenant of grace, wherein is promised remission of sins, and life eternal,
in and by Christ. And the Sacrament, is only a seal of that covenant, and no
more.

Now if baptism cannot make a Christian, much less can it give unto him, a
spiritual being in the body of Christ, and consequently any such spiritual
alliance, whereby one member may be allied unto another.

II. There is not the same reason of Baptism, that is of carnal propagation
or birth. For Baptism is not regeneration it self, but the Sacrament, that
is, the sign and seal of regeneration. And therefore though natural kindred
comes by carnal seed and birth, yet spiritual kindred, cannot come to any by
baptism. III. The scripture mentions only two sorts of kindred, and no more;
the one which arises properly, from society and communion of blood, which we
call Consanguinitie; the other, which comes by carnal conjunction of man and
woman, in the estate of marriage, commonly termed Assinitie. And besides these,
the scripture acknowledges none.

If it be said, that God is the father of all believers, and that they are his
sons and daughters, and Christ their elder brother: and therefore there must
needs be a spiritual alliance between them all. I answer, it is true: but
that this kindred has his original from baptism, and begins with that
relation, that is between the Sureties and their god-children in that
Sacrament, it is a Popish invention, devised by the wit of man, without ground
or warrant in the word of God.

III. Q. But be it, that the Papists opinion were true, then a further Question
may be moved.

Whether spiritual kindred contracted by baptism, can be a just impediment of
marriage between the witnesses themselves, or their children?

The Papists in their writings answer, that spiritual alliance, being far
more excellent Lib. sent. 4 did. 41. quest. 2. impedit contrahendum
matrimonium, and diti nit contractum.
then carnal, is of much more force, both to hinder a man from marriage,
before he marry, and to break off marriage, when it is consummate.

But this doctrine (as the former) is not warrantable. For first, they
themselves affirm, that this impediment does not depend Bell. de matr. lib. 1.
c. 30.
upon the law of nature, but upon the judgment of the Church. But the estate
of marriage, stands by Gods ordinance, who has given liberty of entrance into
it, to all men, that are out of the degrees forbidden in his law, without
exception: and therefore the laws and constitutions of men, cannot prejudice,
or take away any man's liberty in that behalf.

Secondly, all believers are brethren and sisters in Christ, and therefore are
spiritually allied each to other. Now if this spiritual alliance be polluted
by marriage, or makes marriage undertaken, a mere nullitie; then no believer
shall marry in the Lord: for Christians by this means must never match with
Christians, but with Pagans and Infidells.

Thirdly, this impediment is a superstitious invention of Popish Canonists,
only to increase the Treasury of their Church, by their multitude of
dispensations. And it seems that they are either ashamed of it, or weary to
bear the imputation thereof. For some of their own Canons are against it,
Decr. Greg. lib. 4. tit. 11. c. 1.
which do allow Godfathers children to marry, and a man to marry his
godfathers wife. And the Counsel of Trent, has drawn Council. Trid. sess. 24.
decrer. de reformatione Matrimon^, cap. 2. etc.
this affinity into a narrower compass, which before was so far enlarged,
allowing the Witnesses themselves to be man and wife, not urging all the three
kinds of kindred, but only some degrees of compaternitie.

III. Question, touching Baptism. Whether children of excommunicate persons,
which are cast out, and not holden as members of the Church, have right to
Baptism?
For better resolving of this Question, the ground of the answer is first to be
laid down, and then the answer directly to be made.

There are two texts of Scripture commonly alleged, concerning the force and
use of Excommunication. The first, is Matthew. 18. the second, is 1. Cor. 5. The
scope of them both is, to show, that the man which is excommunicated, is barred
from the kingdom of heaven. For he is not to be holden a true member of the
church, but as a Heathen and a Publican: and therefore is put out of Gods
kingdom, and delivered up to Satan. Of this weight is Excommunication.

Now in Excommunication, there are three judgments to be considered. The
first, of God: the second, of the Church: the third again, of God.

The first is, when God does hold any obstinate sinner, guilty of his offense,
and consequently guilty of condemnation, unless he repent. This is the first
sentence. The second, is the judgment of Gods church upon the offender, after
that God has holden him guilty. For the judgment of the church, follows the
judgment of God, and does indeed nothing, but pronounce the party guilty,
and subject to condemnation. And the difference between them both, is only
this; That God holds the offender guilty, and the Church declares him so to
be. Now the second judgment is not to be given absolutely, but with condition
of repentance, and so far forth, as man can judge by the fault committed, as
also by the word, which gives direction, how to discern of the impenitencie of
the sinner. The third and last judgment is Gods, whereby he ratifies and
confirms that in heaven, which the Church has done on earth: and this in
order follows the second.

This ground being laid down, I come now to the Answer.

First therefore, the parties excommunicate, are in some respects no members of
Christ's body, and in some respects they are.

They are not, in two regards. First, in that they are cut off from the
company of believers, by lawful excommunication, and so have no participation
with them, either in prayer, hearing the word, or receiving the Sacraments. The
reason is: for that the action of the Church stands in force; God ratifiing
that in heaven, which the Church does upon earth. Secondly, because by their
sin, they have (as much as in them lies) deprived themselves, of the
effectual power of Gods spirit, which might rule and gouerno them.

But in other respects they are members, as will appear, if we consider the
diverse sorts of members.

Some are members not actually, and in present, but in the eternal counsel of
God, and are to be in time when they shall be called. Thus was Paul before his
conversion, and therefore he says of himself, that God had separated him from
his mothers womb, and called him by his grace. Gal. 1. 15. Also of himself
and other beleuers he says, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God,
by the death of his son. Romans 5. 10. Some again are members, only in show
and appearance; of which sort are hypocrites, which seem by their outward
profession, to be that they are not indeed, wherein they rese^ble the wooden
leg, that is cunningly fastened to the body, but indeed is no leg, nor
part of the body, whereto it is adjoined. A third sort are lively members, which
are united unto Christ by faith, and have fellowship with God in him, being
justified, sanctified, governed and preserved by his spirit; and withal do
feel, and show forth the power of the same spirit dwelling in them. Of these
Paul speaks, Romans 8. 14. As many as are lead by the spirit of God, they are
the sons of God. The fourth sort are decayed members, which though they
belong to Gods election, and are plants truly ingrafted into the vine Christ
Jesus, yet for the present, have not a lively sense of the power, and virtue of
the spirit of Christ in them. These may fitly be resembled to the leg of a
man, or some other part, that has the dead palsy, which though it remain for
some time, without feeling, and incapable of nourishment, yet being joined to
the body, it may by virtue of some strong medicine, be recovered, and made
whole as the other.

Of this sort, are excommunicate persons. For in regard of their ingraffing,
they are true members, and can not be quite cut off from the body of Christ,
Ioh. 10. 28. though otherwise, they are not holden so to be, in a threefold
respect.

One, in regard of men, because they are excluded, from their holy communion
with the faithful, by the Churches censure. The second, in regard of God,
because that which the Church rightly binds on earth, is bound in heaven. The
third, in regard of themselves, because for a time, they want the power, and
efficacy of the Spirit, until they be thoroughly touched with repentance, and
begin (as it were) to live again.

Now, though in these respects, they be not esteemed members of the church, yet
the truth is, they are not wholly cut off, from the society of the faithful.
For the seed of faith remains in them, and that knits the bond of
conjunction with Christ, though the sense thereof be lost, until they repent.

In this case, the party excommunicate is, as a free man in bonds, who until
he get out of prison, has no use of his freedom, and yet continues a free man
still, though he remain in prison. So also the children of God, may still be
the children of God, though excluded from the congregation of the church, for
some offenses.

From this that has been said, arises the Answer to the Question propounded;
namely, that the children of such persons, as are excommunicated, are
(notwithstanding their excommunication) to be baptized, because they are
indeed, and in the judgment of charity, true members of the body of Christ,
though in some other regards, they are not in present holden so to be.

Yet further besides the former grounds, consider these reasons.

First, children of parents, that are professed members of the church, (though
cut off for a time, upon some offense committed) have right to baptism,
because it is not in the power of man, to cut them off from Christ, though they
be excommunicated. Secondly, the personal sin of the parent, may not keep
the blessing from the child: and therefore not deprive him, of participation of
the ordinance of God. Thirdly, we must always put a difference between them,
which do not make separation from the church, and yet are grievous offenders:
and open Apostataes, that join themselves with the enemies of the Church, to
the ruin and overthrow of the truth of the Gospel. Fourthly, we must put a
difference between those, that have given up their names to Christ, though
fallen grievously; and Turks, and Infidels, that are forth of the Covenant, and
never belonged to the Church. Lastly, if the mercy of God enlarge it self to
thousands, yea to infinite generations: why should man be so hard hearted, as
to make question, whether such Infants belong to the Covenant? and consequently
keep them from the Sacrament of Baptism.

Out of this Question, arises a second;

Whether children borne in fornication, have right to baptism?

Ans. They are not to be kept from it. For the wickedness of the parent, ought
not to prejudice the child, in things that belong to his salvation.

Yet in this case, some Cautions are carefully to be obscrued; as first, that
the parent hold the true faith and religion: secondly, that he be by the
Minister exhorted, to a true humiliation of himself, and to earnest repentance
for his sin committed, and that before the child be baptized. Thirdly, that
their be some appointed, to answer for the Infant, besides the parents; and to
make solemn promise openly to the Church, that it shall be carefully brought
up, and instructed in the faith. And the same is to be observed and practiced,
before the baptizing of the children of parents excommunicate.

IV. Question. How men are to make a right use of their baptism, when they
become to years?
The not observing hereof, is the cause of many sins and corruptions in the
lives of men. It is commonly holden a great fault in civil matters, for a man
not to keep his covenants. Much more is it a heinous sin before God, not to
keep the promises, and pay the vows, made unto him.

For answer therefore to the Question, we must first take this for a ground;
That baptism both for signification, force, use, and fruit, continues not for
a moment of time, but for the whole course of a man's life; It does not respect
only the time past or present, but that which is to come, yea, that whole
time, that a man has to spend, from the very act of his baptism to his death.
Again, baptism is the true Sacrament of Repentance, for remission of sins;
which being once received, remains a perpetual Mark. 1. 4. Luke 3. 3.
testimony and pledge of the everlasting covenant of God, and of the
continual washing away of sin in the blood of Christ.

This Ground premised, I come to the use of baptism, which is two fold.

The First is, that it serves to be a token, and pledge of Gods favor toward
us, and that principally three ways.

First, in that it seals and confirms to us, the free pardon and
forgiveness of our sins. Thus Cornelius was baptized of Peter, after he had
heard the Gospel preached, and received the Holy Ghost; that it might be unto
him a pledge, of the remission of his sins, Act. 10. 48. And in like manner,
does Peter exhort the converted Jews, to repent them of their sins, and to
receive the Sacrament of Baptism, as a seal and pledge of Gods mercy, in the
forgiveness thereof by Christ, Act. 2. 38.

In regard of this use, baptism is of great force, to relieve the heart in
distress. For when any child of God, feels himself laden with the burden of
his sins; the consideration and remembrance hereof, that God has pardoned
them all, and given him a special, and certain pledge of his pardon in
baptism; will serve to stay and support his soul. Yea though his sins were
of force, to make a separation between God and him. Yet remembering, that his
name is written in the Covenant of God, and that he has by Gods mercy
received the seal of the Covenant, he shall not need to be much dismayed.
When Satan tempts him to doubt of his own estate, in regard of his
corruptions; even then let him have recourse to his baptism, and think of the
earnest and pledge of Gods favor, which he has received. Let him draw out his
evidences, signed with the seal of Gods covenant, made unto him in Jesus
Christ; and that shall be sufficient to stop the mouth of Satan, and to
repel his temptations.

Secondly, Baptism is as a pledge of the virtue of Christ's death. Do you not
know, says Paul, that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have
been baptized into his death? Romans 6. 3. For they that believe, are by
baptism conformed to Christ their head, because they are by it, buried
together with him into his death. verse. 4.

This point is of excellent use in our lives. For it teaches a man, when his
own corruption moves him to sin, and he is now even in the Combat, (the
Spirit lusting against the flesh, and the flesh against the Spirit;) even then,
to call to memory his baptism, wherein it pleased God, to seal unto him the
mortificatio^ of his sin, by the power of Christ's death: and consequently to
pray earnestly unto him, for the continuance of the same power in his his
heart, for the continual crucifiing of the old man; and the utter destroying
of the body of sin, Romans 6. 6.

Thirdly, baptism is a pledge unto us, of the Life of Christ, and of our
Fellowship with him therein. For look, as he being dead in the grave, raised
himself to life, by his own power; even so, and more then so, being now in
heaven glorified, does he by the power of his Deity, raise up us his members,
from death to life, Romans 6. 4. A certain pledge whereof, he has given us in
this Sacrament. Which also affords singular comfort and joy unto a man, even
in his greatest extremity. True it is, that man by nature is dead in sin; yet
God of his mercy, seals unto him in baptism, his rising from the death of
sin, to newness of life. True it is again, that all men must die. Yet this
is our comfort, that in baptism God has sealed to us, even our rising from
the grave to life everlasting; and all by the virtue and power of Christ's
resurrection. This is a comfort of all comforts, able to uphold the soul of
man, even in the hour of death.

The second Use of Baptism is, that it serves to be a notable means, of our
death unto sin, and that three ways.

First, by putting us in mind, of mortifying the flesh, and crucifying our
own corruptions. For if we be baptized into the death of Christ, as Paul
says, Romans 6. 3. then ought we not to continue in sin, but to labor by all
means, as by prayer, by fasting, by the word preached, and by avoiding all
occasions of offense, to kill and destroy the corruption of our nature, and the
wickedness of our hearts, Gal. 5. 24.

Secondly, it causes us to dedicate our selves wholly, unto God and Christ;
remembering, that we once offered our selves to be baptized, (in the presence of
the whole congregation) in token that we should ever afterward, consecrate our
souls and bodies unto the Lord, and wholly renounce, and forsake the flesh,
the world, and the Devil.

Thirdly, it causes us to labor, to keep and maintain peace and unity with
all men; but specially with Gods people. For Baptism is a solemn testimony,
of the bond of mutual love and fellowship, both of Christ with his members,
and of the members one with another. To this end Paul says, that we are all
by one spirit, baptized into one body, 1. Cor. 12. 13. yea, and Baptism is
one of those things, whereby the unity of the Spirit is preserved in the bond
of peace, Ephesians. 4. 5.

V. Question. Whether a man falling into sin, after he is baptized, may have
any benefit of his Baptism?
Answer. He may if he repent. And the reasons are these.

First, his Indentures and Evidences remain whole, in respect of God, and his
name is not put out of the covenant. Which is otherwise in the Evide^ces of
men. For if they be once cancelled, a man cannot have his name put into them
again,

Secondly, Baptism is indeed (as has been said) the Sacrament of
Repentance; and (as it were) a plancke or board to swim upon, when a man is
in danger of the shippewracke of his soul. Therefore if a man repent, and be
heartily sorry for his sins committed, he may have recourse to his baptism,
wherein was sealed unto him, the pardon of all his sins past, present, and to
come; he standing to the order of his baptism, believing and repenting.

Thirdly, to them that fall even after Baptism, there is hope of repentance,
and consequently of the favor of God, if they be touched in heart with true
remorse, and sorrow for their offenses. For hence it was, that Paul calls the
Galatians (fallen after they had been baptized) to the remembrance of the
favor of God, promised unto them in the Covenant, and sealed in their
Baptism, Gal. 3. 3. 19. 27. In the same manner, does John call the Churches of
Asia, that had left their first love, to repentance and conversion, Apoc. 2. 5.
16. And the said John, in Ecclesiastical Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 23.
history is said, to have reclaymed a young man, who had most grievously
fallen after his Baptism.

CHAP. X.
Of the Lords Supper.

THus much concerning the Sacrament of Baptism. Now we come to the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper; concerning the use whereof, there are two principal
Questions moved.

I. Question. How far forth men have liberty, to use or not use the Lords
Supper?
For the answering hereof, I propound three Rules.

The First. Every man of years, living in the Church, and being baptized, is
bound in conscience by Gods commandment, to use the Lords supper. In the
institution of the Supper, the Lord gave a Sacramental Word; whereof there be
two parts; a Commandment, and a Promise. The Commandment is expressed in
these terms; Take, eat, drink, do ye this. And it binds all men in the
Church that are baptized, to the use of the Lords Supper.

The second Rule. Every man of years baptized, is to receive it often. 1. Cor.
11. 26. As often as ye shall drink it in remembrance of me. The reason is,
because we have need continually to feed on Christ. And herein the Lords
Supper differs from Baptism; because by Baptism, a man is once only
graffed into Christ; but being in Christ, he has need often and continually
to be fed in him, to life eternal. And this often nourishment of the
believer, is sealed unto him, by the often use of this Sacrament.

The third Rule. Every man is to receive, and use the Lords Supper, according
to the laudable custom of that Church, whereof he is a member, unless there
be a just impediment. A just impediment is that, which bars a man from the
use of the Supper, as Suspension, Contagious, and incurable sickness, Absence
upon a just and weighty cause, as when a man is in his journey, and such like.

The reason of the Rule is; first, if any man refuse to receive it, when he may
conveniently, having no just Impediment; so doing, he neglects and contemnes
the ordinance of God. Secondly, for a man to abstain, when he is called to
receive it, though happily he may be excused, in regard of some reason inwardly
known to himself; yet his abstinence is a bad example, and may give offense
to others. Thirdly, the man that may receive, and yet will not, does in effect,
suspend and withhold himself, from the benefit of this holy Sacrament.

Now these three Rules, as they serve directly to answer the Question in hand,
so they do plainly discover some errors and faults, in the practice of
sundry persons in these days. Some there be, that think it sufficient to
receive the Communion once by the year, namely at Easter time. Whereas on the
contrary, it is to be used, as often as may be; considering that it is nothing,
but the showing forth of the Lords death till he come: which is not once or
twice in the year, but often, yea continually to be remembered. Others there
are, that take liberty to themselves, to com to this Table, and abstain at
there pleasure; as if it were a thing arbitrary to themselves; which
notwithstanding the Lord has enjoined by express commandment, as has been
said.

But some allege for this their practice, that they are at variance with such
and such persons, that have done them wrong, and whom they cannot forgive; and
in this respect, they were better abstain, then come unprovided. To whom it
may be said; that their unfitness in this and other respects, ought to be a
strong motive to induce them, at least to use all holy endeavor, to prepare
themselves every day, rather then a means to keep them back. For if a man
should abstain upon every occasion of variance, coffeehouse, and
infirmity, he should never receive, and so consequently have no benefit by
this ordinance of God. Daily preparation therefore, is the more necessary,
that when they be called, and have opportunity, they may come as welcome
guestes, unto that heavenly banquet.

II. Question. How may a man rightly use the Lords Supper, to his comfort and
salvation?
Ans. Three things are required thereunto; A right preparation; a right
Receiving, and a right Use of it afterward.

Sect. 1.
That Preparation is needful, the commandment of the Apostle plainly
shows, which is directed to al Communicants without exception. 1. Cor. 11. 28,
Let a man, that is, let every man examine himself.

Now that a man may be rightly prepared, he must bring with him four several
things.

First, Knowledge of the foundation of Religion, specially of the use of both
the Sacraments. That this is necessary to Preparation, it appears by that,
which Paul requires in a good Communicant, 1. Cor. 11. 26. to wit, the showing
forth of Christ's death, which is done by confession and thanks giving; and
these two cannot be performed without knowledge.

The second thing required, is Faith For all Sacraments are seals of the
righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11. Now Faith is hereby discerned; when the
heart of the believer, contents it self only with Christ, in the matter of
salvation; and does believe, not only that there is a remission of sins in
general, but that his sins are forgiven to him, in particular.

The third, is Repentance, standing in a hearty sorrow for sins committed, in
a hatred and detestation of the same, and in a resolved purpose of amendment,
and obedience for time to come.

Here we must remember, that renewed Repentance for sins committed, is
principally required before the Sacrament. For the Apostle charge the
believing Corinthes, with unworthy receiving, because they came in their
sins, without renouation of their repentance.

The fourth, is Charity toward man. For this Sacrament is a Communion,
whereby all the receivers, jointly united together in love, do participate of
one and the same Christ. And therefore, as no man in the old law, might offer
his Sacrifice, without a forehand agreement with his brother; so no Communicant
may partake with others at this Table, without reconciliation, love, and
charity.

Now further touching Preparation, there are three Cases of Conscience to be
resolved.

I. Case. What shall a man do, if after preparation, he finds himself
unworthy?

Ans. There are two kinds of unworthiness; of an euili conscience, and of
infirmity. Unworthiness of an evil conscience is, when a man lives in any
sin, against his conscience. This we must especially take heed of. For it is
proper to the Reprobate; and he that comes to the Table of the Lord unworthily,
in this sense, questionless he shall eat his own judgment, if not
condemnation. The unworthiness of infirmity is, when a man truly repents and
believes, and makes conscience of every good duty, but yet sees and feels
wants in them all, and in regard hereof, himself unfit to the Supper. Such
unworthiness cannot justly hinder a man, from coming to this Sacrament, neither
is it a sufficient cause to make him to abstain. The reason is, because the
Lord requires not therein, perfection of faith, and repentance; but the truth
and synceritie of them both, though they be imperfect.

If it be demanded, how the truth of faith and repentance may be known? I
answer, by these notes. I. If our faith be directed upon the right object,
Christ alone. II. If there be a hungring and thirsting, after his body and
blood. III. If we have a constant and serious purpose, not to sin. IV. If
there follow a change in the life. Thus we read, that many of the Jews, in the
days of Hezekias, came to Jerusalem, and did eat the Passover, which had not
cleansed themselves, according to that which was written in the Law. And yet,
for those among them, that had prepared their whole hearts, to seek the Lord,
the text says, that God heard the prayer of Hezekias, and healed the people,
though they were not cleansed, according to the purification of the Sanctuary,
2. Chron. 30. 18, 19, 20.

II. Case. Whether it be requisite to preparation, that a man should come
fasting to this supper?

Ans. It is not necessary. For in the Primitive Church, Christians did first
feast, and at the end of their feast, received the Lords Supper. And if
receivers bring with them, attentive minds, reverent and sober hearts, it
matters not, whether they come fasting or not. The kingdom of God, stands not
in meats, and drinks, as Paul says, Romans 14. 17.

III. Case. Whether such persons, as are at contention, and go to law one with
an other, may with good conscience, come to the Lords table? The reason of the
Question is, because men think, when they go to law, that they do not
forgive.

Ans. There be three kinds of forgiveness; of revenge, of the penalty, and of
judgment. Ofreuenge, when men are content to lay aside, all hatred and
requital of evil. Of penalty, when being wronged, they are content to put
the matter up, and not proceed to revenge by inflicting punishment. Of
judgment, when a man is willing, to esteem and judge things badly done, as
well done; and to judge a bad man, no evil person, nor an enemy, though he be
an enemy.

Of these three, the first is always necessary. A man is bound in conscience,
to forgive the revenge, and leave that to the Lord, to whom Vengeance properly
belongs. But to the forgiveness of penalty and judgment, we are not always
bound. We must shun and decline injuries offered, as much as possibly we can;
but when they be offered, we may with good conscience, seek a remedy of them,
and use any lawful means, to defend our selves.

Therefore I answer to the Question thus: That if a man, going to law with an
other, forgiues him in regard of revenge, when he comes to the Lords table; he
does his duty. For doing that, he is not bound to the other, as has been
said.

Sect. 2.
The Second thing, in the right use of the Lords Supper, is the right Receiving
of it. Wherein there be two things required.

First, the renewing of our Knowledge, or General Faith. And then secondly,
the renewing of our Special Faith in Christ.

Let the reason of both be observed. This Sacrament co^taines many particular
Signs; as not only the bread and wine, but the actions about the same. The
Signs may be thus distinguished. Some of them are representing signs; some
are signs applying.

Representing signs are such, as do lively set forth unto us Christ, with his
benefits; as the bread and the wine, the breaking, and the pouring. Applying
are those, that do appropriate the same; as, the giving, and receiving of the
bread and wine. The first sort serves properly to renew our knowledge: The
second, to confirm the saine by application.

Now answerable to the scope of the Sacrament, must be our right Receiving,
which consists, in renewing of our knowledge and faith, in the mystery
thereof.

Our Knowledge is renewed principally, by meditation in the use of the Supper,
after this manner.

First, when we see two signs to be received, we must call to mind that
Christ is our perfect Savior, that is, both bread and water Heb. 7. 25.
of life.

Secondly, when we behold the bread and wine, set apart by the Minister, and
consecrated, by repeating the promise, and prayers made for that end; we must
remember, that Christ was ordained and appointed by God, to be our Mediator
and Savior. Ioh. 6. 27. Act. 2. 23. 36.

Thirdly, when we see the bread broken, and wine powered out; we are to meditate
of Christ, that was crucified for us, and broken, both by the first death, and
pains of the second, whereby life and righteousness was procured unto us.

Fourthly, the giving of the elements into the receivers hands, offers unto our
meditation, thus much; That God does truly and really give Christ, with his
merits and efficacy, to every believing receiver.

On the otherside, our Faith is renewed, by apprehension and application, in
this manner. When the Minister gives the bread and wine, and the communicant
receives them; at the same time, are we to lift up our hearts to heaven, to
apprehend Christ by faith; believing him, with all his benefits to be ours;
that he was made man for us, that he suffered, and died for the remission of
our sins. For these outward symbolicall or sacramental actions, serve to no
other end, but to signify unto us, these inward actions of the mind and will,
whereby we apprehend and receive Christ, to our salvation.

Here by the way, two Cases are propounded.

I. Case. What is to be done, if a man, after often receiving, still doubts,
whether he has faith or no?

Ans. He must strive against doubting, and endeavor to believe; being heartily
sorry for the weakness and infirmity of his faith; And let him withal consider
and remember, that God has not only given his promise, but set apart this
Sacrament, to be a special sign and pledge of his mercy contained in the
promise, for the upholding and strengthening of man's faith.

But some man will say; Mine endeavor is nothing, if doubting prevail. Ans.
It is not so. For if a man can be heartily sorry for his infirmity; if he
strive to believe; if in heart he hungreth and thirsts after Christ, faith is
begun, and he in some sort does apprehend Christ. The poor beggar by the
high way side, enjoys the alms that is given him, though he receive it with
a lame and leprous hand. The stomach that lothes physic, if it receives into
it at the first, but one drop of the potion prescribed, and that in very
weak and fainting manner, it will be able at length to take benefit by a
greater quantity, and in the mean time it receives good. The man that is in
close prison, if he sees but one little beam of the Sun, by a small
crevisse; by that very beam he has use of the Sun, though he sees not the
whole body of the Sun. In like manner, though our faith, the hand of our
soul, be mingled with weakness and corruption; though we feel never so little
measure of Gods grace in us; yea though our knowledge be never so small; yet it
is an argument, that the Spirit of God begins to work in our hearts, and that
we have by Gods mercy, begun to lay hold on Christ.

It will be said further; If I feel not Christ given unto me by God, I do
not, nay, I cannot believe. Answ. In Nature it is true, that Experience
begins first, and then follows Assurance; but in Spiritual and Divine
things, there is a contrary course to be taken. For here, we must begin with
faith, and in the first place, simply believe Gods promises; and afterward we
come, by the goodness of God, to feel and have experience of his mercy. This
point was notably practiced by Iehosaphat, who being in a great extremity, and
seeing no way to escape, practiced his faith in the first place, and said,
Lord, we know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee. 2. Chro. 20. 12.
And the like he taught the people at the same time, ver. 20. Put your trust in
the Lord, and ye shall be assured. Thus Abraham is said, above hope, to believe
under hope the promise of God, even against sense, reason, and experience, Romans
4. 18.

II. Case. If in the very instant of receiving, a man feel his heart so hard,
that he cannot lift it up unto God, what is then to be done?

Ans. First, hardness of heart is two fold, sensible, and insensible. The
Insensible hardness of heart, is a great and dangerous judgment. But the
Sensible and felt hardness, which is in Gods children, and which they feel and
bewail in themselves, is rather a blessing, then a curse. Of this, the people
of God complained, Esaias. 63. 17. And it must not discourage any Communicant,
but rather comfort him, because it is a sign of grace. For if there were no
grace in the heart, corruption and hardness could not be felt.

Secondly I answer, that the benefit of the Sacrament, is not tied to the very
instant of receiving; but if before and after, a man lift up his heart to God,
he shall find comfort, though for the present, he has not so lively sense and
feeling thereof, as he desires. This always provided, that the same party be
displeased with himself, that he cannot do that which he would, and ought,
nor in that measure, that is required. And such a one, must consider this to
his comfort, that though he do not apprehend Christ, yet Christ apprehends
and accepts him.

Sect. 3.
In the Third place; After the receiving of Right use after Receiving.
the Sacraments, two things are required.

First, that Thanks be given unto God, not only in word, but in every action
of our life, for Christ, and all his benefits. Secondly, that not only for the
present, but ever afterward, still we renew our faith, repentance, and
obedience.

But what is a man to do, if after receiving, he find no comfort? Ans. First
he must examine, whether he has truly believed and repented, yea or no; If he
has not, then the fault is in himself, and not in Gods ordinance. If he has,
let him not be dismayed, for the joy of the Spirit is sown in his heart; and
though it lie hid for a time, yet at length it will show it self. Psalm. 97.
11.

CHAP. XI.
Of Adoration.

THe Fourth Head of the outward worship of God, is Adoration; wherein we
consider two things. First, what it is? Secondly, what be the Questions
propounded concerning it?

Sect. 1.
For the former. Adoration in general, is an outward Worship, signifying and
testifying What Adoration is.
the inward worship of the heart. More specially, by it we must conceive, the
bowing of the head, and knee; the bending and prostrating of the body; the
lifting up of the hands, eyes, and such like.

Adoration is twofold; Religious, or Civil.

Religious Adoration, is that worship of God, in which Religion and Godliness is
exercised, expressed, and signified. In it there be two things always joined
together, and yet distinctly to be considered. The first and principal, being
the foundation of all the rest, is the intention of the mind, whereby God is
conceived, as an absolute and omnipotent Lord, knowing all things, yea the
heart of man: hearing the prayers of all men, in all places, at all times; the
author, preserver, and giver of all good things. The second, depending upon the
former, is the Outward prostrating of the body, as the bowing of the knee, and
such like, for this end, to testify our subjection unto God, as our absolute
Lord, etc. This is it, which makes Adoration a true religious worship.

The other kind of Adoration, is Civil, pertaining to the second Table,
termed by some sociall; because it is the adoration or worship, that
fellow creatures give one to another. And this (as the former) has in it two
things. The one is, the Intention of him, that performs it, which must be
this; That the creature worshipped, is induced with excellent gifts of God; Or,
that he has a power of government over us. For one of these two, is ever the
Ground of Civil Adoration. The other is, the Action or Outward Gesture of the
body; in token that the creature worshipped, is endued with excellent gifts,
and graced with authority before-named: Here we must remember, that the bowing
of the body, etc. and in general, all bodily gesture performed, is one and
the same, both in Religious, and Civil worship; and the distinction stands
only in the intent of the mind.

Sect. 2.
Now the Questions about Adoration, are two.

1. Question. To what things is Adoration due, and in what manner?
Ans. We must distinguish the things that are; and they be of three sorts, or
ranks. In the first rank, comes God the Creator; in the second, the
Creatures: in the third, the Work of the creatures.

For the first; Adoration that is due to God the Creator, must not be sociall,
(for we are not Gods mates and companions,) but only Religious. Yea, all
religious worship is due to God, and to him alone; which I prove thus. The
Devil when he tempted our Savior, desired no more of him, but the prostrating
of his body; Yet upon this ground, that he was the giver and disposer of all
the kingdoms of the earth, But Christ denies it, and answers, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and HIM ONLY shall thou serve, Math. 4. 10. Again,
the very scope of Religious Adoration, is to acknowledge the Godhead, and the
properties thereof. And hereupon, it must be given to God alone, and
consequently not to the creature, unless we will acknowledge a Godhead in the
creature.

Here we are to remember two Caueats, touching Religious Adoration.

First, if Adoration be given to the true God, with a false and erroneous
intention, it makes him an Idol. For example; If the body be bowed, with this
intent, to worship God out of the Trinity, as the Turk does; or if he be
worshipped out of the Son, with the Jew; thus doing, we worship not the true
God, but an Idol. The reason is, because God is so to be conceived of us, as
he has manifested himself in his own word, and no otherwise. If otherwise,
God is not conceived, but an Idol or fiction of the brain; and the Adoration
is not done to God, but to the Idol.

Secondly, to worship God in, at, or before an Image, is Idolatry and
superstion; and God so worshipped, is made an Idol. For he that thus worshipps
him, binds his presence, operation, and grace, to those places, to which God
never bound himself, or his presence, etc. God has not appointed Images, to
be pledges of these things, either by promise, or commandment. Hence it
follows, that the man, which worships God, otherwise then he would be
worshipped, or looks to be heard, when God will not be heard, is an Idolater.
Again, God expressly forbids the the worship of his Majesty, in, at, or
before any creature in heaven or in earth. Deuteronomy. 4. 16. 17. 18. 19.

But the Idolater in excuse of his sin, is wont to pretend many things.

First, that when he worshippeth, he intends not to worship the Image, but
God in the Image. To this we answer, that it matters not what his meaning is.
For let him intend what he will, if God detesteth that manner of worship, it
is not to be tendered unto him, in any sort. The Israelites worshipped not the
calfe it self, but God in the calse, Exodus 32. 8. Yet then Moses says, that
they worshipped an Idol.

Secondly he alleges, that in the old Testament, God was worshipped before
the Arc; and that there he promised to hear the prayers of his people. Ans.
The reason is not alike. For they had an express commandment, given them by
God, touching Adoration before the Arc; and a promise, that they should be
accepted and heard. But the Idolater has no such commandment, or promise.

Thirdly, he obiecteth, that Subjects do kneel down before the chair of
estate in the absence of the King or Queen, in token of subjection due unto
them; and therefore much more may they to the Images of God, and Saints in
heaven glorified. Answ. This reason is also insufficient. For the kneeling
before the chair of estate, is a mere civil Testimony of civil worship,
and being referred to this end, to show loyalty and subjection to lawful
Princes, it stands in force by the commandment of God. But there is no such
warrant from Gods word, for bowing to Images; neither is it his will, that they
should be tokens, and pledges of his presence.

The second sort of things that be, are the creatures, which must be
distinguished into four kinds. I. Wicked Spirits. II. Good Angels. III.
Living men. IIII. Men departed.

Touching wicked Spirits or Devils, the Question is, What is the Adoration that
is due unto them?

Ans. They are the enemies of God, and accursed of him; therefore no honor or
service belongs unto them, by his will and appointment. And for that very
cause, we are to have no dealing with them at all. Nay, we are utterly to
renounce, and abandon, whatsoever things come from the Devil, or his
instruments; as namely all Spells, Charms, Enchantments, etc. which serve to
the working of wonders, and yet have no such virtue given them from God for
that end, either by creation, nature, word, or institution.

Now concerning the good Angels; If they did now appear unto us, and we had
certain knowledge thereof, we might adore them. But how? only with civil and
sociall worship. For so we read Genesis 19. 1. that Lot seeing two Angels
coming toward Sodom, rose up to meet them, and bowed himself with his face
to the ground. By which example it appears, that though Angels may be adored,
yet not with Religious, or that which is mixed with Religious worship, but with
worship purely and merely civil. Whereupon it was, that the Angel refused
the worship done unto him by John, saying, See thou do it not: I am thy fellow
servant, and one of thy brethren, etc. Rev. 19. 10. I add moreover, that since
at this day, the Angels appear not unto us; we may not worship them at all,
either in civil or religious manner, albeit we must ever have a reverent
estimation of them.

As for living men, Adoration merely civil is only due unto them, and that
in respect of the gifts of God, which we see to be in them, as also of their
authority and place, which they have amongst men. This is expressly enjoined
in the fist Commandment, Honor thy father, etc. and confirmed also by the
example of Abraham, who stood up, and bowed himself, before the people of the
land of the Hittites, Genesis 23. 7. Provided always, that this Adoration, be
according to the laudable custom of the country, where they live.

But for worship, either simply religious, or mixed, it is in no sort to be
yielded them. Thus Peter (when Cornelius met him, and fell down at his feet)
refused to accept of the honor done unto him; which notwithstanding was not a
divine, but a mixed kind of worship, performed unto Peter, in a reverent
opinion of his person, as being more then an ordinary man, Act. 10. 25, 26.
In like manner, Mordecai the Jew denied to worship Haman, because the honor
which the King appointed to be given unto him, was an excessive honor, having
some divine worship in it, such as was done to himself. Of the same sort, is
the kissing of the Popes feet, which indeed is civil worship, but mixed with
religious. For it is tendered unto him, as to the Vicar of Christ, and one that
cannot err; the like to which, is not done to any Emperor or Potentate on
earth.

Lastly, touching dead men, or Saints departed, as Peter, Paul, and the rest;
all the worship we owe unto them, is no more, but a reverent estimation of
their persons, and imitation of their ^es. Religious or civil Adoration due
unto them, we acknowledge none; because neither we have to deal with them, nor
they with us. Therefore Romish Adoration of them we renounce, as flat
Idolatry; considering it gives unto them a Divinity, making them present in
all places, to know our hearts, and hear our prayers at all times, which is
the prerogative of God alone.

Now for unreasonable creatures, no Adoration at all appertains to them, but
only a reverent, and holy use of them. For Adoration, is a sign of Subjection
of the inferior to the superior; but man is their superior, and therefore he
is to do them no worship or service. And hereupon, we justly condemn the
Adoration of the relics of Saints, of the bread and wine in the Sacrament,
etc.

The Third sort of things, is the Work of the Creature, to wit, Images. Where
if it be demanded, what Adoration is due to them? I answer, None at all.
Reasons. 1. We have an express inhibition to the contrary, in the third
Commandment, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, etc. 2. The
superior must perform no adoration to the inferior. Now though it should be
granted, that they were the Images of God, yet man is a more excellent Image
then they, and they are inferior not only to him, but even to the baser sort
of creatures. The wo^e is one of the basest creatures upon the earth, yet it is
a work of God. The Image is a work not of God, but of man. Man therefore may
as well in all reason, and better, worship the worm, then the Image.

CHAP. XII.
Of outward Confession.

THe fifth Head of Gods outward worship, is Confession. I mean not the
Ordinary or Ecclesiastical Confession, but that which is made before the
Adversary. Concerning which, there be many Questions commonly made.

I. Question. Whether Confession of faith be necessary, and when?
Ans. That Confession is necessary, it appears by manifest testimonies of
Scripture. 1. Pet. 3. 15. Be ready to give an answer always to every man,
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you. Here is a flat
Commandment for Confession. Again, Romans 10. 9, 10. If thou shall confess
with thy mouth, and believe with thy heart, thou shall be saved. For with the
heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses to
salvation. And, Mark. 8. 38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, in this
adulterous generation, of him shall the son of man be ashamed also, when he
comes in the glory of his Father, with his holy Angels. This is granted of
all Divines, save only of some pestilent Heretics.

The second part of the Question is, When Confession is to be made?

For answering whereof, this must be remembered for a Ground, that there is a
distinction to be made, between Commandments affirmative, and negative. The
Negative binds at all times, and to all times. For it is not lawful at any
time, for a man to do evil. The Affirmative binds at, and in all times, but
not to all times. For it commands a duty to be done, which nevertheless is
not at all times to be done. For example: To give alms, is prescribed by an
affirmative commandment, and yet alms are to be given only at fit times, and
occasions. Hereupon it pleased the Lord, to propound part of the Moral Law, in
negative terms, because negatiues are of greater force. Now Confession;
being commanded not by a negative, but by an affirmative commandment, we are
not bound thereunto, at, and to all times, but when just occasion is offered.

What then (may some say) are the especial times, in which, Confession is to
be made before the Adversary?

Ans. There are two principally, to which all the other may be reduced. The
first is, when we are examined touching our Religion, by them that are in
authority, as by Magistrates, Princes, Judges, etc. For at such time we are
lawfully called to make confession of our faith, and may do it with boldness.
Thus much the place before-named imports, where we are enjoined to be ready
to give an account, etc. 1. Pet. 3. 15. that is, not to every Examiner; but to
those alone, who have power and authority given them by God, for that purpose.
And the same is implied in Christ's speech to his Apostles, Math. 10. 19. And ye
shall be brought before gouerners and Kings for my sake, in witness to them and
to the Gentiles. And in this case, not to make profession of our faith, is in
effect to deny Christ; to scandalize the Church, and greatly to prejudice the
truth. The second time of Confession is, when in the want thereof, Gods glory
is directly impeached, the salvation of men hindered, and our neighbor
offended. And then we are necessarily to confess, though no examination be
made.

If it be here asked, How we may be able to discern of this time? The answer
is; by Christian wisdom, which teaches us, that when by our silence, wicked
men are emboldened to speak evil of Gods word, and weak ones occasioned to
fall from the faith, then is the fittest time, to stand in the defense and
maintenance of the truth. Out of these two times and cases, Christians have
liberty not to confess, but may lawfully conceal their faith; nay (which is
more) their persons; by changing their habit and attire, upon this ground,
because the affirmative commandment does not always bind.

Here it is objected. First, that we are saved only by faith, and therefore
confession is not necessary? Ans. We must consider faith two ways. First, as
an instrument created in the heart, whereby we apprehend, and apply Christ with
his benefits to our selves, for our justification and salvation. Secondly,
faith must be considered more largely, as it is a way, to bring us to life
everlasting. Now in the first acceptio^, it may truly be said, that we are
saved by faith alone. For there is no grace of God, where by we take hold of
Christ, but faith. But if we take it in the second sense, as a way to life,
then we may truly say, that it alone saves not, but hope, love, repentance,
good works, and all divine virtues. In this sense Paul says, we are saved by
hope, Romans 8. 24. because by it we wait for our salvation; and hope is the way,
in which all must walk that look to be saved. Again he says; Momentany
afflictions do work unto us an eternal weight of glory. 2. Cor. 4. 17. But
how? Not as causes, but as ways, signs, and marks, that give us direction to
our iourneies end. And thus, The woman is said to be saved by bearing of
Children, 1. Tim. 2. 15. Which bearing and bringing up of children, is no
cause, but only a way wherein she must constantly walk to glory. And though
in man's judgment, that may seem a way of misery and death, yet indeed it is
otherwise, if the Children continue in faith, love, and holiness with
modesty. Again, the Apostle James says, that Abraham's faith wrought together
with his works, Iam. 2. 2. which are likewise not to be understood, as working
causes, but as testmonies and evidences, declaring and manifesting that he was
just in the sight of God.

Secondly it is objected, that confession of our faith to God is sufficient.
For so Saint Paul seems to say; Romans 14. 22. Have thou faith? have it with thy
self before God: Therefore confession before man is not needful. Ans. The
Apostle speaks not of that faith, whereby we are justified and saved, but of
that which stands in a persuasion, of the use or not use of things
indifferent. And this a man may keep to himself, that is, he may so use it,
as he shall not thereby offend his brother. That commandment was given by Paul
for those times, when men were not fully persuaded of the use of God creatures,
as meats, drinks etc. but to these times it is not.

II. Question. Whether it be lawful for a man being urged, to go to
Idol-seruice, and hear Mass, so as he keep his heart to God?
Ans. It is not, and I prove it by the scope of the eigth and tenth Chapters of
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, where the Apostle disputes the Question,
whether the Corinthians might go into the temples of Idols, and eat of meat
offered unto them, in the mean time, not partaking with Idolaters in the
worship of the Idols? This he avouches to be utterly unlawful, and for that
purpose tells the Corinthians, That they cannot drink of the cup of the
Lord, and of the cup of Devils. Now as this was unlawful for them, so it is
unlawful for any Protestant, to go to any Popish assembly, to hear Mass.
Again, God is the Creator of the Body and Soul; therefore he is to be
worshipped in both; and consequently we rob him of his due, when we reserve
our hearts to him, and give our bodies to Idols. To this purpose Paul
exhorts the Romans, to give up their bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and
acceptable unto God, Romans 12. 1. Which place utterly condemns the error of
some, who think, that God will be content with the soul, and that they may
bestow there body, in the service of the Devil.

But against this Doctrine sundry things are alleged. The first is, the
example of Naaman, 2. Kings 5. 18. 19. who said to the Prophet, when I bow my
self in the house of Rimmon, the Lord be merciful to me in this thing. To
whom Elisha answered, go in peace. Here (say some) the Prophet gives leave to
Naaman, to worship in an Idols Temple.

To this, there be sundry answers given. Some affirm, that Naaman speaks
only of Civil, and Politic worship; and not of Religious. For his office was
to kneel down in the Temple, that the King might lean upon his shoulder, when
he worshipped the Idol. And Naaman makes open protestation, v. 7. that he will
worship no God, but the God of Israel.

Others answer, and that more truly, that Naaman does acknowledge it a sin,
to go to the house of Rimmon, and therefore he craves pardon for it, at the
hands of God, twice together, ver. 18. and withal makes a vow, that he will
thenceforth offer, neither burnt offering, nor sacrifice, to any other God,
save only to the Lord, and hereunto Elisha answers, Go in peace.

Yet further it is answered, that Naaman requesteth the Prophet, to pray for
him, that he might be constant in the service of the true God. And (in case he
were drawn against his purpose, by humane frailty, to bow again before
Rimmon, with his King;) that the Lord in mercy would pardon his offense. And
to this the Prophet yields, saying, Go in peace. As if he should say, Go
to; I will pray for thee, to this end and purpose. This text therefore gives
no warrant for bodily presence, in Idolatrous assemblies.

The second Objection. Iehu openly professed the worship of Baal, and yet he
dissembled, meaning nothing less: 2. king. 10. 18. And the Lord commends him,
for his diligent execution of that, which was right in his eyes, verse. 30.

Ans. Iehu is commended, not for his dissembling, but for his diligence in
destroying Achabs house, his religion, and the Priests, with all that belonged
unto them; though in other matters belonging to the service of God, he departed
not from the sins of Jeroboam.

The third objection. Dan. 3. 6. Nebuchad-nezzar made a decree, that whosoever
would not fall down and worship the golden Image, should the same hour be
cast into the midst of an hot fiery furnace. Now we do not read, that any
more refused to obey but three, and therefore it seems, that Daniel did worship
the Image, as well as others.

Ans. Daniel was not accused as the three children were, and for that cause,
there is no mention made of his refusal. Again, put the case he had been
accused, yet the King took no knowledge of his accusation, because he was in
favor, both with him, and the people.

The fourth Objection. Paul together with four men, that had made a vow,
yielded to purify himself, according to the law of Moses, because he would
not offend the weak Jews, Act. 21. 24. And yet that Law concerning
purification, as also the whole body of Ceremonies, was abrogated in the death
of Christ. Now if he might do that, which was unlawful, for the avoiding of
offense; why may not a man go to Mass, and so prevent the scandal, which may
be taken on the behalf of the Papists?

Ans. It is true, that there was an end put unto the Ceremonial law by
Christ's death; yet it was not at the first wholly to be abolished, but by
little and little. Again the use of ceremonies, remained as a thing
indifferene in it self, till the Temple of Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus,
and the Church of the New Testament thoroughly planted. And till both these were
accomplished, the use of the Ceremonial law was no sin; provided, that it
were not holden, or urged, as a thing necessary to salvation.

Now whereas it is said, that we may be present at the Mass, for the avoiding
of offense; it may further be answered: first, that we are to do our duties,
though men be never so much offended: for it was the rule of Christ in like
case, Let them alone, they be the blind leaders of the blind, Matthew. 15. 14.
Secondly, we ought not to do evil, that good may come thereof.

The fifth Objection. The Mass is Gods ordinance, appointed by Christ, though
now it be corrupted by men. Ans. It is a most damnable Idol, yea worse then any
Idol of the Gentiles; and the adoration performed therein, is most abominable,
and has more affinity with gross Gentilisme, then with the Institution of
our Savior Christ.

III. Question. Whether any man, especially a Minister, may with good
conscience fly in persecution? and if he may fly, when?
Sect. 1.
This Question consists of two parts. Whether it be lawful to flies
Touching the first. Sundry men are of opinion, that it is utterly unlawful
to fly in persecution; as Tertullian, who has written a whole book of this
argument: and besides him, certain Heretics, named Circumcelliones, in that
part of Afrike, which we now call Barbarit, and some also of the sect of the
Anabaptists. But the truth is, that sometimes it is lawful to fly, though not
always. For proof whereof, consider these reasons.

First, Christ's commandment, Matthew. 10. 23. When they persecute you in one
city, fly into an other. If it be said, that this commandment was limited
to the times, wherein the Aposties preached in Iewry, and therefore is
temporary. I answer, No; for there cannot any text of Scripture be brought,
to show that it was ever yet repealed. And the Apostles (who had received this
commandment, even after Christ's ascension, and the giving of the holy Ghost,)
being persecuted, did fly from one place to another, as we may read, Act. 9.
2. Cor. 11. If it be alleged, that if this be a commandment to fly, then
all must ^^ie; I answer again, that though the commandment be general to
all persons, and therefore every Christian may lawfully shun apparent danger:
yet the same is particular, in regard of circumstances, of time and place. For
though all may fly, yet there be some places and times, wherein men may not use
that liberty, as shall appear afterward.

The second reason, is taken from the example of many worthy men recorded in
Scripture. Jacob the Patriarch fled from the presence of his brother Esau into
Haran, to Laban, Genesis 27. and again, from thence to the land of his fathers.
Genesis 31. Moses, after he had slain the Aegiptian, fled out of Egypt into
Madian, where he lived 40. years, Exodus 2. And this was no rash flight, but a
work of faith, Heb. 11. 27. Obadiah the governor of Ahabs house, hid a
hundredth men of the Lords Prophets, by fifty in a cave, and fed them with
bread and water, when Iezabel would have destroyed them, 1. King. 18. 13. Eliah
being in fear of his life, fled from Iezabel into Mount Horeb, 1. King. 19. 3.
Again, in the N. Testament, our Savior Christ being in danger, withdrew
himself, John 10. 39. and that sundry times, till the hour of his passion was
come. Paul, when the Jews took counsel together to kill him, was let down
by the brethren in a basket through a wall in Damascus. Act. 9. 25. And when
the Grecians went about to slay him, he was brought by the brethren to Cesarea
and sent to Tarsus, ver. 29. 30. Again, being in danger, he used Christian
policy to save himself. For, by saying he was a Pharisee, he made a division
between his accusers, the Pharisees and Sadduces, and so escaped. Act. 23. 6.
7. And if that were lawful for him to do, then is it also lawful for a man,
by flight to save himself, in case of danger, whether he be a private man, or
a Pastor.

Yet for the better clearing of the Answer, some allegations to the contrary,
are to be examined.

Objection I. Persecution is a good thing, and that which is good, may not be
eschewed. Ans. Good things, are of two sorts. Some are simply good, in, and by
themselves; as virtues, and all moral duties: and these are not to be
eschewed. Some again, are good only in some respects. Of this sort are things
Indifferent, which he neither commanded nor forbidden, but are good or evil,
in respect of circumstances. And these may be eschewed, unless we know that
they be good for us. Now persecution being of this kind, that is to say, not
simply good, but only by accident, may be avoided; because no man can say that
it is good or bad for him.

Object. II. Persecution is sent of God, for the trial and good of his Church.
Ans. First, evil things sent of God, may be avoided, if he show a mean or
way, how they may be avoided. For example: God sends sickness, famine, the
plague and sword; he sends also means, and remedies for the preventing, and
remoouing of them, as physic and food, etc. And these we may lawfully use
for the said purposes: and in like manner may persecution be avoided, if God
offer means of escape. Secondly, there is a twofold Will of God, his revealed,
and his secret will. By his Revealed will, he has appointed, that in case of
present danger, when means of escape be offered, they may be used. Now
because they that fly lawfully, are assured of Gods revealed will, therefore
in obedience thereunto, they use the means to save themselves from danger. As
for his Secret will, because it is unknown, and therefore uncertain unto us,
we may not rashly presume thereof, and against his express will, refuse the
means offered, but use them rather, till God reveal the contrary.

Object. III. To fly in persecution, is a kind of denial of Christ, and
against confession: he therefore that flies, seems to make no confession, but
rather to deny Christ.

Ans. Christian confession is double, open, or implicit. Open confession is,
when a man boldly confesses his faith, before the Adversary, even to the
death. This is the greatest and highest degree of confession; and in it the
holy Martyrs in former times, continued even to the loss of their lives,
undergoing the punishment of death, inflicted upon them by the Adversaries of
Christ Jesus, for the maintenance of the truth. Implicit is, when a man to
keep his Religion, is content to forsake his country, friends, and goods.
This is a second degree, inferior to the former, and yet it is a true
Confession, acceptable to God. And under this kind, comes Flight in
persecution. Whence it appears, that lawful flight in times of danger, is no
denial of Christ, nor yet against Confession. For sometimes it pleases God,
to call men to profess his name and truth openly, by suffering: sometimes
again, not openly by suffering, but by flying: and this latter way, though it
be not so high a degree, as is the former, yet it is indeed and in truth, in
the measure, a true profession of Christ, and pleasing unto God.

Object. IV. Our Savior Christ commands us, Fear not them that can kill the
body, Matthew. 10. 28. Now if a man must not fear them, then he must not fly.

Ans. The text speaks not of all fear, but of such fear, as tends to
Apostasy, and causes men to renounce faith, and good conscience. Again, it
speaks of that fear, whereby man fears man more then God. Thirdly, it
speaks of such fear, as by which a man is urged to tempt God, by doing some
thing that is repugnant to his will, and that out of his calling. Now when the
Question is of Flight in persecution, we understand not such a flight, as
tends to Apostasy, or argues the fear of man, more then of God, or that is
repugnant to Gods will; but that alone, whereby we use the means offered,
according to his appointment; least we should seem to tempt him, and bring
upon our selves unnecessary danger. And thus the first part of the Question,
is answered.

Sect. 2.
The second is, concerning the Time; when a man may fly, Minister, or other?
And for better resolution thereof, we are to remember, that there be eight
Conditions required in Christian Flight, especially that, which pertaines to
the Minister.

The first is, if there be no hope of doing good, by his abode in that place,
where the persecution is. But while he conceiues any hope of doing good, by
teaching preaching, or otherwise, he may not fly. This, the Minister shall
easily: discern in Christian wisdom. To this purpose Paul, Act. 18. 10.
having a while preached at Corinth, and finding that the Jews detested him,
and his ministry, intended a present departure thence. But the Lord appearing
unto him, by night in a vision, warned him to stay: for (says he) I have much
people in this city: that is, many that are to be converted, and brought unto
the faith. Every Minister in his place, must have a special care of furthering
Gods kingdom, whether it be by flying, or not flying.

The second Condition. Consideration must be had, whether the persecution be
personal, or public. Personal is that, which is directed against this, or
that man's person. Public, which is raised against the whole Church. If it be
directed against the person of the Pastor, he may use his liberty. For it may
be, that his flight will bring peace to the Ch^.

But what if the people will not suffer him to fly? Ans. They should be so
far, from hindering of him in this case, that they ought rather to succor
and relieve him. Thus, when Demetrius had raised a tumult against Paul, under
pretense of Diana, and he would have presented himself unto the people, in the
common place; the Disciples suffered him not, Act. 19. 30. And what care they
had of his preservation, the same ought the people to have of their Pastor, in
case of like peril. But, if the persecution be common to the whole Church,
then he is not to fly. For it is necessary, at such times especially, that
those which are strong, should support and confirm the weak.

The third Condition. If there be in the Pastor a moderation of mind. For he
must take heed of these two extremities, that he be neither overcome with
excessive fear, nor through overmuch confidence, run headlong into apparent
danger. And that he may avoid these extremities, he must first pray unto God,
for wisdom, courage, and constancy: and secondly, use the consent and advise
of the Church, for his direction in this behalf; that all things may be done
in wisdom.

The fourth Condition of lawful flight is, that the Minister withdraw himself
only for a time, and not utterly forsake his charge, and calling. Yea, if he
be principally aimed at in the persecution, he may lawfully go apart; and it
is the duty of the Church also, to see him conuaied away in safety, till the
persecution be over. And thus doing, he neither forsakes the Church, nor his
calling; but only uses the means of his preservation, for the keeping of
faith, and a good conscience. This warrant, our Savior gives to his Apostles,
Matthew. 10. 23. When they persecute you in one city, fly into another. The
end of that commandment was, that the Apostles might preserve themselves in
safety, till they had preached the Gospel, to all the cities of Israel, as the
next words do declare.

The fifth Condition. If after due trial and examination, he find not himself
sufficiently armed with strength, to resist or bear the extremity. For then
he may retire himself, into some place of safety; where he may live to the
glory of God, keeping faith and a good conscience.

The sixth Condition is, If he be expelled, or banished by the Magistrate,
though the cause be vniuft. For subjection is simply to be yielded, to the
punishments and corrections of Magistrates, though we do not always tender
Obedience to their commandments.

The seventh is, If God offer a lawful means, and way of escape; and does
(as it were) open a door, and give just opportunity to fly. In this Case not
to fly, (especially if he have not strength sufficient to stand out) is a
tempting of God.

The eight condition. If the danger be not only suspected, surmised, and seen
a far off; but certain and present. Otherwise the Pastor falls into the
sin of Jonah, who fore-casted dangers in his calling, and therefore prevented
them by flying to Tarsus.

These conditions being observed, it may be lawful both for Pastor and people
to fly in times of persecution.

Sect. 3.
In the next place it may be demanded, When a man may fly?
When a Pastor, or other may not fly?

For answer hereunto, the Signs of unlawful flight are to be considered, and
they are principally four.

The first is, when God puts into a man's heart, the Spirit of courage and
fortitude, whereby he is resolved to abide, and stand out against the force of
all enemies. Thus Paul, Act. 20. 22. went bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem.
Where, though he knew that bonds and afflictions did abide him, yet he would
not be dissuaded, but uttered these words of resolution. I pass not at all,
neither is my life dear unto my self, so that I may fulfill my course with
joy, and the ministration, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify
the Gospel of the grace of God. This motion of the Spirit is not ordinary,
yet in the time of hot persecution, it has been found, in many worthy
instruments of Gods glory, as may be seen in the Histories of sundry Martyrs,
in the days of Queen Mary. But one especially, (of whom I was credibly
informed) that having this motion, not to stand out, and yet flying: for that
very act, felt such a sting in his conscience, that he could never have peace
till his death.

The second sign is, when a man is apprehended, and under the custody of the
Magistrate. For then he is not to fly, because he must, in all his
sufferings, obey the Magistrate.

Here a Question is moved, Whether a man that is imprisoned, may break prison?

To this, Popish Schoolmen answer, that he may; if the cause of his
imprisonment be unjust. And suitable to this assertion, is the common practice
of Papists. We on the contrary say, and that truly, that no man being in
durance, may use any unlawful or violent means to escape; for we may not, at
any hand, resist the Magistrate in our sufferings. Servants are commanded, to
subject themselves with patience, unto the unjust corrections of their
Masters, 1. Pet. 2. 19. And this reason is given; For it is thankeworthy, if a
man, for conscience toward God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully. The
Apostles, being in prison, used no means to deliver themselves; but when the
Angel of the Lord had opened the prison doors, then they came forth, and not
before, Act. 5. 19. And that which Peter and the other Apostles did, must
Pastors and other men also do, in the like case, for Religion sake.

The third sign, When a man is bound by his calling and ministry, so as in
it, he may glorify God and do good to the church by preaching; the^ he must
not fly. For, the duties of a man's calling, must be preferred before any
worldly thing whatsoever, whether body, goods; friends or life, etc.

The fourth sign. When God in his providence, cuts off all lawful means and
ways of flying, he does then (as it were) bid that man stay and abide. I
say, lawful means; because we may not use those that are unlawful, but
rather rest contented, and resign our selves wholly to Gods will and pleasure.
We must not do any evil, that good may come thereof; and of two evils, not
only not the less, but neither of both is to be chosen. So much of Confession.

CHAP. XIII.
Of an Oathe.

THe sixth head of Gods worship is, an Oath; concerning which, three Questions
are to be handled.

I. What an Oathe is? II. How an Oathe is to be taken? III. How far forth it
binds, and is to be kept?
Sect. 1.
I. Question. What is an oathe?
An Oathe, is a religious, and necessary The nature of an Oathe.
confirmation of things doubtful, by calling on God, to be a witness of
truth, and a revenger of falsehood.

First, I call it, a Confirmation; for so the Holy Ghost speaks, An oath for
confirmation, is among men an end of all strife. Heb. 6. 16.

Secondly, I term it a religious confirmation, because an Oath is a part of
Gods Religion and worship; Yea it is sometimes put for the whole worship of
God; Esaias. 19. 28. In that day, shall they swear by the Lord of hosts, that is,
they shall worship the true God.

Thirdly I add, a necessary confirmation, because an Oathe is never to be
used, in way of confirmation, but only in case of mere necessity. For when
all other humane proofs do fail, then it is lawful, to fetch testimony from
heaven, and to make God himself our witness. In this case alone, and never else,
it is lawful to use an Oathe.

Fourthly I say, in which God is called upon, as a witness of the truth, and a
revenger of falsehoode. This is added in the last place, because herein alone,
stands the form and life of an O^the; that in things doubtful; we call God as
a witness of truth, and a just revenger of the contrary. There be sundry kinds
of confirmation, as the affirmation, the asseueration, and the obtestation. And
by this Clause, an Oath is distinguished from them all; because in it, we call
upon God to give witness to the thing avouched, but in the other three we do
not.

Now touching this last point, of the form and life of an Oathe, three
Questions are to be answered, for the better clearing of the whole doctrine.

I. Question. Whether an Oathe taken by Creatures be a true Oath, and to be
kept?

Ans. An Oathe by creatures, is an Oath, though unlawful. For though there be
not in it, a direct invocation of God for witness, yet when we call the
creature to give testimony, we do then indirectly call upon God, because he is
seen in them; and look how many creatures there be in the world, so many
signs are they of Gods presence. This answer Christ himself makes, Matthew.
23. 21, 22. He that swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God, and by
him that sits thereon, that is, by God himself.

II. Question. Whether an oath by false gods, be a true oath or no? for
example, the oath of the Turk by Mahomet; the oath of Laban, by the gods of
Nachor, that is, by his Idols: when as in them, there is no invocation of the
true God of heaven and earth.

I answer as before; though it be not a lawful oath, yet it is in value and
effect an oath. For though that thing be a false god indeed, by which it is
taken; yet it is the true God, in the opinion of him that swears. Thus
Mahomet is to the Turk, in stead of the true God, and is honored of him as
God: and therefore his oath by Mahomet, is a true oath. Thus when Jacob in the
covenant that he made with Laban, swears by the fear of his father Isaak, and
Laban by the Idols of Nachor; Jacob accepted the oath which was tendered to
him, in the name of a false god; which he would not have done, if it had not
been an oath at all. And hence the Case is plain, that swearing by a false
god, is an oath: and therefore binds the swearer in Conscience, thought it be
unlawfully taken.

III. Question. If in every oath, God ought to be cited as a witness, how then
can God swear by himself, seeing none can witness unto him?

Ans. This description of an oath, whereby the creature swears, includes not
that oathe, whereby God swears. For the end why God swears is, to bind
himself (as it were) with a bond unto man, whereby he would have man to repute
him a lier, and no God, if he fails and keeps not his promise. Thus the Lord
swears in his wrath, Hebr. 3. 11. If they shall enter into my rest. The words
of the oath, are to be understood with this clause, If, etc. then let me be
holden as no God, or as a false god. And in this manner is God said to swear,
when he manifests to man, that he is content to be counted no God, if that
which he avouches by oath, be not performed.

Furthermore in every Oath, there be four distinct things. First, an
Asseueration of the truth; which should be avouched, though there were no oath
taken. Secondly, a confession or the omnipotent presence, wisdom, justice and
truth of God; whereby we acknowledge, that he is the searcher and knower of the
heart; yea that he is both witness, judge, and revenger of falsehood and lying.
Thirdly, Prayer and Invocation, whereby God is called upon, to give testimony
to the conscience of him that swears, that he speaks nothing, but the truth.
These two actions, of Confession and Invocation, do make an oath, to be no
less a true and proper part of Gods worship, then prayer it self. Fourthly,
Imprecation, in which a man acknowledging God the the just revenger of a lie,
binds himself to punishment, if he shall swear falsely, or speak an
untruth wittingly or willingly.

Now, though these be the distinct parts of an Oath, yet all of them are not
expressed in the form of every oath; but sometimes one, sometimes two of the
principal, and the other concealed, but yet always understood. For example.
The Prophet Jeremy teaches the people of Israel a form of swearing, Thou
shall swear, The Lord lives, Ierem. 4. 2. In which, there is expressed only
the second part, Confession, and in that, the rest are to be understood.
Again, the words of Ruth to Naomi, The Lord do so to me, and more also, if
ought but death depart thee and me, are only an Imprecation, in which the
other parts are infolded. So, the oath which God makes, Heb. 3. 11. If they
shall enter into my rest, is expressed only by imprecation, and the other
parts understood, though they be not mentioned. In common speech between man
and man, it is usually avouched, (though most wickedly,) If it be not thus or
thus, let me be banged, I would I were dead, I would I might never move hence,
etc. Now this auouchment, howsoever it may be taken, is indeed a form of
swearing, in value and force all one with the oath of God, when he says, If
they enter into my rest, let me be no God, but a deceiuer.

Sometimes two parts of the four, are expressed, and the rest understood. 2.
Cor. 1. 23. Now I call God to record unto my Soul. Here Invocation with
Imprecation, is uttered in speech, and the other two conceived in the mind. By
these particulars, we see it usual in Scripture, to propound forms of
swearing, by expressing some one, or two particular parts in stead of the rest,
yet so, as the parts concealed be all understood, for otherwise the oath is not
formalland entire.

Sect. 2.
II. Question. How an Oathe is to be taken in a good and godly manner?
For the answering hereof, two Rules are to be remembered.

The first Rule. He that will take an Oathe by the name of God, must swear in
truth, in judgment, in righteousness. Ierem. 4. 2. Here three virtues are
required in a lawful Oathe.

First, that it be made in truth. And we must know, that there is a double
truth, the one, of the thing spoken, the other, of the mind wherein it is
conceived. Truth of the thing is, when a man's speech is framed according to the
thing, as it is indeed, or as near as possibly may be; and that because God
is truth it self: This is called by Schoolmen, Logical verity. Sometimes by
reason of men's frailty, this truth is wanting, because we know not things as
they are. The truth of the mind is, when a man speaks or swears as he
thinks, or is in conscience persuaded of the thing; and this the Schoolmen
term, Moral verity. Now, though the first of these two be wanting, yet the
latter must necessarily be in an oath, least we fall into perjury.

The second virtue is Judgment, that is, prudence or wisdom. This Judgment
requires discretion, and consideration, principally of five things. First, of
the thing in question, which is to be confirmed. Secondly, of the nature of the
oath, that is taken. Thirdly, of the mind, and true meaning of him that
swears. Fourthly, of the particular circu^sta^ces, of time, place, and
persons, when, where, and before whom he swears. Fifthly, of the event or
issue of the oath. All these are duly to be regarded, that we swear not
rashly, or unadvisedly.

The third is Justice, wherein also care must be had of two things. First, that
the point to be confirmed, be lawefull. And it is then lawful, when it may
stand with piety, and charity. Secondly, that the occasions of taking the
oath, be also just; and they be chiefly four. I. When it may further Gods
glory and worship: or serve to prove some doctrine of salvation, in whole or
in part. II. When it may tend to the furtherance of brotherly love; or to the
preservation of our neighbors life, goods, or good name: or further, to the
confirmation of some league, covenant, or contract made between parties, upon
good ground, and for good and necessary purposes. III. When it serves, to
relieve a man's own private necessity; as when one swears to maintain his
own good name, goods, or life; to confirm his own faith and truth in
contracts. An example hereof we have in Paul; who to confirm the Romans, in
the persuasion of his love and care of their salvation, says, God is my
witness (whom I serve in my spirit, in the Gospel of his Son) that without
ceasing, I make mention of you, Romans 1. 9. And again, to keep his own credit
and good name, among the Jews, I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my
conscience bearing me witness, in the holy Ghost, Romans 9. 1. IV. When the
Magistrate does exact it, by order of justice. This, though it be a just
occasion, and warrant of an oath, yet three Caueats are in it to be observed.

First, that the oath be administered lawfully, not against piety or charity.
Secondly, he which takes an oath, tendered by the Magistrate, must swear
according to the mind and meaning of the Magistrate who exacts the oath, and
not according to his own private intent. Thirdly, he must not swear
ambiguously, but in a simple sense, so as the words of his mouth, may be
agreeable with that, which he conceiueth in his heart. Psalm. 15. 2. And
whatsoever oath is taken without observation of these Caueats, the same is not
taken in truth, but in fraud and deceit. Popish teachers affirm, that in some
cases, they may swear in a doubtful meaning: And this they practice in time
of danger, when being conuented before the Magistrate, and examined, they
answer Yea in word, and conceive a negation, or No in their minds. A practice
most impious, and flat against this excellent Rule of the Prophet, that a man
should swear in truth, judgment, and justice.

The Second Rule is, That the form in which the oath is propounded, must be a
plain, simple, and direct form, wherein God is directly called to witness.
For his worship is directly to be given to him: and therefore the oath also,
being an Invocation of his name, and a part of his worship, is directly to be
made.

That the meaning of this Rule, may the better appear, one Question is to be
answered; Whether in the Form of an oath, a man may not swear, directly by
creatures, and indirectly by God?

Most of the Popish sort, and some Protestants hold, that he may. But the truth
is otherwise. I say unto you (says our Savior) swear not at all: neither by
heaven -- nor by the earth -- nor by thy head, etc. Matthew. 5. 34. In which
words, he forbids all indirect oaths, whereby men swear directly by
creatures, and indirectly by God: for so did the Pharisees. Again, if a man
might swear by creatures, and conceal the name of God, it would diminish his
Majesty and authority, and much deceit might be used: for the swearer might
say, that he swear not, but only used an obtestation.

Against this it is objected. I. That Joseph swear by the life of Pharaoh, Genesis
42. 25. therefore it may seem, that oaths by creatures are not unlawful.
Ans. First, it may be said, that Joseph sinned in so swearing: for therein he
imitated the Egyptians, who swear by the life of their King. Secondly, it may
be answered, that Joseph does only make an asseueration, and not an oath.

Object. II. The Church in the Canticles takes an oath, by the Creatures. Cant.
2. 7. I charge you, daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the hinds of
the field, etc. Ans. It is no oath, but an obtestation, whereby the Church calls
the creatures, to witness her earnest affection to Christ. The like is made by
Moses, De^^. 30. 19. when he says, I call heaven and earth to record against
you this day. And by Paul, in his charge to Timothy, 1. Tim. 5. 21. I charge
thee, before the elect Angels. In which, and the like speeches, there is no
swearing, but a kind of citation, or summoning of the Creatures as witnesses.
And there is great difference between an oath, and an obtestation. In the
Obtestation, there is no more, but a calling of the creature to give
testimony, the matter being already apparent and manifest. But in an Oath,
where the matter is not so manifest, God is made not only a witness, but also
a judge and revenger.

Object. III. Saint Paul swears by his rejoicing in Christ, 1. Cor. 15. 31.
which rejoicing was a created passion, or a creature. Ans. That was also an
obtestation, or a word of auouchment, and asseueration; and not an oath. For it
is all one, as if he had said thus; My sorrows and afflictions, which I endure
for Christ, would testify (if they could speak) that as certainly as I rejoice
in Christ, so certainly I die daily.

Object. IV. Abigail swear to David by the creature; As the Lord lives, and as
thy soul lives, 1. Sam. 25. 26. Ans. The former part of her speech, may be
called an oath, but the latter is only an obtestation, or earnest auouchment,
joined with an oath.

Now, although it be in no sort, lawful to swear by creatures, yet when a man
swears directly by God, he may name the creatures in way and form of an
oath; specially if he make them as his pawnes, and pledges, set before God,
that he may in justice, be revenged upon him in them, if he lies and swears
not a truth.

Sect. 3.
III. Question. How farre-forth does an Oath bind, and is to be kept?
The answer to this Question is large, and When an oath binds?
therefore for orders sake I distinguish it into two parts, and first I will
show when an oath binds, secondly when it binds not.

For the first; An Oathe taken of things certain, lawful, and possible, is to
be kept, yea and binds always, though it be tendered even to our enemies; To
this purpose God has given special Commandeme^nt in sundry places. Numbers.
30. 3. Whosoever swears an oath, to bind his soul by a bond, he shall not
break his word, but shall do, according to all that proceeds out of his mouth:
Mat. 5. 33. Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform thine oaths
unto the Lord: Exodus, 20. 7. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain; that is, lightly and rashly. But Gods name is taken in vain, when an
oathe made of things lawful and possible is not kept; David, at the humble
request of Shimei, (who had before cursed him) pardons his fault for the time,
and swears to him that he should not die, 2. Sam. 19. 23. David made
conscience of this oathe, knowing himself to be bound thereby, and therefore
till his death he kept it; only he charged Solomon not to count him innocent.
1. King. 2. 9.

Now for the better clearing of the answer, we are to consider four particular
cases touching this point.

I. Case. What if a man take an oath by false Gods, whether is he bound to
keep it, yea or no?

Ans. He is, and the reasons are these; First from the like. There was a
question among the Scribes and Pharisees, Matt. 23. 16. whether a man swearing
by the creature were a debtor or no? The Pharisees taught, that if a man swear
by creatures, the oathe did not bind; But Christ verse. 20. affirms, that he
that swears by the Temple, or by the Altar or by heaven, swears by God
indirectly, and so takes an oathe, though not a lawful oath; and thereupon
remains bound, and is a debtor; now by propotion he that swears by false
Gods, swears by God indirectly, because the false God is, in the opinion of
him that swears, a true God, and so his oath binds, and is to be kept.
Secondly, Abraham accepts the oathe that Abimelech tendreth unto him in the
name of a false God, Genesis 21. 23 So does Jacob accept of the oathe made unto
him by Laban, Genesis 31. 53. which they would not have done, if their oaths had
not been sufficient bonds, to bind them to observation, and performance.

It will be said; He that admits of an oathe by an Idol, does communicate in
the sin of him that swears. Ans. In case of necessity, a man may admit
of such an oath, without sin. A poor man, being in extreme want, borrows
of an usurer upon interest. It is sin to the usurer to take it; but it is not
so in the poor man, who is compelled by the usurer to give interest: Thus the
poor man does use well the iniquitio of the usurer: So it is in an oath; A
Godly man may well use, and take benefit by the wicked oaths of Idolaters, so
far forth as they shall serve for the ratifying, and confirming of lawful
covenants.

II. Case. If a man take an oathe, and afterward endure hurt or damage by it,
whether is he then bound to keep his oath or no?

Ans. If the loss he but temporary and private, (the oath being made of a
thing lawful) it must be endured. For David reckons it among the properties
of a good man, That he swears, and changes not, though it be to his hurt,
Psalm. 15. 4.

And here a difference is to be made between a promissorie oath, and a single
promise. A single promise may be reversed by the will, and consent of him, to
whom it is made; but a promise made by an oath, is to be kept, though losses
and hindrances ensue thereupon. For the reverence we bear to the name of God
used in the oathe, ought to be of greater force with us, then any private
hinderance or inconuenie^ce, which may befall us, upon the performance of the
same.

III. Case. Whether does an oath bind conscience, whereunto a man is drawn,
by fraud and subtlety?

Ans. If the oath be of things lawful and possible, it binds and is to be
kept, though we were induced to it by deceit. Joshua deceived by the
Gibeonites, was brought to make Covenant of peace with them, and to bind it by
an oath: Now perceiving after three days, that they had wrought it by craft,
he would not touch them, in reverence of the oath, that he had taken. Josh. 9.
18, 19, 20. And about 300 years after, when Saul had slain certain of the
Gibeonites, the Israelites for that fact, were punished with three years
famine; which could not be stayed, till seven persons of Saul's house were
hanged up in Gibeah. 2. Sam. 21.

IV. Case. What if a man take an oath by fear and compulsion, is he to keep
it, yea or no? For example. A man falling into the hands of thieves, for the
safety of his life, is urged to take a solemn oath, that he will fetch and
deliver them some portion of money, and withal never disclose the parties. The
oath being thus taken, the Question is, whether he be bound to keep it?

Ans. Some Divines are of opinion, that the oath is to be kept, and some say
no: but generally it is answered, that it must be kept, because this fear did,
not abolish the consent of his will. But if it be alleged, that in so doing,
he shall hurt the Commonwealth: Answer is made, that if he do not swear
secrecy, he may in probability bring greater damage to the weal public, in
depriving it of a member, by the loss of his own life. But it will be said,
by this means he maintains a thief. Ans. Be it so: yet he remains
excusable, because that was not his intent, but only to preserve his own
life, to the good of the Commonwealth.

Thus the most and best Divines do hold. But for my part, I leave it in
suspense; though it seems in likelihood that the party which swears silence,
does after a sort maintain theft, and communicate with the sin of the
robber: and further gives occasion, that others may fall into the like hazard
and ieopardie of their lives. And so much of the first part of the Answer.

The second part of the Answer to this third maine Question follows: namely to
When an Oath binds not?
show, when an oath binds not. An oath does not bind in six Cases.

I. When it is against the word of God, and tends to the maintenance of sin.
The reason is, because when God will not have an oath to bind it must not bind:
For an oath must not be a bond of iniquity. Hereupon David having sworn a
rash oath, to destroy Nabal and his house, and being stayed from it by the
Lord in the means of Abigail; he praises God in this manner: Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy
counsel, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day, from coming to
shed blood. 1. Sam. 25. 32, 33.

II. If it be made against the wholesome laws of the Commonwealth; because
every soul must be subject to the higher powers. Romans 13. 1.

III. If it be taken of such persons, as want reason; as of children, madmen,
or fools; because they know not what they swear: and there can be no binding
of Conscience, when he that swears wants reason to discern what he does.

IV. If it be made by those, who are under the tuition of their superiors, and
have no power to bind themselves; as by children which are under the
government of their Parents: For these are part of their parents goods, and
therefore not fit to undertake an oath, without their consent. Neither are they
to choose a calling, or make any contract of themselves, but only by the
direction and advise of their parents; though some of the Popish sort do
erroniously teach, that a child may bind himself by oath, to become a Monk
of this or that order, without Consent of Parents.

V. If it be made of things impossible: for then it is a vain oath.

VI. If at the first it were lawful, and afterward become impossible and
unlawful. For such oaths God himself may be said to reuerse. Thus if a man
bind himself by oath to live in single life without marriage, and after finds
that God-hath not given him the gift of continency; in this case, his oath
becomes impossible to be kept, and therefore being reversed by God, and
beco^ming unlawful, it may be broken without impiety.

To these six, the Papists add two other. The first, when the oathe is made
upon custom. And they put this example; If two men going out of a door or over
a bridge, the one swears by God that he will not go first; likewise swears
the other: yet at the last after contention, one of them goes first. In this
case, says the Papist, the oath binds not. Ans. Custom cannot make that,
which is sin, to be no sin, or perjury, to be no perjury: but rather
doubles the sin, and makes it above measure morevile and abominable: and they
that give themselves to this usual, and customable swearing, cannot but
oftentimes become guilty of flat perjury.

The Second Case is, when the Superior power, that is, the Pope, or other
inferior Bishops, give order to the contrary, by relaxation or dispensation.
Ans. It is falfe. For in every lawful oath there is a double bond; one of man
to man, the other of man to God. Now if in the oath taken, man were only
obliged to man, the oath might be dispenseable by man: But seeing man, when he
swears to man, swears also to God, and thereby is immediately bound to God
himself; hence it follows, that an oath taken, cannot have release from any
creature. Therefore our Savior Christ's commandment is, Thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform thy oaths, to whom? to the Lord.
Math. 5. 33. And the oath that passed between David and Jonathan, is called
The Lords oath, 2. Sam. 21. 7 and 1. Sam. 20. 8. God will have the oath to
bind, as long as seems good unto him; yea and cease binding, when it
pleases him. And that which himself binds, or will have to be bound, no
creature can loose; The things which God has coupled, let no man separate.
Math. 19. 6. And herein the Pope shows himself to be Antichrist, in that he
challenges power to dispense with a lawful oath, made without error or
deceit, of things honest and possible.

Out of this answer, another Question may be resolved; namely, when does a man
commit Perjury?

Ans. 1. When a man swears that which he knows to be false. 2. When he
swears that, which he means not to do. 3. When he swearing to do a thing,
which he also means to do, yet afterward does it not. In these three, the
not performing of an oath made, it flat perjury.

That we may yet be informed, concerning the sin of Perjury, one Question of
moment is to be skanned. In Societies and Corporations, there be Laws and
Orders; to the keeping whereof, every one admitted to an office, takes a
corporal oath: Afterward it falls out upon occasion, that he breaks some of
the said Statutes: The Question is, whether he be not in this case perjured?

Ans. Statues are of two sorts. Some are principal or fundamental, which
serve to maintain the state of that body or Corporation. Others less
principal, or mixed, that serve for order or decency. In the statutes
principal, the lawmaker intends obedience simply; and therefore they are
necessary to be kept. But in the less principal, he exacts not obedience
simply, but either obedience, or the penalty; because the penalty is as much
beneficial to the state of that body, as the other. The breach of the former
makes a man guilty of perjury; but it is otherwise in the latter, so be it the
delinquent party be content to bear the mulct if it be imposed. Thus, students
and others belonging to such societies, may in some sort excuse themselves,
from the sin of perjury, though not from all fault, in breaking some of the
lesser local statutes, else few could live in any society without perjury.

Yet one more Question is propounded touching perjury, whether a man may exact
an oath of him, whom he fears or knows will forswear himself. Ans. A
private man must not; but a Magistrate may, if the party offer to take his
oath, (not being urged thereto,) and be first admonished of the greivousnesse
of the said sin of perjury. In the execution of Civil Justice, Magistrates
must not stay upon men's sins: Moses expected not the Israelites repentance,
for their Idolatry; but presently proceeded unto punishment. Neither must the
public good of the Common wealth be hindered, upon the likelihood or
suspicion of a man's perjury.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of Vows.

THe Seventh head of the Outward worship of God, is concerning a vow. All the
Questions whereof may be reduced to these four.

I. Question. What is a Vow?
Ans. A Vow, is a promise made to God of things lawful and possible. I call
it a promise, to distinguish a vow from a single purpose. For a purpose may be
changed, but a vow lawfully made cannot. Again, there is great difference
between these two: for in a vow, there is first, a purpose to do a thing:
secondly, a binding of our selves to do that we pupose. For this cause I
term it a promise, because it is a purpose with a bond, without which there
can be no vow made.

In the next place I add, a promise made to God; not to Saint, Angel, or Man.
The reasons are these. First, a vow is properly the work of the heart,
consisting in a purpose. Now God alone knows the heart, and he alone is able,
to discern of the purpose and intent of the same which no Angel, Saint, or
other creature can possible do. Secondly, when the vow is made, none can
punish and take revenge of the breach thereof, but God. Thirdly, in the old
Testament, the Jews never vowed, but to God; because the vow was a part of
Gods worship: Deuteronomy. 23. 21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy
God, thou shall not bestack to pay it; for the Lord thy God, will surely
require it of thee, and so it should be sin unto thee. Where by the way, we
may take notice, of the superstition of the popish Church, that makes vows to
Saints and Angels, which is in effect to make the^ gods, and to worship the^ as
the Jews worshipped God in the old Testament.

II. Question. Whether a vow, be now in the new Testament, any part of
Religion, or Gods worship?
The answer is threefold.

First, if a vow be taken for a promise of moral obedience; the answer is,
that a vow is indeed the worship of God, and so shall be, to the end of the
world. For as God (for his part) promises mercy, in the covenant of grace, so
we in Baptism, do make a vow, and promise of obedience to him, in all his
commandments; and therefore Peter calls Baptism a stipulation, that is, the
promise of good conscience to God. This promise once made in Baptism, is
renewed so often as we come to the Lords Supper, and further continued in the
daily spiritual exercises of Invocation, and Repentance.

But it may be said, we are already bound to the obedience of the Law by order
of divine Justice; therefore we cannot further bind our selves. Ans. He that
is bound by God, may also bind himself. David though he was bound by god in
conscience, to keep the Law, yet he binds himself freely by oath, to help
his own weakness, and to keep himself from falling, when he says, I have
sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments, Psalm.
119. 106. And the same bond is no less necessary and behooffefull for us, if
we consider how prone and ready we are to fall from the worship of God.

The second Answer. If a vow be taken for a promise of some ceremonial
duty, as of Sacrifices and Oblations, or of giving house, lands, and goods to
the Temple; then we must put a difference between the Old Testament and the
New. In the Old Testament, the vow of such duties, was part of Gods worship;
but in the New it is not, and that for these Reasons.

First, The Jewish ceremonies were to the Jews, a part of Gods worship, but
to us Gentiles they are not; considering they are all in Christ abolished, and
none of them do now stand in force by Gods Law to us. Thus the Passover was a
ceremony, or service, appointed by God to be observed of the Israelites and
their posterity, Exodus 12. 24. 25. and therefore stood as a part of Gods
worship to them for a perpetual ordinance. But to us in the new testament,
both it and other Legal ceremonies are abrogated, and we have only two
Sacraments to be administered and received, as seals of the Promises of God,
and parts of his worship, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

Secondly, that which is not commended unto us by God, in the name of
worship, is no worship to us. Now, the ceremonies of the Jews, are no
where commended unto us in that name; and therefore it is a vain thing for any
man to vow the observation thereof.

Thirdly, vows of ceremonial duties, did, in a peculiar manner, and upon
special respects, pertain to the Jews. Hereupon, when they vowed House,
Lands, Goods, etc. to the use of the Temple, this they did, as being the Lords
Tenants, of whom alone they held their possessions: and hereby they
acknowledged and also testified their Homages and Services due unto him. And
this particular respect concerns not the Church and people of the New
Testament: whence it follows, that they are not tied by the same bond, to
perform worship unto God, by the vows of Ceremonies, gifts, oblations, and
sacrifices.

The third and last part of the Answer. If a vow be taken for a promise, of
some bodily and outward work, or exercise; as fasting, giving of alms,
abstaining from certain meats and drinks, etc. then it is not any part of
Gods worship, but only an help, stay, and furtherance of the same. For first,
we have liberty of conscience in Christ, to use or not to use, all indifferent
things. Now Gods worship is not a thing of that nature, but absolutely
necessary. Secondly, Paul, 1. Tim. 4. 8. affirms, that bodily exercise
profits little, but godliness is profitable for all things: In which words, he
opposes godliness to bodily exercise, and therefore godliness, or the worship of
God, consists not in them.

But the words of David are alleged to the contrary, Psalm. 76. 11. Vow and
perform unto the Lord your God. Where we have a double command, one to make
Vows, another to pay them. To which I answer: first, if David speaks of the
vow of all moral duties, then the Commandment concerns every man; because
the thing commanded, is a part of Gods worship. For it is as much as if he had
said, Vow thankful obedience unto God, and perform it. Again, if the place
be meant, of the vow of ceremonial duties, then it is a commandment peculiar
to the old Testament, and so binds the Jews only: howbeit not all of them,
but only such as had just cause to make a vow: for otherwise they had liberty
to abstain from vowing, Deuteronomy. 23. 22. When thou abstainest from vowing, it
shall be no sin unto thee. Of one of these two kinds, must the place
alleged necessarily be understood, and not of the third, which is of bodily
exercise: for then it should reuerse Christian liberty in the use of things
indifferent, which no Commandment can do.

By light of this Answer, we may discern the error of the Popish Church,
which makes Vows a part of Religion, and the Worship of God. Nay further, it
teaches that some vows, as namely those of Poverty, Continency, Regular
Obedience to this or that Order, are works of merit and supererogation,
tending to a state of perfection, even in this life; and deserving a further
degree of glory in heaven, then the work of the Moral Law.

III. Question. When a Uow made, does bind, and when not?
Before I give answer to the Question, I will lay down this Ground.

In making of a lawful Vow, four Conditions are to be observed.

The first, concerns the person of him that voweth; that he be a fit person.
His fitness may be discerned by two things. First, if he be at his own
liberty, (as touching the things whereof he makes his vow,) and not under the
government of a superior. Thus in the Old Testament, if a daughter had made a
vow, without the consent or allowance of her father, it might not stand in
effect. Numb. 30. 4, 5. Secondly, if the party keep himself within the
compass of his calling general and particular. Hence it follows, that Vows
of going a Pilgrimage, to worship this or that Idol, in this or that place,
(for example, S. James of Compostella, and the Lady of Loretto, etc.) are
utterly unlawful; because such persons, by this practice, do leave their
calling and condition of life, and take upon them a calling, not warranted by
the Lord.

The second Condition is, concerning the Matter of a Vow. It must be Lawful,
Possible, and Acceptable to God. Hereupon it follows, that there be four
things, which cannot be the matter of a Vow. The first, is Sin. Thus the
Jews bound themselves with a Vow, that they would neither eat, nor drink,
till they had killed Paul, Act. 23. 12, 14. This their vow was nothing else, but
a threatening of God himself: and therefore utterly unlawful. Secondly,
Trifles, and light matters; as, when a man voweth, not to take up a straw, or
such like. And this is a plain mocking of God. Thirdly, things impossible; as
to fly, or to go on foot to Jerusalem. Fourthly, things merely necessary;
as to die, which cannot be avoided.

The Third, is touching the Form of a Vow. It must be voluntary, and free.
And that it may be so, three things are necessarily required. First, that it be
made in Judgment, that is, with reason and deliberation. Next, that it be done
with consent of will. And thirdly, with liberty of conscience.

Hence it appears, that the Vows of children, madmen, and fools, or such as
are taken upon rashness, or constraint; also the vow of perpetual abstinence
from things simply indifferent, are all utterly unlawful. For, the first sort
are not done upon judgment, the next without due consideration, and the last
are greatly prejudicial to Christian liberty.

The fourth concerns the End; which is, not to be a part of Gods worship, but
only a stay and proppe to further and help us in the same. Now there be
three particular Ends of a vow. First, to show our selves tha^kfull to God for
blessings received: secondly, to prevent sin to come, by keeping so brietie
and moderation: thirdly, to preserve and increase our faith, prayer,
repentance, and obedience.

This Ground being laid, the Answer to the Question propounded is this. When
in vowing, we observe the conditions prae-required, the vow is lawful, and
consequently binds the party vowing, so as if he keep it not, he dishonors
God. But when the said Conditions, do not concur in the action of vowing,
it becomes unlawful, and the party remains free, and not bound to
performance.

Here by the way, a Question of some moment is made; Whether Iephte upon his
Vow, did offer his Daughter in Sacrifice or no? considering that it is plain,
even by the light of Nature, as also by the doctrine before taught, that a man
is bound by the vow which he makes.

This Question admits sundry answers, according to the diverse opinions and
judgments of men, upon the place written, Judge. 11. And my purpose is not to
examine that which others have brought in way of resolution, but briefly to
deliver that which I take to be the truth. I answer therefore that Iephte did
not offer his Daughter in Sacrifice upon his vow; but only dedicated her unto
God, after the manner of the Nazarites, to the end of her days; to lead her
life apart in a single estate. The truth of this answer will appear by these
reasons.

First, in the 37. verse of the chapter, the daughter of Iephte craves leave of
her father, to go apart into the mountains, for two months space, to bewail
her virginity. Where it may be observed, that she went not to deplore the
loss of her life, but her future estate and condition, because she was (upon
her fathers vow) to live a perpetual single life. And why? surely, because (as
the text says, verse. 39.) she had not known a man; and it was accounted a
curse in Judea, for a woman always to live unmarried.

Secondly, in the last verse it is said in our common English translation, that
the daughters of Israel went year by year, to lament the daughter of Iephte:
But I take it, it may be as well, or better translated out of the Hebrew, they
went to Le-thannoth So it is expounded by the Hebrewe Doctors. Quintil. in Iud.
11. 40.
talk or confer with her, and so to comfort her: and that this
interpretation may not, seem strange, the very same word is observed in this
sense, Judge. 5. 11. there shall they Iethannu.
talk or confer of the righteousness of the Lord. Now if they went year by
year to comfort her, then she was not put to death.

Thirdly, Iephte is commended by the holy Ghost, for the excellency of his
faith, Heb. 11. 32. and that out of the same history. Now the commendation of
his faith, and the unnatural murder of his daughter, cannot stand together.

But it will be said, that Iephte vowed, that whatsoever came out of his doors
to meet him should be the Lords, and he would offer it for a burnt offering, v.
31. Ans. The words may more truly be read thus; or I will offer it in
sacrifice. And the meaning of the vow was this: That thing which first meets
me, if it be a thing to be sacrificed, I will sacrifice it: if not. I will
dedicate it to the Lord. For it seems to consist of two parts, whereof the
latter is coupled to the former, by a discretiue coniunctio^, as the
Gra^marians speak. In this manner, the word is else where taken, so as it may
either way be expounded. In the fourth commandment, Exodus 20. 10. in our
common translation it is read, thou and thy son, and thy daughter, but out of
the Ebrwe, it may be translated either and, or or.

It will be said again, that Iephte rent his clothes, because his daughter
met him, when he returned from the victory. Ans. That was in regard of her
vowed virginity: which was a curse among the Jews. And besides, he had but
one daughter, and by this means of sacrif^ing her all hope of posterity after
him was cut off.

But it seems, that Monastical vows of virginity, by this example are
lawful. Ans. Indeed the custom of vowing virginity began in those days,
but they thought it not a state of perfection, but rather an estate of misery,
as may appear, in that he rent his clothes, when she met him, and the
daughters of Israel went to comfort her, as being now in a woeful and
miserable estate.

Upon these Reasons, I conclude, that Iephte did not offer up his daughter in
sacrifice, but only set her apart, to live a single life, to the honor and
service of God. And Iephte might know even by the light of nature, that it was
a finne to vow h^ daughters death, and a double sin to kill her.

IV. Question. Whether Monastical, or Monkish vows bind or no?
To this the Papists answer affirmatively, placing the greatest part of their
Religion, in practice and observance of these vows.

That we may know them the better, they are in number three. The first is, the
vow of continency, whereby a man renounceth Marriage for ever, and voweth unto
God perpetual virginity. The second, of Voluntary Poverty, which is, when a
man gives over all property of his goods, and binds himself to live by
begging. The third is, of Regular obedience, when a man resignes himself in
conscience, to be ruled by another, and to keep some devised order, in all
actions and duties pertaining to religion.

Now the Question being, whether these vows bind or no? I answer in a word,
they do not, and that for these reasons.

I. First, they are flat against the law of God, which I make manifest in the
particulars. The vow of perpetual chastity, is expressly against Gods
commandment. 1. Cor. 7. 9. If they cannot abstain, let them marry: for it is
better to marry then to burn. To this text the Papists answer, three ways.

First they say, that this place of scripture, is only a divine permission,
and not a commandment: we reply again directly, that it is a plain
commandment: For the intent of the Holy Ghost in that text, and in the whole
Chapter is, to ordain a necessary remedy for incontinencie, which Paul calls
burning, and for the avoiding of fornication, which brings destruction to the
soul. And for that purpose, he speaks not in permitting manner, but in
imperative terms, Let the^ marry.

Secondly, they answer, that the words concern only incontinent persons, that
commit fornication. We on the other side affirm, that they are not only given
to them that live incontinently, but to all persons, which are subject to
burning, which burning may be without incontinencie.

For the better understanding whereof, let it be considered, that there be
three distinct degrees of lust in man. The first is, when the temptation is
first received into the mind. The second, when the same temptation prevails,
though with some resista^ce and trouble of the mind and conscience, which also
(though no outward offense as yet follow) is a degree of burning. The third is,
when the temptation so far prevails, that the heart and will are overcome,
and the duties of religion for the time utterly hindered: This is the highest
and worst kind of burning. And if we consider these degrees well, it will
easily appear, that there may be burning without incontinent living.

Thirdly, they answer; that this text speaks not of persons that are free,
but of those alone, who are bound from Marriage by solemn vow: we contrariwise
affirm and hold, that the words are general, and plainly directed to all
persons, bound by vow or otherwise; and that appears by verse. ^5. where he
says, I speak not this to tangle you in a snare. These words do show, that
Paul's mind was, touching the vow of perpetual virginity. For he leaves every
man according to Gods ordinance, to his own liberty, willing none by vow to
bind himself from the use thereof.

Now for the vow of Regular Obedience, that also is against the word of God. 1.
Cor. 7. 27. Ye are bought with a price, be not the servants of men. Where the
Apostle forbiddes us, to subject our hearts and consciences, to the laws and
ordinances of men, in matters of Religion; and consequently overthrows the
vow of Regular obedience. For in that a man binds himself to be ruled (in
all things belonging to Gods worship) according to the will and pleasure of his
Superior, yea to eat, drink, sleep; to be clothed. etc. according to a
certain rule given and prescribed by him; whereas in regard of conscience we
are bound only unto God.

Lastly, the vow of voluntary Poverty, is also a plain abuse of Gods own
ordinance and appointment, Deuteronomy. 15. 4. that there should be no beggar in
Israel.

But it may seem, that this law is not perpetual. For in the New Testament we
read, that there were beggars, as namely one, that was laid at the gate of the
Temple, daily to ask alms, Act. 3. Ans. This Law neither was then, nor is now
abrogated by God, but the observation of it (at that time, and since) was much
neglected. And the neglect of provision for the poor, is the cause of begging;
and the vow of perpetual poverty, still remains as a manifest breach of
Gods holy ordinance, notwithstanding any thing that may be pretended to the
contrary.

II. The second reason follows. Monkish vows, as they are against Gods
commandment, so are they also against the Liberty of Conscience, which we
have by Christ touching the use of the creatures, and ordinances of God: as
riches, marriages, meats, drinks, and apparel. Stand fast, says the Apostle,
in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, Gal. 5. 1. Again, Let no
man judge you in meat, or in drink, or inrespect of an holy day, Coloss. 2.
16. In these places, there is granted unto man, a free use of all things
indifferent, so it be not in case of offense.

Now in Monkish vows, those things which God has made indifferent, and put in
our liberty, are made necessary: whereas no ordinance of man, can make things
simply necessary, and parts of Gods worship, which he himself has made
indifferent, and left free to the will of man. And hence it was that the
forbidding of meats and marriage, were termed by the Apostle, The doctrine of
Devils, 1. Tim. 4. 1.

But (will some say) does not the civil Magistrate in our Commonwealth,
forbid the use of some meats? Ans. He does. But by his commandment he takes
not away the liberty that we have in the use of things indifferent, but does
only moderate it, for the common good, which he may do lawfully.

III. The third reason. Some of them are out of the power and ability of him
that voweth; as the vow of perpetual chastity in single life. For our
Savior says, All men cannot receive this word, but they to whom it is given,
Matthew. 19. 11. that is, Continency is a gift of God, whereof all men are not
capable, but those only to whom he gives it, when, and as long as it
pleases him; neither is it denied unto some, because they will not, but because
they are not able.

Against this, the Papist obiecteth, that we may receive any good gift of God,
if we pray for it: for Christ has said, Ask, and ye shall receive, Matthew. 7.
7. Ans. It is false. Gods gifts are of two sorts. Some are common to all that
believe, and necessary to salvation; as Faith, Repentance, Obedience, the
Fear of God. Some again are special gifts, not given to all, nor needs full
to salvation, but peculiar only to some; as health, wealth, continency,
single life, etc. Now the promise of our Savior, Ask, and ye shall receive,
is meant of things necessary to salvation, and not of particular and special
gifts. For some may pray for them, and yet never receive them. Thus Paul prayed
thrice, that the prick in his flesh, the messenger of Satan, might be removed
from him, yet he was not heard, nor his petition granted. And why? Because
that which he prayed for, was not a common gift necessary to salvation, but a
special grace, for the time of the temptation, wherewith he was presently
assaulted; whereupon Answer was given, My grace is sufficient for thee.

And hence we learn, in what manner, to ask things at the hands of God, when
we pray. Such as are necessary to salvation, we may ask absolutely and
simply; but things that are less necessary, with this condition; If it may
stand with the good will and pleasure of God.

Again, the Papist alleges an example of two married persons; the one
whereof being smitten by the hand of God with the dead palsy, the other must
needs pray for the gift of continency. Ans. In this case a married party may
ask it, and by Gods mercy obtain it, because now there remains unto him or
her no other remedy. But it is not so with single persons, considering that
they have an other remedy, which is Marriage: and therefore they may not look,
or hope to obtain such a gift.

Thirdly, they say, God has given to all men sufficient aid and strength,
that if they will use the means, they may have the gift of chastity. For
sufficient grace is given to all, though not effectual. Ans. It is false:
there is neither sufficient, nor effectual grace given to all, to live a
single life; but it is a rare and special gift given only to some. Paul to
Timothy, wills younger women, not to endeavor to forbear, when they have
not the gift, but in want thereof to marry, 1. Tim. 5. 14. Where he takes it
for granted, that they had no such power given them of God, to live in
perpetual chastity, though they would.

IV. The fourth Reason. Popish vows do abolish that order, which God has set
in the Society of mankind, to wit, that men should not only serve him in the
duties of the first Table, out in the duties of the second, by serving of men,
Gal. 5. 13. By love serve one another. Again, Romans 13. 10. Love is called the
fulfilling of the Law; because the law of God is practiced, not apart by it
self, but in and with the love of our neighbor. From this order it follows,
that every man, beside the General calling of a Christian, must have some
particular kind of life, in the which he must walk, and therein do service
to men: Which if he refuse to do, he must not eat, according to the Apostles
rule, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.

Now these vows make a separation between these two: for they bring men into
a general calling, but they utterly frustrate and make void the particular,
and the duties of it; so as a man keeping them, cannot be serviceable to man,
either in Church or Commonwealth. Besides, by the vow of poverty, the Apostles
rule is disanulled, 1. Tim. 5. 16. which is, that if a man be able to maintain
himself, or have any kindred able to do it, he should not be chargeable to the
Church; and so there might be sufficient alms to them that are truly poor.

V. The fifth Reason. They bring in again Iudaisme: for Jewish religion by Gods
appointment, stood in bodily rites, and outward ceremonies, actions, and
gestures, yea in outward things, as garments, meats, drinks. And their rule
was, Touch not, taste not: from all which we are wholly freed by Christ.

VI. Sixthly, these vows are Idolatrous and superstitious: for they are made
and observed with an opinion of Gods worship, of merit, and of the state of
perfection: whereas nothing can be made Gods worship, but that which himself
commands. And bodily exercises are unprofitable, as Paul says, and therefore
they can not be meritorious. And further, to dream of a state of perfection
beyond the Law of God, is to make the Law it self imperfect: whereas
contrariwise, the Law of the Lord is perfect, righteous, and pure, Psalm. 19. 7,
8.

VII. Lastly, these vows are against the preservation of Nature: for by them,
specially that of perpetual chastity, men are brought to destroy even their
own bodies and lives, which they are bound to preserve and maintain. Ephesians.
5. 29. No man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it.
The Apostle, even in his days, noted it as a fault, in the voluntary
religion, that was then taken up by some; that for the maintenance thereof,
they spared not their own bodies, Coloss. 2. 23. And like unto that, is the
practice of Popish Votaries, which tends to the ruin and overthrow of
nature, and life it self.

These be the Reasons. In the next place, we are to consider the Allegations
that are commonly made, in the favor and defense of Popish vows.

And first it is objected: In the Old Testament, Vows were a part of Gods
worship: therefore they are so to be holde^ in the New. Ans. There is great
difference between them. For first, they had their warrant out of Gods word;
these have not so: nay there be express testimonies of scripture against these
Vows.

Secondly, in their vows, there was always right reserved to superiors, to
reuerse them, if they liked them not. But in Monastical vows, all right is
taken from superiors. For children are permitted to vow; and their promises
must stand against parents consent. And wives (according to Popish doctrine)
may vow, against the express consent of their husbands.

Thirdly, they were not perpetual, but ceased with the ceremonial Law. But
these are supposed to have a perpetual equity, that must continue till the
end of the world.

Secondly, they allege that which is written, Matthew. 19. 12. Some have made
themselves chaste for the kingdom of heaven. Ans. The meaning of the text is
not, that some have vowed single life, but that there are some, who being
assured that they have the gift of continency, upon that gift, do endeavor
to maintain their present estate, that so they may the better serve God, and
advance his kingdom, both in themselves and others.

Thirdly, they object, 1. Tim. 5. 12. where Paul speaks of certain young
women, which have damnation, because they have broken their first faith: that
is, (as they interpret it) their vow of single life. Ans. The words are not to
be understood, of the faith of the vow; but either of that faith and promise,
which was made to God in their Baptism, or the faith and promise of service
and relief to be performed to the poor; and for the breach of either of
these, they may be said to incur damnation.

Fourthly, they say, Christ himself was a beggar, and therefore why may not we
also be beggars? Ans. Though Christ was poor, yet was he no beggar. For he
kept a family, and had a treasure. Judas was the steward of his family, and
bare the bag, Ioh. 13. 29. Again, there is mention made of 200 pence, Ioh.
6. 7. which in likelihood was in the bagg that Judas kept: yea, of the money
which he had, the Disciples are said to buie meat, Ioh. 4. 8. And though it
were granted, that Christ was a beggar, yet it follows not, that we should be
so. For his poverty was expiatorie, and part of his sufferings. So says the
Apostle, He being rich, for our sakes became poor, that we through his
poverty might be made rich, 2. Cor. 8. 9.

Fifthly, they allege, that the Disciples forsook all, and lived in poverty;
and their example is propounded for our imitation. Ans. They forsook all
indeed, yet how? not for ever, but for a time; and that not by vow, but only
in affection and disposition of their hearts. For after they had forsaken all,
we read, that they came to their nets and boats again, Ioh. 21. 3. Again,
the Apostle Paul speaks of himself and the rest, when he says, Have we not
power to lead about a wife being a sister? 1. Cor. 9. 5. By which it is
plain, that they put not away their wives.

Sixthly, Mat. 19. 21. If thou will be perfect (says Christ to the young man)
go, sell all that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven, and come and follow me. Here (says the Papist) our
Savior prescribes perpetual poverty, by express counsel. Ans. The words
are no counsel, but a special Commandment of trial, directed to this young
man. And the end of it was, to discover unto him, his secret pride, and
hypocrisy, in that he boasted, that he had kept all the commandments, when as
indeed he knew not what they meant.

Lastly, they object the example of the Recabites, who according to the
commandment of their father Ion adab, would drink no wine, nor dwell in
houses, nor build, nor plant, nor sow, Ierem. 35. and the Lord approoueth
their practice. Ans. They did obey their fathers command in these things, as
being things indifferent, but not as parts of Gods worship in the doing
where of they placed Religion. And they obeyed it carefully, for this end,
that they might inure themselves unto hardshippe. Secondly, this their
obedience, touching these things, stood not by any vow, much less was it
perpetual. For then they should have observed all the things which they vowed,
equally, which they did not; for they dispensed with their fathers voluntary
iniunction for dwelling in Tents; and as we read verse. 11. They came up, for
fear of the Chaldeans, that were in the land, and dwelt at Jerusalem.

And so much touching Popish Vows, whereof to conclude, this may be said; That
they are all, but a mere will worship, standing upon no ground or warrant of
Gods word, and therefore of no force, to bind the consciences of men, but are
to be holden, as they are in truth, wicked and abominable.

CHAP. XV.
Of Fasting.

THe eight Head of the outward worship of God, is Fasting.

By Fasting I understand, the Religious Fast, which is joined with the duties
of Religion; and namely, the exercises of Prayer and Humiliation. Touching it,
there are three principal Questions to be handled in their order.

I. Question. What is a Religious Fast?
Ans. It is a voluntary and extraordinary abstinence, taken up for a religious
end; what this end is, we shall see afterward.

First, I call it voluntary, because the time, and particular manner of
Fasting, is not imposed, or determined, but left free to our own liberty.
Again, I term it extraordinary, to distinguish it from ordinary fasting;
which stands in the practice of temperance and sobriety; whereby the appetite
is restrained, in the use of meats and drinks, that it do not exceed
moderation. Now this kind of fast is to be used of all Christians, at all
times; whereas the extraordinary is not daily and ordinarily to be practiced,
but upon special occasions, and at special times, in as much, as it is a more
strait and severe abstinence then the other.

II. Question. How a Religious Fast is to be observed?
Ans. For the observation of it, three things are required.

I. A just and weighty cause. II. A right manner. III. Right ends.
Sect. 1.
Fasting is then to be used, when a just and The just cause of a fash
weighty cause or occasion thereof is offered. There be two just causes of a
fast.

The First is, when some judgment of God hangs over our heads, whether it be
public, as Famine, Pestilence, the Sword, destruction, etc. or private. The
Prophet Joel in the name of the Lord, calls the Jews to a strait and solemn
fast; and that upon this just occasion, because the Lord had sent a great
dearth upon the land, Joel 2. 14, 15, etc. Hester and her company fasted, when
she had heard news of the intended destruction of the Jews, Ester. 4. 16.
The people of Nineueh, which were not Jews, but forreiners in regard of the
Covenant, when the Prophet came, and denounced destruction unto them for their
sins, they gave themselves generally to fasting and prayer. Ion. 3. 5. 8.

The second cause of fasting is, when we are to sue, and seek by prayer to
God, for some special blessing, or for the supply of some great want. Thus,
when Daniel desired to obtain the deliverance of the children of Israel, out
of captivity in Babylon, he gave himself to fasting, Dan. 10. 3. Thus, Christ
fasted, and spent the whole night in prayer unto God, before he chose his
twelve Apostles, Luke 6. 12. And in like manner, Paul and Silas when they were
to found and plant Churches, used prayer and fasting, Act. 14. 23. because in
these matters of so great importance, they looked for special direction from
God himself. Lastly, Anna, that she might be more fervent in prayer, fasted
night and day in the Temple, Luc. 2. 37.

Sect. 2.
The second point, is the Right manner of fasting, which stands in three
things. The right manner of fasting.


The Frist is, Abstinence from meat and drink: for therein consists the
very nature of a fast; and if that be wanting, it is no fast at all. Thus Ester
commanding the Jews to fast for her, biddes them neither eat nor drink for
three days, Ester. 4. 16.

The Second is, an abstinence from all delights, which may any way cheer and
refresh nature. In this sort Daniel fasted three whole weeks of days,
abstaining from all pleasant bread, flesh, wine, and ointments, Dan. 10. 3. So
when David fasted, it is said that he lay all the night upon the earth, that
he neither washed, nor anointed himself, nor changed his apparel, 2. Sam.
12. 16, 20. In the solemn fast of the Jews, the bridegroom and bride must
come out of their chambers, Ioe. 2. 15, 16. By these places it is manifest,
that in a true fast, there is required, not only abstinence from meat and
drink, but from all delights, recreations, and other things that might refresh
the nature of man. By this the Popish Fasting is justly reproved; wherein,
though men are enjoined to abstain from flesh, yet there is given liberty to
use other delicates.

The Third thing in the manner of a Fast, is, so far forth to abstain from
meat, and other delights, as the body may be thereby afflicted. Ezra
proclaims a fast, and he gives a reason thereof, that himself and the people
might afflict themselves, Ezra 8. 2. This Afflicting of a man's self; is
expounded by Paul, 1. Cor. 9. 27. where he says, I beat down my body, and
bring it in subjection. Now, though we must humble and afflict our bodies by
fasting, yet we ought not to weaken, abolish, or destroy nature; or do that
whereby the strength of nature may be taken away. For such afflicting is
forbidden, Coloss. 2. 23. And contrariwise, we are commanded by Christ, to pray
for daily bread, that is, such food as is fit to sustain our substances; and
therefore we may by such exercises, overthrow the same.

Yet for the better understanding of the manner of Fasting, three Questions are
to be answered.

I. Question. How long the fast must continue?

Ans. The beginning and end of a Fast, is left unto our liberty. But it is so
long to be kept, as the principal actions of the fast, that is, humiliation
and prayer, do continue, And though the beginning and end thereof be free to
us, yet it is most meet and convenient, that solemn fasts should begin in
the Morning, and last till the Evening. This was the usual custom of the
Church in the old Testament.

II. Question. Whether in the day of a solemn fast, a man may eat any thing
or no? and if he may, what? and how often?

Ans. We may eat, and that (if need require) once or twice. Yet here we must
take with us two caueats. First, concerning the quantity of our meat; it must
be less then ordinary, and only that which is necessary to proserue nature,
and no more: for if it be otherwise, we abolish our fast. Secondly, concerning
the quality of that we eat; it must not be dainty and pleasant, but the
meanest food, and such as has least delightsomnes and delicacie in it. Thus
Daniel fasted for three weeks of days, from morning to evening: in which time
he ate but a small quantity of meat, and that which was none of the
daintiest, Dan. 10. 3.

These caueats observed, a man may lawfully take some sustenance, even in the
time of a solemn fast. For there is no kind of meat but may then be eaten,
quantity and quality being observed. In the old Testament, no clean beast
was forbidden to be eaten, in the day of a fast. And in the New, To the pure,
says Paul, Tit. 1. 15. all things are pure. And the kingdom of God, stands
not in meats and drinks, but in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost, Romans 14.

III. Quest. Whether all persons, are bound to keep the form prescribed, in
the day of the solemn fast?

Ans. All that are able, and can abstain, are bound. Yet because Gods
worship stands not in eating or not eating, some persons are here exempted.

First, all those that are weak, as children, aged persons, and those that are
sickely. Secondly, they that, by reason of the constitution of their bodies,
do find themselves unfit to pray, and hear the word cheerfully, when their
stomachs are empty. These persons may eat in the day of a solemn fast, so
that they observe the caueats before remembered. It is not with us in these
countries, as it was with the Jews: They could fast one, two, or three days
together, without any inconvenience; we cannot do the like. And the reason is
plain. Men that live in those hot countries, have cold stomachs, and so
may fast the longer; but in colder climates, such as ours is, in respect of
theirs; men being of hotter stomachs, are not able to continue fasting so
long as they.

Sect. 3.
The third point is, concerning the Right The right ends of fasting.
ends of a religious fast; and they are four.

The first is, to subdue the flesh, that is, to bring the body, and so the
bodily lusts into subjection to the will and word of God. By eating and
drinking, the body is made heavy, the heart oppressed, the senses dull; and
the whole man unfit for the duties of humiliation, prayer, and hearing of the
word, Luke 21. 24. That therefore this unfitness may be taken away, not only
the body it self, but the unruly lusts of the flesh are to be mortified and
subdued, by this exercise of fasting.

The second end is, to stir up our devotion, and to confirm the attention of
our minds in hearing and in prayer. To this purpose, in the Scripture, fasting
and prayer are for the most part, if not always, joined together; because,
when the stomach is full, the body and mind are less able, to do any good
duty; and contrariwise, when abstinence is used, the heart is lighter, the
affections in better order, the whole man more quick and lively in the service
of God. For this very cause Anna is said, to worship God night and day with
fasting and prayer, Luke 2. 37. And the intent of the Holy Ghost there, is to
commend her for the feruencie of her prayer, which she testified in that by
such exercises, she stirred up and increased the attention of her mind.

The third end is, to testify the humility and contrition of our hearts,
that is to say, our inward sorrow and grief for sin, and our repentance and
effectual turning unto God. Without this end, the fast is but a vain
ceremony. And therefore the Prophet Joel calls upon the people, to turn unto
the Lord with all their hearts, with fasting, weeping, and mourning; to rent
their hearts and not their garments, etc. Joel 2. 12, 13. The Prophet Esaias in
like manner, reprooveth the Jews, because when they fasted, they would afflict
their souls for a day, and how down their heads as a bu^rush, and lie down
in sackcloath and ashes: But made no conscience to turn from their evil
ways. Esaias. 58. 5, 6. Therefore their outward humiliation was but hypocrisy.

The fourth end of a fast, is to admonish us of our guiltines before the Lord,
and to put us in mind of the acknowledgement of our sins, whereby we become
unworthy of any blessing, gift, or mercy; yea unworthy to go upon the ground,
to breath in the air, to eat, drink, sleep, or enjoy any other benefit. In
a word, that we have deserved by our sins all the plagues and punishments
threatued in the Law against sinners. The Malefactor in the day of Assizes,
cannot give greater testimony of the true confession of his guiltines, then by
coming before the Judge, with the rope about his neck; neither can we bring a
more notable sign, of our true humiliation before God, then by coming before
him, in the day of the solemn fast, with open confession and Proclamation of
our guiltiness, both of sin and punishment. Hence it was, that in the fast
of Nineueh, not only men but even the beasts were forbidden to feed or drink
water; for this very end, that the Niuevites might acknowledge their sins to
be so great, and heinous in the sight of God, that in regard thereof, not only
the reasonable creatures themselves, but also the beasts of the field, for
their sakes, were unworthy of life and nourishment.

III. Question. Whether Popish Fasts be lawful, and approved of God?
Ans. They are wicked, and therefore neither approved of God, nor to be
observed by man; and that for three special causes.

First, the patrons and maintainers of them, do appoint set times of fasting,
which are, necessarily to be kept, upon pain of mortal sin. And abstinence
from flesh (with them) is made a matter of conscience. Now to prescribe set
times necessarily to be observed, is contrary to that liberty, which the
Church of God and the governors thereof have for this purpose, only upon
special occasion. When the question was moved to our Savior, by John's
Disciples, Why they and the Pharisees fasted often, whereas his fasted not;
Answer was given in this manner, Can the children of the marriage chamber
mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come, when
the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast, Mat. 9.
15. From whence we may gather, that times of fasting must be, according to the
times of mourning. For Christ gives them to understand, that they were to fast,
as occasions of mourning were offered. As therefore, there can be appointed no
set time for mourning, no more can there be enjoined a set time for fasting;
but must be left to the liberty of the Church, to be prescribed, as God shall
give occasion. Again, the Apostle reprooueth the Church of Galatia, for
observing set days, and months, and times, and years, in way of Religion.
Gal. 4. 10. Montanus the Heretic is thought (in Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c.
17.
Ecclesiastical stories) to have been the first, that made laws for
set-fasting. And the Churches of God in ancienter times, fasted of their own
accords freely, not enforced by law or commandment, but as time and occasion
served.

It is alleged, that this doctrine seems to challenge the Church of England
of Heresy: for it appoints and observes set times of fast. Ans. Nothing
less. For our Church inioyneth and approoueth these times, not upon necessity,
or for religions sake, but for civil and politic respects: whereas the
Romish church, holds it a mortal sin, to put off a set fast appointed, so
much as till the next day following.

The second reason. They of the Church of Rome make a distinction of meats.
For they wholly forbid flesh to be eaten upon days of fast, and allow
whit-meates only then to be used; and that of necessity. Now this difference
of meats is partly impious, partly absurd and foolish.

Impious it is, because they make it for Religions sake. For since the coming
of Christ, there is a liberty given to all men whatsoever, to eat of all
kinds of meats, without any distinction: commanding abstinence from nothing,
which God has created, to be received with thanksgiving. It is true indeed,
we hold a difference between meat and meat, but how? not in way of religion,
but in regard of temperance and health, for civil and politic uses, and
respects. As for the other, we rest upon the word of God, and hold it with
Paul, a doctrine of Devils, to command forbearance of meats, in regard of
conscience, 1. Tim. 4. 3.

But to this place of Paul, they give answer, and say, that it is spoken of
Heretics, such as the Manichees, and Novatia^s etc. were, that held meats in
their own nature unclean. We on the other side reply, and say, that this text
condemns those that make meats any way unclean. And that the Papists do put
this difference, in way of Religion, and conscience; as appears by their
strait prohibitions of flesh as unclean, and that for conscience sake. And
this text they shall never be able to shift off: for it plainly condemns any
such distinction; seeing to the pure, all things are pure; and every creature
of God is good, and nothing to be refused, so it be received with thanksgiving,
1. Tim. 4. 4.

Furthermore, this difference of meats is also foolish. For first, the light
of nature and common sense teaches, that in such meats, as they permit, there
is as much delicacie, pleasure, and contentment, yea as much (if not more)
strength: for example: in some fish, fruits, and wines, as is in flesh by them
forbidden. Yea S. Paul ascribes flesh unto fishes, 1. Cor. 15. 39. There is one
flesh of men, an other of beasts, an other of fishes, etc. Secondly, I call it
foolish, because in their set Fasts they forbid flesh, but permit diverse wines,
and the daintiest iuncates that the Apothecaries shop can affoarde: whereas
in a solemn fast, all meats, drinks, and all other delights, of what kind
and nature soever, are to be forborne. For this was the practice of the Church
in former times, to forbear not only ordinary food, but soft apparel,
sweet ointments, and whatsoever it was, that served to refresh and cheer the
heart, as has been showed.

The third Reason. The Church of Rome gives to their fastings, false and
erroneous ends; as namely, to merit something at the hands of God thereby, to
satisfy his justice for sin, and to be true and proper parts of his worship.
And that these are false and erroneous, I prove by these reasons.

First, they do wholly frustrate the death of Christ, which is the only thing
in the world appointed by God, to be meritorious and satisfactorie.

Secondly, Fasting of it self, is a thing indifferent, neither good nor evil.
For though it be referred to a religious end, which is the humbling of the
soul; yet it is not good in it self, but only in regard of the end. Neither
is it any part of Gods worship, being so referred; but only a proppe and
furtherance, serving (in the right use thereof) to make a man more fit for the
duties of Gods service.

Thirdly, these ends if they be well considered, cannot be the true ends of
fasting, as will appear by this example. A beggar at our doors, entreats an
alms, we give it, and he receives it. But will any man say, that by begging he
does merit or deserve his alms? In like manner we are all beggars, that have
nothing of our own, neither food nor raiment, nor any other blessing we do
enjoy, but all we have, comes unto us only from God. Well, upon just
occasion we give our selves to fasting, we pray earnestly unto him for mercy,
in the pardon of our sins. In this case, is it not great madness to think,
that we by begging mercy can merit mercy at the hands of God? But prayer
(says the Papist) as it is prayer, merits nothing, but as it is a good work.
Ans. Prayer as it is a good work, is no other then begging; and then it is
impossible, that it should be meritorious, unless it be granted, that begging
is meritorious, which cannot be.

These reasons considered, I conclude, that Popish fasts, which stand in force
among them at this day, are wicked and damnable, and consequently to be
abolished, if it were no more, but for the blasphemous ends, which they make of
them.

And thus much touching this point of Fasting, as also concerning the other
Heads of Gods outward worship.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Sabbath day.

THe fourth maine Question touching man, as he stands in relation to God, is
concerning the Time of Gods worship. Wherein certain particular questions are
to be resolved touching the Sabbath day.

The First, and most principal of all the rest is this.

Whether it be in the liberty of the Church of God upon earth, to alter the
Sabbath day from the seventh day, to any other?
In answering to this Question I will not resolutely determine, but only
propound that which I think is most probable.

First therefore, I answer negatiuely. That it is not in the Churches liberty,
to alter the Sabbath, from the Seventh day. The reasons are these.

I. Reason. The substance of the fourth commandment is unalterable. Now the
sanctifying of a rest upon the seventh day, is the substance of the fourth
commandment. Therefore the sanctifying of the rest of the seventh day, is
unalterable in regard of any creature.

That the truth of this reason may appear two things are to be considered.
First, what is changeable and temporary in the Sabbath: and then, what is
moral and perpetual.

Sect. 1.
The things which are temporary and ceremonial What is Ceremonial in the
Sabbath.
in the Sabbath day, are these.

I. That rigorous and precise rest, prescribed to the Jews, which stood in
the strait observation of three things.

First, the Jew might not on the Saboth go forth, or take a journey any
whether, for any matter or business of his own. For of this, there was a
special commandment given, Exodus 16. 29. Tarry every man in his place: let no
man go out of his place the seventh day, namely, to do any work, or business
of his own whatsoever.

Secondly, the Jew might not kindle a fire upon the Sabbath day. For so says
the Lord by Moses, Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations; etc.
Exodus 35. 3. It will be then said, How did they for meat and fire in winter?
Ans. They prepared and dressed their meat the day before: as they were
commanded, Exodus 16. 24. And for fires in winter, if they had any upon the
Sabbath, it was necessary (as I suppose) that as they dressed their meat the
day before, so they should then begin their fire also, which being then
begun, might be preserved on the Sabbath.

Thirdly, the Jew might not carry a burden. This the Lord did expressly
forbid them by the Prophet Jeremy, Thus says the Lord, Carry no burdens
upon the Sabbath day, neither bring them in by the gates of Jerusalem, etc.
Ier. 17. 21. And Nehemiah charged the men of Judah, with the profanation of
the Sabbath in that kind, Neh. 13. 15, 16, 17. In these three particulars,
stood the strict observation of the Jewish rest; which is altogether
temporary, and does not concern the times of the New Testament; because it
was only typical, the Sabbath being (in regard of that manner of rest) a
figure of the most strict spiritual rest from all sin, in thought, word, and
deed, required of cuery true believer.

II. Again, in the Sabbath this was ceremonial and temporary, that it was a
special sign between God and his people, of the blessings that were
propounded and promised in the Covenant, Exodus 31. 13. And these were
principally two. First, it was a sign of their sanctification, to teach them,
that as the Lord had set apart a day of rest, so he did and would sanctify the
obseruers thereof unto himself, by forgiving their sins, and receiving them
into his favor, in and by the Messiah to come. Secondly, it was ordained by
God, to figure and signify the everlasting rest of Gods children, in the
kingdom of heaven. Of this the Prophet Esaias speaks, when he says, that from
month to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath, all flesh shall come to worship
before God, Esa. 66. 23. And the author to the Hebrews, There remains
therefore a Sabbatisme, or rest to the people of God, Heb. 4. 9.

III. Furthermore, this was temporary in the Sabbath, that it was to be
observed upon a set day, namely, the seventh from the Creation, and that with
set rites and ceremonies. So says Moses, The seventh day is the Sabbath,
Deuteronomy. 5. 14. Again, On the Sabbath day, ye shall offer two lambs of a year
old, without spot, and two tenth deals of fine flower, for a meat offering
mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof: and the burnt offering of
every Sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering, and the drink offering
thereof, Numb. 28. 9, 10.

IV. This also was Ceremonial, that it was to be observed, in remembrance of
their deliverance out of Egypt Remember that thou wast a servant in the land of
Egypt, and the Lord thy God brought thee out thence, by a mighty hand and
stretched out arm: therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to observe the
Sabbath day, Deuteronomy. 5. 15.

Sect. 2.
Now, as there were some things temporary and Ceremonial in the Sabbath: so
there are some things in it perpetual and Moral, and those I take it are
three especially.

First, that there should be a day of rest, in which man and beast might be
refreshed after labor.

Secondly, that this day should be sanctified; that is, set apart to the
worship of God. These two first, are therefore moral, because they are
expressly mentioned in the Commandment touching the Sabbath.

Thirdly, that a seventh day should be sanctified to an holy rest, and that
this holy rest should be observed in a seventh day. I say not, in this or that
seventh day, but in one of the seven.

Now that this also is moral, it appears by these reasons.

First, the Sabbath of the seventh day, was instituted and appointed by God in
Paradise, before the fall of man, and the revealing of Christ; yea even then,
when there was one condition of all men. This is plainly set down in Genesis 2.
as also in the fourth Commandment. And upon this ground it is manifest, that a
Sabbath of a seventh day cannot be a Ceremony simply, considering the
ordination thereof was in time long before all Ceremonies. If it be objected,
that it was made a Ceremony afterward. I answer, that the reason is naught.
For Matrimony was ordained in Paradise, and afterward made ceremonial, to
signify the spiritual union between Christ and his Church, and yet
Matrimony is perpetual: and so is a Sabbath of a seventh day. If it be
again **
alleged, that God did then keep a seventh day in his own person, and
afterward enjoined it to man by his commandment. I answer, that the
institution of the Sabbath in Paradise consisted of two parts, Blessing, and
Sanctification: and the meaning of the Holy Ghost is, that God did both bless
it in regard of himself, because he kept it in his own person, and hallowed
it also in regard of man, by commanding it to be sanctified and kept in
performance of holy duties.

Secondly, the reasons of the fourth Commandment are general, and the equity
of them is perpetual, and they have this end, to urge the rest of a seventh
day. Let them be considered in particular. The first, in these words, Six
days shall thou labor. Which some take to be a permission: as if God should
have said thus; If I permit thee six, thou shall allow me a seventh. But they
may be also taken for a commandment, inioyning labor in the six days;
first, because they are propounded in commanding terms; secondly, because they
are an exposition of the curse laid upon Adam, Thou shall eat thy bread in the
sweat of thy face, namely, in the six days: and thirdly, because idleness, the
spoil of mankind, is there forbidden. This being so, there must needs be a
seventh day, not only of rest, to ease them that labor in the six days,
but also of an holy rest, that God might be worshipped in it. The second reason
is taken from Gods example: For in six days, the Lord made heaven and earth,
etc. That which the Lord himself has done in person; the same must man do by
his commandment. But the Lord himself in six days labored, and rested the
seventh. Therefore man must do the same. This reason made by God to the
creature, must stand in force, till he reuerse it, which yet he has not done,
nor does. If then these reasons do not only enforce a rest, and an holy rest
but a rest on the seventh day; then this lest on the seventh day, is a part
of the fourth Commandment: and consequently the Church can not alter it from
the Sabbath day, because they can not alter the substance of that Commandment
which is eternal.

II. Reason. The Sabbath day in the new Testament, (in all likelihood) is tied
to that, which we call the Lords day, and that (as I take it) by Christ
himself. The Reasons thereof are these.

I. The sabbath day of the new Testament, is called the Lord day, Apoc. 1. 10.
Now I suppose, (for in these points still we must go by likelyhoods) its
called the Lords day, as the last Supper of Christ, is called the Lords Supper,
for two causes. First, as God rested the seventh day after the Creation, so
Christ having ended the work of the new creation, rested on this day from his
work of redemption. Secondly, as Christ did substitute the last supper in
room of the passover, so he substituted the first day of the week in room
of the Jews Sabbath, to be a day set apart to his own worship.

II. The Church of Corinth every first day of the week, made a collection for
the poor, as we may read, 1. Cor. 16. 2. and this collection for the poor in
the primitive church followed the Preaching of the word, Prayer, and the
Sacraments, as a fruit thereof, Act. 2. 42. For these be Sabbath exercises,
that went always together in the Apostolical Church. But it will be said,
that collecting for the Saints, is a matter of indifferency, and may be done
upon any day, as well as upon the Sabbath. To this I answer, that Paul commands
the Corinths to do it, as he had ordained it in the Church of Galatia: whereby
he makes it to be an Apostolical, and therefore a divine ordinance. Yea, that
very text does in some part manifest thus much, that it is an ordinance and
institution of Christ, that the first day of the week should be the Lords
day. For Paul commands nothing, but what he had from Christ.

III. Christ and his Apostles, kept the first day of the week as the Sabbath.
For Christ rose again, the first day of the week, and appeared to his
disciples, Ioh. 20. 19. and eight days after, he appeared again to Thomas,
ver. 26. which was the next first day of the week. And this has been the
opinion of sundry ancient divines. Cyrill. lib. 12. in Johan. cap. 58.
Cyrill upon John, says, that this eight day was without doubt the Lords
day, and so ought to be kept, because it is likely Christ himself kept it
holy. And the same is affirmed and taught by Ad Casulanum. Epist 86. ad
Ianuarium. Epist 119. c. 13.
Augustine and Sermon. 5. de res^^rect.
Chrysostom. Again, the Apostles also kept it. For when the Holy Ghost
descended upon them, they were again assembled upon this day, Act. 2. v. 1.
which I prove thus. The day of Pentecost was the first day of the week; for
the Jews were commanded to bring a sheafe of their first fruits, the morrow
after the Sabbath in the passover, Levit. 23. 10. etc. and betwixt that and
Pentecost, they were to reckon fifty days. Hence it follows, that the day
of Christ's resurrection, falling the morrow after the Jews Sabbath, which is
the first day of the week; Pentecost must needs fall on that day: and
therefore the Apostles met that same day, and not they only, but also the
whole Church gathered themselves together, and celebrated this day with
preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments, Act. 20. 7. And
according to this institution of Christ, and the examples of his Apostles, has
been the constant practice of the Church, from their times until now.

IV. That which was prefigured, in that it was prefigured was prescribed: but
the Lords day was prefigured in the eight day, wherein the children of the
Jews were circumcised: therefore it was prescribed to be kept the eight day.
Thus the ancient fathers, by name Cyprian and Augustine have reasoned and
taught. Again, the day of Christ's resurrection was prefigured by that day,
wherein the stone which the builders refused, was made the head of the corner,
Psalm. 118. v. 24. and in that it was prefigured it was appointed by God. For
then it appeared to be true which Peter says of Christ, that god had made him
both Lord and Christ, Act. 2. 36. And the same may be said of the Sabbath of
the new testament, that it was in the figure preordained, and therefore limited
and determined by our Savior Christ unto the Lords day. Other reasons might be
added, but they are only conjectures: these be the principal.

III. Reason. God is Lord of times and seasons, and therefore in all equity,
the altering and disposing thereof is in his hands, and belongs to him alone.
Act. 1. 10. Times and seasons the father has kept in his own hand. Again,
Christ is called the Lord of the Sabbath. And Autiochus Epiphanes is condemned
by the Holy Ghost, because he took upon him to alter times. Dan. 7. 25.
Besides that, Daniel says, that it is God alone that changes times and
seasons, Dan. 2. 21. Now if it be proper unto God, as to create, so to
determine and dispose of times, then he has not left the same to the power of
any creature. And therefore as the knowledge thereof, so the appointment, and
alteration of the same, either in general or particular, belongs not to the
Church, but is reserved to him. The Church then, neither may nor can alter the
Sabbath day. And this is the first part of the answer.

Sect. 2.
The Second is this, If the Church had liberty to alter the Sabbath, then this
alteration must be made within the compass of the week, to the sixth, or fifth,
or fourth, or second, or third, or first day, and not to the eight, or ninth,
or tenth days without the compass of the week. The reason is plain. The
Church of the New Testament, has more knowledge and more grace, then the
people of the old Testament had; and in that regard, ought to have more zeal,
and greater alacrity in the worship of God then they had, that it may exceed
the Jews according to the measure of grace received. And thus, the first and
principal question touching the Sabbath, is answered and resolved.

Sect. 3.
Now, before I come to the next, let us in Objections.
the mean while see and examine the Reasons, that are brought against the
answer presently made. First therefore it is alleged, that in the new
Testament there is no difference of days. For if we have or make difference of
days, we are in truth no better then Jews. That there is no distinction of
days, they prove out of two places. The first is, Col. 2. 16. where the
Apostle says, Let no man condemn you in respect of an holy day, or of the new
moon, or of the Sabbath day. The second, Gal. 4. 10. where the same Apostle
reprooues the Galatians, for observing days, and months, and times, and
years.

To this I answer, that both the places speak of the Feasts of the Jews, and
of difference of days, that stands in force by the Jewish Ceremonial law.
Paul to the Colossians, warnes them to give no occasision to others, whereby
they might justly condemn them, for observing of days in superstitious
manner, upon opinion of holiness and necessity, as if men's consciences were
bound to such observation. And he reprooues the Galatians, for observing days
(as it is likely they did) not only in the Jewish, but also in the Heathenish
manner. To which purpose Paul says, v. 11. He is afraid of them. His meaning
was, because they placing their salvation (in part) in their Jewish observation
of days, after they had been informed touching their liberty in Christ, did
thereby mix the Gospel with the Law: and therefore he feared, least by that
means Christ should become unto them unprofitable, and so his preaching to
small or no purpose.

Again, they allege, Romans 14. 5. where Paul says, One man esteems one day
better then an other, and an other man counts every day alike. In which words
the Apostle blames not them, which think all days as one.

Ans. In the New Testament, all days be as one, in regard of the aptnes
thereof to the worship of God: and yet there may be a difference of days in
regard of order: and this Paul no where condemns. That we may the better
conceive this distinction, we must consider a difference between the Jews
Sabbath and ours, which is this; That the Jews Sabbath was both the time of
the worship of God, and also a part of his worship. But the Sabbath of the new
Testament, though it be a necessary time of Gods worship, yet it is not a part
thereof. If it be said, that it is commanded, therefore (...) must needs be a
part of Gods worship: I answer: It is commanded, not as Gods worship for
substance, but in respect of the duties of the worship, that are to be kept and
performed in it. And hence it is manifest, that in regard of Gods worship,
there is no difference of days in the new Testament, but in regard of order.

Thirdly, they object, that Paul kept the Jews Sabbath, as well as the Lords
day. For he and Barnabas came to Antiochia, and went into the Synagogue on the
Sabbath day, Act. 13. 14. And again, he and Timothy converted Lydia upon the
same day. Act. 16. 13.

Ans. The Apostle did this upon very good ground, not because he held the
observation of it as necessary as the other; but in regard of the weakness of
the Gentiles and Jews newly called. For the Church that consisted of such
persons in those days, was not yet fully persuaded and resolved of the
abrogation of th^^e wish Sabbath: and therefore, for the time, he yielded to
their weakness, and observed it as well as the other. But afterward, when they
were confirmed in that point, he forbear that liberty, and taught the full
abolishment both of it, and other Ceremonies.

Fourthly, Act. 18. 3, 4. Paul is said to come to Corinth to Aquila and
Priscilla, and to work with them in their trade of tent-making: and further,
it is said, that he disputed in the Synagogue every Sabbath day, that is, on
the Jews Sabboths, and exherted the Jews and Grecians: Hence it is gathered
by some, that Paul did only keep the Sabbath of the Jews, and that both on
the Lords day, and on the week days, he wrought with Aquila and Priscilla.

Ans. First, we must remember this Rule, That Charity and Necessity, do
dispense with the Sabbath, and with Ceremonies. If a Town should be on fire,
or if a City or country should be presently assaulted by the enemy, in the
time of the word preached, on the Sabbath day; the preaching of the word, in
these cases, must cease for a time, till by convenient help the fire be
quenched, and the enemy be taken or driven back. Now whereas Paul in the
ordinary days of the week made tents, and on the seventh too, not observing
it, but the Jews Sabbath; we must know, that he did it upon necessity, for
the salvation of the Jews. For Priscilla and Aquila were Jews unconverted,
and Christ was not yet revealed unto them. And if Paul had but once named
Christ, he could have done no good among them. Yet afterward, when he saw
better opportunity, at the coming of Silas and Timotheus from Macedonia, then
he could no longer contain himself, but burned in the spirit, and testified
to the Jews, that Jesus was the Christ, verse. 5. Now if there was cause why he
did not speak of Christ for the time, then was there cause also why he did not
make profession of a Sabbath. Secondly I answer, though Paul did not then
openly sanctify the Sabbath; yet it is to be supposed, that he kept it
privately by himself, reserving some special time for that purpose: and the
contrary cannot be showed.

The Second Question touching the Sabbath.

How the Sabbath of the New Testament is to be observed?
Ans. In observing a Sabbath of the new Testament, there are two things
required; a Rest, and a Sanctification of the same rest to an holy use. This
Answer is made out of the very substance of the fourth Commandment, which is
moral, and has nothing ceremonial in it. And the fourth Commandment (for
substance) consists in a ceasing from labor, and a holy dedication of our rest
to holy use, that is, to the worship and service of God.

Sect. 1.
Now touching the first point, the Rest of the Sabbath; there are three
several Opinions, Rest.
whereof two are contrary, and the third is a mean between both.

The first Opinion is, that we are bound as strictly to keep the outward rest
of the Lords day, as the Jews were to keep the Sabbath: and sundry men are
of this mind. But I take it, this opinion is not warrantable. For (as we said
before) the Jewish manner of keeping the Sabbath in straitnes, is a Ceremony.
And if we be bound to keep it as straightly as the Jews did, then Iudaisme must
still remain, and the ceremonial Law (at least in some part) must still be in
force.

But in favor of this opinion, it is alleged. First, that the fourth
Commandment is a Law, given as well to Christians as to Jews, and therefore
it binds both alike. Ans. The fourth Commandment binds Christians to keep a
seventh day for the Sabbath, both in respect of Rest, as also in regard of
Sanctification thereof; but that it binds them to the same strait manner of
keeping the rest, as it did the Jews, we utterly deny.

Secondly, That the reasons used to inforc* the Commandment, do equally bind
all: therefore the Commandment it self. Ans. It is true for the duty
commanded, but not for the manner of performance. Again, the reason alleged
does not follow: for sometimes the holy Ghost uses a reason that is
perpetual, to enforce a Ceremony. That Levi should have no part, nor
inheritance among his brethren, was a Ceremony commanded by God; and yet the
Lord inforceth it, with a reason that was perpetual, namely, because himself
was the part and inheritance of Levi, among the children of Israel, Numb. 18.
20.

Thirdly, that the Sabbath is a sign (to believers in the new Testament) that
God is their God, and they his people; and the same it was to the Jews:
therefore the bond is as strict to the one, as to the other. Ans. 1. Believers
under the Gospel, have two only signs of the Covenant, Baptism and the Lords
Supper, and no more. 2. The Scripture restrains the Sabbath, as a sign,
only to the Jews. It is a sign between me and you in your generations,
Exodus 31. 13. Again, v. 16. the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath --
for an everlasting covenant. 3. The Sabbath was not a sign in the first
institution in Paradise. For the Covenant of grace was made after the fall of
man, and the sign thereof must needs be appointed after it: considering that
before the fall, Ceremonies signifying sanctification had no place. And this is
the first Opinion.

The second Opinion touching the Rest of the Sabbath, is flat contrary to the
former; namely, that on the Sabbath day, (after the public worship of God is
ended, and the Congregation dissolved,) men have liberty either to give
themselves to labor, or to honest pleasures and recreations. This Opinion does
quite abolish one of the Commandments of the Decalogue. For it presupposes
all days to be alike, this only provided, that the public worship of God be
solemnly kept. Now this may be done in any day of the week; and there will be
no need of appointing a set time for Gods service, if all days be equal,
without any difference or distinction. But the fourth Commandment (for
substance) is eternal, and requires (upon pain of the curse) both rest from
labor, and a setting apart of the same rest, to the duties of holiness and
religion. And if it command abstinence from ordinary abour, then much more
from pleasures and recreations.

The third and last Opinion, holds the mean between the two former
extremities, and that I take to be the best and safest. The substance hereof
consists of these two conclusions.

1. That upon the Sabbath day of the new Testament, men are to rest from the
ordinary labors of their callings. Thus much is commanded in the fourth
commandment. For the rest it self was not a ceremony, (as I said before) but
the straight and precise manner of resting. Again, it is most necessary, that
religion and the power thereof, should be maintained amongst Gods people, which
cannot possibly be, unless men (at sometimes) set themselves apart unto it.
The student that desires learning, does not attain unto knowledge, unless he
do daily consecrate and devote himself to the study thereof. In like manner,
religion cannot be preserved and maintained in the Church, except men do
wholly and continually employ themselves in the practice of the same.
Furthermore, it is the liberty that Gods law gives to servants, yea and to
beasts, that they shall not be oppressed with labor by working on the Lords
day; and this liberty is grounded upon the law of nature, and common equity.

Here the common sort are wont to reply and say. If we must rest from the
labor of our callings the whole day, we shall not be able to maintain our
selves and our families. To which it may be answered, that they which gathered
Manna only in the six days, had as much as they, that gathered it on the
seventh day; and that which they gathered the seventh day, did not remain
sweet, but stanke and perished. They therefore which rest on the Sabbath day,
must not be distracted with needelesse cares, but live by by faith, and depend
upon Gods providence for meat, drink, and clothing. And the labor of the
calling then used, when it is expressly forbidden by God, brings rather a
curse with it, then a blessing. Again, such persons must remember, that
Godliness has the promises of this life, and the life to come. 1. Tim. 4. 8.
and if they will first seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, all
things necessary shall be cast unto them in way of advantage, Mat. 6. 33.
Therefore, if they keep his commandment, and rest upon the seventh day, God
will in mercy give a blessing, and they shall no less receive from him their
daily bread, in that day, then in any other.

II. Conclusion. In this Rest, sundry kinds of works may be done, and that
with good conscience; principally two.

The first are works both holy, and of present necessity. And they are such,
as cannot be done before or after the Sabbath. These are likewise of two sorts.
The first are those, that do necessarily pertain to Gods worship, so as
without them God cannot be worshipped. Of this kind is the Sabbath days
journey, Act. 1. 12. allowed among the Jews to the people, to go and hear
the word preached. Thus we read, that the Shunamite went ordinarily upon the
Sabbath and new Moon, to the Prophet, to hear him. For when she demanded
leave of her husband, to go to the Prophet, he asks her, Why will thou go,
seeing it is neither new Moon, nor Sabbath day, 2. King. 4. 23. Of the same
sort, were the killing and dressing of sacrificed beasts, in the time of the
law; whereof our Savior says, Have ye not read in the law, how that on the
Sabbath days, the Priests in the temple break the Sabbath, and are blameless,
Mat. 12. 5. The next sort of works of present necessity, are those that
belong immediately, to the preservation of the temporal life of man and beast,
or that serve to the good estate of them both. Such are works of mercy: as,
the watering of cattle, Mark. 12. 11. the drawing of a beast out of a pit,
Luc. 14. 5. and such like.

The second kind of works, that may be done upon the Sabbath, are works of
Christian liberty, out of the Case of necessity. These were such as the Jews
might not do, and yet we in the new Testament may do them. For example:
provision and dressing of meat, making fires, and carrying of burdens. Yet
upon this liberty, men ought not to gather, that they may do what they will,
because they must cease from the ordinary execution of the works of their
callings. For the word of God gives no such warrant: men are in this case, to
submit themselves to his will expressly revealed, and to use their liberty
according to the same.

Here two Cases are propounded.

I. Case. Whether we may not lawfully use recreations on the Sabbath day, as
shooting, bowling, hunting, hawking, wrestling, etc?

Ans. I take it, we are not denied to rejoice and solace our selves upon this
day. For to some men, at some times, recreation may be more necessary then
meat, in case of weakness, for present preservation of health. And though not
in that regard, yet being well ^sed, it may be a furtherance to men, in the
performance of the duties of godliness, as well as in the duties of their
calling. But this rejoicing must be such as was the rejoicing of the Jews,
Nehem. 8. 12. which was only spiritual, and in the Lord. For they rejoiced
only for this, that they understood the law of God, that was taught them.

But as for the recreations and pastimes aforenamed, as bowling and such like,
they are not at this time to be used. My reason is this. That which is the more
principal and necessary, namely labor in the execution of a man's calling, is
forbidden: recreation therefore which is for labor, must cease on that day
when labor cease. Again if the duties of the ordinary vocation, otherwise
lawful and commendable, be therefore forbidden, because they destroy the rest
commanded, and take up the mind, that it cannot be freely employed in the
affairs of God, then much more are works of pleasures forbidden, because they
do the same things much more, though otherwise in themselves they be not
unlawful. Object. Servants must have recreation, otherwise how shall they be
able to work in the week day? Ans. True; but their recreation must be granted
them in the days of labor. For recreation pertains not to rest, but to
labor, and is therefore used, that a man by it may be made more fit to
labor.

II. Case. Whether men upon any occasion, may not do a work of their
callings, in the morning or evening of the Sabbath day, as Tradesemen, for
example I answer that they may, so be it they observe four caveats. I. That
the work done, be no scandal to any person. II. That it withdraw not the mind
of the worker or any other, from sanctifying the Sabbath, either publickely or
privately. III. That it be not a work of gain, but a work of mercy, or tend
to a work of mercy. IV. That it serve for the immediate preservation of life,
health, or goods. Of life; thus Elias continued his flight from Iezabel many
Sabboths together. 1. King. 19. 8. And the reason is good: the Sabbath was made
for man (says Christ) that is, not for the hurt, but for the good of man. Of
health; and thus our Savior Christ visited the sick. Ioh. 5. 3. and cured the
blind man upon the Sabbath. Ioh. 9. 14. By whose example, the Physician and the
Surgeon may lawfully go, not only to give necessary counsel, but to
minister necessary physic and do cures. Lastly, of goods which are in
present danger of loosing. Thus Christ would have the ox presently pulled out
of the pit, Luke 14. 5. and the ship on the shore full fraught with wares,
requires present help, if it be in apparent danger of sinking. Thus much
concerning the first thing, required in the observation of the Sabbath.

Sect. 2.
The second thing, required in the halowing of the Sabbath of the new
testament, is Sanctification of Rest.
the Sanctification of rest, which is nothing else, but the dedicating of it to
a religious use, that is, to the practice of divine worship. This
sanctification, is either public or private.

The public, is the solemn performance of spiritual works, commanded in the
second and third Commandments, and tending to public worship. And this may be
reduced to four principal heads. I. The reading or preaching of the word,
when the Minister publicly in the Congregation assembled, does faithfully
deliver unto the people pure and sound doctrine, and applies the same as
necessity requires, and occasion serves, to the edification and salvation of
all and every hearer in public audience: and the people on the otherside, do
reverently and attentively hear the same word read and preached. II. The
administration of the Sacraments according to Gods institution, by the
Ministers of the Church lawfully called. III. Public prayer, wherein the
Minister calls upon the name of the Lord, and the whole congregation, in
fervent affection, lift up their hearts unto him, and in mind give assent to
the prayers made in the name and behalf of them. IV. Collection and giving of
alms for the relief of the poor, whether they be captives and strangers, or
those that dwell among us, the sick, the needy, orphans and widows, and
such like. Upon these four heads, does stand the whole public worship of God.
For proof and declaration hereof, read these places, Neh. 8. Act. 2. 42. Act.
13. 14. 15. Act. 16. 13. Act. 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16. 1. 2. etc.

Private sanctification, (which serves to answer the second opinion) stands in
these things. I. That every man in the beginning of the Sabbath, in the
morning, do privately prepare himself to the public service that follows,
by private prayer, by examination and humbling of himself before God, in
respect of his particular sins. This the wiseman exhorts unto, when he
says, Take heed to thy foot when thou entrest into the house of God, Eccles.
4. 17. and his meaning is, that before a man betakes himself to the public
congregation, there to perform service and worship unto God, he should look
into his heart, and examine his affections and thoughts, that he come not
unprepared, which duty though it be always to be done, yet principally on the
Sabbothday. The children of Israel rose up early in the morning on the
Sabbothday, to offer up burnt offerings, and peace offerings to an Idol, Exo.
32. 5. 6. much more ought we, etc. And it is said of our Savior Christ, that
he arose very early in the morning before day, and went into a solitary place
to pray; and the day following was the Sabbath, when he preached in the
Synagogues, Mar. 1. 35, 36. II. That when the congregation is dissolved, we
spend the rest of the Sabbath; in meditation and conference of the word before
preached, and of the creatures. Thus it is said of some that heard Paul preach,
that they received the word with all readiness, and searched the Scripture,
whether those things were so, Act. 17. 11. And the whole 92. Psalm was penned,
that it might be a song of the Sabbath, and it contains nothing but a
meditation of the works of God. III. That men privately exercise themselves,
in the works of charity and mercy; as in visiting the sick, in making peace
between those that are at discord, in releeuing the poor, in teaching and
instructing the ignorant, in co^forting those that are distressed and
comfortless. Neh. 8. 12. Then all the people went to eat and to drink, and
to send part abroad to the poor, and to make great joy.

The Tthird Question touching the Sabbath.

When the Sabbath does begin?
To this some do answer, in the evening, and some in the morning. My answer is
this, that the Sabbath of the new Testament amongst us, is to begin in the
morning, and so to continue t^l the next morrow, and not in the evening, till
the evening.

The reasons be these. 1. The Sabbath is to begin, when other ordinary days
begin, according to the order and account of the Church wherein we live. 2. It
was the practice of Christ and the Apostles. For Christ (as it has been
thought of ancient times) consecrated the Sabbath, in that he rose from the
dead early in the morning, when the first day of the week began to dawne,
Matthew. 28. 1. and therefore it is fit that the Sabbath day should then begin
when he rose, for as much as it is kept in remembrance of his resurrection. The
same was the practice of the Apostles. For Act. 20. 7. the first day of the
week the Jews came together at Troas in the morning, and there Paul preached
from that time till midnight, being the next morning to depart, having staid
there as is plain out of the 6. v. seven days. In that text I no^e two
things. First, that the night there mentioned was a part of the seventh day of
Paul's abode at Troas. For if it were not so, then he had stayed at least a
night longer, and so more then seven days, because he should have stayed part
of another day. Secondly, that this night was a part of the Sabbath which they
then kept. For the Apostle keeps it in manner of a Sabbath, in the exercises
of piety and divine worship, and namely in Preaching. Yea further he
continues there till the rest was fully ended: He communed with them till the
dawning of the day, and so departed. verse. 11. Besides this text, David says
in his Psalm of the Sabbath, that he will declare Gods loving kindness in the
morning, and his truth in the night, Psalm. 92. 2. making the night following a
part of the Sabbath.

Against this doctrine it is alleged, first, that the Sabbath is to begin in
the evening, because in the first of Genesis it is said, fix several times, the
evening and the morning made the first day, and so the second, and third, etc.

Ans. First; in that text when it is said, the evening and the morning, made
such and such days, by the evening is understood the night and by the morning
the day, and the evening was the end of the day, and the morning the end of the
night. This exposition is ancient, and yet in Scripture we find not one place
where the evening is put for the night, Secondly, I answer that the collection
from that place is of no force. For thus the reason must needs be framed. That
which God did in appointing of days, the same must we do in using of them.
But God in appointing of days, began the day at the evening. Ergo, etc. The
consequent is false. For the case is otherwise in the constitution of time,
then it is in the use of time constituted: and there is not the same reason of
things in doing, as there is of the same things in being and use. Thirdly,
this did not bind the Jews. For they in all likelihood began their Sabboths in
the morning. Indeed their solemn feasts, as the Passover and such like,
began and were kept from evening to morning, as we may read Levit. 23. 5. But
their ordinary Sabbath was kept from morning to morning. Whence it is that
Saint Matthew calls the dawning of the first day of the week, the end of the
Sabbath of the Jews, Matthew. 28. 1. and there is nothing (I take it) that can
be brought to the contrary.

It is objected that Moses says, Leuit. 23. 32. From even to even shall ye
celebrate your Sabbath. Ans. The words must be understood of the feast of
reconciliation, being the tenth day of the seventh month, which was
solemnized and kept from even to even. And it is called a Sabbath, because it
was by special commandment appointed to be kept as the Sabbath day and that
in two respects. First because it was to be kept holy by the Jews, in humbling
themselves and offering Sacrifices, verse. 27. Secondly, because upon that day
it was not lawful to do any servile work upon pain of death, verse. 25. 30.

Again, it is alleged that Joseph of Arimathea could not embaulme Christ, by
reason that the Sabbath was at hand, and this was the evening. I answer, that
the Jews Sabbath there meant, concurred with the day of their passover, and
hence it was that their Sabbath began in the evening.

By this that has been said, the answer to the third Question is plain, to
wit, that in the new Testament the Sabbath is to begin at the morning, and so
to continue to the next morning, and not as some suppose to begin at the even,
and continue till the next even. And thus much touching the special Questions
of Gods worship, as also generally concerning those that belong to Man as he
stands in relation to God.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK of the Cases of Conscience, concerning Man, as he stands in
relation to man.
CHAP. I.
Of the Nature and Differences of Virtue, and the Order of the Questions.

THVS far we are proceeded in the handling of two sorts of Questions, whereof
some do concern man as he is considered apart by himself, without respect
unto another: some again concern man, as he stands in the first relation,
namely to God.

Now we come by order, to speak of the third and last head of Cases,
propounded by the Conscience of man, as he stands in the second relation, to
man. And under this Head are comprehended all those Questions of Conscience,
that are incident to the lives of men; and which do belong unto man, as he is
a member of some Society, whether it be the Family, the Church, or the
Commonwealth.

For the better and more orderly proceeding in this Discourse, some convenient
Subject or Matter is to be propounded, whereunto all the Questions that follow
may fitly be reduced. Now of all other, the most convenient Subject in this
kind is Virtue, and therefore according the differences of Virtue, we will
distinguish the Questions into three several sorts.

But before we proceed to particulars, it shall not be amiss to speak
somewhat generally of Virtue, so far forth, as the knowledge thereof may give
light to the things that follow.

Touching Virtue, two things are briefly to be remembered: first, what it is;
and then, what be the distinct kinds thereof.

Virtue is a gift of the Spirit of God, and a part of regeneration, whereby a
man is made apt to live well.

I call it first, a gift of the Spirit of God, because in whomesoeuer it is,
whether in Christians or in Heathen men, it has the nature of a gift that
flows immediately from the spirit of God. And this I put in the first place,
to confute the received error of the wisest Heathen Philosophers, which call
Virtue an habit of the mind, obtained and confirmed by custom, use, and
practice.

Secondly, I call it such a gift, as is also a part of regeneration; and this
is added for two causes.

First, that we may put a difference between Christian and Heathen virtues.
For, howbeit the same virtues in kind and name, are and may be found, both in
them that profess Christ, and those also that are ignorant of the true God;
yet they are in them after a diverse manner. For in Heathen men they are the
gifts of God, but not parts of regeneration and new birth: but in those that be
true Christians, they are indeed not only the gifts of Gods spirit, but also
essential parts of regeneration.

That we may the better yet conceive this difference, we must understand, that
the grace of God in man, is twofold; restraining, and renewing.

Restraining is that, which bridleth and restrains the corruption of men's
hearts, from breaking forth into outward actions, for the common good, that
Societies may be preserved, and one man may live orderly with another. Renewing
grace is that, which does not only restrain the corruption, but also
mortifieth sin, and renewes the heart daily more and more. The former of
these is incide^t to Heathen men; and the Virtues which they have, serve only
to repress the act of sin in their outward actions: but in Christians, they
are graces of God, not only bridling and restraining the affections, but
renewing the heart, and mortifyin* all corruption. And though those virtues of
the Heathen be graces of God, yet they are but general and common to all:
whereas the virtues of Christians, are special graces of the spirit,
sanctifying and renewing the mind, will, and affections. For example,
chastity in Joseph was a grace of Gods spirit, renewing his heart; but
chastity in Xeuoerates was a common grace, serving only to curb and
restrain the corruption of his heart. And the like may be said of the justice
of Abraham; a Christian, and of Aristides, a Heathen.

Secondly, I add this clause, to meet with an error of some learned
Philosophers, who taught, that the very nature of Virtue stands in a mean, or
mediocritie of affections. This that they say is true in part, but not wholly.
For the mediocritie, of which they speak, without renouation of affections, is
nothing: and therefore all virtues, that are not joined with a renouation and
change of the affections, are no better then sins. This point the
Philosophers never knew, and hence it was, that they stood only upon a
mediocritie, defining a man to be truly virtuous, that did wisely observe a
mean between two extremes.

Lastly, I say that this gift of God, makes a man fit to live well. In which
clause stands the proper effect of Virtue; which is, to make those in whom
it is, to lead their lives well. And by this we are advertised, to take heed
of the opinion of Philosophers, concerning some particular virtues. For in
their moral discourses, they give both the name and the nature of Virtue to
those things, which are either false and counterfeit virtues, or indeed none
at all. For example, Aristotle makes Vrbanitie a virtue, which is indeed a
sin, being nothing else, but a dexterity in mocking and descanting upon
reens persons and names: and so it is reckoned by Paul amongst grievous sins
and vices, which are to be avoided, Ephesians. 5. 4. Again, the Philosopher calls
Magna^imitie (whereby a man thinks himself worthy of great honors, and
thereupon enterpriseth great things) a Virtue; which notwithstanding is to be
holden a flat vice. For by the law of God, every man is to range himself
within the limits of his calling, and not to dare, once to go out of it.
Whereas on the contrary, the scope and end of this virtue (as they term it)
is to make men to attempt high and great matters above their reach, and so to
go beyond their callings. Besides, it is directly opposite to the virtue of
humility, which teaches that a man ought always to be base, vile, and lowly
in his own eyes. The Prophet David cleares himself of this sin, Psalm. 131.
1. when he says, Lord, I am not high minded, mine eyes are not hautie, I have
not walked in things that be great, and above my reach. Furthermore, no Virtue
must make us to forsake good life, but every one serves for this end, to make
us fit to live a godly life.

The next point to be considered is, What be the kinds of virtue.

Virtue is either in the mind of man, or in the will. The virtue of the mind,
is Prudence. The virtue of the will, is that that orders man's will; and it is
twofold: for it respects either our selves, or others.

That which respects our selves, is conversant about two maine things in the
heart of man, the revenging, and the lusting power. That which respects the
revenging power, is Clemency; which stands in the ordering and reforming of
the raging power of Anger. The next, which respects the lusting power, is
Temperance.

Virtues that do respect others, are either concerning courtesy, as
Liberality; or concerning Equity. And these consist partly in doing of
equity, as Justice; partly in defending and maintaining it, as Fortitude.

Now according to this distinction of virtues, the Questions of Conscience are
to be distinguished, in this sort. Some of them concern Prudence; some
concern Clemency; some Temperance; some Liberality; some also concern
Justice, and some Fortitude. Of all which in order.

CHAP. II.
Of Questions concerning Prudence.

THere are two maine Questions of Conscience, which concern Prudence.

I. Question. How a man should practice Prudence or Wisdom?
This I acknowledge, is a high point in the life of man, and such, as cannot be
resolved, as it ought, without great deliberation; notwithstanding I will do
mine endeavor to answer something.

Concerning Prudence, there are sundry things to be considered.

First, what is the beginning of the practice of this virtue: and that in a
word, is the Fear of God. This fear stands principally in two things; the
first is, a reverent awe of the Majesty of God in all places, and at all
times, whereby we are resolved, that wheresoever we are, we are in his
presence, and whatsoever we think, speak, or do, it is wholly and perfectly
known unto him. The second is, a resolved care to walk as in the presence of
God: that is, to keep his commandments, and to yield obedience unto his
Majesty in all things. Now that this fear is the beginning of wisdom, it
appears by sundry places of scripture. Psalm. 111. 10. The beginning of
wisdom, is the fear of Jehovah. Pro. 3. 7. The beginning of knowledge is the
fear of the Lord: fools despise wisdom and understanding. Moses tells the
children of Israel that herein stood their wisdom and understanding before
the eyes of all people, that they observe and practice all the ordinances and
judgments of God, which he had commanded them, Deuteronomy. 4. 6. And David
professes of himself, that by his daily meditation in the law of God, and
keeping his commandments, he became wiser then his enemies, Psalm. 119. 98. Yea
of more understanding then all g^^ teachers, ver. 99. yea further, more prudent
then the ancient, ver. 100.

Secondly, we must consider the rule of prudence; and that is, spiritual
understanding, whereby we are enabled to know and conceive spiritually truth
and falsehood, good and badde. This Saint Paul wished unto the Church of Coloss.
when he says, we cease not to pray for you, and desire, that ye might be
fulfilled with knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, Col. 1. 9. And the same Apostle exhorting the Romans, to give
up their bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, and not to
fashion themselves like unto this world; he makes the ground of his
exhortation, and consequently the rule of their obedience thereunto, the
renouation of their minds or understandings, to this end, That they might
prove, what is the good will of God, acceptable and perfect, and answerably
do and perform the same, Romans 12. 2. And his reason is good, because though
prudence be the rule of all virtues, as the ancient Philosophers among the
heathen have affirmed, yet it self must be ruled by a higher rule; which they
knew not, namely, by spiritual understanding and knowledge, according to the
word of God.

Thirdly, we are to consider what is the Practice of Prudence; and wherein it
consists.

In the practice thereof, two actions are required; the one, is Delil^ration,
whereby according to spiritual understanding, we advise what is good and bad,
what truth and falsehood, what is to be embraced and done, and what not. The
other is Determination, whereby we resolve upon former deliberation, to
embrace, to do, to follow, and pursue the best things in every kind. And
therein stands the very nature and form of true Christian prudence, when a man
(upon due consideration of things and actions, together with their properties
and circumstances) proceeds to a holy and godly resolution according to the
rule aforesaid. Now the practice of Prudence in these two actions is very
large, and consists of sundry branches. I will only touch^ the principal,
and propound them in these Rules following.

The first Rule is this. A man must, in the first place, and above all things
in the world, carefully provide for the forgiveness of his sins, and the
salvation of his soul. This our Savior Christ commands as a special duty,
Matthew. 6. verse. 33. Seek ye first the the kingdom of God and his
righteousness. And sinners and unrepentant persons, are sundry times in
scripture termed fools, as in many other respects, so principally in this,
because they fail in this first point of wisdom, going on in their sin
without repentance. The five virgins in the Gospel are for this very cause
pronounced foolish, or fools, because they provided not for the oil of Faith,
but did only content themselves with shining lamps, that is, a naked
profession of religion and virtue; and for want of wisdom and prudence in
this point, they were justly deprived of access into the bedde-chamber. Thus,
the rich man, that had great revenues and abundance of wordly wealth, is
notwithstanding termed by God himself a fool, because he gathered riches to
himself and was not rich in God; that is, he minded earthly things, and placed
his chief felicity in vain and transitory riches, not once forecasting, how
to come into the favor of God, that he might be saved.

To this Rule I add that, which Paul by way of caveat commends to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 5. 16. Take heed that ye walk circumspectly, not as unwise,
but as wise, redeeming the time. As if he should say, Play the part of wise
men; take time while time serves, lay hold of the means of salvation, use no
delays in heavenly matters, defer not your repentance from day to day: for
the days are evil, and you may be surprised in your sins before you be
aware.

II. Rule. We must use continual watchfulnes against our enemies, but
specially against our spiritual enemies. This watchfulnes our Savior
commands often in the Gospel, but specially in Mark. 13. 33. Take heed,
watch, and pray. 35. Watch therefore, for ye know not, etc. 37, Those things
that I say unto you, I say unto all men, Watch. And S. Peter exhorts in like
manner, Be sober, and watch: for your adversary the Devil as a roaring lion,
walks about, seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 5. v. 8.

Now this duty stands principally in two things. First, that we diligently
observe the danger, wherein we are, by reason of temptations. Secondly, that we
daily labor to search and find out the secret counsels, practices, and
enterprises of our enemies, and withal seek to prevent them. To this purpose,
we must watch against the corruptions of our hearts, the temptations of the
Devil, and the day and hour of our death, that we be not found unprepared.
For our own sins are many; Satan is strong and subtle in his suggestions,
and temptations; and death, though of all other things it be most certain, and
cannot be avoided, yet it is most uncertain in regard of the time when, the
place where, and the manner and kind, of what and how a man shall end his
days.

III. Rule. Every man must measure himself by his own strength, and do
nothing beyond his ability. This Rule is set down, though expressed in other
terms, Romans 12. 3. No man must presume to understand, above that which is
meet to understand, but ought to be wise according to sobriety, as God has
dealt to every man the measure of faith. An example of the transgression of
this Rule, we have in David's three Worthies, who brake into the host of the
Philistims, to fetch David the king water from the well of Bethlem, 2. Sam. 23.
^6. Which act of theirs, was a rash enterprise, and such a one, as David
himself condemns in that Chapter, because they went beyond their strength,
to encounter with a whole garrison of men, they being themselves but few,
namely three in number.

IV. Rule. We must distinguish between the necessary works of our callings,
that pertain to us, and other works that are out of our callings, and
pertain not unto us: and we must do the other, though we leave these undone.
This Rule is propounded in 1. The. 4. 11. Meddle with your own business, that
is, do the necessary works of your callings that belong to you, though you
leave the other for the time undone. The contrary to it, is to live or to
behave himself inordinately, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 7. And we have an example of the
transgression hereof in Peter, Ioh. 21. 21. whom when Christ had commanded to
follow him, he would needs ask him what John should do; Christ's gives him
this answer, what is that to thee? In which words, he teaches that not only
Peter, but also every man must attend upon the necessary and proper works of
his own vocation, and not deal with other men's business; which because Peter
did, he is by that answer secretly repooued, and justly condemned of curiosity
in that behalf.

V. Rule. We must put a difference between things honest and of good report,
and things dishonest and of bad report, and these we are to let pass, and only
to do the other. Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things. To E duobus malis non
minimum, sed n^ntrum eligendum.
this may be added one caveat, that, Of two evils which are both sins, we must
not only not choose the les, but we are to choose neither. For their damnation
is just, who affirm that men may do evil, that good may come of it as the
Apostle says, Romans 3. 8.

VI. Rule. Things of profit and pleasure, must give place to things that belong
to virtue and honesty. This conclusion the light of nature teaches. Worldly
men say, who will show us any good? But David's prayer is, Lord lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon us, Psalm. 4. 6. Godliness is the great gain:
therefore all gain must give place to godliness, 1. Tim. 6. 6.

VII. Rule. We may not trust men upon fair pretenses, that they make unto us,
without further trial. This point was practiced by our Savior Christ, who,
though many believed in his name, when they saw the miracles which he had done;
yet he did not commit himself unto them, because he knew them all, Ioh. 2. 24.
And it is also verified by the common proverb, First try, and then trust.

VIII. Rule. We must give place to the sway of the times, wherein we live, so
far forth as may stand with keeping faith, and a good conscience. We may not
be temporizers, and change our Religion with the times: but yet we may and must
give place to times, as we give place to the stream, so that it be done with
keeping of true religion, and good conscience. This Rule was practiced by Paul,
Act. 28. 11. who living among the Heathen, was constramed to speak as they,
and therefore he says, that he departed in a ship to Rome, whose badge was
Castor and Pollux, Act. 19. 10. Again, he was three years in Ephesus an
idolatrous place, where the great goddess Diana was worshipped; yet in all
that time he contained himself, and spoke nothing in particular against Diana,
but only in general against false gods, saying, that they be no gods that are
made with hands, v. 26. Nay. Alexander could not charge him with this, that he
had in all that while, blasphemed their goddess Diana. Paul therefore was
feign to yield to the sway of those times, that so he might do some good in
Ephesus by his Ministry. Whereas, if he had spoken against Diana directly, it
had not bin possible for him, to have done that good by preaching, which
otherwise he did. Again, in the Primitive Church, the Apostles for the weakness
of the Jews, did yield to the use of Circumcision, and permitted abstinence
from blood, and that which was strangled, etc. so far forth, as it stood with
pure religion, and good conscience: and if they had not so done, they should
not have won the Jews to the faith as they did.

IX. Rule. If we cannot do the good things that we desire, in that exquisite
manner that we would, we must content our selves with the mean; and in things
which are good, and to be done, it is the safest course to satisfy our selves
in doing the less, least in ventring to do the more, which cannot be, we grow
to the extremity, and so fail or offend in our action. It is a good and wise
counsel of the Preacher, to this purpose. Eccl. 7. 16. Be not just overmuch:
and his meaning may be this; Be not too strict or curious, in effecting that
which thou intendest, exactly, when thou can not; but rest contented in this,
that thou have done thine endeavor; and take to the less, when the greater
cannot be effected. In some countries, Popish Images erected in Churches, do
stand undefaced. The good desire of the people is, that they may be pulled
down; but this cannot be brought to pass. What then are they to do in this
case? they must not grow to extremity, and pull them down themselves; but they
must entreat the lawful Magistrate for their remooueall, and pray to God, that
he may be moved so to do; and in the mean time, rest content with that they
have done, and wait the Magistrates pleasure. In the Judicial law, by reason
of the hardness of the Jews hearts, sundry sins could not utterly be taken
away, as diuorcements, polygamie, usury. Hereupon, the Lord makes a law of
Toleration, without approbation; and did not remove them quite away, for that
was not possible, in regard of man, for the time: but restrained the evil,
that could not be quite off and abolished otherwise. And herein appeared the
great wisdom of God, in making a Law not to allow of, nor yet utterly to take
away, but to moderate the practice of these sins in the Jews, for the
hardness of their hearts. In like manner, in this our land there is the practice
of Usury, a sin that cannot, nor ever shall be rooted out utterly. For this
cause, the States of this kingdom, have out of their wisdom, provided a Law
for the toleration thereof after a sort, and that upon special cause. For if
the Magistrate should have enacted a Law utterly to abolish it, it would before
this (in likelihood) have grown to great extremity. The same was the practice
of the Apostles in their times, who yielded to bear with the use of
Circumcision for a time, when they could not otherwise utterly cut it off.

II. Question. Whether a man may lawfully and with good conscience, use
Policy in the affairs of this life?
Ans. There be four principal Caueats, which being observed, Policy may be
used, and is not against Christian religion. I. Nothing must (in policy) be
said, done, or intended, to prejudice the truth, specially the truth of the
Gospel. II. Nothing is to be said done, or intended, against the honor and
glory of God, either in word, in deed, or in show. III. Nothing must be
wrought or contrived against justice that is due to man. IV. All actions of
policy, must be such as pertain to our calling, and be within the limits and
bonds thereof. For if any action whatsoever, be done out of that calling
wherein God has placed us, or at least be not answerable thereunto, though it
be plotted and attempted in never so great wisdom and policy, it is
unlawful and not warrantable.

These Caueats observed, it is not unlawful to use that which we commonly call
Policy. And the reason is this: when any business is to be done, we must make a
twofold inquiry. First, into the thing to be done, whether it be good or
badde, lawful or not lawful, commanded or forbidden. Secondly, into our
selves, whether the work in hand be agreeable to the calling of the doer, or
answerable to that duty, which he owes to God and man. Now because both these
are grounded upon the former cautions, therefore we conclude, that whatsoever
business is taken in hand, and not suited unto them, it has not good warrant,
and so cannot be done with good conscience.

Yet for better clearing of this answer, let us a little consider the
Scriptures, and the examples there recorded, touching this policy. In Josh. 8.
5. we shall find that Joshua uses Martial policy in the besieging of Ai,
placing one part of his army in an ambush, and causing the other part to fly:
for by that means, the men of Ai coming out of the city, and pursuing those
that fled, the soldiers that lay in ambush, took the city and destroyed it.
In 2. Sam. 5. 23. David being to make war against the Philistims, asks
counsel of God, and God teaches him policy; he therefore in his own example
allows policy; and more especially those wise and prudent shifts in war,
which we call Stratag^ms or policies of the field. We have also the example of
Paul for this purpose, who Act. 21. 26. faines himself to have made a vow to
be a Nazarite, that he might yield somewhat to the weakness of the Jews, who
were not sufficiently informed in the doctrine of Christian liberty. This
practice was warrantable, neither was it a sin in Paul: for he did it by the
counsel of the Church at Jerusalem, v. 20, 24. And Paul himself never made
mention of this, as of a sin, which he would undoubtedly have done, had it
been sin Again, Act. 23. 6. when he was brought before Ananias the Priest,
and the council at Jerusalem, being in some danger, he uses policy: for he
pretended that he was a Pharisie, and by that means raised a dissension
between the Pharisees and the Sadduces. And this was no sin in Paul: for he
spoke no more but the truth, only he concealed part of the truth.

Now if it fall out otherwise, that policy be used, and any of these four
Caueats be not observed, then it looses both the name and nature of true
Policy, and becomes fraud, craft, and deceit, and so is condemnable. Example
hereof we have in David, 1. Sam. 21. 14. who when he came to the court of
Achish king of Gath, and saw himself in danger, he faines himself mad.
Which though he did to save his own life, yet his poli^^e was not to be
allowed of: for it tended to his own disgrace, (he being King of Israel:) and
it was also dishonorable unto God, who had appointed him to be the king of
Israel. Again, that which is commonly called the policy of Machiavel, is here
to be condemned. For it is not answerable to the Cauears before remembered.
Besides that, it is not only against the written law of God, but even against
the law of Nature. And the very foundation. thereof, stands only in the
practice of lying, swearing, forswearing, in fraud, deceit, and injustice.

CHAP. III.
Of Questions concerning Clemency.

Clemency or meekenes, is a virtue, that serves to moderate wrath and revenge.

Touching Clemency there be three Questions.

I. How a man is to carry himself, in respect of injuries and offenses done
unto him? II. When Anger is a sin, and when not? III. How a man should
remedy his rash and unjust anger?
I. Question. How may a man carry himself, in respect of injuries and
offenses done unto him?
Aus. That a man may behave himself so as becomes a Christian in these
cases, he must in the first place, inquire into the nature and quality of the
wrong done.

Now, Offenses that are done to us by others, are of three sorts.

The first sort, and the least are, when some things are done to us, that do
only displease us, but bring no loss or hurt to us. These be light offenses;
and of this kind are common infirmities, as hastiness, teastinesse,
frowardness, slownesse and dullness of nature; of this kind also, are
reproaches of unskillfulness, ignorance, baseness, poverty and such like. The
first degree then of Clemency is, not so much as to take notice of these
slight offenses; but to let them pass, and bury them in oblivion. Solomon
says, A man's understanding deforreth his anger, and it is his credit to pass
by an offense, Pro. 19. 11. his meaning is, that when small offenses are done,
which cannot be avoided, then in discretion a man should with hold his anger,
and not take notice of them, but pass by them and let them go: for this shall
be a far greater ornament unto him, then if upon the deed done, he should
have hastily proceeded to revenge.

The second sort of Offenses, are small injuries, such as doc not only
displease us, but with all bring some little hurt to us, either in our goods,
life, or good name. Now, the second degree of meekenes is, to take notice of
these, but withal to forgive them and put them up. The reason is, because
always greater care must be had of peace and love, then of our own private
affairs. Read the practice hereof, Ioh. 8. 49. It was objected to Christ
wrongfully, that he was a Samaritane, and had a Devil. Christ takes knowledge
of the wrong, and says, you have reproched me; but withal he puts it up,
only denying that which they said, and clearing himself, I have not a Devil,
but I honor my father. David had received great wrong, at the hands of Ioab
and Shimei, as appears in the history of his life; but principally, when he
came first to be King of Israel, a. Sam. 3. and yet he takes not a hasty
course, presently to be revenged upon his adversaries: but proceeds in this
order. First, he takes notice of the fact, and commits his cause to God, ver.
39. and then afterward, as opportunity served, gave the parties their just
desert. The reason was, because being newely invested in the kingdom, his
adversaries were strong, and himself weak, even by his own confession, and
therefore not able at the first, to redress the injury done unto him. But when
he had once established himself, then he does not only begin, 2. Sam. 19.
14. but proceeds to full execution of punishment upon them, as we read 1.
King. 2. ver. 5. 6. 34. 35.

The third sort of Wrongs, are greater injuries; such as are not only
offensive to our persons, but withal do prejudice our lives, and bring a
ruin upon our estates, both in goods and good name. These are the highest
degree of Iniuties, manifested in open and apparent wrongs. And therefore
answerable to them, is required the third and highest degree of Clemency,
which stands in three things. First, in taking notice: secondly, in forgiving
them: thirdly, in a just and lawful defending our selves against the wronging
parties. This is the sum and substance of the answer.

For the better conceiving whereof, sundry Questions are further to be
propounded and resolved.

First in general; it is demanded, how a man should and ought to forgive an
injury?

Ans. In forgiveness there be four things.

The first is forgiveness of Revenge, that is of requiting evil for evil,
either by thought word or deed. This must always be practiced. For vengeance
is not ours, but the Lords, and great reason then, that we should evermore
forgive, in regard of revenge and hatred. This the Apostle teaches, when he
says, 1. Cor. 13. 5. Love is not provoked, it never thinks, much less
speaks or does, evil.

The second is forgiveness of private punishment; which is, when men return
punishment for injuries done, in way of requital; and this must always take
place with us, because as vengeance it self, so also punishment in way of
revenge, is Gods alone.

The third is, forgiveness of judgment, when we judge an inurie done to be an
injury. This judgment we are not bound to forgive unto men. For we may with
good conscience, judge a sin and a wrong to be as they are. And yet
notwithstanding, if a man make satisfaction for the wrong done, then there
ought to be forgiveness, even in regard of iudgemen.

The fourth is forgiveness of satisfaction. This we are not always bound to
remitte, but we may with good conscience, always require satisfaction where hurt
is done.

Secondly, for the further clearing of this general Question, we are to answer
some particular Cases usually propounded in the lives of men, and namely five.

I. Whether a man may defend himself by law? II. How he may defend himself by
law? III. Whether a man may defend himself by force? IV. How? V. Whether a man
may defend himself by Combat?
I. Case. Whether a man may, with good conscience and a meek Spirit, defend
himself by law, for wrongs that are done unto him?

I answer affirmatively: A man may, with good conscience, defend himself
against great injuries, by the benefit of law. For Magistracy is Gods
ordinance, for the good of men. Romans 13. 4. and therefore men may use the
benefit of the authority, judgment, and jurisdiction of Magistrates, without
breach of conscience. Again, it is the express law of God, that when a false
witness rises up against a man, to accuse him of a trespass; that both the
accuser and the accused, should stand before God, that is, before his Priests
and Judges for the time being, and have remedy at their hands. An example of
which judicial defense, we have in Paul, who in case of wrong, makes his
appeal to the judgment seat of Rome. Act. 25. 10.

But it is alleged out of Scripture, to the contrary, Luke 6. 29. To him
that smites thee on the one cheek, offer also the other, Mat. 5. 40. If any
man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him carry thy cloak
also.

Ans. These places are spoken of private persons, that want the defense and
assistance of the public Magistrate; and such must rather suffer wrong upon
wrong, blow upon blow, and loss upon loss, then right their own wrongs, by
revenging themselves.

Again, it is objected, that Paul says, Lawing is a fault, 1. Cor. 6. 7.
There is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one with an other,
etc.

Ans. We must distinguish between things themselves, and the manner of doing
them. When Paul says, it is a fault, he condemns not lawing absolutely in it
self, but the Corinthian manner of going to law: which was this. First, they
went to law with scandal, before the Tribunalls of Heathenish and unbelieving
Judges, and so made the Gospel to be slandered and reproched. Secondly, they
went to law upon light causes, and for small injuries, which they might well
have put up, and easily brooked. Thirdly, in lawing they fell into rash and
violent passions of rage, and envy, so as they could not temper themselves,
but must needs go to law in the first place; which should rather have been
the last and the desperatest remedy of all. And this bad manner of suing one
another at the law, is it which Paul rebukes as a fault. And it is to be
observed, that Paul notes their fault by a word, that signifies (...).
Weakness or impotencie of their affections, whereby it came to pass, that
being overcome by the strength of their own desires, upon injuries offered,
they were unable to bear them in any degree of Christian moderation, and there
upon hastily proceeded to the Courts of Heathen Judges, for determination of
controversies and contentions among them.

It is further alleged, that when a man is any way wronged, it is Gods will
it should be so, and therefore he ought not to seek redress, but to rest
himself in the will, of God.

Ans. It is Gods will we should have diseases, and yet it is no less his will,
that we should use good means to be cured of them. So is it in wrongs and
injuries done unto us. As his will is, we should be afflicted, so also has he
willed our deliverance, by such means, as himself has appointed.

But our Savior would have his Disciples, to be as sheep among wolves, and
therefore we ought to endure all wrongs without revenge. For the sheep takes
all wrongs, and does not so much as defend it self against the woolfe.

Ans. So Christ commands, that we should be simple as doves, Matthew. 10. 16.
and yet withal, he commands us to be wise as Serpents, to defend our own
heads, and to save our selves.

Lastly, it is alleged, 1. Cor. 13. 5. that love seeks not her own:
therefore love must not defend her self.

Ans. Love does not so seek her own things, as that she neglects the good
of others; but seeking her own, she seeks the good of all. And this practice
is not against, but according to the law of Charity.

II. Case. How is a man to defend himself by Law?

Ans. For the resolving of this Question, we must take two Rules.

The first is this. We must first try all means, and use all remedies that
may be, before we use the remedy of Law. It is our Saviors direction, Matthew.
5. 25. Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art in the way, that
is, before the controversy be ended by order of law. Again, Matthew. 18. 15. If
thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee
and him alone. And Saint Paul in this case, prescribes a course to be taken
beforehand; namely, first to bear and suffer as much as may be, 1. Cor. 6. 7.
Why rather suffer ye not wrong? why rather sustain ye not harm? Then, if
bearing will not end it, to commit our cause to private arbitrament, of one or
two, v. 5. Is it so that there is not a wise man among you, no not one that can
judge between his brethren? Law is to be used in this case, as the Physician
uses polson, and that is, only in desperate cases.

The second Rule is, That our patient mind must be made known to all men,
Phil. 4. 5. In taking the benefit of Law, we are to use great Moderation of
mind, and that in three respects; before we go to law, in lawing, and when the
suit is ended.

The Moderation of mind, before the beginning of suits in law, stands in three
things.

First, we must consider, that all injuries whatsoever they be, do befall us by
the providence of God, and that for our sins. Upon which consideration, we
ought to submit our selves to Gods will, to obey him, to arm our selves with
patience, and to lay aside all anger, envy, malice, and impatience.

Secondly, we must consider beforehand, that Courts of Justice, are the
ordinance of God, in which it pleases him to testify his presence, justice,
and goodness; and upon this ground, we shall be moved to depart with our own
right, and to yield our selves, and all the right we have, into the hands of
God, in the use of the means appointed; in the mean time depending on him by
faith, for the issue and event of our suit.

And hence (by the way) it appears, that few or none do use this ordinance of
God, as they ought; because the greater sort of men, that commence suits in
law, do not consider either the nature, or end of civil Courts. No man
ordinarily will yield a hair of his right, but every one sixeth his eyes
wholly, upon the event of his action by extremity of law: and so swarueth from
that Christian moderation, required by the word of God in this case.

Thirdly, we must set down with our selves, lawful and just ends of our
actions, not unjust and unlawful. These just ends are; first, Gods glory in
the execution and manifestation of justice: secondly, the honest defense of our
own right: thirdly, public peace: fourthly, the amendment of disordered
persons, and not the defamation or hurt of any man.

The Moderation of the mind in Lawing, stands in these particulars. 1. In
seeking after peace to the utmost, Romans 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as
in you is, have peace with all men. 2. In love of our enemies, with whom we are
at controversy in law. 3. In neither using nor showing extremity in our
proceedings, Matthew. 5. 25. Matthew. 18. 28.

After that the suit is ended, the moderation of our minds must be expressed,
by our behavior, in regard of the event of our action. For if the Law go with
us, we are to give God thanks for the manifestation of his justice, in the
course taken. If on the otherside it go against us, we may not rage or be
discontentedly grieved, but commend our cause quietly to God, and accuse our
selves for our own sins, and say with David, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and
just are thy judgments. Psalm. 119. 137.

III. Case. Whether may a man defend himself by force, when he is wronged?

Ans. In some Cases, he may lawfully defend himself by force. Reasons. First,
because the Gospel does not abolish the Law of nature, nor the positive laws
of all countries, but it does establish them. Now, it is the Law of nature and
nations, that a man may defend his life and health, in some cases, upon just
occasion. Secondly, this is Gods Law, Exodus 22. 2. If a thief be found
breaking up a house, and be smitten that he die, no blood shall be shed for
him. Abraham was a stranger in the land of Sodom, and yet he reskued his
brother Lot, and recovered all his substance that he had lost, by force and
arms, Genesis 14. 14. and his action was approved of God. For Melchisedeck met
him, at his return from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed him. Yea and
blessed God for his deliverance, v. 19. 20. Again, in some cases, a man may
give his life for his brother. So says S. John, 1. Ioh. 3. 16. We ought also
to lay down our lives for the brethren.

IV. Case. When may a man defend himself by force?

Ans. Not always and upon every occasion, but only in these cases. First,
when violence offered is so sudden and unexpected, that when it comes, there
can be no escape, either by yielding, or by flying, or by some suffering.
Secondly, when the violence offered is open and manifest, so as there is no
other way to reskue our selves, but by striking or killing. Thirdly, when
violence is offered, and the Magistrate absent; either for a time, and his stay
be dangerous, or altogether, so as no help can be had of him, nor any hope of
his coming. In this case, God puts the sword into the private man's hands.
Fourthly, when the defense is Just, and done in a right manner.

A Just defense stands in these things. I. It must be done incontinent and
forthwith, so soon as ever violence is offered. For if there be delay, and it
come afterward, it looses the name of a just defense, and becomes a revenge,
arising of prepensed malice, as the Lawyers use to speak. II. There must be an
intention, not to revenge principally, or to kill, but only to defend
himself. III. There must be a just and equal proportion of weapons; therefore
it is no just defense to shoot a naked man through with a musket, or other
piece of ordinance, when he offers violence.

V. Case. Whether a man may reskue himself or others by Combat?

Ans. It has been of ancient times, an usual manner of defense in some
countries, that in case of difference, between people and people, in matters
of weight, two men should be chosen out among the rest, who by fighting hand to
hand, and killing one an other, should end the controversy. But this way of
defense, how ancient so ever it be, is utterly unlawful.

Reasons are these. First, it is the express commandment of God, Thou shall
not kill. In which, all private men are forbidden to kill or slay, but in the
case of just and necessary defense. Secondly, we may not hazard our lives,
without some special warrant from God: if we do, it is a flat tempting of
God: and this is done in every combat. Thirdly, if Magistrates will permit
such fights as this is, then they are bound to defend and save the life of the
innocent. For by such permission, oftentimes innocent blood is shed, and the
more harmless party goes by the worst.

But it will be, and is objected. First, that a Combat is a trial of
innocence. Ans. It is not so. For he that is stronger usually ouercomes in the
combat, not he that has the more righteous cause. Again, there be other
means to try a truth, besides this; as by examination, and by oath. Lastly,
trial by the combat, is of the same nature with the trial of a murderer by
the bleeding of a corpse touched, or handled, which is very doubtful, and of
all other most uncertain,

Secondly, it is alleged, that if a man take not a challenge, he is disgraced
for ever. Ans. There is no warrant in Gods word, for a private man to accept a
challenge. Nay, it is rather flat against the word. For God says, Revenge is
mine. The private man says the contrary, The wrong is mine, and I will be
avenged of him that has done it. Again, it is better for any man, to endure a
little reproach with some men, then to loose or hazard his life.

Thirdly, it is objected, that the Philistims offered to try the victory by a
single combat with the Israelites, and appointed Goliath (on their side) to
give the Challenge; and that David (on the Israelites side) accepting the
challenge, encountered with him, and had good success. It may seem therefore,
that combats are lawful.. For it is better that one man should perish in
war, then that a whole army should miscarie. Ans. That was a special and
extraordinary example of trial, and David was a champion in that fight, not
by ordinary appointment, but by extraordinary prophetical instinct of Gods
spirit. Again, in war, though there be less danger in hazarding one man's
life, then a whole army: yet a good and just cause is to be maintained, with
all the strength that may be made, and not to depend upon the power and courage
of one man, who, in probability, unless he be supported by special calling
and assistance from God, may be overcome and loose the victory.

Fourthly, it is alleged, that an army may fight against an army therefore
one man against an other. Ans. The reason is not alike. For wars and armies
are Gods ordinances, and so are not combats; and it is not Gods will, that men
should devise and establish new ways and means of trial, not allowed by his
word, but rather rest content with that he has appointed.

Fifthly, Jonas did hazard his life, by casting lots; therefore a man may by
combat Answ. To say that Jonas did put his life in hazard by lottes, is an
untruth. For there was only a coniecturall trial made, who should be the
cause of the present danger. And when the lot fell upon him, he was not cast
into the sea by the lotte, but by his own advise and counsel. Again, the
casting of Jonas into the sea, did not befall him by lotte, but by his own
voluntary resignation of himself, into the hands of God; willingly undergoing
it, as a just punishment of the neglect of his calling; which himself
confessed in these words, For I acknowledge, that for my sake the great tempest
is upon you, Ion. 1. 12.

Sixthly, Moses and the Egyptian fought a combat, and Moses slew him. Ans.
Moses took upon him public revenge in this action, as a Magistrate, and not
private, as a private man. For though as yet, his calling was not fully
manifested to his brethren, yet the truth is, God had called him to be their
deliverer out of the hands of the Egyptians; and this very action was a sign
of their deliverance, which was to come to pass afterward. It was (I say) a
sign, thus; As he defended his brother and avenged his quarrel upon the
Egyptian, so in time to come the Lord would by his hand, give them full
freedom and deliverance from the tyranny of Pharaoh, and all his and their
enemies, Act. 7. 25. Being then a public person, his example can prove
nothing for this purpose.

II. Question. When Anger is a virtue, and so, good and lawful, and when it is
a vice, and consequently evil and unlawful?
This Question has two distinct parts: of which I will speak in their order.

Sect. 1.
The first part is, when Anger is a virtue and lawful?

For Answer hereof, we must understand, that in just and lawful Anger, there
be three things; a right Beginning or motive; a right Object; and a right
Manner of being angry.

To the right Beginning of anger, three things are required.

First, that the occasion of anger be just and weighty, as namely, a manifest
offense of God. Take an example, or two. Moses in sundry places, is said to be
angry, and the occasions of his anger were great, as appears in the
particulars. First, because some of the Israelits, against Gods commandment,
had reserved Manna till the next day, Exodus 16. 20. Again, he was angry,
because the Israelites had tempted God, in worshipping the golden calfe, Exodus
32. 19. In Numb. 16. 15. Moses again is wroth, because Coreh, Dathan, and
Abiram rebelled against him, and in him against God. Phinees, Numb. 25. 8. 11.
is said to have been zealous, that is, angry for God: the occasion was,
because the Israelites committed fornication with Heathenish women. David in
like manner, 2. Sam. 13. 20, 21. was angry upon this occasion, because Ammon
his son had deffoured his sister Thamar. Elias is angry, 1. King. 19. v. 14.
and why? because the Israelites forsook the conenant of God, cast down his
altars, and had slain his prophets with the sword. Nehemias, Chap. 6. ver. 5.
is very angry, because the Israelites oppressed one another with usury, and
other kinds of exactions. Ieremic also, Chap. 6. 11. was angry for this,
because the Israelites were of uncircumcised hearts and ears, and the word of
the Lord was unto them as a reproach, and they took no delight therein.

Secondly, it is required, that anger be conceived upon counsel and
deliberation, Pro. 20. 18. Establish thy thoughts by counsel. If thoughts must
be established by counsel, then the affections, and so our anger also. And the
Apostle says, Iam. 1. 19. Be slow to wrath. Now the reason is plain; Counsel
ought to be the foundation of all our actions, and therefore much more of our
affections, which are the beginnings of our actions.

Thirdly, just and lawful anger must be kindled and stirred up by good and holy
affections, as namely, by desire to maintain the honor and praise of God, by
the love of justice and virtue, by hatred and detestation of vice, and of all
that is evil. One says well to this purpose, that anger must attend upon
virtue, and be stirred up by it against sin, as the dog attends upon the
sheepeheard, and waits upon his eye and hand, when to follow him, and when to
pursue the wolf.

The Second thing in good anger, is a fit Object or Matter to work upon;
touching which, two thing must be remembered.

First, we must put a difference between the person, and the offense or sin
of the person. The sin of the person is the proper object of anger, and not
the person, but only by reason of the sin. Thus David says of himself, that
he was consumed with anger, not because the men with whom he was angry, were
his enemies, but because they kept not Gods law, Psalm. 119. 139. Thus Moses was
angry at the Idolatry of the Israelites, wherewith they had sinned against
God forty days together; and yet he prays earnestly unto God, for their
persons, as we read, Exodus 32.

But it is alleged to the contrary, that David directs his anger against the
persons of his enemies, especially in Psalm. 109. Answ. First, Prophets (as has
been said heretofore) were endued with a special measure of zeal; and their
zeal was a pure zeal, taken up specially for the glory and honor of God;
but our zeal against our enemies, is commonly mixed with hatred, envy, and
selfeloue, therefore we must not, nay we cannot follow their examples.
Secondly, imprecations used by David, were predictions rather then prayers: for
he rather foretold in them what should come to pass, then prayed that it might
come to pass. Thirdly, David in his imprecations, accurseth not his own
private enemies, but the enemies of God, and not al them, but such only as
were incurable: for by the spirit of prophecy, he knew the state of those,
against whom he did pray, so do not we.

Secondly, we must put a difference between the cause and offense of God, and
the cause and offense of man^. Now just anger must be directed against persons,
for the offense of God properly, and not for private offense, but only so
far forth, as it tends to the offense of God. Thus Mi^iam and Aaron
murmured against Moses, because he had married a woman of Aethiopia. But this
was only a private offense, and therefore Moses behaved himself meekely
toward them, Numb, 12. 3.

The Third thing in good anger, is the Right Manner of conceiving it. Wherein
these Cautions are to be observed. First, that our anger be mixed and tempered
with charity and love. It is the property of God himself, in wrath to
remember mercy, Hab. 3. 2. and herein we must be like unto him. This was Moses
his practice, who out of his love prayed for those, with whom he was angry,
Exodus 32. Secondly, anger against any offense, must be mixed with sorrow for
the same offense. Thus Christ was angry with the Jews, but withal he
sorrowed for the hardness of their hearts, Mark. 3. 5. The reason hereof is
this. In any society whatsoever it be, if one member sins, the sin of
that one member, is the punishment of the rest that be in that society; even
as it is in the body, if one part be affected and ill at ease, the rest will
be distempered. Paul says of himself, that he was afraid, least when he came
to the Corinths, God would humble him for their sins, 2. Cor. 12. 21. Again
he teaches, that those which are fallen into any fault, must be restored by
the spirit of meekenes, because we our selves are subject to the same
tentations, Gal. 6. 1. And in this regard, he would have men to mourn with
them that have in them the cause of mourning, Romans 12. 15. Thirdly, just anger
must be contained within the bounds of our particular calling, and civil
decency; that is, so moderated, as it makes us not to forsake our duties which
we owe to God and man, nor break the rules of comlines. Thus Jacob was angry
with Laban, and yet he speaks and behaues himself as a son to his father,
even in his anger, Genesis 31. 36. Jonathan was angry with Saul his father, and
yet he withdrawes not any reverent or dutiful respect from him, 1. Sam. 20.

Sect. 2.
The second part of the Question is, When Anger is a vice and unlawful?

Ans. It is a sin in five regards, contrary to the former.

First, when we conceive it without counsel and deliberation. This rash,
hasty, sudden and violent anger, is condemned by our Savior Christ, Mat. 5.
22. Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be culpable of
judgment.

Secondly, when it is conceived for no cause, or for a light or trifling cause.
Prou. 10. 12. Love couers a multitude of sins. Therefore every light offense,
must not be the cause of open anger. Prove. 19. 11. It is the glory of a man to
pass by some infirmities. Eccles. 7. 23. Take not notice of all the words that
men speak, no not of all those which servants speak unto their masters.
Besides that, causeless anger is many times forbidden in the Scripture. And
Paul says, that love is hardly provoked, because it will not be moved to
conceive hatred, but upon weighty and important causes, 1. Cor. 13.

Thirdly, when the occasion is just, yet the measure of anger is immoderate.
Ephesians. 4. 26. Be angry, and sin not; and if by infirmity thou fall into it,
let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath. The reason is added in the next
words, Give not place to the Devil; because he is always at hand to inflame
the affection, as he did Saul's, who therefore in his rage, would have killed
him that was next him.

Fourthly, when it makes us to forget our duty to God or man, and to fall to
brawling, cursing, and banning. Thus was Shemei angry, when he railed upon the
King and flung stones at him and his servants, giving him bad and vnreuerent
terms, and calling him a man of blood, and a man of Belial. 2. Sam. 16. 5. 6.
7. Thus did the Disciples forget their duty of love unto their brethren, and
in anger desired that fire might come down from heaven, and destroy the
Samaritanes, Luke 9. 59. Thus the Jews, in indecent and uncharitable manner,
gnashed with their teeth at Steven, Act. 7. 54. And Saint Paul says, that the
fruits of wicked anger, are clamors, and crying speeches between person and
person in their fury, Ephesians. 4. 31. And thence it is, that we find Balaam in his
anger, to have been more void of reason then his ass, Numb. 22. 27.

Fistly, when we are angry for private respects concerning our persons, and
not concerning the cause of God. Thus Cain is said to be exceeding wroth, and
to have his countenance cast down, only upon a private respect, because he
thought his brother Abel should be preferred before him, Genesis 4. 5. Thus Saul
was wrath with David, taking himself to be disgraced, because the people
(after the slaughter of the Philistimes) ascribed to David ten thousand, and to
him but a thousand. 1. Sam. 18. 7. In like manner he was angry with Jonathan,
for his love that he bare to David, and for giving him leave to go to
Bethleem, 1. Sam. 20. 30. Thus Nebuchadnezars wrath was kindled against the
three children, because he took himself to be contemned of them, Dan. 3. 19.
Thus Haman. merely in regard of private disgrace, grows to great indignation
against Mordecai, Esther. 3. v. 5. Thus Asa was angry with the Prophet Hanani,
because he thought it a discredit to him, to be reproved at his hand, 2.
Chron. 16. 10. And in this sort, were the Jews filled with wrath at Christ's
reproof, Luke 4. 28. showing thereby, as it is truly expounded by the
Commenter, that they were very hot in their own cause, and not in the cause
of God.

III. Question. What is the Remedy of unjust Anger?
Ans. The Remedies thereof are twofold. Some consist in meditation, and some in
practice.

Sect. 1.
The Remedies that stand in Meditation, are of three sorts; some do concern
God, some our neighbor, and some our selves.

The Meditations concerning God; are specially six.

I. Meditation. That God by express commandment forbiddes rash and unjust
anger, and commands the contrary, namely, the duties of love. Read for this
purpose, Mat. 5. 21. 22. where we may observe three degrees of unjust anger.
The first whereof is, that which is inwardly conceived, and not outwardly
showed. The second, when unjust anger shows it self by signs of contempt, as
by snuffing, rushing, changing and casting down of the countenance. The third,
is railing (thou fool) which is culpable of Gehenna fire, the highest degree
of punishment. Now all these three degrees are murder; and the punishment of a
murderer is, to be cast into the lake of fire, Rev. 21. 8. Again, Christ
commands us to reward good for evil, to bless them that curse us, and to
do good to the^ that hate us, if we will be the children of our Father which
is in heaven, Mat. 5. 45. And S. Paul wishes us, to overcome evil with
goodness, Romans 12. 21.

II. Meditation. That all injuries which befall us, do come by Gods
providence, whereby they are turned to a good end, namely, our good. Thus
David says, that God had bidden Shemei to curse him, 2. Sam. 16. 10. And this
was the ground of Christ's reproof of Peter, Shall I not, (says he) drink of
the euppe which my Father has given me to drink of? Ioh. 28. 11.

III. Meditation. God is long-suffering, even toward wicked men; and we in
this point must be followers of him. In regard of this, God is said to be
merciful, gracious, slow to anger, abunda^t in goodness and truth, Exodus 34. 6.
Hence it was, that he spared the old world 120 years, ^. Pet. 3. 19. He spared
the Israelits, after their Idolatry, 390 years, Ezekiel. 4. 5. Besides this, we
have example of the lowlines and long suffering of Christ, who says, Matthew.
11. 29. Learn of me, for I am humble and meek: and of whom it is said, 1.
Pet. 2. 22. When he was reviled, he reviled not again, when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed his cause to him that judges righteously. Now
because some may happily say, that these examples of God and Christ, are too
perfect for man to follow, who cannot imitate God in all things? therefore
besides them, consider further the examples of some of the servants of God.
Moses, when the people murmured at him, did not answer them again by
murmuring, but cried unto the Lord, what shall I do to this people? for they
be almost ready to stone me, Exodus 17. 4. And Steven, when he was stoned,
prayed for his enemies, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge, Act. 7. 60.

IV. Meditation is, concerning the goodness of God toward us; an argument
whereof is this, that he does every day, forgive us far more offenses, then
it is possible for us to forgive men.

V. Meditation. All revenge is Gods right, and he has not given it unto man.
Romans 12. 19. Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. And man by
revenging his own quarrel, makes himself both the judge, the witness, the
accuser, and the executioner.

VI. Meditation is, touching Christ's death. He suffered for us the first death,
and the sorrows of the second death; much more then ought we at his
commandment, to put up small wrongs and injuries without revenge. His
commandment is, Resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on the right
cheek, turn to him the other also, Matthew. 5. 39. Again, Destroy not him with
thy meat, for whom Christ died, Romans 14. 15.

The Meditations concerning our neighbor, are two. The first, is the condition
of him, with whom we are angry, namely that he is a brother. Let there be no
strife between me and thee, for we are brethren, Genesis 13. 8. Again, he is
created in the Image of God; we must not therefore seek to hurt or destroy
that Image. The second is, concerning that Equity which we look for at the
hands of all men. If we wrong any man, we desire that he would forgive us: and
therefore we must forgive him the injury that he does unto us, without unjust
anger. This is the very Law of nature, Whatsoever ye would that men should do
unto you, even so do you unto them, Matthew. 7. 12.

Meditations concerning our selves, are six.

First, he that conceiueth rush anger, makes himself subject to the wrath of
God, if he cherish the same without relenting. Matthew. 6. 15. If ye do not
forgive men their trespasses, no more will your father forgive you your
trespasses. And, Matthew. 7. 2. Judge not, that ye be not judged. Yea, when we
pray to God to forgive us, and do not resolve to forgive our brethren, we do
in effect say, Lord condemn us, for we will be condemned.

Secondly, we are commanded to love one another, even as Christ has loved us,
Ephesians. 5. 2. It is the property of love, to suffer, and to bear, and not to be
provoked to anger, 1. Cor. 13. And it is a mark, whereby Gods children are
discerned, from the children of the Devil, that they love their brethren, 1.
Ioh. 3. 10.

Thirdly, we are ignorant of men's minds in speaking and doing: we know not the
manner and circumstances of their actions. And experience teaches, that much
anger comes upon mistaking and misconstruing them. Whereas contrariwise, if
they were thoroughly known, we would not be so much incensed against men, as
commonly we are.

Fourthly, in rash anger, we can do no part of Gods worship that is pleasing
to him. We cannot pray: for he that prays, must lift up pure hands without
wrath, 1. Tim. (...). 8. We cannot be good hearers of the word: for S. James
wishes us to be swift to hear, and slow to wrath; because the wrath of man
does not accomplish the righteousness of God, Iam. 1. 20, 21.

Fifthly, we must consider what are the fruits and consequents of unjust anger.
For first, it greatly annoies the health. It annoies the brain, and pulses; it
causes the gall to flow into the stomach and the bowels; it kills and
poisoneth the spirits; and it is the next way to procure distemper of the whole
body, and consequently loss of health. Secondly, it makes a man captive to
the Devil, Ephesians. 4. 27. which we see to be true in Saul's example, who being a
man full of wrath, and giving place to his own rage and fury, an evil spirit
entered into him by the just judgment of God.

Sixthly, we must consider the Causes of unjust anger. It is commonly thought,
that Anger is nothing but the flowing of choler in the gall, and in the
stomach. But the truth is, anger is more then choler. For it rises first, of
a debilitie of reason and judgment in the mind. secondly, from evil
affections; as from envy, and self-love. thirdly, from the constitution of
the body, that is hot and dry. Again, we read in histories, that men having
no gall, have notwithstanding been full of anger: and choler indeed is a
furtherance, but no cause of anger.

Sect. 2.
The Remedies of unjust anger that stand in Practice, are especially five.

The first is, in the time of anger to conceal the same; both in word and
deed. The indignation of a fool (says Solomon, Prou. 12. 16.) will be known
the same day; but the wise man covers his shame: that is, he restraines his
anger, which if it should presently break forth, would be a reproach unto him.
Answerable to this notable speech of Solomon, was the wise counsel of Ambros.
de obit. Theod.
Ambrose to Theodosius; that after sentence given, he should take 30 days
respite before execution. And not unlike has been the practice of the very
Heathen in their time. Socrates said, I had beaten thee, but that I was angry.
A^^enodoru^ gave Augustus this rule, that when he was angry, he should first
say over the whole Alphabet, before he put in execution his anger.

Secondly, we must depart from them with who^ we are angry. For this affection
is as a fire; take the matter away from fire, and it will cease to burn; so
let a man depart, and employ himself (for the time) some other way, and he
shall soon cease to be angry. Thus did Jonathan depart out of his fathers
presence, 1. Sam. 20. 34. Abraham in his anger withdrew himself from Lot, Genesis
13. Jacob in wrath departed from Esan, Genesis 27. 43, 44.

Thirdly, we must avoid the occasions thereof; as contentions, and contentious
persons. Do nothing through contention, Phil. 2. 3. Make no friendship with an
angry man, neither go with a furious man, least thou learn his ways, and
receive destruction to thy soul, Prou. 22. 26. We must, for this purpose, be
careful to avoid all means, that may serve to further the heat of the
temperature of such a body, as is apt and disposed to this unruly passion.

Fourthly, we are to consider that we sin against God, not once or twice, but
often, yea every day, and therefore the course of our anger must be turned
against our own selves, for our sins. For this is one property of true
repentance, to work in us a revenge upon our selves, in regard of our sins
committed against God, and our brethren. 2. Corinthians. 7. 11.

Fifthly, we must accustom our selves to the daily exercises of invocation of
the name of God, for this end, that he in mercy would mortify all our
affections, especially this corrupt and violent affection of unjust wrath. And
this must we do, as at all times, so then especially; when anger is creeping
upon us.

It will be said of some; Our anger is violent, and comes upon the sudden, and
therefore these remedies will do us no good. Ans. Such persons, when their
minds be quiet, must often read and meditate of the foresaid remedies, and by
this means they shall be able to prevent hastines.

But what if we be overtaken with anger, what must we then do? Ans. If thou
fall into it through infirmity, yet remember thy self, let not the sun go
down upon thy wrath, Ephesians. 4. 26. Consider with thine own heart, that anger is
as a poison; if a man drinks poison, he must not suffer it to rest, and flow
into the body and veins, but with all speed must purge it out; and so must
anger be dealt withal, whensoever we are overtaken with it.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Questions concerning Temperance.

TEmperance is a virtue, that moderateth appetite or lust. And this moderation
of appetite, stands in four things.

I. In the use of Riches. II. In the use of Meat and Drink. III. In the use of
Apparel. IV. In the use of Pleasures; wherein Recreations are to be
considered.
Sect. 1.
Concerning the Moderation of Appetite in the use of Riches, there are two
maine Questions.

I. Question. How far a man may, with good conscience, proceed in the
desiring and seeking of Riches?
The Answer of this Question is the rather to be considered, because this
doctrine rightly conceived and understood, serves greatly for the direction of
the whole course of our lives unto the end. Here therefore I will first set
down the Ground of the Answer, and then the Answer it self.

The Ground of the Answer, I propound in five Rules.

I. Rule. We must consider, that riches and goods, are of two sorts: some are
necessary, some are more then necessary, which the Scripture calls Abundance.

Goods and riches are two ways necessary; necessary to nature, or necessary
to the person of a man. Goods necessary to nature, are those, without which
nature and life cannot be well preserved; and these are most needful.
Necessary in respect of a man's person, are those goods, without which a man's
state, condition, and dignity wherein he is, cannot be preserved.

Now Riches more then necessary; I term those, without which both the life of
man, and his good estate, may well be preserved. And whatsoever is besides
them, is necessary. For example. To the calling of a Student, meat, drink, and
cloth, are necessary in respect of nature; besides these, other things, as
books, and such like, are also necessary for him, in respect of his condition
and place.

II. Rule. Things and goods, are to be judged necessary and sufficient, not by
the affection of the covetous man, which is vnsa^^able, but by two other
things; the judgment of wise and godly men, and the examples of sober and
frugall persons.

III. Rule. We must not make one measure of sufficiency of goods necessary
for all persons; for it varieth, according to the diverse conditions of persons,
and according to time and place. More things are necessary to a public man,
then to a private; and more to him that has a charge, then to a single man.

IV. Rule. That is to be judged necessary, which in some short time to come
may be needful, though it have no present use. For example; the dowry that a
father gives to his daughter at the day of marriage, though it be not presently
needful, yet because in short time it may be necessary, therefore it is to
be reputed amongst necessary goods.

V. Rule. We our selves do often err in judgment, in determining of things
necessary and sufficient for our selves: and therefore when men seek things
competent and necessary, they must always pray to God, to give them that,
which he knows in his wisdom, to be meet and necessary, not prescribing a
measure unto him.

I come now to the Answer of the Question, which is twofold.

The first is this. Man may with good conscience, desire and seek for goods
necessary, whether for nature, or for his person, according to the former
rules; but he may not desire and seek for goods more then necessary; for if
he does, he sins. The reasons of this answer are these.

First, Deuteronomy. 17. 16. 17. the commandment is given to the King, that has most
need of abundance, that he should not multiply his horses or his silver or his
gold. That which the King may not do, the subjects ought much less to do;
and therefore they are not to multiply their goods. For this cause it is a great
fault in subjects, remaining (as they be) subjects, to seek to attain to the
riches of Princes. Again, Paul says, 1. Tim. 6. 8. Having food and raiment,
let us be ther^ith content. Besides that, in the petition, Give us this day,
etc. we crave but only bread for our substance, that is meet to preserve us
for nature, in that calling wherein we serve God day by day. The prayer of Agur
is, that God would give him food convenient for him, or (as the words
signify) bread of his statute, that is, which God in his counsel had
appointed and ordained for him, Prove. 30. 8.

Secondly, seeking of abundance is a hazard to the salvation of the soul, by
reason of man's corruption. Therefore, Matthew. 13. Riches are called thorns,
that choke the word of God sown in the heart. And 1. Tim. 6. 9. They that
will, that is desire to be rich, and content not themselves with things
necessary, fall into the snare of the Devil.

Thirdly, seeking of abundance, is a fruit of diffidence in the providence of
God. Now all fruits of unbelief must be cut off; we must not therefore desire
more then necessary.

In the next place, for the better clearing of this doctrine, the Objections of
Covetous men are to be answered.

Object. I. Good things are to be sought for; but abundance is a good thing,
and a blessing of God. Ans. Good things are of two sorts. Some are simply good,
that is to say, good both in themselves and to us; as remission of sins,
holiness, righteousness, and life everlasting in the kingdom of heaven, and
such like: these may we desire, and seek for. Some again, are good only in
part, which though they be good in themselves, yet are not always good to us.
Of this kind is abundance of riches, and store of wealth more then necessary
for nature and person. For which cause, riches in abundance, are as the knife
in the hand of a child, likely to hurt, if it be not taken away; because they
are (in some men) occasions of sin, unless God in mercy prevent and hinder
them. And for our selves, what know we, whether God will keep and preserve us
from sin, when we seek and labor for abundance?

Object. II. It is the promise of God, that riches and treasures shall be in
the house of the just, Psalm. 112. 3.

The answer is twofold. First, riches in Scripture sometimes, do signify
only things sufficient and competent, and of them is that place to be
understood. To this purpose David says, that a small thing, that is, a
competent and mean portion, though but very little, is to the just man better
then great riches to the wicked and mighty, Psalm. 37. 16. And whereas David in
another place affirms, that nothing shall be wanting to them that fear God,
Psalm. 34. 9. and again, They which seek the Lord shall want nothing that is
good: the places are to be understood with exception of the cross and
correction, in this sort; that they shall have competencie, unless the Lord
intend to chastise and correct them by want. Secondly, if by riches David there
means abundance, the words must be understood with this condition; if they be
for their good. For so all promises of temporal things must be limited with
exception, partly of Gods glory, kingdom, and will, and partly of our good and
salvation.

Object. III. We must do good to the poor, to the Church, to the common
wealth, and we must also leave somewhat to posterity. I answer: we may not do
evil that good may come thereof. Again, every man is accepted of God,
according to that he has, and not according to that he has not, if there be a
ready mind, 2. Cor. 8. 12. And the end of a man's calling, is not to gather
riches for himself, for his family, for the poor; but to serve God in
serving of man, and in seeking the good of all men; and to this end, men must
apply their lives and labors.

Object. IV. We are called to imitate the Ante, Prove. 6. and 13. which gathers
in one season, for her relief in another. Ans. The Ante gathers in summer,
only things necessary; she does not, by the instinct of nature, seek
superfluity and more then is necessary.

This doctrine serves to direct and inform almost all the world, to beat
down the wicked practice of the usurer, and to teach every one of us, to
moderate our care in things pertaining to this life.

The Second part of the Answer is this: If God give abundance, when we neither
desire it, nor seek it, we may take it, hold and use it as Gods stewards.
Abraham and Joseph of Arimathaea, are commended for their riches, and yet they
obtained them not by their own seeking, and moiling, after the manner of the
world; but walking in their callings, God in his providence blessed and
multiplytheir wealth. For further proof of this answer consider but one only
place, Act. 5. 4. Where Peter says to Ananias, When it remained, appertained
it not unto thee? and when it was sold, was it not in thy power? These words
import thus much; that if we have possessions and abundance, we may with good
conscience enjoy them as blessings and gifts of God.

Against this doctrine it is alleged first, that our Savior says, It is a
hard thing for him that has riches, to enter into the kingdom of God, Matt.
19. 23. Ans. The place is to be understood of them, that trust in their riches,
as it is expounded, Mark. 10. 24.

Secondly, it is objected, we must forsake all and become Christ's disciples, by
the commandment of Christ, Luke 14. 26. Ans. A man must forsake al, not
simply, but in regard of the daily disposition and preparation of his mind; and
so a man ought to forsake the things that are dearest unto him, because he must
have his mind resolved to forsake them. Again, man must be content to part
with all, not only in affection, but actually, when it comes to this point,
that either he must loose them, or renounce Christ.

Thirdly, it is alleged, that Riches are called unrighteous, Luke 16. 9. Make
ye friends of unrighteous Mammon: therefore it seems we may not have them.
Ans. Mammon, is called Mammon of iniquity, not because it is so in it self,
but because it is so in the common use, or rather abuse of wicked men: and that
in sundry respects. First, because it is commonly (though not always)
unjustly gotten: for it is a hard thing to become rich without injustice.
Secondly, it is made ordinarily, among sinful men, an instrument of many
evils. Thirdly, evil gotten goods, are unjustly possessed, and no man can be
truly termed rich, that unjustly possesses riches.

II. Question. How a man may, with good conscience, possess and use Riches!
The Answer to this Question, I propound in four Rules.

I. Rule. They which have riches are to consider, that God is not only their
sovereign Lord, but the Lord of their riches, and that they themselves are but
the stewards of God, to employ and dispense them, according to his will. Yea
further, that they are to give an account unto him, both for the having and
using of those riches, which they have and use. This Rule, is a confessed
truth. In the petition, when we have bread in our houses and hands, yea which
is more, in our mouths; when we are in the use of the creature, even then are
we taught to say, Give us this day our daily bread, to signify, that God is
our sovereign and absolute Lord, and that when we have the creatures, we have
no use of them, unless he give it unto us. Again, the commandment, Luke 16.
2. Give an account of thy stewardship; pertaines to all men that have riches,
though it be but meat and bread.

II. Rule. We must use special moderation of mind, in the possessing and
using of riches, and be content with our estate, so as we set not the affection
of our heart upon our riches, Psalm. 62. 10. If riches increase, set not your
heart upon them; that is, place not your love and confidence in them; be not
puffed up with pride and ambition, because you are rich, Luke 6. 24. Woe be to
you that are rich: that is, that put confidence in your riches, Matthew. 5. 3.
Blessed are the poor in Spirit. Now poverty of Spirit is, to bear poverty
with meekenes, patience, and obedience, as a cross imposed by God. And in this
sense, the rich man may be said to be poor in spirit, if he bestows not his
love and confidence upon his wealth, but in affection of heart is so disposed,
as if he were not rich, but poor. And this poverty is necessary even in the
midst of wealth, because it will restrain the fury of the untamed and
unruly affection. Again, Christ says, Matthew. 10. 39. He that loses his life
for my sake, shall find it. Loosing there mentioned, is not an actual loosing,
but (as before) a disposition or preparation of the heart to loose, for Christ's
sake, (if need be) the dearest thing we have, that is our life. And again,
Luke 14. 26. If any man come to me, and hate not father and mother, -- yea and
his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. That place is not spoken of
actual, but of habitual hatred. And this stands in a readiness and
inclination of the heart to hate (if need be,) father and mother, yea our own
life for Christ and the Gospels sake. To this purpose the Apostle says, They
that buie, must be as though they possessed not, 1. Cor. 7. 30. that is, in
respect of moderation of the affection, and the disposition of the heart. For
otherwise, it is the Law of nature, that he that buies must possess.

Example of this moderation of the affection, we have in Moses, who esteemed
the rebuke of Christ, greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, Hebr. 11. 26.
And in David, who though he were a King, and a Lord in the earth, yet says of
himself, that he was but a pilgrim and soiourner in it, as all his fathers
were, Psalm. 39. 13. And he speaks this in respect of the affection of his
heart, and moderation thereof, because he did not fix the same upon abundance.
And of Paul, who professes in this manner, I have learned to be full, and to
be hungry: in all things I am instructed, (...).
or entered in this high point of Christian practice, to be hungry and to be
full, Philip. 4. 12. In which text, two things are set down. First, that
Christian moderation or contentment, is a high mystery; yea that it requires
much skill and art to know, how to be poor and how to be rich. Secondly, that
himself was a learner of this art, and that he had bin but entered and
initiated into the knowledge thereof.

Now, that this Moderation of mind may be learned and practiced, we must
remember that two especial means are to be used. First, we must labor to be
able to discern between things that differ, Philip. 1. 10. How is that? by
judging aright between riches temporal, and the true riches, that will make a
man rich before God. This gift of discerning was in Moses, who upon a right
judgment in this point, accounted the rebuke of Christ, greater riches, then
the treasures of Egypt, Hebr. 11. 26. In David, who says, that the Lord was
his portion, when he was a King, and even in the midst of his riches, Psalm.
119. 57. In Paul, who esteemed the best things that were, but base, yea dross
and dung, that he might win Christ, Phil. 3. 8. The Second means of
Moderation is, to consider that we are in this world, as pilgrims and
strangers, 1. Pet. 2. 11. that the best of us brought nothing into the world,
neither shall (when we die) carry ought out of it.

III. Rule. We must, upon the calling of God, forsake our riches, and all that
we have in this world, not only in disposition of mind, but in deed.

The word of God teaches, that there be three Cases, wherein a man is indeed
to forsake all.

I. If he be extraordinarily and immediately called, to publish the Gospel to
all nations. This was the case of the Apostles and Evangelists, who in regard
of their calling, at least for use, forsook all that they had, Matthew. 19. 27.

II. In the Case of Confession; when for professing the name of Christ, a man
is deprived of them in the days of trial. Thus when our Savior says,
Whosoever he be that forsakes not all that he has, etc. Luke 14. 33. the
words are spoken of all believers, in the Case of Confession, when they are
called by God unto it; and therefore S. Matthew explaines it thus; Whosoever
etc. for my names sake, he shall receive, etc. Matthew. 19. 29.

III. When in the time of persecution, famine, or war, the necessity is so
great, that it requires present relief, which can no other way be had, but by
giving and selling the goods that a man has. In Psalm. 112. 9. the good man is
said to disperse to the poor; this dispersing must not be understood of all
times, but in case of extreme need. Again, when Christ says, Luke 12. 33.
^ell all that thou have; this commandment must be limited: for a man is not
bound to sell al at al times, but in the time of great and urgent necessity.
Thus the christians in the Primitive Church, in the days of imminent
persecution, sold all their possessions, Act. 2. And so Paul acknowledges,
that the Church of Corinth relieved the Church of Macedonia, even beyond their
ability, in the days of extremity that was in that Church, 2. Cor. 8.

Here, another Question may be moved; Whether a man may voluntarily, and of
his own accord, give away all his goods, live upon alms, and give himself to
fasting and prayer?

Ans. He may in Popish conceit give himself (in this sort) to voluntary
poverty, which they hold to be lawful, and (which is more) a state of
perfection. We on the contrary do answer, that this practice is in no sort
lawful, unless a man have special calling and warrant from God so to do.
For first, the Law of nature sets down and prescribes distinction of
possessions, and propriety of lands and goods, and the Gospel does not
abolish the law of nature. Again, the same distinction and propriety, is
allowable by the written Law of God. Solomon teaches, Prou. 5. 15. that a man
must let his waters flow out of his cisterne, but he must keep the fountain
to himself. And, Prou. 10. 22. It is the blessing of God to be rich, and he
adds no sorrows to it. Men must not therefore voluntarily forsake their
riches, and so bring sorrow to themselves. Besides that, Agur prays against
poverty; Give me (says he) neither poverty, nor riches, Prou. 30. 8. David
makes it a curse, to be a beggar; Psalm. 109. 10. and he never saw the righteous
man's seed begging their bread, Psalm. 36. 25. Our Savior Christ biddes him
that had two coats, not to give both away, but one, Luke 3. 11. And Paul
says, It is a more blessed thing to give, then to receive, Act. 20. 35.
Therefore he biddes every man to labor with his own hands, that he may need
nothing: that is, that he may not need the relief and help of any man, or of
anything, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11, 12.

But it is alleged to the contrary, Matthew. 19. 21. If thou n ilt be perfect,
sell all. Ans. The words are a personal and particular commandment. For this
young Prince, whom Christ speaks unto, was called to become a Disciple of
Christ, and to preach the Gospel, Luke 9. 59. And the commandment is not given
generally to all men, but particularly to him alone: and we cannot make a
general rule of a special commandment or example. Again further, it was a
commandment of special trial.

Secondly they allege, Matthew. 10. 9. Possess neither gold, nor silver, nor
money in your purses. Ans. That commandment was temporal, and given to the
Disciples, but only for the time of their first embassage into Jury, as
appears in the 5. v. where Christ bids them not to go yet into the way of the
Gentiles. And the commandments of their first embassage, were reuersed
afterward, Luke 22. 36. Considering then that it belonged only to their first
embassage, when they preached to the Jews, it was not given them for all times.

IV. Rule. We must so use and possess the goods we have, that the use and
possession of them, may tend to Gods glory, and the salvation of our souls.
Rich men must be rich in good works, and together with their riches, lay up a
good foundation in conscience, against the evil day, 1. Tim. 6. 18.

For the better pactizing of this rule, take these three cautions.

I. We must seek to have Christ, and to be in him justified and sanctified:
and being in him, then shall we in him and by him, have the holy use of all
that we have.

Some will say; Infidels have the use of riches. Ans. They have indeed, and
they are to them the gifts of God: Yet they so enjoy them, as that before God
they are but usurpers. They be gifts of God in regard of Gods giving, but they
are abuses and thefts in regard of their receiving, because they receive them
not as they ought. A father gives a gift unto his child, upon condition that he
shall thus and thus receive it; now the child steals the gift that is given
him, and therefore has it not in that manner, that his father would he should
have it. In like manner do Infidels steal and usurp the blessings of God, to
which they have no just title, themselves being out of Christ, neither do they
use them in that manner, which God requires, sanctifying them by the word and
prayer, 1. Tim. 4. 5.

II. We ought to pray to God, that he would give us his grace, rightly to use
our riches to his glory, and our own salvation. For Riches and other temporal
blessings, to sinful me^ that have not the gift to use the^ well, are
dangerous, even as a knife in the hand of a child. They are thorns, and choke
the grace of God, they keep those that trust in them, from entrance into the
kingdom of heaven. Yea they are the devils snare, whereby he catches the
wicked, and holds them in it at his will and pleasure.

III. Our riches must be employed to necessary uses. These are First, the
maintenance of our own good estate and conditions, Secondly the good of
others, specially those that are of our family or kindred, 1. Tim. 5. 8. He
that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his household, he
denies the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. Thirdly, the releife of the
poor, according to the state and condition of every man. Fourthly the
maintenance of the Church of God, and true religion, Prove. 3. 9. Honor God
with thy riches. Fifthly, the maintenance of the common wealth: Give tribute
(says Paul) to whom tribute belongs, Romans 13. 7. And give unto God, says
Christ, the things that are Gods, and unto Casar, the things that are Caesar's,
Matt. 22. 21. Thus much touching the moderation of the appetite in the use of
riches.

Sect. 2.
In the second place follow those Questions, that concern the Moderation of
our Appetite, in the use of Meat and Drink. Concerning which, there are
principally two; the answer to the first whereof is the ground of the second.

I. Question. Whether there be any difference in the use of Meats and Drinks,
now in the times of the New Testament?
Ans. There is a distinction and difference of Meats, to be observed in
sundry respects.

I. In respect of man, for healths suks. Paul counsels Timothy; Drink no
more water, drink a little wine, 1. Tim. 5. 23. In which it is plain, that
there is a distinction of meats approved and commended for man. For every
kind of food fittes not every body: meats therefore are to be used with
difference. Man was not made for meat, but meat for man.

II. In respect of scandal. Some are not to be used at some time, and some are
at the same time to be eaten. Thus Paul professes, that rather then he would
offend his brother, he would eat no flesh while the world endures, 1. Cor. 8.
13. And in Romans 14. he disputes the point at large, touching the distinction of
meats, that is to be observed, in regard of offending them that are weak.

III. There is a distinction to be made, in respect of civil and politic
order; when for the common good of societies, certain kinds of meats for
certain seasons of the year are forbidden. Thus in our common wealth, there
are appointed days of flesh, and days of fish, not in respect of conscience,
but in regard of order, for the common good of the country.

IV. There is a difference of meats, which arises upon the bond of
conscience, so as it shall be a sin to use or not to use this or that meat.
Touching this difference; Before the flood, the Patriarchs (in all likelihood)
were not allowed flesh, but only herbs, and the fruit of the ground, Genesis 1.
29. After the flood, flesh was permitted, but blood forbidden, Genesis 9. 3. 4.
From that time there was commanded a dististinction of meats, whereof some were
clean some unclean; which distinction stood in force till the death of
Christ, and that in conscience, by virtue of divine Law. But in the last days,
all difference of meats in respect of obligation of the conscience, is taken
away; and a free use of all is given in that regard.

This the Scripture teaches in many places, Act. 10. 15. The things that God
has purified, pollute thou not. Peter in these words teaches, that all meats
in the new Testament in regard of use, were made clean by God, and therefore
that no man by refusal of any kind of meats, should think or make them
unclean. Again, Romans 14. 17. The kingdom of God is not meat or drink, but
righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost. For whosoever in these things
serves Christ, is acceptable to God and approved of him. Hence it appears,
that in the Apostles judgment, meat and drink does not make any man accepted
of God, whether he uses or uses it not, but the worship of God is it that
makes man approved of him. To the same purpose it is said, 1. Cor. 8. 8. Meat
does not commend us unto God. Again, Col. 2. 16. Let no man condemn you in
meat and drink, etc. ver. 20. If ye be dead with Christ, why as if ye lived in
the world, are ye burdened with Traditions, as Touch not, Taste not, Handle not?
All which perish with the using. Here, Paul would not have the Collossians
burdened with rites and Traditions concerning meats, so as if they used them
not, they should in cur the blame and condemnation of men: but he would have
them to use them freely and indifferently. And his reason is double; First,
because they were now freed in conscience, from the bond of the Ceremonial law
touching meats; and therefore they were in conscience much more freed from men's
laws. Secondly, because these traditions are not the rules and commandments
of God, but the doctrine and precepts of men. Furthermore, Paul in 1. Tim. 4.
3. foretells, that there should be many in the latter days, that should
command to abstain from meats. To which place the Papist answers, that that
was, because such persons taught, that meats were unclean by nature. But the
words are simply to be understood, of meats forbidden with obligation of the
conscience; and the text is general, speaking of the doctrine, not of the
persons of those men; nor in civil respects, but in regard of the bond of
conscience. Lastly, it is a part of Christian liberty, to have freedom in
conscience, as touching all things indifferent, and therefore in regard of
meats.

To this doctrine, some things are opposed, by them of contrary judgment.

Object. I. Princes do make laws, and in their laws do forbid meats and
drinks, and they must be obeyed for conscience sake, Romans 13. 5.

Ans. They do so; but all these laws are made, with reservation of liberty
of conscience, and of the use of that liberty to every person. But to what end
then (will some say) are laws made, if they be made with reservation? Ans. The
scope of them is, not to take away, or to restrain liberty, or the use of
liberty in conscience, but to moderate the overcommon and superfluous outward
use. As for that text, Romans 13. 5. It is to be understood for conscience sake,
not of the law of the Magistrate, but of the law of God, that binds us to obey
the Magistrates law.

Object. II. There was blood and things strangled forbidden, in the counsel at
Jerusalem, after Christ's ascension, Act. 15. Ans. It was forbidden only in
regard of offense, and for a time, so long as the weak Jew remained weak,
not in regard of conscience. And therefore afterward Paul says, that all things
even blood it self was lawful, though not expedient in regard of scandal, 1.
Cor. 6. 12. And to the pure all things are pure, Tit. 1. 15.

Object. III. Papists make laws, in which they forbid some meats, only to
restrain concupiscence. Ans. Then they should forbid wine, as well as flesh.
For wine, spices, and some kinds of fish, which they permit, are of greater
force to stir up lust, then the use of flesh. And hence it is, that Saint
Paul exhorts men not to be drunk with wine, wherein is excess, Ephesians. 5. 18.
Again, I answer, that Just may be restrained by exhortation to temperance,
without prohibitory laws for the obligation of the conscience, which are flat
against Christian liberty.

Upon this Answer a further Question may be made.

Whether a man may with good conscience eat flesh at times forbidden?

Ans. There are two kinds of eating; eating against the Law, and besides the
law.

Eating against the law is, When a man cats, and by cating hinders the end of
the law, contemns the authority of the lawmakers, frustrates the law it self,
and withal, by his eating, gives occasion to others to do the same. This
eating is a flat sin against the fifth commandment. For it is necessary,
that the Magistrates laws should be obeyed in all things lawful. Heb. 13. 17.
The master and the parent, must be obeyed in all lawful things, much more the
laws of Magistrates.

Eating beside the law, is, when a man eats that, which the law mentions and
forbids, but not hurting the law. And that a man may thus eat, sundry
cautions are to be observed. I. This eating must be upon just cause in a man's
own self. II. It must be without contempt of the lawmaker, and with a loyal
mind. III. It must be without giving offense to any, by his bad example. IV.
When it does not hinder the maine end of the law.

V. When the eater does subject himself to the penalty, voluntarily and
willingly. In this eating, there is no breach in conscience, neither is it a
sin, to eat that which the law forbids. For man has free liberty, in
conscience, to eat that which he does eat. Now, if he use his liberty, and
hurt no law, observing these cautions, his eating is no sin. For example. It
was Gods law, that the Priests only should eat the shewbread. Now David upon a
just cause in himself, (all the former cautions observed) eats the shewbread
and sins not; because his conscience was free in these things; and therefore
David's eating was not against the Law, but only beside the law.

II. Question. How we may rightly use meats and drinks, in such sort as our
eating may be to Gods glory, and our own comfort?
Ans. That we may so do, some things are to be done before we eat, some in
eating, and some after our eating.

ect. 1.
The thing that is to be done before our eating, What is required be^ we eat.
is the Consecration of the food, that is, the Blessing of the meats which we
are to eat, 1. Tim. 4. 5, Every creature of God is sanctified by the word of
God, and prayer. By sanctification there, is not meant that, whereby we are
sanctified by the holy Ghost: neither that, whereby the bread and the wine is
hallowed in the Sacrament of the supper. But it is this; when we are assured,
that the creature is made so free, and lawful to us, in respect of our use,
that we may eat it freely, and with good conscience. By the word of God, Paul
means the word of creation, mentioned in Genesis 1. 28. 29. and repeated, Genesis 9.
3. as also the word of God touching the liberty of conscience, namely that to
the pure all things are pure, Tit. 1. 15. It is further added, and prayer, that
is prayer grounded upon the said word of creation, and the doctrine touching
Christian liberty; whereby we pray for grace to God, that we may use the
creatures holily to his glory.

The reasons, why this sanctification of our meat is to be used, are these.
First, that in the use of it, we may lift up our hearts unto God, and by this
means, put a difference between our selves and the brute beasts, which rush
upon the creatures, without sanctifying of them. Secondly, that we may be
admonished thereby, touching the title we have to the creatures, which being
once lost by the fall of Adam, is restored unto us again by Christ. Thirdly,
that it may be an assured testimony to our hearts, that we may use the
creature with liberty of conscience, when we do use it. Fourthly, that we may
be sanctified to the use of the creature, as it is sanctified to us, to the
end, that we may use it with temperance, and not abuse it. Fifthly, that when we
use the creature, we may depend on God for the blessing of it, to make it our
nourishment. For no creature can nourish of it self, but by Gods commandment,
who as David says, Psalm. 145. 16. Opens his hand, and fills all things
living of his good pleasure. And in bread, we must not consider the substance
only, but the staff, which is the blessing of God upholding our bodies.
Sixthly, that we may not grow to security, forgetfulness, and contempt of God,
and so to prophanes in the use of our meats and drinks, as the Israelites
did; which sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.

Now besides these Reasons, we have also the Examples of holy men. This
blessing of the meat, was so known a thing of ancient times, that the poor
maids of Ramath-zophim, could tell Saul, that the people would not eat their
meat, before the prophet came, and blessed the sacrifice, 1. Sam. 9. 13.
Christ in his own family, would not eat of the five loaves and two fishes,
till he had looked up to heaven and given thanks. Mar. 6. 41. Paul took bread
in the ship, and gave thanks in the presence of all that were with him. Act.
17. 35.

The Use of the first point is. I. By this doctrine, all persons are taught,
but specially gouerners of others, as Masters of families and Parents; never to
use, either meats or drinks or any other blessing, that they receive at the
hands of God, but with praise and thanksgiving. For this which is said of
meats and drinks, must be enlarged also to the use of any benefit, blessing,
or ordinance, that we take in hand, to use or enjoy. II. Though we do not
simply condemn, but allow of Hallowing of Creatures, yet we detest Popish
consecration of salt, cream, ashes, and such like. First, because Papists
halow them for wrong ends, as to procure by them remission of sins, to drive
away devils, etc. Secondly, because they sanctify creatures without the word;
yea though they do it by prayer, yet it is prayer without the word, which
gives no warrant thus to use the creatures, or to these ends; and therefore
of the same nature with magical enchantments. Thirdly, if the creature must be
sanctified for our use, before we can use it, then we our selves must be
sanctified both in soul and body, before we can be sit for the use and
service of God. Look as the creature, by the hand and providence of God, is
presented before us to serve us; so must we being strengthened and nourished by
the same give up our-selues, souls, and bodies, to serve and honor him. Yea
our sanctifying of the creature to our holy use, should put us in mind of
sanctifying our selves to his glory. So soon as the Prophet Esaias was
sanctified by God unto his office, then he addressed himself and not before,
and said, Lord, I am here, Esa. 6. 8. and so we our selves, before we can
perform any acceptable duty unto God, must be purged and cleansed. The sons
of Aaron would not do this honor unto God, by sanctifying his name before the
people, and therefore God glorified himself in their death, and temporal
destruction, Leuit. 10. 2. And when Moses the servant of God, failed in the
sanctification of his name, by the circumcision of his son; Gods hand was
upon him to have destroyed him. This point is duly to be observed of all, but
principally of such as are appointed to any public office; if they will serve
God therein with comfort and encouragement, they must first labor to be
sanctified before him, both in their souls and bodies.

ect. 2.
I come now to the second thing, required What is required in our Eating.
for the right and lawful Use of meats and drinks, namely, a Christian
behavior while we are in using them.

For the better understanding whereof, we are to consider two points. First,
what we may do; and then, what we must do in using the creatures.

I. Touching the former. We may use these gifts of God, with Christian
liberty: and how is that? not sparingly alone, and for mere necessity, to
the satisfying of our hunger, and quenching of our thirst, but also freely and
liberally, for Christian delight and pleasure. For this is that liberty, which
God has granted to all believers. Thus we read, that Joseph and his brethren
with him, did eat and drink together of the best, that is, liberally, Genesis
43. 34. And to this purpose David says, that God gives wine, to make glad the
heart of man, and oil to make the face to shine, as well as bread to
strengthen the body. Psalm. 104. 15. And the Lord threatens to bring a
punishment upon his people, Agg. 1. 6. in that he would give them his creatures
indeed, but such a portion of the, as should only supply their present
necessities, and no more. Ye shall eat (says he) but ye shall not have
enough: ye shall drink, but ye shall not be filled. Again, we read that Levi
the Publican, made our Savior Christ a great feast in his own house. Luke 5.
29. At the marriage in Caua a town of Galile, where Christ was present, the
guests are said, according to the manner of these countries, to have drunk
liberally. Ioh. 2. 10. And at an other place, in supper time, Marie is said to
have taken a box of precious and costly ointment, and to have anointed his
feet there with, so as the whole house was filled with the savor of the
ointment. Ioh. 12. 3. Judas indeed thought that expense which she had made
superstuous, but Christ approoues of her act, and commends her for it.

I add further, that by reason of this liberty purchased unto us by Christ,
we may use these and the like creatures of God, with Joy and rejoicing. This is
the profit that redoundeth unto man, in the use of them, that he eat and
drink, and delight his soul with the profit of his labors. Eccles. 2. 24.
The practice hereof we have in the Acts, chapter 2. v. 46. where they of that
Church that believed, are said to eat their meat together with gladness,
and singleness of heart. And yet this rejoicing in the creatures, must be
limited with this clause; that it be, in the Lord: that is to say, a hurtlesse
and harmless joy, tending to the glory of God, and the good of our
neighbor. This condemns the common practice of the world, who solace and
delight themselves in the use of Gods creatures, but so, as with their joy is
joined the ordinary traducing of the Magistrate, Minister, and those that
fear God, and will not run with them to the same excess of riot. 1. Pet. 4. 4.

II. The second point is, what we must do, when we take the benefit of Gods
creatures; a matter of great consequent in the lives of men. And it is this,
that we use our liberty in the Lord, and whether we eat or eat not, we must
do both to the Lord. Romans 14. 6. This is done by laboring, both in eating,
and in abstinence, to approve the same unto God, unto his Saints, and unto our
own consciences. Wherein appears a manifest difference between the wicked and
the godly man. For the one, when he eats or drinks, he does it in the Lord,
and to the Lord; the other, does it not to the Lord, but to himself, that is,
to the satisfaction and contentment of his own carnal delight and pleasure.

That a man may eat to the Lord, there are four things distinctly to be
observed.

I. That in our eating, we practice Justice. Solomon says, The bread of
deceit, that is, gotten by unlawful means, is sweet unto a man: but
afterward, his mouth shall be filled with gravel. Prove. 20. 17. And Paul gives
a rule to the Church of Thessalonica, that every man should eat his own
bread: that is, the bread which is procured and deserved, by his own just and
honest labor, (...). These. 3. 2. This first thing, serves to check a number
of men, that live in the daily practice of injustice, by spending their goods
in good fellowship, at Tauernes and ^ipling houses, neglecting (in the mean
while) the maintenance of their own charge, by following their honest labor;
and by this means, do even rob their families, of their due and right.

II. That we may eat to the Lord, we must practice Love and Charity in our
eating. How is that?

First, we must give offense to no man whatsoever. It is good, says Paul,
neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing, whereby thy brother
stumbleth, is offended, or made weak. Romans 14. 21.

Secondly, in our eating we must have respect of the poor. Thus Nehemiah
exhorts the Jews that were mourning for their sins, to be cheerful, to
eat of the fat, and drink the sweet, and send part unto them, for whom none
was prepared: that is, to them that were poor. Nehem. 8. 10. And the Prophet
Amos, inueigheth against some of the Princes of Israel, who drunk wine in
bowls, and anointed themselves with the chief ointments, and were not sorry
for the affliction of Joseph: that is, did not relieve the poor brethren, that
were led captive, and wanted food and maintenance. Amos 6. 6.

III. We must use our meat in Sobriety. Sobriety is a gift of God, whereby
we keep a holy moderation in the use of our diet. Prove. 23. 1, 2. When thou
sit test to eat, etc. consider diligently, what is set before thee, and put
the knife to thy throat, that is, be very careful and circumspect in taking
thy food, bridle thine appetite, take heed thou do not exceed measure.

If it be asked, what Rule of moderation is to be observed of all, whether they
be men or women, young or old?

I answer. First, one man's particular example, must not be a rule of direction
to all. In the East countries, we read, that men have lived, and do yet live a
great time with a little; for example with parched corn and a cake. Now this
example of theirs, is no rule to us that live in these parts. For their country
is hotter then ours, and therefore less might serve them then us: we are hot
within, and so our appetite is the more strong. Again, in eating we may not
judge or condemn him that eats more, or less, then we our selves, because
his eating is no rule to us in this case.

Secondly, a man's own appetite, is not to be made a rule of eating for others.
For a man must not eat, so long as his stomach craves meat; least he fall
into the sin of gluttony, Romans 13. 13. And this sin is noted by our
Savior Christ, to have been in the old world, in the days of Noah, Mat. 24.
38. when they gave themselves to (...).
eating and drinking like the brute beasts: for so the word signifies.

If then neither example, nor appetite may rule our eating, what be the right
rules of Christian moderation in this behalf?

Ans. That we may not exceed measure, we must keep or serves within these
limits.

First, our food must not go beyond the condition, place, ability, and
maintenance that God has given us. John the Baptist being in the wilderness,
contented himself with very mean fare, agreeable both to the manner of that
country, and to his own calling, and condition of life. His meat was locusts
and wild honey. Mat. 3. 4.

Secondly, it must be framed to the order and difference of time and place.
Against this Rule the rich glutton offended, who fared deliciously every day,
without any difference of time or place, Luke 16. Solomon pronounces a woe to
that Land, whose Princes eat in the morning, Eccl. 10. 16. S. Paul notes it a
fauit in a Minister, to be (...).
given to wine, 1. Tim. 3. 3. that is, a common tipler, and one that loves to
sit by the wine morning and evening, day by day.

Thirdly, every man must eat and drink so much, as may serve to maintain the
strength of his nature, of his body and mind, yea so much, as may serve to
uphold the strength of grace in him. Solomon the King of Israel, would have all
Princes to eat in time, for strength, and not for drunkenness. Eccl. 10. 17.
Esaias notes it as a judgment of God upon men, when they use feasting and mirth,
and have not grace to consider the works of God, Esaias. 5. 12. Our Savior
would have all men so to eat and drink, that they may be the fitter to watch
and pray. Luke 21. 34. 36. And the Apostle Paul exhorts men, not to be drunk
with wine wherein is excess, but to be filled with the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 5. 18.
His meaning is, that men ought so to eat and drink, that their bodies,
minds, and senses, may not be made thereby more heavy, but rather more
lightsome and able to perform their duties to God and man. For if they so eat,
as that thereby they be hindered in this behalf; they are guilty of excess
and riot, which is greatly displeasing to God and offensive to men. This rule
serves to admonish somepersons, who (as the Proverb is) are good
forenoone-men, but bad afternoonemen; because in the morning they be sober, but
for the most part, over come with drink after dinner.

IV. Every man must eat his meat in Godliness. This is indeed to eat unto the
Lord, and it may be done by observation of these rules.

First, by taking heed of the abuse of any creature appointed for food, by
Intemperance. This abuse holy Job suspected in his sons, while they were a
feasting, and therefore he sent day by day, and sanctified them, and offered up
burnt offerings unto God according to the number of them all. Job. 1. 5.

Secondly, by receiving the creatures, as from the hand of God himself. For
this very end did God, by express word, give unto Adam every hearth bearing
seed, which was upon the earth, and every tree wherein was the fruit of a tree
bearing seed for his meat, that he might receive it, as God had given it unto
him, from his own hand, Genesis 1. 29. Thus Moses said unto the Israelites
touching Manna: This is the bread, which the Lord has given you to eat. Exodus
16. 15. This David acknowledged saying, Thou give it them, and they gather
it, thou openest thy hand and they are filled. Psalm. 104. 28. and 145. 15. The
Lord vpbraideth Israel with this fault, by the Prophet Hosea, She did not
acknowledge that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied her
silver and gold, Hos. 2. 8. Yea it is noted as an argument of Gods love to
Israel, by the Prophet Joel, that he sent them corn, wine, and oil, that they
might be satiffied therewith. Joel. 2. 19.

By this duty, are justly to be reprooved the careless and Godless
behauiours of sundry persons, who (with the swyne) feed upon the Creatures of
God, but never lift up their eyes or hands unto him, of whom, and from whom
they do receive them. The very bruit beast can teach them a better lesson.
For (as David says) The Lions roaring after their pray, do seek their meat
from God. Psalm. 104. 21. Yea the heavens and the earth, and all that are in
them, do always depend upon his providence; and are altogether guided and
directed by him, Job. 38. And shall not man much more have an eye unto his
Creator, and wholly depend upon him, for all blessings, from whom he receives
life and breath and all things.

Thirdly, we must receive these creatures from God our father, as tokens of our
reconciliation to him in Christ. So says Saint Paul, Giving thanks always,
for all things, to God even the father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Ephesians. 5. 20. Thus we hold and receive Gods blessings, and he that holds and
receives them otherwise, is an usurper, and not a right and lawful possessour
of them.

Fourthly, we must learn to be content, with that portion that God assigns
to us, be it never so small; and withal labor to see the goodness of God, even
in the meanest fare that may be. Our table is (as it were) a lively Sermon to
us, of Gods special providence over our bodies. For first, in reason, dead
flesh should rather kill us, then give us nourishment, and yet by his blessing
and providence, it continues life and strength. Again, both we and our meat
are but perishing, and therefore when we feed thereon, it may serve to stir
us up, to seek for the food of the soul, that nourishes to life everlasting.
Ioh. 6. 27. Furthermore, look as every creature serves for our use, even so
should we our selves, consecrate our selves unto God, and serve him both with
our souls and bodies, as before has been showed.

Sect. 3.
The third and last point is, what we are to do, and how to behave our selves
after our What is required after out meat.
meat? This Moses teaches the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 8. 10. When thou have eaten
and filled thy self, thou shall bless the Lord thy god. This praising or
blessing of god stands in two things.

First, in a holy remembrance, that God has given us our food. For being once
filled, we must take heed, we forget not God, who has opened his hand, and
plenteously refreshed our bodies with his creatures. Deuteronomy. 8. 11.

Secondly, we must make conscience, in liew of thankfulness to God, to employ
the strength of our bodies in seeking his glory, and walking according to all
his laws and comandements. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do,
do all to the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10. 31. We may not live idly, and give
our selves to riot and gaming, but labor to serve God and our country, in
some profitable course of life, least it be said of us, as it was once of the
old Jews, that we sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play.

To this I add one thing further, that when we have eaten to our contentment,
and something remain, care must be had to reserve it, and not to cast it away.
For this purpose, we have the example of Christ, who commands to gather up
the broken meat that remains, that nothing be lost. Ioh. 6. 12. The reason
is, because these relics and fragments, are part of the creatures; yea they
are as well Gods good creatures, as the rest were, and must be preserved to the
same use.

Now if these may not be abused, or lost, much less ought the gifts of the
mind, which are greater and far more precious, be suffered to miscarie, but
rather to be preserved and increased. A good lesson for such, as have received
any special gifts of nature, or grace from God; that they mispend them not, or
suffer them to perish, but carefully maintain them to the glory of God, and
the good of others.

To conclude this Question, we are all to be exhorted to make conscience of
this duty, to use the good blessings of God in such sort, as they may always
tend to the honor of the giver, avoiding all excess and riot.

Reasons to move us hereunto, may be these. I. Excess destroys the body,
and kills even the very natural strength and life thereof. II. It brings great
hurt to the soul of man, in that it annoyeth the spirits, it dulleth the
senses, it corrupts the natural heat, and good temper of the body. Now
these things being the helps, and next instruments of the soul, if they be
once corrupted and decayed, the soul it self will at length, be brought to
the same pass. III. Let this be considered, that a Woe belongs unto them, that
eat and drink immoderately. Esa. 5. 11. And for this very sin, the Lord led
his own people into captivity. v. 13. Yea the drunkard and the glutton, shall
become poor. Prove. 23. 21. And both shall equally, with there pomp and
excess, descend into Hell. Esaias. 5. 14. IV. We should be willing to part from
all for Christ's sake, much more from our excess; and shall we think it
possible for a man to forsake all, even his own life, that will not forsake
excess and intemperance, in the use of Gods creatures?

It will be said of some, we are not drunken, though we drink much. Ans. It is
a policy of the Devil, to delude men withal, when he persuades them, that
much drinking is not amiss, if a man be not overtaken therewith. For it is a
sin to live and sit daily by the wine, to be always bibbing and sipping.
We know not when or where we shall die, and we are commanded to watch over our
hearts, that we be not overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness. What a
madness then is it, to give over our selves to such immoderate excess;
whereby we are utterly disabled from these, and all other duties of Godliness?

Sect. 3.
In the Third place, we come to those Questions, that concern the Moderation
of our appetite in the use of Apparel. And of this kind there be two
principal Questions; the former of them, being nothing else, but an
introduction to the latter.

I. Question. Whether ornaments of gold, silver, precious stones, silks and
veluets, etc. may not lawfully be used?
Ans. There is a lawful use of these things, yet not in all, but only in
themto whom they belong. Reasons of the Answer are these.

I. Gold and silver, etc. are the gifts of God, and serve not only for
necessity, but for ornament and comeliness.

II. We have the Examples of sundry persons in Scripture, which do warrant
the use of these creatures, and blessings of God. Abraham by his Steward sends
unto Rebecca a golden abiliment, or earing, of half a shekel weight, and two
bracelets of ten shekels weight of gold. Genesis 24. 22. And it is said, that
when she received it, she ware the Jewel of gold in her forehead, and the
bracelets upon her hands, verse. 47. Joseph being advanced in Pharaohs Court,
had the signet of Pharaoh put upon his hand, and a chain of gold about his:
neck, and was arrayed in fine linen; all which were the ornaments of Princes
in those countries. Genesis 41. 42. Again, all the Israelites did were earings of
gold, which afterward they took off from their ears, and gave them to Aaron,
to make thereof the golden calfe. Exodus 32. 3. And they are not blamed for
wearing them, but because they put them to Idolatrous uses. So it is said of
king Solomon, that he had silver in such abundance, that, according to his
state, he gave it in Jerusalem as stones, 2. Cron. 9. 27. And Christ speaks
of the royalty of Solomon, as of a rare and excellent thing, which himself
approved, howsoever he preferres the glory of the Lilies of the field before
it, Matt. 6. 29. The daughter of Pharaoh is said to be brought unto Solomon, in
a vesture of gold of Ophir, that is, in a garment of the finest beaten gold.
Psalm. 45. 10. All these examples do show thus much, that there is a lawful
use of these things in them to whom they appertain.

Against this doctrine, some things are objected.

Object. I. In some places of Scripture, women are forbidden to wear costly
apparel and gold. For Paul wills Timothy, that the women array themselves in
comely attire, not with broidored hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly
apparel. 1. Tim. 2. 9. And to the same purpose Peter speaks. I, Pet. 3. 3.

Ans. First; these ornaments, are not by Paul and Peter simply forbidden but
the abuse of them in riot and excess. For persons that were in those times
called, were of meaner estate; and the Churches in the days of the Apostles,
co^sisted (for the greater part) of poor, base, and mean men and women. 1.
Cor. 1. 28. These things therefore are forbidden them, because the use of gold
and precious ornaments, is nothing else but mere riot, in those that are but of
a mean condition. Secondly I answer, that the Apostles in the places
alleged, do reprove a great fault, which was common and ordinary in those
days. For men and weomen desired, and affected the outward adorning and
trimming of their bodies, accounting the outward ornament, which consisted of
gold, pearl, and costly apparel, to be the principal* whereas indeed the
chief ornaments of a Christian, should be the virtues of Modesty and
Humility, seated in the mind, and restified in the outward carriage.

Object. II. The Prophet Esaias condemns these things in particular. For it
seems, that he had viewed the wardrobes of the Ladies of the court in
Jerusalem, Chap. 3. 18. etc. where he makes a Catalogue of their special
attires and ornaments, and pronounces the judgments of God against them all.

Ans. Some of the ornaments, which the Prophet there mentions, are indeed
mere vanities, that were of no moment, and served to no necessary or
convenient use or end at all. Again, others of them, were in themselves
things lawful, and the Prophet does not condemn the^ at all, as they have
meet and convenient use: but he condemns them in this regard, because they
were made the instruments and signs, of the pride, wantonness, vanity, and
lightness of those women. The truth of this answer will appear, if we consider
the 16. v. of that Chapter, where the prophet shows, what his drift was in
speaking of those things; not to condemn all ornaments, but the pride of the
daughters of Jerusalem, and their hautines and wantonness, testified by diverse
particular behauiours there mentioned. Again, some of the things there named,
were the like, if not of the same kind, with those which Abraham sent to
Rebecca, and which she did wear, Genesis 24. 22. And therefore we may not
think, that the Prophet intends to condemn all things there specified, but
only the abuse of them, as they were then misapplied to wrong ends, and
served to proclaim to the world, the pride and wantonness of the hearts of that
people.

II. Question. What is the right, lawful, and holy use of apparel.
Answ. In the use of Apparel, two things are to be considered: the Preparation
of it, when it is to be worn; and the Wearing, when it is prepared.

ect. 1. In the right Preparation of our apparel, two Rules are propounded in
Scripture, Preparation of apparel.
for our direction.
I. Rule. Our care for apparel, and the ornaments of our bodies, must be very
moderate. This our Savior Christ teaches at large, Math. 6. from the 28 to
the 31 v. Where, commanding men to take no thought for apparel, he forbids not
all care, but the curious and immoderate care. The reason is added, because
they which walk in their callings, and do the duties thereof with diligence,
shall have, by Gods blessing, all things needful provided and prepared for
them. He that dwells in a borrowed house, will not fall a trimming of it, and
suffer his own hard by, to become ruinous. In like manner, our body is the
house of our soul borrowed of God, and by him lent unto us for a time; and we
are but his Tenants at-will: for we must depart out of it at his commandment.
And therefore our greatest care must be employed upon our souls; and the other
which concerns the adorning of our body, must be but moderate. Again, God
in his providence, clotheth the very herbs of the field, therefore much more
is he careful for man. And Paul says, If we have food and rament, we must
therewith be content, 1. Tim. 6. 8. that is, if we have food, and raiment
necessary for us and ours, we ought to quiet our hearts, and have no further
care for our apparel.

It will be said, How shall we know what is Necessary?

Answ. A thing is Necessary two ways: first, in respect of nature, for the
preservation of life and health: secondly, in respect of place, calling, and
condition, for the upholding and maintenance thereof. Now we call that
Necessary raiment, which is necessary both these ways. For example: That
apparel is necessary for the Scholar, the Tradesman, the Countryman, the
Gentleman; which serves not only to defend their bodies from cold, but which
belongs also to the pla^ce, degree, calling, and condition of them all.

If it be asked, who shall determine and judge, what is necessary to these
persons and purposes? I answer. Vain and curious persons are not to be
competent judges hereof; but in these things, we must regard the judgment and
example of modest, grave, and frugall persons in every order and estate; who
upon experience and knowledge, are best able to determine, what is necessary,
and what is not. Again, though we must not seek for more then necessary
apparel; yet if God of his goodness, give us ability to have and maintain
more, we must thankefully receive it, and become good stewards of the same, for
the good of men.

But some will say; It seems, that we ought not to keep abundance, when God
gives it, because we may not have above one coat. For John gives this rule,
Luke 3. 11. Let him that has two coats, give to him that has none. Ans.
John's meaning must needs be this; He that has not only necessary rayments,
but more then necessary, he must give of his abundance to them that want. For
otherwise, his rule should not agree with Christ's own practice, who had
himself two coats, an inner and an upper garment, which he kept and wore. Nor
with S. Paul's, who had both a cloak and a coat.

This Rule, discouers the common sinful practice of many men in the world.
The greater sort of men are exceedingly careful, by all means and ways, to
follow the fashion, and to take up every new fangled attire, whenever it
comes abroad. A course flat contrary to Christ's doctrine, which commands an
honest care only for necessary ornaments, and condemns the contrary, and
that upon special reason; because this inordinate and affected care, is
commonly a great picke-purse. It fills men's heads and hearts with vain and
foolish thoughts: it makes them wastfully to abuse the blessings of God given
unto them, whereby they are disabled, from helping others that are in need.
Whereas, the first and principal care, ought to be for the adorning of the
soul with grace, and putting on the Lord Jesus; and this is it, which will
yield more comfort to the mind and conscience, then any external formalitie
to the outward state of man.

II. Rule. All apparel must be fitted to the body, in a comely and decent
manner; such as becomes holiness. Tit. 2. 3.

If it be here demanded, How we should thus frame and fashion our attire? The
answer is, by observing the Rules of decency and comeliness, which are in
number seven.

First, that it be according to the sex: for men must prepare apparel for
men, weomen for weomen. This rule is not Ceremonial, but grounded upon the Law
of nature, and common honesty. Deuteronomy. 22. 5. The woman shall not wear that
which pertains unto the man, neither shall a man put on woman's raiment: for
all that do so, are abomination to the Lord thy God.

Secondly, our apparel must be made according to our office; that is, such as
may be fit and convenient for us, in respect of our calling: that it may not
hinder or disable us, in the performance of the duties thereof. Whereupon comes
justly to be condemned the kind of apparel, (specially of women) that is used
in this age. For it makes them like to an image in a frame, set bolt upright;
whereby it comes to pass, that they can not go well, and with ease or
conueniencie, about any good business, but must of necessity either sit, or
stand still.

Thirdly, our attire must be according to our ability, and maintenance, either
in lands or in goods and substance. We must (as the common proverb is) shape
our coat according to our cloth, that so we may not be in want, but have
sufficient wherewith to maintain our families, and to relieve the poor. Which
also serves to condemn the sin of many persons, who lay upon their backs,
whatsoever they can scrape and gather together; in the mean while, neglecting
the honest maintenance of their own estates for time to come, and the
necessary relief of them, that are in distress and want.

Fourthly, it must be answerable to our estate and dignity, for distinction of
order and degree in the societies of men. This use of attire, stands by the
very ordinance of God; who, as he has not sorted all men to al places, so he
will have men to fit themselves and their attire, to the quality of their
proper places, to put a difference between themselves and others. Thus we read,
that Joseph being by Phaaroh set over all the land of Egypt, was arrayed with
garments of sine linen, and had a golden chain put upon his neck, to put a
difference between him and the inferior princes of Pharaoh. Genesis 41. 42. Thus
in ancient times, the captains and chief of the armies, did wear fine
garments of diverse colors of needle work, to distinguish them from others.
Iud. 5. 30. Thus in Kings courts, they went in soft raiment, and the poorer
people in baser and rougher attire. Matt. 11. 8. By which it appears, that
many in these days do greatly offend. For men keep not themselves within
their own order: but the Artificer commonly goes clad like the Yeoman: the
Yeoman like the Gentleman: the Gentleman as the Nobleman: the Nobleman as the
Prince: which brings great confusion, and utterly ouerturneth the order,
which God has set in the states and condions of men.

Fifthly, men's attire is to be framed and prepared, according to the ancient and
received custom of the country, wherein they are brought up and dwell.

Touching this Rule, it is demanded, whether, if a man see a fashion used in
other countries, he may not take it up here, and use it?

Ans. He may not. For God has threatened to visit all such, as are clothed
with strange apparel. Zeph. 1. 9. And Paul taxes it as a great disorder in
the Church of Corinth, and even against nature, that men went in long hair,
and women went uncovered. 1. Cor. 11. 13. 14. And if this be so, then what a
disorder is that, when men of one country, frame themselves to the fashions and
attires, both of men and women of other nations. This one sin is so common
among us, that it has branded our English people with the black mark of the
vainest and most newfangled people under heaven. If a stranger comes into our
land, he keeps his ancient and customeable attire, without varying or
alteration. We on the contrary, ca^ see no fashion used either by the French,
Italian, or Spanish, but we take it up, and use it as our own.

Sixthly, the garments that we make to cover our bodies, must be such as may
express the virtues of our minds; specially the virtues of Modesty,
Frugalitie, Shamefastnes. They should be as a book written with text letters,
wherein, at the first, any man may read the graces that be in the heart. Thus
Paul exhorts weomen, that they array themselves with comely apparel, in
shamefastness and modesty, not with broidered hair, etc. but as becomes
weomen, that profess the fear of God, with good works. 1. Tim. 2. 9. 10. And
our Savior commands, that the light of our conversation, even in outward
things, should so shine unto me^, that they seeing our good works, may glorify
the father which is in heaven. Mat. 5. 16.

Seventhly, it must be framed to the example, not of the lighter and vainer
sort, but of the grauest, and the most sober of our order and place, both of
men and weomen. We have no express rule in Scripture, touching the measure and
manner of our apparel: and therefore, the wise and grave presidents of good
and godly men, that are of the same, or like degree with our selves, ought to
stand for a rule of direction in this behalf. To which purpose Paul exhorts,
Whatsoever things are pure, honest, of good report, if there be any virtue,
etc. think of these things which ye have both learned and received and heard
and seen in me, those things do, Phil. 4. 9. Examples hereof, we have many in
the word of God. Of John the Baptist, who had his garments of Camels hair,
Mat. 3. 4. Of Elias, who is said to be a hairie man in respect of his attire,
and to be girded (as John was) with a girdle of leather about his loins. 2.
King. 1. 8. For these rough garments, were the principal raiments of Prophets
in those times and places, as we read, Zach. 13. 4. And it was the ordinary
fashion of the Jewish nation, to use goats-hair, not only for making of their
apparel, but even of the curtains, that were made for the use of the
sancturie, Exodus 36. 14. If this Rule were practiced, it would serve to cut off
many scandalous behauiours, in the conuersations of men. For now a days, men
do strive, who shall go before another, in the brauest and costliest attire;
having little or no respect at all, to the examples of godly and sober persons
of their degrees and places. And this their excessive pride and vanity, is
ordinarily maintained, by unjust dealing, in lying and deceit, by covetousness,
and unmercifulness to the poor: sins which are so greatly dishonorable
unto God, that the very earth whereupon men do live, can hardly endure the
same. Wherefore those that fear God, and have a care to serve him in holiness
and righteousness, ought to hate and detest these courses, renouncing the
curious vanity of the world, and testifying the graces and virtues of their
minds unto men, even by their grave and sober gestures and habits of their
bodies.

ect. 2.
The Second thing to be considered in the VVearing of apparel.
right use of apparel, is the wearing and putting of it on. Touching which,
two special Rules are to be observed.

I. Rule. That we wear and put on our apparel, for those proper Ends, for
which God has ordained the same. The Ends of apparel, are specially these.

First, for Necessity sake; that is, for the defending of the body from the
extremity of parching heat, and the pinching cold, and consequently the
preserving of life and health. This was the end, for which garments were first
made after the fall. And the reason of it is this. Whilst man was yet in the
state of Innocence, before his fall, there was a perfect temperature of the
air, in respect of man's body, and so there was no need of garments; and
nakedness then was no shame unto man, but a glorious comelines. Now after that
Adam and in him al mankind, had sinned, vanity came upon all the creatures;
and amongst the rest, upon the air a marvelous distemperature in respect of
heat and cold. For the remedy whereof, it was ordained that Adam should wear
apparel, which God having once made and appointed, he has ever since blessed
it as his own ordinance, as daily experience shows. For, our attire which is
void of heat and life, does notwithstanding preserve man's body in heat and
life; which it could not do, if there were not a special providence of God
attending upon it.

The Second End of apparel, is Honesty. For to this end do we put it on,
and wear it, for the covering and hiding of that deformity of our naked
bodies, which immediately followed upon the transgression of our first parents:
and in this respect also, were garments (after the fall) appointed by God, for
the use of man.

It is objected, that Esaias prophesied naked and barefoot, Esa. 20. (...). and
so did Saul, 1. Sam. 19. 24. I answer: first, that which the Prophet did, was
done by commandment, as may appear in the second verse of that Chapter. For
the Lord gave him commandment so to do. Again, he is said to be naked,
because he put off his upper, ^ent, which was sackcloath, or some other rough
garment, that Prophets used to wenre; but it cannot be proved, that he put off
that garment which was next his flesh and skin.

Concerning Saul, there be two answers given. One, that he put off his upper
garment, as Esaias did. For we are not to imagine, that he prophesied naked, it
being so unseemly a thing, and even against the Law of nature since the fall.
The other answer, and that according to the true meaning of the text is; that
Saul, before the Spirit of prophecy came upon him, had put on and wore his
warrelike attire, wherewith he went out to take David. But when the Spirit came
upon him, then he put off his military habit, and went in other attire, after
the manner and fashion of a Prophet, and so prophesied. And therefore, whereas
he is said to go naked, the meaning is, that he stripped himself of his
armor, which both himself and his messengers used, in pursuing after David.

Now touching the Covering of the body with apparel, these things are to be
remembered. First, that it must be covered in decent, and seemly sort. Thus
Joseph wrapped Christ's body that was dead, in a clean linen cloth, together
with the spices, Matt. 27. 59. Secondly, the whole body must be covered some
only parts excepted, which (for necessity sake) are left open and bare, as
the hands and face: because there is an ignominious shame, not only on some
parts, but over the whole body. And here comes to be reproved, the affected
nakedness used of sundry persons, who are wont to have their garments made of
such a fashion, as that their neck and breasts may be left for a great part
uncovered. A practice full of vanity, and clean contrary to this Rule
grounded in corrupted nature. For if the whole body be over spread with shame,
by sin, why should any man by such practice, (as much as in him lies) uncover
his shame to the view of the world? The end of attire is, to hide the
shameful nakedness of the body, from the sight of men. But such persons as
these are, do hereby express the vanity and lightness of their minds, by
leaving some parts of their bodies open and uncovered. Wherein, what do they
else, but even display and manifest unto men and Angels, their own shame and
ignominy? Nay, what do they else, but glory in that, which is (by the just
judgment of God) reproachful unto them? Let all those that fear God, and are
humbled in the consideration of their sins, which are the matter of the shame
of mankind, be otherwise affected.

A Third End of apparel is, the honoring of the body. To this purpose S.
Paul says, 1. Cor. 12. 23. Upon those members of the body, which we think
most dishonest, put (...) on the greater honor, etc. v. 24. God has tempered
the body together, and given the more honor to that part which lacked. And in
1 Thessalonians. 4. 4. It is the will of God, etc. that every one of you should know
how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor. These words are spoken of
chastity, but they are generally to be understood of any other virtue
belonging to the body. Now the reason of this end is plain. For the body of
every believer, is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and a member of Christ, in the
kind and place, as well as the soul. Therefore it ought to be both holily and
honorably used.

For the honoring of the body with outward ornaments, we must remember this
distinction. Some ornaments are inward, and some are borrowed. Inward, are the
graces and gifts of God; these are our own. Borrowed, are gold, silver,
pearls, and precious stones: and these are outward. And of the two, more
special care ought to be had of the inward, then of the outward and borrowed.
For these are indeed fair and honorable, in the opinion and estimation of
men, but the other are far more honorable in the sight of God. And therefore
Saint Peter exhorts weomen, that their apparel be not outward, as with
broidered hair, and gold set about, or in sumptuous garments, but that the
hidden man of the heart be vncorrupt, with a meek and quiet spirit, which is
before God a thing precious. 1. Pet. 3. 3, 4.

Now that we may use our apparel, to the Ends before rehearsed, we are yet
further to observe some special Rules, which may serve for our direction in
the right adorning of the body.

First, every one must be content with their own natural favor, and
complexion, that God has given them; and account of it, as a precious thing,
be it better or be it worse. For the outward form and favor that man has, is
the work of God himself, fitted and proportioned unto him, in his conception,
by his special providence. Being then the Lords own work, and his will, thus
to frame it rather then otherwise, great reason there is, that man should rest
contented with the same.

Here comes to be justly reproved, the strange practice and behavior of some
in these days, who being not contented with that form and fashion, which God
has sorted unto them, do devise artificial forms and favors, to set upon
their bodies and faces, by painting and coloring; thereby making themselves
seem that which indeed they are not. This practice is most abominable in the
very light of nature, and much more by the light of Gods word; wherein we have
but one only example thereof, and that is of wicked Iesabel, 2. king. 9. 30.
who is noted by this mark of a notorious harlot, that she painted her face.
For what is this, but to find fault with Gods own workmanship? and to seek
to correct the same, by a counterfeit work of our own devising; which cannot
but be highly displeasing unto him.

A cunning Painter, when he has once finished his work, if any man shall go
about to correct the same, he is greatly offended. Much more then may God, the
most wise and absolute former, and Creator of his works, be highly offended
with all those, that cannot content themselves, with the favor and feature
they have received from him, but will needs be calling his work into
question, and refining it according to their own humors and fancies.
Tertullian in his book de habitu mulieru^, calls such persons, and that
deservedly, the Devils handmaides.

But may some say, if there be any deformity in the body, may we not labor
to cover it? Ans. Yes: but we may not set any new form on the face, or habit
on the body. Dissembling is condemned, as well in deed, as in word, and such
is this.

Secondly, we must place the principal ornament of our souls and bodies, in
virtue and good works, and not in any outward things. So would Paul have
woomen to array themselves in comely apparel, with shamefastnes and modesty,
1. Tim. 2. 9.

Thirdly, in using of ornaments beforenamed, we must be very sparing, and keep
our selves within the mean. Genesis 24. 22. Abraham's servant gave Rebecca an
abillement of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets of ten shekels of gold,
which she put upon her forehead and hands, v. 47. all which were of no great
value, and therefore not excessive, but comely and moderate. And in the Old
Testament, kings daughters were clad but in parti-colored garments. 2. Sam.
13. 18. There was therefore, even amongst them, great plainness.

It will here be demanded, What is then the measure that must be used? Ans. The
Scripture gives no rule for our direction in this point, but the example and
judgment of the sagest and soberest persons in every order, age, and
condition; and as they do and judge, so must we. As for example: whether a man
should wear a ruff single, or double, or tripled, etc. the Scripture, in
particular, gives no direction: only we must look upon the example of the
soberest, and discreetest persons of our order and age, and that ought to be
our president for imitation.

Fourthly, ornaments must be used not always alike, but according to times and
seasons. It is noted as a fault in the rich glutton, that he went every day in
costly apparel. Luke 16. 19. In the days of rejoicing, we may put on more
outward ornaments: and so they used of ancient times, at marriages, to put on
wedding garments. Matthew. 22. But in the days of mourning, baser and courser
attire is to be used, as fittest for the time.

Fifthly, we must adorn our bodies to a right end; to wit, that thereby we may
honor them, and in them honor God. Against this Rule do offend those, that
adorn their bodies, to be praised, to be counted rich and great persons, and
to purchase and procure unto themselves the love of strangers. This is the
harlots practice, described by Solomon at large, Prou. 6. 25. and 7. 10. 16.
These are the Ends, for which we must attire our selves.

And so much of the first maine Rule to be observed, in the wearing and putting
on of apparel.

The Second maine Rule follows. We must make a spiritual use of the apparel
which we wear. How may that be done?

Ans. First, we must take occasion thereby to humble our selves, and that in
this manner. When we see the plaster upon the sore, we know there is a wound:
and so, the cover of our bodies, must put us in mind of our shame and
nakedness, in regard of grace and Gods favor, by reason of original sin. And
we are to know, that it is a dangerous practice for any man, to puff up
himself in pride, upon the sight and use of his apparel. For this is to be
proud of his own shame. Nay, it is as much, as if a these should be proud of
his bolts, and of the halter about his neck, garments being nothing else but
the cover of our shame, and the signs of our sins.

Secondly, by the putting on of our garments, we must be admonished to put on
Christ. Romans 13. 14. Quest. How shall we do that? Ans. Thus: We must conceive
Christ's obedience active and passive, as a covering; and therefore by prayer we
are to come unto God in his name, and entreat him to accept this his obedience
for us: yea that Christ may be made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. And we on the other side, made conformable to
him in life and death, in all moral duties. Lastly, that we may have the same
mind, affection, and conversation that he had.

Thirdly, when we put off our clothes, we then are admonished of putting off
the old man; that is, the mass and body of sinful corruption. And we then
put him off, when we can by grace hate sin, and carry a resolute purpose in
our hearts of not sinning.

Fourthly, when we cloth our selves, and trusse our attire to our bodies; this
should, teach us a further thing, that it behooves us, to gird up our loins,
to have our lights burning, to prepare our selves to meet Christ, whether by
death, or by the last judgment. If we make not these uses of our attire, we do
not rightly use, but rather abuse the same.

In a word, to shut up this point; we are all to be exhorted to make conscience
of the practice of these Rules, and to take heed of pride in these outward
things. And in way of motive hereunto; consider first, how great and heinous a
sin Pride is. The greatness of it may be discerned by four things.

First, in it, and the fruit thereof, superfluity of apparel, there is an
abuse of our wealth, to needless and superfluous uses, which ought to be
employed to uses more necessary; as to the good of the Church, common wealth
and family, and especially for the releife of the poor.

Secondly, in this sin there is an abuse of time. For they that give
themselves to pride; spend so much time in the adorning of their bodies, that
they have no leisure for the adorning and beautifying of the soul. Hence it
comes to pass, that proud persons abound with ignorance, idleness,
wantonness, and many other enormities.

Thirdly, in this sin there is an abuse of the attire it self: in that it is
made a sign of the vanity of the mind, and wantonness of the heart, which
should be the sign of a heart religiously disposed.

Fourthly, in it there is a confusion of order in the estates and societies of
men. For whereas one order of men should go thus attired, and another after
another manner; by this it comes to pass, that equal and superior are clothed
both alike, and that which should be an occasion to humble us, is made an
occasion to puff us up.

Fifthly, there is a great judgment threatened against this sin. Esaias. 2. 11.
12. Zeph. 3. 11.

The greatness of this vice, we are to endeavor, by all means possible, to
redress in our selves. For which purpose, we must be careful to see and feel,
and withal to bewail the spiritual nakedness of our souls; which is a
deprauation of the image of God, wherein we are created, according to him, in
holiness and righteousness, the want whereof makes us ugly and deformed in the
eyes of God. And the true sense and experience of this, will turn our minds
and thoughts from the trimming of the body, and make us especially to labor
for the righteousness of Christ imputed, as the only covering which will
keep us warm and safe from the storms and tempests of the wrath and fury of
God.

Sect. 4.
In the fourth place, we come to the handling of those Questions, that concern
the Moderation of our Appetite in the Use of Pleasures and Recreations. And
these are specially three.

I. Question. Whether Recreation be lawful for a Christian man?
Ans. Yea, and that for two causes.

First, Rest from labor, with the refreshing of body and mind, is necessary;
because man's nature is like the bow, which being always bent and used, is soon
broken in pieces. Now that which is necessary, is lawful. And if rest be
lawful, then is recreation also lawful.

Secondly, by Christian liberty, we are allowed to use the creatures of God,
not only for our necessity, but also for meet and convenient delight. This
is a confessed truth; and therefore to them, which shall condemn fit and
convenient recreation (as some of the ancient Fathers have done, by name
Chrysostom and Ambrose) it may be said, be not to righteous, be not to wise.
Eccl. 7. 18.

II. Question. What kinds of recreations and sports, are lawful and
convenient, and what be unlawful and inconvenient?
Ans. I will first lay down this ground, that, All lawful Recreation is only
in the use of things indifferent, which are in themselves neither commanded nor
forbidden. For by christian liberty, the use of such things for lawful
delight and pleasure, is permitted unto us. Therefore meet and fit recreations
do stand in the use of things indifferent, and not in things either commanded
or forbidden. Hence I derive three Conclusions, that may serve for the better
answer of the Question.

I. Recreation may not be in the use of holy things; that is, in the use of the
word, Sacraments, prayer, or in any act of religion. For these things are
sacred and divine, they do stand by Gods express commandment, and may not be
applied to any common or vulgar use. For this cause it is well provided, that
the pageants which have been used in sundry cities of this land are put
down; because they were nothing else, but either the whole or part of the
history of the Bible turned into a Play. And therefore the less to be
allowed, considering that the more holy the matter is which they represent, the
more unholy are the plays themselves. Again, all such jests, as are framed
out of the Phrases and sentences of the scripture, are abuses of holy things,
and therefore carefully to be avoided. The common saying may teach us thus
much. Non est bonum ludere cum Sanctis.
It is no safe course to play with holy things. Lastly, upon the former
conclusion, we are taught that it is not meet, convenient, or laudable for men
to move occasion of laughter in Sermons.

The second Conclusion. Recreation may not be made of the sins or offenses of
men. They ought to be unto us the matter of sorrow and mourning. David shed
rivers of tears, because men brake the commandments of God, Psalm. 119. 136.
The righteous heart of Lot was vexed, with hearing the abominations of Sodom.
2. Pet. 2. 8.

Upon this, it follows first, that common plays, which are in use in the
world, are to be reproved, as being not meet and convenient matter of
Recreation. For they are nothing else, but representations of the vices and
misdemeanou^s of men in the world. Now such representations are not to be
approoved. Paul says, Fornication, covetousness, let them not be named among
you, as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5. 3. And if vices of men may not be named,
unless the naming of them, tend to the reproouing and further condemning of
them, much less may they be represented, for the causing of mirth and pastime.
For, naming is far less, then representing, which is the real acting of the
vice. Indeed Magistrates and Ministers may name them, but their naming must be
to punish, and reform them, not otherwise. Again, it is unseemly, that a man
should put on the person, behavior, and habit of a woman; as it is also for a
woman to put on the person, behavior and habit of a man, though it be but for
an hour. The law of God forbiddes both, Deuteronomy. 22. 3. And that law, for
equity, is not merely judicial, but moral. Nay, it is the law of nature and
common honesty.

Here also, the dancing used in these days is to be reproved; namely, the
mixed dancing of men and weomen, in number and measure, (specially after
solemn feasts) with many lascivious gestures accompanying the same; which
cannot, nor ought to be justified, but condemned. For it is no better, then the
very bellows of lust and uncleanness, yea the cause of much evil. It is
condemned in the daughter of Herodias, dancing before Herod. Mark. 6. 22. And
in the Israelites, that sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play, that
is, to dance. We read indeed, of a kind of dancing commended in Scripture,
that Moses Aaron and Miriam used at the red sea, Exodus 15. 20. And David
before the Arc, 1. Sam. 18. And the daughters of Israel, when David got the
victory of Goliath, 2. Sam. 6. 14. But this dancing was of another kind. For
it was not mixed, but single, men together, and women apart by themselves. They
used not in their dancing wanton gestures, and amorous songs, but the Psalms
of praise and thanksgiving. The cause of their dancing was spiritual joy, and
the end of it was praise and thanksgiving.

It may be alleged, that Ecclesiastes says, There is a time of mourning, and
a time of dancing, Eccl. 3. And David says, Thou have turned my joy into
dancing, Psalm. 30. 1^. And the Lord says in Jeremy, O daughter Sion, thou
shall got forth with the dance of them that rejoice. Ier. 31. 4. I answer:
first, these places speak of the sacred dancing before named, and not of the
dancing of our times. Secondly, I say, that these places speak not of
dancing properly, but of rejoicing signified by dancing: that is to say, a
hearty rejoicing, or merrie-making. Besides that, the Prophet Jeremy speaks
by way of comparison, as if he should say, Then shall the Virgin rejoice, as
men are wont to do in the duin^^. And it is sometimes the use of the
Scripture, to express things lawful by a comparison, drawn from things
unlawful: as in the Parables of the unrighteous Judge, the unjust Steward, and
the thief in the night.

The third Conclusion. We may not make recreations of Gods judgments, or of
the punishments of sin. The Law of God forbiddes us to lay a stumbling block
before the blind, to cause him to fall, though it be not done in earnest, but
in sport, Leuit. 19. 14. Upon the same ground, we are not to sport our selves
with the folly of the natural fool. For that is the blindness of his mind,
and the judgment of God upon him. I know it has been the use of great men,
to keep fools in their houses: And I dare not condemn the fact. For they may
do it, to set before their cies a daily spectacle of Gods judgment, and to
consider how God in like sort, might have dealt with them. And this use is
Christian. Nevertheless, to place a special recreation, in the folly of such
persons, and to keep them only for this end, it is not laudable. When David
fained himself to be mad, before Achish the King of Gath, mark what the
Heathen King could say, Have I need of mad men, that ye have brought this
fellow, to play the mad man in my presence? Shall he come into my house? 1.
Sam. 21. 15.

Again, the Bayting of the Bear, and Cockefights, are no meet recreations.
The baiting of the Bull has his use, and therefore it is commanded by civil
authority; and so have not these. And the Antipathie and cruelty, which one
beast shows to another, is the fruit of our rebellion against God, and should
rather move us to mourn, then to rejoice.

The Second answer to the former Question, is this.

Games may be divided into three sorts. Games of wit or industry, games of
hazard, and a mixture of both.

Games of wit, or industry are such, as are ordered by the skill and industry
of man. Of this sort are Shooting in the long bow, Shooting in the caleeuer,
Running, Wrestling, Fensing, Music, the games of Chests, and draughts, the
Philosophers game, and such like. These, and all of this kind, wherein the
industry of the mind and body has the chiefest stroke, are very commendable,
and not to be disliked.

Games of hazard are those, in which hazard only bears the sway, and orders
the game, and not wit; wherein also there is (as we say) chance, yea mere
chance in regard of us. Of this kind is Dicing, and sundry games at the Tables
and Cards. Now games that are of meere-hazard, by the consent of godly
Divines, are unlawful. The reasons are these.

First, games of mere hazard are indeed lo^s; and the use of a lot, is an act
of religion, in which we refer unto God, the determination of things of
moment, that can no other way be determined. For in the use of a lotte there be
four things. The first is, a casual act done by us, as the casting of the
Die. The second is, the applying of this act, to the determination of some
particular controversy, the ending whereof maintains peace, order, and love
among men. The third is confession, that God is a sovereign judge, to end and
determine things, that can no other way be determined. The fourth is,
supplication, that Go^ would, by the disposition of the lotte, when it is cast,
determine the event. All these actions are infolded in the use of a lotte, and
they are expressed, Act. 1. ver. 24. 25. 26. Now then, seeing the use of a
lotte is a solemn act of religion, it may not be applied to sporting, as I
have showed in the first conclusion. Secondly, such games are not recreations,
but rather matter of stirring up troblesome passions, as fear, sorrow, etc.
and so they distemper the body and mind. Thirdly, covetousnes is commonly the
ground of them all. Whereupon it is, that men usually play for money. And for
these causes, such plays by the consent of learned Divines, are unlawful.

The third kind of plays are mixed, which stand partly of hazard, and partly of
wit, and in which hazard begins the game, and skill gets the victory: and
that which is defective by reason of hazard, is corrected by wit.

To this kind, are referred some games at the cards and tables. Now the common
opinion of learned Divines is, that as they are not to be commended, so they
are not simply to be condemned, and if they be used, they must be used very
sparingly. Yet there be others, that hold these mixed games to be unlawful, and
judge the very dealing of the cards to be a lotte, because it is a mere
casual action. But, as I take it, the bare dealing of the cards is no more a
lotte, then the dealing of an alms, when the Princes Almner puts his hand into
his pocket, and gives, for example, to one man six pence, to another twelve
pence, to another two pence, what comes forth without any choice. Now this
casual distribution is not a lot, but only a casual action. And in a lot,
there must be two things. The first is, a casual act: the second, the applying
of the foresaid act, to the determination of some particular and uncertain
event. Now the dealing of the cards is a casual act; but the determination of
the uncertain victory, is not from the dealing of the cards, in mixed games,
but from the wit and skill, at least from the will of the players. But in
things that are of the nature of a lot, the wit and will of man has no stroke
at all. Nevertheless, though the dealing of the cards, and mixed games, be no
lots; yet it is far saffer and better, to abstain from them, then to use
them: and where they are abolished, they are not to be restored again, because
in common experience, many abuses and inconveniences attend upon them: and
things unnecessary, when they are much abused, because they are abused, they
must not be used, but rather removed, as the brazen serpent was, 2. king. 18.
4.

III. Question. How are we to use recreations?
For answer whereof, we must remember these four special rules.

I. Rule. We are to make choice of Recreations, that are of least offense, and
of the best report. Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are of good report, think of
them. The reason is, because in all recreations, we must take heed of
occasions of sin, both in our selves and others. And this moved Job, while
his sons were a feasting, to offer daily burnt offerings, according to the
number of them all, because he thought, it may be, my sons have sinned, and
blasphemed God in their hearts. Job 1. 5. And not only that, but I add
further, we must take heed of occasions of offense in others. Upon this
ground, Paul says, that rather then his eating should offend his brother, he
would eat no meat while the world endured. 1. Cor. 8. 13. In this regard, it
were to be wished, that games of wit should be used only, and not games of
hazard, because they are more scandalous then the other. Lastly, in things that
are lawful in themselves, we are to remember Paul's rule, All things are
Lawful, but all things are not expedient. 1. Cor. 6. 12.

II. Rule. Our Recreations must be profitable to our selves, and others; and
they must tend^ also to the glory of God. Our Savior Christ says, that of
every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account at the day of
judgment. Matthew. 12. 36. Where by idle words, he means such, as bring no
profit to men, nor honor to God. And if for idle words, then also for idle
recreations, must we be accountable to him. Again, S. Paul teaches, that
whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, we must do all to the glory
of God (...). Cor. 10. 31. Therefore the scope and end of all recreations is,
that God may be honored in and by them.

III. Rule. The end of our Recreation must be, to refresh our bodies and
minds. It is then an abuse of recreation, when it is used to win other men's
money. The gain that comes that way, is worse then usury, yea, it is flat
theft. For by the law, we may recover things stolen, but there is no law to
recover things won. And yet, if play be for a small matter, the loss whereof
is no hurt to him that loses it, and if it be applied to a common good, it is
lawful, otherwise not.

IV. Rule. Recreation must be moderate and sparing, even as the use of meat and
drink, and rest. Whence it follows, that they which spend their whole life
in gaming, as Players do, have much to answer for. And the like is to be said
of them that have lands and possessions, and spend their time in pleasures and
sports, as is the fashion of many gentlemen in these days.

Now Recreation must be sparing, two ways.

First, in regard of time. For we must redeem the time, that is, take time
while time lasts, for the procuring of life everlasting. Ephesians. 5. 16. This
condemns the wicked practice of many men, that follow this game and that, to
drive away time, whereas they should employ all the time that they can, to do
Gods will. And indeed, it is all to little, to do that which we are
commanded: and therefore while it is called to day, let us make all the have we
can, to repent and be reconciled unto God.

Secondly, Recreation must be sparing, in regard of our affection. For we may
not set our hearts upon sports, but our affection must be tempered and alaied
with the fear of God. Thus Solomon says, that laughter is madness, Eccles. 2.
2. so farre-forth, as it has not the fear and reverence of the name of God to
restrain it. This was the sin of the Jews reproved by the Prophet, that
they gave themselves to all manner of pleasure, and did not consider the work
of the Lord: that is, his judgments and corrections. Esa. 5. 12. And thus if
Sports and Recreations be not ordered, and guided according to this and the
other Rules, we shall make them all not only unprofitable unto us, but utterly
unlawful. And so much of the virtue of Temperance.

CHAP. V.
Of Liberality.

HItherto we have treated of the first sort of Virtues, that are seated in the
will, which do respect a man's own self, namely of Clemency, which stands
in the moderation of the mind in respect of anger: and Temperance, which
consists in the moderation of our appetite, in respect of riches, apparel,
meat and drink, pleasures and recreations.

Now we come to the second sort, which respect others beside our sel^es. And
these belong to the practice either of Courtesy and kindness, or Equity and
right. Of the first kind, is Liberalltie: of the second is Justice, in showing
or giving Equity, or Fortitude in maintaining the same. Of these in order.

Liberality, is a virtue, seated in the will, whereby we show or practice
courtesy and kindness to others. The principal Questions touching this Virtue,
may be referred to that text of Scripture which is written Luke 11. 41.
Therefore give alms of those things which ye have, and behold all things shall
be clean unto you.

The words are a rule or Counsel, delivered by Christ to the Pharisees: and
the true and proper sense of them, is this. You Pharisees, give your selves to
the practice of injustice and oppression, and thereby you desile your selves,
and all your actions. For redress hereof, I propound you this Rule; Practice
Charity in giving of your alms, let your outward good actions, proceed from
the inward sincere affection of your hearts toward your brethren; and then
shall you attain to a holy and pure use of your goods. The counsel of Daniel
to King Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4. 24. to break off his sins by the practice of
justice, and his iniquities by mercy to the afflicted, may be a good
Commentary to this Text.

In the words, I consider two things. A remedy, Therefore give alms of those
things you have: and the fruit that follows upon the remedy, and behold all
things shall be clean unto you.

Sect. 1.
The Remedy, is the virtue of Christian Liberality, consisting principally in
the practice of Love and mercy, in giving of Alms.

For the better understanding whereof, five Questions are briefly to be
propounded and resolved.

I. Question. Who, or what persons must give Alms?
Ans. There be two sorts of men, that are, and ought to be, giuers of Alms.

The first sort are Rich men, who besides things necessary, have superfl^^tle
and abundance, yea, much more then things necessary. These are such as have
the worlds good, as S. John says, whereby they are enabled, to (...). Ioh. 3.
17.
give and bestow relief upon others, out of their abundance. Thus Saint Paul
says, that the abundance of the Corinthians, must supply the want of other
Churches, 2. Cor. 8. 14. Many other proofs might be brought, but these are
sufficient in a known and confessed truth.

A second sort of giuers, are men of the poor sort, that have but things
necessary, and sometime want them too. And because this point is not so easily
granted, therefore I will prove it by the Scriptures.

The man that lives by his work, is commanded to labor in his calling, that he
may have something to give to them that want, ^ph. 4. 28. The poor widow that
cast into the Lords treasury of her penury, but two mites, that is the eight
part of a penny, is commended; and Christ preserreth her alms, before the
great gifts of the richer sort, luke 21. 2. The Church of Macedonia, being
poor and in extreme necessity, does yet send relief to other Churches, and
is commended for it by Paul. 2. Cor. 8. 2. Their poverty excused them not from
liberality, but they were liberal, not only according to, but even beyond
their ability. Our Savior Christ himself lived of alms: for Ioanna the wife
of Chuza Herod's steward, and Susa^na ministered unto him of their substance,
Luke 8. 3. Where by the way, we note, that he did not live by begging, as the
Papists affirm, but by the voluntary ministration and contribution of some,
to whom he preached. Now, though he was so poor himself, yet he used to give
aims of that he had, Ioh. 13. 29. The oblations of the Old Testament, for the
maintenance of the Altar, were a matter of great cost and charge, in
sacrifices, and such like ceremonies: and yet al were charged with them, the
poor, as well as the rich. Now in the new Testament, the material Altar is
taken away, and yet we have something in the room thereof, namely, those that
are poor and destitute, which all men are bound in conscience to relieve and
maintain, as once they were to maintain the Altar. Saint John commends unto
us Charity, not that which consists in words only, but which shows it
self in actions, 1. Ioh. 3. 18. teaching that the one is no way sufficient
without the other. Lastly, all mankind is distinguished into these two sorts:
some are givers, some are receivers of aims: there is not a third kind to be
found in the Scriptures.

Yet here an exception must be added, that this doctrine be not mistake^. There
are some persons exempted from this duty, and they be such, as are in
subjection to others, and are not at their own disposition. Of this sort, are
children under the government of their parents, and servants subject to the
authority and dominion of their Masters. For the goods which they have, are
not their own, neither may they dispose of them as they list: they therefore
must not be giuers.

It may be asked, whether the wife may give alms without the consent of her
husband, considering that she is in subjection to another, and therefore all
that she has is another, and not her own. Ans. The wife may give alms of
some things, but with these cautio^s; as first she may give of those ex
paraphernalibus.
goods that she has excepted from marriage. Secondly, she may give of those
things which are common to them both, provided it be with her husbands consent,
at least general and implicit. Thirdly, she may not give without or against
the consent of her husband. And the reason is, because both the law of nature,
and the word of God, commands her obedience to her husband in all things.

If it be alleged, that Ioanna the wife of Chuza Herodes steward, with
others, did minister to Christ of their goods, Luke 8. 3. I answer. It is to be
presumed, that it was not done without all consent.

Again, if it be said, that Abigail brought a present to David, for the
releife of him and his young men, whereof she made not Nabal her husband
acquainted, 1. Sam. 25. 19. I answer, it is true, but mark the reason. Nabal
was generally of a churlish and unmerciful disposition, whereupon he was
altogether unwilling, to yield releife to any, in how great necessity soever;
whence it was, that he ^ailed on the young men, that came to him, and dro^e
them away, ver. 14. Again, he was a foolish man; and given to drunkenness, so
as he was not fit to govern his house, or to dispense his alms. Besides
that, Abigail was a woman of great wisdom, in all her actions, and that which
she now did was to save Nabals and her own life, yea the lives of his whole
family: for the case was desperate, and all that they had, were in present
hazard. That example therefore, is no warrant for any woman to give alms,
unless it be in the like case.

II. Question. To whom must alms be given?
Ans. To them that are in need Ephesians. 4. 28. For the better conceiving of this
answer, we must remember, that there be three degrees of need. The first is
extreme necessity, when a man is utterly destitute of the means of
preservation of life. The second is great need, when a man has very little to
maintain himself, and his. The third is common necessity, when he has
something, but yet not sufficient or competent.

Now those that are in the first and second degree of need, they are the
persons that must be s^^coured and relieved. For proof hereof consider these
places, Mat. 25. 35. 36. I was hungry, and ye gave me meat, I thirsted, and ye
gave m^ drink, I was naked, and ye clothed me, I was sick, and ye visited
me, I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Where observe what person Christ
commends unto us to be relieved, the hungry, thirsty, naked, sick,
harbourles, and the capt^ue or prisoner. Romans 12. 20. If thine enemy hunger,
feed him; if the thirst, give him drink. We must not only supply the need of
our freindes, but also our enemies. (...). Tim. 5. 16. If any believing man or
woman have widows, let him minister unto them, etc. that there may be
sufficient for them that are widows indeed. Here widows that are desolate,
without friends and goods, are commended to the liberality of the Church.
Leuit. 25. 35. If thy brother be impouerished, and has the trembling hand,
thou shall relieve him, as a stranger or soiourner, so shall he live with thee.
By the trembling hand, is meant the man that works hard for his living, and
yet cannot by his labor get things necessary, but must needs stretch out his
hand, to others that are in better state for help.

Here two Questions may further be made. First, whether we must give alms to
beggars? I mean such as go from door to door: for they come under the
degrees of needy persons.

Ans. Beggars are of two sorts: either such as are strong, able to labor, and
do somewhat for their living; or such as are weak and impotent, unable to
take pains for the maintenance of themselves, or those that belong unto them.

The first sort, are not to be reiceued. For touching them, the Apostle has
given this rule, He that will not labor, must not eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. 12.
Every man must live by the labor of his own hands, and feed upon his own
bread. Again, such beggars are thieves and robbers, because they steal their
labor from the Church and Commonwealth, which is as profitable, as land and
treasure. In the old Law, if two men striued together, and the one had wounded
the other; the offender was enjoined, not only to pay for the healing, but for
the loss of his time also. Exodus 21. 19. And in like manner, ought such
persons to bear the punishment, both of their theft, and of the loss of their
labor. And the truth is, they that give to them in this their loose life, do
maintain them in wickedness.

Yet here one Caution is to be remembered: that, if such a man be in extreme
need, he must be helped, rather then he should perish. And the Magistrate is
to punish him for his idleness; and to compel him to labor. The Magistrate, I
say: for private persons have no authority to inflict punishment in this case.

As for the other sort, that are unable to work, they are not allowed by the
word of God, to gather their alms themselves by begging from door to door,
but to be relieved at home in their houses. Deuteronomy. 15. 4. There shall not be a
beggar in thee. v. 11. there shall be ever some poor in the land. Here the
holy Ghost makes a plain difference, between the poor and the beggar,
forbidding the one, and commanding to help the other. Saint Paul likewise
distinguishes of widows, whereof some have rich kindred, and they are to be
provided for by them, 1. Tim. 5. 4. Others are destitute of friends and
kindred, by whom they may be relieved, and such he wills to be maintained by
the Church. v. 16. And this is no toleration or approbation of beggars.

Again, the begging of alms is the very seminary of vagabonds, rogues, and
straggling p^^so^s, which have no calling, nor are of any corporation, Church,
or commonwealth. Yea it does proclaim to the world, in the ears of all men,
the shame either of the Magistrate who restraines it not, having authority: or
of the wealthy and able, that they have no mercy or compassion. It is also a
great disorder in commonwealths. For the boldest and most clamarous beggar,
carries away all the alms from the rest: and so relief is distributed both
unwisely and unequally. And howsoever it is the good law of our Land, agreeable
to the law of God, that none should beg that are able to labor, and all men
are bound in conscience to see it observed, that have any care of the good of
this Church and commonwealth: yet it is a plague of our times, and greatly to
be bewailed, that it is neglected, and not put i^ execution.

In the Second place it is demanded, whether we must put a difference between
persons and persons, in giving our alms.

Ans. There be three differences of men, that are in need.

The first, is a man's own: And such are they, that be of his household, for
which he that makes not provision, is worse then an Infidel, as the Apostle
speaks, 1. Tim. 5. 8. Those also which are of a man's own blood, as father and
mother, etc. Mat. 15. 5, 6. Now contrary to this sort are strangers, to whom
we must not give. For to neglect a man's own, and to bestow it upon forrainers,
unless there be just and necessary cause so to do, is a sin against the
law of nature

A second difference of men is this. Some are of the household of faith. Saint
Paul's rule is this, that we prefer them before the other, Gal. 6. 10. Do
good unto all men, but specially to them that are of the household of faith.

A third difference. Some are our own poor, of our town, land, and country:
and some be strangers in the same respects. Now, howsoever we are debtors to
all that we can do good to: yet those that are nearer to us in habitation or
neighborhood, are to be respected and relieved before others. This the Lord
commands, Deu^. 15. 7. If one of thy brethren with thee be poor, within any
of thy gates in thy land, which the Lord thy God gives thee; thou shall not
harden thy heart, and shut thine hand from him. And these being relieved, we
may in the next place afford our help to others. Thus did the good Samaritane,
in case of necessity, practice his charity upon a stranger, Luke 10. 33. and
is therefore commended by our Savior Christ.

III. Question. How much relief must every man give?
Ans. We must put a difference between the alms of private men, and of
Incorporations or Churches. Touching private men's alms, the Scripture has not
determined how much must be given, but has left it to the discreet
consideration of every Christian. And yet it must be remembered, which the
Apostle says, that he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly. And again,
Let every man give, as he has determined in his own heart. Lastly, he gives a
commandment touching the quantity of giving, that every first day of the
week, every one lay aside by himself, and lay up as God has prospered him;
that is, according to the ability, wherewith God has blessed him. 1. Cor. 16.
2.

But two cautions are proprounded in the word, touching this quantity.

First, that we must not so give alms, that others be ^ased, and we our selves
grieved. 2. Cor. 8. 13. It is not Gods will, that we should give all that we
have in alms, and keep nothing for our selves, but that we keep a due
proportion in giving, and do that good to others, whereby we may not our
selves be hindered or oppressed. Our fou^taines and rivers must run, to serve
the necessity of the stranger, in use. Prove. 5. 16, 17. But yet the right must
remain our own, we may not give away fountain and water, and all. Luke 3.
11. He that has two coats, let him part with him that has none, that is, he
that has things necessary and in abundance, let him give freely, yet so as he
reserve one coat to himself.

Here the Papist is justly to be blamed, who holds it a state of perfection,
to give away all, and to live by begging. For this can not be, seeing it is
against Gods commandment, who will have some given, and not all, one coat not
both, and so is a state rather of sin and imperfection.

Secondly, in the case of extreme necessity (and not otherwise,) we must
enable our selves to give alms, though it be by the selling of our
possessions, Luke 12. 33. Sel^ that ye have, and give alms: our Saviors
meaning is, in the case of extreme necessity; when there is no other way to
relieve those that are to be relieved. David notes it as a property of a
merciful man, that he disperseth abroad, and gives to the poor, Psalm. 112. 9.
It was practiced by the Primitive Church, in the times of persecution, in the
like case. Act. 4. 34. 35. And the Church of Macedonia, though they were in
want themselves, yet supplied the extreme want of other Churches. 2. Cor. 8.
1, 2.

Now touching the alms of whole bodies, and Churches, this is the Rule: that,
they should maintain the poor with things necessary, fit, and convenient, as
meat, drink, and clothing. 1. Tim. 5. 16. And this serves to con^ute a
gross error, maintained by learned Papists; who hold, that whatsoever a man
has, above that which is necessary, to nature and estate, he should give it
in alms. But the truth is otherwise: for a man may and ought to give alms
more liberally, when he has abundance, yet so, as he is not bound to give all,
but may reserve even part of his superfluity, for the public use of Church
and Commonwealth. And to this purpose, is that which our Savior says, luke
3. 1^. He that has two coats, that is, things necessary and superfluous,
must give but one, and that in the case of the greatest necessity; meaning
thereby, that all superfluity must not be given in alms, saving only in the
case aforesaid of extreme want.

IV. Question. How many ways is a man to give alms?
Ans. Three ways. First, by free giving to the poor. Secondly, by free
lending: for this is oftentimes, as beneficial to a man, as giving. For this
end, there was a law given, Deuteronomy. 15. 8. Thou shall open thy hand unto thy
poor brother, and lend him sufficient for his need which he has. Luke 6. 35.
Lend, looking for nothing again. Exodus 22. 25. If thou lend money to the poor
with thee, thou shall not be an usurer unto him, thou shall not oppress him
with usury. Thirdly, by remitting due debt, in case of men's decay and extreme
poverty. Exodus 22. 26. If thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge, thou
shall restore it unto him, before the sun go down. 27. For that is his
covering only, and this is his garment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep?
therefore when he cries unto me (for cold and necessity) I will hear him:
for I am merciful. According to this law, Nehemiah exhorts the Rulers and
Princes of the Jews, that had oppressed their poor contrymen, saying,
Ren^it unto them the hundredth part of the silver, and of the corn, of the
wine, and of the oil, that ye exact of them for loan. Nehem. 5. 11.

V. Question. How should alms be given, that they may be good works, and
pleasing unto God?
Ans. For the right manner of giving, sundry things are required, but specially
these six.

First, a man must consecrate himself, and all the gifts that he has and
enjoys, to God and his honor. This duty is commended in the Church of
Macedonia, that they gave their own selves, first to the Lord, and after unto
them that were in need, by the will of God. 2. Cor. 8. 5. And thus the Prophet
Esaias foretells, that the city Tyrus being converted, should consecrate
themselves, and their goods to the Lord. Esa. 23. 18. Yet her occupying and her
wages shall be holy unto the Lord: it shall not be laid up nor kept in store,
but her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat
sufficiently, and to have durable clothing.

Secondly, we must gives alms in faith. How is that? first, we must be
persuaded, that we are reconciled to God in Christ, and stand in his favor:
and then our alms shall be accepted. For, no work of the person can please
God, before the person himself be approved of him. Secondly, we must depend
upon God by faith, for the good success of our alms. Saint Paul compares the
poor man to a field well tilled, and alms to the sowing of seed, which has
a most plentiful harvest of blessing following it, 2. Cor. 9. 6. Now as the
husbandma^, casting his seed into the earth, waits upon God for the fruit
thereof, Iam. 5. 7. so must the good man that gives alms, depend upon God for
the event thereof. Solomon says, He that has mercy upon the poor, lends to
the Lord, and the Lord will recompense him that which he has given, Prou. 19.
17. Upon these grounds must our faith rest, when we do good to the poor.

Thirdly, we must give in simplicity. Romans 12. 8. He that distributeth, let
him do it with simplicity, that is, of mere pity and compassion, and not for
any sinister respect, pleasure, or praise of men. Mat. 6. 3. When thou do
thine alms, let not thy left hand know, what thy right hand does.

Fourthly, we must give in love. 1. Cor. 13. 3. Though I feed the poor with
all my good: etc. and have not love, it profits me nothing.

Fifthly, in justice. For we must not give other men's goods, but our own truly
gotten. Esa. 58. 7. The true fasting is, to break thine own bread to the
hungry, to bring the poor that wander, into thine own house, etc.

Sixthly, with a bountiful and cheerful mind. 2. Cor. 9. 7. As every man
wishes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, or of necessity: for
God loves a cheerful giver. Our alms must not be extorted, but frank and
free. And hence it follows, that there ought to be no begging from door to
door, in a Christian Commonwealth. For that shows, that men part with their
alms, of a niggardly and compelled mind. And thus much of the Remedy.

Sect. 2.
In the next place follows the Fruit of the Remedy, in these words, And all
things shall be clean unto you.

Here first, I will speak of the false, and then of the true and right fruit
of Liberality.

The false Fruit is this, that, giving of alms does merit forgiveness of sin,
and satisfy the justice of God, for the temporal punishment thereof. That we
may the better see the error of this doctrine, I will answer their arguments.

Object. I. First, they allege out of this text, that giving of alms makes
all things clean unto us.

Ans. We must understand the text, thus. If we turn to God, believe in Christ,
and leave all our sins, then are we clean, and all our actions, and
consequently our almesgiuing shall be clean unto us: for to the pure all
things are pure. Now alms and other things, are then said to be clean unto a
man, when he being himself pure, makes and has a pure use of them.

Object. II. Dan. 4. 24. Redeem thy sins, by giving of al^.

Ans. This place makes against the Papists: for by sins, the Prophet
understands both the guilt, and also the punishment. Whereas they affirm,
that the guilt of sin cannot be redeemed, but by Christ alone, and man only
is to satisfy for the temporal punishment of sin. Secondly, the word which
they translate redeem, does properly signify (as it is in the Chalde
paraphrase) to break off. As if the Prophet should have said, Thou art, O
King, a mighty Monarch, and thou have used much injustice and cruelty:
therefore, now repent thy self, and break off the course of thy sins, and
testify thy repentance, by doing justice, and giving alms to the poor, whom
thou have oppressed. Thirdly, the word in the ancient Latin translations,
signifies to amend; and then it bears this sense: Amend thy self, and the
course of thy life, and let thine injustice be turned into justice, thy
cruelty into mercy.

Object. III. Make you friends with the riches of iniquity, that when ye shall
want, they may receive you into everlasting habitations, Luke 16. 9.

Ans. Receiving here mentioned, is not by way of merit, as though a man could
deserve it by giving alms, but either by way of hearty prayers made by the
poor, that they may be received, or else because their alms shall be unto them
a pledge and earnest, of their receiving into Gods kingdom.

Object. IV. Prou. 16. 6. By mercy and truth, iniquity is redeemed.

Ans. 1. Salomons meaning is, that by Gods goodness, and not ours, iniquity is
pardoned. 2. If by mercy, is meant man's mercy, then are we to understand it
thus; that mercy and truth, are evident signs unto us that our sins are
forgiven, and not the working causes of remission.

Object. V. Luke 14. 14. And thou (which give relief) shall be blessed,
because they can not recompense thee: therefore alms do merit.

Ans. When God promises reward to the giving of alms, the promise is not made
to the work, but to the worker, and that not for the merit of his person, or
work, but only for Christ his sake, in whom he is, by whose means he stands
reconciled unto God. And so men that practice charity in giving of alms, are
rewarded with blessedness, not for their alms, but according to the mercy of
God in Christ.

Now follows the Right fruit of Almesgiuing: and it stands in four things.

First, they are the way in which we must walk to life everlasting. I say the
way, not the cause either of life, or any other good thing, that God has
promised.

Secondly, they are effects and fruits of our faith: yea, the signs and seals
of Gods mercy to us in Christ. To this purpose, S. Paul wishes Timothy, 1.
Tim. 6. 17, 18, 19. to charge them that be rich in this world, that they do
good, and be rich in good works, and be ready to distribute, laying up in
store for themselves a good foundation, against the time to come, that they may
obtain eternal life. Now where is this foundation to be laid up? not in
heaven, for that is impossible for us, and it is laid up for us there already
by Christ; but in our own consciences, and that is our assurance of Gods
favor in this world, and life everlasting in the world to come: of which
assurance, this and other good works, are signs and seals unto us.

Thirdly, alms comes in the way of restitution of those goods, that have been
gotten fraudulently, though from whom, we know not. Thus Zacheus at his
conversion, for wrongs that he had done, he knew not to whom, gave half his
goods to the poor, and proclaimed restitution to those that could come forth
and challenge him.

Lastly, aims are a notable remedy against covetousness. For he that has a
merciful heart, to bestow upon the poor, shall easily be content with that he
has, and avoid that sin whereby otherwise he falls into tentations and
snares of the Devil. 1. Tim. 6. 9.

CHAP. VI.
Of Justice.

Psalm. 15. 2. He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness.
THe substance of the whole Psalm is a Question, and an Answer. The Question
is, who are the members of Gods Church upon earth, that shall come to life
eternal in heaven. ver. 1. The Answer, is made in the rest of the Psalm. And
in this answer, is contained a description of the parties, by their properties
and marks. The first mark is, walking uprightly; that is, in truth and
sincerity of religion, which stands in the sincerity of faith, and a good
conscience. The second note, is the practice of Righteousness.

Now Righteousness, or Justice, is twofold: the Justice of the Gospel, and the
Justice of the Law.

Evangelicall justice is that, which the gospel reveals, and not the Law; to
wit, the obedience of Christ in his sufferings, and fulfilling of the law,
imputed to them that believe for their justification; and this is not here
meant.

Legal justice is that, which the law reveals, and withal requires. And it
is either universal, or particular.

Universal justice, is the practice of all virtues: or that, whereby a man
observes all the commandments of the law. Of this Paul speaks, Romans 10. 5.
in which place, he opposes it to the righteousness, which is by faith. And
Zachary and Elizabeth, are said to be just before God, Luke 1. 6. namely, by
this universal justice; because they walked in all the commandments, and
ordinances of the Lord, indeauouring in althings to please him.

Particular justice is that, whereby we give to every man his right, or due:
and of this David here speaks. The reason is, because if it were not so, then
this second mark should comprehend under it all the rest; and so there would
be no good distinction of these properties, one from the other.

Particular justice, is twofold; in distribution, or in exchange, and
contract. Justice in distribution is that, which keeps a proportion in giving
to every man that honor, dignity, reverence, reward, or punishment, that is
due unto him.

Of this, there are moved principally two Questions.

I. Question. What is that judgment, which men are to give, and hold, one to
and of another?
Ans. Judgment, is of two sorts: public, and private.

Public, which is given and administered by a public person, in a public
place. Such is the judgment of the Magistrate, when he acquitteth or
condemns men, as their deserts are, to temporal punishment. Of which we may
read, 2. Cron. 19. 6. Psalm. 58. 1. Such also is the judgment of the Prophet,
or Minister, whereby he does openly pronounce to me^, that believe and repent,
that their sins are remitted, or retained, 1. Cor. 14. 24. or that, whereby
he delivers obstinate sinners up unto Satan, by the censure of
Excommunication, or Suspension. 1. Cor. 5. 3. 4. 5.

Private judgment is that, whereby one man gives judgment privately of
another. And touching it, we are to consider two points. First, of what things
judgment must be given. Secondly, how we are to give judgment.

For the first; we must give judgment of three sorts of things; of men's facts,
of their doctrines, and of their persons. Touching facts; the Apostle Paul
would not have us to have fellowship, with the unfruitful works of darkness,
Ephesians. 5. 11. but rather to reprove them, because they are subject to our
judgment: and being reproved by us, they are judged of us. And our Savior
does therefore command us, when our brother trespasseth against us, to go and
reprove him, because Matthew. 18. 15.
his actions are liable to our censure.

Secondly, the doctrines of men are to be judged by us. Try the Spirits,
whether they are of God, or no, 1. Ioh. 4. 1. The spiritual man judges all
things, that is, all doctrines. 1. Cor. 2. 15. And our Savior says, You shall
know them by their fruits; that is, partly by their doctrine, and partly by
their lives, being judged according to the rule of Gods word. Mat. 7. 20.

Thirdly, we may judge of the persons of men. Now men are of two sorts: either
in the Church, or out of the Church. The members of the Church, must be judged
by the judgment of charity, not of infallibility. They that are out of the
Church, we must suspend our judgments concerning them, and leave it to God.
For, what have I do (says the Apostle) to judge those that are without? 1.
Cor. 5. 12. We may try and examine the person, but we must reserve the
judgment of condemnation to God alone.

The second point, is; How we are to judge one of another.

Ans. The right manner of judging according to the word of God, I will lay
down in six Rules.

The first is; If we know any good thing by any man, whether virtue, or action,
we are willingly to speak of it, to commend it, and glorify Gods name in it,
and for it. Thus Paul affirms, that the Churches of Iudaea, when they heard
the word which he preached, glorified God for him. Gal. 1. 23.

The second Rule; If we know any evil, sin, vice, or offense by any man,
there is a time when we may, and a time when we may not speak of it, and that
with good conscience. For the better keeping of this Rule, four cautions are
to be remembered.

First, he that will give sentence of another man, must in the first place,
purg and reform himself. To this purpose, Christ commands, first to pluck
the beam out of our own eye, and then shall we see clearly, to cast out the
more out of our brothers eye. Matthew. 7. 5. And he that will not do this, in
iudgeing another, he condemns himself. Romans 2. 1.

Secondly, we must be rightly and truly informed in the matter, before we give
judgment. This was Gods own practice, who came down to see, whether the
sin of Sodom was answerable to the cry, Genesis 18. 21.

Thirdly, our love and charity, must order and direct, both our speech and our
judgment of others, that we speak not of them without deliberation. For he
that upon hatred, reports the evil he knows by another, is a backebiter.
When Doeg the Edomite came, and showed Saul that David was gone to the house of
Abimelech, he told no more then the truth; and yet because it proceeded from
an evil mind, therefore David accuses him of hatred, backebiting,
slaundering, and unrighteousness. Psalm. 52. 1. 2.

Fourthly, he that speaks the evil he knows by his neighbor, must have the
testimony of his own conscience, to assure him that he has a calling to do
it.

Now a man is called by God, in three cases. First, when he is commanded by the
Magistrate, to testify what he knows. Secondly, when an evil that is in his
neighbor, is to be redressed by admonition. Thirdly, when an evil is to be
prevented, that it spread not abroad to the infection of others.

These caueats observed, we may speak the evil we know by others, truly and
with an upright conscience. But if they cannot be concealed, rather then a man
should blaze abroad the faults of others, whereunto he is privy, he ought to
be silent: remembering always the saying of Solomon, that it is the glory of a
man, to pass by an infirmity, and not to take notice thereof, but by love to
cover a multitude of sins. Prove. 19: 11.

The third Rule. When a man's speech or action, is doubtful, and may be taken
either well or ill, we must always interpet it in the better part. When Christ
was brought before Caiphas the high priest, there came two witnesses against
him, who affirmed something of him, which he had spoken: but because they
changed and misconstrued his words, turning them to a wrong sense, therefore
they are called by the Holy Ghost, to their perpetual shame and reproach, false
witnesses. Mat. 26. 90. Again, the Apostle says, that Love thinks no evil,
1. Cor. 13. 5. therefore love takes every speech and action in the better sense.

The fourth Rule. Touching secret offenses of our neighbor, we must suspend
our judgment of them. The reason is, because love always hopes the best, and
thinks no evil, 1. Cor. 13. 5. And our Saviors rule is, If thy brother
trespass against thee, first reprove him privately, between thee and him,
and go no further, if that will prevail. Mat. 27. 15.

The fifth Rule. Against an Elder, receive not an accusation under two or three
witnesses, 1. Tim. 5. 19. By an Elder, understand ministers, civil governors,
and all superiors. And if we must not receive, then much less may we frame an
accusation against them. This may be a lesson for all inferiors to learn, who
take liberty to themselves, to speak what evil they please of their
governors.

The sixth Rule is, concerning ministers. The Spirit of the Prophets, is subject
to the Prophets, and not to private persons, 1. Cor. 14. 32. Indeed private
persons have power to examine and try their doctrine and ministry: but they
must go no further: for they have no power to give judgment, either of their
ministers doctrine, or persons. The doctrine and manners of teachers, are
subject to the censure of Prophets only. For example: A private man says,
that he may excommunicate, at his pleasure, those that sin, if he proceed
according to the three degrees mentioned, Mat. 18. But this is in him a fault;
for he must not judge in this case, at his own pleasure, but his judgment
must follow the judgment of the Church: and when the Church has given
censure, then may the private man proceed to censure, and not before. So says
our Savior Christ, Mat. 18. 17. If he hear not the Church, after the Church
has judged him, let him be unto you as a heathen and a publicane.

Here if the Question be made, how a man may with good conscience give
judgment of his own self?

I answer, by observing two Rules. First, a man must always in the presence of
God, judge himself in regard of his sins, both of heart and life, 1. Cor. 11.
31. If we should judge our selves, we should not be judged. And this judgment
of a man's self, must not be partial, but sharp and severe, with true
humiliation and lowlines of heart. For this is a true ground of all charitable
judgment of others. Secondly, before men a man must suppress his judgment of
himself, and be silent: no man is bound either to praise or dispraise, to
excuse or accuse and condemn himself before others: and grace must teach him
thus much, not vainly to commend or boast of of his own gifts and actions;
but rather to bury them in silence, and refer them to the judgment of
others.

Now to conclude this point. The doctrine delivered, is most necessary for
these times. For the fashion of most men is, to give rash and sinister
judgment of others; but themselves they will commend, and that highly. If any
thing be evil said or done, all men must have notice of it. If a thing be
doubtful, it is always construed in the worser part. If a thing be done of
weakness and infirmity, we aggrauate it, and make it a double sin. We are
curious in searching and inquiting into the lives of others, that we may have
something to carpe and find fault with. But let this be remembered, that as we
judge, so we shall be judged; first, of God by condemnation, and then by hard
and unequal judgment from others. Again, what is it that makes men to be open
mouthed, in declaring and censuring our faults, but this; that we open our
mouths to the disgrace and defamation of others? Wherefore, if we would have
other men to judge of us, and our actions in love, we must also make
conscience, to give charitable judgment of them.

II. Question. How one man should honor an other?
Ans. That we may rightly honor men, we must first know the causes, for which
men are to be honored. And that the causes of honor may be conceived, I will
lay down this Ground. Honor is in the first place, principally and properly,
to be given unto God. 1. Tim. 1. 17. To God only wise, be honor and glory.
The reason hereof is rendered in the Lords prayer; be cause his is kingdom,
power, and glory. Again, God is goodness it self: his goodness and his essence
are one and the same: therefore honor is due to him in the first place. Now
every creature as it comes near unto God, so it is honorable, and the more
honorable, by how much nearer it comes unto him. But man especially, by how
much nearer he comes to God in divine things, by so much more is he to be
honored in respect of other creatures. From this Ground do follow these
Conclusions.

First, that Man is first of all to be honored, for virtues sake: because
therein principally, stands the internal image of God, Romans 2. 10. To every
man that does good, shall be honor, glory, and peaece; to the Jew first etc.
Now whereas the Question might be, Who is the Jew, to whom this honor must be
yielded? Paul answers, verse. 29. that he is not a Jew, which is one outward,
but he is a Jew, who is one within. And the circumcision is of the heart. And
Solomon says, that Honor is unseemly for a fool, Prou. 26. 1. And the Holy
Ghost to the Hebrews says, that by faith, our Elders were well reported of.
The Heathen man Heb. 11. 2.
Marcus Marcellus a Roman, dedicated a Temple to the Goddess of Honor, and
the way to that temple was, by the house of Virtue.

The Second Conclusion is, That man is to be honored, not only for virtue,
but also for divine representations of other good things: in a word, because
one man before an other, hears the image of some thing that is in God. As
First, of his Majesty. Thus the King is honored, because in his Majesty and
state, he carries a resemblance of the power and glory of God: so as that
which is said of God, may be also spoken of him. Hence it was, that Daniel
said to Nebuchadnezar: O King, thou art a King of Kings, and why? for the God
of heaven has given thee kingdom, power, strength and glory, Dan. 2. 37.
Secondly, of his Dominion. Thus the husband is to be honored of the wife,
because he bears before the woman, the image of the glory of God; yea, of
his providence, wisdom, Lordship, and government. 1. Cor. 11. 7. Thirdly, of
his Paternitie: and so the father is honored of the son, because he bears
in his person the image of Gods paternitie, or father-hoode. Fourthly, of his
Eternity; and hence it is, that honor is given to the aged before the young
man, because he bears the image thereof. Thus we see that Divine
representations, do imprint a kind of excellency, in some persons, and
consequently do bring forth honor.

The third Conclusion is, That men are to be honored, even for the virtues of
others. Thus the sons of Princes, are called by the honorable name of
Princes. The children of Nobles, are esteemed by birth Noble. Thus Dignities
do run in descent, and the posterity is honored in the name of the
ancestors, but principally for the virtues of the a^ncestours.

The fourth Conclusion is, Men are to be honored for their Riches. I mean not
for riches simply, but for the right use of riches; namely, as they are made
instruments, to uphold and maintain Virtue.

If it be said, that to honor rich men, is to have the faith of the Lord Jesus
Christ in respect of persons, Iam. (...). 1. I answer: In that place, we are
not sorbidden to honor rich men: but the Apostles meaning is, to reprove a
fault of an other kind, when men prefer riches before piety; when rich men
are honored being ungodly, and when godly poor men are despised and
rejected, because they are poor.

Now having premised the Ground, we come to give Answer to the Question before
propounded. A man therefore is to honor every one in his place, whether he be
his superior, equal, or inferior. Yea there is a kind of honor to be
performed to a man's own self. The truth of this Answer we shall see in the
particulars that follow.

Sect. 1.
Touching the honoring of Superiors, these Ruies are to be observed.

First: All Superiors must have reverence done unto them, whether they be
Superiors in age, in gifts, in authority, or howsoever, and that because they
are superiors.

The actions of Reverence due to all superiors, are principally six. The
first is, to rise up before the superior. Levit. 19. 32. Thou shall rise up
before the boar head, and honor the person of the old man. The second, when
they are coming toward us, to go and meet them. Thus, when Abraham saw the
three Angels coming toward him, he ran to meet them from the tent door,
Genesis 28. 2. And king Solomon, when his mother Bathsheha came toward him, to
speak unto him for Adoniah, the text says, he rose up to meet her, 1. King.
2. 19. The third, to bow the knee before the superior. Thus we read in the
Gospel, that a certain man coming to Christ, as he was going on the way,
kneeled unto him, Mark. 10. 17. Thus Abraham ran to meet the three Angels,
and bowed himself to the ground. Genesis 28. 2. And the same Abraham, else where,
bowed himself before the people of the Land of the Hittites, Genesis 23. 7. The
fourth, to give them the first and highest seat or place. This our Savior
Christ means in the parable, wherein he wills those who are invited to a
banquet, to yield the chiefest place to them, that are more honorable then
themselves. Luke 14. 7. And it is set down as a commendation of Joseph's
brethren, that they sat before him in order, the eldest according to his age,
and the youngest according to his youth, Genesis 43. 33. Here we must remember;
that though in common practice among men, the right hand is a note of
superiority, yet in Scripture the practice is contrary. For in the article of
our Creed, Sitting at the right hand signifies, the inferioritie of the
Mediator, in respect of the father; though it be a token of his superiority,
in regard of the Church. And so must the place be understood, (1. King. 2. 19.
where it is said, that Bathsheba sat at the right hand of Solomon,) namely,
that it was an argument of Superiority, whereunto he preferred her before the
people; but it showed her infirmity in regard of Salomo^ himself. And this
custom is frequent, both in the scriptures, and in humane writers. The fifth,
to give liberty of speaking in the first place. This was the practice of
Elihu, one of the friends of Job, who being the youngest in years, dared not
to show his opinion, till Job and others, who were his ancients had spoken. But
when they had left off their talk, then he is said to have answered in his
turn, Job. 32. 6. 7. 17. The sixth, to give the titles of reverence to all
superiors. Sara according to this rule, called Abraham Lord, 1. Pet. 3. 9. The
man in the Gospel, coming to learn something of Christ, calls him by this
name, Good Master, Mar. 10. 17. And Anna rebuked by Eli, answered him with
reverence, and said, nay, my Lord. 1. Sam. 1. 15.

The second Rule touching honor due to superiors, is more special, touching
superiors in authority; namely that they also must be honored. And this
honor shows it self in four things.

The first is, special reverence: which stands in the performance of two
duties. The former is, to stand when our superiors do sit. For thus Abraham
after he had received the Angels into his tent, and prepared meat for them,
served himself by them under the tree, giving attendance, while they did eat,
Genesis 18. 8. In like manner, when Moses sat in judgment, the people are said
to have stood about him, from morning until evening, Exodus 18. 13. The latter
is, not to speak, but by leave. A duty always to be observed, but specially
in the courts of Magistrates. Example whereof we have in Paul, who being
called before Foelix the governor, did not speak a word, until the governor
had beckened unto him, and given him leave. Act. 24. 10.

The second thing is, subjection; which is no thing else but an inferioritie,
whereby we do (as it were) suspend our wills and reasons, and withal cause
them to depend (in things lawful and honest) upon the will of the superior.
This subjection is yielded to the authority of the superior, and is larger
then obedience.

The third is, obedience; whereby we keep and perform the express
commandment of our superior, in all things lawful and honest, It stands in
sundry particulars, as First, it must be in the Lord, and as to the Lord
himself, Whatsoever ye do (says the Apostle,) do it heartily, as to the
Lord, and not unto men, Col. 3. 23. Again, obedience must be performed even to
superiors that are evil. Thus Peter exhorts servants to be subject to their
Masters, in all fear, not only to the good and courteous, but also to the
froward, 1. Pet. 2. 18. Thirdly, it must be done to Rulers, in whom we see
weaknesses. For their infirmities ought not to hinder or stop our duty of
obedience, considering that the commandment of honoring the father and
mother is general without exception. Fourthly, it is to be performed to them
that are Deputies to Rulers, yea which are deputies of deputies. Submit your
selves (says Peter) unto all manner ordinance of man, for the Lords sake,
whether it be unto the King as unto the superior, or unto governors, as unto
them who are sent of him, etc. 1. Pet. 2. 13, 14. Fifthly, though punishment be
wrongfully, and most unjustly imposed by Rulers, yet it must be borne without
resistance, till we can have our remedy. For this is thankeworthie, if a man
for conscience toward God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully. 1. Pet. 2. 19.
The practice of this we may see in Hagar, the handmaid of Sara, who is
commanded by the Angel, to return again to her dame, and humble her self
under her hands, though she had dealt very roughly with her, Genesis 16. 9.

The fourth thing due to Superiors in authority, is Thanksgiving, in
praising God for their pains, authority, and gifts principally. Thus Paul
exhorts, that prayers, intercessions, and thanksgiving, be made for Kings, and
all that be in authority, 1. Tim. 2. 1. The reason is, because being over us
in authority, we have the benefit of their gifts and authority. Genesis 45. 9.

Sect. 2.
In the second place comes to be considered, our honor due unto our Equals.
Concerning which, there be two Rules.

I. Rule. Equals, must esteem better of others, then of themselves. Thus Paul
exhorts all men, in meekenes of mind, without contention or vainglory, to
esteem others better then themselves. Phil. 2. 3.

II. Rule. Equals, in giving honor, must go one before another. Romans 12. 10.
where the Apostle says not, in taking honor, because the duty by him
prescribed, concerns not all persons, but those alone who are of a like or
equal condition.

Sect. 3.
A third sort, to whom honor is to be yielded, are Inferiors. And the honor
due unto them is, without all contempt, in meeknes of Spirit, to respect them
as brethren. This duty the Lord commands expressly to the King; That his
heart be not lifted up above his brethren. Deuteronomy. 17. 20. The same was the
practice of Job, who says of himself, that he did not contemn the judgment
of his servant, or of his maid, when they did contend with him, Job. 31. 13.
Naaman the Syrian, thought it no disgrace, to be advised and ordered by the
counsel of his servants. 2. King. 5. 13. And true it is, that all superiors
ought to keep their state and place; yet so, as they have respect also to such
as are inferior to them, without scor^^ or contempt.

Sect. 4. (...)
Lastly, there is a kind of honor to be performed to a man's own self, which
duty the Apostle exhorts unto, Phil. 4. 8. where he says; If there be any
virtue, if there be any p^^ise, think on these things. By which he would teach
us, not only to tender the honor of our superiors, equals, and inferiors,
but even of our selves, in seeking after virtue and praise that follows after
it.

But how should a man in righteous manner honor himself?

Ans. By observing two rules.

I. Rule. We must preserve our selves in body and soul; specially, we must
keep the body, that it be not made an instrument of sin. For when we do use
our bodies as instruments of uncleanness, then do we bring a shame upon them.
And it is the will of God, that every man should know how to possess his
vessel in holiness and honor, 1. These. 4. 4. 5. And that which is said of the
body, is to be understood of the hand, the heart, the tongue, and all the
parts and members thereof.

II. Rule. If we would truly honor our selves, we must honor God in all our
ways. For God will honor them, who honor him, 1. Sam. 2. 30. Now to honor
God, is to honor him according to his will and word, in the duties of good
conscience and good life. On the contrary, they that dishonor God, God will
dishonor them before all the world. And this must teach us, even to dedicate
our selves to God and his providence, in the whole course of our callings,
whether in the Church or Commonwealth.

etc. etc. etc.

etc. etc.

etc.

Faults escaped in the most Copies are thus to be amended.
Page 2. lin. 11. dele and. 19. 16. hedenies, he denies. 59. 11. mumnednesse,
nummednesse. 222. (...). eight, eighteenth. 250. 16, 17. dele and. 290. 16. one
Question, two Questions. 316. pen^lt. ye must, yea must. 317 8. qualified.
qualified. 318. 18. Nor, Now. 351. 21, 22, 23. Questions about Adoration are
two. I. Q. read, Question about Adoration is, To what etc. 354. 22. their,
they. 356. 20. appearetht, hat, appetreth that. 363. 2. God, Gods. 377. 12.
delc not. 382. 12. vrath, wrath. l. 25. or, of. 383. 6. dele the. 392. 25. he,
be. 398. 7. it, is. l. 17. Statues, Statutes. 401. 3. possible, possibly. 409.
Margin. Quintil. Quimchi 448. 23 Sect. 2. Sect. 3. 449. 11. Sect. 3. Sect. 4.
456. 21. abour, labor. 464. ult. Tthird, Third. 470. 10. the, to the. 478. 25.
bed chamber, bride-chamber. 484. 30. off, cut off. 493. 3. iudgemen, judgment.
553. 28. or selves, our selves. 619. 27. do, to do. 630. 1. infirmity,
inferioritie.

Kind Reader. I entreat thee to be advertised of two texts of Scripture,
alleged page 578, 579. in way of proof of a rule there mentioned. They were
quoted and uttered in those very terms by the Author himself: But because
they faulted in some words, and were not for matter so well filled to the point
in hand, as was meet, I set upon them a mark in my Copy, either to be
explaned or wholly left out. Yet being in my absence, through the Printers
have, slipped in, much against my will, and now past help, I am forced to
desire thee, for the time, in love to pass by the examples themselves; and
only to take the Rule for thy direction, in the use of borrowed ornaments.

Farewell.

