THE FIRST PART OF THE CASES OF CONSCIENCE. Wherein specially, three maine
Questions concerning Man, simply considered in himself, are propounded and
resolved, according to the word of God.

Taught and delivered, by M. William Perkins in his Holy Day Lectures, by
himself revised before his death, and now published for the benefit of the
Church.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1604

And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crown by Simon
Waterson.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir Edward Denny, Knight.
THere is no one doctrine revealed in the word of God, or dispensed by the
Prophets and Apostles, of greater use and consequence in the life of man, then
is that, which prescribes a form of releeuing and rectifying the conscience.
The benefit, which from hence issues unto the Church of God, is unspeakable.
For first, it serves to discover the cure of the dangerousest sore that can
be, the wound of the Spirit. Which how great a cross it is, the wise man
reports out of true experience, when he says, that the Spirit of a man Prou.
18. 14.
will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded Spirit who can bear it? And his
meaning is, that no outward grief, can fall into the nature of man, which will
not be with patience endured, to the utmost, so long as the mind is not
troubled, or dismayed. But when once the Spirit is touched, and the heart,
(which, being well apa^ed, is the very fountain of peace to the whole man,)
smitten with fear of the wrath of God for sin; the grief is so great, the
burden intolerable, that it will not by any outward means, be eased or
assuaged. Secondly, it gives for all particular Cases, special and sound
direction; whether man be to walk with God, in the immediate performance of
the duties of his service, or to converse with man according to the state and
condition of his life, in the family, in the Church, or in the Commonwealth.
The want of which direction, of what force it is, to turn the actions of men,
which are good in themselves, to sins in regard of the agents, S. Paul
affirms in that general conclusion, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.
Wherein he Rom 14 2^*
would teach us, that whatsoever is done, or undertaken by men in this life,
whether it concern the knowledge and worship of God, or any particular duty
to be performed, by virtue of their callings, for the common good; whereof they
have not sufficient warrant, and assurance in conscience, grounded upon the
word, that it is to be don, or not to be done; to them it is a sin. Thirdly,
it is of all other doctrines, (if it be rightly used) the most comfortable. For
it is not founded in the opinions, and variable conceits of men, neither does
it consist, of conclusions and positions, that are only probable and
coniecturall: (for the conscience of the doubting or distressed party, cannot
be established and rectified by them:) but it rests upon most sufficient and
certain grounds, collected and drawn out of the very word of god, which, as
it is mighty in operation, ^earcing the heart, and discerning the thoughts
Heb* 4. ^*
and intents thereof, so is it alone available and effectual to pacific the
mind, and to give full satisfaction to the conscience. And as the benefit is
great; so the want of this doctrine, together with the true manner of applying
the same, is, and has been the cause, of many and great inconveniences. For
even of those that fear God, and have received to believe, there be many, who
in the time of their distresses, when they have considered, the weight and
desert of their sins, and withal apprehended the wrath of God, due unto
them; have been brought unto hard exigents, mourning, and wayling, and crying
out, as if God had forsaken them, until they have been relieved by the Spirit
of Christ, Psalm. 119. v. 49, 50.
in the meditation of the word, and promise of God. But those especially, who
have not been instructed in the knowledge of the truth, nor been acquainted
with the course of Gods dealing, with his distressed children, by reason of
ignorance and blindness, in matters of religion and piety, when the Lord has
let loose the cord of their consciences, and set before their eyes, both the
number of their sins committed, and the just anger of God purchased thereby,
what have they done? surely despairing of their own estates, and of the mercy
of God, they have either grown to frenzy, and madness, or else sorted unto
themselves fearful ends, some by hanging, some by drowning, others by
murdering their own selves. And if not in regard of grief and trouble of
mind; yet for want of better resolution in particular cases, within the
compass of their general or personal callings, though otherwise, men endued
with some measure of knowledge and obedience, herein they have failed, that
they have either abused, or else quite relinquished and forsaken their callings,
and thereby have become scandalous, and offe^siue unto others.

Now as this is a matter of great weight and importance, so is it most meet,
that the best and fittest course should be taken, in the teaching and enforcing
of the same. In which regard we have just cause, to challenge the Popish
Church, who in their Case-writings have erred, both in the substance and
circumstances of this doctrine, as shall appear in the sequel. First, because
the duty of releeuing the Conscience, is by them commended to the sacrificing
Priest, which, though according to their own Canons Decr^^. de peni^ent: did.
6. cap. ^ Caue^t spiritualis iudex, vt sicut non co^mi^^^ cr^m^^ nequiti^,
(...) non care ^t munere scienciae.
he should be a man of knowledge, and free from imputation of wickedness, yet
often times it falls out that he is either unlearned, or else wicked and lewd of
conversation, and consequently unfit for such a purpose. Secondly, they teach
that their Priests appointed to be comforters and releeuers of the distressed,
are made by Christ himself Iudices in cau^^s poenitentium. Bella^. d^ paen.
lib. 3. ca. 2. Council. T^id. ^ess. 14. can 9.
judges of the cases of conscience, having in their own hands a iudiciarie
power and authority, truly and properly to bind or to loose, to remit or to
retain sins, to open or to shut the kingdom of heaven. A blasphemous
doctrine. Considering that Christ only has the keys of David, Mark. 2. 10.
which properly and truly opens, and no R^u. ^. 8.
man shuts, and properly and truly shuts, and no man opens. And the
Ministers of God, are not called to be absolute Judges of the Conscience, but
only Messe^gers and Ambassadors of reco^ciliatio^; 2. Cor. 5. 20.
whereupon it follows, that they cannot be Theophylact. comment in Joan. 8.
34. and Hieron. lib. ^* comment. in Math. super verba. Tibi dabo claues.
the authors and giuers of remission of sins, but only the Ministers and
Dispensers of i^^e same. Thirdly, the Papists in their writings have scattered
here and there, sundry false and erroneous grounds of doctrine, much
prejudicial to the direction or resolution of the Conscience in time of need,
as namely, I. That a man in the Emanuel Sa. in Aphori^. confessatio^^.
course of his life, may build himself upon the faith of his teachers, and for
his salvation rest contented with an implicit and vn-expressed faith. Which
doctrine, as it is an only mean, to keep men in perpetual blindness and
ignorance, so it serves to no other purpose in the time of temptation, but to
plunge the heart of man into the pit of despair, it being incapable of
comfort, for want of knowledge and understanding of the word and promise of
God. II. That every man ought to stand in fear and doubt of the pardon of his
sins, Council. T^id* ses^. 6. Cap. 9.
and that no man can be assured by the certentie of faith, either of the
present favor of God, or of his own salvation. True it is, that in respect of
our own unworthiness and indisposition, we have just cause, not only to doubt
and fear, but to despair and be confounded before the judgment seat of God.
Yet that a man should not be certainly resolved by faith of the mercy of God,
in and for the merit of Christ, is a comfortless doctrine to a distressed
soul, and contrary unto the saving Matthew. 14 31. Iam 1. 6. Romans 4. ^0.
word of the Gospel, which teaches, that certentie flows from the nature of
faith, and not doubting. III. That every man is bound in conscience upon pain
of Council. Trid. ^e^^. 14. can. ^
damnation, to make special confession of his mortal sins, with all the
particular circumstances thereof, once every year to his Priest. This doctrine
and practice, besides that it has no warrant of sacred writ, nor yet any
ground of Orthodoxe antiquity, for 800 years more or less after Christ i^
makes notably to the disturbing of the peace of conscience* in time of
extremity, considering that it is impossible either to understand or remember
all, many being unknown, Psalm. 19 (...).
and hidden and the mind being informed that forgiveness depends upon such
an enumeration* may thus be brought into doubt and distrust, and will not be
able to rest by faith in the sole mercy of God, the only sovereign medicine
of the soul. Again, the grief of the mind, does not always arise from all
the sins that a man has committed, neither does the Lord se^ before the
sinners eyes, whatsoever evil has bin done by him* but some one or more
particulars; and these are they, that do lie heavy upon the heart and to be
eased of them, will be work enough* though ^e does not exhibit unto the
Confessor* a Catalogue of all the rest. IV. That some sins are venial,
because they are only besides the law of God not against it and because (...)
veniale, quod non ^olli^ or sinem ^d vltimum finem, vnde non mer^tur poenam
^^ernam, sed t^mpo^alem. Jacob. de Graphi^s: Decision. aur^ar Ca^. Con^c. lib.
1. cap. 6.
they ^in^^ ^uer the sinner only to temporal, and not to eternal punishments.
This conclusion, first is false; For though it be granted that some offenses
are greater, some lesser some in an higher degree, others in a lower: again,
that sins in regard of the event, being repented of, or in respect of the
person sinning, being in Christ, and therefore accounted just, are pardonable,
because they are not imputed to condemnation; yet there is no sin of what
degree soever, which is not simply, and of it self mortal, whether we respect
the nature of the sin, or the measure and proportion of divine justice. For
in nature it is an anomie, that is to say, an aberration from the 1. Ioh. 3. 4.
perfect rule of righteousness, and therefore is subject to the curse, both of
temporary and eternal death. It is an offense against the highest Majesty,
and consequently, man stands by it engaged to everlasting torment. Secondly,
it is a weak and insufficient ground of resolution, unto a troubled
conscience. For whereas true and saving joy is the daughter of sorrow, and the
heart of man cannot be lifted up, in assurance of Gods favor, to the
apprehension and conceit of heavenly comforts, unless it be first abased, and
by true humiliatio^, brought to nothing in it self. The remembrance of this,
that the offense committed is venial, may in some cases too much enlarge the
heart, and give occasion to presume, when happily there will be reason to the
contrary. And if not that yet in the case of falling by infirmity, after grace
received, the mind being forestalled with this erroneous conceit, that the
sin is less, then it is indeed, because venial, may in the issue be less
quieted, and more perplexed. Council. Trid. i^^^. 14. can. ^^.
V. That a man may satisfy the justice of the God, for the temporal
punishment of his sins committed. To omit the untruth of this position, how
it makes to the easing of the heart, or the asswaging of the grief of mind
in temptation, I appeal to common experience. For when a man, being assured
of the pardon of his sins, shall yet consider, that there is something more
behind to be done on his part, how can he in probability, rely himself wholly
upon Christ's satisfaction? How can he reap unto himself from thence any
assurance of reconciliation to God, whom he formerly offended? If we may and
must do something in our own persons, whereby to appease the wrath of God, why
has our Savior taught us for our hearts releife, wholly and only to make the
plea of pardon for our sins? True it is indeed, that Popish Confessors do
teach their Penitents, when they feel the wrath of god upon them for sin, to
stop the mouth of Conscience, by performance of a formal humiliation and
repentance, yea to offer unto God some ceremonial duties in way of
satisfaction. But when sorrow seazeth upon the soul, and the man falls into
temptation, then it will appear that these directions were not current; for
notwithstanding them, he may want sound comfort in Gods mercy, and run into
despair without recovery. And for this cause, upon experience it has bin
proved, that even Papists themselves, in the hour of death, have bin content
to renounce their own works, yea the whole body of humane satifactions, and
to cleave only to the mercy of God in Christ for their salvation.

By these instances, and many more that might be alleged to this purpose, it
is apparent, upon how weak and unstable grounds the Case-diuinitie of the
Popish Church stands; and how indirect a course they take, for the resolution
and direction of the troubled Conscience.

Now by the benefit and abuse of this Doctrine, we see how necessary it is,
that in Churches which profess Christian religion, it should be more taught,
and further enlarged then it is. And to this purpose it were to be wished, that
men of knowledge in the Ministry, that have by the grace of God attained unto
the Tongue of the learned, would employ their pains this way: not only in
searching into the depth of such points as stand in bare speculation, but in
annexing thereunto the grounds and conclusions of practice, whereby they might
both inform the judgment, and rectify the conscience of the hearers. By this
means it would come to pass, that the poor distressed soul might be
relieved, piety and devotion more practiced, the kingdom of Sin, Satan, and
Antichrist weakened, and impaired, and the contrary kingdom of Christ Jesus
more and more established.

What the Author and co^triuer of the discourse ensuing has done in this
behalf, it is evident by the whole course of his writings, that he has left
behind him: all which, as they do openly show unto the world, how great a
measure of knowledge and understanding, with other endowme^ts both of nature
and grace, the Lord had enriched him withal, so do they carry with the^ the
sweet savor of piety and sanctification, wherewith he approved his heart unto
god, and his life unto me^. Wherein also upon occasion he has propounded, and
explained sundry notable rules of direction and resolution of the conscience,
as will appear to the view of the learned and well-aduised reader.

To let pass all the rest: this present work does affoard very sufficient
testimony, of his knowledge and dexterity in that kind, attained unto, not
without great pains, much observation, and long experience. A labor which
commends it self unto the Church of God in two respects principally. One,
because his grounds and principles, whereupon he gives direction, are drawn
either directly, or by just consequence out of the written word, and so are of
greater force, to give satisfaction to the mind, either doubting, or
distressed. The other, for that it is delivered with such perspicuitie, and
disposed in such order and Method, as fitteth best for the understanding and
memory, of him that shall peruse it.

Now this whole treatise of the Questions, I have made bold to present unto
your Worship, and to publish abroad under your patronage and protection, as one
to whom they do justly belong. First, because God, who honors those that
honor him, has adorned you, not only with civil authority and dignity in
the Commonwealth, but with the honorable name of a Friend to the Church of
God; a thing directly confirmed by your unfeigned love of the truth, and your
continual favors to the teachers of the same, the Ministers and dispensers of
the Gospel. Secondly, because as the Author of these Cases, was himself in many
respects, bound unto you, while he lived; so his wife and children for his
sake, have received much kindness at your hands, since his death; a manifest
proof of the truth and sincerity of your affection toward him in the Lord.
And in the last place, it was my desire, by setting forth this and the other
two parts that shall follow, under your name, to give some testimony of duty
to your Worship, presuming that as you loved the Author, so you will be pleased
to patronize the work, and favorably to interpret, of the pains and good
intention of the publisher. And so ceasing your further trouble, I humbly take
my leave, and commend your Worship to the grace and favor of God in Christ.
From Emanuel College in Cambridge. Iun. 28. 1604.

Your W. in all duty to command, Tho. Pickering.

To the godly and well affected Reader whosoever.
IT was not my purpose, (Christian Reader) at the first to have sent abroad
only one part of the Cases of Conscience, without the rest; but that I was
moved thereunto, partly upon the importunity of some of the Authors friends,
and partly because I desired to satisfy thy expectation in a thing, which I
persuade my self has been long expected. Upon which two motives, I have now
commended unto thee this first part, promising by the grace of God, ere it be
long, to add the second, and the third, so far as the Author proceeded in
this Treatise before his death. And although I could have wished, this labor
had been undertaken by others, better able to perform it then my self; yet
being well acquainted with the copy, which is mine own, and knowing it to
have bin perused by the Author himself, before his death, I was the more
encouraged, to bestow my pains for thy good in that behalf. If in reading
thereof thou find, either any thing amiss, or thy self not fully satisfied
in the particulars; then remember that the Author himself is gone, who might
have brought the work to perfection, if God had pleased to prolong his days
upon the earth. And withal consider, that it were better for thee, to accept
of these his labors, as they are now imparted to thee, then by the suppressing
of them to be deprived of so great a benefit. And thus hoping of thy kind
acceptance of my pains for thy behoof, I commend thee to God, and to the word
of his grace. June 28. 1604.

T. P.

Faults escaped in the printing.
After page 38. read for 27, 29.

Places false quoted correct thus:

Read, page 60. for Iam. 2. 20. Iam. 2. 10. p. 70. for Col. 3. 26, Col. 3. 3, 4.

Read page 8. lin. 24. for actonis, actions. p. 12. 25. for ptesent, present,
p. 29. for yets o, yet so. p. 37. 22. for it a, it is a. p. 38, 4. for bonds,
bos^ds. p. 49. 9. come to the answer. p. 74. 5. for of sense, offense. p. 92.
3. for conforting, comforting. p. 80. pe^ult. for vain, vein. p. 82. 1. for
finn^. sin. p. 105. 1. for print, present. p. ^ad. 10. thorgh but once. p.
108. 6. which shall be laid, etc. p. 152. 17. for yncleate, vncleate. p. 154.
19. Mark the words. p. 157. 1. for mighe, might. p. 160. 12. for
apprenhendeth, apprehends. p. 161. 22. for consceence, conscience. p. 162. 1.
for diuihe, divine. p. 165. 17. for decre, dear. p. 169. 24. for faults,
falls.

The Contents of the Book.
I. The Grounds or preambles* four. 1. Private confession.page 5. 2. The
degrees of Goodness in things and actions. 6. 3. The Nature and Differences of
Sin. 9. 4. The Subjection and power of Conscience. 43.
II. The Questions of Conscience, touching Man simply considered in himself:
three. I. What man must do that ^e may come into Gods favor and be saved?
Answer is, by performance of four Duties. 1. Humiliation before God. 50. 2.
Faith in Christ. 55. 3. Repentance. 57. 4. Newe-Obedience. 59.
II. How a man may be in conscience assured of his own salvation? 65. Answered
by 5. te^^s of Scripture. 1. Romans 8. 16. 65. 2. Psalm. 15. 66. 3. The 1. epist.
of John. 68. 4. 2. Tim. 2. 19. 74. 5. 2. Pet. 1. 10. 75.
III. How a man being in Distress of mind^, may be comforted and relieved?
76. Here. Generally ^o^ching all distresses is showed, 1. What is Distress of
mind? ^7. 2. The Original and kinds of distresses. 77, 78. 3. The general
remedy of the^ all. 79.
Specially, the Distresses are five. I. The Distress arising of the Divine
Tentation: with the examples, occasions effects, and Remedies. 95. etc. II. The
Distresses arising of outward Afflictions. 106. These are three.
1. Deferring of deliverance. 117. 2. Bodily and Temporal death. 126. 3.
Satanicall molestation of persons and places of ^bode. 140.
III. The Distress of mind arising of the Tentation of Blasphemies: with the
means, danger, and cure thereof. 148. IV. The Distress of mind arising from
a man's own sins, with the degrees and Remedy thereof. 158. V. The Distress
of mind arising from a man's own body: partly by Melancholy, partly by
strange alterations in the body: with the degrees, effects, and Remedies. 173,
etc.




FINIS.
Isaiah, 50. 4. The Lord God has given me a tongue of the learned, that I
should know, to minister a word in due time, to him that is weary.
IN that part of the Prophecy which goes before, the Holy Ghost sets down
and foretells the Calling of the Gentiles, which was to begin at the death of
Christ, and from thence to continue unto this day, and so consequently to the
end of the world. In the former verses of this Chapter, there is mention made
of the rejection of the Jews; I mean not a general, but a particular
rejection, namely then, when they were in affliction in the days of Isaiah.
Now in this, and so in all other prophecies of the like kind, which entreat of
this point; Christ himself is brought in, speaking in his own person; and the
words of this Chapter from the beginning, to this present verse and the rest
that follow, are the words of Christ the Mediator.

In the verses going before, he disputes the case of their reiection, and the
sum of the whole disputation is: that either he or they themselves were the
causes thereof; but he was not the cause, and therefore they themselves by
their sins. The reason, whereby he proves that they themselves were the
cause, is framed in this sort. You Jews cannot bring any writing or bill of
divorce, to show that I rejected you: therefore I appeal even to your own
consciences, whether you have not brought this judgment upon your selves, by
your iniquities. verse. 1. On the other side, the reason why God was not the
cause is: because he for his part called them in great mercy and love: but
when he called they would not obey. ver. 2.

Now in the end of the second verse, is contained an answer to a secret reply,
that some obstinate Jew might make after this manner: God has no^ now the
like power in saving and delivering us, as he has had in former times:
therefore we cannot hope or expect any deliverance from him, and how then
shall we do in the mean while? To this the Lord himself makes answer, ver.
2, 3, 4. that his hand is not shortened, not his power lessened in regard of
greater works, much less in respect of their deliverance; and though the
present affliction which they endured, was great and tedious, yet they were not
to be overmuch dismayed in themselves, but rather to be comforted: because God
had given him the tongue of the learned, to minister a word in season to the
weary and distressed, and consequently, that he had power to ease and refresh
that their wearines and affliction.

In this text then, there is set down one principal duty of Christ's
prophetical office, by allusion to the practices of the Prophets in the old
Testament, especially those which belonged to the schools of Elias and
Elizeus, who are here termed, the learned. And out of the words thereof, one
special point of instruction may be gathered, namely, That there is a certain
knowledge or doctrine revealed in the word of God, whereby the consciences of
the weak may be rectified and pacified. I gather it thus. It was one special
duty of Christ's prophetical office, to give comfort to the consciences of
those that were distressed, as the Prophet here records. Now as Christ had
this power to execute and perform such a duty, so he has committed the
dispensation thereof to the Ministers of the Gospel. For we may not think
that Christ in his own person, ministered and spoke words of comfort to the
weary, in the times of the Prophets, because he was not then exhibited in our
nature; and yet he did then speak, but how? in the persons of the Prophets. So
likewise, because Christ now in the new Testament, speaks not unto the
afflicted in his own proper person, it remains therefore, that he performs
this great work in the Ministry of Pastors and Teachers upon earth, to whom
he has given knowledge and other gifts to this end and purpose. There must
needs therefore be a certain and infallible doctrine, propounded and taught in
the Scriptures, whereby the consciences of men distressed, may be quieted and
relieved. And this doctrine is not attained unto by extraordinary revelation,
but must be drawn out of the written word of God.

The point therefore to be handled is, What this doctrine should be? It is not
a matter easy and at hand, but full of labor and difficulty: yea very large,
like unto the maine sea: I will only (as it were) walk by the banks of it,
and propound the heads of doctrine, that thereby I may at least occasion
others, to consider and handle the same more at large.

That I may proceed in order; First, I am to lay down certain Grounds or
Preambles, which may give light and direction to the things that follow: and
in the next place, I will propound and answer the maine and principal
Questions of Conscience.

The Grounds or Preambles are especially four. The first touching Confession.
The second touching the degrees of Goodness in things and actions. The third
touching the degrees of Sin. The fourth and last concerning the Subjection
and Power of conscience. Of these in order.

The first Ground is, That in the troubles of conscience, it is meet and
convenient, there should always be used a private Confession. For James says,
Confess your faults one to another, Iam. 5. 16.
and pray one for another, thereby signifying that Confession in this case, is
to be used as a thing most requisite. For in all reason, the Physician must
first know the disease, before he can apply the remedy: and the grief of the
heart will not be discerned, unless it be manifested by the confession of the
party diseased; and for this cause also in the grief of conscience, the
scruple, that is, the thing that troubles the conscience must be known.
Nevertheless in private confession, these caueats must be observed. First,
private confession must not be urged, as a thing simply or absolutely
necessary, without which there can be no salvation. Again, it is not fit that
confession should be of all sins, but only of the scruple it self, that is,
of that or those sins alone, which do trouble and molest the conscience.
Thirdly, though confession may be made to any kind of man, ( Confess one to
another, says James,) yet is it especially to be made to the Prophets and
Ministers of the Gospel. For they in likelihood of all other men, in respect of
their places and gifts, are the fittest and best able to instruct, correct,
comfort, and inform the weak and the wounded conscience. Lastly, the person
to whom it is made, must be a man of trust and fidelity, able and willing to
keep secret things that are reueiled, yea to bu^ie them (as it were) in the
grave of oblivion, for Love covers amultitude of sins.

The next ground is touching the degrees of Goodness in humane things and
actions. Goodness in things is twofold; uncreated, and created. Uncreated is
God himself, who never had beginning, and who is Goodness it self, because
his nature is absolutely and perfectly good, and because he is the author and
worker thereof in all things created. Created goodness is that whereby the
creature is made good; and it is nothing else, but the fruit of that goodness
that is essentially in God. Now the degrees thereof are these. There is a
general or natural goodness in creatures, and a more special or moral
goodness.

General goodness is that, whereby all creatures are accepted and approved
of God, by whom they were both created and ordained. Thus every creature is
good, partly by creation, and partly by ordination. By creation it is, that the
substance of each creature, as of the Sun, the Moon, the Earth, Water,
Meat, Drink, etc. is good, having the being thereof from God. Hence also the
essential properties, quantities, qualities, motions, actions and inclinations
of the creatures, in themselves considered, with all their events, are good. By
the same general goodness also, even the Devil himself and his actions, as
he is a substance, and as they are actions, having their being from God, are
good. Things again do take unto them the condition of goodness, not only by
creation, but also by Gods ordination, whereby they are directed and appointed,
to some certain uses and ends. Thus the evil Conscience, Hell, and Death are
good, because they are ordained of God, for the execution of his justice,
howsoever in themselves and to us they be evil.

Besides this general and natural goodness, there is also a special or
moral goodness properly so called: and it is that, which is agreeable to the
eternal and unchangeable wisdom of God, revealed in the moral law, wherein
it is commanded; and things as they are therein commanded to be done by God,
are good morally. Now of actions morally good, there be two degrees; for they
are either good in themselves alone, or good both in themselves and in the
doer. In themselves alone some things be morally good; for example, when a
wicked man gives alms, it is a good work only in it self, but not good in
the doer, because it is not done in says, and from a good conscience; and so
are all the virtues of the Heathen, morally good in themselves, but they are
not good in heathen me^: for in them they are but Splendida pecc^^^.
beautiful sins. The next degree of goodness is, whereby things and actions
are both good in themselves, and in the doer also. Of this sort were the
prayers and alms of Cornelius good in themselves, Act. 1^.
and in him also, because he was a believer.

Now opposite to things and actonis morally good or evil, are actions and
things of a middle nature, commonly termed Indifferent, which in themselves
being neither good nor evil may be done or not done without sin; In
themselves I say, for in their circumstances, they are and may be made either
evil or good. And here we must remember, to put a difference between
conueniencie, and inconvenience, which arises from the nature of indifferent
things. Conueniencie is, when a thing or action is so fitted to the
circumstances, and the circumstances fitted to it that thereby it becomes a
thing Convenient. On the otherside, Inconvenience is, when the thing or action
is done in unmeet circumstances, which bring some hurt or loss to the outward
man, or stand not with decency: and therefore do make it to be Inconvenient.
And by this that has been said, we may discern, when an action is good,
evil, indifferent, convenient, or inconvenient.

The third Ground, is touching the degrees or differences of Sin. And here we
must first of all search, what is sin properly, and what is properly a
sinner. Sin in his proper nature (as S. John says) is an anomie, that is, a
want of 1. Ioh. 3. 4.
conformity to the law of God. For the better understanding whereof, we must
know, that there were in Adam before his fall, three things not to be severed
one from the other: the Substance of his body and of his soul: the Faculties
and powers of his body and soul: and the Image of God consisting in a
straightnes, and conformity of all the affections, and powers of man to Gods
will. Now when Adam falls, and sins against God, what is his sin? Not the
want of the two former, (for they both remained,) but the very want, and
absence of the third thing, namely, of conformity to Gods will. I make it
plain by this resemblance; In a musical instrument, there is to be
considered, not only the instrument it self, and the sound of the instrument,
but also the harmony in the sound. Now the contrary to harmony, or the
disorder in music, is none of the two former, but the third, namely the
discord, which is the want or absence of harmony, which we call disharmonie.
In the same manner, the sin of Adam, is not the absence either of the
substance, or of the faculties of the soul and the body, but the want of the
third thing before named, and that is, conformity, or correspondencie to the
will of God, in regard of obedience. But some may say: the want of conformity
in the powers of the soul, is not sin properly: because in sin, there must
be not only an absence of goodness, but an habit or presence of evil. I
answer, that this very want of conformity, is not only the absence of
goodness, but also the habit or presence of evil. For as this want enters
in, and is received into man's nature, it is properly a want or absence of
goodness: again, after it is received into the nature of man, it continues
and abides in the powers and faculties thereof, and so it caries the name of an
habit.

It may be said again, that lust and concupiscence, that is, Original sin,
draws the heart away from the service of God, and entises it to evil. Now to
entise or draw away, is an action, and this action cannot proceed of a mere
privation or want. Ans. We must consider sin two ways: first jointly with
the thing or subject, in which it is; secondly by it self in his own nature.
If we consider it with his subject, it is an evil inclination or action, but
if we consider it in it own nature, it is no inclination, or action, but a
want. For example: in a murder we must consider two things: one is, the action
of moving the body, and of holding up the weapon, etc. which is no sin
properly, if it be considered as an action: because every action comes from
God, who is the first cause of all things and actions. Again, in murder there
is a second thing, namely the killing or slaying of the man, which is the
disorder or aberration in the action, whereby it is disposed to a wrong use and
end; and thus the action is a sin, namely in respect it wants conformity to
the will of God. The nature then of the sin lies not in the action, but in
the manner of doing the action: and sin properly is nothing formally
subsisting, or existing (for then God should be the author of it, in as much as
he is the creator and ordainer of every thing and action,) but it is an
ataxie, or absence of goodness and vprightnes, in the thing that subsisteth:
therefore it is well and In p^cc^to ^ihil positivum.
truly said in Schools, In sin there is nothing positive: but it is a want
of that which ought to be, or subsist, partly in the nature of man, and partly
in the actions of nature. Thus we see what sin is.

The second thing to be considered is, what is a Sinner properly? For the
knowledge hereof, we must consider in every sin four things: first, the
fault whereby God is offended: then, 1. Cu^p^.
the guilt which binds over the conscience 2. Rea^^s.
unto punishment: thirdly, the punishment it self, 3. P^^^.
which is eternal death. Of these three, not the guilt or punishment, but the
fault or offense, makes a man a sinner. But here is a further difficulty. When
a man has committed some offense, and the said offense is done and past, it
may be some twenty or thirty years: yet the party offending, does not
therefore cease to be a sinner. Now then I demand, what is the very thing, for
which he is named and rearmed still a sinner in the time present, the offense
being past? The answer is, that every actual sin, beside the three former,
must be considered with a fourth thing, to wit, a certain stain, or blotte,
which it imprints and leaves in the 4. Macul^.
offender as a fruit, and that is an inclination, or evil disposition of the
heart, whereby it becomes apter or pronener to the offense done, or to any
other sin. For look as the dropsy man, the more he drinks, the drier he is,
and the more he still desires to drink: even so a sinner, the more he sins,
the apter is he to sin, and more desirous to keep still a course in
wickedness. And as a man that looks upon the Sun, if he turn his face
away, remains turned until he turn himself again: so he that turns from
God by any sin, makes himself a sinner, and so remains, until he turn
himself again by repentance. Thus David was a sinner, not only in the very
act of his adultery and murder: but even when the act was done and past, he
remained still a murderer and an adulterer; because a new, or rather a
renewed pronenesse to these, and all other sins, took place in his heart by
his fall, and got strength, till he turned to God by repentance, upon the
admonition of the Prophet. The thing then, whereby a sinner is termed a
sinner, is the Fault together with the fruit thereof, namely, the blotte
imprinted in the soul, so often as men do actually offend.

The use of this doctrine touching sin, is two fold. First, by it we learn
and see what is Original sin, whereby an Infant in the first conception and
birth is indeed a sinner. Every Infant must be considered as a part of Adam,
proceeding of him and partaking of his nature: and thereby it is made a sinner,
not only by imputation of Adams offense, but also by propagation of an
aptness, and pronenesse unto every evil, received together with nature from
Adam. And thus ought we to conceive Original sin, not to be the corruption
of nature alone, but Adams first offense imputed, with the fruit thereof the
corruption of nature, which is an inclination unto every evil, derived
together with nature from our first parents. Secondly, by this we are taught,
to take heed of all and every sin, whether it be in thought, word, or deed:
because the committing thereof, though in respect of the act it passes away in
the doing, yet it breeds and increases a wicked disposition in the heart,
(as has been said) to the offense done, or any other sin. Men deceive
themselves, that think all the evil of sin, to be only in the act of
sinning and to go no further; whereas indeed every offense has a certain blot
going with it, that corrupts the heart, and causes man to delight and lie in
his offense, which lying in sin is a greater cause of damnation, then the
very sin it self. This therefore must admonish us, to take heed least we
continue in any sin, and if it fall out, that through infirmity we be
overtaken by any tentation, we must labor to rise again, and turn from our
sin to God, by new and speedy repentance.

Thus much of Sin it self. Now follow the differences thereof, which are
manifold. The first sort are to be gathered from the causes and beginnings of
sin in man, which are threefold, Reason, Will, and Affection.

The differences of sin in respect of Reason are these. First, some are
sins of knowledge, some of ignorance. A sin of knowledge is, when a man
offends against his knowledge, doing evil when he knows it to be evil: and
this is greater then a sin of ignorance, for he that knows his masters
will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. A sin of ignorance
is when a man does evil, not knowing it to be evil. Thus Paul was a
blasphemer, an oppressor, and persecuted the Church of Christ ignorantly, and
in a blind zeal, not knowing that which he did to be evil. Now by ignorance
here I mean, an ignorance of those things which ought to be known, and this
is twofold: simple, or affected. Simple ignorance is, when a man after
diligence and good pains taking, still remains ignorant; this ignorance will
not excuse any man, if it be of such things as he is bound to know: for it is
faide, He that does not his masters will, by reason he knew it not, shall be
beaten with stripes, though fewer.

And in this regard, even the Heathen which knew not God, are inexcusable,
because they were bound to have known him: for Adam had the perfect knowledge
of God imprinted in his nature, and lost the same through his own default, for
himself and his posterity. And it is the commandment of God, whereunto every
man is bound to perform obedience, that man should know him, that is, his will
and word. But some may demand, how any man can be saved, seeing every man is
ignorant of many things which he ought to know? Ans. If we know the grounds of
religion, and be careful to obey God according to our knowledge, having withal
a care and desire, to increase in the knowledge of God and his will, God will
hold us excused: for our desire and endeavor to obey, is accepted for
obedience it self. And the greater this simple ignorance is, the lesser is the
sin: and hereupon Peter lesseneth, and (in some sort) Act* 3. 17.
excuses the sin of the Jews, in crucifying Christ, because they did it
through ignorance: and so does Paul his sin in persecuting the Church, 1. Ti^*
^. (...).
when he alleges, that it was done ignorantly in unbelief. But howsoever
this sin by such means may be lessened, yet remains it still a sin
worthy condemnation. Affected ignorance is, when a man takes delight in his
ignorance, and will of purpose be ignorant: not using, but contemning the
means, whereby to get and increase knowledge. And that carelessely and
negligently, because he will not leave sin which he loves, nor forsake the
evil trade of life, wherein he delights This is the sin of those, whereof
Job speaks, who say unto God, Depart from Job ^1. 14.
us: for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. And of whom David
complains, that they Psalm. 36. 2, 3.
flatter them selves in their own eyes, and have left off to understand, and
to do good. This ignorance is damnable and deuillish: it excuses no man, but
does rather aggrauate and increase his sin: yea it is the mother of many
grievous enormities.

Again, Ignorance is twofold: of the Ignoran^i^ iuris.
Law, or of the thing the Law requires. Ignorance of the Law is, when a man
knows not the law of God written, nor the law of nature. This ignorance may
somewhat lessen the sin, but it excuses no man: because it is natural, and
every man is bound to know the Law. Ignorance of the thing the law requires,
is the ignorance of the Ignorancia fact^.
fact: and that is either with the fault of the doer, or without the fault.
Faulty ignorance, is the ignorance of a fact, which he might have prevented.
As when a man in his drunkenness kills another: in this fact, not knowing what
he does, he also knows not that he has offended: and yet because he might
have prevented his drunkenness, therefore he is faulty, and sins. Faultlesse
ignorance is, when a fact is done, which could not be either known, or avoided
before hand. For example: if a man be lopping a tree, and his axe head fall
from the helue, out of his hand, and kills another passing by; here is indeed
manslaughter, but no voluntary murder: because it was a thing that could not
be avoided, and did not fall out through his default. And this ignorance is
excusable.

The second fountain of sin, is the Will, from whence arise these three
differences of sins: some are from the will immediately, some besides the
will, and some are mixed, partly with the will, and partly against the will.
Sins proceeding from the will, are properly termed voluntary; such as the
doer moved by his own will commits, though he know them to be evil. And
here, the more free the will is, the greater is the sin: for will added to
knowledge, makes the sin the greater. Under voluntary sins, are
comprehended all such, as proceed from stirred affections; as when a man tells
a lie for fear, or strikes another in anger: and the reason is, because these
offenses, though they are not done upon deliberation, but arise from the
violence of affection, yet they do not exclude Consent. Hither also we may
refer, sins committed by compulsion: as when a man is forced to deny his
religion, his offense in deed and in truth is voluntary, (though some
otherwise think it to be a mixed action.) For compulsion does not reach to the
will, but to the outward man, and serves to draw forth a consent: and when
consent is yielded, he denies his religion voluntarily: for the will cannot be
constrained. Voluntas (...) cogitur.
In the next place, sins beside the will are such, as are neither directly
from the will, nor against it. Of this sort are the first sudden motions unto
sin, conceived in the heart with some inward pleasure and delight: and these
are truly sins, though in respect little sins, condemned in the last
commandment. And they are not from the will, because they go without and
before consent: neither yet are they against the will, because then the heart
would not take delight in them. Here by the way, we are to note, against the
doctrine of the Papists, that all sins are not voluntary: for whatsoever
wants conformity to the law of God, it is sin, whether ^^o^. ^* ^*
it be with consent of will or no. But many such desires and delights, arise
suddenly in the heart of man, which are not according to the law of God, and
have no consent or approbation of will. In like manner, when one man kills
another, thinking that he kills a wild beast: if the same man remembers
after wards what he has done, and is not grieved for the fact: in this case he
has sinned, because his not grieuing, is offensive unto God, though the fact
were merely besides his will.

Mixed Sins are partly from the will, partly against it. Of this sort are the
works of the man regenerate, which are done partly with his will, and partly
against his will, being partly good, and partly evil. The reason hereof is
this. There are in man after regeneration, two contrary grounds or beginnings
of actions, to wit, natural corruption, or the inclination of the mind, will,
and affections, to that which is against the Law, called the Flesh* and a
created quality of holiness, wrought in the said faculties by the holy Ghost,
termed the Spirit. And these two are not severed, but joined and mingled
together, in all the faculties and powers of the soul. Now between these,
there is a continual combat, corruption fighting against grace, and grace
against corruption Hence it is, that there being eue^ in one and the same
will, contrary inclinations, there must necessarily flow from the man
regenerate, contrary actions; the flesh in every action, willing that which is
evil, and the Spirit on the otherside, that which is good. This Paul confessed
and acknowledged, upon his own experience, after his conversion, when he said,
To will is Romans 7. 18.
present with me, but I find no means [perfectly to doe] that which is good.
Again, I delight in the and 22. 23*
law of God, concerning the inner man, but I see another law in my members,
rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive to the law of
sin, which is in my members.

The third Ground or fountain of sin in man, is Affection, from whence do
proceed two kinds, namely, sins of Infirmity, and sins of Presumption.
Sins of Infirmity are such, as proceed from the sudden passions of the
mind, and the strong affections of the heart: as from hatred, grief, anger,
sorrow, and such like. These sins are commonly thought to be in all men: but
the truth is, they are properly incident to the regenerate. For infirmity
cannot be said properly to be in them, in whom sin has firmitie or
strength, and where is no power of grace at all. Again, the man that is
regenerate, sins not either when he would, because he is restrained by the
grace of God that is in him: or in what manner he would, partly because he
sins not with all his heart, the strength of his flesh being abated by the
Spirit; and partly, for that being fallen, he lies not still, but recouers
himself by speedy repentance. An evident argument, that the sins whereinto he
falls, are not presumptuous, but arise ordinarily of weakness and infirmity.
Sins of Presumption are such, as proceed from pride, arrogance, wilfulnes,
and hau^nes of man's heart. Against these David prays, saying, Let Psalm. 19.
1^.
not presumptuous sins have dominion over me. And of them there be three
degrees. The first is, when a man wilfully goes on in his sins, upon an
erroneous persuasion of Gods mercy, and of his own future repentance; this is
the sin of most men. The second is, when a man sins wilfully, in contempt
of the law of God* this is called by Moses, a sin with a high hand, Numb. 15.
(...).
and the punishment thereof was, by present death to be cut off from among the
people. The third, when a man sins, not only wilfully and contemptuously,
but of set malice and spite against God himself, and Christ Jesus. And by
this we may conceive what is the sin against the holy Ghost: which is not
every sin of presumption, or against knowledge and conscience: but such a
kind of presumptuous offense in which true religion is renounced: and that of
set purpose and resolved malice, against the very Majesty of God himself and
Christ. Heb. 10. 29.

Now follow other differences of sin in regard of the object thereof, which
is the Law. In respect of the Law, sin is twofold: either of commission, or
of omission. I say, in respect of the Law, because God has revealed in his Law
two sorts of precepts: the one wherein some good thing is commanded to be done,
as to love God with all our hearts, and our neighbor as our selves: the other
wherein some evil is forbidden to be done, as the making of a graven Image,
the taking of the name of God in vain, etc. Now a sin of commission is, when
a man does any thing, that is flatly forbidden in the Law and word of God: as
when one man kills another contrary to the Law, which says, Thou shall not
kill. A sin of Omission is, when a man leaves unperformed, some duty which
the Law requires: as for example, the preserving of his neighbors life, or
good estate, when it lies in his power so to do. These also are truly sins,
and by them as well as by the other, Math. ^5. 42* 43.
men shall be tried in the last judgment. Sins of Omission have three
degrees. First, when a man does nothing at all, but omits the duty commanded,
both in whole and in part; as when having opportunity and ability, he does
not move so much as one finger, for the saving of his neighbors life.
Secondly, when a man performs the duty enjoined, but fails both in the
manner and measure thereof. Thus the heathen men failed in doing good works,
in that the things which they did, for substance and matter, were good and
commendable, being done upon civil and honest respects, and referred to
common good; yet in truth their actions were no better then sins of omission,
in as much as they issued from corrupted fountains, hearts void of faith: and
aimed not at the maine end, and scope of all humane actions; the honor and
glory of God. Thirdly, when a man does things in a right manner, but fails
in the measure thereof. And thus the children of God do sin, in all the
duties of the law. For they do the good things the law commands, as love God
and their neighbor: but they cannot attain to that measure of love, which the
law requires. And thus the best men living, do sin in every good work they
do, so as if God should enter into judgment, deal with them in the rigor of
his justice, and examine them by the strict rule of the Law, he might justly
condemn them, even for their best actions* And in this regard, when we pray
daily for the pardon of our sins, the best works we do, must come in the
number of them: because we fail, if not in substance and manner, yet at the
least in the measure of goodness, that ought to be in the doing of them. We must
also have care to repent us, even of these our sins of Omission, as well as
of the other of Commission: because by leaving undone our duty, we do ofter
offend, then by sins committed: and the least omission is enough to condemn
us, i^ it should be exacted at our hands.

The next difference of Sins may be this. Some are Crying sins, some are
sins of Toleration. Crying sins I call those, which are so heinous, and in
their kind so grievous, that they hasten Gods judgments, and call down for
speedy vengeance upon the sinner. Of this kind there are sundry examples in
the Scriptures, principally four. First, Cains sin in murdering his
innocent brother Abel; whereof it was said, The Genesis 4. ^0.
voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the earth. The next is, the
sin of Sodom and Gomorrha, which was pride, fulness of bread, abundance of
idleness, unmerciful dealing with the poor, and all manner of uncleanness,
Ezech. 16. and of this, the Lord said, that the cry Genesis 1^. 20.
of Sodom and Gomorrha was great, and their sins exceeding grievous. The
third, is the sin of Oppression, endured by the Israelites in Egypt, at the
hand of Pharao, and his taskmasters. The Exodus 3. 7.
fourth, is merciless Injustice in wrongful withholding, and detaining the
laborers hire. Now Iam. 5. 4.
they are called Crying sins, for these causes. First, because they are now
come to their full measure and height, beyond which, God will not suffer them
to pass, without due punishment. Again, the Lord takes more notice, and
inquires further into them, the^ into others, by reason that they exceed, and
are most eminent where they be committed. Thirdly, they call for present help
to the afflicted and wronged, and consequently, for speedy exequution of
vengeance, upon the authors and committers of them. And lastly, because God is
wont to give ear un to the cries of those, that endure so heavy measure at
the hands of others, and accordingly to help them, and reward the other with
deserved punishment.

Next unto these are sins of Toleration, lesser then the former: which though
in themselves they deserve death, yet God in his mercy shows his patience and
long sufferance, upon the committers thereof, either deferring the temporal
punishment, or pardoning both temporal and eternal to his Elect. Such a sin
was the ignorance of the Gentiles before Christ's coming: which God deferred to
punnish, and Act. 17. 30.
(as we may say) (...)
winked at it. More especially there be three sorts of sins of Toleration:
the first is Original sin, or concupiscence, in the regenerate after
regeneration: for it is not in our conversion quite abolished, but remains
more or less molesting and tempting us till death. And yet if we carry a
constant purpose not to sin, and endeavor our selves to resist all
tentations: this concupiscence of ours, shall not be imputed unto us, nor we
condemned for it. And to this purpose the holy Apostle says, There is no
condemnation to them that Romans 8. ^.
are in Christ. Yet says he not, There is nothing worthy condemnation in
them: for Original sin remains till death, truly deserving damnation,
though it be not imputed. The second kind of sins of Toleration, are unknown
and hidden sins in the regenerate. For who can tell Psalm. ^9.
how of the offends? says David. When a man that is the child of God, shall
examine his heart, and humble himself even for all his particular sins,
which he knows by himself: there shall yet remain some unknown sins, of
which he cannot have a particular repentance: and yet they are not imputed but
pardoned, when there is repentance for known sins. As for example, David
repents of his murder and adultery, and yet afterward (erring in judgment,
by reason of the corruption of the times,) he lived to his death, in the sin
of polygamie, without any particular repentance, that we hear of. In like
manner did the Patriarks, who may not altogether be excused: yet they were not
condemned therefore: neither were they saved without repentance for this sin,
but God in mercy, accepted a general repentance for the same. And the like is
the case of all the Elect, in regard of their secret and hidden faults: for
unless God should accept of a general repentance for unknown sins, few or
none at all should be saved. And herein does the endless mercy of God notably
appear, that he vouchsafes to accept of our repentance when we repent, though
not in particular as we ought to do. Nevertheless, this must not incorage, or
imbolde^ any man to live in his sins, without turning unto God. For unless we
repent in particular, of all the sins we know, not only our known offenses,
but even our secret sins shall condemn us. Many sins are committed by men,
which afterward in process of time be quite forgotten. Others are committed,
which notwithstanding are not known, whether they be sins or no. And in doing
the best duties we can, we offend often, and yet when we offend, we perceive it
not: and all these in the regenerate, through the mercy of God, are sins of
Toleration, in respect of particular repentance. The third kind of sins of
Toleration, are certain particular facts of men reproved in Scripture, and yet
never punished. Such was the fact of Exodus 4. ^5.
Zipporah, in circu^cising her child, in the presence of her husband, he being
able to have done it himself, and she having no calling, to do that which
she did. For though the hand of God was against him, yet was he not sick, (as
some would excuse the matter) neither is there any such thing in the text: but
it is rather to be thought, that she her self circumcised her son in have,
to prevent her husband: for the deed was done in some indignation, and she
cast the foreskin at his feet. And yet, because this fact was some manner of
obedience, in that the thing was done which God required, (though not in that
manner that he required,) God accepted the same, and stayed his hand from
killing Moses. Thus God accepted of Achabs humility, though it were in
hypocrisy, 1. king. 22.
because it was a show of obedience: and for that deferred a temporal
punishment, till the days of his posterity. God sent lions to destroy the
Assyrians, 2. king. 17.
that dwelt in Samatia, for their Idolatry: yet (...) soon as they had learned
to fear the Lord, after the manner of the God of Israel, though they mingled
the same with their own Idolatry, God for that half obedience, suffered them
to dwell in peace.

The Sixth distinction of Sins may be this. Some are sins against God, some
against men. This distinction is grounded upon a place in Samuel: If one man
sin against another, the 1. Sam. 2. 25.
Judge shall judge it: but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall plead for
him? Sins against God are such, as are directly and immediately committed
against the Majesty of God. Such are Atheism, Idolatry, Blasphemy,
Petiurie, Profanation of the Sabbath, and all the breaches of the first table.
Sins against men, are injuries, hurts, losses, and damages; whereby our
neighbor is, in his dignity, life, chastity, wealth, good name, or any other
way justly offended, or by us hindered. And such actions must be considered two
ways. First, as they are injuries and hurts done unto our neighbor: and
secondly, as they are breaches of Gods law, forbidding us so to do: and in
this second respect they are called sins, because sin is properly against
God: and therefore by sins against men, we are to understand, injuries,
losses, or damages done unto them. In this sense, must that place in Matthew be
expounded: If Matthew. 1^.
thy brother sin against thee, etc.

The seventh difference of sins, is noted by S. Paul, where he says, Every
sin that a man 1. Cor. 6. 18.
does, is without the body: but he that commits fornication, sins against
his own body. In which place, sins are distinguished into those that are
without the body, and those that are against a man's own body. Sins without
the body, are such sins as a man commits, his body being the instrument
of the sin, but not the thing abused. Such are Murder, Theft, and
Drunkenness: for in the committing of these sins, the body is but a helper,
and only a remote isntrumental cause, and the thing abused is without the
body. For example: in drunkenness, the thing abused by the drunkard, is wine or
strong drink: in theft, another man's goods: in murder, the instrument whereby
the fact is committed. The body indeed conferres his help to these things,
but the injury is directed to the creatures of God, to the body and goods of
our neighbor. And such are all sins, adultery only excepted. Sins
against the body are, those in which it self is, not only the instrument,
but the thing abused too. Such a sin is Adultery only, and those that are of
that kind, properly against the body: first, because the body of the sinner,
is both a furthering cause of the sin, and also that thing which he abuses
against his own self. Secondly, by this offense, he does not only hinder,
but loose the right, power, and propriety of his body, in that he makes it
the member of an harlot. And lastly, though other sins in their kind, do
bring a shame and dishonor upon the body, yet there is none that sits so
nigh, or leaves a blot so deeply imprinted in it, as does the sin of
uncleanness.

The eight distinction of sins, is grounded upon Paul's exhortation to
Timothy: Communicate 1. Tim. 5. 22.
not with other men's sins. Sins are either Other men's sins, or
Communication with other men's sins. This distinction is the rather to be
known and remembered, because it serves to extenuate or aggrauate sins
committed. Communication with sin is done sundry ways: first, by counsel:
thus Caiphas sinned when he gave counsel to put Christ to death: Secondly, by
commandment: so David sinned in the mu^tner of Vrias. Thirdly, by consent, or
assistance, Romans 1. 31. Thus Saul sinned in keeeping the garments of them that
stoned Steven. Act. 22. 20. Fourthly, by provocation: thus they sin that
provoke others to sin, and hereof Paul speaks when he says, Fathers must
not provoke their children to wrath. Ephesians. 6. 4. Fifthly, by negligence, when men
are called to reprove sin, and do not. Sixthly, by flattery, when men sooth
up others in sin. Seauenthly, by winking at sins, or passing them over by
slight reproof, Ephesians. 5. 11. Thus Eli sinned in rebuking his sons, and
thereby brought a temporal judgment upon himself, and his family. 1. Sam.
2. chap. and 4. Eighthly, by participation, Ephesians. 5. 7. and thus they do sin,
that are receivers of thieves. Ninthly, by defending another man in his sin:
for he that justifies the wicked, and condemns From. (...). 15.
the just, even they both are an abomination to the Lord.

The Ninth distinction follows. Some men's sins (says Paul) are open before
hand, some ^. Ti^. 5. 24.
follow after. Which place by some is expounded thus: Some men's sins are kept
secret, till the last judgment, and some are revealed in this life, before
that day. This I think is a truth, but not the meaning of the text. For in the
23. verse the Apostle spoke of Ordination, giving charge to Timothy, that he
should not suddenly admit any into Ecclesiastical offices, least he did
partake with their sins. Now in this 24. verse, he rendereth a reason
thereof, saying, Some men's sins are open before hand: that is, some men's
faults and wants are known, before their ordination to Ecclesiastical
offices, and of such the Church may know what to judge and say. But some again
follow after, that is, they are not revealed till after their ordination: and
thus Judas his wickedness, did not appear at the first, but was revealed after
he was called to be an Apostle.

And thus we see what be the Differences of Sins: touching all which, this
must be held and remembered for a Ground, That every sin, in what degree so
ever it be, is mortal of it self: and no sin is venial in it own nature.
For the ^ages of every sin is death. Romans 6. 23. And, Cursed is every one,
that continues not in all things, that are written in the book of the law, to
do them. Gal. 3. 10.

This Ground must be holden against the Church of Rome: who in her
Case-diuinitie, uses to pacify the conscience, by teaching men, that sundry
of their sins be venial. And though every sin of it self be mortal, yet
all are not equally mortal: but some more, some less: because in sin there
be sundry degrees, as has been in part showed.

Again, the same sin may be increased, or lessened, and consequently made
more or less heinous, sundry ways. First, by the Circumstances, which are
principally seven. The first is, the subject or person sinning. Thus the sin
of a public person, is more beinous, yea more mortal, then the sin of a
private man: because he is in eminent place, and his actions are more
exemplarie and scandalous, then are the actions of inferior men. The servant,
that knows his masters will, if he does it not, is the greater sinner, and
shall endure a greater punishment, then he that neglectes the same upon simple
ignorance. Matthew. 10. 15. The Minister and dispenser of the word, if he be
unfaithful and unprofitable, his offense, and consequently his punishment, is
far greater then other men's. Matthew. 5. 13. The second is, the object or
party which is offended: thus the Jews did more heinously sin in crucifying
Christ the son of God, the Lord of glory, then did their fathers which
persequuted and killed the Prophets. The injury that is done unto those whom
God tenderly loves, is far more displeasing unto him, the^ if it were done
to others. He that touches you (says the Prophet, meaning the Jews his
chosen and beloved people) touches the apple of his eye. Zach. 28. The man
that deniseth mischief against his harmless brother that dwells peaceably
by him, commits a sin most odious unto God and man. Prove. 3 29. Psalm. 7.
4. He that is called and converted unto God and Christ, and makes not honest
provision for his own, which are of his family, is so notorious an offendour,
that S. Paul holds him a denier of the faith, and worse then an Infidel. 1.
Tim. 5. 8. The person that shall rail upon the Judge, or speak evil of the
Ruler of his people, is a greater transgressour of Gods commandment, then he
that reuileth, or abuses an ordinary man. Exodus 22. 28. The third is the
Thing done in which the offense is committed. Thus, to falsify the word of
God, and to profane his worship and Service, is much more abominable in his
sight, then is the falsifying of the word of a man, or the abuse of humane
laws and ordinances. The hurting and indamaging of the person and life of our
neighbor, is a more odious offense, then is the diminishing of his goods and
outward estate: and the hurt that redoundeth by our default unto his soul, is
more offensive every way, then the wrong that is offered unto his body. The
fourth, is the place where it is done. According to this Circumstance, if a man
shall either speak or do any thing, that comes under the name of a breach of
piety or justice, in public place, as in the congregation, in open court, or
general assembly, and that with public and general scandal: he is a greater
offendour, then if he spoke or did the same at home, in his house or closet.
The fist is the End, in respect whereof, he that steals from another, that
whereby he may satisfy his hunger, and save his life, being driven to
extreme necessity: offends in a lower and lesser degree, then the thief
that robs by the high way side, for this end, to enrich himself by the
losses of other men. The sixth is the Manner how? Thus he that commits
uncleanness in the outward act, does more grievously sin, and with greater
scandal, then if he only entertained an unclean thought into his heart. And
he that sins of set purpose and presumption, or of obstinate and resolved
malice against God, has proceeded unto a higher degree of iniquity, then if
he had fallen upon ignorance, infirmity, or disordered and distempered
affection. In like manner, the sin of the Jews, in forcing Pilate by their
threatening terms, (as that he was an enemy to Caesar, etc.) to the unjust
condemnation of Christ Jesus, was in a higher degree, then the sin of Pilate
himself, who yiedling unto their importunity, pronounced sentence against
him, Ioh. 19. 11. The last is the Time, which also serves to aggrauate the
sin. For ordinary disobedience in the time of grace, and wilful neglect of
gods calling, in the abundance of means, is a great deal more damnable, then
the commission of sin, in the days of ignorance 2. Pe^. 2. 21.
and blindness, when the like means are wanting.

Now from this doctrine of the increasing and lessening of Sin in these
respects, we may gather, that all sins are not alike or equal, as the Stoics
of ancient times, and their followers have falsely imagined. For it has bin
proved at large, by induction of sundry particulars, that there are degrees
of sins, some lesser, some greater: some more offensive and odious to God and
man, some less. And that the circumstances of time, place, person, and manner
of doing, do serve to enlarge or extenuate the sin committed.

If it be here alleged, that Sin is nothing but the doing of that, which is
unlawful to be done, and that this is equal in all men that sin: and
therefore by consequent, offenses are equal. I answer, that in every sin, men
must not consider the unlawfulness thereof only, but the reason why it should
be unlawful: and that is properly, because it a breach of Gods law, and
repugnant to his will revealed in his word. Now there is no breach of a divine
Law, but it is more or less repugnant unto the will of the Lawgiuer, God
himself. And many transgressions, are more repugnant thereunto then fewer: for
the more sin is increased, the more is the wrath of God inflamed against the
sinner upon his due desert* If it be said again, that the nature of Sin
stands only in this, that the sinner makes an aberration from the scope, or
mark that is set before him, and does no more then pass the bonds of duty
prescribed by God, and that all are alike in this respect; The answer is, that
it is a falsehood to affirm, that he which makes the less aberration from the
duty commanded, is equal in offense to him that makes the greater. For the
same sin for substance, has sundry steps and degrees, in respect whereof,
one man becomes a more heinous offender then another; for example, in the
seventh commandment when God forbiddes the committing of Adultery, he
forbids three degrees of the same sin; to Math. 5. 2^.
wit, adultery of the heart, consisting of inordinate and unclean affections;
adultery of the ^. Cor. (...). (...).
tongue in corrupt, dishonest, and unseemly speeches; and the very act of
uncleanness and filthiness committed by the body. Now it cannot be said,
that he which breaks this commandment only in the first degree, is as great
a transgressour, as he that has proceeded to the second, and so to the third.
And therefore it remains for an vndoubred truth, that Sins committed
against the Law of God are not equal, but some lesser, some greater.

The second way to aggrauate sin, is by addition of sin to sin: and that
is done sundry ways: first, by committing one sin in the neck of another;
as David sinned, when he added murder to adultery. Secondly, by doubling and
multiplying of sin, that is, by falling often into the same sin. Thirdly,
by lying in sin without repentance. And here it must be remembered, that men
of years living in the Church, are not simply condemned for their particular
sins; but for their continuance and residence in them. Sins committed make
men worthy of damnation; but living and abiding in them without repentance, is
the thing that brings damnation. For as in the militant Church, men are
excommunicate, not so much for their offense, as for their obstinacy; so shall
it be in the Church triumphant; the kingdom of heaven shall be barred against
men, not so much for their sin committed, as for their lying therein without
repentance. And this is the manner of Gods dealing with those that have lived
within the precincts of the Church; they shall be condemned for the very want
of true faith and repentance. This should admonish every one of us, to take
heed, least we lie in any sin^ and that being any way overtaken, we should
speedily repent, least we aggrauate our sin by continuance therein, and so
bring upon our selves swift damnation.

Thirdly, the same sin is made greater or lesser, 4. ways: according to the
number of degrees in the committing of a sin, noted by S. James, Temptation
Conception, Birth, and Perfection. Actual sin in the first degree of
tentation is, ^^m. 1. 15.
when the mind upon some sudden motion, is drawn away to think evil, and
withal is tick led with some delight therein. For a bad motion cast into the
mind, by the flesh and the devil, is like unto the bait cast into the water,
that allureth and delights the fish, and causes it to bite. Sin in
conception is, when with the delight of the mind, there goes consent of will
to do the evil thought on. Sin in birth is, when it comes forth into action
or execution. Sin in perfection, when men are grown to a custom and habit
in sin, upon long practice. For the often committing of one and the same
sin, leaves an evil impression in the heart, that is, a strong or violent
inclination, to that or any other evil, as has bin taught before. And sin
thus made perfect, brings forth death: for custom in sinning, brings hardness
of heart: hardness of heart, impenitencie: and impenitencie, condemnation. Now
of these degrees, the first is the least, and the last is the greatest. One and
the same sin is lesser in tentation, then in conception: and les^e in
conception, then in birth: and greater in perfection, then in all the former.

Sundry other Distinctions there are of sins as namely, That the maine sins
of the first Table, are greater then the maine sins of the second Table. And
yet the maine sins of the second, are greater then the breach of ceremonial
duties, against the first table. But this which has been said shall suffice.

The use of this doctrine is manifold. First, by it we learn, what the heart
of man is by nature: namely, a corrupt and unclean fountain, out of Math. 15.
19.
which issues in the course of this life, the streams of corruptions infinite
in number, noisome in qualities, heinous in degrees, dangerous in effects. For
from thence do flow, all the differences of sins before named, with their
several branches, and infinite many more, that cannot be rehearsed. This must
move us humbly to sue unto God, and earnestly to entreat him, to wash us
thoroughly from our wickedness, and cleanse us from our sins: yea to purge and to
rinse the fountain thereof, our unclean and polluted hearts. And when by Gods
mercy in Christ, apprehended by faith, our hearts shall be purified, then to set
watch and ward Act. 15. ^.
over them* and to keep them with all diligence. Prou. 4. 23.
Secondly it teaches us, that miserable mortal man, is not guilty of one or
more sins, but of many and sundry corruptions, both of heart and life. Who can
understand his faults? says David. Now Psalm 19. 1^.
the alowa^ce of sin being death by gods ordinance, and God being justice it
self: answerably to the number of our offenses, must we needs be liable to
many punishments, yea to death it self, both of the body and of the soul.
This being our woeful estate, little cause is there, that any man should think
himself to be in good case, or presume of Gods mercy in regard of the small
number of his sins. And much less cause has he, falsely to imagine with the
Popish sort, that he can merit the favor of God by any work done by him,
above that which the Law requires; considering that it is impossible for him
to know either the number, or the nature, or the measure of his sins.
Lastly, the consideration of this point, must be a bar to keep us in, that
we be not too secure or presumptuous of our own estate: for as much as we
learn out of the word of God, that in respect of the multitude of our
corruptions, this our life is full of much evil, and many difficulties, that
we have whole armies of enemies to encounter withal, not only out of us in the
world abroad, but within us, lurking even in our own flesh. And upon this
consideration, that we should be at continual defiance with them, using all
holy means to get the victory over them, by the daily exercises of invocation
and repentance, and by a continual practice of new obedience, unto all the
laws and commandments of God, according to the measure of grace received. And
so much of the third Ground.

The fourth and last Ground, is touching the subjection and power of
Conscience. Conscience is a knowledge joined with a knowledge. For by
conscience we know what we know; and by it we know that thing of our selves
which God knows of us. The natural condition of every man's conscience is
this; that it is placed in the middle between man and God, under God and above
man. And this natural condition has two parts: the one is the subjection of
conscience to God and his word; the second is a power whereby the conscience is
over the man to urge and bind him. Of the first, we have this rule, that God
alone by his word does only bind conscience properly: for he is the only
Lord of the conscience, which created it, and gouerns it. He again is the
only lawe-giuer, that has power to save or destroy the soul, for the keeping
and breaking of his Laws. Iam. 4. 12. Again, man's conscience is known to
none but to God, and it is he only that gives liberty to the conscience, in
regard of his own laws. Upon this it follows, that no man's commandment or
Law can of it self, and by it own sovereign power bind conscience, but
does it only by the authority and virtue of the written word of God, or some
part thereof. Now the Power of conscience appears in Paul's rule: Whatsoever
is not of faith, that is, whatsoever Romans 14. 23.
man does, whereof he is not certainly persuaded in judgment and conscience,
out of Gods word, it is sin. More plainly: a thing may be said, not to be
done of faith two ways. First, when it is done, with a doubting and unresolved
conscience, as in those that are weak in knowledge. Of which sort were some in
the Primitive Church, who notwithstanding they heard of the doctrine of
Christian liberty, yet they were of opinion, that after Christ's ascension,
there was a difference to be made of meats, and thereupon thought, they might
not eat of some kind of meats. Suppose now, that these persons (by accident)
should have bin drawn to eat swines flesh, which themselves had holden a
thing forbidden* these men upon this very fact have sinned, because that which
they did, was upon an unresolved conscience. Secondly, when a thing is done
upon an erroneous conscience, it is done not of faith, and therefore a sin.
The reason is, because the conscience, though it err and be deceived, yet it
binds so sarre forth, as that if a man judge a thing to be evil, either
simply or in some respect, (though falsely) and yet afterward does it, he has
sinned and offended the Majesty of God, as much as in him lie^h.

THus much touching the Preambles, or Grounds of this doctrine. Now it
remains that we come to the Questions of Conscience.

These Questions may be fitly divided, according to the matter or subject of
them, which is Man. Now as Man is considered diverse ways, that is to say,
either apart by himself, or as he stands in relation to another, and is a
member of a Society: so the Questions of Conscience are to be distinguished,
some concerning man simply considered by himself: some again, as he stands in
relation to another.

Man stands in a twofold relation: to God, or to Man. As he sta^ds in
relation to man, he is a part of a body, and a member of some society. Now
the Questions that concern him, as a member of a society, are of three sorts,
according to the three distinct kinds of societies. For every man is either a
member of a Family, or of the Church, or of the Commonwealth* And answerably,
some Questions concern man as a member of a family: some as he is a member of
the Church: some as he is a member of the Commonwealth.

In a word therefore, all Questions touching man, may be reduced to 3. general
heads. The first whereof is, concerning man simply considered as he is a man.
The second, touching man as he sta^ds in relation to God. The third, concerning
him as he is a member of one of the three societies, that is, either of the
Family, or of the Church, or of the Commonwealth.

QVestions of the first sort, as man is a Christian, are especially three.

The first: What a man must do, that he may come into the favor of God and be
saved? The second, How he may be assured in conscience of his own salvation?
The third, How he may recover himself, when he is distressed or fallen?
I. Question.
What must a man do, that he may come into Gods favor, and be saved?

FOr answer to this question, some Ground must be laid down before hand. For it
is to be considered, and remembered in the first place, how and by what means,
God that saves brings a man to salvation.

In the working and effecting of our salvation, there are two special works of
God: the giving of the first grace, and after that the giving of the second.
The former of these two works, has X. several actions. I. God gives man the
outward means of salvation, specially the Ministry of the word: and with it,
he sends some outward cross, to break and subdue the stubbernnesse of our
nature, that it may be made plyeable to the will of God. II. This done, God
brings the mind of man to a consideration of the Law, and therein generally
to see what is good, and what is evil, what is sin, and what is not sin.
III. Upon a serious consideration of the Law, he makes a man particularly to
see and know, his own peculiar and proper sins. IV. Upon the sight of sin,
he smites the heart with the spirit of fear, whereby when man sees his
sins, he makes him to fear punishment and hell, and to despair of
salvation, in regard of any thing in himself.

Now these four actions, are indeed no fruits of grace, but are only works
of preparation going before grace; the other actions which follow, are effects
of grace. V. The fifth action of grace therefore is, to stir up the mind to a
serious consideration, of the promise of salvation propounded and published in
the Gospel. VI. After this, the sixth is, to kindle in the heart some seeds ot
sparks of faith, that is, a will and desire to believe, and grace to strive
against doubting and despair. Now at the same instant, when God begins to
kindle in the heart, any sparks of faith, then also he iustifies the sinner,
and withal begins the work of sanctification. VII. Then, so soon as faith
is put into the heart, there is presently a combat: for it fights with
doubting, despair, and distrust. And in this combat, faith shows it self, by
seruent, constant, and earnest invocation for pardon: and after invocation
follows a strength and prevailing of this desire. VIII. Furthermore, God in
mercy quiets and setles the Conscience, as touching the salvation of the
soul, and the promise of life, whereupon it rests and staieth it self. IX.
Next after this settled assurance, and persuasion of mercy, follows a stirring
up of the heart to Evangelical sorrow, according to God, that is, a grief for
sin, because it is sin, and because God is offended: and then the Lord
works repentance, whereby the sanctified heart turns it self unto him. And
though this repentance be one of the last in order, yet it shows it self
first: as when a candle is brought into a room, we first see the light before
we see the candle, and yet the candle must needs be, before light can be. X.
Lastly, God gives a man grace to endeavor, to obey his commandments by a new
obedience. And by these degrees, does the Lord give the first grace.

The second work of God tending to salvation, is to give the second grace:
which is nothing else, but the continuance of the first work begun, that a man
may persevere in grace to the end.

Now then to come the Answer; the holy Ghost has propounded to us, this
Question of conscience, together with the resolution thereof, in these examples
following. The men that were at Peter's sermon, being touched with the sense of
their own misery, upon the doctrine which had been delivered, as the Holy
Ghost says, were pricked in their hearts, and cried one to another: Men and
Act. 238.
brethren what shall we do? Peter moved by the spirit of God answers them,
Repent and be baptized, for the remission of your sins. The like was the
case of the Iayler, who, after that the stubbernnesse Act. 16. 33.
of his heart was beaten down, by fear of the departure of the prisoners, he
came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and moved this question
unto them; Sirs, what must I do to be saved? To whom they gave answer,
Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thine household. The
young man in the Gospel sues to Christ, and asks him, What shall I do to be
saved? Christ answers him. Mat. 10 17. etc.
Keep the Commandments. When he replied that he had kept them from his youth,
Christ tells him, that he must go yet further, and sell all that he has, and
give to the poor. And John tells the Scribes and Pharisees, who came unto his
Baptism, and confessed their sins, that if they would fly from the wrath to
come, they must repent, and bring forth fruits worthy a Math* 38.
mendement of life. I answer then out of all these places, that he that would
stand in the favor of God and be saved, must do four things; first humble
himself before God: secondly, believe in Christ: thirdly, repent of his
sins: fourthly, perform new obedience unto God.

For the first. Humiliation is indeed a fruit of faith: yet I put it in place
before faith, because in practice it is first. Faith lies hid in the heart,
and the first effect wherein it appears, is the abasing and humbling of our
selves. And here we are further to consider three points: first, wherein stands
humiliation: secondly, the excellency of it: thirdly, the Questions of
conscience that concern it.

Touching the first point, Humiliation stands in the practice of three things.
The first is, a sorrow of heart, whereby the sinner is displeased with
himself, and ashamed in respect of his sins. The second is, a confession to
God, wherein also three things are to be done: first, to acknowledge all our
maine sins original and actual: secondly, to acknowledge our guiltiness
before God: thirdly, to acknowledge our just damnation for sin. The third
thing in Humiliation, is supplication made to God for mercy, as earnestly as
in a matter of life and death: and of these three things we have in scripture
the examples of Ezra, Daniel, and the Prodigal son. Ezra 9. Dan. 9. Luke 15.

The second point is, the excellency of Humiliation, which stands in this,
that it has the promises of life eternal annexed to it, Esa. 57. 15. I dwell
in the high and holy place: with him also that is of a contrite and humble
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to give life to them that are
of a contrite heart. Psalm. 51. 17. A contrite and a broken heart, O God, thou will not despise. Prou. 28. 13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper:
but he that confesses and forsakes them shall find mercy. 1. Ioh. 1. 9. If
we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just, to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. By all these and many other places,
it is manifest, that in the very instant, when a sinner begins, truly in heart
and conscience to humble himself, he is then entered into the state of
salvation. So soon as David said, I have 2. Sam. 12. 13.
sinned, Nathan pronounces in the name of the Lord, that his sins were put
away. And David himself says, alluding to the former Psalm. 32. 5.
place, I said I will confess my sin, and lo, thou forga^est the
wickedness of my sin. When the Luke 15. 18.
Prodigal son had but said, I will go to my father, etc. even then, before
he humbled himself, his father meets him, and receives him.

The third point, is touching the Questions of conscience, concerning
Humiliatio^, all which may be reduced to four principal Cases.

I. Case. What if it fall out, that a man in humbling himself, cannot call to
mind either all, or the most of his sins? I answer; A particular humiliation
indeed is required, for maine and known sins: but yet there are two cases,
wherein general repentance, will be accepted of God for unknown sins. One
is, when a man has searched himself diligently, and by a serious examination,
passed through all the commandments of God, and yet after such examination and
search made, cannot call to remembrance his particular offenses; then the
general repentance is accepted. For this is answerable to the practice of
David, who after long search, when he could not attain to the knowledge of his
par^icular slippes, then he addresseth himself to a general humiliation,
saying, Who knows the errors of this life? Cleanse me Lord from Psalm. 19. 12.
my secret faults: and upon this, he was no doubt accepted. Again, when a man
humbles himself, and yet is prevented by the time, so as he cannot search his
heart and life, as he would: his general repentance will be taken and accepted
of God. The truth hereof appears in the theife upon the cross, who having no
time to search himself, made no special humiliation, yet upon his general
confession he was accepted. Now the ground of this doctrine is this; He that
truly repents himself of one sin, in this case when he is prevented: is, as
if he repented of all.

II. Case. What must a man do, that finds himself hard hearted, and of a dead
spirit, so as he cannot humble himself as he would? Answ. Such persons, if
they humble themselves, they must be content with that grace which they have
received. For if thou be grieved truly and unfeignedly for this, that thou
can not be grieved, thy humiliation shall be accepted, For that which Paul
says of alms, may be truly said in this case, that if there be a ready
mind, a man shall be accepted, 2. Cor. ^. 1^.
according to that he has, and not according to that he has not.

III. Case. Whether the party, that is more grieved for loss of his friend,
then for offense of God by his sin, does or can truly humble himself?
Answ. A man may have a greater grief for an earthly loss, then for the other,
and yet be truly grieved for his sins too. The reason is, because that is a
bodily, natural, and sensible loss, and accordingly sorrow for it is
natural. Now the sorrow for the offending of God, is no sensible thing, but
supernatural and spiritual; and sensible things do more affect the mind,
then the other. David did notably humble himself for his sins, and he did
exceedingly mourn for the loss of his son Absalom, yea and more too then
for his sins, Would God I had died for 2. Sam. ^8 33.
thee Absalom, O Absalom my son, my son, etc. Again I answer, that the
sorrow of the mind, must be measured by the intention of the affection, and by
the estimation of the thing for which we sorrow. Now sorrow for sin, though
it be less in respect of the intention thereof* yet is it greater in respect of
the estimation of the mind, because they which truly mourn for their sins,
grieve for the offense of God, as the greatest evil of all; and for the loss
of the fauo^^ of God, as for loss of the most excellent and pre^ious thing in
the world.

IV. Case. Whether it be necessary in humiliation, that the heart should be
smitten with a sensible sorrow? Answer. I. In sorrow for sin, there are two
things: first, to be displeased for our sins; secondly, to have a bodily
moving of the heart, which causes crying and tears. The former of these is
necessary, namely in heart, to be deeply displeased with our selves: the
latter is not simply necessary, though it be commendable in whomsoever it is,
if it be in truth; for Lydia had the first but not the second. II. It falls
out oftentimes, that the greatness of the grief, takes away the sensible
pain, and causes a nummednesse of the heart, so that the party grieueth not.
III. Sometimes the complexion will not affoard tears: and in such there may be
true humiliation, though with dry cheeks.

The second thing to be done for the attaining of Gods favor, and consequently
of salvation, is to Believe in Christ. In the practice of a Christian life, the
duties of humiliation and faith cannot be severed, yet for doctrines sake, I
distinguish them. In Faith there are two things required, and to be performed
on our behalf. First, to know the points of religion, and namely the sum of
the Gospel, especially the promise of righteousness and life eternal by
Christ. Secondly, to apply the promise, and withal the thing promised, which
is Christ, unto our selves* and this is done, when a man upon the commandment
of God, sets down this with himself, that Christ and his merits belong unto
him in particular, and that Christ is his wisdom, justification,
sanctification, and redemption. This doctrine is plain out of the sixth of
John: for Christ is there propounded unto us, as the bread and the water of
life. Therefore faith must not be idle in the brain, but it must take Christ
and apply him unto the soul and conscience, even as meat is eaten.

The Questions of conscience touching Faith are these. First, how we may
truly apply Christ, with all his benefits unto our selves. For wicked men
apply Christ unto themselves falsely, in presumption, but few do it truly,
as they ought to do. I answer, that this may be done, we must remember to do
two things. First, lay down a foundation of this action, and then practice
upon it. Our foundation must be laid in the word, or else we shall fail in our
application, and it consists of two principles. The one is: As god gives a
promise of life eternal by Christ, so he gives commandment, that every one in
particular, should apply the promise to himself. The next is, that the
Ministry of the word, is an ordinary means, wherein God does offer, and
apply Christ with all his benefits to the hearers, as if he called them by
their names: Peter, John, Cornelius, Believe in Christ and thou shall be saved.
When we have rightly considered of our foundation: the Second thing is, to
practice upon it, and that is, to give our selves to the exercises of faith and
repentance; which stand in meditation of the word, and prayer for mercy and
pardon: and when this is done, then God gives the sense and increase of his
grace. When Lydia was hearing the sermon of Paul, then God opened her heart,
Act. 16. 12.

Secondly, it is demanded: When faith begins to breed in the heart, and when
a man begins to believe in Christ? Answer. When he begins to be touched in
conscience for his own sins, and withal hungers and thirsts after Christ,
and his righteousness, then begins faith. The reason is plain. As faith is
renewed, so it is begun, but it is renewed when a man is touched in
conscience for his sins, and begins a new to hunger after Christ: therefore
when these things first show themselves, then faith first begins. For these
were the things that were in David, when he renewed his repentance. Psalm. 51.


The third duty necessary to salvation is Repentance. In which, two things
are to be considered* the beginning, namely, a Godly Sorrow 2. Cor. 7. and upon
this sorrow a Change. In Sorrow we consider, first, the nature of it;
secondly the properties of it. Touching the nature of sorrow, it is either
inward or outward. The inward sorrow, is when a man is displeased with himself
for his sins. The outward, when the heart declares the grief thereof by
tears, or such like signs. And sorrow in this case, called a godly sorrow, is
more to be esteemed by the first of these, then by the second. The property of
this sorrow, is to make us to be displeased with our selves, for our sins
directly, because they are sins, and do displease God. If there were no judge,
no hell, or death, yet we must be grieved because we have offended, so
merciful a God and loving father. And as godly sorrow will make us thus to
do, so is it the next cause of repentance, and by this is repentance discerned.

The next thing in repentance is, the Change of the mind and whole man in
affection, life and conversation. And this stands in a constant purpose of
the mind, and resolution of the heart, not to sin, but in every thing to do
the will of God. Hereupon Paul exhorts them, to whom he wrote, to continue
in the love of God, and in the obedience of his word. Barnabas Act. 11. ^3.
when he came to A^tioch, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and
exhorted all, that with purpose of heart they should cleave unto God, or
continue with the Lord. So the Prophet Ezekiel says, If the wicked will turn
from Ezekiel. ^8. 21.
all his sins, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live and shall not die. In this purpose stands the very
nature of repentance, and it must be joined with humiliation and faith, as a
third thing availeable to salvation, and not to be severed from them. For a man
in show may have many good things: as for example, he may be humbled, and seem
to have some strength of faith; yet if there be in the said man, a want of this
purpose and resolution not to sin, the other are but dead things, and
unprofitable, and for all them, he may come to eternal destruction.
Furthermore, we must distinguish this kind of purpose, from the mind and
purpose of carnal men, thieves, drunkards, harlots, usurers; for they will
confess their sins, and be sorry for them, yea and shed some tears, wishing
they had never sinned as they have. In these men, indeed there is a wishing
will for the time, but no settled purpose. And it is a property of nature to
avoid evil, but to have a constant resolution of not sinning, is a gift of
grace; and for this, it is, that we must labor, otherwise our repentance, is
no true and sound repentance.

The fourth and last duty, is to perform New obedience unto God in our life
and conversation. In this new obedience, three things are required. First, it
must be a fruit of the spirit of Christ in us, for when we do any good thing,
Ioh. 15. 5.
it is Christ that does 'it in us. Paul says, that good which I do, I do it
not, but Christ that dwells in me. Secondly, this new obedience must be, the
keeping of every commandment of God. For as Saint James says, He that breaks
one commandment, is guilty of all: that is, he Iam. 2. 20.
that does willingly and wittingly break any commandment, and makes not
conscience of some one, makes not conscience of any, and before God he is as
guilty of all, as if he had broken all. Thirdly, in new obedience, the whole
man must endeavor, to keep the whole law in his mind, will, affections, and
all the faculties of soul and body. As it is said of Josiah, that he turned
^. King. 23. 25.
to God, according to all the laws of Moses, with all his heart. There are yet
three other things required in him, that must perform new obedience: first, he
must not live in the practice of any outward sin. Secondly, there must be an
inward resisting and restraining, of the corruption of our nature, and of our
hearts, that we may truly obey God, by the grace of the spirit of God. The
heart of Joseph was ready pressed, to resist the evil request of Potiphars Genesis
3^. 9. ^0.
wife. And David staid his affection from revenging himself upon Shemei, when
he cursed 2. Sam. 16. 10.
him. Thirdly, he must stir up and exercise the inward man, by all spiritual
motions of Faith, Joy, Love, Hop eand the praise of God.

Here a necessary Question is moved. Considering that all good works, are
the fruits of a regenerate person, and are contained under new obedience* How
a man may do a good work, that may be accepted of God, and please him? For
resolution whereof, it is to be carefully remembered, that to the doing of a good
work, sundry things are required: Whereof, some in nature do go before the
work to be done, some do accompany the doing thereof, and some again do
follow the work, being required to be done, when the work is done. Before
the work, there goes reconciliation: for the person must be reconciled unto
God in Christ, and be pleasing to him: for if the person of the worker do not
please God, the work it self cannot; neither are works of what dignity
soever, to be esteemed by the show, and outvvard appearance of them, but by
the mind and condition of the doer. Again, before we do any good work, we
must by prayer lift up our hearts unto God, and desire him to enable us by his
spirit to do it, and to guide us by the same, in the action, which we are
about to do. This did the Prophet David oftentimes, as we may read in the
Psalms, but especially in Psalm. 143. 10. when he says; Teach me to do thy
will O God, for thou art my God, let thy good spirit lead me, unto the land of
righteousness.

In the doing of the work, we are to consider two things; the matter, and the
manner or form of doing it. For the matter, it must be a work commanded in
the word of God. Christ says of the Pharisees, that they worshipped him in
Mark. 7. 7.
vain, teaching for doctrines, the commandments of men. He therefore that
will do a work, tending to the worship of God, must do that which God
commands. And here we must remember, that a thing indifferent in the case of
off^nce, comes under a commandment of the moral law. To which purpose Paul
says, If eating flesh will offend my brother, 1. Cor. 8. vlt.
I will eat no flesh while the world stands; His meaning is, that though his
eating of flesh, was a thing indifferent in it self: yet in case of offense,
his mind was to abstain from it, as much as from the breach of the Law of God
Again, if an action indifferent, comes within the case, of furthering the good
of the Common wealth, or Church, it cease to be indifferent, and comes under
commandment; and so all kind of callings and their works, though never so
base, may be the matter of good works. Now for the form of the work, there
must be first a general faith, whereby we must be persuaded that the thing to
be done, may lawfully be done; for, what soever is not of faith, is sin.
Secondly, a particular or justifying faith, which purifieth the heart, and
makes it fit to bring forth a good work: for it gives a beginning to the
work, and also couers the wants and defects thereof, by apprehending and
applying unto us, Christ and his merits. Thirdly, it must be done in obedience;
for knowing the thing to be do^e, to be commanded of God, we must have a mind
and intention, to obey God in the thing we do. It will be here demanded,
seeing works must be done in obedience, how, and to what part of the word we
must direct our obedience? I answer: to the Law, but how? not considered in
his rigor, but as it is qualified, mollified, and tempered by the gospel: for
according to the rigor of the Law, which commandes perfect obedience, no man
can possibly do a good work.

Furthermore, the Ends of a good work are manifold: first, the honor and
glory of God. Whether ye eat or drink* or what soever ye do, 1. Cor. 10. 3^.
do all to the glory of God. Secondly, the testification of our thankefulnes
unto God, that has redeemed us by Christ. The third is, to edify our
neighbor, and to further him in the way to life everlasting. The fourth is to
exercise and confirm our faith and repentance, both which be much strengthened,
by the practice of good works. Fifthly, that we may escape the punnishment of
sin, the destruction of the wicked: and obtain the reward of the righteous,
life everlasting. Sixthly, that we may be answerable to our calling, in doing
the duties thereof, and in walking as children of light, redeemed by Christ
Jesus. Seventhly, that we may pay the debt, which we owe unto God. For we are
debtors to him in sundry regardes; as we are his creatures: as we are his
servants: as we are his children: In a word, as we are redeemed by Christ, and
our whole debt is, our duty of praise and thanksgeuing.

After the work is done, then comes the acception of it. God acceptes of our
works diverse ways. First, in that he pardons the fault which comes from us,
and secondly, in that he approoues his own good work in us. We then after we
have done the work, must humble our selves, and entreat the Lord to pardon the
wantes of our works, and say with David, Lord enter not into judgment with
thy servant: Psalm. 143. 2.
and with Daniel, Lord unto us belongs open shame and confusion, but to thee
righteousness, Daniel 9. 8. 9.
compassion, and forgiveness. And the reason is plain, because in us there is
no goodness, no holiness, no righteousness, nor any thing that may present us
acceptable in his sight: and for this cause Paul says, I know nothing by my
self, yet am I not thereby justified. Great reason then, that we should humble
our selves before God, for our wants, and pray unto him, that he will in mercy
accept our endeavor, and confirm the good work begun in us, by his holy
spirit.

II. Question.
THe next general Question touching man as he is a Christian is, How a man may
be in conscience assured, of his own salvation?

For answer to this Question, diverse places of scripture are to be skanned;
wherein this case of conscience, is fully answered and resolved.

The first place is Romans 8. 16. And the spirit of God testifies together with
our spirits, that we are the sons of God. In these words are two testimonies
of our adoption set down; the Spirit of God dwelling in us, and testifying
unto us, that we are Gods children: and our Spirit, that is, our conscience,
sanctified and renewed by the holy Ghost.

Here put the case, that the testimony of the spirit be wanting: then I
answer, that the other testimony, the sanctification of the heart, will
suffice to assure us. We know it sufficiently to be true, and not painted
fire, if there be hear, though there be no flame.

Put the case again, that the testimony of the spirit be wanting, and our
sanctification be uncertain unto us, how then may we be assured? The answer
is, that we must then have recourse to the first beginnings, and motions of
sanctification, which are these. First, to feel our inward corruptions.
Secondly, to be displeased with our selves for them. Thirdly, to begin to hate
sin. Fourthly, to grieve so often as we fall and offend God. Fifthly, to avoid
the occasions of sin. Sixthly, to endeavor to do our duty, and to use good
means. Seventhly, to desire to sin no more. And lastly, to pray to God for
his grace. Where these and the like motions are, there is the spirit of God,
whence they proceed: and sanctification is begun. One apple is sufficient to
manifest the life of the tree, and one good and constant motion of grace, is
sufficient to manifest sanctification. Again, it may be demanded, what must
be done, if both be wanting? Answ. Men must not despair, but use good means,
and in time they shall be assured.

The Second place is, the 15. Psalm. In the first verse whereof, this question
is propounded, namely, Who of all the members of the Church, shall have his
habitation in heaven? The answer is made in the verses following: and in the
second verse, he sets down three general notes of the said person. One is, to
walk uprightly in sincerity, approouing his heart and life to God: the second
is, to deal justly in all his doings: the third is for speech, to speak the
truth from the heart; without guile or flattery. And because we are easily
deceived in general signs, in the 3, 4, and 5. verses, there are set down
seven more evident and sensible notes of sincerity, justice and truth. One
is in speech, not to take up or carry abroad, false reports and slanders. The
second is, in our dealings not to do wrong to our neighbor, more then to our
selves. The third is in our company, to contemn wicked persons worthy to be
contemned. The fourth is in our estimation we have of others, and that is, to
honor the^ that fear God. The fifth is in our words, to swear and not to
change: that is, to make conscience of our word and promise, especially if it
be confirmed by oath. The sixth is in taking of gain, not to give money to
usury, that is, not to take increase for bare lending, and to lend freely to
the poor. The last is, to give testimony without briberie or partiality. In
the fifth verse, is added a reason of the answer: he that in his endeavor does
all these things, shall never be moved, that is, cut off from the Church as an
hypocrite.

The Third place of scripture, is the first Epistle of John: the principal
scope whereof, is to give a full resolution to the conscience of man, touching
the certainty of his salvation. And the principal grounds of assurance, which
are there laid down, may be reduced to three heads.

The first is this. He that has communion or (...) 5* 11.
fellowship with God in Christ, may be undoubtedly assured of his salvation.
This conclusion is propounded, Chap. 1. v. 3. 4. Where the Apostle tells the
Church, that the end of the preaching of the Gospel unto them was, that they
might have fellowship, not only mutually among themselves, but also with God
the father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And further, that having both
knowledge, and assurance of this heavenly communion, to be begun in this life,
and perfected in the life to come, their joy might be full. that is, they might
thence reap, matter of true joy and sound comfort, unto their souls and
consciences. Now whereas it might be happily demanded by some believers, how
they should come to this assurance? S. John answers in this Epistle, that the
certainty thereof may be gathered by four infallible notes. The first is
Remission of sins. For though God be in himself, most holy and pure, and no
mortal man, being unclean and polluted by sin, can have fellowship with
him: yet God has showed his mercy, to those that believe in him, and has
accepted of the blood of Jesus Christ his son, whereby they are cleansed from
all their corruptions, v. 7. If here it be asked, how this pardon and
forgiveness may be known? It is answered, by two signs. one is Humble and
hearty Confession of our sins unto god; for so says the Apostle, If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all iniquity, v. 9. The other is the pacified Conscience; for
being justified by faith we have peace Romans 5. ^.
with God: and, If our heart condemn us not: that is, if our conscience in
respect of sin does not accuse us, then have we boldness toward God, Chap.
3. v. 21. The second note of fellowship with God, is the sanctifying Spirit,
whereby we are renewed in holiness and righteousness: Hereby we know that he
abides in us, even by the Spirit which he has given us, Chap. 3. v. 24. The
third is, holiness and vprightnes of heart and life. To this end the Apostle
says, If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie
and do not truly: but if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we
have fellowship one with another, etc. Chap. 1. 6. 7. The fourth is,
perseuera^ce in the knowledge and obedience of the Gospel. So the same Apostle
exhorts the Church: Let therefore abide in you that same doctrine concerning
Christ, which ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard
from the beginning, remain in you, that is, if ye believe and obey it; you
also shall continue in the same, and in the father. Chap. 2. 24.

The second Ground. He that is the adopted son of God, shall undoubtedly be
saved. This point the Apostle plainly declares, when he says: Beloved now
are we the sons of God. Chap. 3. v. 2.
-- And we know, that is, we are undoubtedly assured by faith, that when
Christ shall appear in glory, we shall be like unto him, for we shall see him as
he is. That the latter part of these words, is thus to be expounded, I gather
out of Chap. 2. 28. as also by comparing this text with that of S. Paul, where
he says, When Christ which is Col 3 26.
our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory. And
again, If we be sons, we are also heirs, even the heirs of God, and Romans
8. 19.
heirs annexed with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also
be glorified with him. Now put the case, that the conscience of the believer,
will not rest in this, but desires to be further resolved, touching the
certainetie of his adoption? Then I answer, that he must have recourse unto the
signs, whereby a son of God may be discerned from a child of the devil: and
these are principally three. First is, truly to believe in the name of the
son of God: for those that have God for their father, are made the sons of
God, by faith in Jesus Christ. And Gal. 3. 2^.
this faith shows it self by obedience. For hereby we are sure that we know
Christ, that is, that we believe in him, and apply him with all his benefits
unto our souls, If we keep his commandments. Nay further, He that says, I
know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not
in him, chap. 2, 3, 4. The second sign is, a hearty desire, and earnest
endeavor to be cleansed of his corruptions. Every son of God that has this
hope, purifieth himself, even as Christ is pure, chap. 3. verse. 3. The third
is, the love of a Christian, because he is a Christian: for hereby says the
Apostle, are the children of God known from the children of the devil: because
the sons of Satan do hate their brethren, (as Cain did his brother Abel)
even for the good works which they do. On the other side, Gods adopted
sons, may hereby know themselves to be translated from death to life, because
they love the brethren, Chap. 3. 10, 11, 12, etc.

The third Ground. They that are assured, of the love of God to them in
particular, may also be certainly assured of their own salvation. This
doctrine follows necessarily upon the Apostles words, chap. 4. v. 9. For those
whom God has loved from all eternity, to them he has manifested his love,
by sending his only begotten son into the world, that they might live
through him eternally. But how may a man be assured of Gods special love and
favor? The same Apostle answers, by two notes; The first is the love of our
brethren: and that according to Gods commandment, wherein it is commanded,
that he that loves God, should love his brother also 4. 21. Andif any man say,
I love God, and hate his brother, be is a liar. For how can he that loves not
his brother, whom he has seen, love God whom he has not seen? 4. 20. Now
that a man deceive not himself in the love of his brother; Saint John gives
three rules: One, that Christian brotherly love, should not be, for outward
respects or considerations, but principally, because they are the sons of
God, and members of Christ: Every one that loves him which did beget: that is
god the father, loves him also which is begotten of him. 5. 1. Another is,
that it must not be outward, in show only, but inward in the heart. Let us not
love in word or in tongue only, but in deed and in truth. 3. 18. Lastly,
that it be not only in time of prosperity, but when he stands in most need
of our love. For whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have
need, and shuts up the bowels of compassion from him, how dvvelieth the
love of god in him? 3. 17. The second note of Gods love unto us is, our love of
god. For those whom God loves in Christ, to them he gives his grace, to love
him again: And this loving of him again, is an evident token of that love,
wherewith he loves them. So says the Apostle, We love him, because he loved
us first, 4. 19. If it be demanded, how a man may be assured that he loves
God? the answer is, he may know it by two things; first by his conformity to
him in holiness. The child that loves his father, will be willing to tread in
the steps of his father: and so in like manner, he that loves God, will
endeavor even as he is, so to be in this world. 4. 17. But how is that? not
in equality and perfection, but in similitude and conformity, striving to be
holy, as he is holy, and indeauouring to do his will in all things. Secondly,
by the vveaning of his affection from the things of this world, yea from all
pleasures and delights of this present life, so far forth, as they are
severed from the fear, and love of God, Love not this world, nor the things
that are in the world: if any man love this world, the love of the father is
not in him. 2. 15.

The Fourth place, is in the second of Timothy, 2. 19. The foundation of God
remains sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his, and let
every one that calls upon the name of the Lord, depart from iniquity. In
these words, Paul goes about to cut off an ofsence, which the Church might
take, by reason of the fall of Hymenaeus and Philetus, who seemed to be
pillars, and principal men in the Church. And to confirm them against this
offense, he says; The foundation of God, that is, the decree of Gods election,
stands firm and sure: so as those which are elected of God, shall never fall
away, as these two have done. And this he declares by a double similitude;
First of all he says, the election of God, is like the foundation of an house,
which stands fast, though all the building be shaken. Secondly he says, that
election has the seal of God, and therefore may not be changed; because
things which are sealed, are thereby made sure and authentical. Now this
seal has two parts: the first concerns God, in that every man's salvation is
written in* the book of life, and God knows who are his. And because it
might be said, God indeed knows who shall be saved, but what is that to us?
we know not so much of our selves. Therefore Saint Paul to answer this, sets
down a second part of this seal, which concerns man, and is imprinted in his
heart and conscience; which also has two branches* the gift of invocation, and
a watchful care, to make conscience of all and every sin, in these words,
And let every one that calls upon the name of the Lord, depart from
iniquity. Whereby he signifies, that those that can call upon God, and give
him thanks for his benefits, and withal, in their lives make conscience of
sin, have the seal of Gods election imprinted in their hearts, and may
assure themselves they are the Lords.

A Fifth place of scripture, touching this question is, 2. Pet. 1. 10. Give all
diligence to make your election sure, for if you do these things, you shall
never fall. Which words contain two parts: first, an Exhortation, to make our
election sure, not with God, for with him all things are known, but to
ourselves, in our own hearts and consciences. Secondly, the Means whereby to
come to this assurance, that is, by doing the things before named, in the 5, 6,
and 7. verses; and that is nothing else, but to practice the virtues of the
moral law, there set down, which I will briefly show what they are, as they
lie in the text.

To faith, add vertue] by faith he means true religion, and that gift of
God, whereby we put our trust and confidence in Christ. By virtue, he means
no special virtue, but (as I take it) an honest and upright life before men,
shining in the virtues and works of the moral law. By knowledge, he means a
gift of God, whereby a man may judge, how to carry himself warily, and
uprightly before men. By temperance, is understood a gift of God, whereby we
keep a moderation of our natural appetite, especially about meat, drink,
and attire. By Patience, is meant a virtue, whereby we moderate our sorrow, in
enduring affliction. Godliness* is another virtue, whereby we worship God, in
the duties of the first table. Brotherly kindness, is also that virtue,
whereby we embrace the Church of God, and the members thereof with the bowels
of love. And in the last place, Love, is that virtue, whereby we are well
affected to all men, even to our enemies. Now having made a rehearsal of these
virtues: in the tenth verse he says, If ye do these things, ye shall never
fall, that is to say, If ye exercise your selves in these things, you may
hereby be well assured and persuaded, of your election and salvation.

III. Question.
THe last general Question touching man as he is a Christian is, How a man
being in distress of mind, may be comforted and releiued?

Ans. Omitting all circumstances (considering that much might be spoken
touching this Question) I will only set down that which I take to be most
material to the doubt in hand.

Distress of mind, (which Salomo^ calls a broken Prou. 18. 14.
or troubled spirit) is, when a man is disquieted and distempered in
conscience, and consequently in his affections, touching his estate before God.
This distress has two degrees; the less, and the greater: The less is a
single fear, or grief, when a man stands in suspense and doubt, of his own
salvation, and in fear that he shall be condemned. The greater distress is
Despair, when a man is without all hope of salvation, in his own sense and
apprehension. I call despair a greater distress, because it is not a distinct
kind of trouble of mind, (as some do think,) but the highest degree, in
every kind of distress. For every distress in the mind, is a fear of
condemnation, and comes at length to desperation* if it be not cured.

All distress of mind, arises from temptation, either begun or continued.
For these two do so necessarily follow, and so inseperably accompany each the
other, that no distress, of what kind soever, can be severed from temptation.
And therefore according to the diverse sorts of temptations, that do befall men,
must the distresses of the mind be distinguished.

Now Temptations be of two sorts; either of trial or seducement. Temptations
of trial, are such as do befall men, for the trial and proof of the grace
of God which is in them. The Temptations of trial are twofold: the first is a
combat of the conscience directly and immediately with the wrath of God; which
being the most grievous temptation that can be, it causes the greatest and
deepest distress of conscience. The second is, the Trial of the Cross, that
is, of outward affliction, whereby God makes proof of the faith of his
children; and not only that, but of their hope, patience, and affiance in his
mercy, for their deliverance.

Temptations of seducement be such, as wherein men are entised, to fall from God
and Christ, to any kind of evil. And these are of three kinds. The first is,
the temptation of Blasphemies, or the Blasphemous temptation, which is from the
Devil immediately. The second is, from a man's own sins, original and
actual; and this also has sundry branches, as we shall see afterward. The
third proceeds from Imagination corrupted and deceived. Now answerable to these
several kinds of temptations, are the several kinds of distresses: and as all
temptations may be reduced to those five, which have been before named: so may
all distresses be reduced to five heads, arising of the former temptations.

Before I come to handle them in particular, we are to consider in the first
place, what is the best and most sure general Remedy, which may serve for all
these, or any other kind of temptation, that is incident to man: and by this,
the curing of any particular distress, will be more easy and plain.

This general Remedy is, the Applying of the promise of life everlasting, in
and by the blood of Christ. For no physic, no art or skill of man, can cure
a wounded and distressed conscience, but only the blood of Christ. And that
this is the sovereign remedy of all other, no man doubts. The maine
difficulty, is touching the manner of proceeding, in the application of the
promise. Herein therefore three things must be performed.

First of all, the party must disclose the cause of the particular distress,
that the remedy may the better be applied. For the truth is, that the very
opening of the cause, is a great ease to the mind, before any remedy be
applied. Yet by the way, this care must be had, that the thing to be revealed,
be not hurtefull to the party, to whom it is made known. For the distress
may happily arise of some confederacy, in matters of Treason* by the
concealing whereof, the party to whom they are revealed, may entangle
himself in the same danger.

Secondly, if the cause may be known, (for sometime it is hid, from the party
distressed) the^ trial must be made, whether the said party, be fit for
comfort yea or no? For if he be found to be unfit, the word of God shall be
misapplyed, and consequently abused. His fitness for comfort, may be found
out, by searching whether he be humbled for his sins, or not; for me^ may be
in great distress, and yet not touched at all, for their sins. This
humiliation stands in sorrow for sin, with confession of the same unto God,
and in earnest prayer for the pardon thereof, with an hearty desire of
amendment of life. But if on the other side, the party be vnhumbled, then the
first and principal care must be, to work in him some beginning of
humiliation. This may be done in a freindly, and Christian talk and
conference, whereby he must first be brought to see, and well to consider his
own sins; secondly, to grieve, and to be sorry for them, at the least, for
some of the principal.

And touching this sorrow, two things must be remembered: first, that the nature
of worldly sorrow must be altered, by being turned, and changed into sorrow
according to God. If a man be in some danger of his life, by bleeding at the
nose: experience teaches, the counsel of the Physician is, to open a vain,
and let the party blood in the arm, that the course thereof may be turned
another way: The like order is to be taken with men, that are troubled, with
worldly sorrow in their distress: and that is, to turn the course of their
grief, by causing them to grieve not for worldly respects, or only in
consideration of the punishment due unto their sins, but principally for the
very offense of God, in, and by their sins committed.

This done, a second care must be had, that this sorrow for sin be not
confused, but a distinct sorrow. The man that is in sorrow, must not be grieved
only, because he is as other men are, a sinner: but more specially for this,
and that particular sin, by which it comes to pass, that he is such, or such
or a sinner, that so his sorrow in respect of sin, may be distinct, and
brought as it were to some particular head. And men in this case, must deal
with the party distressed, as Surgeons are wont to do with a tumor, or
swelling in the body, whose manner is, first to apply drawing and ripening
plasters to the place affected, to bring the sore to an head, that the
corruption may issue out at some one place: and then afterward healing
plasters which are of great use to cure the same. Even so confused grief,
must be reduced to some particulars: and then, and not before, is a man fit for
comfort, when his conscience is touched in special, in regard of some one or
more distinct and several offenses. And he that is grieved for one sin
truly, and unfeignedly, from his heart; shall proportionally be grieved for all
the sins, that he knows to be in himself.

The third thing required in applying this remedy is, the ministering and
conuaying of comfort to the mind of him, that has confessed his sins, and is
truly humbled for them: and it is a point of the greatest moment of all. Where
if the question be, how this comfort should be ministered* the answer is, it may
be done, by bringing the party troubled, within the compass of the promise of
life. And there be two ways of doing this: the one false, and the other true.

Some think, that men may be brought within the Covenant, by the doctrine of
Universal grace and redemption. But this way, to persuade us of title in the
Covenant of grace, is both false, and unfit. False it is, because all the
promises of the Gospel, are limited with the condition of Faith, and
Repentance, not being universal, but made only to such persons, as repent
and believe: therefore they are indefinite in regard of whole mankind, and to
believers they are universal.

It is objected, that God would have all men ^. Tim 2. 4.
to be saved. Ans. The Apostle is the best expounder of himself, and he faith
in the Acts to the same effect, The time of this ignorance God Act. 17. 3^.
regarded not, but now he admonishes all men every where to repent. In which
words, Paul adds this circumstance of time ( now,) to limit this good will of
God, to the last age of the world, after the coming of Christ in the flesh,
and not to enlarge the same to all the posterity of Adam. And ^o must he be
understood in the place to Timothy, God would have all men to be saved, that
is, now in this last age of the world. And thus the same Apostle 2. Cor. 6.
expounds a certain prophecy of Isai, concerning the acceptable time of grace.
Now, says he, is the acceptable Esa. 49 ^.
time: behold (Now) is the day of salvation, meaning the time of the new
Testament. And Col. ^. 26. The mystery hid from the beginning, is now made
manifest to the Saints. And To. 16. 26. The revelation of the secret mystery
is now opened. All which, and many other places about the same matter, having
this circumstance of time ( Now,) must needs be limited to this last age of the
world. As for the note of universality, All, it must not be understood of all
particulars, but of all kinds, sorts, conditions, and states of men, as may be
gathered out of the former words: I would that prayers be made for all men, not
for every particular man: (for there be some that ^. Ioh* ^. 1^.
sin unto death, for whom we may not pray,) but for all states of men, as
well Princes as subjects, poor as rich, base as noble, unlearned as learned,
etc.

But the saying of Paul is urged, 2. Cor. 5. 18. God was in Christ, reco^ciling
the World unto himself: therefore the promise in Christ, belongs to the whole
World, and consequently to every one. Ans The same Apostle shall again answer
for himself. Romans 11. 15. The casting away of the Jews, is the reconciling of
the world, that is, of the Gentiles in the last age of the world: for so he
said before more plainly, The falling away of the Jew, is the riches of the
world, and the diminishing of them, the riches of the Gentiles. And so must
that place to the Corinths be understood, namely, not of all and every man,
that lived in all ages and times; but of the^ that were (by the dispensation of
the Gospel) to be called out of all kingdoms, and nations, after the death and
ascenfion of Christ. Thus then the promise of salvation, is not universal,
without exception, or restraint: and therefore application made by the
universality of the promise, admits some falsehood.

Secondly, this way of applying, is also Unfit. For the reason must be framed
thus: Christ died for all men: but thou art a man: therefore Christ died for
thee. The party distressed will grant all, and say, Christ indeed died for
him, i^ he would have received Christ, but he by his sinn^ has cut himself
off from his own Savior, and has forsaken him, so as the benefit of his
death will do him no good.

The right way of ministering Comfort to a party distressed follows. In the
handling whereof, first, I will lay down the Grounds, whereby any man that
belongs to God, may be brought within the Covenant. And then, I will show the
Right Way, how they must be used, and applied.

For the first. Recourse must not be had to all graces, or to all degrees and
measures of grace; but only such, as a troubled Conscience may feel and reach
unto. For those that be the true children of God, and have excellent measure of
grace; when they are in distress, feel little or no grace at all in
themselves. The graces then, that serve for this purpose, are three. Faith,
Repentance, and the true Love of God. which is the fruit of them both. And that
we may the more easily and truly discern of them, and not be deceived,
inquiry must be made, what be the Seeds and beginnings of them all.

The first Gronnd of grace is this: A desire to repent, and believe, in a
touched heart and conscience, is faith and repentance it self, though not in
nature, yet in Gods acceptance. I prove it thus. It is a principle granted
and confessed of all men; that in them which have grace, God accepts the will
for the deed. If there be a willing mind (says the Apostle) it is ^. Cor. ^.
1^.
accepted not according to that a man has not, but according to that he has.
Again, God has annexed a promise of blessedness, and life everlasting to the
true and unfeigned desire of grace. Whence it is, that they are in Scripture
pronounced Matthew. 5. 6.
blessed, which hunger and thirst after righteousness. And who are they but
such, as feel themselves to want all righteousness, and do truly and earnestly
desire it in their hearts. For hunger and thirst, argues both a want of
something, and a feeling of the want. And to this purpose the holy Ghost says,
To him that is a thirst will I give to drink of the water of R^^^l. ^1. 6.
life freely Now this thirsty soul, is that man, which feels himself
destitute of all grace, and Gods favor in Christ, and withal does thirst
after the blood of Christ, and desires to be made partaker thereof. God is wont
mercifully to accept of the desire of any good thing, when a man is in
necessity, and stands in want Psalm. 10. 1^.
thereof. The Lord (says David) hears the desire of the poor, that is, of
them that are in distress either of body, or mind. Yea, he will fulfill the
desire of them that fear him. Psalm. 14^. 1^.


It will be said, that the desire of good things is natural: and therefore God
will not regard men's desires. I answer, Desires be of two sorts; some be of
such things, as men by the mere light of nature know to be good: for example:
the desire of wisdom, of civil virtue, of honor, of happiness, and such
like: and all these nature can desire. Others be above nature, as the desire of
remission of sins, reconciliation, and sanctification: and they which
seriously desire these, have a promise of blessedness and life everlasting. And
hence it follows, that desire of mercy, in the want of mercy, is mercy it
self; and desire of grace, in the want of grace, is grace it self.

A second Ground is this. A godly sorrovv whereby a man is grieved for his
sins, because they are sins, is the beginning of repentance, and indeed for
substance is repentance it self. The Apostle Paul rejoiced that he had in the
work of his Ministry, wrought this godly sorrow in the hearts of the
Corinthians, calling it sorrow that causes repentance not to be repented of.
2. Cor. ^ ^.
This sorrow may be discerned in this sort: The heart of him in whom it is, is
so affected, that though there were no conscience, nor devil to accuse, no
hell for condemnation; yet it would be grieved in it self, because God by
sin is displeased, and offended.

I^ it be alleged, that every one cannot reach to this beginning of
repentance, thus to sorrow for his sin; then I add further, if the party be
grieved for the hardness of his heart, whereby it comes to pass, that he cannot
grieve, he has undoubtedly received some portion of godly sorrow. For it is
not nature, that makes us to grieve for hardness of heart, but grace.

The third Ground is, that A settled purpose, and willing mind to forsake all
sin, and to turn unto God, (though as yet no outward conversion appear,) is
a good beginning of true conversion, and repentance. I thought (says David) I
will confess against my self my wickedness unto the (...). 3^. ^*
Lord: and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin. And to this is added (
Selah,) which is not only a musical note, but; as some think, a note of
observation, to move us to mark the things that are set down, as being of
special weight and moment. And surely this is a matter of great consequence;
that upon the very unsained purpose of confession of sin, God should give a
pardon thereof. Take a surther proof of this in the Prodigal son, whom I
take not for one that was never called, or turned to God, (though some do so,
and seem to have warrant for their opinion:) but rather for him that is the
child of God, and afterward falls away. Now such a one being brought by
outward crosses and afflictions, to see his own misery, purposes with
himself, to return to his father again, and to humble himself, and confess
his iniquity: and upon this very purpose, Luke 15. 17, 18.
when he had said, I will go to my father, and say unto him, father, I have
sinned, etc. at his return a far off, his father receives him as his child
again, and after acceptance follows his confession. The like is to be seen
in David, 2. Sam. 1^. 1^.
who being reproved by the Prophet Nathan, for his sins of adultery and
murder, presently made confession of them, and at the very same time, received
by the prophet, sentence of absolution, even from the Lord himself, wherein he
could not err.

The fourth Ground. To love any man because he is a Christian, and a child of
God, is a sensible and certain note of a man that is partaker of the true love
of God in Christ. Hereby 1. John. ^. 14.
(says S. John) we know that we are translated from death to life, because we
love the brethren. Love here is not a cause but only a sign of Gods love to
us. And our Savior Christ says, He that receives a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward. Now that we be not deceived in these
grounds; it must be rememebred, that these beginnings of grace, (be they never
so weak) must not be flittering and fleeting, but constant and settled, not
stopped or stayed in the way, but such as daiely grow and increase: and then
they are indeed accepted of God. And he that can find these beginnings, or any
of them truly in himself, he may assure himself thereby, that he is the
child of God.

Having thus laid downethe Grounds of comfort: I come now to the way, by which
the party in distress, may be brought within the compass of the promise of
salvation. This way stands in two things; in making trial* and in applying
the promise.

First then, trial must be made* whether the person distressed have in him as
yet, any of the forenamed grounds of grace or not. This trial may be made by
him that is the comforter, in the moving of certain Questions to the said
person. And first, let him ask whether he believe and repent? The distressed
party answers no, he cannot repent nor believe. Then he must further ask,
whether he desire to believe and repent? to this he will answer, he does
desire it with all his heart; in the same sort is he to make trial of the
other grounds. When a man is in the fit of tentation; he will say resolutely,
he is sure to be damned. Ask him in this fit, of his love to God, he will give
answer, he has none at all: but ask him further, whether he love a man
because he is a Christian, and a child of God, then will he say he does indeed.
Thus after trial made in this manner, some beginnings of faith and repentance
will appear, which at the first lay hid. For God uses out of the time of
prosperity, by and in distress and affliction to work his grace.

The second point follows. After that by trial some of the foresaid
beginnings of grace, be found out, then comes the right applying of the promise
of life everlasting to the party distressed. And that is done by a kind of
reasoning; the first part whereof, is taken from Gods word, the second from the
testimony of the distressed conscience, and the conclusion is the applying of
the promise, on this manner. He that Mayor.
has an unfeigned desire to repent and believe, has remission of sins, and
life everlasting: Minor.
But thou have an earnest desire to repent and believe in Christ. Therefore
remission of sins Conclusio.
and life everlasting is thine.

And here remember, that it is most convenient, this application be made by the
Minister of the Gospel, who in it, must use his ministerial authority given
him of God, to pronounce the pardon. For in distress, it is as hard a thing,
to make the conscience yield to the promise, as to make fire and water agree.
For though men have signs of grace and mercy in them, yet will they not
acknowledge it, by reason of the extremity of their distress. In this manner,
upon any of the former grounds, may the troubled and perplexed soul be
assured, that mercy belongs to it. And this I take to be, the only general
and right way, of conforting a distressed conscience.

Now that the promise thus applied, may have good success, these rules must
necessarily be observed.

I. One is, that the comfort which is ministered, be delaied with some mixture
of the Law; that is to say, the promise alone must not be applied, but withal
mention is to be made, of the sins of the party, and of the grievous
punishments, due unto him for the same. The reason is, because there is much
deceit in the heart of man; in so much, as oftentimes it falls out, that men
not thoroughly humbled, being comforted either too soon, or too much, do
afterward become the worst of all. In this respect, not unlike to the iron,
which being cast into the fire vehemently hot, and cooled again, is much more
hard, then it would have bin, if the heat had bin moderate. And hence it is,
that in the ministering of comfort, we must somewhat keep the^ down, and bring
them on by little and little to repentance. The sweetness of comfort is the
greater, if it be delayed with some tartenesse of the Law.

II. Another rule is this: If the distressed party, be much possessed with
grief, of himself, he must not be left alone, but always atte^ded with good
company. For it is an usual practice of the Devil, to take the vantage of the
place and time, when a man is solitary and deprived of that help, which
otherwise he might have in society with others. Thus he tempted Eve, when she
was apart from her husband. And in this regard, Solomon pronounces a woe to him
that Eccles. 4. 10.
is alone. But herein does his malice most appear, in that he is always
readiest, when a man is in great distress, and withal solitary, then upon
the sudden to tempt him to despair, and to the making away of himself.

III. Thirdly, the party in distress must be taught, not to rest upon his
own judgment, but always to submit himself, and be content to be advised by
others that are men of wisdom, judgment, and discretion. A thing to be
observed the rather, because the very neglect thereof, has caused sundry
persons, to remain vncomforted for many years.

IV. Fourthly, the party distressed, must never hear tell of any fearful
accidents, or of any that have bin in like, or worse case the^ himself is. For
upon the very report, the distressed conscience will fasten the accident upon
it self, and thereby commonly will be drawn to deeper grief or despair. For
the mind afflicted will imagine fearful things, and sometime, the very bare
naming of the Devil, will strike terror and fear into it.

V. Fifthly, The party that is to comfort, must bear with all the wants of the
distressed; as with their frowardness, peevishness, rashness, and with their
distempered and disordered affections and actions* yea he must put upon him (as
it were) their persons, being affected with their misery, and touched with
their sorrows, as if they were his own, grieuing when he sees them to
grieve, weeping when they do weep and lament.

VI. Sixthly, he that is the comforter, must not be discouraged, though after
long labor and pains taking, there follow small comfort and ease, to the
party distressed. For usually, it is long before comfort can be received; and
why? surely because God has the greatest stroke in these distresses of mind,
and brings men thorough all the temptations, that he has appointed, before he
opens the heart to receive comfort. The Church in the Canticles seeks for her
believed; but before she can find him, she goes about in the city, through
the streets, and by open places, passing by the Watchmen themselves, and after
she has used all means without help or hope, at length she finds her
beloved* him in whom her soul delights. C^^^ 3.


Thus much for the general remedy of all distresses: now I come to the
particular distresses themselves.

The first distress arises of a divine Temptation, which is a combat with
God himself immediately. And this distress is, when the conscience speaks
some fearful things of God, and withal the party distressed, feels some
evident tokens of Gods wrath. Examples hereof we shall find many in the word
of God. One is, the example of righteous Job, who having been long in outward
afflictions, was withal exercised with the apprehension of the anger of God,
and in that state he says, that the arrows Job. 6. 4.
of the Almighty were in him, that the venime thereof, did drink up his
spirit, that the terrors of God did fight against him. Yea further he adds,
that God was his enemy, and writ bitter Job. 13. 26.
things against him: and made him to possess the sins of his youth. And at
another time he complains, that Gods wrath had torn him, Job. 16. 9.
that he hated him, g^ashed upon him with his teeth, and had sharpened his eyes
against him In all which, and diverse other places, it appears that his
conscience was exercised, with the sense of the wrath of God, which had now
even seized upon his soul.

Another example we have in David, who also was exercised with this temptation
and trouble of mind, as the first words of the 6 Psalm, and the whole tenor
thereof do evidently Psalm.6.
show; For first, he desires the Lord, not to rebuke him in his wrath, and
afterward complains, that his grief was so great, that his very flesh
consumed, his bones were vexed, and his body brought to such a state, as no
sickness could have brought him unto. And it is not unlike, that the same
Prophet did often fall into the like kind of distress of mind, as may be
gathered out of Psalm, 77* and sundry other places.

Now as it fared with these, and diverse other servants of God, in ancient
times, so are we not without some instances thereof in our days. Amongst
many, that worthy man Master Luther, writes of himself, that he was in this
particular temptation, and that he learned in it, the doctrine of the
Justification of a sinner, by the mere mercy of God, without any merit of
works* and upon the sense and experience of the nature and properties of this
distress, he w^ote^ notable exposition of the 6. Psalm of David* ^^e scope
and intent whereof, he writes to be nothing else, but a sovereign remedy of
this and the like distresses of the mind and conscience.

If it be demanded, what is the occasion of this kind of temptation? I answer,
that it arises some times, upon the commission of some notorious sin, which
does wound the conscience, as in Cain, Judas, and Saul, who for their great and
capit all sins, that stinged and wounded their consciences, grew to a
fearful state, and consequently perished in this temptation. Sometimes again
it comes when there is no sin committed, but obedience to God performed: and
then there cannot be rendered any reason of it, either in man, or out of man,
save this, that God will have it so to be. And the truth hereof is plain by
the examples of Job and David before remembered.

The Effects of this Temptation are many* and very strange. For outwardly it
works upon the body, as it were a burning ague, and it causes the entralls to
rise, the liver to roll in the body: and it sets a great heat in the bones,
and consumes the flesh, more then any sickness can do. And that it is so, as I
say, beside experience, it is clear in the word of God. David in this
distress affirms, that his eyes were eaten as it were with worms, and sunk
into his head Psalm. 6. 7. that his moisture became as the drought in summer.
Psalm. 32. 4. and Job says, that his skin was black upon Job. ^0 30.
him, his bones were burnt with heat: yea that by means of this distress he
was now full of wrinkles, Job. 15. 8.
and his leanenes did rise upon him. It is a principle which Physicians do
hold, that The mind follows the temperature of the body, and is affected
according to the good or evil constitution thereof: which though it be true,
yet withal it is as manifest on the other side, that the body does often
follow the state and condition of the mind. For a distressed heart, must of
necessity, make a fainting and a languishing body.

But the principal thing to be sought for in this temptation, is the Remedy
thereof: whereunto there be five things required, which are to be practiced, as
occasion shall be offered.

First, choice must be made of the most fit and present remedy, and that must
be used in the first place.

Now the most fit and present remedy is, to bring the party troubled to the
personal exercises of faith and repentance, by, and in him self. For this
end, he must examine his conscience most straigthly and narrowly of all the
sins of his heart, and life. Secondly, he must humbly confess against
himself, all his known sins: and withal acknowledge the due condemnation,
that he thereby has deserved. Thirdly, he must cry to heaven for mercy,
entreating the Lord most instantly for pardon, and for the restraint of his
wrath due unto him for his sin. David being in this distress, performed all
these duties, as we may read in the 6. Psalm: and he says further of
himself, that whilst he concealed his sins, the hand of God was heavy upon
Psalm. 32.
him: but upon his earnest confession, and deprecation, he received mercy. And
if we read the book of Job, we shall find that the principal scope thereof
is this; namely, to show unto us, that Job was thoroughly exercised with this
temptation, and that in the end having been rebuked both by his friends, and
by God himself, his recovery was made, by humbling himself, when he says,
Behold, I am vile: again, Job. ^9.^9.
now I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

Some may here demand, If it fall out, that the person himself, cannot
perform any good duty, of himself, by reason of his distraction in soul,
and body, what must then be done? Ans. If the party can but sigh, and sobbe
unto God for mercy, and comfort: it is no doubt, a work of Gods spirit, and a
practice both of faith, and repentance. We know not (says Saint Rom* ^. (...).
Paul) what to pray as we ought, (namely, in our distresses) but the Spirit it
self makes request for us, with sighs that cannot be expressed: and therein
lies our comfort. Thus Moses at the red sea being in great distress, and
not knowing what to say, or do, sighed and groned inwardly in his soul unto
the Lord, for help and protection: and his very desire was in stead of a Exodus
14* 15.
loud cry in the ears of the Lord.

The second thing is, that trial must be made, whether the party has in him
any tokens of grace, or not.

These tokens are the small beginnings of grace, which before I have declared.
As for example: a grief because we cannot grieve for sin as we should: a
serious will and desire to believe, and repent: a purpose to sin no more, and
such like. If these be found in the party, then by them as by sure pledges, he
may be assured of the favor of God toward him: and where any of these be
found, the saying of God to Saint Paul must be urged, My grace is sufficient
for thee: and 2. Cor. 12. 9.
therewith must the distressed party stay his mind. Yea we are to be content
with any condition in this life, be it never so miserabie, so long as we are in
the favor of god, though he should lay upon us even the pains of hell, till
the time of our death. So did David, who when he was pursued by his own son,
uttered these words unto God, Behold, if I please thee not, do with 2. Sam.
15. 26.
me what thou will. And the like was the mind of Paul, who being assured of
the favor of God, was content for his glory, and the salvation ^om. 9. 3.
of the Israelites (if it had been possible) to be separated from Christ, and
to endure the very pangs of hell.

The third thing in this cure is, to Apply to the said distressed party, such
promises of God made unto afflicted persons, as are most large and comfortable.

For example, that The Lord is near to them that are of a contrite heart, and
will save such as be afflicted in spirit. Psalm. 34. 18. Again, I came not
(says our Savior Christ) but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
Matthew. 15. 24. He says not, to the straying sheep, but to such as ate now in
the pit, ready to be drowned, or in the Lions mouth, ready to be devoured.
Again* The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, Luk* 4. 1^.
therefore he has anointed me that I should preach the Gospel to the poor;
that is, to such as are distressed in conscience, and poor in spirit: he has
sent me that I should heal the broken hearted, that I should preach
deliverance to the captives. These and many other such like promises, are in
this case to be urged, and the party moved to endeavor to believe them, and
to rest himself upon them, though he loose all things else.

Fourthly, the party must be brought to a serious consideration of his life
past, and of Gods merciful dealing with him in former times, and therewith is
he to be comforted for the time present. For if aforehand he has received any
tokens of the favor and love of God, by them he is now to stay and ^o settle
his mind. The reason is plain: the gifts of God are without repentance; whom
he loves once, he loves to the end, and whom he chooses he calls,
justifies, and sanctifies, and will also in time glorify. David being in
such affliction, that he could hardly think upon God, yet he took this
course, prayed to the Lord for comfort, communed with his own heart, and
called to remembrance how God Psalm. 77. 1^.
had formerly dealt with him, and with this meditation of the continual course
of Gods mercy in his preservation, he confirmed his faith, and stayed his
heart in his greatest troubles.

The fifth and last thing to be done, is the remooueall of such reasons and
doubts, as the party distressed usually makes against himself, for his own
overthrow. For it is the manner of those that are troubled in mind, to dispute
against themselves; and commonly they are wont to allege three things.

First, being instructed how to humble themselves, and to depend on Gods
mercy, they will grant, that all these indeed are good things, but they
belong not to them: for they neither do, nor can feel any thing, but the
tokens of Gods anger, and that they are already entered, into some degrees of
condemnation.

This objection may be taken away, by informing them of the manner of Gods
dealing in all his works. For commonly he works all things in his creatures,
in, and by Contraries, if we could know the whole frame of them.

Thus in the Creation, every creature had his being of that which had no
being, and something was made, not of something, but of nothing. After the
flood, the sign of Gods covenant, for the preservation of the world from
destruction by rain, is the Rainbow, which indeed is a natural sign of
rain. When Elias was to prove the Lord to be the only true God, against the
idolatrous priests of Baal, and that by burnt offerings; he powered water upon
the sacrifice, and fills a trench with water round about, and in this contrary
means was the sacrifice burnt up. Christ for the curing of a blind man,
te^pers spittle and clay together, which in all reason, is a fitter means to
put out the eyes* the^ to cause the blind to see. Thus in the work of our
Redemption, Christ gives life, not by life, but by death, and he sendes men to
heaven by the gates and suburbs of hell. He will not build upon an old
foundation, but he pulls down and destroies all, that Man may have no hope at
all in himself, but that all the hope he has, may be in God. First he kills,
and then he makes alive, as Anna speaks: first he wounds, and ^. sa^. ^.
then he heals. He makes man to sow in tears, that afterward he may reap
in joy. And he that knows Gods dealing to be this, must herewith rest
content, and satisfied: because in wrath, God uses to remember his mercy; yea
his mercy is never sweet unto the palate of the soul, until it be seasoned
with some taste of his wrath. The Paschall Lamb was eaten with sour herbs, to
signify, that we can feel no sweetness in the blood of Christ, till we first
feel the smart of our own sins, and corruptions.

Secondly, these persons use to allege against themselves, that if they could
feel any comfort at all, then they would stay their minds, and yield to good
persuasions, and exhortations.

To this, the answer is; That there is a Rule of grace, (which we must follow)
gathered out of the word of God, and the experience of Gods children, contrary
to the rule of nature. and above the light of reason: and it is this, that in
case of affliction, we must not live by feeling, but by faith.

This Rule is grounded upon the speech of the Lord by the Prophet, The just man
shall live by his faith. When we have neither sight, nor Hab. ^. 4.
sense, nor any taste of Gods mercy, but only apprehend his wrath, even then
we must labor to lay hold of mercy in his word, and promise. Sense, and
feeling, are not always fit directions for the time of this life: For he may
be the dear child of God, that in prsent feels nothing but his wrath and
indignation. This indeed is the true trial of our faith, when even above and
against reason, we rely on the mercy of God, in the apprehension of his
anger. So did David. Out of the deep, (says he) that is, being now deeply
plunged Psalm. ^30.
into the pangs of a distressed conscience, have I called upon thee, O Lord:
and Job in the like case. Lord, though though thou kill me, yet will I trust in
thee. Abraham is commended by the holy Ghost, amongst other things, for this,
that he believed in God, above hope: that is, against all matter of hope, that
might possibly be conceived, upon the Romans 4. 18.
consideration of the strength of natural causes. The theife upon the cross,
feeling nothing but woe: and seeing nothing in Christ but misery and contempt,
yet he believed in Christ, and was saved. In a word, Christ himself when he
was forsaken of all men, and void of all worldly comfort, and felt nothing but
the depth of the wrath of God, in his agony and passion; yet by the faith of
his manhood, he stayed himself and said, My God, my God.

Thirdly, they use to plead, that their case is desperate, that never any was
in such a state as they are, never any touched with the like distress of mind.

Answ. It is false: For the holy Ghost has penned three notable places of
Scripture, the book of Job, and two Psalms of David, wherein Psalm. 6. and 77.
are propounded unto us the examples of Job and David, Gods own dear
servants, who were in as great distress, as ever they, or any other have
been. And they may not think, that they ever could be able, to endure greater
pains then Christ, who notwithstanding in the anguish of his soul upon the
Cross, cried out, My God, my God, why have thou for saken me?

And thus much touching the first kind of trouble of conscience, called the
divine temptation.

The second kind of Distress is that which arises from outward afflictions.
By Afflictions I understand, all manner of miseries and calamities in this
life, from the least to the greatest, from the pain of the little finger, to
the very pangs of death.

Now the Question is, how the Trouble of mind, arising by Afflictions, may
be remedied. For the answer of which question, two things are required of the
party distressed; Practice and Meditation.

The Practice is that, which is to be used, in all distresses of mind
whatsoever. And it is a diligent examination of the conscience in regard of
sin; an earnest and hearty confession thereof unto God: and deprecation,
that is, earnest prayer unto him, for the pardon of the same. These three
things, being done truly and unfeignedly from the heart, are a present remedy
against this trouble, and bring with them much comfort.

Manasses the king of Judah, that had committed much wickedness: when he was
carried captive to Babel, and there put in chains: he 2. Ch^o 33. 11, 12.
humbled himself, acknowledged his sins, and prayed earnestly unto the Lord,
and the issue was good; for God was entreated of him, and gave him deliverance.
Job being long in outward affliction, humbled himself in like manner, and at
length received comfort. Daniel humbled himself before God, for his own
sins, and for the sins of Gods people, making Dan. 9. (...), 2^.
request unto God earnestly for them, and even when he was in the act of
praying, the Lord sent his angel Gabriel, to give him notice of deliverance.
Lastly, the Church of God, under the cross, performed the like duty, Let us
Lament. 3. 40.
search and try our ways, and turn to the Lord,, and God in mercy gave an
ear unto her mourning and lamentation. By all these places, it is apparent,
that there is no better remedy in the world, for the mind of man, grieved by
means of outward afflictions, then the practice of the duties before named.

The next thing unto Practice, is the Meditation of the comfortable doctrines
that are set down in the word of God, touching afflictions. All which
doctrines, may be reduced to five principal and maine grounds of comfort,
shall be laid down in their order.

The first Ground is, that All afflictions from the least to the greatest, do
come to pass, not by accident, chance or fortune, but by the special
providence of God. I explain it thus. In every particular cross and
affliction, there is the hand of Gods particular providence, and that in three
regards.

First, because God decrees, and foreappointeth every particular cross. Mark
the words of Paul, Whom God has foreknowne, them he Romans 8. 28.
has predestinate, to be made like unto the image of his son; and what is
this image? nothing else, but a conformity unto Christ in afflictions for this
life, and in glory for the life to come. Now if God has decreed, that those
whom he foreknewe, should be conformable unto his son in these respects,
then has he also decreed the afflictions themselves.

Secondly, God does not only barely permit afflictions to be, but also he
effects them, and brings them into execution, as they are crosses,
corrections, trialls, and punishments. I make peace (says the Lord) and I
create evil, Esa. 45. 7.
that is, not the evil of sin, but of punishment, which is evil in our
sense and feeling. For things are termed evil two ways: some are evil
indeed, some are evil not indeed, but in regard of our sense, apprehension,
and estimation; and of this latter sort are afflictions, which God is said to
create. And to this purpose is the saying of the Prophet Amos, Shall there be
evil in the Amos 3. 6.
city, and the Lord has not done it?

Thirdly, as God causes afflictions, so he orders and disposes them, that
is, he limiteth and appoints the beginning, the end, the measure or
quantity, and the continuance thereof. Yea he also orders them to their
right ends, namely, his own glory, the good of his servants, and the benefit
of his Church. Thus God is said to correct his people in judgment, that Ierem
30. 11.
is, so as he will have the whole ordering of the correction in his own hand.
Joseph tells his brethren, that when they intended evil against him, in
selling him to the Ishmaelites for silver, God disposed it for good. G^n 50.
19, ^.
When Shemei cursed David, he forbade his servants, so much as to meddle with
him, and why? because ( says he) the Lord bade him to curse, and who then dare
say unto 2. Sam. 16. 10.
him, why have thou done so? And to this purpose the Prophet David says, I
held my peace and said nothing: why? because thou Lord have done it, Psalm. 39.
9.

Here some will say, if Afflictions did come only from God, it were somewhat,
but oftentimes they come from men, that bear us no good will, and therefore no
marvel though we be impatient. Answ. When crosses do come from men, God uses
them as instruments, to execute his judgments upon us; and in this work, God
is the chief doer, and they are as tools, in the hand of the workman. And
the Lord inflicteth them upon us by men, to try our patience under the cross.
Joseph, though he knew well, the badde dealing of his brethren toward him,
yet he looked not to them alone, but to an higher cause, namely, the Lord
himself, who executed his own good will by them; God (says he) disposed it
to good. And again, Genesis 45. 5. and 50. 20.
God did send me before you into Egypt for your preservation.

The Second ground is, the commandment of God, touching the cross, and
obedience unto him therein. This commandment is expressed, Luke 9. 23. where
we are commanded to take up our cross every day, and follow Christ. Abraham
was commanded, with his own hands to sacrifice his only son Isaac; and to
this commandment, (though otherwise a great cross unto him) he addresseth
himself to yield obedience. And in the prophecy of Micah, the Micah. 7. ^.
Church says, She will bear the wrath of the Lord, that is, she will
perform obedience to him in the cross, because she had sinned against him.
And S. Peter says, that God resists the 2. Pet ^ 5, 6.
proud and gives grace to the humble, therefore humble your selves under the
mighty hand of God. And this being the commandment of God, that we should
yield obedience to him, in every affliction, we ought to be no less careful
to obey it, then any one commandment of the moral law.

The Third ground is, that God will be present with his servants in their
afflictions. Upon this ground, David comforts himself, because God Psalm 91. 15.
had promised to hear him, to be with him in trouble, and to deliver him. And
in another place, though I should walk in the shaddowe of Psalm. 13. 4.
death, I would fear none ill, for thou art with me. etc.

Now that we may the better understand this doctrine, we are to consider what
be the Ends or Effects of Gods being with us in a^fliction, whereby he
testifies his presence, and they are three.

The first is, to work our deliverance from the cross: Call upon me (says
the Lord) in the Psalm 50. 1^.
day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee. This promise must not be
understood simply, but with an exception, so far forth as it shall be for our
good. For all promises of temporal deliverance, are conditional, and must be
conceived, with this limitation of the cross and chastisement, if God please
to impose it. Some may say, how if God will not deliver us, but leave us in the
affliction, what comfort shall we then have?

Answ. In the second place therefore we must remember, that God will temper and
moderate our afflictions, so as we may be able to bear them. Habbakuk prays
unto God, in the behalf of the Church, that he would in Hab. 3. ^.
wrath remember mercy. And Paul says, that the Lord will not suffer us to be
tempted above 1. Cor. 10. 13.
that we are able to bear, but will give an issue with the temptation.

Thirdly, put the case that God does not moderate our afflictions, but suffer
them to remain upon us, not only for some time of our life, but to the very
death: yet then will be testify his holy presence another way, namely, by
giving the party distressed, power and strength to bear his affliction. Unto
you it is given (says Paul) for Christ, that not only ye should believe in
him, but also suffer for his sake. Phil. 1. 29.


The Fourth ground of comfort in affliction is, that every affliction upon the
servants of God, has some special goodness in it, Romans 8. 28. We know that
all things, work together for good unto them that love God. And in regard
hereof, the crosses which are endured by Gods children, are so far from
being prejudicial to their salvation, that they are rather helps and
furtherances of the same. Now this Goodness is perceived two ways. First, by
the fruit and effect of it, and then by the quality and condition thereof. In
both which respects, afflictions are good.

Touching the fruits of Afflictions, because they are manifold, I will reduce
them to seven principal heads.

I. Afflictions do make men to see and consider Consideration.
their sins. Joseph's brethren for twenty years together, were little or not
at all troubled for their wickedness, in selling their brother; yet upon their
affliction in Egypt, they began to consider what they had done: We have (say
they) G^n. 42. (...).
verily sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul,
when he be sought us, and we would not hear him: therefore is this trouble
come upon us. Manasses in the time of his peace, gave himself to witchcraft,
and the worshipping of strange gods: but when he was captive in Babylon, then
was he brought to the sight of his sins, and moved to humble himself before
God for them.

II. Afflictions serve to humble men in their Humilia^^on.
souls before God. The young unthrift in the Gospel called the Prodigal
child, while his portion Luke 15. 17. etc.
lasted he spent liberally, and was grieved for nothing: but when he came to be
pinched with hunger, and that through his own folly, then he humbled himself
before his father, and returned home unto him. David says of himself, that in
his prosperity he thought he Psalm. 30. 7.
should never be moved, because the Lord of his goodness had made his mountain
to stand strong: but (says he) thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled,
then cried I unto the Lord.

III. They serve to work amendment Amendment.
of life. No chastising (says the Author to the Hebrews) for the present
seems to be joyous, Heb. 12. 21.
but afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness to them that are
thereby exercised, that is, afflictions and chastisments that seize upon Gods
children, do leave after them amendment of life, as the needle passes through
the cloth, and leaves the thread behind it. When we are judged (says the
Apostle) we are 1. Co^. 11. 32.
nurtered of the Lord, that we might not be condemned with the world. And David
confesses Psalm. 119. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I
might learn thy statutes. And the good husbandman, purges and pruneth the
Ioh. ^5.
vine, that it may bring forth more and better fruit.

IIII. They cause men to deny themselves, A^negation.
and to rely wholly on the mercy of God. Thus Paul received the sentence of
death in himself, that he should not trust in himself, but in God, that
raises the dead.

V. The fi^t is Invocation. For afflictions Invocation.
make us to cry hartelie and fervently unto god, to bring our selves into his
presence, and there to abase our selves before him. Thus the Lord says of his
children that in their affliction they Hos. 5. 15.
will seek him diligently.

VI. The sixth is Patience. Affliction brings Patience. Romans 5 3.
forth patience, patience experience, etc. As if he should say; because the
love of God is shed in our hearts, therefore in afflictions we are patient. Now
whilst we patiently bear the cross, we have experience of the mercy and love
of God toward us: and having once in some notable deliverance, tried and
tasted the mercy of God, we do by hope (as it were) promise to our selves,
the said favor and mercy, for time to come.

VII. The last fruit is obedience. This the Obedience.
holy Ghost teaches, to have been the fruit of the suffering of Christ, when
he says, Though Heb. 5. 8.
he were the son, yet learned he obedience, by the things which he suffered.

In the next place, Afflictions are good in regard of their quality and
condition, which is, that they are tokens and pledges of our adoption, when we
make the best use of them. If ye endure chastening, (says the holy Ghost) God
offers himself unto you as unto sons, that is, he Heb. 1^. 7.
comes to you in the cross, not as a judge and revenger, but as a kind and
loving father: and the cross imposed, is as it were his fatherly hand, where
with he chastises us: and therefore Job praises God for his affliction,
saying, God has Job ^.
given, and God has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

The fifth Ground of comfort is, that the party distressed, has partners in
the cross. For first he has Christ to be his partner, because he has
fellowship with him, in that he is afflicted, and is willing to obey God
therein. Paul accounts it happiness, to know the fellowshippe of Christ's
afflictions, and to be made conformable unto his death. Phil. 3. 10. Secondly,
if the party afflicted repent, Christ communicates with him in all his
Crosses, and accounts them as his own. The Apostle in this regard, would have
no man think it strange, no not when he is in the fiery trial; but rather to
rejoice because he is partaker of Christ's sufferings. Phil. 4. 31. And Christ
says to Saul persecuting his Church, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
Thirdly, he that is afflicted, has other servants of God, partakers with him
in all his afflictions. The Apostle Peter wishes the Church of God to resist
Satan by faith, knowing, says he, that the same afflictions are accomplished,
in your brethren that are in the world. 1. Pet. 5. 9.

Thus much generally of Afflictions, and of Comfort in them. It were a long and
tedious work, to set all down in particular, together with their proper and
distinct Comforts: therefore I will pass them over, and speak only of three
kinds of Afflictions, with their Remedies.

The first is, the Deferring of deliverance: a great affliction if it be
considered. And touching it, I propound one Question, namely, How the mind of
the party distressed, may be stayed, when as the Lord deferres deliverance.

For the answer hereof, three especial points are to be considered.

I. First, that God has in his wisdom, set down certain and unchangeable
times, for the accomplishment and issue of all things that are. There is a time
appointed, to every thing under* the sun. Eccles. 3. 1. The speech of Solomon
is general, and the meaning of it is this: Whatsoever there is in the world,
either done, or suffered, or enjoyed by man, whether it be of the number of
natural things, or of those which are voluntarily undertaken, or necessarily
endured; God has in his providence sorted unto them, a set time and season,
whereof depends the success of the^ all. And this time, himself most freely
orders and rules, at his own good pleasure; which, as no man can hinder or
stay, so is it not in the power of any, to hasten, or prevent.

This point, the holy Ghost in Scripture proves by two instances, of the
threatenings and promises of God, which himself accomplisheth at some certain
and unchangeable times. When the old world in the days of Noah, had grown to
much impiety, and wickedness, the Lord appointed a certain space of 120
years, Genesis 6 *.
for their repentance and conversion, at the very end and term whereof, he
brought the flood upon them, and not before. For if we compare the particular
circumstances of time, noted in the 7. of Genesis, with that which S. Peter
writes, 1. Pet. 3. 20. we shall find, that the inundation of waters came upon
the earth, at the very point of time before determined. Again, God threatened
by Jeremy, that the Jews for their sins, Ier. 25. 12.
should be led captive, and serve the king of Babel 70 years. Now if we take
the just computation of time, it will appear, that so soon as ever those
years were expired, the foresaid threat was accomplished. And therefore Daniel
alluding to Ieremies prophecy, exactly sets it down, when he says, The
same night was Belshazzer king of the Chaldeans slain, that is, the very night
wherein those 70 years came to their full period.

And as there are set times, allotted by God for the execution of his
threatening sentences; so also has he determined certainly, the accomplishment
of all and every of his promises. An example hereof we have in the Israelites,
of whom the Lord said to Abraham, that they should be in affliction in a
strange land, 430 years, and then be delivered. This promise of God was
expressly fulfilled, as we may read in the book of Exodus. Exodus (...). 41.
For before the end and term of these years, they had no deliverance at
all: but when that time was expired, even that self same day, departed all the
hosts of Israel, out of the land of Egypt. And though Moses, forty years
before this time took in hand the work of their deliverance; yet he did it
without success, and upon a certain accident, being himself constrained to
fly into Madian, he lived there as a stranger with Iethro his father in law,
till the said time of four hundred and thirty years was accomplished;
toward the end whereof, being called of God to that office, he prospered, and
not before. And in the same manner, has God set down a certain period of time,
within which, he will exercise his children more or less, and at the end
whereof, and not before, he will relieve and comfort them again.

Now as the certentie of the accomplishment of Gods threatening word, serves to
terrify all wicked livers from sin: so the unchangeable performance of his
promises, at the very time prefixed, and not before, teaches the children of
God sundry things.

First, that when they are in any distress, and have not present or speedy
deliverance, according to their desire; they should wait the Lords leisure, and
expect with patience till the time come, which is appointed by him for their
case and relief: and in the mean while stay their hearts, by hope and
affiance in his mercy. Reason is plain. God is sure in his word, therefore
though heaviness may endure for a night, yet joy will return in the morning
Psalm. 30. 5.

Thus the Lord comfort the Jews in a particular distress, as we may read
in the prophecy of Habbakuk* where the Prophet in the Hab. 2. ^. ^
name of the Jews, complains and expostulateth the matter with God, why his
own people should be so lamentably afflicted, by a terrible and a furious
nation, and why they should be led away captives, by the Chaldeans the enemies
of God? To this the Lord makes answer, that as he had certainly determined, that
judgment to come upon them, so certainly had he appointed a set time, wherein
they should be delivered. In the mean while, he biddes them to comfort
themselves in this, that though the affliction should rest upon them for a
season, yet undoubtedly they should be cased at the length: and therefore, that
they should in patience wait for the vision, that is, the accomplishment of
the vision, touching their deliverance.

Secondly, hence we learn, that we must not only believe the promises of God
in general, that God is true and faithful in them, and that he is able and
willing to fulfill them, even as he made them: but we must believe them in
particular, that is, with application to their proper and several
circumstances, which are the particular means, places, and times, whereby, and
wherein he has given his word, as touching our freedom and exemption from the
cross. Take an instance hereof in the Prophet Daniel, who knew well by the
spirit of Prophecy, that the Lord had determined to bring upon the Jews 70.
years captivity in Babylon. He knew also that God had promised to put an
end to that captivity, at the end and term of those years. Now what did
Daniel in this case? Upon knowledge of the will of God in that point, during
the said time, he prayed not Dan 9.
unto the Lord, for deliverance of his people: But when he understood that the
time drew near, wherein it was the will of God, that the Jews v. 2.
should return out of captivity, then by faith applying the promise of God to
that particular time: he besought the Lord in prayer and supplications, with
fasting, in sackcloath and ashes, and the Lord gave ear unto his prayers, and
yielded him a gracious answer.

II. The second point is, that God, when he deferres deliverance, he does it
upon great and weighty causes and considerations, best known to himself.

The first whereof is, that thereby he might humble men thoroughly, and bring
them to an utter denial of themselves, and consequently cause them, to learn
patience in affliction, which they would not learn, if they might be their
own caruers, and have speedy deliverance from the cross, at their own wills
and pleasures.

Secondly, that being afflicted, they may acknowledge whence their deliverance
comes; yea, whence they do receive not only that, but every other good
benefit, which they enjoy: namely, not from themselves, or any creature, but
only from the Lord; and accordingly may learn to value and prize his gifts,
at their deserved excellency. For it is a true saying, and often verified in
affliction and want, that benefits easily obtained, are lightly regarded, and
sooner forgotten.

Thirdly, that by the continuance of the cross without intermission, he may
make the^ to distaste the world, and consequently draw them to the meditation
of the life to come, wherein all matter of mourning shall cease, and Reu. 21. 4.
all tears shall be wiped from their eyes.

Fourthly, the Lord deferreth deliverance from affliction, that he might
prevent greater evils and dangers, whereinto those that are afflicted might
run, if they had their hearts desire, and were eased not at his will, but at
their own wishes. When the children of Israel came into Canaan, they were
informed, that they should dwell together with the Canaanites, and Moses
re^dreth a reason thereof, Least (says he) the wild Exodus 23. 28.
beasts of the field multiply against thee. And for Deuteronomy. 7. 2^.
the preventing of this evil, the Israelites must endure some annoyance by the
Canaanites. Even so the Lord keeps his servants under the cross, for the
preventing of greater sins and offenses. This should stay the minds of men,
and make them content, to wait upon God for deliverance, when they are
afflicted.

The third and last point is, that God always has and does exercise his best
servants, with long and continued crosses. Abraham was childlesse, till he was
70. years of age, and at those years the Lord promised him issue. But this
promise was not accomplished till a long time after, when he was an hundred
years old. David had a promise to be king of Jerusalem, and Judah* but the Lord
exercised him by many and grievous afflictions, before he came to the crown,
in so much, that he says of himself, that his eyes failed with waiting upon
his God. Zachary and Elizabeth prayed to God, both of them in their youth, and
many years after for issue, but the Lord granted not their request, till they
were old.

To add no more examples; by these we see the Lords dealing, even with holy
men and women, his own dear servants, that he does not always grant their
requests, nor condescend to their desires at the first, but as it were holds
the^ off, and suspends his grace and favor for a time. And therefore if it
shall please him thus to deal with any of us, we must from these examples be
taught, to possess our souls with patience, resting contented in his will,
and waiting on his good pleasure to the end.

To conclude this point. Suppose that the condition of Gods servants be such,
as that they find no end of their afflictions, but that they do continue even
unto death, what shall they do in this case?

Ans. Besides that which has been said before, for the resolution of this
Question, I answer page 112.
further, that first, they must still, even unto death, live by faith, and say
with holy Job, Lord though thou kill me, yet will I trust in thee.

Secondly, they must stay and releive their souls in the mean time, with
these and such like meditations.

I. That it is the will and pleasure of God, that we should through many
afflictions, enter into the kingdom of God. Act. 14. 22. Now it is the
property of a true child of God, to rest content in his fathers good will and
pleasure, even when he is afflicted, Prou. 3. 11. My son -- be not grieved at
my correction, that is, let it not be tedious unto thee, be content to bear
it. Our duty therefore is, meekely to subject our selves unto the hand of God,
as the child does unto the correction of his father.

II. That though afflictions be long and tedious, yet God will at length give a
joyful and comfortable issue. For so himself has promised, Math. 5. 4.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Psalm. 34. 19. Great
are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord will deliver him out of the^
all. Mark the upright man, Psalm 37. 37.
and behold the just, for the end of that man is peace.

III. Afflictions be they never so heavy, in regard of continuance, yet they
are in no sort co^parable to those eternal ioies, that god has prepared for
the^ that love him. This was Paul's meditation, who endured the cross, eue^ to
his dying day. Our light affliction (says he) which is but for a moment,
works unto us an excellent, and eternal 2. Cor. 4. 17.
weight of glory. And elsewhere he professes that he did not count the
afflictions of this present time, answerable in value to the glory, which
shall be revealed unto Gods children, To. 8. 18. Saint Peter tells them to whom
he wrote, that in regard of their assured hope of eternal life, they should
rejoice, though now for a season, they were in heaviness through manifold
tentations, 1. Pet. 1. 6. Lastly the author to the Hebrews, comfort the
Church by this reason, because it is is yet a very little while, and he that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Heb. 10. 37.


IV. Though God withholds his hand in respect of deliverance even to death,
yet his love is constant and unchangeable, and the cross which we undergo,
cannot separate us from that love, wherewith he has loved us in Jesus Christ,
Romans 8. 35. And thus much of the first particular distress of mind.

The Second kind of affliction, is bodily and temporary Death, which
consists in the separation of the soul from the body. And touching this
affliction, it is demanded, How any servant of God, may be able to endure with
comfort, the pangs of death?

For the answer hereof, two things are required: a preparation to death, and
helps in the time of death. Concerning preparation, there are three duties to
be performed.

The first and most principal is commended unto us in the book of Psalms,
where David prays unto God, Lord make me to know mine Psalm 39. 4.
end, and the measure of my days. And Moses in like manner, Lord teach me to
number my days, Psalm. 90. 12.
that I may apply my heart unto wisdom. In which places, is remembered a
notably duty of preparation: to wit, that a man should resolve himself of
death continually, and aforehand number his days. And this is done, by
esteeming of every day, as the day of his death, and accordingly doing always
that which he would do, if he were now to give up the ghost.

Secondly, in way of preparation, we must endeavor to disarme and weaken
death, who is as an armed man, that has his weapons, whereby he seeks to
destroy us. And in this case, we must deal with death, as the Philistims dealt
with Sampson. They saw by experience that he was a mighty man, and by his
power and strength, had given them many foyles; and therefore they labored to
know, in what part of his body his strength did lie. And after inquiry,
finding it to be in the hair of his head, they never rested, till they had
spoiled him thereof. And questionless, the time will come, when we all must
encounter, with this strong and powerful Sampson, Death, In the mean while,
it is a point of wisdom, 1. Cor. 15.
to inquire wherein his power and might consists. When this search has bin
made, we shall find that his weapons, are our manifold sins, and
corruptions, both of heart and life. For as Paul says, The sting of death is
sin. Therefore, that we may spoil him of this his furniture, we must
exercise our selves in the practice of two duties.

First, use all means for the cutting off of the lock of our sins, whereby
alone Satan has the vantage of us; and these means are the duties of
invocation, and true repentance. We must therefore be instant in prayer, for
the pardon of our sins past, and present, and in this point give the Lord no
rest, until we have obtained in our consciences, the sweet certificate of his
favor and mercy in Christ, whereby our minds may be stayed and comforted.

This done, it stands us in hand to turn unto God, to be careful to leave
sin, to entertain in our hearts, a resolved purpose and intention of new
obedience, and conformity to the will, and commandment of God in all things.
And this is the only way in the world, to bereave this our enemy of his
armor, to pull the sting out of the mouth of this serpent* and consequently,
even in death to prevail against him.

Thirdly, in way of preparation, our duty is, even aforehand (while we live
in this world) to endeavor, to have some true taste of life everlasting, and
the joys of heaven. The due consideration whereof, will be of great use. For
it will stir up in our hearts, a desire and love of perfect happiness in
heaven, yea a fervent expectation of Christ's coming to judgment: and it will
further cause us to say, with Simeon, Lord, now let thy servant depart in
peace: and with the Apostle, I desire to be dissolved* and be with Christ.

Touching this spiritual joy and comfort in the holy Ghost, these Questions of
Conscience are moved. First, how may we in this life have and nourish in our
hearts, a true taste of eternal happiness, and of the joys of the world to
come?

Ans. First, by a serious consideration of the evils that do hinder, or
prejudice our happiness: and they are principally four.

One is* the Misery of our lives* in respect of sin, and the consequen^s
thereof. For there is no man in the world, be he never so righteous, that can
truly say of himself, I am clean from my sin, Prou. 20. 9. Yea, even the
regenerate, that have received grace to believe, to ^urne unto God, and to live
according to the Spirit, do find by experience, corruption and rebellion in
Romans 7. 14. 23, etc
their minds, wills, and affections, which daily affords matter of sinning
against God: and on the other side, hinders and quenches all the good motions
of the Spirit that are in them. Again, such is the irreconciliable malice of
Satan, that he takes vantage of man's corruption* and neglects no time or
opportunity, to intrappe the children of God, in the snares of his
temptations. And hence it is that man, by reason of his own corruption, and
the wicked suggestions of the Devil, is at continual strife with himself,
has daily occasion of sorrow, works out his salvation with fear and
trembling, wading (as it were) even while he lives, in a sea of many miseries.

The second evil, is the Vanity of all things that are in the world. For
whether we consider the world it self, or the things therein contained, done,
or suffered, there is nothing so sure and steadie, whereunto man having
attained, can possibly rest fully satisfied, and contented; or which in the
end, will not prove to be most vain vanity. And the truth hereof appears,
in the experience of Solomon himself; who (being king over Israel) wanted
neither authority, nor ability, and opportunity, to take knowledge and
trial, of all worldly things in all estates and conditions. And having even of
set purpose, carefully and earnestly searched into them all, at length he
concludes, that the issue of all was unprofitable vanity, and vexation of
mind, as we may read in his Ecclesiastes.

The third evil is, the Changeable condition of our life in this world,
whereby it comes to pass, that we are always in a fleeting and transitory
state. For we are (as S. Peter speaks) but ^. Pet. ^. (...)*
strangers and Pilgrims, that wander to and fro in the earth, as in a strange
country, and still are making forward to our own home. We have here no
abiding city: the houses wherein we Heb. 1^. 14.
dwell, are but Innes, in which we soiourne for a time: yea the bodies which we
have, are but tents and tabernacles, always ready to be shifted, and our selves
to be translated into another place.

Fourthly, by remembering, that Christ our Head, being now in heaven, and we
his members upon the earth; during our life, we are in presence separated from
our Head, and consequently, from that happy and glorious fellowship, which we
shall enjoy with him, and all the Saints our fellow members, in the kingdom of
heaven. This S. Paul notes, when he says, whilst we are at home in the body,
we are absent 2 Cor. 5. 6.
from the Lord: and thereupon himself desired Phil 1. 23,
to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

Having thus entered into the due consideration of the aforesaid evils, we must
in the second place, exercise our selves in the frequent meditation, of the
blessed estate of Gods chosen, in the kingdom of glory: who being translated
out of this life, into the bosom of Abraham, are fully and perfectly freed
from sin, from Satan, from vanity and mis^^ie: have all tears wiped Ap^^*
22 4
from their eyes: do behold the face of God, are made like unto Christ in
holiness and honor: 1. Ioh. 3. ^.
and do with him inhe^it the kingdom, prepared for them, from the fou^dations
of the world. M^^th. 25 34.


In the third place, having thoroughly considered of these things, we must
Compare the estate of this present life, in the respects before named, with the
estate of that, which is to come in the kingdom of heaven: and laying them in
a parallel together, we shall find the one, infinitely far to excel the
other, in regard of true joy and comfort. And this will make us, though living
1. Cor. 7.
in the world, yet to use it, as if we used it not: to have our conversation in
heaven: to think, with Paul, that to be loosed, and be with Philip. 3. ^0. 1.
2^.
Christ, is best of all for us: to have a true and lively taste of the joys of
the world to come, and accordingly with Abraham* Isaac, and Jacob, to look for
a city that has foundations, whose Heb 11. 10.
builder and maker is God.

Secondly, it is demanded, how a man may truly discern, whether this joy of
the Spirit be in him, yea or no? For answer hereunto, it is to be remembered,
that there are sundry properties whereby it differs from carnal joy. And
these are principally five.

First, this joy is brought forth (as it were) of sorrow for sin, and for the
want of Christ. Ye shall sorrow, (says our Savior Christ to his Disciples,
meaning for his departure,) but your sorrow Ioh. 16. 20.
shall be turned into joy. These words, are not only meant of his Disciples,
but of all believers, who upon consideration of their sins, and the
spiritual want of Christ Jesus, do mourn and lament. For not only they, but
all true believers, are there opposed unto the World. Again, blessed Matthew. 5.
4.
are they that mourn: that is, being touched with causes of exceeding grief,
do withal mourn for their sins* for they shall be* comforted. On the other
side, carnal joy* as it has his beginning from the flesh, and arises of
things pleasing thereunto, so it ends in sorrow and heaviness. In the end,
rejoicing is turned into mourning, Prou. 14. 13.
says Solomon* And, Woe be to you that Luke 6. 23.
now laugh: for ye shall weep.

Secondly, the joy of the Spirit, is a fruit of righteousness: that is, it
issues and flows from Christ known and believed, to be made unto us of God,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, Romans 14. (...).
and full redemption. For from hence follows peace of conscience, and from
peace comes joy in the holy Ghost. Contrariwise, the joy of the flesh, arises
only from the sudden feeling of some worldly delight: and therefore cannot
bring any sound peace, unto the conscience o^ the man possessed of it.

Thirdly, spiritual joy is founded in the holy use of the Word, Sacraments,
and Prayer: and in the practice of Christian duties of mercy, love, justice,
etc. The other is not so. For the world conceiueth a joy besides the word, out
of the exercises of invocation and repentance: which stands in the practice of
cruelty, malice, oppression, injustice, and all manner of impiety. And Job.
^1. 13, 14, 15.
hence it is, that having spent their days in such matter of rejoicing, at
length in a moment they go down to hell.

Fourthly, heavenly joy is so fixed and rooted in the heart, that it cannot be
removed thence. Your joy shall no man take from you, says Christ. Ioh. 16.
(...).
It must needs therefore be true and sound, yea able to swallow up all matter
of grief, and heaviness: whereas the other is never sincere, but with the
sweetness thereof, has always mingled some bitterness. Even in laughter (saitl,
S^lomon, speaking thereof) the heart is heavy. Prou. 1^. 13.
When the face of the wicked man shines, and his countenance is pleasant, even
then is he inwardly sorrowful, and his mind is troubled.

Lastly, the joy of the Spirit is eternal: abiding in the mind of man, not
only for the term of this life, but for ever, in the world to come. So is not
the rejoicing of the world in earthly things: for it is fading and deceitful,
as the things themselves be, wherein it is placed: it has the beginning in
corruption, and ends with this present life. The examples of the two Luke 1^.
10. and 16. (...).
rich men in the Gospel, do manifest this truth. And to this purpose, is the
speech of Zophar, in the book of Job, that the rejoicing of the Job. 20. ^.
vicked, is very short, and the joy of hypoer^^es is but a moment, etc.

By these five properties, may we put a true difference, between earthly and
heavenly rejoicing, and consequently discern of them, even in our selves. And
if we perceive this joy of the Spirit, (rightly received in our hearts, and
grounded in the right use of the word, and Sacraments; as also in the exercises
of invocation, faith, and repentance*) to take place in our souls and
consciences; we shall find it of force, to moderate and delay the very
terrors of death. And so much for Preparation.

Now the Helps to be used in the time of death, are manifold: the sum of all
may be reduced to two heads, Meditations, and Practices.

Touching Meditations, we must in the first place, consider Death in a double
respect; one, as it is in it own nature, and another, as it is changed and
qualified by the death of Christ. Death in it own nature, is a Curse, or
forerunner of condemnation, the very gates and suburbs of hell it self: but
being qualified by Christ, it is a blessing, a short passage unto joy, an
entrance into everlasting life, a quiet sleep, void of all annoyance, by
dreams and fantasies. And the grave, a resting chamber, persumed by the death
of Christ, for the bodies of all the Elect, our of which when they awake, they
shall be admitted and received, into the presence of God in heaven.

Secondly, we are to consider, that there be three degrees of eternal life.
The first where of, is in this world before we die; and it is then, when we*
begin to repent and believe in Christ, and to be assured in conscience, that
God the father is our father, Christ our redeemer, and the holy Ghost our
comforter. For this is eternal life, to know God, and him whom John 17. ^.
he has sent Jesus Christ. The next degree is in death: for death cuts off all
sin, original and actual: death frees us from all worldly miseries: death
prepares the body, that it may be fit, to enter into eternal happiness
together with the soul, which is already in heaven. The last degree is, when
body and soul reunited, go both together, into eternal and euerla^^ing
glory in heaven.

Our third meditation is, that there is a mystical union and conjunction,
between Christ and every believer, and that not onley in regard of soul, but
of body also; which being once knit, shall never be dissolved, but is
eternal. Whereupon the dying, dead, rotten, and consumed body, remains
still a member of Christ, abides within the covenant, and is and shall be
ever, a temple of the holy Ghost. Thus Adam, and Abraham, which are dead so
many thousand years ago, yea every true believer, from them to the end of the
world, shall rise at the last day, in body to glory, by the power of their
conjunction with Christ. In the winter season, we see the most trees void of
leaves, buddes, and blossoms: so as they seem to us to be dead, and yet
nevertheless, there is a sap in the root of them, which in the Spring will
ascend, and revive the decayed branches. Even so it is with our bodies, which
though they be corrupted, rotten, burnt, or eaten with worms, or devoured by
wild beasts, so as they may seem to be utterly perished, yet there is (as it
were) a secret and hidden sap in them, (by reason of their union with Christ)
by which they shall be raised, revived, and quickened, being made like unto
the glorious body of Christ their head, with whom they shall reign, and live
for evermore.

Helps in practice are two; First, he that will bear with comfort the pangs
of death, must labor that he may die in Christ, and that is, by faith, laying
hold of the promise of God, touching forgiveness of sins and life
everlasting by Christ. All these (says the holy Ghost) died in Heb. 11. 1^.
faith, namely, Abel, Enoch, Noe, Abraham, and Sarah, all laying hold of the
promise of life by Christ. When Jacob on his deathbed, was blessing of his
children, he brake forth into this heavenly speech, O Lord I have waited for
thy Genesis 49. 1^.
salvation. In which words it is plain* that his faith rested on the mercy of
God, and by hope he waited for his salvation. And our Savior Christ says, As
Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, Ioh 3 14. 15.
so must the son of man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him, might
not perish, but have life everlasting. Out of which words, the forenamed duty
may be learned, that look as the children of Israel, being stung with fiery
serpents, and that unto death, were healed by looking up to the brazen serpent,
erected by Moses: so when we are stung with sin and death, we must ever
remember by faith to look upon Christ. But specially when we are dying, then
it is our part, to fix the eyes of our souls, by faith upon him; and thereby
shall we escape death, and be made partakers of eternal life and happiness.
Notable is the example of Christ, who as he was man, always fixed his trust
and confidence in his fathers word, especially at his end. For when he was
dying, and the pangs of death seized upon him, he cries unto the Lord, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? and again, Father, into thy hands I commend
my spirit: which words are full of faith, and do bewray what great affiance he
placed in his fathers love, etc. When David in an extremity, saw nothing
before his eyes, but present death, the people intending to stone him, at the
very instant (as the text says) he comforted himself in the Lord his ^. Sam.
30. 6.
God* but how? by calling to mind the merciful promises, that God had made
unto him, and by applying them unto his heart by faith. And Paul says of
himself, and the rest of the faithful, that they received, the sentence of
death in themselves, 2. Cor. 1. ^.
that they might not trust in themselves, but in God.

From these examples it follows, that they which desire with comfort to bear
the pangs of death, must die by faith; that is, they must set before their
eyes, the promise of remission of sins, and life everlasting, and depend upon
it, wrapping (as it were) and enfolding themselves in it, as in a close and
warm garment, that will keep them safe and sure, against the wind and
weather of temptation.

The second Practice in time of death is, to die in obedience; which is nothing
else, but willingly, readily, and joyfully, without murmuring, to submit
ourselves to Gods will, in bearing the pains of death. A most worthy
president of this obedience, we have in our Savior Christ, when he said unto
his father, Not my will, but thy will be done; thereby submitting his will, to
his Fathers will, touching the death which he then suffered. And this his
example at the time of his departure, must be a rule of direction unto us, upon
the like occasion. True it is, that obedience to God in death, is against
corrupt nature: and therefore our duty is, the more to invre our selves, to
the performing of it: and that which the blessed Apostle said of himself, I
die daily, ought to be continually our resolution and practice.

If we shall inquire, how this may be done; the answer is, when God lays
afflictions upon us, in our life time, then by indeauouring to bear them with
patience, meeknes, and lowliness. For every affliction, is (as it were) a
petty death: and if we do in it, subject our selves to the hand of God, we
shall the better obey him, in the great death of all* and thus doing, whenever
God strikes us with death, we shall with comfort endure the same.

The Third particular Affliction, is Satanicall molestation, whereby both
persons, and places of mansio^, or abode, are either possessed, or otherwise
molested by the malice of the Devil.

Touching this affliction, the Question of conscience is, How such persons as
are possessed, or fear possession, or else endure molestations by the Devil
in their houses: may have their minds quieted and stayed, and consequently, in
that case be remedied?

And here 2. things are generally to be considered, in way of answer.

First, it is to be remembered, that possession is known by two signs. The one
is, when the devil is evidently present, either in the whole body, or in so^e
part of it. The other, when he has rule of the said body, either in whole or
in part: so as the party himself, has not that use of his body, which he
would. As for example, when the devil possesses the instruments of the voice,
as the tongue, and makes a man to speak Latin, Greek, Italian, or other
tongues, which he understands not. Both these things were found in them that
were possessed, in the time of our Savior Christ.

Secondly, we must consider, it falls out oftentimes, that strange diseases
do seize upon men, having strange effects in the^* which the art of Physic
neither can search out, nor cure: and yet they are neither acts of witchcraft,
nor real possessions. As when God laid extraordinary diseases on the
Corinthians, for the contempt of his Word and Sacraments, 1. Cor. 11.30. Like
unto which, he vvorthily inflicts upon men in these days, for the same and
other sins.

Now to stay the mind in this case, these Rules are carefully to be thought
upon.

First of all, it is to be remembered, that though Satan's malice and power, be
very great and large: yet he cannot practice the same, against the children of
God, when, where, and how he lists. The malice which Satan bears to
mankind, and principally to the members of Christ, appears in this, because he
is said, to accuse them before God, day and night, Reu. 20 2. And as a roaring
lion, to walk about the world, seeking whom he may devour, 1. Pet. 5. 8.
Again the Scripture notes him, to be a powerful spirit, whose strength far
exceeds and surpasses the might of any man or creature, that is not of an
Angelical nature, as himself is. For he is termed a Prince of the air, and
the god of this world, his power reaches even to the spirits and souls of
men, whereby he works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. his
principallitie is so great, that no strength, no defense of man is able to
withstand it, unless man take unto himself the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.
10.

Now although the Devil, be so malicious an enemy of mankind, that he cease
not to devise, whatsoever may be hurtful unto them; and withal so powerful
in his attempts, that no man by his own proper strength, is able to resist
him: yet he cannot put the least part of his power in execution, in what time,
place, or manner he desires. The reason is, because God has determined his
power, by certain bounds and limits, which he cannot pass: and they are
especially two.

The one is, his own nature, whereby he is a creature, and therefore finite.
Hence it is, that he can neither know, nor do any thing, that is beyond the
reach or capacity of his nature, or above the power and skill of a creature.
For example, he cannot directly and immediately know the deep things of God,
unless they be revealed unto him: nor yet the secrets of man's heart. None
knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man, which is in him: even so,
the things of God knows none, but the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2. 11. Again, he
cannot do that which is truly and properly a miracle, the cause whereof is
hidden and utterly unknown, and which comes not within the power and order of
nature. For this is proper unto God, who only does things simply wonderful,
Psalm. 77. 14.

The second thing whereby Satan's power is restrained, is the will of God. For
look as the sea, being by nature, apt to ouerflowe the whole earth, is kept
in, and shut up within the shore, (as it were) with doors or gates, that it
cannot break forth; and that by the Lord himself, who has established his
decree upon it, Job. 38. So though Satan be by nature strong, and his malice
great, yet can he do nothing at all, no nor execute his natural power, to the
hurt, and prejudice of any man, without the will and permission of God. Thus
the evil spirit, could not go forth to deceive Ahab, until the Lord had said
unto him, Go and thou shall pre^aile, 1. King. 22. 22. Thus the Devil, could
not touch the body, children, goods, or friends of righteous Job, whilst he
was fenced and fortified, by the power and providence of God. But when the
Lord, in regard of Jobs outward estate, had given him leave, and said, Lo all
that he has is in thine hand, then did he exercise his power, to the utmost:
yet so far only, as he was permitted, and no further. Job. 1. 12.

The consideration of this first point, that Satan's power is determined by God,
will serve to stay the minds of those, whose persons, houses, or friends are
molested by him. For hereupon it follows, that God, who has the Devil bound
up (as it were) in chains, will not suffer his power to be enlarged, against
his own children, to their destruction and confusion: but so far forth alone,
as shall be expedient for their good and salvation. Again, that God being
their father in Christ Jesus, they may in the case of such affliction, have
access unto him, and call upon him, for the restraint of Satan's power and
malice, and consequently, for the deliverance of them and theirs.

A second Rule is this* Such persons must have recourse to God in his word, in
which he promises his presence and protection, to his children, in their
greatest dangers. And namely, that there shall no evil come unto them, neither
any (...)* 9^* 10, (...)*
plague shall come near their dwelling: because he will give his Angels charge
over them, to keep them in all their ways. Again, that he will be a wall of
fire, round about his people. Zach. 2. 5. that he will extend peace over his
Church, like a stood. Isa. 66. 12. And that there shall be no sorcerie in
Jacob, nor south saying in Israel. Numb. 23. 22. And by this means,
possessions and witchcraft, though they befall Gods children, yet they shall
turn to their good, rather then their hurt.

Thirdly, it must be considered, that the best servants of God, have been in
their times molested by the Devil. Christ in his second temptation, was
carried by the Devil, from the wilderness, to a wing of the Temple of
Jerusalem. The children of Job, were destroyed by the Devil, and he himself
was filled with botches, and sores. A certain woman, even a daughter of Luk
1^* 15.
Abraham, that is, one following the faith of Abraham* was troubled with a
spirit of infirmity, eighteen years together. Matthew. 15. 21, 22. And the
daughter of the woman of Canaan, was grievously vexed with a Devil.

Fourthly, men in this case, ought to lay fast hold, upon the promise of life
everlasting, and must wait the Lords leisure, not limiting him in respect of
time, or means of deliverance. This was the practice of Job, Though he kill
me, yet will I trust in him. And of holy Abraham, who did not limit God, but
was content to do with Isaac, what the Lord would: and though it was in
likelihood, a mean to bereave him of all posterity, yet still he kept
himself to the promise.

In the molestation and annoiance of houses by spirits, two things are to be
remembered.

First, men must not consort together, and abide there, where it is certainly
known, that the Lord has given the Devil power and liberty; least in so
doing, they tempt the Lord. Our Savior Christ, did not of his own private
motion and will, betake himself into the wilderness, but by the direction of
the holy Ghost. Math. 4. 1. Paul in like manner, did not of his own head go
to Jerusalem, but upon the motion of the Spirit. Act. 20. 22. In the light of
these examples men are taught, not to cast themselves, into any places of
apparent danger: much less to frequent those, which God has delivered up,
into the power of Satan. And this condemns the rash, and headie conceits of
some persons, who upon confidence of their own strength, do put the^ selves
into needless dangers, having neither extraordinary calling from God, nor any
sufficient warrant out of his word.

If it be asked, what me^ are to do in this case? I answer, First, that they
ought rather to fly to God by prayer, and to draw near unto him in their
hearts: and he in mercle will draw near unto them.

Secondarily, that which we do in meats and drinks, is also to be done in
the houses and places where we dwell. And what is that? we must sanctify them
to our use, by the word and prayer. Noah at Gods commandment, went into the
Arc, abode in it, and came out again: and when he came forth of it, into the
earth afterward; it is said of him, that he built an Altar, Genesis 8. ^0.
gave thanks to God for his deliverance, and prayed the Lord, to vouchsafe him
the use of the earth, as he had before. Though Abraham had a promise of the
land of Canaan, to him and his posterity for ever, yet he went not out of his
country toward it, till the Lord commanded (...). 1^*
him: and when he was come thither, he built an Altar, for the worship and
service of God. The (...). 13. ^. G^^ (...).
like he did afterward at Bethel. And many years after, did Jacob offer
sacrifice unto God, in the same Bethel, when he came to dwell there. And for
this very end, in the law, by a special ordinance the first fruits of the
harvest were offered to sanctify the rest of the corn. And so much touching
the second distress.

The Third kind of trouble of mind, is that which arises of the Tentation of
Blasphemy, which in regard of the vileness and ugliness thereof: is not amiss
termed by some, the foul Tentation. And it is, when a man is troubled in
Te^^atio f^da.
his mind, with blasphemous cogitations and thoughts, directly against the
Majesty of God, the father, the son, and the holy Ghost. As for example: to
think that God is not just, merciful: that he accepts men's persons: that he
has not knowledge of things, that are done here below, or at least that he
does not regard them: that God cannot do this or that: that he is injurious to
some men, and partial to others, etc. These and such like blasphemous thoughts
there be, which are not fit to be uttered amongst men: forasmuch as they are
most horrible, and execrable, as any can be conceived.

That we may the better know this Temptation, let it be considered, what are
the forerunners thereof, and by what means, it takes place in the heart
possessed of it.

Sometimes it comes, merely and only of the suggestion of the Devil; which
troubles the fantasy, even of those which are in that regard innocent, and
casts into their hearts, impure and ungodly thoughts. Sometimes again, it
comes upon men, by an evil custom: when as they willingly lend their ears,
to leude and cursed speeches, that immediately tend to the dishonor of God, or
the wilful abuse of his word, his judgments, and mercies: and upon the
hearing, either give their applause and approbation, though not expressly; or
do not hinder or stay them, as much as in them lies. Otherwhiles, it creepes
into the heart of man by degrees, when he begins to wax cold in Gods
service, to make little conscience of those duties, that immediately concern
his worship, and consequently inures himself, to the taking of the name of God
in vain, by often and eauselesse swearing, for swearing, cursing, etc. By
these and such like means, is this foul and horrible tentation conuaied into
the mind of man.

Now the danger of it, whether it arises from these, or any other causes, is
exceeding grievous, specially to those, that have begun to choose the way of
truth, and to apply their hearts to serve God, and to fear his name. For it
brings forth strange and fearful effects, as namely, desperation, and
manifold horrors and troubles of mind: yea diverse persons have hereupon bin
astonished in such sort, that they have bin moved to make dispatch of
themselves; being in their own judgment no better, then the very firebrands of
hell,

Now for the Curing of this wonderful trouble, and distraction of Conscience,
two things are to be done: to wit, Inquiry must be made into the next causes,
whence this Tentation should arise: and after that, the Remedy is to be
applied.

For the first. Inquitie must be made, whether the present distress, had his
beginning from the thoughts of a man's own mind, or from the suggestion of the
Devil. For this is in all likelihood, the next way to minister Comfort, to the
afflicted party.

It may be said, How shall a man discern the thoughts that are from the
Devil, from his own thoughts? Ans. He shall know them by sundry notes.

First, by the entrance of them into the mind. For those that come from the
Devil, come speedily, as lightning into a house: and they are after a sort,
forced into the mind by violence, so as the party cannot avoid them: and they
come into the mind again and again, yea a thousand times in a day, so as, by
their often coming, they weaken the memory, dull the senses, weary and
confound the brain. These are thoughts that come from the Devil, and by him
are conuaied from without, into the mind of man. And if such cogitations, were
from a man's own self, they would not come with so great vehemency and
celeritie, but with leisure: and they would rise with more moderation, and
less violence: Yea further, the frequent use of them, would not produce so
many, and so fearful effects as it does.

Secondly, such thoughts may be discerned, to come from the Devil, by this
sign; because they are against the very light of nature, against natural
knowledge, reason, and conscience. For they are most wicked and deuillish,
fastening upon God, things that are most vile and monstrous: whereas commonly,
the thoughts that arise from our own corrupt nature, are not against the light
of nature, though they be most corrupt.

The third sign is, that at the first conceiving of them, the party is
smitten with an extraordinary fear, his flesh is troubled, and oftentimes,
sickness and faintings do follow. But the thoughts that men conceive of
themselves, cause neither fear, nor fainting, nor sickness.

Fourthly, blasphemous thoughts, cannot come ordinarily from the heart of any,
save of those alone, that are of reprobate minds. But the parties that are thus
distressed, are honest, civil, and such as profess the Gospel, at least in
show; yea sometime they befall such, as are the true members of Christ.
Therefore it is manifest, that they come from without, even from the Devil
casting them into the mind, and not from within a man's own self.

In the next place, Inquiry must be made, whether the party does approve,
love, and like these and such like thoughts, or no? To this he will answer, if
he be asked, that he abhorres the^ as the Devil and Hell it self: thus even
natural men will answer, and that truly.

After Inquiry thus made, the Remedy is to be applied. And the first and
principal remedic, pertaines to doctrine, and instruction: in which the party
is to be informed of his or her estate; namely, that the foresaid blasphemies,
are not his sins, but his crosses. For they are the Devils sins, and he
shall answer for them: and they are not ours, till we intertaine, receive,
approve, and give consent unto them.

For proof hereof, let this be considered, That unclean thoughts which have
their residence in the mind of man, are of two sorts: Inward, and Outward.
Inward are such, as have their original from the flesh, and arise of the
corruption of man's nature, though stirred up by the Devil. And these, at the
very first conceiving, are our sins, though they have no long abode in our
minds: and they are directly forbidden, in the tenth commandment. Outward
thoughts are those, which have relation to an outward cause, or beginning: of
which sort are those evil thoughts, that be conucied into the mind by the
Devil: and if we take no pleasure in them, nor yield consent unto the^, they
are not to be accounted our sins, but the Devils, by whom they are
suggested. The truth hereof appears in Christ's example; into whose mind the
devil cast this blasphemous tentation, thereby moving him to infidelity,
covetousness, and idolatry: which nevertheless were not his sins, because his
holy heart gave not the least approbation to the^, but abhorred and repelled
the^, and therefore was free from any taint of sin, in or by them.

This distinction of thoughts must be remembered. For hence it follows, that
blasphemous thoughts, not consented to by us, are not our sins, but the
Devils: Even as in like case, when one wickedly disposed, sollicites another to
treason, or murder: if the said party listen not, nor yield thereto, he cannot
be holden guilty of those crimes. Therefore men must not fear those kind of
thoghts overmuch: at least, if they please not themselves overmuch in them:
because, though they be indeed their crosses, yet are they not their personal
sins, for which they shall incur the wrath and displeasure of God. Again,
they must let them go as they come: they are not to strive against them, for
the more they labor to resist them, the more shall they be entangled with them.

The second thing to be used in way of remedy, for the staying of the mind in
this tentation, is, that though it should be granted, that the foresaid evil
and blasphemous thoughts are our sins, yet we are to remember, that they may
through the mercy and goodness of God, be pardoned: if they be heartily and
unfeignedly repented of: yea further, that neither they, nor any other sins
(except that against the Holy Ghost) do condemn him, that prays against
them, and is heartily sorry for them.

It was Paul's complaint, Romans 7. 19. That he did not the good which he would
do, speaking of the inward endeavor of his heart: and again, that he did the
evil which he would not, meaning in respect of the corruption of his nature.
Now upon this, that he indeauoured to do that, which was agreeable to the will
of God, that he loathed and detested the contrary, and strove against his
corruptions, how did he comfort himself? Mark words following, v. 20. If I do
that I would not: that is to say, if against my general purpose, I sin
against God; if I be sorry for it, if I be displeased with my self, in that I
cannot obey God, in that perfection I desire, It is no more I that do it, but
sin that dwells in me. From this example of Paul I gather, that if any man,
have in his mind evil thoughts, and does (as Paul did) grieve, because he
thereby offends God; if he do abhor them, and pray against them, he shall
not be condemned for them; they shall never be laid to his charge. The party
then that is troubled with these thoughts, may upon these grounds, stay his
mind, and comfort himself: for if he shall not be condemned for them, then
let him not fear them above measure.

The third point to be remembered is, that the party must not be alone. For
this Tentation begins, and is confirmed by solitariness; and the parties
thus distressed, love to be apart by themselves, from the society of others:
and for that cause, in case they be liable to this distress, they must use to
solace themselves, in good company, that is mere and fit for them: and their
minds are to be exercised, in holy meditation of the word, and singing of
Psalms; and they are to be occupied in good speech and conference. Our first
parent Eve was tempted by Satan, when she was apart from Adam: and our
Sauiout Christ, when he was alone out of company and society, then was he by
the malice of the Devil, in the wilderness, assaulted with strong and mighty
tentations.

The fourth point, to be remembered of the party troubled is, that he must as
heartely and earnestly repent him, of those his evil thoughts, as of evil
words and deeds. For the truth is, because men have no more care of their
thoughts, then commonly they have; therefore the Lord justly suffers the
devil* to plague them, and torment them, by conuaying into their hearts, most
vile and damnable cogitations. Furthermore, the said party must labor to be
renewed in the spirit of his mind, that is, to have Ephesians. 4. 23. 24.
his mind enlightened by the spirit, whereby he may know and understand the
will of God in his word. After repentance for evil thoughts, there must follow
watchfulness, and a careful circumspection over all his ways; but
principally, he must have an eye unto his heart, the fountain of all. Keep
thine heart with all diligence, Prou. 4. ^3.
says Solomon: that is, above all things see that thou countergard thy
thoughts, desires, motions, and affections.

That the heart of a man may be guarded, two rules are to be observed. First,
that the word of God dwell plentifully in it: for by this means, it is guided
and directed, that it swerve not from God and his word; and our hearts are then
ruled and governed by the word, when we know and meditate, upon the
commandments and promises of God. This rule is of special use. For therefore
do men hatch, and breed evil thoughts in their hearts, because they are not
taken up with holy meditations: and hence it is, that the heart of man, is made
even a pray unto the devil, because the word of God is not lodged therein.
Excellent was the practice of David in this case, who kept the word of God in
his heart, that he mighe not Psalm. 119. 11.
sin against him.

The second rule of the keeping of the heart, is to establish our thoughts by
counsel. It is the wisemans advise in so many words. Prou. 20. 18. wherein he
would teach us, that it is the property of a worldly wise man, in matters of
weight, not to trust to his own wit, but to follow the direction and counsel of
wise and skilful men. And if this be a sound course in matters of the world,
much more ought it to be taken, in the maine matters of religion, and
conscience, concerning the heart and soul of man. And therefore by the law of
proportion, it gives us direction, not once to think or conceive, so much as a
thought, but upon advice and direction taken at God and his word. Thy
testimonies (says David) are my delight, Psalm. 119. ^4.
and my counselors. And what benefit had he by taking such a course? surely,
by the word of God, which was his continual meditation, he gat understanding,
he became wiser the^ the ancient; it made him to hate all the ways of falsehood:
it kept him from declining from God, either to the right hand, or to the left.
The same rule must be practiced of us, in the use of our senses, our speeches,
and actions, and then shall the heart be kept clean, and free from these
temptations.

And seeing this temptation is so dangerous and fearful, as has been said,
and does ost^^ befall men: our duty is to make conscience, of practicing the
foresaid rules continually. And thus much concerning the third kind of
distress of conscience.

The Fourth Distress of mind is that, which arises from a man's own sins,
or rather from some one special sin committed. And this kind of tentation is
twofold: For either it is more violent, and less common, or less violent and
more common.

The violent Distress of mind, shows it self by fears and terrors of the
conscience, by doubtings of the mercy of God, by lamentable and fearful
complaints made to others. Now Question is moved, How this violent distress
of mind, arising from our own sins, is to be cured? Answ. That it may be
cured by the blessing of God, three things must be done.

First, that particular sin must be known, which is the cause of this
violent distress. And here we are to know, by the way: that it is an usual
thing, with the parties thus distressed, to dissemble and cloak their sins:
and therefore they will allege, that their trouble arises from some evil
thoughts, from wicked affections, and from the corruption of nature: whereas
commonly men are not distressed, in violent manner, for evil thoughts,
affections, etc, but the violent distress comes from some actual and odious
sin or sins done, which wound the conscience, and are the causes of great
distraction of mind: and they are many, which having bin upon occasion before
rehearsed, I will not now repeat them. Only this must be remembered, that the
greater sins against the third, sixth, and seventh commandments, are the
maine and proper causes of violent distresses: and the more secret these sins
are, the more horror goes with them.

Secondly, the particular sin being known, Inquiry must be made, as much as
possibly may be, by signs, whether the party distressed repents, yea or no.
For except he has repented, he cannot be fitted to receive comfort: and
unless he be first fitted to receive comfort, he cannot be releiued in
Conscience. Now if it be found, that the party has repented, then care must
be had in the next place, that his repentance may be renewed, for the particular
sin committed.

Thirdly, having thus done, the comfort must be ministered, for the moderating,
or taking away of the distress. And here remember by the way, that the
comforts ministered, usually and ordinarily must not go alone, but be mingled
and te^pered, with some terrors of the Law: that being thereby feared, with the
consideration of sin, and of the wrath of God due unto the same, the comfort
may appear to be the sweeter. The ministering whereof, in case of this
distress, would not be direct and present, but by certain steps and
degrees: except only in the point of death: for then a directer course must be
used. These degrees are two.

First, the party is to be informed of a possibility of pardon, that is, that
his sins are pardonable, and though in themselves they be great, and heinous,
yet by the mercy of God in Christ, they may be remitted. Now put the case,
that the afflicted apprenhendeth only the odiousness of his sins, and the
wrath of god due to the same, and in this fit puts off the pardon from
himself, and cannot be persuaded that his sin may be forgiven, what then is
to be done? Ans. Then for the effecting of this first degree, certain grounds
are to be laid down, whereupon assurance in that case may be built up in his
heart.

The first ground of possibility of pardon is, That the mercy of god is
infinite, yea over al his works, Psalm. 145. 9. That the death of Christis of
infinite price, merit, and value before God. That God is muchin sparing, Isa.
55. 7. That with the Lord is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption,
Psalm. 130. 7. That Christ's satisfaction is not only a (...).
price, but a (...).
cou^terprice, 1. Tim. 2. 6. able to satisfy for the sins of all men, yea
for them that have sinned against the Holy Ghost: for that sin, is not
therefore unpardonable, because the offense thereof is greater, then the merit
of Christ: but because the party offending neither does, nor can apply the
merit of Christ unto himself. An ancient father upon Cains words, My
punishment is greater then I can bear, says, Thou lie Cain, for Gods mercy
is greater then thy sins. The mercy of God was very 2. Chro. 33 13. 2. Sam.
7. 14. 15.
great to Manasses, and to Solomon, and to many others, though they were great
offenders.

The second ground. Men of years, living in the Church of God, and knowing the
doctrine of salvation, shall not be condemned simply for their sins, but for
lying in their sins. Upon this ground, I say, that men distressed must be
grieved, not so much for committing of sin, as for lying and continuing in
sins committed.

A third ground. It pleases God many times to leave men to themselves, and to
suffer them to commit some sin that wounds consceence. It is true and
cannot be denied. But we must withal remember, that sins committed, do not
utterly take away grace, but rather make it the more to shine and show it
self. For God in mercy turns all things, even sin it self, to the good
of them that be his: and therefore sin committed cannot either waste, or
extinguish grace received, but by diuihe dispensation, serves to amplify and
enlarge the same; so as where sin abounds, there grace abounds much more.
Romans 5. 20. And the Lord said to Paul, being in great extremity. 2. Cor. 12.
9. My grace is sufficient for thee, for my power is made perfect through
weakness. Hence it appears, that the grace of God is not utterly lost, but
appears lively in the time of distress.

The fourth ground is this. The promises of God touching remission of sins,
and l^fe eternal, in respect of believers are general, and in regard of all
and every man indefinite: that is, they do not define, or exclude any person,
or any sinner, or any time; only they admit one exception, of final
impenitencie. Here a question may be moved, How long he that ministers
comfort, must stand upon the possibility of pardon? I answer, until he has
brought the party distressed, to some measure of true repentance: and this
being done, then he is to proceed to the second degree of comfort.

The second degree of comfort is, to teach, that the sin or sins of the
party distressed, are indeed pardoned. But it may be asked, upon what signs
may this comfort be applied? I answer, upon these two. First, if the party
distressed confess, that he or she is heartily grieved, that by their sin
or sins, they have offended so loving and so merciful a God. Secondly, if
they profess, that they desire with all their heart, to be reconciled unto God
in Christ: and at least do desire to repent for their sins; and withal do
carry in heart, a purpose to sin no more, but in all things, (as much as in
them lies) to perform new obedience unto God. Now for the better enforcing
of this comfort, some textes of Scripture, fitting this purpose must be
rehearsed, as for example, Matthew. 9. 12, 13. I came not to call the righteous,
that is to say, those that judge themselves righteous, but sinners, that is,
those which are grieved, because in their own conscience, they are vile and
heinous offenders, to repentance. Again. Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me, allye
that are weary, and ^eauie laden, and I will refresh you.

To conclude this point, there remains yet a further question to be resolved,
and that is this. A man after repentance, for some grievous sin, falls into
it again, and is distressed more then before: It is a case somewhat grievous.
For we know, that if a man be recovered of an ague, and through distemper in
diet, or otherwise, makes a relapse in^o it again, his case is often
desperate, and he hardly scapeth with his life. In the same manner, it is a
dangerous case, if after repentance, men make a relapse into the same sin
again. It may then be asked, how such persons may be recovered after a relapse?

I answer, though we find not any one particular example in scripture, of any
one person, that was restored again after a relapse: yet nevertheless there
is some comfort for such persons. Upon what grounds may some say? Ans. Men that
have not so much as a drop of mercy, in comparison of God, must forgive their
brethren often and many times, yea as our Savior Christ says to Peter, till
seventy times seven times, if they return and say it repents them. Now God is
infinite in all his attributes. He is much in sparing: with him is plenteous
redemption: and therefore he will questionless, upon true repentance, often
forgive and forget, even the same sin iterated again and again. Now these
persons are to be releiued in this sort. First they must have their Consciences
settled in this point, that their relapse is pardonable, though very dangerous.
For proof hereof read Esaias* 2. 18. Where mention is made of diverse Apostataes,
that were by God called to repentance, with promise of pardon, if they turned
unto him. And in Luke 15. the Prodigal child, (by whom I understand one, that
after grace received, ^ell from his repentance and obedience to God) when he
did but purpose in his heart to return again, was pardoned, and received into
favor. In the 2. Cor. 5. 20. Paul says to the Corinths, that were fallen
away* We pray you in Christ's stead that ye be reconciled unto God.

Secondly, being thus settled in conscience, they must again repent them of
their sins.

Thirdly and lastly, they are to be comforted, with the promise of remission of
sins, after that some signs of renewed repentance for sins past, have been
given.

The Second Tentation or Trouble of mind, which is more common and less
violent, befalls the children of God: and it is a grief of heart, more or
less, whereby men are troubled, in respect of the want of grace in their
hearts, and defects of obedience in their lives. Paul the dear servant of God,
was possessed with this trouble of mind, as we may read, Romans 7. And indeed
there is no child of God, but more or less, one time or other, he feels the
stings of sin, and the buffe^ings of Satan, which cause grief in his heart.
But this grief is a notable grace of God, and therefore they which want it,
must labor to have it, and they which have it, must not seek to put it out,
but to keep it in measure and order.

And the grounds of comfort, whereby the heart may be stayed in this sorrow,
that it be not immoderate, may be these.

I. Ground. It is Gods will, that the work of sanctification, or regeneration,
should be imperfect in this life, and remain unfinished til death. This point
needs no proof, for it is manifest both in the word of God, and in daily
experience. The reasons for which God will have it to be so, may be these.

First of all, God gives grace, according to the measure, and manner of our
receiving of it, which in this life is imperfect. Some gifts of God in Christ,
bestowed on his servants, as remission of sins by his death, and
justification by his obedience, are not put into us, but are only applied and
made ours by imputation. Some other gifts there be, which are infused and put
into us, as namely, sanctification, regeneration, the love of God and man: and
by one of these two means, to wit, either by imputation or infusion, are all
the gifts of God in Christ made ours. Yet before we can have them, we must
receive them: and the means whereby we receive them is faith, which God has
ordained, to be the hand of our souls, to receive his benefits bestowed on us.
Which faith because it is weak and imperfect, in this life, therefore the
gifts which we receive thereby, are also imperfect. For though Gods benefits be
like a bottomless sea, yet the faith, whereby we lay hold of them, is like
unto a vessel with a narrow neck, which though it be cast into the great
Ocean, receives but a little water at once, and that by degrees, drop by drop,
according to the wideness of the mouth. And hence it is, that though the
gifts of God without us, which are ours by imputation, be perfect; yet all
such graces as are put into us, are weak and imperfect.

Secondly, if any servant of God, should be perfectly regenerate, and made
absolutely holy in this life: then he should fulfill the moral law, and so
become a Savior to himself: and by the tenor of the law have life: and so
should not Christ be a Savior properly, but only an instrument, to dispose us,
to the keeping of the law, whereby we might save our selves. But there is one
only al-sufficie^t Savior, Christ Jesus: and the beginning, the middle, and
the acco^plishment of our salvation, is to be ascribed to him alone.

Thirdly, it is the will of God, that his own children, with whom he is well
pleased in Christ, should be brought to nothing in themselves, that they might
be all in all out of themselves in Christ: being, as it were, emptied of
self-love, and of all confidence in their own goodness. But if
sanctification should be perfect at the first, then a man should not go out of
himself, but would rather stay as he is, and rest contented in his own
goodness. For this cause Paul, after his exaltation, was buffered by Satan's
temptations, that he might not be exalted out of measure, 2. Cor. 12. but
should content himself with this, that he was in the love and favor of God in
Christ.

II. Ground is: To consider, what makes a man professing Christ, accepted of
God, and how much he himself must do, for this end? The substance of all
things to be done of us for this end, that we may become the children of God,
may be reduced to three heads.

First of all, we must heartily bewail our sinful lives past, and seriously
humble our selves, in regard of our own sins, both of heart and life: and if
by occasion we fall into any sin, we must not lie therein, but by speedy
repentance, recover our former estate.

Secondly, in regard of the sinnefulnesse of our hearts and lives, in times
past, we must rest our selves on Gods mercy alone, flying to the throne of
mercy for the pardon of them all.

Thirdly, we must endeavor in the course of our lives afterward, to perform
obedience to God in all his commandments: that thereby we may show our selves
thankful to him for his mercy.

Consider the examples of this practice in Gods children. All that David that
worthy servant of God could do, after his sins committed, to bring himself
again into the favor of God, whom he had offended, consisted of these very
heads, which have been named; Repentance, Confidence, and Affiance in Gods
mercy, and Performance of new obedience. And this his practice was verified,
amongst many other places, specially in the 119. Psalm, and in all the Psalms
commonly called penitential. Again, the Prophet Daniel was accepted of God
only for the doing of these things. Dan. 9. And in like manner was Paul, and
the rest of the Apostles.

Yet here remains a great difficulty. Many a good servant of God, may, and
does truly say of himself, I bewail my sins, and do in some sort rest on
Gods mercy, and withal I endeavor to perform new obedience: but alas! here
is my grief, I cannot do these things as I would. In matter of sorrow and
grief, I am troubled with hardness of heart: in occasions of boldness and
confidence, with doubting: in endeavor to obey, with many sins, and sundry
faults. For the staying and moderating of this grief, these rules may further
be remembered.

The first Rule. If there be in the mind, a purpose not to sin, in the will,
a desire to please God, and in the whole man, an endeavor to perform the
purpose of the mind, and the desire of the will: mark what follows upon this:
God in mercy accepts the purpose and will to obey, for obedience it self;
yea though a man fail in the very act, and do not so well as he should. This
is a great mercy of God, and we can never be sufficiently thankful for the
same. But yet that we may not here delude our hearts with conceits, and bless
our selves in vain: we must know, that God does not always accept the will
for the deed, unless there be a constant purpose in heart, a true desire in
will, and some resolved endeavor suitable in the life. Malach. 3. 17. Goa
spares them that fear him, as a father spares his own child. How is that?
though the child being commanded some business, goes about it very
vnhandsomly, and so the deed be done to small purpose: yet the father accepts
it as well done, if he see the child yield unto his commandment, and do his
endeavor, to the uttermost of his power. Even so will God deal with those
that be his children.

But how will some say, can God accept a work of ours that is imperfect? Ans.
So far forth, as the obedience is done in truth, so far forth God accepts
it, because it is his own work in us: and as it is ours, he pardons it unto us,
because we are in Christ.

A second Rule is laid down, Romans 7. 19. where Paul says to this purpose,
the good which I would do, I do not, and the evil which I would not, that
do I. In these words, is set down the state of all regenerate men in this
life: and the meaning is this. The good things which God has commanded, I do
them, but not as I would, and the evil forbidden I avoid, but not as I would.
This we shall see to be true by comparing the voices of three kinds of men
together. The carnal man says, I do not that which is good, neither will I do
it, and that which is evil I do, and I will do it. Contrariwise, the man
glorified, he says, That which is good I do and will do it, and that which is
evil I do not, neither will I do it. The regenerate man, in a middle between
them both, he says; The good things commanded I do, but not as I would; the
evil things forbidden I avoid, but not as I would.

And this is the estate of the child of God in this life, who in this regard,
is like unto a diseased man, who loves his health and therefore observes both
diet and physic: and yet he often falls into his fit again, (though he be
never so careful to observe the rules of the Physician) by reason of the
distemperature of his body: and hereupon is feign to go to the Physician the
second time for new counsel. In like manner, Gods children, have indeed in
their hearts, a care to please and obey God; but by reason of sin that
dwells in them, they fail often, and so are feign to humble themselves
again before him, by new repentance. Again, the servants of God are like to a
man, by some sudden accident cast into the sea, who in striving to save
himself from drowning, puts to all his strength, to swim to the shore, and
being come almost unto it, there meets him a wave or billow, which drives him
clean back again, it may be a mile or further, and then the former hope and
joy conceived of escape, is sore abated: yet he returns again, and still
labors to come to the land* and never rests till he attain unto it.

III. Ground. He that is indeed regenerate, has this privilege, that the
corruption of nature, is no part of him, neither does it belong to his person,
in respect of divine imputation. Paul says of himself, Romans 7. 17. It is no
more I, but sin that dwells in me. In which words, he distinguishes between
his own person, and sin that is in him. For in man regenerate, there be
three things, the body, the soul, and the gift of Gods image restored again.
Now touching the corruption of nature, that is in his person, and so may be
said to be his; but it belongs not to the man regenerate, it is not his,
because it is not imputed to him, and so indeed is, as though it were not in
him. The Apostle 1. These. 5. 23. prays for the Thessalonians, that God would
sanctify them throughout, and preserve their whole spirit, soul, and body.
Of which place (amongst many) this exposition may be given. The Apostle
speaking of men regenerate, and sanctified, makes three parts in them: body,
soul, and spirit: and by spirit, we are to understand, not the conscience, but
the gift of regeneration, and sanctification, which is in the whole man body
and soul, opposed to the flesh, which in a natural man, is that which is
called the old man, Romans 7. And the prayer which Paul makes in the behalf of
the Thessalonians, teaches us in effect thus much; that though corruption
remain in the regenerate, after regeneration; yet in respect of divine
acceptance, he is accounted as righteous, and so continues: his sin, (by
the mercy of God in Christ) not being imputed to him to condemnation. And so
much for that point.

Now these Grounds of comfort, and others of the like nature, may serve to
sustain and uphold the hearts of the children of God, when they shall be
pressed and troubled, in consideration of their estate in this life, which
cannot till death, be fully freed, from much weakness and manifold imperfections.

The Fifth and last kind of Temptation or Trouble of mind, arises from a man's
own body.

Before I enter to speak thereof, one Question, in the mean time, must be
answered, namely, How the body should, or how it can trouble the mind,
considering that the soul or mind, is not bodily, but spiritual: and it is
against reason, that that which is bodily, should either alter or trouble a
spirit. For an answer hereunto, these things must be considered.

First of all, the actions of man, do proceed from one only fountain, and
common cause, the soul; and are done by the power thereof. The body of it
self, is not an agent in any work, but as it were a dead instrument, in and by
which the soul produces all actions and works.

Secondly, the most of the works of the soul, and mind of man, are such, as
are performed by the body, and the parts thereof, and by the spirits that are
seated in the body, as by instruments. Indeed some actions of the soul and
mind, are done without the help of the body; but I say, that the most actions
thereof, are performed by the body, and spirits therein contained. Yet these
spirits in themselves, are no agents at all: but the only agent in any work,
is the soul it self. For example: the using of the outward senses, as of
sight, hearing, tasting, touching, smelling, as also of the inward, as
imagination, memory, etc. all this is done by the brain, and the parts of the
brain, as proper instruments. All affections both good and bad, are acted by
the soul; but yet they come from the heart, as the seat thereof. So also the
power of nourishment, comes from the liver, as the instrument, whereby the
soul nourishes the body.

Now then the body affects the soul and mind thus: The body and the soul
are so joined together, that they make one person, and thus, the body being
troubled, the soul is also troubled: yet is not this done, by any dividing of
the soul. For it cannot be divided. Neither by diminishing the parts of the
soul, but only by corrupting the action of the mind, or more properly, by
corrupting the next instrument of the mind.

This may be conceived by a comparison. A skilful artificer in any science,
has an unfit tool, and a naughty instrument to work withal: his skill is
good, and his ability is sufficient, but his instrument whereby he works is
imperfect: and therefore he brings forth an imperfect work. Now his tool
takes not away the skill of his workmanship, nor his power of working, but
keeps him from doing that well, which otherwise he should and could do well.
In like manner, the body being corrupted, hinders the work of the soul. It
does not take away the work of the soul, nor the ability of working: but
because it is a corrupt instrument, it makes the soul to bring forth a corrupt
work.

The Temptation follows. The body causes the trouble of the mind two ways,
either by Melancholy, or by other strange alterations in the parts of the
body, which oftentimes befall men: in what sort we shall see afterward. For
it is a very common thing, yea more common then the former.

Touching Melancholy, sundry things are to be considered for our instruction,
and for the Remedy of that evil.

And first of all, if it be asked what Melancholy is? I answer, it is a kind
of earthie and black blood, that is specially in the spleen, being stopped;
which conuaieth it self to the heart, and the brain, and there partly by his
corrupt subsia^ce, and specially by his contagious quality, annoyeth both
heart and brain, being the seat and instrument of reason.

The second is, what are the effects and operations of Melancholy? Ans. They
are strange, and often fearful. There is no humor, yea nothing in man's
body, that has so strange effects, as this humor has, being once
distempered. An ancient Divine calls it the Devils bait, because the Devil,
by Gods just permissio^, Esca di^bo^^.
conueies himself into this humor, and works strange conceits. When the
evil Spirit came upon Saul, it so tempted him, that he would have slain him
that was next unto him: how so? surely, because God in justice withdrew his
spirit of government from him, and suffered Satan, to enter into the humor of
choler, or melancholy, or both, and by this means caused him to offer
violence to David.

Now the effects thereof in particular, are of two sorts. The first effect, is
in the brain and head. For this humor being corrupted, it sends up noisome
spirits, and fills the instrument of reason (as it were) with a mist, and
makes it unfit to use reason. Hence follows the first effect, strange
imaginations, conceits* and opinions, framed in the mind: which are the first
work of this humor, not properly: but because it corrupts the instrument,
and the instrument being corrupted, the faculty cannot bring forth good, but
corrupt actions.

For example. That which they call the beast^ like Melancholy is, when a man
thinks himself to be a beast of this or that kind, and carries himself
accordingly. Of this sort, are those, that think themselves to be (...).
wolves, and practice wolvish behavior. Thus we read, Dan. 4. 30. that
Nebuchad-nezzar lived, behaved himself, and fed as a beast. Some say, that he
loss his soul, and had the soul of a beast. But they er^e. For there is no
such transportation of souls into bodies, either of men, or beasts. Others
think, that Nebuchadnezzar was smitten in the brain with this disease, and in
a beastly imagination carried himself as a beast. And this interpretation is
not against the text: for in the 31. verse of that chapter it is said, that his
mind came to him again: and therefore in the disease, his understanding, and
the right use of his reason was lost. And the like is true in history, by
diverse examples, though it were not true in Nebuchadnezzar.

Again, take another example, that is common and ordinary. Let a Melancholic
person upon the sudden, see some fearful thing, the strength of his
imagination presently fasteneth the thing upon himself. As if he see or hear
that a man is hanged, or possessed with a Devil, it presently comes to his
mind, that he must be hanged, that he is or shall be possessed. Likewise upon
relation of fearful things, presently his phantasi: works, and he imagines,
that the thing is already, or shall befall him. And this imagination, when it
enters once and takes place, it brings forth horrible and fearful effects.

The second effect or work of Melancholy, is upon the heart. When the mind
has conceived and framed fearful things, there is a concord and consent
between heart and affection, and then comes affection, and is answerable to
imagination. Hence do proceed exceeding horrors, fears, and despaires, and
yet the Conscience for all this untouched, and not troubled or disquieted.

Thirdly, it may be demanded, whether there be any difference between the
trouble of Conscience and Melancholy? for many hold, that they are all one.
Ans. They are not all one, but differ much. Affliction of Conscience is one
thing, trouble by Melancholy is another: and they are plainly distinguished
thus. First, when the Conscience is troubled, the affliction it self is in the
Conscience, and so in the whole man. But in Melancholy, the imagination is
disturbed, and not the Conscience. Secondly, the Conscience afflicted, has a
true and certain cause, whereby it is troubled, namely, the sight of sin: but
in Melancholy, the imagination conceiueth a thing to be so, which is not so:
for it makes a man to fear and despair, upon supposed and fained causes.
Thirdly, the man afflicted in Conscience, has courage in many things: but the
Melancholic man fears every man, every creature, yea himself, and has no
courage: when there is no cause of fear, he fears. Fourthly, imaginations in
the brain caused by Melancholy, may be cured, taken away, and cut off by
means of Physic: but the distress of Conscience, cannot be cured by any
thing in the world but one, and that is the blood of Christ, and the assurance
of Gods favor.

Fourthly, the way to cure Melancholy is this. First the person troubled must
be brought to this; that he will content himself, to be advertised and ruled,
not by his own, but by the judgment of others, touching his own estate: and
by this shall be reap much quiet and contentation.

Secondly search and trial must be made, whether he has in him any beginnings
of faith and repentance or no. If he want knowledge of his estate, then means
must be used, to bring him to some sight and sorrow for his sins, that his
melancholy sorrow, may be turned into a godly sorrow. If he want faith and true
repentance, some good beginnings thereof must be wrought in his heart.

Thirdly, when he is brought to faith in Gods mercy, and an honest purpose not
to sin any more; then* certain merciful promises of God, are to be laid
before his eyes: and he must be exhorr^d, to rest upon these promises, and at
no time to admit any imagination or thought, that may cross the said promises.
Now the promises are these and such like: Psalm. 34. 9. No good thing shall be
wanting to them that fear God. Psalm. 91. 10 No evil shall come near the
godly man. 2. Chron. 15. The Lord is with you, while you are with him, and if
you seek him, he will be found of you. Iam. 4. 8. Draw nere to God, and he
will draw near to you. And the best means to cause any man thus diseased, to
be at peace with himself, is to hold, believe, and know the truth of these
promises, and not to suffer any bythought to enter into his heart, that may
cross them.

Moreover, though the former promises may stay the mind, yet will they not
take away the humor, except further help be used. Therefore the fourth and
last help, is the art of Physic, which serves to correct and abate the
humor, because it is a means by the blessing of God, to restore the health,
and to cure the distemper of the body. And thus much touching the trouble of
mind, caused by Melancholy.

The second means whereby the body annoies the mind is, when it occasions
trouble to the mind, by strange alterations incident to the body. When a man
begins to enter into a Frenzy, if the brain admit never so little
alteration, presently the mind is troubled. Thus by the trembling of the
heart, many fearful imaginations are caused, when a man knows not the cause.
The same is procured by the swelling of the spleen, by the rising of the
entralls, by strange convulsions, and such like.

The remedy hereof is this. First it is still to be considered, whether the
party thus troubled has true faith and repentance or no. If he has, it is so
much the better. If* he has not, the first duty is to use all means, to stir
up in him some godly sorrow for his sins.

Secondly, this being done, means must be used to take away the opinion
conceived, and to give information of the alteration of the body, and of the
true cause thereof. This being known, the grief or fear conceived, will
easily be staid. For take away the false opinion, and inform judgment, and
the whole man will be the better.

Thirdly, the opinion being altered and reformed, it may be the alteration in
the body will remain: the party therefore in that case must be taught, that
it is a correction of God, and that God does not barely suffer the correction
to be inflicted, but is the very author of it: and therefore the party is to
be well pleased, and to rejoice in that will of God. For every present estate,
whether it be good or badde, is the best state for us, because it comes by the
will of God.

And thus much touching the distinct kinds of distresses of mind. I add this
one thing further, that if we make examination of the estate of such persons,
as are troubled with any of these five temptations, we shall not usually find
them single, but mixed together, especially Melancholy, with some other
temptations.

And so much of the first Sort of Questions, concerning Man simply considered
in himself.

FINIS.

