Deaths Knell: or, The sick man's Passing Bell: Summoning all sick Consciences
to pr(...)pare themselves for the coming of the great Day of Doom, lest
mercies Gate be shut against them: Fit for all those that desire to arrive at
the heavenly Jerusalem. Whereunto are added Prayers fit for Householders.

The ninth Edition.

Written by W. Perkins.



Printed at London for M. Trundle, and are to be at her Shop in Smith-field.
1628.

Deaths Knell.
LEt the memory of Death (good Christian) be ever the Looking-glass of thy
life, thy continual Companion, and inseparable Spouse: let thy solace be ye
sighs of a sorrowful soul; and those the more bitter, the better: whilst
Worme-like, thou crawlest here below, fasten all thy faculties upon the
Commandments of thy Creator; for those in thy final passage, must be the
Pylot to steer thee into the Haven of Heaven; Think every moment thou art in
the waning, that the date of thy Pilgrimage is wel-nigh expired, and that the
lamp of thy life lies twinkling upon the snuff; and that now it stands thee
upon to look toward thy Celestial home* thy forces are enfeebled, thy senses
impaired, and on every side, the tottering and ruinous Cottage of thy faint
flesh threatens fall.

And meeting so many Harbengers of death, how can thou but prepare for so
ghastly a guest? The young man may dye quickly, but the old cannot live long:
the young man's life by casualty may be cut off, but the aged by Physic cannot
be preserved: Green years must resolve to grow to the grave, and the
meditations of old age must dwell in the same: be mindful of things past,
careful of things present, and provident for things to come. Use the blessings
of nature to the benefit of thy soul; be wise in well-doing, and watchful for
thy end: Serve not the world; for that can possess thee of nothing but pride,
envy, lust, anger, malice, and infinite follies: for it defiles a man with
sin, disquieteth with troubles, oppresses with labors, vexes with
temptations, vanquisheth with vain delights, and miserably wrappeth him up in
woeful calamities. The world, it is an Ambassador of the evil, a scourge of
the good, a tyrant of the truth, a breaker of peace, a worker of war, a sweet
of vices, a gall of virtues, a friend of lies, an inuenter of novelties, a
travel to the ignorant, a table of Gluttons, a furnace of concupiscence, a
sepulcher of the dead, a prison of the living, a pitfall to the rich, a burden
to the poor, a Palace of Pilgrims, a Den of Deceivers, a slanderer of the
good, a commender of the wicked, and a deluder of all. Thou have no reason to
dote upon the world; for at first it affords thee but a wrangling welcome, and
at last turns thee off, with a fearful farewell: moreover, it does torment
thee, abuse thee, consume thee, and at length expel thee: whereas on the
contrary: Heaven does comfort thee, conserve thee, and exalt thee. On Earth,
thou sowest but in a field of Flint, which brings forth nothing but a Crop
of care, and languishing for thy labor: it is time therefore to leave so
vnthriuing a husbandry, and to sow in Gods ground the seed of repentant
sorrow, and water it with the tears of humble contrition; so shall thou reap
a plentiful harvest, and gather the fruits of everlasting consolation. Imagine
thou thy Spring to be spent, thy Summer ouer-past, and that thou art arrived at
the Fall of the Leaf, and though thy loving Lord do long forbear offenders,
yet at last he will scourge them; and that his patience lends us but respit to
repent, not leisure to sin. He that is tossed with sturdie storms, and
cannot come to his desired Port, rids little way, but is much turmeiled: so he
that passes many years, and purchases but small profit to his soul, has
had a long being, but a short life; for life is to be measured by virtuous
actions, not by number of days. Some men by many days, purchase many deaths,
and others in a short space attain to life everlasting. What is the body
without the soul, but a corrupted Carkeise? and what is the soul without God,
but a Sepulcher of sin? Man was made, and sent hither, to no other purpose
but only to serve God in this life, and to enjoy Heaven in that life
hereafter. If our end be the Kingdom of Heaven, why are we so much enamoured
on the Earth? If the end of our Creation, be eternal salvation, why hunt we
after the vanities of this vain life? If our inheritance be to reign as
Kings, why live we like servile slaves, in danger to be divided from God, from
Christ our Savior, from the Angels, from the Communion of Saints, and from the
hope of our celestial portion? If God be the way, the truth and the life; then
he that walks without him, wandreth; that is not instructed by him, erreth;
and that lives without him, dies: to revolt from him, is falling; to return
to him, is rising: to stay upon him, is sure standing: He it is, from whom to
depart, is to dye; to whom to repair, is to revive: in whom to trust, is truly
to live. O be not thou like those, that begin not to live, until they be
ready to dye, and then (when they deserve an enemies reward) come to crave of
God a friends entertainment. Some think to snatch Heaven in a moment, which
the best can scarce attain in many years; and when they have glutted
themselves with worldly delights, would iumpe from the Diet of Dives, to the
joys of Lazarus; from the service of Satan, to the solace of a Saint. But be
sure, that God is not so penurious, to make his Kingdom saleable for the
refuse and reuersion of their lives, who have sacrificed the principal and
prime thereof to his enemies, and their own brutish appetites; then only
ceasing to sin, when the ability of offending is taken from them. What thank
is it to pardon our enemies, when we can not hurt them? to give away our
goods, when we can keep them no longer? to shake hands with our pleasures,
when we can use them no more? to forsake sin, when sin leaves us? God may
be merciful at the last gasp: but most miserable is that man, who casts the
Anchor of his eternal weal or woe, on so uncertain and sandy a point. The
thief may be saved on the Cross, and mercy found at the last; yet it is not
likely, that he should find favor at his death, whose life earned the wages
of wrath; or that his penitence should be accepted, who more for fear of hell,
and his own self-love, then for the love of God, or lothsomelesse of sin,
cries out for mercy,

Put not off repentance therefore to the last point: take David's early in the
morning: stay not till to morrow; though thou sufferedst the Bud to be blasted,
the Flowers to fade, the Fruit to perish, the Leaves to wither. the Boughs to
dry up, and the body of the Tree to decay; yet still keep life in the Root,
for fear lest the whole become fuel for Hell fire: for where the tree falls
there it lies. Imagine that Time has flied off the better part of thy
natural forces, and left thee in the Lees of thy dying days: and that thou
art onword in thy voyage, and not far from the period of thy last harbor:
be not therefore disfurnished of necessaries required in so perrillous a
journey. O how men do carefully begin, industriously prosecute, and
effectually end their labors, in attaining to this transitory trash upon
earth! but of that great affair of winning Heaven, or falling into hell, there
is had no respect: Nay, they do not so much as remember, that there is a Hell
for sinners, a Heaven for good livers, a dreadful day of Judgment, or a
strict reckoning to be made. Death in its own property is sufficiently
fearful, but far more terrible, in respect of the Judgment whereto it
summoneth.

If ^hou were now laid on thy departing Pillow, wearied with waiting, pinched
with pain, drowned in dolor, oppressed with the heavy load of thy fore-past
committed sins, wounded with the sting of a guilty crying conscience: if thou
feltst the force of death cracking thy heart strings asunder, ready to make the
sad divorce of thy soul and body: if thou layest panting for shortness of
breath, sweating a fatal sweat, and tired with struggling against deadly pangs;
O, how much then would thou give for a days contrition, an hours
repentance, or a minutes amendment of life? Then worlds would be worthless in
comparison of a little time, which now by whole months and years thou
lauishly mis-spendest. How deeply would it wound thy soul, when looking back
into thy life, thou should espy many faults committed, but none amended; many
good works omitted, but none recovered; thy duty to God promised, but not
performed! How disconsolable would thy case be, thy friends being fled, thy
senses affrighted, thy mind amazed, thy memory decayed, thy thoughts aghast,
and every part disabled in its proper faculty* saving only thy guilty
conscience crying out against thee? What would thou do, when stripped and
turned out of thy house of Clay, into the World of Worms, the Den of dust, and
Cabine of corruption; from thence to be conuented before a most severe Judge,
carrying in thy own bosom, thy Indictment ready written, and a perfect
Register of all thy mis-deedes; when thou should behold the glorious
Majesty of Jesus Christ, (clothed in white linen, through which, his body
shining like precious stones, his eyes like burning Lamps, his face like
lightning, his Arms and Legs like flaming Brass, and his Uoice as the shout
of a multitude) prepared to pass the sentence upon thee; when thou should
see the great Judge offended above thee, hell open beneath thee; the Furnace
flaming, the Devils waiting, the World burning, thy conscience accusing, and
thy self standing as a forlorn wretch, to receive thy fearful and
irrecouerable sentence of condemnation?

Oh, bethink thy self, how these visions would affright thee: to behold the
gnashing of teeth, the horror of the place, the rigor of the pain, the
ugliness of the company, and the eternity of these punishments; where the fire
is unquenchable; the torments insupportable, hopeless, helpless, easelesse,
and endless! For our fire may be endured; that intolerable; ours for comfort;
that, for torment; ours, if not fed, extinguisheth; that, without feeding,
never goes out; ours gives light; that, none: ours consumes the matter, and
ends the pain; that torments, but never wastes, to make the pain perpetual.
In Hell, the lazy Loyterer must be pricked with flaming Forkes; the Glutton
fed with hunger and thirst; the Drunkard quaffe bowls of burning Brimstone;
the Covetous pine in penury; the lustful embrace ugly Su^^es; and the proud
apparelled with shame and confusion* and further, to aggrauate their grief,
and up heap the measure of their unmeasurable misery, they shall turn up
their affrighted eyes, and behold the meek triumphing, the Godly rejoicing:
then shall they perceive base apparel to be glorious; gaudy attire ^^^amous;
the humble Cottage commended; the gilded Palace despised; simple obedience
show fairer then subtle policy; a clear conscience better accepted, then
profound and abstruce Philosophy; zealous prayers far worthier then fine
tales; good works preferred before sweet words. Is not he more then mad, that
will play away his time allotted to prevent these intolerable calamities? Is it
not a senseless security, to hug in thy bosom so many serpents as sins? or
to foster in thy soul so many malicious accusers, as mortal faults? would
thou not then think one life too little, to repent for so many iniquities, the
least whereof is strong enough to hurl thee irrecouerably into these
unspeakable torments? Betimes then deuote the residue of thy days, to make an
atonement with Jehovah, the general Judge, and so endeavor to set free thy
soul from such confusion, as by sin thou art sure to fall into. What can
thou purchase by being so long a customer to the World, but false ware, suitable
to such a Merchants Shop, where traffic is toil; wealth, woe; gain, loss?
what interest can thou recover, that can equal thy detriments in grace and
goodness? or what can thou find in this vale of vanities, that is comparable
to the favor of God? Let not thy youthful affections ouersway thee; for time
will tell thee, they are but bubbling follies. Let not temporal fear misleade
thee; for the force of reason will rather draw thee to fear God then man, and
to stand more in awe of perpetual then temporal punishments. Who would fasten
his eternal affairs upon the slipperinesse of uncertain life? or who (but
one of distempered wits) would offer to put tricks upon him, who is the strict
searcher out of the closest secrets* with whom he may dissemble to his cost,
but to deceive him, it is impossible? Will thou account it a craft to steal time
from God, and to bestow it on his enemies* who keeps tale of the least minute
of thy life, and at thy ending will call thee to question, how thou have
employed every moment? Is it not preposterous policy to fight against God,
till our weapons be blunted, our forces enfeebled, our strength made impotent,
our best spent; and at last when we are fallen into fainting, and fought our
selves wel-nigh dead; then so presume of his mercy, whom we have to much
offended, so long opposed? Would it not be held an exorbitant course, that
while the Ship is sound, the Pylot well, the Saylors strong* the Gale
favorable, and the Seas calm, to lie carelessly idle at rode, losing so
seasonable weather, and then when the Ship leakes, the Pilot sick, the
Mariners feeble, the winds aloft* the storms boisterous, and the waves
outrageous, to lanch forth, hoist sail, and set out for a far Journey? Such
are our euening-repenters, who in the soundness of health, and perfect use of
reason, cannot abide to cut Cables, and weigh those Anchors that withold them
from GOD* but when their Senses are benumbed, their Reason distracted, their
Understanding dulled, and both soul and Body tormented with pangs of pains,
and sorrowful sickness, then will cast back their memory on these weighty
affairs; then will they needs become sudden Saints, that are scarce reasonable
creatures.

How can a man, disanimated with inward Garboyles of unsettled conscience,
maimed in all his faculties, and surrounded with such strange incombrances, be
fit to dispose of his choysest Jewel, his soul, in so short a spurt? They
that will loyter in Seed-time; and begin to sow, when others reap: They that
will have their Weapons to provide, when their Fellow Soldiers go forth to
fight: They that will lavish in health, and cast their accounts when they
cannot speak: They that will sleep out the day, and stumblingly travel in
the night; O let them thank their own folly, if they dye in debt, and finally
fall headlong into the pit of perdition. Let the grief of the sore be then the
measure of thy sorrow: let a wide wound have a careful cure: let thy
contrition be agreeable to thy crime, and thy repentance equal to thy
transgressions. Thou must spend the day in mourning, the night in watching and
weeping, and thy whole time in praying, and practice of repentance. Not every
short sigh will be a sufficient satisfaction; nor every little knock, a
warrant to get in: for many cry, Lord, Lord, yet are not admitted. The foolish
virgins knocked, yet stood without. Judas conceived a sorrow for sin, yet
dyed desperately. Linger not thy conversion, nor put off thy repentance from
day to day, lest the Almighty come upon thee in a minute, and in his wrath
suddenly destroy thee; neither soiourne thou long in sinful security, nor
shift off thy repentance till fear enforce thee to it: for then it will be
bootlesse for thee to strive to stand, when thou art already fallen. Frame out
thy beginning as thou meanest to end, and endeavor to live as thou desire to
dye. Will thou sacrifice the Fattlings to the Fiend of darkness, and offer the
carrion Karkeises to the Father of Light? Will thou present the maine Crop to
the Devil, and leave God the Gleanings? Will thou cramme the Devil with thy
fairest fruits, and turn God to feed upon thy wind-fals and after-gatherings?
If Hell was prepared for the Devil, and Heaven purchased for man, why should
not he then provide for himself, but wilfully lose his inheritance by
persisting in sin? While we draw healthful breath, hope strongly persuades
us, that by tears euer-flowing from the Sea of a sorrowful soul, we may
wash away our sins pollution, how foul soever; but being once at deaths
door, notwithstanding our teeth gnash, our eyes cry out, our throats become
hoarse with howling, our eyes gush Rivers of tears, and our hearts send out
sighs as loud as Thunder, yet will it not avail us; for then none shall hear
us, none assist us; no, nor so much as comfort us: Then, O then, shall thou
find, though (alas) too late, that thou have lost thy labor, have trifled
away thy time, and let slip the opportunity of thine own gain. Thou shall then
perceive thine error irrecouerable, thy punishment insupportable, thy
penitence unprofitable, thy grief, sorrow, and calamity irrecouerable: Let
thy soul then enjoy her lawful Sovereignty, and thy body follow the footings
of her directions: let not thy servile senses, and lawless appetites overcome
her, and make her a Uassall in her own Dominions. Do thou desire to have
all good necessaries: as good house, good furniture, good fare, good apparel?
and yet will thou suffer thy poor soul, thy principal charge, and above all
these worthy the best respect, to lie cankering and custing in all kind of
evils? O unspeakable blindness, that thou will be nice in wearing a bad shoo,
yet carest not to carry an ugly and betattered soul! Alas, do not thou set so
light by that Jewel, which thy Maker sets at so high a price; nor rate thou
thy soul at so base a penniworth, being of so peerless worth. If the soul
be so inestimable, that neither gold, nor treasure, nor any thing of less
price, then the precious blood of that immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus was able
to buy it; if not all the Delicacies that Heaven and earth could afford, but
only the glorious Body of our Savior, were deemed a fit repast to feed it; If
not all the Creatures of this, or millions of new worlds, if they were, but
only the vnlimitable goodness and Majesty of God, can satisfy the desire, or
fill the compass^ and capacity of it (for who is so insensible, that finds not
the insaciety of his soul?) Who then, but one of perverse will, incredulous
mind, or pitiless spirit, would set more by the world then his souls
worthiness; or suffer so peerless a Paragon, so many hours, days, months
and years, to lie enchannelled in the filthy mire of sin? Thou will trudge
to a Physician for thy sick Servant, and look out for a Leach to cure thy
diseased Horse, and be very busy to patch up thy worn garments, and yet wilt
suffer thy soul to languish for want of looking to, and dye for want of cure;
and seeing it mangled with millions of vices, never seek to bind it up, and
restore it to its primative integrity. Is thy Servant more near thy Horse more
dear, and thy Coat to be more cared for then thine own soul? How long, O how
long will thou hunt after vanities, and rush violently and wilfully into thine
own ruin? Dare not thou suffer a Spider or a Toad to come near thee; and
will thou nestle in thy bosom so many Uipers as Uices, so many Serpents as
Sins; and permit thy silly soul to be gnawed upon with the poisonous tuskes of
Satan? Is thy soul so slight a substance, as to be held in so small esteem?
Did Christ come down from Heaven, and become a wandering Pilgrim upon Earth,
exiling himself from the comfort of his Godhead, and wearing out thirty years
in pain and penury for our souls? Did he suffer the Tragedy of his Passion
to be bloodily acted, and patiently accepted? Did he make his Body as a Cloud,
to dissolve into shewres of unblemished blood, and yielded the dearest Ueines
of his heart to be cut asunder, that from thence might issue the precious
price of our souls redemption? Why do we then sell our souls to the Devil
for every delight and poor pittance of worldly pelf? O that a Creature of so
incomparable a worth should be in the custody of so unnatural Iaylors; and
that, which in it self is so gracious and amiable, that the Angels and Saints
delight to behold it, should by sin be made a horror to heaven, and a fit
play-feere for the fowlest Fiends! Let us remember that our soul is not only
a part of us, but also the Temple, the Paradise of Almighty God; by him in
Baptism garnished, furnished, and endowed with most glorious Ornaments: How
will he take it, to see his Temple profaned, and turned into a Den of Devils?
His Paradise displanted, and made a Wilderness of Serpents? His Spouse
deflowred, and become an Adultresse to his Enemies? Durst we commit such
outrage against our earthly Princes? Would not the terror of the Law, and
popular shame curb us from it? and shall not the glorious Majesty of Jehovah,
and the vnrebated keenness of his flaming double-edged Sword, deter us from
offering the like to his dearest Spouse? Will he that keeps Register of every
singular hair, suffer himself to be wronged, and ouer-passe it unpunished?
Remember that it is a thing full of horror, to fall into the hands of God, who
is able to crush the proudest spirit, and to make his face his Footstool. O
wrestle not against the cares and cries of thine own Conscience, but so keep
and conserve it, as that at the last it may gladly go with thee, and be
joyfully prepared before the Throne of God to answer for thee.

There was a man had three friends; two whereof he loved entirely, the third
he made no great reckoning of. This man being conuented before the King, upon
the accusation of some committed crime, solemnly came unto his best friend, and
entreated him to go with him, but he would not, yet went he with him some
part of his way: Bethinking himself better he returned to his second friend,
and desired him to go with him; but he made him this flat answer, that by
reason of his more important affairs he could not go with him; yet gave him a
token of his remembrance. Being driven to this hard exigent* he trudged to his
third friend, of whom he made slight account, and he at the first word went
with him to the King, and there stuck to him in all his dangers. So fares it
with a man being sent for by death, comes to his Wife Children or Friends, and
entreats them to go along with him; but they slip their necks (...) of the
C^l^ar, and will not, only bear hi^ company to his grave: then he persuades
(...) goods and gold to go along with him, but (...) cannot; and so turns him
off with a (...) simple sheet lapt about him: then, when all these shrink
back and fail him, at the last point, his bosome-friend, his Conscience, will
not forsake him, but go along and make an answer for him. Labor then to keep
a good Conscience: for in the utmost of extremities, That will never fail
thee. There was a country, where the Commons used to elect their King, and
again to banish him at their pleasure, into a far Country, almost naked: But
one, (more provident than the rest) so soon as he was chosen King, he daily
sent beforehand some provision into that far Country; so that when the people
banished him from them, he was (having made a provident preparation of wealth
before) most royally there entertained. So must every cantelous Christian
provide upon Earth, as he may be joyfully received into Heaven.

Prayers for private Households at all times.
O Lord prepare our hearts to pray.
O Most mighty and eternal God, who art the Creator, Guider, Governor, and
Preserver of all things, both in Heaven and Earth; vouchsafe, we humbly beseech
thee, to look down with the eye of pity and compassion upon us miserable
and wretched sinners; who at this time are prostrate here before thee, to
offer up this our Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving unto thee. And although
we be unworthy, by reason of our manifold transgressions, to present our selves
before thee: yet we humbly beseech thee, for thy Son. Christ Jesus, our
blessed Lord and Saviors sake, to accept of us, and to grant these our prayers
and petitions which we do make unto thee.

O merciful Lord, and loving Father, remember the infirmities of thy frail
servants, (...)ssisting our weak souls with thy grace, (...)hat in all things
we may love, honor, and o(...)ey thy heavenly will and Majesty, waking (...)nd
walking in the paths of righteousness to (...)he scope of perfect Holiness,
contemning this witching world, with all her foolish illusions, for the true
glorifying of thy Name, through Christ Jesus our Lord, Amen.

Another Prayer.
O Merciful Lord, and loving Father, that of the incomprehensible riches of
thy mercy toward the disobedient and lost children of Adam, (who serving Satan
after the blind and unbridled lusts of the vile flesh, were carried away
through sin and ignorance to damnation,) have reconciled us to thy favor,
through grace and adoption in Christ Jesus the righteous by faith and holy
conversation: in whom we are delivered from eternal death and destruction:
Have mercy upon us, yea (Lord) have mercy upon us, and for love of thy sweet
Son, our Redeemer, defend us against the power of the Destroyer, and with thy
mighty hand lift us up out of the puddle, and deathfull corruptions of this
abominable world: purifying our hearts with thy grace, that we being wholly
inclined to thy heavenly desires, may grow perfect in holiness, and abounding
in the good works which thou have prepared for thy Saints to walk in, for the
glorifying of thy Name: we may grow an acceptable Temple, for thy continual
dwelling in us, O Lord; to the unspeakable peace and comfort, and to the
everlasting bliss and salvation of our souls: through Christ our Savior,
Amen.

LOrd, let not the darkness of ignorance comprehend us.

Lead us by the continual light of thy grace to work r^ghteousnesse.

Let us not sleep in sin, O God.

Quicken our weak souls against earthly sluggishnesse.

Give us the heavenly rest of thy unspeakable peace, O Lord:

And nourish us with thy grace to salvation.

Lord comfort the needy, the sick, the prisoned, the tormented, the distressed
and helpless, with the presence of thy grace: and have mercy upon them, and us.

Pitifully hear our complaints, O dear Father, and grant our requests, for
thy sweet Sons sake, our Savior.

FINIS.

