A view of some part of such public wants and disorders as are in the service
of God, within her Majesty's country of Wales, together with an humble
PETITION, unto this high Court of Parliament for their speedy redress.

WHEREIN IS SHEVVED, not only the necessity of reforming the state of religion
among that people, but also the only way, in regard of substance, to bring
that reformation to pass.

To all those that faithfully love the lord Jesus, and unfeignedly desire the
flowrishing estate of Sion, together with the utter razing of whatsoever
obscureth the perfect beutie thereof: and namely, to such of my brethren and
countrymen, as the Lord has enlightened with a true knowledge, the joy of an
upright and comfortable profession, with the increase of all other the Lords
good graces, be multiplied in Jesus Christ our LORD.
I Am not ignorant (beloved in the Lord) how many and great causes there are,
vvherof the very least might seem to have been sufficiently able to discourage
me from this enterprise, which under the holy hand of my God I have now
undertaken. J am guilty unto my self of great corruption and weakness. The
glory of God is not so regarded amongst men as it ought to be. The Parliament
has hitherto rejected this cause: The enemies thereof are many and strong. But
as the discouragements are not a fevve, so J confess my self to be drawn back
with none more, then with the consideration of my self. For looking into
mine own heart, I do from the bottom thereof protest, so sinful, base,
contemptible, and every way so vveak a wretch as J am, to be the unfittest
instrument under heaven, to deal in so vvaighty a cause. It comes into my
mind, that the Lord in just judgments toward my sins, should deny any
blessing unto my endeavors. J know that my weakness in handling the cause,
might disgrace the same. And inasmuch as states for the most part, look with
fleshly eyes; It comes into my mind, that the suit, by reason of my base
estate should be rejected and cast off. But all those likelihoods
notvvithstanding: yet I see that the Lord will have the cause once again
brought unto the Parliament in my hands, to try whether men will not
acknovvledge the Gopell, and the government of his son; to wit, the scepter,
whereby alone Christ Jesus rules among men, to be vvorth the entertaynment in
their assemblies, though it be not accompanied with that vvorldly majesty,
vvhervvith when it pleases him, he is able to countenance it. And hereby it
is in deed, that men do truly sh^vv themselves to tremble before the son of
God, and to stoop unto his royal Scepter, when they are not ashamed of his
word, how base soever they be that become suitors in the behalf thereof.

For mine own part, howsoever I have just occasion to lament mine own
great corruptions, yet J may boldly say in the presence of God, and al those,
unto whose consideration these labors of mine are offered, publish thus much,
that this cause, as near as I could, is altogether separated from those foul
stains, vvhervvith J acknovvledge my self to be defiled. And J hope, that it
so offers it self unto the public view and consideration of the
Parliament, as they have no just cause by reason of my great weakness and base
estate, to reject the same. Neither is any man to marvel, that J being charged
of late, by M. Doct. Some in public vvriting, to be not only a defender of
many blasphemous errors, but also an underminer of the civil State, durst
presume to become a suitor unto the high Court of Parliament, before J had first
cleared my self of those crimes. For my purpose being to have published an
answer to M.D. Some, before this cause should be made known; I was drawn
whether I would or no, to take the opportunity of setting out this, which I
thought to be most vvaighty; least that if I had deferred it until the other
had come forth, I might have bin prevented of the means to publish it in any
due time. Besides the 185. page, line 2. and 30. of M.D. Somes book, wherein
he has freely granted me the controsie betvveene us; which is, that
unpreaching ministers, are no ministers, and consequently, not to be
communicated with: do evidently show, that he did not well know himself
what he did in charging me, so far beyond christian modesty, for defending
nothing else in these points, but that which his own vvritings do publicly
witness against him to be Gods truth. So that of al oother causes, his bare
(and by his own witness, for the most part false) accusations, ought least of
all to disvvade me from this labor, though I never meant to aunsvvere him. But
by the grace of God he shall be ansvvered, and that very shortly.

And the Petition being in the behalf of Gods honor, and the good of his
Church, the small regard that the Parliament has had heretofore unto such
suites, ought not greatly to discourage me, the number, might, power, and
authority of the enemies of the cause, much less. He that rules the hearts of
men, can incline them to the setting forth of his own glory when he thinks
good. That which the Lord, for some cause seeming good unto his vvisdome, does
not grant at one time, he (being for the promoting of his honor) lightly
brings to pass at some other season. And the attempts of his children for
the buylding of his Church, have not alvvayes that success which they vvish
under their hands. For he uses the endeavors of some, not to finish the
building, but to be a preparation unto that work which he means to effect
by the hand of others. Zerubabel and Ezra labored very hardly in the building
of Jerusalem; the Lord did not finish the work by their means: and yet that
which they did, was a great furtherance unto Nehemiah, whose hands the Lord
used in joining the wall. So the endeavors of Gods children in our days, may
have their effect to the glory of God, and the comfort of his Church amongst
our posterities.

It was a common demand the last Parliament, where the cause of reformation
(being then labored for) was 26. or 28. years agone, and wherefore after so
many years of the Gospel, enjoyed in this land, the motion of altering the
outvvard state of the Church, in the offices and officers thereof? Came it so
out of time to be considered off? Least the like objection should be used in
the ages to come; behold, the mountayns of Wales, do now in the 31. year of
the reign of Queen ELIZABETH, call heaven and earth to witness, that they are
weary of their dumb ministers, nonresidents, Lord Bishops, etc. and that they
desire to be watered by the dew of Christ's holy Gospel, and to be compassed
about, with that beautiful wall of his holy government. Be it then granted,
that the Lord in anger toward our sins, does not account us now living,
worthy to be invited by her right excellent Majesty and the state, as Jsrael
was sometimes, by the godly king Hezekiah; to give the hand to the Lord, 2.
Chro. 31.8
and to come unto the Sanctuary which he has chosen, and serve the Lord our
God, that the fiercenes of his wrath should turn away from us: yet
notvvithstanding, least it should be prejudicial unto our children, that we
never claymed any interest unto the truth of the Gospel, and never desired to
be unburdened of our blind and tyrannical guydes: This Petition of mine
shall be a witness that both has bin labored for. Whosoever they be then, that
would vvish men, not to trouble themselves in that cause, wherein in their
judgments, they can see no hope of preuayling; do not consider, that thereby
they bereave our posterities of a great means, to come by that which the
children of God now living, would so willingly obtain. And they do not
consider, that as the Lord has appointed some to lay the foundation, and make
up the buylding of his Church; so he has ordained others, to prepare, and as
it were, to cleanse the place where he means to buyld his Temple.

The adversaries of this cause may be many, and of great countenance; but we
know that the Lord has committed all power in heaven, and in earth, not
unto man, but unto his own son Christ Jesus, the alone head and king over
his Church. Math. 28.18
The cause therefore in hand being his, in whose hands is all power and
dominion; why should we fear any thing that earth can invent against the
same? And if the question were, who ought to be terrified in this matter,
they by whom the Petition is promoted, or they who oppugn the same: it shall
be found that the adversaries hereof, have no other cause, but to be stricken
with a desperate and uncomfortable fear: Whereas on the other side, the
patrons of the suite may be every way exceedingly comforted. For what else do
the enemies hereof, but (after the manner of the wicked mentioned in the book
of JOB) say unto the Almighty, depart thou from us? Chap. 2^.13 15.
Because we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, any further then it may
stand with the upholding of the corruptions received and mayntained in our
Church, by the consent of the State. Yea, and in their practice they say, who
is the Almighty that we should serve him; if he be so strickt in his
vvorshipp, that he cannot abide a Church government to be mayntained, which
may be changeable, at the pleasure of the civil State? Who is the Almighty
that we should serve him; if none must he in our ministry, but such as both
for their gifts and faythfulnes, do in deed show themselves to be his true
messengers? Who is the Almighty that we should serve him; if men for the
bettering of their outvvard state, may not be Lords over their brethren, and
ioyn living with living, that they may be able to maynayne a part unbeseeming
their calling. And I would they did not say, what profit is there, if we did
stoup so lovv unto him, as without delay, there should nothing be in our
Church, which might svvarue from that severe rule of his word? Should Gods
children then fear least these men should have the upper hand over them, and
the Lords cause which they mayntayn. Nay, I tell you, that although such
adversaries, were of that power and authority, that it might be demanded,
Who they were that durst presume to declare their evil vvayes unto their
faces: yet should they undoubtedly be made as stubble before the vvind, and as
the chaff, which the storm caryeth away. For this cause and every one, that
in the sincerity of his heart, seeks the prosperous success thereof, may
boldly say with JOB: Mine enemy shall be as the wicked; Job. 27.7. and 20.27.
and 21.10.
and he that rises against me, as the unrighteous, the heavens shall declare
his wickedness, and the earth shall rise up against him. The increase of his
house shall go away, it shall flow away in the day of his wrath, his eyes
shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty.
This shall be the portion of as many as to the end, oppose themselves against the
cause of reformation now labored for. It is not a matter of dalliance, to
vvithstand the powerful ordinance of God, in the government of his Church,
especially when in the steed thereof, the merchandise of shameless Babylon
is maintained. It is but folly to fight against the lamb, in the defense of
her pleasant things; For the lamb shall overcome, because he is the king of
kings, and the Lord of Lords, and they that are of his side, chosen, and
called, and faithful. Great Babylon the mother, that mighty harlot, being in
her full strength in this land, was not able to stand against him; what then
shall it boot the vveake daughter to strive? And let them fear and take
heed, who defend the daughters fornication, least they be made partakers of
the punishment denounced against them, who committed adultery with the
mother. Themselves they may hurt, but their practizes against Gods truth and
his Saints, ought not to discourage the Lords chosen, from standing to the
cause of their master. Be they then never so many, never so powerful, never
so flovvrishing, never of so great authority in the eyes of the world, who
cannot abide that the Gospel should have such a free passage in this kingdom,
as the heat thereof should melt whatsoever is amiss in our state; yet the
Lord not being of their side in this point, they shall not be able to
prevail. For this is that cause against which, never man as yet striued and
prospered. J know there will be many in this Parliament, who questionless
favor the cause of God from their heart, and would be forvvard in pleading for
the sovereignty of Christ Jesus, if they savv not their endeavors crossed and
withstood, by many of high place and authority. All those whosoever they be,
J do from the bottom of mine heart earnestly beseech, that they would
consider, that in dealing for the putting down of the dumb ministry, for
the abolishing of Nonresidency, and the rooting out of Lord Archb. and Lord
Bishops, and whatsoever else the right hand of the Lord has not planted: and
in seeing that the word preached, may freely sound thorowout this kingdom,
they do thereby nothing else, but desire that the God of heaven and earth may be
acknoledged, and accounted worthy alone to rule in his Church within this
land. The consideration whereof, ought so to move and stir them up, as no
creature under heaven should be able to dismay them, in this their Petition and
request. They seek that he may rule his Church by his word and laws alone,
at whose reproffe the 2 Job. 21.12
pillars of heaven do tremble and quake. They seek that he may be
acknowledged for the only Savior and redeemer of men, and for the only
lavvgiuer in his Church, who has protested that he vvil not abide to impart
the glory thereof unto any other. And whom should they then fear in this
suite? The Lord has promised, that none who trust in him shall perish, Psalm.
34.22. And he has promised, that although the wicked vvatch to slay the
righteous, yet he will not leave him in his hand, psalm. 37.32. Yea, he has
promised to be with those that fear him, when they Esaias. 48.1.2.
pass through the waters, that they should not be ouerflovven; and when they
walk thorough the fire, that they should not be burnt. Wherefore then, should
they fear man, whose breath is in his nostrels, as long as they sincerely stand
to the cause of their God. Though they be but a fevv in number, yet the Lord
with legions of Angels stands on their side, to d scomfite all those that
contend with him. Oh J would that the words of the Lord spoken by Isaiah
the Prophet, were thoroughly written in the hearts of as many in this
honorable assembly, as for the fear of man will be the hardliar drawn,
thoroughly to stand to the cause of their God. For thus comfortably the Prophet,
Chap. 51 of his prophecy, speaks unto all those that with an upright heart
seek the honor of the Lord. Hear me, ye that follow after righteousness, and
ye that seek the Lord, look to the rock whence you are hewn, and to the
hole of the pit whence you are dug. Consider Abraham your father, and Sarah
that bare you; for I called him alone and blessed him, and increased him.
Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, and the people in whose hearts is
my law, fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be you afraid of their
rebukes: I, even I am he that comfort you. Who art thou that thou should
fear a mortal man, and the son of man, which shall be made as grass, and
forgettest the Lord thy maker, which has spredd out the heuens, and laid the
foundations of the earth, etc.

Now then, whosoever they be, that are timorous in the cause of God, (as
alas, what flesh and blood is not too too fearful) here is a steadfast rock
for them to lean unto; here is a defender for them, under the shadovv of
whose vvings, they might be bold to contemn whatsoever their adversaries can
bring against them. Are they but a fevv in number, let them look unto Abraham,
he was called alone, and yet the Lord blessed him, and increased him. Are they
afraid of the rebukes of man? why they seek the righteous vvayes of the Lord,
and therefore he commands them not to fear. Are they powerful and mighty,
by whom the suit is d scountenaunced: yea, but notvvithstanding they are but
mortal, and they shall be made as grass, and the time will come, wherein it
shall be demanded; Where are they now that withstood the cause of God in the
Parliament of England? Js not their memory written in water, and their hope
perished together with them? To desire the free passage of the Gospel in this
land, together with the speedy remoouing of all that hinders the same, is
to plead the cause of that God, who has controlled kings and great Monarchs,
yea quite overthrown them and their kingdoms, for denying the free use of
his service within their dominions. Even the cause of that God, who has not
only brideled the rage of tyrants, entending the suppression of his truth,
but also turned that, unto the great good of his Church, whereby they sought
to work the ruin thereof. Pharaoh, Achitophel, Senacherib, Haman, came to
the grave with blood, when in the eyes of men, the most of them were
likeliest to prevail, and the cause of God and his children unlikeliest to
stand. The Lord in this kingdom can do the like when he thinks good. Ezra.
4.7.8. and 5.3. Cap. 6.7. and 7.23.
The accusations and slanders of Mithridath, Tabeel, Rehum, Shimsai,
Shetherboznai, with their companions, did seem likely once and again, to
hinder the buylding of the holy city: but at the length it brought from Darius,
a most sure and strong commandment for the furtherance of the work, clean
contrary to the expectation of the enemy. And who knovveth whether the Lord
at this Parliament, will not stir up the spirits of the Sates, and especially,
of her R. excellent Majesty, that they may say unto the enemies of this cause,
as Darius did unto the men aforenamed. Therefore Tatnai, captain beyond the
river, and Shetherboznai with their companions; be ye far from them. Suffer
the work of this house of God to go forvvard. And Ezra. 7.23.
whatsoever is by the commandment of the God of heaven, let it be done
speedely for the house of the God of heaven; for why should he be wroth
against the realm, etc. wherefore beloved, whosoever you be, that at any time
shall be employed, either as Parliament or otherwise, in the s^tting forvvard of
the cause of reformation, stand manfully in defense of the truth, and the
liberty of his Church

The practices of the adversaries, I mean of our bishops, show manifestly,
that these relics of cursed Babylon, which they maintain among us, must
needs go away with a noise, as the rest was overthrown. They will not
yield to the truth, howsoever it has gotten the upper hand of them. The
Lord must use violence to throvv them out, as he did against the caterpillars
their forefathers. Revel. 18.19. They have manifested hitherto, how desperate
and past recovery, the cause which they defend is become, in that they have
denied, to yield a quiet and a brotherly conference or disputation, with
those who are contrary minded unto them. Jf J may but procure this with our
BB. in Wales, I will loose my life, if they be not overthrown: which I
speak not, without the humble acknowledgement of mine own weakness. And
let me not be thought by any, to deal too confidently, for J deal in a sure
and a confident cause, which is not timerously to be dealt in, but in the fear
of God, with all boldness to be stood to, and avouched. And whenever they or
any of theirs, shall but adventure their places against my life; they shall
perceive by the grace of God, that there is strength in the cause, which
hitherto they have withstood to their small gain.

Yea, but I might have dealt more sparingly against them. It were pity in
deed, but J should entreat the high court of Parliament to heal the disease of
my country, but so notvvithstanding, as they would suffer the cause of the
grief and misery thereof still to remain. The Parliament should be sued unto
for help, against the disease and bane of the country of Wales, but so as
they would favor the causes thereof. And what malladie is there J pray you in
our Church, whereof the dumb ministers, nonresidents, our Lord BB. with the
rest of that ungodly generation are not the cause. J should spare them who
spare not the Church, and in whose eyes the glory of God is not esteemed, and
yet the Lord knovveth, I hate them no farther then they are Gods enemies. Their
favor I desire not, as long as they continue to be the adversaries of the
Church. If they would yield peace unto it, I would be soon brought to lay
down my complaints against the^.

Concerning you my dear countrymen, whom God of his infinite goodness and
mercy, has translated out of the kingdom of darkness, unto the blessed
possession of the heavenly Jerusalem; I beseech you very earnestly, that you
would be careful to walk worthy the Gospel of christ. Be careful hereof,
whether your abode be in England or in Wales, and at any hand, endeavor to
live where you may enjoy the means of the word. And be careful to have the
Lord purely worshipped in your families. Take heed of the profanenes, whereby
the most now living, are drawn to contemn Gods judgments against their
sins. The time vvil come, wherein it shall be made known that your hope was not
in vain. Labor diligently, as far as your callings will suffer you, to be a
means to convey that treasure unto your country, whereof you your selves have
bin made partakers. Particularly, let me here put you in mind, R. honorable
and worshipful, who of my country are in this Parliament, to acquaint this
honorable court, with the miseries of our country, and to be earnest for a
redress. And you my brethren, who having fit gifts, and are employed in the
ministry, either in your own country or in England, forget not I pray you,
to be remembrancers of Sion, give the Lord no rest, until the righteousness
thereof break forth as the light, and the salvation thereof as a burning
lamp. J would to God that I might join with you, and you with me, in some
endeavor, whereby the means of salvation might be had in our native country;
it is my hearty desire. The God of peace, who has called us to his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, make us perfect, confirm, strengthen and stablish us to
the end, Amen.

A view of some part of such public wants and disorders as are in the service
of God, within her Majesty's country of Wales, together with an humble
PETITION, unto this high Court of Parliament for their speedy redress. Anno
1588.
THe aeternall God, before whom I now stand, and shall stand in that day,
either to be acquitted or condemned; knows that the pitiful and miserable
estate of my pitiful and miserable countreimen, the inhabitants of Wales; do
enforce me in most dutiful and humble manner, at this time, both to lay open
before your eyes, who by the providence of God, are now to be assembled
together in this high court of parliament: the wantes and deformities of the
service of god in wales, my dear and native country, and also to entreat with
the like submission, that the same by your wisdoms may be speedely redressed.
The Lords holy service among that people has many corruptions and more wants.
Their case in regard thereof is very pitiful. Few or none there be who are
thoroughly touched to have compassion thereof. The means of redress is in the
hands of this assembly, who are met together, to the end that all the subjects
of this kingdom, may with fredome and liberty acquaint them with their suits
and Petitions, for the promotinge of Gods glory, and the good of their cuntry.
And therefore, in that I make known unto this high court, the greefes of my
country, and desire the redress thereof; therein I neither entreat any thing
which lies not in your power to grant, nor crave that, wherein the case being
neglected by others, I may not lawfully be a suter. The reason that moves me
thereunto, is the discharge of my duty toward the Lord my God, toward his
Church, towatdes my native country, and toward you of this honorable
assembly, which could not stand with my silence now in this suit. Concerning
the Lord, because I am a pore wretched sinner, upon whom he has showed great
mercies, in pardoning my great offenses often committed against his majesty; I
have by his grace taken a bond of my self, to seek the promoting of his
honor by all means possible: and in the seeking thereof, to utter the truth as
far as my calling will permit, without respect of person, time, place, estate,
or condition of life whatsoever; and so to become an utter enemy unto all
these corruptions (by what authority or person soever they be maintained)
whereby his holy service is hindered. And therefore you of this honorable
assembly are not to marvel, that I both seek the overthrow of these
corruptions in Wales, whereof a non I will speak more at larg, whereby the Lords
holy and sacred ministry is shamefully polluted, and his service with the
salvation of his people greatly withstood: and also lay upon you whose
authority, good name, credit, estimation, and high place, I ought and by the
grace of god will defend, against all the detractors thereof, eue^ with the loss
of my life when it shall be needful; the stain and discredit of denying gods
heavenly truth, the passage joined with the continuance of the lamentable
misery of souls, and the defense of monstrous impiety, eue^ in gods own
house, unless you yield unto the suit, whereunto at this present you are
entreated to be favorable. As for the Church of God into which I have bin
begotten through the word preched, by means of my abode in England, in these
peaceable days of her highness. I have wholly dedicated my self to seek the
flowrishing estate thereof by laboring to beutifie the same, both in the
plucking up by the roots, of these filthy Italian weeds, wherewith it is now
miserably deformed; and planting therein whatsoever might be for the comlines
of Gods orchard, in respect of my poor country; because it pleased the Lord
of life that therein I first saw the light of the sun, and have been by my
parents there living, brought up in both the universities of this land, to the
end if ever the Lord enabled me, I should procure the good of my native
countrymen. I have vowed my self dutifully to benefit them all the ways I
may. And in doing them good, I purpose not to respect mine own quietness, yea or
life, where my death can win them the gospel. And wherein shall I stand my dear
cuntrimen in any steed, if not by speaking in their behalf then, when their
wantes are most pitiful, and they not able, or not willing, to make known
their misery? if not in blessing their deaf ears, in removing the stumblinge
block from before the eyes of the blind? if not in labouringe to bring them
to heaven, who of their own natures should live eternally in a worse place to
their woe? Their misery at this day consisting partly, in the great ignorance
of God wherein they live, partly in those corruptions and unlawful callings,
where by the Church generally within her majesty's dominions is pestered; I am
now with all humilytie to seek the redress both of the one and the other at
the hands of this honorable assembly. This ignorance also, and these
corruptions standing as enemies in the way to hinder my brethren from eternal
life, I profess my self to seek their overthrowe and confusion, and by the
Lords assistance as long as I live, never leave either of both, until the
Church of God in Wales be disburdened of such unnatural plants. Concerning
you of this honorable assemblye, seeing I have received the former blessings
through your hands by means of the outward peace, whereof her right
excellent majesty has made the whole land partaker from the Lord, I cannot of
conscience; but in most humble submission and reverent manner, put you in mind
of the estate wherein you stand before the Lord, unless at this your meetinge,
there be order taken, for the reforming in Wales of such things as now shall be
made known unto you to be amiss, and you earnestly with all reauerence and
duty, entreated to reform. May it please you therefore to understand, that
there is not only such a defect of the service of the everliving God in all the
public meetinges for the most part, of all the inhabitants of Wales, her
majesty's free borne subjects and people: as the most parishes within that
cuntry, want the means of salvation, and have wanted the same all this time of
her prosperous government: but also that there is such corruptions in that part
of Gods service which is established, as the Lords holy and sacted ministry,
with all other ecclesiastical functions, pertaining unto the outwatd service of
God, and the government of his Church, are most intollerablie abused, and
profaned by such as are there tolerated to intermedle with them. And may it
please you in like sort, that some order may be taken, whereby the service of
God in his pure worship, being as you hear, many ways defective and corrupt
among the people, may be without delay restored unto the integrity, which
shall be acceptable in the sight of God, and the means of their salvation who
profess the same. This most humble and most weighty petition, I am the rather
encoraged at this time to prefer, in as much as it does not only tend to the
salvation of many thousands souls, who^ now (alas) perish in miserable
darkness and ignorance, but concerns the furtherance, which is the point
especially to be respected, of the pure and sincere worship of the eternal
God. And it is that cause, being my second encouragement, which you of this
high court of parliament profess all of you to favor. For who is he that will
not profess him self to be the fauorer of a suit tending to the honor of God,
and the deliverance of men from eternal woe and perdition? And it is that
cause wherein every of you are bound upon your alegeance unto the Lord and her
majesty, laying al other matters aside, first and principally to deal; and so
to deal as you suffer not your selves, for any worldly respects, either by
the utter rejecting, or by the cold and careless intertaining hereof, to
betraie God, to betray his truth, to betraie the salvation of men, and to
betray the whole kingdom unto the fiery wrath of Gods heavy displeasure: Of
all which sins the Lord himself finds and pronounces every one of you to
be guilty, that will not labor at this time of your assembly, for the
promoting of the cause now in hand. And howesoeuer in former times, he has
seemed hitherto to wincke at the careless respect, which you have had to his
true service: yet you are now to understand, that it is to be feared, lest
shameful and speedy destruction will betide the whole kingdom, if the suite
whereupon the worshipp of Gods own Majesty stands; be as slenderly
entreated of the parliament of England, as always heretofore it has been. And
that the petition may apear to be no other, then that, which he by whom alone
all kingdoms and common welths are maintained, requires without contradiction
to be granted, by this honorable assembly, except his heavy wrath and
displeasure, would be procured upon the whole land. And that it may apear to be
no other then that, the grant where of, is the only way to save them on whose
behalf it is made; no other the^ that which no state, no kingdom, no council,
prince, potentate, high or low can deny, except they would show them selves
to have no care of religion and piety: that these things I say may appear, we
are to consider more at large of the petition, and then whether it be such, as
upon the denial thereof, the wrath and anger of God is to be expected, for to
fall upon them, who shall deny the same, and the whole land for their sin.
Now therefore, if there be nothing else required at your hand, in this whole
treatise following, but that which the Lord himself from heaven, pronounces
to be so nearly joined with the former points; as upon the refusal of the
suite, you shall openly declare, that you are an assembly wherein the Lords
cause shall not be hard; an assembly wherein the felicity of miserable men
shall not be respected; an assembly who wittingly and willingly call for the
judgments of God upon the whole kingdom; an assembly wherein truth,
religion, and piety can bear no swaye: then I hope that none will be found in
this honorable court, to be such an enemy unto the honor of God, the felicity
of men, and the quiet state of this common wealth: none so profane, wicked,
and irreligious, as even to think that the consultation of this matter may be
differred. But if on the other side, the suite be found to be of no such
importance, as before is expressed, or if I be found to write any thing
impertinent unto the former points, or not to have behaved my self so dutiful
in my style and manner of writing toward this honorable court, as it became the
basest vassel under heaven, having a calling to deal in the like cause, to
carry himself toward the princes of his people, then let not my life be
precious in your sight. Here therefore, with all humility and reverence, before
the eternal God, his elect Angels and Church, her right excellent, our dread
sovereign, Queen ELIZABETH; I call every one of you to record, that upon
the peril of my life, I will show, that you cannot but give ear unto the
suite, which is now preferred unto you, though by my base and sinful hands,
except you will neglect the honor of God, set light by the salvation of his
people, endanger the state of her Majesty (whom the Lord long preserve unto his
glory) with the whole kingdom, and proclaim unto the world, that all
religion and truth is perished from among you. My manner of dealing herein, as
it shall be by the grace of God in all duty and submission; as writing unto
those, whose authority and places, I am not without great reverence to
consider, so shall it be plain and free without minishing or clipping any part
of the truth (for the fear or favor of any creature) which it concerns you
to hear; wherein I will utter nothing but that, which by the assistaunce of
God, I will seal with my blood, if I shall be driven thereunto. The reason
moving me to so free and plain a kind of writing, as neither I dealing in the
same cause, nor yet any else before me have used, is not (the Lord is my witness)
because I would hereby, arrogate unto my self, the praise of a bold rebuker
of states, and great personages; but it is first, because I deal in that
matter, upon the goodness whereof, I may presume to speak the whole truth of
God, especially writing unto an assembly professing true religion. Secondly,
because the suite is put up unto them, who although they profess to seek the
honor of God: yet have heretofore altogether undutifully refused to give the
hearing unto any motion tending unto the reformation of the religion, which
they pretend to favor and profess. Some of them thinking the cause at all not
worthy to be dealt in. Others, not altogether disliking the suite, judged
notwithstanding the time wherein it was to be handled, not to be as yet come.
Because they saw that the base and supplicatorie manner whereby it desired the
hearing, made al other causes coming with authority from men, to be preferred
before it. The most who in deed sincerely favors the cause, have thought it
to be a gaineles matter to deal at all therein. For as much as it is the
general voice of all men, that reformation cannot be taken in hand, without
the high and heavy displeasure of her Majesty, who (to speak as I am
persuaded) being borne in hand, by the ungodly persuasions of some godless and
irreligious men of the Ecclesiastical state, that the Church within her
Majesty's dominions, cannot be at a better stay then it is; has not without
great reason, been hitherto the hard liar induced to have the cause of religion
again dealt in, which she is persuaded altogether to be in a tolerable sort,
according to the will of her God. Being also undutifully borne in hand that the
endeavor of reforming religion is nothing else, but a new fangled and seditious
attempt, proceeding from the factious and discontented brains of those, who
are slandered to desire thereby nothing else, but the alteration of the present
state, dangerous to her royal crown and person, and ruinous unto the whole
kingdom. In respect whereof, the cause offering it self again to be
considered of this high court; it became the same to come, with a maiesticall
and terrifying countenance; that if it pleased the Lord, it might this way for
fear compel them dutifully to stoop unto it, whose favor and good liking in
a peaceable manner, hitherto it could by no means procure. And it became it so
to offer it self, as withal it might appear, that the enterprise of
reforming religion, is not a matter tendinge to the disturbinge of the
commonwealth, and the disliking of her Majesty. Except men would slanderously
surmise the estate of this kingdom, to be so out of square, as Gods truth
cannot have passage therein, without the imminent ruin of al, and slanderously
report her Majesty's will and affection, to be then intollerably crossed, when
the will of her God, is sought to be established: which assertions, shall be
manifested to be grievous, and undutiful slanders against her Majesty and
the state; by the opening of such things as being amiss within Wales, the
Lord requires to be reformed, at the hands of her Majesty and this
Parliament.

The wants therefore, and corruptions of the service of God in Wales, joined
with the misery of that people are; first, in that the most congregations
within that country, have all this time of the Gospel preached in England,
had no other service of God, for the working of faith and repentance sounding
in them, but such, as whereby the people partaking the same, cannot possibly be
saved ordinarily. Mistake me not. For I do not say, that either that service,
which all this time of her Majesty's government they have had, and now have, is
idolatrous, or that by the public authority of her Majesty and the
Parliament, they have bin publicly enjoined, to profess any other religion,
then that only true religion, in the profession whereof alone, ordinary
salvation is to be had. But I affirm that God is not otherwise served in the
most assemblies there, then that way, whereby the food of eternal life, shall
never be ordinarily conuayed to the people. This I affirm, and this I will
stand unto, because for the space now of 30. years complete, they have every
where, for the most part, wanted the preaching of the word, without which, as
it is plainly set down in many places of the Iam. 1.12. 1 Pet. 1.2^. Job.
33.23. 1. Cor. 121. Romans 10.14. Ephesians. 1.13. and 2.17. Acts. 20.32. Pro.
8.34.35. Isay. 53.11.
word, and I have elsewhere largely proved unto her Majesty and this high
court, ordinarily, no flesh can be saved. Now my Lords, and you the rest of
this Parliament, consider I pray you, what care has bin had of the souls of
men under her Majesty's government, and how in the days of reckoning and
account these things will be answered. Consider how lamentable a case it is,
that in the flowrishingest government for outward peace, that is again under
the cope of heaven; where public idolatry has been bannished, not one family
or one tribe; but a whole nation should perish for want of knowledge. And see
whether I have not sufficient cause to deal with you on the behalf of my
country. My cry, my cry is not the cry of Deuteronomy. 11.8
giltlesse and innocent blood, which were very woeful, but of lost and damned
fowls, which is most lamentable: and give you ear unto it, my LL. least the
blood of souls be laid to your charge, and required at your hands. For it is
not the judispensible duty of the Parliament to give ear unto this cry? How
then I pray you, will it be answered before the judge of all the world in the
day of judgment, if you be careless of a duty so necessarily required at
your hands: when our Savior Christ affirmed it to be nothing availeable unto
men, to win the whole world, Luke 9.22.
if they lose their own souls. Did he thereby think you, not only enforce
that they are in a miserable taking, who in respect of the knowledge of their
salvation, know not the right hand from the left: but also forcible in fear,
that governors unto whom of trust he has committed inferiors, discharge not
their duties in his sight, unless they have great care of the salvation of
their people? Questionless he does. Let them therefore be afraid of aeternall
shame and confusion, who blushe not to be busy in the consultation of every
trifling matter, and would be accounted great state men for tything Minte and
Cummin, whereas in the mean time, they are not ashamed, no not to withstand
the consultation, purposing to bring that to pass, which the wisdom of God
himself Jesus Christ, has pronounced to be worthy the whole world, even the
saving health of men. Well the day will come, how soon he alone knows, in
whose hands are the keys of all knowledge; wherein it shall appear by woeful
experience, and that too late, what an heavy reckoning will be made with such
Parliament men. And take you heed that are of this assembly, now at the length
after so many warnings, lest you be found in their number, who make light
account of the cause of the Gospel offered unto them, and who think the
matter of men's salvation, to be nothing else but a conceit, wherewith the
immaginations of melanchollicke heads are usually troubled. The cause one day
shall be found worth the consideration, howsoever men now think that they may
without damage securely contemn the same. And I would humbly entreat this
high court more seriously to consider thereof. The suite is, that Gods honor
may be truly yielded unto him by the subjects of this kingdom, and that
their souls may be saved in the day of Jesus Christ; such a suit as a greater
cannot be consulted of amongst the sons of men. And will not the wisest and
greatest assembly in the land, take order that this may be harkened unto? Will
they not consult of a way how men may come unto the means whereby they may be
saved; To what end else my Lords should you be assembled together, if this
cause be not handled in your meetings? A Parliament gathered together in
England, in the days of the Gospel under Queen ELIZABETH, and the cause of
Gods honor, and the felicity of the subjects never thought upon, never
accounted worthy the consultation. Such a state and such a government may
flowrish and continue in peace for a time: but undoubtedly the destruction
thereof is decreed with the Lord, the execution of which decree, shall not be
ouerlong deferred, without speedy repentance. Can there be a meeting of all
states in the land to consult in Parliament, what may be most behoffull for
the promoting of Gods glory, and the good of the commonwealth, and yet no care
had, how the aeternal misery of a whole nation, even almost the fourth part of
the kingdom may be prevented? What is this else but to dally with Gods honor,
and to delude his people of their salvation? When especially after so many
Parliaments, in a kingdom freely professing the Gospel for the space of 30.
years, in the fourth part of the kingdom, there shall be found such gross
ignorance, as no region under heaven, could at any time yield the like
president, so long after the bannishing of idolatry. I do not solace my self
in considering the misery of my native cuntrimen, neither do I think thereof
at all, unless it be to bewail their estate, and to consider how it may be
redressed. This I may say of them without offense, that they never as yet for
the most part, enjoyed the preaching of the Gospel, since they were professed
idolators under popery. Now what felicity concerning spiritual things, a
profession without the Gospel preached can have, the same they may enjoye I
deny not. But what will be the end of such a profession? verily even this.
After a few days miserably spent in this life such professors shall be sure (for
any thing that is otherwise revealed) to live in hell for evermore. Will it
then profit them at all, to have lived in a kingdom professing true religion,
though they have gained the whole world therein, seeing they are sure to lose
their own souls: because in this life they have wanted the preaching of the
Gospel. And if this that I have set down be not sufficient to express their
misery, and to move you to consider of them, I know not what may be accounted
miserable, or what may procure compassion. Or if this will not move you to
grant them the preaching of the Gospel, then shall you leave unto posterities,
but a small testimony of your religious hearts, and love to the Lords
sanctuary. Is there not an heaven my Lords, after this life for men to go
unto? Is it possible that they shall ordinarily go thither, who never enjoyed
the preaching of the Gospel? Or can our people in Wales look for
extraordinary salvation? And will not you see that they be no longer destitute
of this means, whereby they may walk in the statutes of life and not die? Is
this peticion that God may be truly honored, and the souls of men saved,
hurtful to the state, dangerous to her Majesty's ctowne and dignity, and
contrary unto her affection? cannot this state stand if God should be truly
honored, and that people trained in the ways of godliness? Cannot her Majesty's
crown and dignity stand, if these things be enacted in Parliament? And must
she needs be undutifully gainsaid, when the honor of her God, and the
blessedness of her people are pleaded for? Whosoever have, do, or will
slander their sovereign, and the whole state, in this vile and undutiful
sort, it is pity they were not severely punished. Again my LL. is that a
religious assembly? Is that an assembly wherein truth, piety, the honor of
God, and the aeternall happiness of men shall bear any sway, where this
petition can not be granted? Which desires nothing else, but that which may be
enacted without the great hurt of any, and which ought to be granted,
whatsoever in the judgment of fleshly wise men might seem to ensue thereof.
They will never therefore in the sight of God and his Church, escape the
ignominy and stain of irreligious and profane men, whose eyes will not be
moved with compassion at the estate of our people, and defects of Gods service
among them. Now if I be thought to have reported any untruth, concerning
their estate, let me be brought face to face, for the trial hereof, with those
unto whom the care (I should say the spoil) of the Church there is committed,
and being convinced to have uttered any untruth, let me have no favor, but
dye the death, before you of this honorable assemblye, and my blood be upon my
own head, for impeaching the credit of the rulers of my people, and their
government, undutifully by public writing, whose estimation I know it to be
unlawful for me, even in thought once to violate.

I do here therefore before your Hh. offer to prove more at large, that the
most congregations in Wales, want the very especial outward marks of a
Church, and so the means of salvation by the word preached, and the comfort
of faith, by the right administration of the Sacraments. I also offer to
prove, that your Hh. without your speedy repentance shall be reckoned with,
because that in this point, you have plowed but iniquity, and sowed wickedness,
and so as Job says, Job. 4.8.
you shall reap the same. Believe them not, who tell you that all is well
within Wales, and that they are a sort of clamorous and indiscreet men, who
affirm the contrary. Believe them not, who tell you that it belongs not unto
your duties to be careful of the estate of the Church, and that the Lord
requires no more at your hands, but the mayntenance of outward peace. As
though men committed to your government, were but droues of brute beasts,
only to be foddered, Ie. 17.13.14.
and kept from external invasions and inroods. Give ear rather unto the words
of the Prophet, who with a loud voice cries unto you; Why will you die, you,
your families and people, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence.
And why will you be damned (I may alude without injury unto the word) as the
Lord has spoken against all those governors, that will not see their people
provided Ezra 7.17.23. psa 2.10. and 101. 2. chr. 29 10. and 30.9 and 34.27.
ex. 20.10. genesis 18.19. 2. chr. 15.12.13. and 17.7.
for, of the means of salvation. Therefore hear not the words of the
prophets, who tell you, that you shall neither see sword nor famine, though you
be still as careless of your people, as hitherto you have been. Look the
punnishments both of flattering prophets, and of those that are deceived by
their flattery. Ierem. 14.15. Hear them not I say, but obey the Lord in the
execution of that duty which he exacteth at your hands, by calling your people
to the knowledge of his son, that you may live. For why should this land be
made desolate, for this your carelesnes? Ierem. 27.17. They prophecy vanity
and lies unto you, which say peace, peace, while you despise the Lord, and
walk in this secure course, or else Jeremiah is deceived. If they be prophets,
and if the word of the Lord be in their mouths, let them entreat her Majesty,
and you of this parliament, that the misery of helples Wales, may at this time
of your meeting be considered off, and redressed.

Thus I have set down some part of the wants ^n the service of God in Wales,
and some part of that misery, wherein my country is bewrapped; and which you
are bound unto the Lord (but by ^^e most humbly entreated) to redress. And
this ^s the cause wherein if you deal not, you betray ^he honor of God,
betraye his truth, betraye the ^eligion which you profess, and betraye her
Ma^estie, and the whole kingdom, unto the reuen^ing hand of God. For without
controversy, the continuance of our ignorance, and the defectes of Gods
service, will one day, and that shortly, I fear me, bring the Lord in
fearful and consuming judgementes to take punnishment of you, your wives
children, families and the wholland: because in your states and consultation,
his honor, and the blood of men's souls were not regarded. But this is neither
all the misery of the inhabitants of Wales, neythet is this all that the Lord
requires to be amended by this Parliament, under pain of his heavy wrath.

In the second place then we are to consider, the corruptions tolerated by
the positive laws of this land, and countenanced by the authority of this high
court of Parliament, in the service of God within Wales. Whereby no small
dishonor redoundeth unto the Majesty of God, and wherein no small part of the
spiritual misery of that people does consist. For the removing of which
corruptions, it behooves the Parliament, with speed to be very careful, even
before such time as the Lord calls the land to an account, for the wicked
constitutions therein maintained. Here therefore I affirm, unless without
delay you labor to cleanse the Church under your government in Wales, of all
L. Bb. dumb ministers, nonresidents, archdeacons, commissaries, and all other
romish officers and offices, there tolerated, and so tolerated, as by the
consent and authority of the Parliament they are mainteyned; that you are both
in this life and the life to come, likely to be subject unto the intolerable
mass of Gods wrath, the execution whereof is not unlikely to fall upon you and
your houses, unless you prevent the fiercenes of the Lords indigna^^^^*

If Moses by a positive law, should have allowed the offering of strange fire
by Nadab and Abihu, tolerated the ministry of blemished and Leu. 20.18 23.
deformed Levites, ennacted that one not being of the line of Aaron, might
press before the Altar, Number. 16.10.18.7.
to offer the bread of his God: if David had made it lawful for Vzzah, to lay
his hand upon the Arc; if Josiah or any other the godly rulers had, either
given leave to the cursed shepheardes in their days, to place others in their
stead, to take Ezekiel. 44.9
the oversight of the Sanctuary? Or permitted a consecrated priest to be a
civil governor; briefly had established any thing in the Church government
prescribed by Moses, contrary to the commandment, had they not been in danger
of the Lords wrath? They had without controversy.

And shall you of the high court of Parliament be dispensed with, being guilty
(except you labor to remove the dumb ministry, nonresidence, with the usurped
and Antichristian seats of L. Bb. etc.) of tollerating and establishing greater
sins among your people in Wales, in steed of the government prescribed by
Jesus Christ? assure your selves no. I do therefore in this point also, for the
discharge of my duty and conscience toward the Lord, his Church, my
country, and the whole estate of this kingdom, taking my life in my hand
^estifying unto you, before the Majesty of God, and before his church that our
dumb ministers, that the callings of our L. Bb. archdea. commiss. with all
other remnants of the sacrilege brought unto the Church by that Romish
strumpet, and now remaining in Wales; are intolerable before the Lord, and
that it is not likely (...) ^uer you tollerating these things any longer,
shall escape Gods fiery wrath. The truth hereof I do briefly make known by
the reasons following, and offer to prove them more at large, even upon the
peril of my life, against our 4. L. Bb. all their chaplains, retainers,
favorers and well willers; whether in either of the two universities of this
land, or in any place else whatsoever. These things I offer to prove against
M. D. Bridges, who lately in a large volume, has undertaken their defense. In
which book of his, he has offered her Majesty and the Parliament most
undutiful injury, by going about for the maintenance of his own belly, and
the belies of the rest of his coat, to allien at the hears of the loyallest
subjects in the land, from their most careful prince and governors. As
though her Majesty and this honorable court, meant to turn the edge of the
sword against the^, who indeed deserve not to be threatened with the scabbord.
Compare page 448. of D Bridges his book with Bellarmine. cap. 10. li. 5. cont
3. and you shall find the one to have written the very same thing for the A^ch
that the other has for the pope
Into which book he has crammed as plain popery for the defense of our Bb.
as ever Harding, Saunders, Turrian, Bellarmine, or any other the firebrands and
ensign bearers of Romish treason against her Majesty's crown, have brought
for the Popes supremacy. And for as much as he in that book, has both
undertaken the defense of those corruptions, for the tollerating whereof, the
anger of God hangs over the whole land; and also showed himself to be
Ammonitish Tobiah, against the buylding of Jerusalem in Wales, by defending the
very breaches and ruins of the Babylonish overthrow, which by the just
judgments of God under popery we sustained, to be the perfectest building
that Sion can be brought unto; and so by this slander withstandeth the
salvation (which I doubt not) her Majesty and the parliament wish unto my
country. I have so framed the reasons following, as they overthrow the very
foundation and whole frame of that wicked book and of al others, written for
the defense of our established Church government.

Now that our dumb ministers, nonresidents, L. bishops, archdea. etc. are
nothing else but an increase of sinful men, Number. 22.14.
risen up in steed of their fathers the idolatrous Monks and Friars, still to
augment the fierce wrath of God against this land and our governors: and that
this book of D. Bridges, and whatsoever else has bin written for their
defense, are nothing else, but edicts, traiterous against God, and slanderous to
your sacred government, to defend the sale and exchange of Church goods, and
the very destruction of souls: to speak al in a word, that both these
corruptions and their defenses, are condemned by the Lords own revealed will, as
things directly against the same, and the laws of her Majesty, expressed in
his written word; and therefore not to be tolerated by your authority,
unless you think that you may tolerate sin by your laws; nor yet once to
be spoken for or countenaunced, unless you would plead for Baal, I prove by
these reasons.

That form of Church government which makes our Savior Christ inferior
unto Moses, Judge. 6.38.
is an impious, ungodly, and unlawful government flat contrary to the word,
Heb 3 6. Nom. 12.7.
and therefore in no case to be tolerated by any laws or authority, and the
book or books defending the same, are ungodly and impious books. But our
Church government in Wales, by L. bishops, archd. dumb ministers, and other
ecclesiastical officers (as for nonresidents, let this one reason for all serve
against them; they as much as in them lies, bereave the people over whom they
thrust themselves, of the only ordinary means of salvation, which is the word
preached) is such government, as makes the Lord of life, Jesus Christ inferior
to Moses, and this book of D. Bridges, with all other books of the like
arguments do the same. Therefore this government is a government, not to be
tolerated by law in any state, unless men would feel Gods heavy
judgementes for the same, and therefore also it is a government most pernicious
and dangerous, even in policy unto the civil government where it is
established, and this book or books defending the same, are vngody wicked and
pernicious books, traiterous against the Majesty of Jesus Christ; crying for
insufferable vengeance upon such as tolerate the^.

The proposition is not to be doubted off. For is that Church government or
books to be tolerated, which make Christ Jesus the son of the aeternall
God, yea God himself inferior unto Moses? The assumption is thus proved.
That government, and that book or books, which holds Jesus Christ God and
man, to have prescribed no external form of the government o^ his Church;
but such, as at the pleasure of the magistrate, when time and place requires
may be altered without sin; prefers Moses before Jesus Christ. This is
manifest out of the express words of the text. Heb. 3.2.6. Because the Lord
Jesus, being the son, is in that place compared with Moses a faithful
servant in deed, and preferred before Moses, in regard of the external
government, which Moses had so faithfully prescribed under the law, as it was
not to be changed at the pleasure of any magistrate, until Dan. 9.27.
the Messiah should cause the oblations to cease. For what king was there ever
in Judah, who without the breach of Gods law, 1 Chronicles. 23.24.
could alter the external regiment of the Jewish Church in the Leuitical
priesthood and officers? David I grant, ordained some things not mentioned in
the books of Moses, but that which he did, proceeded from the spirit of God,
and he had the word for his warrant. The same is to be said of whatsoever was
done by any other of the godly kings in Judah.

Now that the former comparison, Heb. 3.2.6. between the son and the
servant, Christ and Moses, is concerning the external regiment of the church,
and not the spiritual government of the inner man (as D. Bridges affirms page
51. lin 30.) it is plain. Because Moses had nothing to do with the governing
of the inner man; and therefore it were no prerogative for the Lord to be
preferred in faithfulness before Moses, in that dispensation wherein Moses never
dealt. Hence the^ I assume, that our form of Church government in Wales, and
this wicked book, holds Jesus Christ to have ordained such an external
form of government in his Church, at his departure from earth to heaven, as
at the pleasure of the magistrate, might be altered without the breach of Gods
institution: which thing D. Bridges affirms page 55. And all our prelates
grant that this high court of parliament may lawfully alter the form of Church
government now established. Therefore this government, and this book,
prefers Moses before Jesus Christ. And I cannot see how far this differs
from blasphemy. Now if Christ should be said to ordain no external regiment
at all, then Moses is far before him, and the thirst of superiority in our
prelates, and their accomplisses, is turned into extreme drunkenness of
impiety by this assertion.

I beseech the Lord in mercy to open your eyes that are of this assembly, that
you may see how he and his people have been dealt with by retaining such laws
in force, as justle and overthrow the (...) prerogative of his son. And the
Lord make you to see whether those men, that defend the interest of the son of
God in this point against the tiranicall usurpation of Bb. and have brought for
his title unanswerable evidence, out of the sacred records of Gods own
writings, offending either in matter or circumstance in no one thing, but that
they have not dealt more earnestly with your Hh. and more roundly with the
adversaries in the right of their master; have deserved to be imprisoned,
thruste out of their liuinges, reviled, and railed upon by ungodly and wicked
prelates unto the state, as seditious and discontented men with the civil
government, dangerous subjects and enemies unto her Majesty's crown. And
surely the cause being made known unto you, as now it is, how soever the Lord
may bear with your oversight heretofore, in the ignorance of the weight
thereof: yet if you do not, now abrogate such a church government, well may
you hope for the favor and intertainement of Moses, that is the curse of the
law: but the favor and loving countenance of Jesus Christ, I do not see
how you shall ever enjoy. To prosecute this point a little farther. In most
humble manner, I would know of you that are of this high court, whether of
these 2. points following you would be said to maintain, by the continuance of
the aforesaid callings and corruptions within Wales? For of either of the 2.
you must needs be guilty. First do you think you may presume to defend by
your authority and laws, such offices and officers in the ecclesiastical
state, whereby the church is to be governed; that is, such a Church
government, as in your consciences you cannot, but acknowledge to be unlawful
before the Lord, and hurtful unto his Church? Secondly do you think that any
Church government can be lawful before your God, and profitable unto his
church, which the Lord Jesus Christ himself has not prescribed in his word?
The which point whosoever goes about to defend, he, as before you have hard,
makes Jesus Christ, who as he is the only head of his church, so he has the
alone jurisdiction to ordain the government thereof, not to have in the
government of his own house, as great a prerogative as Moses had. I earnestly
entreat you the^, that as you would not be accounted, either to defend and
countenance those things which in your own consciences are sinful, or to
account such a Church government to be lawful, as cannot stand with the royal
souerainty, that Jesus Christ has in his church: so to see the spedy
abolishing of al dumb ministers Lord Bishops, Archdeacons, commissaries,
chauncellors, etc. Out of the church, under your government in Wales. You are
now entreated to abrogate no other Church government then that, which either in
your own consciences you must acknowledge to be unlawful and odious in the sight
of God, and therefore without delay to be removed, or such a regiment the
vnlawefulnes whereof, if with our Bishops you should go about to maintain,
then should you rob Jesus Christ of the prerogative and privilege wherewith the
spirit of God has adorned him. Heb. 3.6. Because it has been showed, that it
was not lawful for any state or power to ordain any other form of government
in the church under the law, then that prescribed by Moses. If then you think
our church government by Lord Bb. Archdeacons, dumb ministers, etc: in your
consciences to be unlawful, that is; if you think it unlawful for a minister,
to join the office of a civil Magistrate with his ministry, and to bear
rule and dominion over his brethren either as a spiritual or temporal Lord; if
you think it unlawful for a Lord Bishop to bear sovereign authority of all the ministers within his diocese; and if you think it unlawful that their
ministry with the execution thereof, should depend upon his pleasure, or
disliking; if also in your conscience you think it unlawful for him to take the
charge of all the souls within 4. or 5. shires, and to take the charge of those
men's souls, whose faces for the most part, he well knows he shall never
behold; if in like mannet you think it unlawful for an Archdeacon, whose name
and office was never read of in the word, and in his best institution is, but
to atend upon the ministers and look unto the poor (to have a great number of
ministers at his beck and controlment) or if you think it unlawful in your
souls and consciences, for our dumb ministers, the patrons of al ignorance and
blindenes, to take upon them the office of the imbassadors of Jesus Christ, to
declare his will unto the people, the best, part whereof, they them selves never
know: the^ there is no question to be made, but that either you will utterly
raze the memory of this wicked and ungodly generation out of the Church of
Wales, or openly manifest, unto men and angels, that you will to the
contumelious dishonor of your God, and the undoing of his church, countenance
and maintain L. Bishops, Archdeacons, dumb ministers, with the rest of that
ungodly race, whose corruptions in your own consciences you cannot but
detest. On the other side, if you think it lawful for you, to ordain, what
form of church government you like best of: and so hold it lawful to
maintain this established among us; then see what will follow the diminishinge
of the prerogative that Jesus Christ has in the government of his church. And
that I fear me will be this. The Lord will enter into judgment with you of
this parliament, for all the souls that hereafter shall be damned in Wales.
Because you make it lawful by your authority, for such guides to be over your
people, as cannot possibly lead, and direct them in the ways of godliness and
salvation. He will enter into judgment with you for all the sins that shall be
there committed, for want of government, which his son Christ has ordained as a
means to keep men from transgressing against their God. He will enter into
judgment with you for the monstrous profanation, whereby those proud, pope
like, and blind guides, have polluted his house in the days of your
government, which you should have withstood. He will enter in to judgmnt with
you for the punishments that are likely to fall upon them, because you have
countenanced, and freely priueleadged them by law, to provoke his wrath in
that grievous sort against their own souls. He will also (it is to be feared)
enter into judgment with the whole land, for this your sin, and make his
sword drunk with the blood of our slain men, yea he will give the whole kingdom,
high and and low, into the hands of the enemy, that is cruel and skilful to
destroy, that all the nations under heaven professing religion, may fear and
take heed, how they do not only deny to be governed by the laws of his
son Jesus Christ, but which is more grievous in stead thereof, establishe
such institutions as are directly against his majesty's revealed will. If those
things be not likely to fall upon us, except the above mentioned unlawful
callings of Lord Bb. dumb ministers, etc. be now at once even in this
Parliament rooted out of the church in Wales, let not my head go to the grave
in peace. Where are they now, who usually affirm the intent or motion of
removing L. Bb. dum ministers, ye the whole church government established in
wales, to be a matter odious in the sight of her Majesty, and dangerous to the
state? Cannot her Majesty abide to hear, that Christ Jesus should be more
faithful in his own house, then Moses was? Is it an odious hearing unto her
Majesty, that the church in her kingdom should be cleansed of al unlawful
callings and corruptions, and beutified, with the holy ordinances of her
savior Jesus Christ, even in her days; that the same praise might be truly
ascribed unto her, in the adges to come, which the spirit of God has yeeled
unto King Josiah. 2. Kin. 23.25.
Like unto Queen Elizabeth was there no Queen before her, that turned unto
the Lord with all her heart, with all her soul, and with all her might,
according to all the law of Moses, neither after her arose there any like unto
her. Cannot her Majesty I say abide these things? Far be it that any should
persuade them selves she cannot. Then are they undutiful slaunderers of her
highness, who to terrify the Parliament from dealing, concerning the redress
of the church, usually avouch such purposes, to be altogether vain, because
her Majesty will never be induced to yield her consent unto the removing of
the established government of the Church; neither is the slander any whit
less undutiful against the estate, when the kingdom is said to be
endangered, except Jesus Christ, should make it lawful for the Parliament to
tolerate what Church government the civil state can best away with. And it is
a point wherein you of this Parliament may show what hearts you bear unto the
sincerity of religion. My 2. reason follows.

That form of Church government, and that book or books, which make the
established regiment to be an human constitution, that is inclusiuely
according to the word (but no otherwise according to the word then the civil
government is, which also must 1. Pet. 2.13 2. Pet. 2.10.
be inclusiuely according to the same,) and so may at the pleasure of man be
altered, as the civil government may: that government and that book or
books, (besides that they prefer Moses before Jesus Christ) is a wicked and
pernicious government, Page 55.
and they ungodly and pestelent books.

But our Church government in Church causes, and this book of D Bridges with all other books of this grieste, make the ecclesiastical government to be
nothing else, but an humane constitution, which may be lawfully altered, and
abolished at the magistrates pleasure. Therefore our Church government in
Wales, and this book or books, are ungodly and wicked.

The proposition is proved by these resons. First they are wicked and
intolerable, because they make no difference between that which belongs to
the true worship of God, as ecclesiastical government does, and that which
apertaineth unto civil policy. Contrary to the apostle Peter, who affirms
in express words, that we have reaceaued by the knowledge of God, whatsoever
belongs unto true religion, in such sort as it is unlawful for man to add any
thing of his own invention thereunto. For so the word Eusebeia translated,
godliness, signifies in that place. Whereas the word has not so furnished us,
with whatsoever belongs to the civil magistracy, called Pet. 3.13.
man's ordinance by the same apostle, but that therein those things, that have
been and are invented by them that never knew God, are warrantable, and may be
inclusiuely according to the word. Secondly ecclesiastical government being
granted to be an human constitution, makes the Pope to have sufficient warrant
out of the word, If you read D. Bridges page 448. lin 3 you shall find him not
far from auouching this point.
not of his Idolatrous and false religion, but of his superiority, over all
civil Maiestrates and pastors within the ecclesiastical body of the church.
For why should not the pope the civil Maiestrate granting him this
superiority, as all they under his jurisdiction do) be allowed by the word, to
be above the emperor, and all other Magistrates and ministers whatsoever, if
the ecclesiastical government be an human ordinance? For I am assured that the
emperor, with all other princes in Europe, may lawfully choose a Magistrate
superior unto them all, if they will. And why may not this magistrate whom they
may lawfully choose (and he lawfully yield unto their choice) to be the highest
and superior go^or in christendom, to be a bishop, or an archb. ^f the Church
government be an humane ordinance, or if it be lawful for either of them to
be Lords, and to bear a civil office? Before I go farther, I am
particularly in this point, to deal with such in this parliament, as are our
L. Bb. in Wales. Here therefore in the audience of her R. excellent Majesty,
and this honorable council, (...) prove before you the B. of Landaff, David's,
A^aph and Bangor, that the Pope of Rome, whose ^uperioritie all sound hearted
christians do ac^nowledge to be intolerable and accursed, has ^ltogether as
good warraunt from the word for his ecclesiastical hierarchy, as you, unto
whom I ^ow speak, to be L. bishops in Wales. My reason (...) conclude after
this manner; and if you can infringe any part thereof, I will not refuse any
death, or other punishment, that shall be laid upon me. What Bb. soeuet they be,
that have no other warrant of their lordly jurisdiction, whereby they exercise
temporal government, as civil magistrates, having still their ministry upon
them, and claim unto themselves superiority over their fellow brethren, as
ministers, then the ordinance, good will and pleasure of man, that is, of the
state wherein they live; they have no better warrant from the word of god, for
this their lordly superiority, then the Pope of Rome has for his, who claymeth
no other jurisdiction and superiority unto himself, over magistrates and
ministers, then that which he has, by the free consent, good liking, and
authority of those states, who voluntarilye submit themselves unto his
idolatrous religion. But you the Bb. of Landaff, David's, Bangor, and Assaph in
Wales, have no other warrant to be L. bishops, that is, to join both
magistracy and ministry together, and claim unto your selves authority
spiritual (in deed according to the spirit that rules in the air, as the
Apostle says) over your fellow ministers, then the constitutions of man, to
wit; the will and pleasure of her Majesty and this high court of parliament.
Therefore you the said L. bishopps, have no other warrant for your Lordships and
superiority over other ministers, the^ the pope has for his supreme
authority, and universal prerogative. As for hi^ cruelty, pride, and
idolatrous profession; far be it but I should make difference between you an^
him. Although every part of this reason be already proved; yet I demand of
you, by what authority you are so far, in respect of temporal things, and the
abuse of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, preferred before many godly and learned
ministers in this land; as you by virtue of your places, are Barons of the
parliament house, enjoye great revenews, and are Lords over your brethren and
fellow ministers? Your answer will be I know, that you hold this by the sole
authority of man, and no otherwise. This must needs be your answer. For if
you would claim your jurisdiction by any other title, your bishoppricks would
soon be forfeited. Now I pray you tell me, has not the pope as good warraunt
for his hierarchy as this is? For has not the Emperor, the king of Spain, the
French king, with other states, now professing popery, as good allowance from
the word, in regard of the office (as for the abuse in the person or religion,
that is not the question) to make whom they will the superior B. within their
own dominions, as her Majesty and the parliament has to make one of you to
be above all the ministers in your dioces, or as good warraunt as they might
have to make either of you, to be Primate and Metropolitan over the rest;
which authority you will not deny unto them, as unlawful I am sure. Either
therefore, the superior power of the pope in his universal bishoppricke, is a
lawful superiority, or else your lordships having no better warrant from the
word, then the popedom has; are unlawful, and intolerable. And it being
unlawful for the parliament to tolerate, and countenance (I do not say the
popish religion) but his superiority over the ministers within this land; it
is also as unlawful for the^ to tollerat your spiritual jurisdiction over your
fellow brethren. Here then I appeal unto your consciences, whether you do not
see that the pope has altogether, as good allowaunce from the word, of his
Antichristian jurisdiction, as you have of your lordly callings. And again I
appeal unto you, whether you, who dare not, but hold the popedom of the B.
of Rome to be an unlawful jurisdiction; do not you think, that the pope
(though he professed the truth of religion, as you do, which in the days of
the first bishopps of Rome they also did) were not bound in conscience, to
give over this universal sovereignty? Or if he could not abide to hear,
that his place and office, which by the positive law, and the good lyking of
the present government, were authorized, should now be accounted unlawful
in the sight of God; do you not think that her Majesty, and this high court of
parliament, notwithstanding the laws established, and the favor they bear
unto his juriidiction, were bound before the Lord, to abrogate his
superiority, as unlawful and intolerable in Gods Church. If you thus judge
of the pope, as I hope you do! Oh then, why will not you execute this sentence
against your selves, which you have pronounced against him? you being no
less guilty of tyrannizing over your brethren, by virtue of your unlawful
calling. The jurisdiction of the pope is unlawful (say you) notwithstanding all
the states in Europe allow him to be universal bishop, and it is unlawful
notwithstanding popery were true religion, and he a most holy man who sat in
the Romish chair. And you hold it also unlawful for the parliament,
notwithstanding all the former exceptions, to tolerate the popish supremacy,
even over the ministers in this land. Why the word of God by the same reason,
pronounces your callings to be unlawful, and denies it to be possible for
them to be lawful and tolerable, no though her Majesty and all the states and
parliaments in the world ratified them to be lawful.

To return again unto the whole body of this honorable assemblye. I
entreat you in the name of God to consider, how prejudicial it will be for our
posterities to refuse the popes jurisdiction (if ever motion should be made in
parliament, for the reducing of that man of sin, as God forbidd there
should) seeing you have not thought it unlawful to retain their Ll. and
superiority, who have no better warrant for their calling then the pope might
have for his, being confirmed by the free consent of the state. I go forward.

Thirdly, if Church government be an humane constitution, then it may be
lawful for a church governor, vz. a bishopp, archdeacon, or some other of
that order, to preach, administer the sacraments, ouersee, excommunicate,
etc. and to be a king. For the holy Ghost makes it lawful, 1. Pet. 2.13. for
any, supplying the place of an humane constitution lawfully, to be a king. And
I would our bishopps durst deny it? Where then learn they that divinity,
that it is more against the word, for a bishop to be Basi^eus, a king,
Hyperichon, a superior, Hegemon, a captain or governor, being titles 1. Pet.
2.13
sanctified by the holy Ghost for civil officers, then Curios a Lord,
Hyperpheron, a prelate, Euergetes, a lords grace. The former and latter, vz.
Curios and Euergetes, being denied by our Savior Luke 22.25
Christ unto bishopps or ministers, the 2. vz. Hyperpheron, never red in the
word, for ought that I can remember. If they say, that the abuse of Lordlines,
and graceles grace is forbidden by Christ, they have been answered, they are
answered, and let them replye when they can; that our Savior Christ never
allowed abuse or tyranny in civil governors, when as he does not forbid them
to rule as Lords, or to be called grace; and therefore speaks in this place,
Luke 22.25. of the lawful and sanctified use of civil government, and titles,
which sanctified use being lawful in the civil magistrates, he denies to be
lawful in his ministers. He denies I say, the use both of the name and title
of the magistracy, and also of the office unto his ministers. Because it were
palpable absurd, to think that the Lord in deed forbids his ministers to
bear the name and title of the magistrates, whereas he grants them the office
and dignity, whereunto that name or title may be lawfully joined in the civil
magistrate. Here I know that the example of Ely the high priests civil
government, will be brought in for the confirmation of the civil authority of
our bishops; whereunto I will make no other answer at this time, but that I hope
that our bishops do not think, that we under her Majesty's reign and peaceable
government, are brought to that exigencie, which the prophet threatens should
come upon the people of Judah: Isa. 3.6.
namely, that we should take hold of some bishop, and say, thou shall be our
governor, because we mean that our fall and overthrow shall be under thine
hand. For when Ely joined the civil government of the Jews with his priesthood,
then the philistims gave the Jews a shameful overthrow, and took away the
Ark of God. So that unless we hold it lawful for us to seek such means, as
whereby we shall be sure to fall before our enemies, and to be bereaved of the
Ark of God; I see not why the example of Ely (who to make the best of it,
shows some extraordinarye thing proper unto Ely, and not to be drawn into
example by others) should make it lawful for ministers to bear civil offices.
For in deed it shows nothing else for our instruction, but that a ready way
to bring a final destruction upon the land, is, for the parliament to give our
ministers leave to join the magistracy and the ministry together. And here it
would be known, whether they (who in their books have whotly and egerly
pursued this example of Ely, to defend the civil jurisdiction of ministers)
have not therein some secret meaning, if opportunity would serve, to aspire
unto the crown. For they may be suspected to hope, if ever an in^erregium
should fall (as I trust in God it shall never be in their days) that the
estate would think ^t most convenient, to commit the sovereignty unto some
conscionable Churchman, until it may be otherwise disposed off. And therefore
it may be justly suspected, that in disputing from the example of Ely, they had
one eye unto this whereof I speak. For they may procue far better by the example
of Ely, who was the chief magistrate in his days, that a minister may join a
whole kingdom unto his ministry, rather then any other ^nferiour office.

To conclude this point. Seeing, First to make that which belongs to the
outward worship of God, to have no more ground out of the word, then that
which appertains unto the civil magistracy. Secondly, to allow of the popes
superiority as lawful. And thirdly, to hold that a minister may be both a
king and a minister, are wicked and absurd assertions, and as we see directly
against the word. Therefore it is wicked in like manner, to make the
ecclesiastical government to be an humane constitution: and not unlikely by
little and little, to paue the way for the undermining of the civil
government; as the reasons which our Bb. do bring for the maintenance of
their superiority, and experience under popery do give us just cause to
suspect. For why may not a forged donation of Constantine, or Lodouicus pius,
in time join the crown of England, to the sea of David's or Bangor especially;
which from Joseph of Aramathea, can be proved to have a little better
continuance of personal succession, then Rome can from Peter; as well, as it
joined the kingdom of Sicilia, the Dukedom of Naples, the Islands, Corsica;
Sardinia, etc: unto the popes Miter.

The third reason is thus framed, and I will be brief. That form of Church
government, and that book or books, which teaches, that there is something
to be observed, besides that, which was included in the commission given by our
savior Christ unto his Apostles, Math. 28.19
wherein they were enjoined to teach men, to observe whatsoever he commanded,
is a government execrable and accursed by the spirit of God in plain words,
Gal. 1.9: and so are the books. And being such, far beit, that either the
government, or the books should be maintained by the authority of this high
court of parliament. Such a curse being pronounced against the maintaining of
execrable things, as we find Deuter. 7.15. But our form of church government
in Wales, and this book with many others, published by authority teach the
same. For where is it included, much less prescribed in the word, that our
Savior Christ abolished an outward government of the Church in the Leuitical
policy, being in no sort an humane ordinance, but altogether prescribed by the
lord himself, to the end, that under the Gospel there should be no government
of the Church but an humane ordinance, that might lawfully be changed at the
pleasure of man? Or where is it revealed, that the Apostles gave the civil
magistrate, when any should be in the Church; the commission to abolishe the
Presbytery by them established; because there was no christian magistrate in
the Church, as our adversaries themselves confess: but as the word says, 1.
Cor. 13.5 11. ephe. 4.4 romans 12.6. 1. pet. 4.10 math. 21 25.
established by the Lord; and therefore not to be abrogated by the magistrate,
until his pleasure in that point be farther known: therefore this
government, and this book or books, are execrable and accursed.

Lastly, that form of Church government, and that book or books, which
affirm the kingdom of Christ in the outward government, to be a kingdom
that cann be shaken, that is, altered, or removed as the ceremonial
government was: affirm that, which is contrary to the express written word
of God. Heb. 12.28. and therefore are not to be tolerated. But our Church
government in Wales by L. Bb. archdea. dumb ministers, commiss. etc, in their
making of ministers, excommunication, etc: is such, and such is this unlearned
heap and sophistical book, with the rest written on this argument. And
therefore both the book or books, affirm things contrary to the word, and
so are not to be tolerated, unless we would have the Lord to bring speedy
shame and confusion upon us, for mayntaining sin by law.

The proposition is apparent. Because that by the word kingdom that cannot be
shaken in the afoersaid place. Heb. 12.28. must needs be meant perticularly
(whatsoever signification else they have as more general) the outward
government established under the Gospel, since the abolishing of the
ceremonial law, which being compared, in regard of continuance, and removing
or doing away with Moses his government, (is said to be a kingdom that
cannot be shaken) that is, such as the Lord never means to alter again unto
the worlds end: as to have any other government placed in stead thereof by
himself, much less by man, whereas that under Moses is affirmed by the prophet
Haggaie, Haggai 2.7.
and hear by the apostle, to be a kingdom or government that could be shaken,
that is, altered. And this is the proper meaning of the place, Heb. 12.28. For
by the kingdom that cannot be shaken, must needs be meant, either the
assurance of salvation, which we have under the Gospel, or our inioying and
professing of external life, or else the outward government, not only in the
preaching of the word, and administration of the sacraments, but in the Church
officers, the manner of their choice and their sub^ects, wherein they are to be
occupied. But as concerning assurance of salvation in this life, and the
profession of eternal life in heaven, which the fa^hers enjoyed under the law,
it was no more to be shaken then ours, the means thereunto by the word
preached, they want no more then we do. And so in these respects they had a
kingdom that could no more be shaken then ours. It remains therefore, that
theirs was to be shaken, ^n regard of their outward government, which was
abolished by the coming of Christ. And therefore ours immooueable in this
respect, vn^il his second coming, which were senseless to be affirmed, if
Christ in his kingdom, whereunto we are subject, had instituted no external
regiment of his Church. Can that be immovable which is not at all? More
senseles it were to think, ^his kingdom to be immutual in regard of the
sacraments, and not of the persons, and officers, who are to deal with those
mysteries.

To come again unto you of this honorable ^ourt of Parliament, you are not to
learn, that ^o defend, by law, or to countenance by authori^ie, the breach of
gods ordinance is the defense of sin, and that the defense of sin, is the
hatred of God, who rewards them to their faces that ^ate him, Deuteronomy. 7.10. and
therefore also you are ^ot to be taught, what horrible sins you shall ^ommit,
Nomb. 26.9.
if hereafter you still maintain such plain and manifest impieties. They are no
trifles as you ^ee. For I assure you, that Dathan and Abiram ^he sons of
Eliab, men famous in the congregation had more color of right, to claim unto
themselves either the civil government from Moses, or the priesthood from
Aharon. Because they were the sons of Reuben the first borne (unto whose
lotte, had he not defiled his fathers Genesis 49.4.
bed, by all likelihood, either the scepter or the priesthood should have
fallen) then these usurpers have to claim the places they are in, whereunto
either by right of inheritance according to the flesh, or ordinance from God,
they came by no title.

Here it must needs follow (you of this honorable assembly having regard
unto the estate of your souls and bodies before the Lord, and your good names
among posterities) that if these things set down be true (if not bring upon
me deserved shame and punishment) you will either labor to redres the miserable
estate of distressed wales, by erecting there a godly ministry, and
abollishing all Cananitishe relikes, or for the defense, of a few
unconscionable and godless men, adventure to undergo the fiery and flaming
execution, of the burning decree of Gods wrath: My Lords, and you the rest of
this assembly, be not deceived, the Lord of heaven is angry with you and his
whole host for the Babilonish garments of these Achanes. Ioh. 7.9.21
Retain them no longer if you would not fall before the enemy. When the L.
shall plead with you, your wives, children, family, and the whole land, Ezekiel.
38.22.
with pestilence or with blood, as he is likely to do for these wedges of
execrable gold, it is not the pontifical Lordships of Bishops, at whose
commandment the Lords sword will return again into his sheath, when your
gasping souls shall cry for mercy at the Lords hand; it is not the proud and
popelike Lordshipps of Bishopps, their usurped jurisdictions, their profane
excommunications, their pitiles murdering of souls, their railinge slanders,
against Gods truth and his servants, their impious brething of the holy Ghost
upon their Idol priests, that will drive the Lord to give you any comfort. Let
me therefore (though my person be base) entreat you, that the judgments of God
against sin, both in this life, and in that other of eternal woe and misery may
apeare so terible in your eyes, and of that undoubted consequence, as you will no
longer retain under your government these things, whose continuance do give the
Lord just cause in this life to pronounce this sentence by the mouth of Jeremy
against every on of you, Iere. 22.29.
that will not promote this suit, and execute the same. O earth, earth, earth,
here the words of Jehovah, write these men destitute of children, men that
shall not prosper in their days, yea there shall not be a man of their seed
that shall prosper, and be a-parliament man, or bear rule in England any
more. And in the life to come to say moreover: These mine enemies that would
not have me to bear rule, Luke 19.27.
by mine own laws over them and their people, bring hither and slay before my
face, yea bind them hand and foot, and throw them to utter darkness, there is
weeping and gnashing of teth. And let me, craving upon my knees, with all
submission and earnestnes, and more earnest if it were possible to obtane, that
my countrymen by your means may have the word preached, even the means
whereby they may live for ever, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom
of heaven. Grant them this my Lords, though I dye for it. And this the Lord
knows is the only scope of my writing, and not the discrediting or galling of
our Lord Bb. Let not their places withstand the salvation of my brethren, and
the true service of God among them, and if ever I either write or speak more
against them, any further then their places, are like to be the ruin of her
Majesty and the whole state, let it cost me my life. Here me in this suit good
my Ll. The reward thereof, your souls shall find; otherwise I am likely to
become a wearisom and an importunate suitor unto this high assemblye. The cause
is so just, that if it were as sometimes it was, by the apostle him self
decided in the Athenianes Areopago, a court for heathen justice of famous and
celebrated memory, I doubt not but it should be hard. And shall it not have
justice in the christian parliament of England; Justice my Lords I say, for I
seek nothing else, but that the statutes of the God of judgment and justice
may be made known in my country, where now they are unhard of. Then the which, I
know not what can be more just; neither can I see what justice in truth can be
administered by them that neglect this cause. Truly for mine own part, God
aiding me, I will never leave the suite; though there should be a thousand
parliaments in my days, until I either obtain it at your hands, or bring
the Lord in vengeance and blood to plead against you, for repelling his cause.
I hope it will not be here said, that the parliament can do nothing in the
matter, because hitherto all Church causes have bin referred unto the
convocation house and the leaders thereof, namely to our Bishops. And do you
mean it shall be so still? Then shall you still maintain these horrible
profanations of Gods sanctuary, whereof I have spoken. Then may it be said
unto your shame, that Sion lying upon the ground, and mourning like a widow,
stretched out her hands unto the parliament of England, but could find no
comfort. Then may you still be said to betray Gods truth, to betray the
salvation of his people, yea and to betray the liberties of this parliament.
For what assembly is there in the land, that dare chaleng unto it self the
ordering of religion, if the parliament may not? When you say then, that you
may not deal in the matters of religion, because the determinations of that
cause is referred unto the Bishops assembled in the convocation house, who in
their Cannons, are to provide and see that the church be not in a decayed
state, do you not thereby think you rob your selves of your own prerogative
and liberties, and take order that the church without controversy may be
starued and spoiled.

In deed if the convocation house were such as it ought to be, vz. a sinod of
sincere, and godly learned ministers, wherein matters of relligion were
determined of according to the word, and the cause of God heard with out
partiallitie, then indeed were it their parts to set down for the direction
of the parliament, such things as were behoofull for the glory of God, and
the good of his church, and the parliament by their direction according to the
word, ought to enjoine all the ministers and people, whatsoever should be thus
enacted by the civil state. And if the conuocatition house were such an
assembly, then were it not laweful for the parliament, to establish any thing
in the matters apertaininge unto the pure worship of God, among their people,
but that wherein they should be directed, by the advice of the church
governors. For as in a christian common wealth, where the civil state
sincerely favors the true worship of the Lord, it is not tolerable, no not
for the right and lawful, muchlesse (say the usurping tiranical governors of
the church) establish any thing in the church, but by the authority of the
christian magistrate: so where there are godly wise and sincere ministers, it is
unlawful for the civil governor, to order any thing in the church within his
domminions, but by their direction according to the word. So that I do not
deny, but that the convocation house being an assembly of true and lawful
church officers, you ought to use their advise and direction how the wants of
the church might be supplied. But you should not permit them to enact what
they would by their own authority, especially their decrees being as now they
are, to the ratifying of corruptions, and to the continuance of ungodly
callings within these dominions. And if you mean to give over your right in
dealing with the case of God unto the convocation house, to what end shall the
states of the land meet together in parliament, be ever again sued unto.

But alas, that any thing in church causes, shall be referred unto that
assembly, which would not stand as it does, if there wear that good order in
the church which the Lord requires, and and as long as it does stand, must
needs be the cause of all disorders therein, and must needs be a means of
continuing that staruing ignoranuce which reigns in this land. Why my Lords,
to refer the cause of religion unto the Convocation house, is nothing else,
but to charge the wolves under pain of the displeasure of careful shepherds,
to see that the lambs may be fedd, besides the injurious derogation that
thereby is offered unto the liberties of this house.

And that it may appear how justly I apeal from that sinagogue, unto this high
court of parliament, and what small hope there is to be conceived of reforming
the abuses of our Church, if the redress be committed unto that meeting; you
of the honorable court of parliament are to understand, that the convocation
house condemns this cause of christ now in hand, before it be hard: and that
their only endeavors who are there met, is how to prevent him from bearing
rule in the Church by his own laws. For it is well known, that all of them
have banded and linked them selves together, to maintain the corruptions of
our Church, whereof I have before spoken; as the ungodly and popish hierarchy
of bishops, the ignorant ministry, etc. Which thing shall be manifested by the
consideration of the persons, who are admitted unto the consultation and
mee^ing. And they are of 2. sorts. First, these who by ^easo^ of the
superiority they vsurp over their bre^hre^, must needs be the chief doers in
that house, ^ow ignorant, unconscionable, and unfit for the government of the
Church soever they be. Of which number, are our Archbb. and L. bishops, etc.
The second sort is of these, who having no interest to be there, in respect of
any superiority they bear in the Church, are therefore elected and chosen
to be there as the clarks of the Convocation house, etc. But there is such
freedom and liberty in the choice of these men, that great care and heed is
always had by our L. Bb. that none shall be chosen thither, but such, as for
good causes are known to be utter enemies unto all sincerity, and strong
maintainers of the established corruptions: if any other by some means be
gotten thither, who does but once mention the healing of the wounds of our
Church, he is straightwaies taken for a Nicodemus among the^; namely, for a man
favoring that side, which none of the great Scribes and Pharisees can brook, and
lightly they take that order with him, which the Jews took with those, who
professed our Savior Christ; that is, they bannish him out of their Synagogue.
To be brief, whosoever are of the house there is nothing done there, but what
the former sort; to wit, L. archb. and Bb. would have enacted. For the rest,
either cannot or will not withstand their proceedings. The whole sway then, and
direction of this synod, being in their hands, who are for the most part, the
greatest cause of the tears of our Church; will you refer the ordering of
religion, and the reformation of the church unto the Convocation house? I have
already showed, that you ought to be so far from permitting unto L. Bb. the
disposition of any thing behofull unto the Church of God, as the very names and
places should be razed from under your government. And woeful experience these
30. full years, has taught us what a lamentable reformation these men now
bring to pass, if they may have their own wills. Why these men my Lords, and
consequently, the whole Convocation house are in judgment contrary unto our
Luke 22.25.
Savior Christ; for they hold it lawful for ministers to be Lords over
their brethren. These men my Ll. are of judgment, that the exhortation of the
Apostle Peter, was not directed unto them? The Elders which are among you,
says the Apostle, I beseech, which am also an Elder, and a witness of the
sufferings of Christ, and also a pertaker of the glory that shall be revealed,
Feed the flock of God which depends upon you, caring for it, not by
constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lukers sake, but of a ready mind,
not as though ye were Lords over Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to
the flock; and when the chief shepherd shall appear, you shall receive an
incorruptible crown of glory. These men I say, are in judgment, contrary unto
this blessed Apostle, for they drink it lawful for the^ to be Lords over Gods
heritage. They are of judgment, that christ Jesus was not so faithful as
Moses, in the government of his own house. And do you then think that they
care how unfaithful rhey do behave themselves, in the oversight of the
Church? They hold the government of the Church to be an humane ordinance, and
so hold the Pope to have sufficient warrant of his hierarchy. They my Ll.
hold the kingdom of Christ in the outward government, to be a kingdom, the
laws whereof, may be changed and abrogated, at the pleasure of man. They do
not stick to affirm it lawful for them, to teach many things, not included in
the commission given by our savior Christ unto his Apostles. These men reject
as untrue, that which the spirit of God has set down by the Apostle Paul,
1. Cor. 1.21. Romans 10.14. which is, that men are ordinarilye saved, by the
preaching of the word. For they are persuaded, that salvation may be ordinarily
attained unto by reading; and so they are persuaded, that the Lord has
promised his spirit to seal that doctrine in the hearts Ephesians. 1.13.
of men, which through preaching was never made known unto them. What care
then will they have, to see the people provided for of preching, whereas they
are not persuaded of the ordinary necessity thereof. They my Ll. maintain the
continuance of the dumb and ignorant ministry, whereby our Church has long
since gotten her bane. Their judgment is, that they may be tolerated for
lawful ministers, in a christian commonwelth and that the parliament may
securely maintain them in our Church, without all fear of Gods judgementes
for tollerating them! O the great hand of God in punnishing our ingratitude,
that in this clear light of the gospel, they who take upon them to be
Archseers, willingly see not, that none can be lawful ambassadors of Jesus
Christ, but they out of whose mouths, this embassage is heard; 1. Cor. 5.
We beseech you in Christ's steed, that you be reconciled unto God: And yet
such is the blindness of the convocation house, that they cannot see this.

But I blush to think, that they dare once presume to give any countenance
unto nonresidencie, that ghastly and fearful sin: and yet behold
notwithstanding, they are not only all of them guilty thereof themselves, but
even in the books which they have published unto the world, in the defense of
their corruptions, they have not been ashamed to advouch the lawfulnes of this
unnatural and desperate murder: Yea the very pulpits have rung again and
again, with invectiues against al those that withstood this their madness. O my
Ll. and you the rest of the R. honorable and worshipful of this high court of
parliament, I can not stay my self, but I must needs in this place, cry unto
you for help and justice, against these unnatural men. The Convocation house
my Ll. defends nonresidencie to be lawful! Nonresidencie my Ll. is defended
to be lawful in the Convocation house! And will you then trust the^ with the
oversight of the people, who are of judgment, that they may lawfully starve and
murder them? Can you hope for any good to come unto the church of God from
that council, where it is enacted, that it may be lawful for a bond of
murdering nonresidents to destroy the same If therefore in the parliament of
England, there be any care of the glory of God, and the liberty of his
Church; if any pity and compassion of the starued souls of men, let others
be trusted to provide food for your people, and not those, whose very
judgments are so darkened, that they hold it allowable by the word, for them
to take order, that men may not be fedd. It is now meet my Ll. that they who
hold it lawful for men to make a trade of murder, should be allowed for
phisicions. And what else are they, who defend the lawfulnes of nonresidencie,
but such as profess it lawful for men to be maintained (rather then they
should want living) even by the murdering of their brethren.

Is it not great pity then, but that this Convocation house should be still
countenanced by the state, to be the only place whence reformation of all the
things out of order in our Church should be expected? For therein doubtless, any
thing shall be heard, which may tend to the furtherance of the gospel; seeing
none sound (few excepted) are admitted into that assembly, who are not guilty
of the merciles and cruel murder of souls, as being all of them for the
most part, cursed and bloody nonresidents. And is it not great pity, but that
the parliament should stay and go no further in the reformation of religion,
then it should be directed by the Convocation house. For it may be hoped, out
of question, that the Co^uocation house will see, that no calling be henceforth
tolerated in the ministry, but such as the Lord in his word warranteth to
be lawful. And therefore it may be hoped, that the leaders thereof will not
stick to put down Archbishops, and L. Bb. that Christ alone, by the officers
which he in his word has appointed may rule in his church. They will not abide
that any blemished and maimed Leuit should come near to the Lords Sanctuary,
nor any pharisaicall high priest should usurp any authority over his
brethren in this land. If this hope might be conceived of them, then in deed
would they be meet to cure the diseases of our church. But the truth is,
that there is no reason why this should be expected at their hands, because
they are so far (as this whole land knows) from having any remorse of the
unlawful and ungodly callings wherein they now remain, that their practices
against God and his truth, do proclaim unto the world, that they never
mean to restore again her own authority unto the Church, whereof by their
Lordships it has been spoiled.

I have determined with my self, not to trouble this honorable assembly at
this time, with any large discourse, concerning these men and their dealngs:
otherwise, I would show by evident profs, that they (and so the whole
Convocation house) are guilty of such crimes, as the fauorablest interpreter
of their proceedings, would of necessity be drawn to give this sentence
against the^, namely; That they are intolerable oppugners of Gods glory, and
utter enemies unto the liberties of his Church. And they should also be drawn
to confess, that the parliament in maintayning the Convocation house, did
maintain and defend, together with the hindering and smoothering of the
truth, not only the deformed ruins; but also the lamentable oppression of the
Church. So that it should appear, that as long as that house stands, as at
this day it does; there could be no hope at all, that either Gods heavenly
truth should have free passage, or the Church her liberty in this kingdom.
The brief heads of the public crimes, whereof the leaders of the Convocation
house are guilty, I will here set down, and they shall be herafter evidently
proved, if they unto whose charge they are laid dare deny them

First therefore, their very callings and places, that is, the callings and
places of our Archbishops and L. Bb. are such as they they cannot possibly, but
dishonor God, and bereave the Church of her liberty by continuing in the^.
Secondly their practices in those places, for the maintenance of their
tyrannical superiority, and others the corruptions of the Church, which they
wilfully contrary unto all truth and aequitie do maintain, are such, as by
them, they have not only monstrously maimed the outward face of the church, in
the matter of government and ceremonies: but also grievously wounded the same,
in the matters of doctrine and sacraments: unto the mayntenance of all which
corruptions in the government of the Church, in the ceremonies, in the doctrine
and sacraments, they have joined the crimes of seducing and deceiving the
civil state and people, by bearing all estates in hand, that al has been and
is well in the Church; and in like manner, as much as in them lay, they have
vexed and persecuted as many of the dear servants of God, as have but intended
to motion the redress of any of the former corruptions. Hereof if I shall not
be able to prove the eyes and leaders of this synagogue, and consequently the
whole house to be guilty; let me to the terror of all slaunderers, be put to
all the torments that may be invented. The Convocation house cannot here
object, that I deal injuriously with the whole assembly, by laying unto the
charge of the whole, those crimes whereof our Bb. alone are guilty. For the
whole house, never as yet, disauowed the hierarchy of Bb. their practices in
urging subscription, in maintayning the dumb ministry, nonresidencie, etc.
And until the corruptions of the Bb. be ouerthrown in that assembly, the whole
house shall be still justly subject unto the former accusations.

See now my Lords whether they do not bewray their impiety who think, that
men weary them selves about small matters, when they call for a reformation of
the church. And see whether there be not many and urgent causes, to enforce the
parliament to take the government of the Church out of the hands of these men,
unless the continuance of the ruinous breaches of our Church would be still
maintined, it is not the matter of capp, surplice, tippet, and other beggarly
and popish ceremonies, whence all the dissension and dissagreement in our church
is sprung up. But the controversies arise, because our Archbb. and Bb. are not
permitted with the silence and consent of the servants of God, to smother,
persecute, deprave and corrupt, the truth of that true religion which in name
they profess, and to undermine, and captiuate the church of God in this land.
Those who withstand, their ungodly procedings, have hitherto dutifully kept
them selves within the bonds of the calings, wherein the Lord has placed them,
they have in all submission and duty entreated that the cause of God might be
equally hard, and that her Majesty and the parliament would amend the things
proved to be amiss, they have never as yet, presumed themselves, to take in hand
the correction of any thing. But how quietly on the other side, have the
leaders of the conuocatio^ house behaved them selves, when a redres has bin
caled for at the hands of the civil state? Surely they have alwais hitherto
presently betake^ themselves, to imprisonments and bonds and would never suffer
the truth to have the hering, nor any man with quietness to stand in the defense
thereof. And therefore also, all the tumults that hereafer are like to arise in
the Church of God within this land, about these controversies, the leders of
the convocation house, are the causes thereof, for they will not yield unto the
truth, but labor by all means possible, to smother the same. Gods servants
cannot wink at their procedings, unless they would betray Gods truth, and the
liberty of his church. The least part of the sins of our Bb. has bin in
the maintenance of unprofitable, supersticious, and corrupt ceremonies. If they
would but yield free passage unto the truth, and her authority unto the church
in other matters, they should not be greatly molested for these things. And woe
be unto them, if they had rather provoke god and his church to battle against
them for the defense of the truth, then receive the light, and grant peace unto
the church. Concerning her Majesty, who (as it is thought) can never be
induced to altar the established government, I answer, that if it be made
known unto her, and proved out of the word, that the established regiment of
the church, is traitorous against the Majesty of Jesus Christ, that it
confirms the popes supremacy. O therefore it is dangerous unto her crown,
that it is besides the commission given by our Savior Christ unto his
apostles; and therefore accursed, that it shows them to be void of all care
of re^igion, who wittingly countenance the same, and that it calls for the
judgments of God against her, and her kingdom, and then if she yield not unto
the razing of all sinful callings, out of the church, I will not desire to
live, if this be thought a matter worthy of death, for a man to be dutyfully
persuaded of his sovereign. Be it that her Majesty has bin moved, by some of
this house, for the redress of the church, you should move her again, and
again, and never leave until you be heard. Great matters are never brought to
pass, without great and mighty endeavors. Our sins have otherwise deserved,
then, that the Lord should at the first incline mercy unto us, in the sight of
her highness. Would any of you alter any part of the government of his family,
being persuaded by lewd flatterers, that all were well, unless the abuse were
showed, and you earnestly dealt with for a reformation. And can you then
marvel, that our sovereign is hardly drawn to reform the church, whose
estate, in her hearing, is daily said out of the pulpit to be most flourishing,
whereas the deformity thereof is not made known unto her. I know it is no small
persuasion that should drive a monarch, to abrogat the receued constitutions,
and establish new, unless the unanswerable necessiry thereof, were made known
unto her or him. I am persuaded that her Majesty knows not, the exacting
necessity, that lies upon her sholders of reforming the church. She knows
not the estate of her untaught and damned subjects to be as it is. Wherefore
serve parliament men, if her eyes must be in all places to see every thing, and
what do you see, if you do not see our misery and lament it? I grant indeed,
that of this point she ought to be most careful, but if of oversight, the
waightiest matters be omitted, should not you put her in mind hereof? And in
submission entreat her and never leave entreating, until she yield to turn
away the wrath of God from her, and her kingdom, by abollishing ungodly
ordinances, and restoring beauty unto Zion.

Well, I have forged, the most notable slanders that ever were coined, or else,
the state of my country under her Majesty's government, is very miserable, and
yours no less lamentable, if it so continue. And if you make not the same
known unto her Majesty, and see it be speedely amended, the Lord make Queen
Elizabeth, and her crown free, from the blood of her destroyed people. And I
pray God if it be his will, that their souls be not required at your hands in
the day wherein quick and dead shall be judged.

But it may be, that you will pretend the want to be so difficult, that it
cannot possibly be performed. Do what lies in you, and then the Lord is
answered. The farther you go herein, the esier will be the passage, you are
desired no more, then not to countenance sin, and for reformation to go no
farther then means will reach. Because it is a work of difficulty, therefore
must you needs hinder the same by law as you do, by tollerating these abuses;
Because the whole work is difficult, therefore shall it not begin; Because it is
a hard matter to plant the ordinance of God, therefore must the breach thereof
be in force, and maintained? Because in Canaan the sons of Anak, Number. 13.14.
and towns walled up to heaven (mountains of pretensed excuses, have been seen)
therefore must you needs suffer the people, brought by her Majesty and you,
out of Egypt, to remain still in ^he wildetnes, on this side Jordan, eue^ under
these men, the dumb ministers L. Bb. I mean which are ^it for nothing else,
then to be leaders, whenever ^portunitie shall serve, Number. 14.4.
to bring the people again unto Egypt? Because our land, by reason of our
continuance in sin, and that we have not had skilful workmen among us, does
not now bring forth religion and godliness in the measure it should, therefore
must you needs be sure, that profanesse and atheism shall be sown, and the
breach of Gods law flourish there, in the persons of those men? Therefore the
just Lord, Ezekiel. 2^.
will be just in the midst of you, whenever he reckons for these things,
because you are so far from doing what you may in the planting of godliness,
that you suffer impiety against his Majesty, to bear sway, and that by law
and authority.

Concerning the hardness of the work, this I make known unto you, that if you
will be ruled by the cannon of the word, you shall be able with ease and the good
liking of your people, to do so much therein, as you shall deliver your own
lives from the wrath of God. But if that rule shall take place no farther, then
it may stand with the continuance of Lord Bishops, and other corruptions of the
ecclesiastical state, I see not what you can say unto the Lord, when he has
made you an astonishment, and an hissing unto all the nations under heaven:
Nehe. 9.39
but surely thou art just in all that is come upon us for we would not be
ruled by thy words.

Well the word teaches and requires of you 2. things and no more, in this
work. In both it requires your practice, if you would be directed by it.
First it requires, that Wales may be redress by proclaiming that commission
given by ou^ Savior Christ unto his apostles, Math. 28.19.20 in every corner
thereof, and both the parts of the commission, it requires to be kept
inuiolably as well that, of go preach and baptize, as the other, of teach them
to observe, whatsoever I have commanded you. Secondly, while you stay the Lords
leisure to raise up fit men for this work in every congregation, it requires,
that the people where preachers cannot be placed at the first, may have some
stay, that inconveniences be avoided. For the Lord will not have religion, so
indiscreetly established, as that the inconveniences that might grow thereby
unto the civil state, as much as may be, be not wisely prevented; in the
effectinge hereof, 2. things are to be looked unto, both of them greatly
furthering the work. First the blessing of God is to be labored for, by
humbling your selves and your people with Daniel before the Lord, Dan. 9.1.3.
in fasting and prayer, and then you shall see, he will be with your endeavors.
Secondly you must enjoine every one according unto his place, to have a hand in
this work, and encourage the gentlemen, and people that shall be found forward,
by gracing and countenancing them for their forwardness in religion, and
showing that the more forward they be, the more credit they are like to
purchase with your Hh. And you must not suffer an uncircumcised mouth, Nom.
14.39.
to bring a slander upon that good land, whereunto the Lord offers to bring
you and your people, Nom. 14.10.
if you would obey, much less, to lift up a stonn against Caleb or Ioshuah,
that withstand the fury of a whole wicked host in the defense of the Lord. For
otherwise, if you suffer al to sit still, and look upon our desolations, the
most to live on the sweetness of our ruins, and discountenance all that labor
therein, you can look for nothing else shortly; but that lamentable complaint,
and it is a great work of God, that we have heard the same long ago, of every
possessor in this land. Whyther shall we go? Our brethren and their hard
intertainment have discouraged our hearts; Deuteronomy. 1.18.
would to God that we had died in the Land of Egypt, would to God we wear
dead: were it not better for us to turn into Egypt? Nom. 14.2.
com let us make a captain and return thither. The land indeed is a good
land, whereunto, when our sovereign brought us out of Egypt, we intended to
make our journey: but alas, we are never able to stand against the poverty,
losses, imprisonment, discountenance by our superiors, that our brethren have
sustained, which have set their faces against this land, never able to swallowe
up the slanders and bitter names of Puritans, precisians, traitos, seditious
libellers, etc. that we see, raised against those that would bring us thither.
And therefore my Ll. and the rest of the high assembly, in vain shall you use
other means, and leave this unattempted

The redress of Wales, consists of 2. parts, both must be speedely set upon
by your Hh. or else certainly the judgments of God will find you out. First
you must abolishe out of the Church, whatsoever you shall find to be a breach
of gods ordinance (as I have proved dumb ministers, nonresidents, and L. Bb.
to be) or else your reformation will be little better then that of the Kin.
17.33.
Samaritanes, who feared Jehovah, but worshipped their own gods. I would have
it marked in this place, what is required at the hands of the parliament, that
it may thereby appear, whether with any color of reason, this part of the
petition in hand can be denied. The parliament is desired to enact, that no
unlawful calling be tolerated under the government within the church of God
in Wales; if they will not yield unto this part of the suite, now put up in the
behalf of that people; what cloak do they leave unto themselves, whereby
they may but cover their small care to glorify God? Is not the case to be
astonished at, that an assembly professing true religion, cannot be drawn to
yield unto so just a request, it is a hard matter I grant, to build the church
of God: Men most willing to bring that work to pass, cannot do it; but there
is no difficulty in the world, for the parliament of England to manifest
that, although they cannot go so far in promoting the Gospel as they would
wish; yet that they will not at any hand maintain by law any thing, which
may hinder the course thereof. Well let as many as are parliament men, look
unto this, as sure as the Lord lives, they shall answer one day, before him,
who is the judge of quick and dead, and give a reason why they would not
consent to root out sin, and the breach of gods law, out of this common
wealth. Do they seek the innovation of the state, who desire, that no law or
statute may be in force, which vpholdeth the transgressing of Gods holy
institution? Or may they be accounted dangerous subjects unto their prince, who
cannot abide that any treson against God should be countenanced? Well, this
branche of the suite is such, as the Tridentine conspiracy would blush to
profes the rejecting thereof. What then may be thought of the high court of
parliament, if it cannot be there granted?

The second means for you to redress the estate of Wales must be this; you
must place as many godly learned men as can be found, to call the people, and
see them provided for. But here great advice is to be taken, where, and how
they be placed. First then, you are to look out the places, that are fittest
by all likelihood to receive the word, and unto those, to have the speciallest
regard. For seeing you are not able at once, to furnish the whole country with
able men; you must first have regard of that part of the haruist, which is most
ready for the mowers. This respect we see the spirit of God to have had, Act.
16.7. Where the spirit would not suffer Paul to go to Bythinia, but rather
took his journey to Macedonia, where by revelation, verse 9.10. he was
assured, that there was preparation made for the receiving of the gospel.
Concerning the other point, the ministers that shall be sent, must not be
scattered asunder, one here, and another there in the country; neither sent
one by one, but many must be sent together, and placed so nere one another, as
may be. And so the ministers having aedification, and comfort one by another,
shall neither decay in their gifts, nor be discouraged; and the people by this
means, shall be sure to be thoroughly called. If the complaint be made for want of
sufficient men, and sufficient stay for their livings: For the men, take al
those, whom the Lord has made fit for this work, and he can require no more
at your hands, until he raise up more: which if he never do, your good
endeavors, and encouragement unto students and others, not being wanting to
bring this to pass, he cannot in justice punish you, though your people be not
taught. Because you have seen all those well bestowed, who^ he quallified for
the calling, and so do now expect a blessing from him upon your labors, that
you might send more. The subterfuge will be but the coat of a net, to ask (as
commonly your prelates do) how there should be possibly found, as many learned
men, as wales requires, seeing they who are found, are not placed there. And
do you deal well with the Lord, that because all cannot be brought at once to
serve him, as he wills, therefore they that may shall not? The same is to be
said of the ministers livings. Remove the dumb ministers, nonresidents, L. Bb.
(if you will not do this, you go besides the word of God, and so there is no
direction for you) and there will be more livings void, able to maintain godly
ministers, the^ shall be I fear me, good men found to supply their places. And
verily I maruail, what men persuade themselves the Lord to be; whereas they
think, he can be satisfied with such sielie shifts? Is it not a strange matter
to find Church livings in wales for L. Bb. nonresidents, and dumb ministers,
to sin against God, and starve souls withal, and deny any to be there, for
godly ministers to honor God, and work the salvation of his people. The
children must starve for want of bread, because the dogs before their eyes must
be fed therewith. Good reason? yea, but the removing of those men, would be
likely to set the land on fire. Mark how subtle the devil is, in the
maintenance of his kingdom. When godly ministers are deprived, because they
will not link themselves with wicked Bb. to betray the kingdom of Christ,
and overthrow the laws of this land, there is no inconvenience feared. But if
Satan's messengers be once shoued at, behold, the land will not be able to bear
this loss. I grant indeed, that men which make no conscience for gain sake,
to break the law of the aeternall, and massaker souls (as these do) are
dangerous subjects, and not to be trusted any farther then they are fed.

The most of them are unsavory salt, such as have hitherto lived upon
sacrilege and the spoil of souls. Order might be taken, notwithstanding by
the magistrate, that these and their families, should neither want things
necessary for their outward estate: nor yet be maintained in idleness. For the
people, the stay for them is, either in regard of public meetings on the
Sabbath, or the sacraments, marriage or burial. For the keeping of the Sabbath,
the word requires they should, if possibly they can, resort where preaching
is, until good ministers be placed in every parish: if the places be far, as
commonly our parishes be very large, and it is not likely in short time, to
plant preachers so near together, as the people may every Saboth resort unto
them, they must be enjoined to meet together in their parish churches, and
some discreet man among them selves to read the word, and use some form of
prayers, as shall be thought meetest: by the advice of the godly learned.
Concerning the sacraments, the word requires, they should resort unto a
preching minister for them, and not attempt to keep their children unbaptized
any longer, then they must of necessity. Marriage is most conveniently to be
don by the minister, but is no proper essential work of the minister; and
therefore may be solemnized by others, at the magistrates appointment.
Concerning burial, it is a work of christian charity, and being the last
duty that we are to perform toward the departed; we ought to accompany them
decently and orderly, with all comlines to the grave. The word mentions or
includes noe form of prayer used at burial; therefore they are superfluous,
neither is the minister as in an action belonging to his office, to have any
more to do herein, then any other of the brethren.

Thus I have set down unto your Hh. the only course in regard of substance,
that the word warranteth to be taken in such a deformed estate as ours is. And
now my Ll. and the rest of this honorable assembly, let my counsel be
acceptable unto you, break of your sins, by rooting out these plants, which
the Lord never planted in his vineyarde, and your iniquities, by abandoning
the same, so much as in you lies; so there may be a healing of your former
oversight. If not the Lords face will be against you, yours, and the wholland
for evil, and not for good. Oh my Lords, is it not a miserable case, that men
should so live under your government in this life, as they cannot possibly, but
live in hell in the life to come. Oh my Ll. heaven cannot be obtained when we
are gone. Oh my Ll. now is the time for the gospel to flourish in Wales or
never. Oh my Ll. if her Majesty and your honors (whom from my very heart I
wish the Lord to bless) should be gone the way of all the world; for mine
own part, the staff of mine hope, to see any good done amongst my brethren
should be broken. Blame me not therefore, if I deal earnestly in a cause of so
great a moment, and so unlikely to be obtained of our woeful posterities, whom
my suit in a most near sort concerns. Oh, why should they have cause to say,
the Lord be judge between us and the governors which were under Queen
Elizabeth, in the days of our fathers; for they might have opened our eyes,
and healed our wounds, which now alas, are desperate and past recovery.

It is now full 30. years and upward, since Babylon has bin overthrown in
Wales, rather by the voice of her majesty's good laws (whom good Lord forget
not for this work) then the sound of any trumpet, from the mouths of the
sons of Aaron among us. But alas, what shall we and our posterities be the
better for this, if Sion be not built. And what comfort can Zerubbabel, or
Nehemiah have, to bring them out of Babylon, if they mean but to reaedifie
Shilo, seeing it is the beauty of Sion, wherein the Lord delights. We have
cause in deed to thank God, that this wicked city has been by her Majesty
broken down in some sort; but are never the better, seeing the walls of Sion
lie even with the ground. Now for the space of 28. years, no man greatly
labored to her Majesty, the parliament, or the people themselves, either by
speaking or writing in the behalf of either of these unreconcilable cities.
Men belike, thinking no more to be required at their hands, then the razing of
Babel, and the devil as yet, contenting himself with Bethel. The last
parliament, by all liklihod the very same week upon a sudden, the interprises
of the building of both in 2. several books, issuing from 2. of the remotest
corners in our lands. (Southwales and Northwales) was taken in hand. The one of
the books pleading the cause of Sion, and co^minig forth by public authority
and alowance, was directed unto her Majesty and the parliament, requiring at
their hands by virtue of the lords own mandatory letters, the performance of
this work showing by evidence of greatest antiquitye, this to be required of
duty at their hands, as a part of the homadge, due unto his highness, whose
foedaries and vassales, all the princes and states under heaven must acknowledge
themselves to be, and a portion of that inheritance being theirs by lineall
dissent, from their predecessors, the godly kings and rulers, who time out of
mind always laid their shoulders unto this burden. y druch Christiano-gawl.
The other written in weltch, printed in an obscure cave in Northwales
published by an author unknown and more unlearned (for I think he had never
read any thing but the common published resolution of. R. P. a book containing
many substantial errors, Friar Rush, and other shamful fables) stood to by
non, and having no reason to show why his Babylon should be raedefied, it
contained it self within the hands of a few private men, and never durst to
this hour be made known unto any of our magestrats. Both the books in this
thing had the same success, in that both together they fell into the hands of
the prelates, who as they pretend, are enemies unto both places, but undoubtedly
unto Sion especially, as it apeared by their hard dealing with the patron of
that cause, This is spoken in respect of the church government.
whereas the fautors of the other, being also in their hands, were either not
at al dealt with, or very courteously entertained of them. The reason of their
enemity unto both, but their hatred unto Sio^ is, that never I fear me,
meaning to go thither, and constrained by law to be enemies unto the other,
they have of the gold of Caldea, and the dross of Jerusalem compacted them a
city, wherewith they mean to content them selves until they return to Babel
again, or (the Lord be merciful unto the^) unto a worse place. Have they not
therefore good cause to be the more beholding to the on for the gold, then the
other for the dross; Well be you asured hereof, that they who stirred up both
these instruments, both at one time, will never suffer them to cease, until in
Wales either a church of Christ, or a sinagogue of satan be built. Out of
question the concurring of both causes, shows that the lord has some secret
work in the matter. Satan's instruments for their parts, were never busier then
they are at this hour, and shall I be silent? They trecherously against the
laws of God and this land seek to bring the people again unto Egypt. I
according unto both, endeavor never to let them rest, until it please the Lord
by means of her Majesty, and the parliament, to bring them within the land of
promise, no though they were upon mount Nebo, whence with their eyes they
might view the same. They have dealt, and deal secretly with poor souls in dark
corners, and dare not make known the fabulous cause. I have dealt all this while
in the face of the sun, and now before the state of the land assembled
together. I-want not a good cause, and by the grace of god, it shall never want
the poor defense which I cann yield unto it, or hide the face as long as I
live; whether you countenance it or no, I know that on day it shall preuail,
when this will be the Lord knows best: but the matter is, whether you will
embrace Christ in the building of his Church, or Satan in continuing the
breaches thereof. Therefore entertain this cause, and you give Satan the
foil, reject this, and you strengthen him. And try if you deny it the hearing,
whether the very papists in this land, will not be thereby encoraged to
supplicate unto the parliament, that you would grant them the liberty of their
seared consciences, to commit public idolatry

All that hitherto I have spoken, has been said either in the cause of Christ,
which is a good cause, or in the behalf of Satan. If I seek the building of
his sinagog, will you let me live? If of the church of Christ, will you deny me
your help? which yet again and again, in the name of the eternal God I
require, and for the precious death and passions sake of Jesus Christ, I
earnestly desire at your hands. My Ll. and whosoever are parliament men, as you
would have the Lord to entertain your souls in the life to come, as you would
have him show you any mercy, as you love her Majesty and her life, as you
would have the continuance of her peaceable reign over us, which the Lord
undoubtedly threatens to shorten, because he would bring destruction upon you
and us al, for the contempt of his truth, as you would not have your names
razed from under heaven, as you would not have the Lord to bring upon us and
our land, the Spanish, Italian, Romish or Guisian forces, as you would not have
these, who shall live to see the desolation and desperate sorrow, which the Lord
is likely to bring upon this land, not abide to see you or your children ride,
or go in the strets, as you would not have the most contemtible to stretch
forth his hand upon the derest things you posses, and offer violence unto the
fruit of your bodies? So entertain this cause, grant this suite, and be
careful of the Lords true service in wales. Otherwise, the vengeance of God I
fear me, will never leave you and your posterities, as long as there is a man
of your houses left under heaven.

Ezekiel in deed is not now living, to put you in mind of the necessity of
redressing the things amiss, by laying open the corruptions of all estates under
your government, as he does cap. 22. of his prophecy. His words I will set
down that you may wey our estate, with the time wherein the prophet lived, and
see whether the Lord will spare you and us, if we still provoke him to smite.
There is a conspiracy of her prophets in the midst thereof, says the
prophet, like a roaring lion, ravening the pray, they have devoured souls, they
have taken the riches and the precious things: they have made her many widows
in the midst thereof, her priests have broken my law, and have defiled my
holy things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither
discerned between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my
sabbath, and I am profaned among them. Her princes in the midst thereof are
like wolves ravening the pray, to shed blood and to destroy souls, for their
own covetous lucre. And her prophets have daubed her with untempered mortar,
seeing vanities, and deuininge lies unto them, sayihg, thus says the Lord
Jehovah, when Jehovah had not spoken. The people of the land have violently
oppressed, by robbing and spoiling, and have vexed the poor and needy: yea they
have opressed the stranger against right. Thus far Ezechiel. Be the sins of
our prophets, of our princes, and of our people the same, that here he speaks
against, be they greater or be the less: yet without controversy, if the Lord
may say, I have sought for a man in the parliament of England, that should make
up the hedge, and stand in the gapp, before me for the land, that I should not
destroy it, but I found none: then woe be unto us, for that shall follow, which
is set down in the prophet. Therefore have I powered out mine indignation
upon them, and consumed them with the fire of my wrath: their own ways have I
rendered upon their heads, says the Lord Jehovah; And unless there were just
cause to think that this Lord, had either already or shortly meant to
pronounce this sentence against us, we might contemn and scorn at the broken
assalts of the Spaniards, or any other the enemies of the Gospel, and her
Majesty's whosoever. But as long as we give not the right hand to the Lord, by
entering into his sanctuarye, we have just cause to fear a nation that is no
nation, much more a people in number as the sand, which is by the seashore. Our
leagues and most stable covenants with the enemies; the Lord will soon
disanul, standing thus at the staffes end with his Majesty, as we do.

Let it not be said in this pIace, that the Lord would not have so wonderfully
wrought our late deliverance, out of the hand of the Spaniarde, if he meant at
al to have called the land to reckoning for the great ignorance, and wicked
ecclesiastical constitutions, which are truly said to be maintained therein.
For this, both Moses and Saloman, Deuteronomy. 29.18.49.20.
note to be the man of all those that shall not prolong their days, Moses
warns al states in any case to take heed, that there should not be among
them, man, woman, family, nor tribe, which should turn his heart away from the
Lord God, so that when he hears the words of the curse, he bless him self
in his heart, saying, I shall have peace though I walked after the stubbornenes
of mine own heart, thus adding drunkenness unto thirst. For says he, the Lord
will not be merciful unto that man: but then the wrath of the Lord shall smoke
against that man, and every curse that is written in this book shall light upon
him, and the Lord shall put out his name from under heaven, and the Lord shall
separate him unto evil, according unto all the curses that is written in the
book of the law. Eccles. 8.11.13.
And Soloman knowing the corruptions of men to be such, as their hearts are
fully set in them to do evil, because sentence against their evil works is not
spedely executed, openly testifies, that although a sinner do evil an
hundredth times, and the Lord prolong his days, yet it shall only be well, with
them that fear the Lord, and do reverence before him. But it shall not be well
with the wicked (says he) for he shall be like a shadow, because he fears not
before God. And therefore although at this time the Lords anger has not
visited, nor caled the sins of our land to account, with great extremity by
the hand of the Spanyard: yet let us be assured, that it shall not go well with
us, unless you of the high court of parliament, show that you fear your God,
and do reverence before him, in purging out of his holy service, what soever
is superfluous therein, and in adding whatsoever is wanting thereunto. The Lord
by that deliverance, gave us warning that he passed by us, but so, as unless
the corruptions of his service be clean don away with speed by her Majesty and
the parliament, means to pass by us no more: but to suffer his whole
displeasure to fall upon us, at his next coming. And in deed, as often as I
consider our late defense from the Spanish invasion, together with our deserts,
I am induced to think, that the Lord then was affected toward us, as sometimes
he was toward Israel his own people, concerning whom he speaks, Deuteronomy.
32.26. I have said, I would scatter them abrod, I would make their remembrance
to cease from among men, save that I feared the fury of the enemy, lest their
adversaries should wax proud, and lest they should say, our high hand and not
the Lord has done all this. Therefore let not our deliverance harden, you of
the parliament, in the sin of maintayning the breaches of the Lords house. The
same Lord that wrought our deliverance, will surely be the cause of our ruin,
if his honor be so neglected by you as usually before time it has been. And we
are to take heed, lest the Lord seeing our profane, and vain insulting of the
victory, when we are not a whit bettered thereby, send some Jeremy among us
which may cry, as he did unto the king, and states of his time, in the like
matter. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, thus shall you say to the parliament
of England. Behold, except at this your meeting, all the deformities that are
tolerated in my service, be at once done a way, and except you grant free
passage unto my gospel: the navy of the Spaniard which I discomfited before
you, shall come again, and fight against this land, and waste it with fire and
sword. Therefore deceive not your selves, saying, the Spaniardes are so
weakened by their last discomfiture, that they are not able to pursue their
intended invasion, for it shall not be so. No though you had smitten the whole
host of the Spaniard, that fought against you, and there remained, but wounded
men among them: yet should every man rise up in his tent, and ouerrun this
land. And let us look assuredly, whenever the abject and contemtible enemy
shall assail us, abject and contemptible I say, in all respects, in comparison
of the value and strength of our men and munition (and the Lord increase them a
thousand fold more) that this God, whose service is so little esteemed of us, will
send a terror into the heart of our valiantest and stoutest men, so that he,
whose heart is as the heart of a lion, shall be as weak as water: and on enemy
shall chase a thousand of us, because the hand of the Lord will be against us for
our sins. It is not therefore the Spanish furniture and preparations: but the
sins within the land, which we are most of all to fear. For although the army
of the Spaniard were consumed with the arrows of famine: although the
contagious and devouring pestilence had eaten them up by thousands: although
their totterting ships were dispersed, and carried away with the whirlwinde and
tempest, although madness and astonishment were amongst them, from him that
sits in the throane, unto her that grindeth in the mill: although the Lords
revenging sword, in the hand of our valiant captains and soldiers, had so
prevailed against them, as it had left none in that uncircumcised host, but
languishing and foiled men, notwithstanding a contemptible, and wythered
remnant, of the plague and famine: a navy of wind and weather beaten ships, a
refuse of feeble and discomfited men, shall be sufficiently able to prevail
against this land; unless another course be taken for Gods glory in Wales by
your Hh. then hitherto has been. If I did speak unto infidels, and ungodly
atheists, I know I should not be so plain, because unto such, the truth at
sometimes is unseasonably spoken. But I speak unto those, that have undertaken
the profession of Christianity, and therefore should at all times be fit to
hear the truth of God. And I know no temporizing truth, no temporizing
judgments of God against sin; no truth that is to be concealed unto
christians, because their Hh. cannot brook the same; no truth that is, either
not at all, or minsingly to be uttered, because states love not to here
thereof. So that I was in this matter, not to consider what your high places
were content to here, but what was the duty of your high places to hear. And
therefore I should think it (I protest) an undutiful and flattering petition,
to entreat your Hh. not to be offended with me, for uttering the truth. As
though I supposed, you would think it wonderful, that a man should adventure
to speak, even in the cause of his God, any farther then stood with your good
liking.

The sum of all that the Lord requires at your hands in the cause of his
honor, is concluded in these 2. points. First, that you abrogate out of the
Church, whatsoever you find therein, to be a breach of Gods ordinance.
Secondly, that you countenance the preaching of the word, in such sort, as the
course thereof be not stayed, for the pleasure or profit of any creature. These
points are so reasonable, that whosoever upon choice, and deliberation,
denies any of them (of inconsideracie and want of due examination of matters.
I know many things may be done amiss) I cannot see, what he differs from a
plain Atheist. And therefore again I admonish you, in the name of God, to
look unto your selves, and thoroughly to weigh, what the Lord by the mouth of
Ezekiel, threatens against you, if you still refuse his ways and maintain
these bypaths of man's inventions in his Church. You have feared the sword,
Ezekiel. 11.8^ 10.12.
says the prophet, and I will bring a sword upon you says the Lord Jehovah,
and I will bring you out of the midst of this land, and deliver you into the
hands of strangers, and execute judgments among you. You shall fall by the
sword, and you shall know that I am the Lord; for you have not walked in my
statutes, nor executed my judgementes, but have done after the manner of the
heathen that are round about you.

The laws offices and officers of our church for the most part, being not
according to the statuts of the lord, but framed after the manner of the popish
government, whereby the nations round about us are tiranized by the man of sin;
that is not a matter to be wondered at, that the alteration of our
ecclesiastical state is desired. And besides our savior Christ and his Gospel
came into the world, to alter, yea, and overthrow states and gouernements, in all things wherein they should be contrary unto his will, and I hope that you of
this parliament will not deny him this prerogative. If I have sought the
removing of any thing, which the lord requires not to be altered, I crave no
pardon of mine oversight. What I have written in this whole treatise, I am ready
by the grace of God, personally to make good (though it were upon mine
uttermost peril) whenever I shall be thereunto called, by you of this honorable
assembly; wherein there are many of good estimation and credit, who upon the
motion of mine apperance by this house, will I trust, undertake that I shall
come to stand unto the premises by me set down. So that I may obtain (which I
most humbly crave of you, R. Hh. and worshipful) that upon mine apperance I be
not ^y any court, or prerogative (only the H. court of parliament excepted,
unto whom, as being the highest council in the land, in this cause I apeale)
debarred of my liberty, before my cause according unto the word be overthrown.
The injury which I sustained the last parliament (being a suitor in this cause)
enforces me to crave this at your hands, which otherwise, I should have
persuaded my self to be a needles suit. For whereas the ancient priueledges
and liberties of this house, do give leave (during the parliament) unto any
that are suitors thereunto, quietly to follow their suits without fear of any
arrest, and being arrested, do presently deliver and set them free, I was not
suffered to enjoy any the former liberties. But contrary unto all religion, law,
equity, and conscience, to the great derogatio^ of the liberties of this noble
court, was committed close prisoner by some, who abused the high commission;
their dealing might have appeared more tolerable, and less derogatorious unto
your Hh. and worships, if they had showed any cause of mine imprisonment (their
abused authority only excepted) which unto this day is altogether unknown unto
me.

I know, that the infirmities and wants of men, who deal in good causes, are
commonly beaten upon the back of the cause they handle. Therefore the Lord
knows how careful I have bin to keep it unspotted, and my self out of all
unnecessary danger. Setting down nothing before I had considered what might
ensue, either in regard of the matter or manner of delivery. But why did I
publish a matter of such weight, before I aquainted the parliament therewith?
Why it is published to the end, that the parliament may be acquainted with
the suite, which could not be done by private writing. And it is but an ungodly
shifte of those that would smother the truth, to pretend it to be against the
law, to move the parliament in any suit that is printed. As though the suits of
men unto that high court, were parliament statutes. In deed if the parliament
had enacted the remoouing out of Wales, all L. Bb. dumb ministers, etc. Then
were it an intolerable part, for any to publishe their acts, but by their
appointment. Grant you the petition, and the cavil of committing it to the
press, will easily be answered. If you do not mean to yield unto the suite,
neither would you have done it, being moved thereunto by private writing. The
cause I make known, to the end it may be granted, and herein let not my life
be precious unto me; upon the necessity of the publishing hereof I stand,
because that the world may see when you redress these things, that you did
nothing, that you durst leave undone, unless you would bring swift destruction
upon your selves and the whole land. But what folly is it to think, that
such great matters will be reformed in our days. Rather what injury do they
unto the whole state, who think that they will any longer tolerate the breach
of Gods law. And in this point, let the good opinion, that they who allege
such pretenses conceive, be wayed with my dutiful persuasions of this honorable
assembly, and both causes judged accordingly. For mine own part, I think the
majesty of the cause to be such, as they who are the Lords, dare not but
entertain it, and tremble to think, that all this while, it has been so
carelessly attended upon. And it is in the behalf thereof, that I have presumed
to deal with you, who otherwise durst not have suffered my voice to be heard,
in the ears of the princes of my people. Let what I have written be examined,
yea by mine adversaries themselves (if I have any) and it shall appear, that I
have made a conscience, how I have dealt with my superiors, especially those,
concerning whom it is said, you are Gods, lest I should seem to leave behind
me, the least print of a mind in any sort tending to defame them or their
government, As I have been careful hereof, so let the Lord, yea and no
otherwise, (which I speak as far as my corruptions will permit) grant this
cause, and my self also, if it be his will, favor in your eyes. In deed in
regard of the cause, I come Mandatorie wise, unto this honorable assembly, but
in regard of my self, I come in fear and trembling as unto the Lords
vicegerents, entreating most humbly, that the dignity of so high a cause, be
thought off, nothing the more dishonorably, because it is brought in my hands.
And I protest in respect of my sins, that the Lord may justly deny it the
favor it deserves in your eyes, because I am a dealer therein, But this
should be no reason why the parliament should give it a repulse. For in the
eyes and ears of all the world I make it known, that it is the cause of the
living god wherein I deal And that if it had been possible for me to have
written more humblye and dutifully, I had done it. Or if I had seen any way,
that might have been likelier to prevail wirh my superiors, then this, I take
the Lord to witness unto my soul, that I would not have used this course.
And I would to God I could tell how to make the cause plawsible. So far I am,
from setting down any thing, that might carry with it any show of occasion to
hinder and disgrace the same. Well I have don my endeavor, the success I
expect at the Lords hands, unto whom I commend the cause and the salvation of
that poor people.

The sword of justice reached unto you by the Lord himself, to take punishment
only of him that is an evil doer. I fear not, because I have not offended. If
it should be drawn against me for this action, the president would be such, as
they who meant herafter to prophecy unto you, might be advisedly counseled not
to prophecy, and the Lord as a token of your just destruction to ensue, would
say they shall not prophecy nor take shame If I have spoken any untruth, bear
witness thereof, if a truth, I dare stand to it by the Lords assistance, and
demand what he is that will presume to object and throw him self unto the
vengance of God, by punnishing me an innocente; It is a common manner with some
in these days, to threaten those who deal in this cause now in hand: but
they are to know that it is not so easy a matter to spil their blood, whose
days are numbered with the Lord. The Lord may (I confess with grief) in
regard of my other sins, bring mine head to the grave with blood, but in
this case what have I offended? And therefore undoubted woe will betide him, that
shall molest me for this work. How soever it be, thus I have performed a duty
toward the Lord, his church, my country, and you of this high court, which I
would do if it were to be done again, though I were assured to endanger my
life thereby. And be it known, that in this case I am not afraid of earth. If
I perish I perish. My comfort is, that I know whither to go, and in that day
wherein the secrets of all hearts shall be manifested, the sincerity also of my
cause shall apeare. It is enough for me, howsoever I be miserable in regard of
my sins, that yet unto Christ, I both live and die, and purpose by his grace,
if my life should be prolonged, to live hereafter, not unto my self, but unto
him and his church, otherwise then hitherto I have don. The Lord is able to
raise up those that are of puerer hands and lips then I am, to write and speak
in the cause of his honor in Wales. And the Lord make them whosoever they
shall be, never to be wanting unto so good a cause; the which, because it may be
the Lords pleasure, that I shall leave them behind me in the world, I earnestly
and vehemently commend unto them, as by this my last will and testament. And
have you R. honorable and worshipful of this parlirment, poor Wales in
remembrance, that the blessing of many a saved soul therein, may follow her
Majesty, your Hh. and worships, overtake you, light upon you, and stick unto
you for ever. The eternal God give her Majesty and you, the honor of building
his church in Wales, multiply the days of her peace over us, bless her and
you so in this life, that in the life to come, the inheritance of the kingdom
of heaven, may be her and your portion. So be it good Lord.

By him that has bound him self continually to pray for your Hh. and
worships. JOHN PENRI*


