A SPANISH GRAMMAR, first collected and published by Richard Perciuale Gent.
Now augmented and increased with the declining of all the Irregular and hard
verbes in that tongue, with diverse other especial Rules and necessary Notes
for all such as shall be desirous to attain the perfection of the Spanish
tongue.

Done by JOHN MINSHEU Professor of Languages in London.

Hereunto for the young beginners learning and ease, are annexed Speeches,
Phrases, and Proverbs, expounded out of diverse Authors, setting down the line
and the leaf where in the same books they shall find them, whereby they may
not only understand them, but by them understand others, and the rest as they
shall meet with them.

Virescit vulnere Virtus.

printer's device of Edmund Bollifant

Imprinted at London, by Edm. Bollifant. 1599

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL GENTLEMEN STVDENTS OF Grayes Inn health and
happiness, and to the affected to languages there, daily increase with perfect
accomplishment of the most commendable qualities.
LVcius a famous Roman meeting on a time with the Emperor Marcus, asked him
whither he went: who answered, I am going to Sextus, vt discam quod nondum
scio, that I may learn that which I do not yet know. Diogenes the philosopher
went to Athens to Antisthenes to learn of him somewhat that he was ignorant
of; but Antisthenes not willing to impart at that time any of his doctrine,
repulsed him: the other left not off his purpose, but more and more importuned
him in such sort, that Antisthenes taking up a staff to drive him away,
Diogenes stretched out his neck, willing him to strike on hardly, for he
should not find a staff so hard, that could drive him from him so long as he
might learn any matter by him worthy the hearing. I speak this Gentlemen,
meaning none of you to be bound by their example, seeing one was an Emperor and
might do what he list, and the other a Cinick philosopher that would do that
he ought: therefore if a man have any learning or quality, let him bring it to
you, and if it be too tedious unto you, or hinder your sport, rather then be
troubled with him, bob him or flout and scoff him away. Be not imitators of
Demosthenes which spent more oil in the lamp in studying to enrich his mind,
then wine to comfort his body; but rather waste your wine and spare your
candles: neither be so foolish as Cleanthes the philosopher, that drew water in
the night that he might follow his study in the day; rather take your ease in
the night and your pleasure in the day, because Mutantur tempora and nos
mutamur in illis. Yet Gentlemen, if you do but set before your eyes these
famous men, which have been and are of the house you now remain in, (the
names of some few I can now recite) as Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper, Lord
Burleigh Lord Treasurer, Sir Walter Mildmay and Sir Francis Walsingham, learned
Fitzherbert Lord chief Justice of the common pleas which abridged the law, and
Sir William Stanford, which wrote the pleas of the crown, Sergeant Yeluerton,
Sergeant Daniell, Sergeant Spurling, Master Brograue, Master Stanhop, Master
Hesquit, Master Anthony and Master Francis Bacon, with diverse others might
well move you to consider that, Qui veult plus qu'vn autre valoir, doibt plus
qu'vn autre scavoir: He that will be esteemed above another man, must have more
knowledge then another man: And Meglio esser mendicante che ignorante, Better
to be a beggar then barren of good letters. But these letters are painefully
purchased, why Petit ardua virtus; Difficilis virtutis via; Difficilia quae
pulchra: Therefore Pythagoras counseled his familiar friends that they should
choose out the best kind of life, although the most difficult: and Salust
says, deckings pertain to women, and travels belong to men: and Seneca
affirms, that base is that honor which is gotten with idleness, which the
Roman policy when it flourished confirmed by an ancient law duly kept, that
every father that had children of the age of ten years should become surety
for them, that they should not live idle, or commit any excess, which was so
nearly looked unto, that they publicly chastised Cato the Censors son for a
saucines committed, and banished a brother of good old Cina for living idly
among them. None durst presume to go into the streets but he carried some
token in his hand what kind of life or study he followed, which if in these
times it were in force, how many street walkers would retire themselves to
some virtuous studies. But me think I hear some say, Ars longa and vita
brevis, I answer them with the Thebane Philosopher, which in the 75.
Olympiade, came to the solemn sports kept about the city Olympia in honor of
Jupiter, who had made all the apparel he ware with his own hands: his shoes
he had sowed his shirt he had wouen, etc. being demanded where he had learned
so many men's arts, answered, In the beginning there was but one art at all,
and that the sloth of men had caused that one to be divided into many, and how
every particular man with diligence and labor might obtain to the knowledge
of that that all men in general had knowledge of. Pythagoras.
To this purpose Pythagoras said, He that knows not what he ought to know, is
a brute beast among men: He that knows no more then he has need of, is a man
among brute beasts: He that knows all that may be known, is a God among men.
So many examples present themselves that rather time would fail then matter
herein, and for that my case stands now rather to demand remedy and not give
counsel, or to give thanks for good turns received, and not prescribe
precepts, I think good briefly and plainly to show unto you how having
found my self beholding to some of you, whom I had read unto in the toongs, I
thought nothing could better agree with my profession as to show my grateful
mind toward you, then by laboring for your ease, in these instructions of
the Spanish tongue: which if they be thankefully received, I shall think my
labor well employed. Yet before I could make an end of this and the
Dictionarie, I did as Robertus Stephanus says of himself in gathering
together his Dictionaries called Thesaurus linguae Graecae and Latinae; I have
made Thesaurum, that is, a Treasure for others, but thereby have made my self
a bagger, whereof some of the right virtuous and worthy gentlemen of that
your house, (to whom I am most beholding, and therefore stand most in
affection bound) understanding, wished me to go forewarde in so good a
work, and not to give over for some wants: which then of themselves they
supplied, whose good kindness if I forget, I wish the law of Draco, (which was
to punish with death, if there were any found so unthankful as not to requite
a good turn, or at least to forbear to acknowledge his benefactors for the
same) might be inflicted on me: for there can be no greater injury offered to
a free mind, then to be reputed ungrateful: although in these days four as
great evils left unpunished as those that are punished, Vntemperatenes,
Unshamefastness, Unfaithfulness, and Unthankfulness. But to begin with my
benefactors in this work in order as they began with me in Graies Inn, first
Master William Willoughby, a gentleman as virtuously minded and of as good
carriage as the rest: next Master Henry Bing, whose excellent learning, placed
together with such gentlemanlike conditions, makes him beloved among the
Elders, and honored among the yoonger sort: after him Master Frances Barneham,
and Master James Hewes, endued with exceeding good wits, and no less good
natures: I may not forget the good woorths of Master Robert Hill, and Master
Cheek, gentlemen well studied in the most commendable kinds of learning:
Master Dauison of excellent learning, wit and virtues: Master Helmes and Master
Gill both for their good parts better known then I can here set down: Master
Thomas Mason, and Master John Roberts, adorned with ornaments of languages, to
their other learning and virtues: Master Archer as he is well read in language,
so is he a good favorer of learning. The rest of the well accomplished young
gentlemen whom I know not, I say of them as my mind is toward them best:
Gentlemen, if for these praises you shall one play on another, I pray you cast
all on me, for I protest none of them ever knew that I meant to write unto
them, much less put any of their names in print. Thus wishing to you as much
as Cicero writing to his friend Atticus, would limite to be wished to his
dearest friends, viz. To enjoy health, to possess honor, and never to suffer
want, I rest:

At your command JOHN MINSHEU.

To the Reader.
IF it be vanity and vexation of mind, for a man to toil in this life to
gather riches together, when he knows not whether he be wise or foolish that
shall enjoy it: we may think the sweat of our spirits and the toil of our
bodies, to be altogether vain, which write or print, when we cannot tell
whether they will prove sober or frantic, to whom we leave the possession of
our travels. But the Spaniard says, Quien de miedo se murio de cagaxones le
hizieron la sepoltura; and because as the Italian saying is, A molti puzza
l'ambro, Amber is accounted stinking by many: and Dal asino non ne hai che
calzi and petti: I am resolved for this once to put on merchants ears, to
hear with patience every man's speech and dispraisings of his wares, because
Quot homines, tot sententiae, So many men, so many minds. Therefore he that
should leave off any good work for any man's ill speech, may well be likened to
that poor seely fellow, which on a time went with one of his sons with his
Ass before him to the wood, to fetch him a load thereof for his wife and
children, and meeting travelers by the way; some misliking with him that he
should go on foot, and let his Ass go leere; others, that he road
himself, and suffered his child to go a foot; others, that he loaded the
poor Ass with two persons, being scarce able to carry himself; others, when
he left his son alone riding and himself go on foot; in such sort that the
country fellow could not tell what to do, seeing do what he could, still he
found reprehenders: whereupon he would go no further forward, but returned sad
home to his house without wood, where he remained for fear of fault finders,
till he and his household were near starued with cold, till at last finding
his own simplicity, he returned to the wood, and to as many as he met by the
way, he said; He that passes for other men's speeches and repreefes, endures
cold and a thousand greefes; and he that will throw a stone at every dog,
shall have a weary arm: but I hope, Qui bien fera, bien aura, And for all the
dogs barking, the moon will stand where it did. And I say to the malicious,
Mets ta main sovent en ton sein, et tu ne mesdiras de ton prochain. And let
them remember, that Chifa quello che non deve, gliavien quel che non creed,
According to a History I have read of an Emperor, who had his brothers son
for his cupbearer: The Emperors steward and uncle, for envy persuaded the
cupbearer that his breath did stink, and wished therefore to turn his face
from the Emperor when he delivered the cup till remedy were found: forthwith
he told the Emperor, that his cupbearer had defamed him to all his court, by
saying his breath did stink; and to know it for a certainty, he likewise told
him how he should see the cupbearer turn away his face from him when he came
near him; whereupon the Emperor conceived such wrath against him, (as the
saying is, the anger of a Prince the messenger of death) that he sent express
command to his burners of brick, that they should burn that man that came
unto them first the next morrow; and likewise commanded his cupbearer to be
there so early that none might be before him: on the morrow morning very
early the cupbearer going, and passing by a church in the way went in and fell
into such a sound sleep, that it was the afternoon before he could awake. The
steward in the mean time to see the event of the cupbearer, went and was
burned himself alive. The cupbearer at his return signified to the Emperor
what had happened, and also was desirous to know of the Emperor why he should
send him thither, etc. If neither Histories nor reason persuade them, they must
needs be answered with silence, and so gentle Reader I rest silent from
troubling thee or them herewith any longer, more grieved at my mishap and
disabilitie, then wanting good will or liking to do thee service. Haec raptim.
Vale.

John Minsheu.

In opus M. Minsheui edendum, Iohannis Keperi generosi (...).
Qui cupis auriferi contingere flumen Jberi
Vocibus and veris noscere gentis opes,
Vel mores, vel quas exercet Iberia merces,
Hesperiam and totam noscere quisquis aues:
Minshaeum legito, lectum (mihi creed) probabis,
Ingenium, genium, munera, verba, fidem:
Qui totidem subijt noctesque diesque labores,
Et flores veluti sedula carpsit apes;
Qui tibi qui patriae, sese sumptumque dicauit,
Edidit, and tantae sedulitatis opus,
Aut lauda, aut saltem noli mordere, latrando
Zoile, tabificus, ne videare, canis.
Soneto de un capitan Espanol del Author.
De un diamantino muro circuydo
Con puertas de metal ynpenetrable;
Y por guarda un dragon fiero espantable;
Era el huerto de Atlante defendido:
Mas siendo del fuerte Ercules vencido,
Fue abierta la puerta yncontrastable,
Y las pomas de precio ynestimable
Gozaron luego quantos han querido,
Vos Mincheu soys el Ercules famoso,
Que a pesar de la ynbidia (dragon fiero)
Abristes puerta al huerto ameno umbroso,
De la yspanica lengua, que primero
Cerrada estubo al yngles curioso,
Do gozara pomas de oro verdadero.
The Proeme.
SPanish is a speech, whereof in times past (in Spain) there has been four
kinds used: Four sorts of Spanish.

1. Biskay tongue most ancient. This tongue drawn from the Caldean.


The first and ancientest is the Biskaine, which was the speech of the province
of Biskay and Navarre: it has his original from the Caldean tongue, as the
learned in them both affirm, to whom it plainly appears that this is of
greatest antiquity.

The next is that which was spoken in the kingdom of Granado, 2. Arabique tongue
in old time used in Granado, Andaluzia, Valencia, and Aragon, and yet retain
it in the pronunciation of these letters, c, g, j, x, z.

3. Catalan tongue or Prouencal, a kind of French, had original from
Ga^scoigne, and was used in Cataluna, Malorca, Juica, Cerdena.

4. The Spanish now used.

Difference between the Spanish and Portugal tongue.


and in part in the kingdoms of Andaluzia, Valencia, and Aragon, and was the
Arabique, whose original is the Hebrewe almost among them quite worn out, yet
to this day they keep the pronunciation of some of their letters still, as c,
G, j, X, Z.

The third is the Catalan, which is a kind of French, and had his beginning
from the province of Gascoigne, from the ancient city Limojes: they spoke this
in the kingdoms of Cataluna, Mallorca, Menorca, Iuica and Cerdena. This Catalan
tongue was called Prouencal: and the Italians confess that the Prouencals were
the first inuentors of their rimes and verses, which are so much prised in
Italy where Petraque, Boccace, and Dante, give some testimony in retaining
their words in many places.

The fourth is that which is now at this day commonly used and spoken through
all Spain, and is called Lengua vulgar, the mother tongue, otherwise Lengua
Castellana, or Espanola, the Castilian or Spanish tongue, principally used in
Aragon, Andalucia, Murcia, Castilla, Nueeua, and Veja, Leon: also in Portugal,
although the Portugal tongue have such difference in certain words and
pronunciations, that it may well be called a language by it self, even as the
English and Scottish, yet in truth, it is not so severed, but that they sprange
from one fountain, and have one descendence.

This Lengua vulgar or Spanish tongue draws his original from the Latin or
Roman, and because the Roman conquerours were most politic in providing
for the continuance of their estates and language to their posterity, by
planting where they woone, A Colonie is a place uninhabited, whither people are
sent to dwell: or people sent to inhabit such place: or a city, the people
whereof once came from another city or country.

Why the Spanish keeps so much of the Latin.

Andaluzia, whereof first so named.


Colonies and garrisons; as also not permitting any stranger to the privilege
of their laws or freedom of their towns, to buie, sell, or traffic, but in
the Roman or Latin tongue, as in Spain they have done: Therefore the Spanish
retains still to this day so much of the Latin tongue. And by reason of the
Incursion and ouerrunning of so many strange nations, as the Africans
inhabiting about Carthage, called Carthaginians, Goths, Huns, and Vandals,
which ceased not till they had ouerrunne the most part of Europe, yet so settled
themselves in Andaluzia in Spain, that they called it by their own name
Vandaluzia or Vandalia of Vandalles, as also Africans inhabiting Mauritania
called Moors, whose first coming in, proceeded from the licentious living and
unbridled lust of Don Rodrigo then king, How the Moors first entered and
conquered Spain. Chro. of Spain.
in dishonouring and deflowring a lady called Cava the daughter of earl
Julian, one of his nobles.

By means hereof, this language remains so altered and changed from his
own first property and nature, admitting words, accents, and pronunciations
of other strange nations, as it is become a language of it self compounded of
the Latin and above named toongs: but yet so, that it has much more of the
Latin then of all the other, whereby it may be called the Latin tongue altered
or corrupted.

For Spanish words coming from the Latin, mark the table here following
and their like.

Spanish words drawn from the Moorish tongue begin much with All, as Alcuza, a
vessel for oil: Alfidel, or Alfiler, a pin: Almud, a measure, a pecke:
Alguarismo, Arithmeticke: Almohada, a pillow, etc. or in c, as caherir, to
vpbraid, cahorda, a hogstie: or sound on r, or x, Almaraxa, an ewer of glass:
Xabon soape: Almoradux, marjoram: Arredrar, to drive away: Arrelde, four
pound weight, etc. also in z, as Zagal, a shepherd. And at this day the
Moors in speaking Spanish for juro a Dios, I swear by God, they say jureux a
Deux: for Hombre, they say Homber, for Vuestra merced, your worship or
mastership, they say Voxar merxe.

General Observations from the Latin for the framing of the SPANISH.
Substantives of the Latins in as, as Charitas, in Spanish thus, Caridad.
Maiestas, Magestad. Crudelitas, Crueldad. Ciuitas, Ciudad. Fidelitas,
Fedelidad. Securitas, Seguridad. Obscuritas, Escuridad. Conformitas,
Conformidad. Calamitas, Calamidad. Voluntas, etc. Voluntad. The most part of
words in Latin beginning with Pl. changed in Ll, as Plenus, In Spanish, Lleno.
Planus, Llano. Pluuia, Lluvia. Plaga, Llaga. Plorare. Llorar. In like sort F.
turned into H, as Facere, Spanish, Hazer. Faba, Hava. Faex, Hez. Falco, Halcon.
Farina, Harina. Foetor, Hedor. Formosus, Hermoso, Ferrum, Hierro, Feruor.
Hervor. The Latin ending in io, made Spanish by putting n to it, as Educatio,
Spanish, Educacion. Religio, Religion. Electio, Elecion. The Latin ending in
tum, by changing um into o, as Ornamentum, Spanish, Ornamento, Experimentum,
Experimento, Exemplum. Exemplo. The Latin ending in lis, by taking away is, as
Materialis, Spanish, Material. Finalis, Final. Subtilis, Sutil. Debilis, etc.
Debil. The Latin ending in the Infinitive mood in e, by taking away e by
Apocope, as Castigare, Spanish, Castigar. Amare, Amar. Tenere, Tener. Perdere,
Perder. Sentire, Sentir. Salire. Salir. By adding to the end of a word by
Paragoge, as Apostema, Spanish, Apostemacion. Appetere, Apetecer. Anas. A'nade.
By adding to the middle of a word by Epenthesis, as Certum, Spanish, Cierto.
Coelum, Cielo. Membrum, Miembro. Messis. Miesse. By adding to the beginning of
a word by Prothesis, as Plumescere, Spanish Emplumecer. Capistrare,
Encabistrar. Scala, Escala. Scandalum. Escandalo.

By changing a letter by Metathesis, in the middle of a word, of the second
person plural of the Imperative mood, as D and L changing places, as for
Castigadle, they write Castigalde, for Dezidle, they say and write Dezilde.

The Spanish shows his original from the Latin, although by corruption many
words have changed letters, as in these following and their like, as a into e as
Lac, milk, Leche. Caseus, cheese, Queso. b u Barba, a beard, Barva. Bibo, I
drink, Bevo. c g Amicus, a friend, amigo. Acutus, sharp, agudo. e i Directus,
directed, derigido. lectus, read, leydo. f h Ferru^, iron, hierro. facere, to
make or do, hazer g y Regnum, a kingdom, Reyno.

I proceed no further herein, but leave every Latinist to consider of them as
he shall meet with them by reading, whereby he shall manifestly perceive by
the multitude of words in this tongue derived from the Latin, No difficulty
in the Spanish tongue or other vulgar tongues coming from the Latin.
how easy it is for every mean scholar speedily to obtain the knowledge of
the same, and with these rules and precepts, which here I shall set down, I
doubt not but that every one (desirous thereof) may with facility and short
time speak it and write it more than meanly: the which the better to perform,
I take it the best order (according to the saying, Qui been diuidit been docet,
He that divides the matter, he handles well, teaches well) to divide this
present Grammar into Orthographie, Prosodie, Etymology, and Syntaxis, of which
though I shall not deal with all of all that may be said, yet at least that
shall be necessary to be said for the instruction of the learner in this
tongue.

OF ORTHOGRAPHIE Of Grammar and her parts.
GRammar is an Art teaching the right rules of true speaking and writing,
Definition of Grammar.
and it is derived from the Greek word (...), which is litera, as much as to
say scientia literaria, a knowledge of letters.

Division of Grammar.
Grammar according to Quintilian, is two fould: Historical, and Methodicall.

Historical, gotten by imitation of Authors.

Methodicall, is taught by precepts, which only we here handle.

Subdiuision of Grammar.
Grammar methodicall is divided into four parts, Orthography, Prosody,
Etymology, and Syntaxis. Division of Grammar.


Orthography, conversant in letters. Prosody, in syllables. Etymology, in
words. Syntaxis, in sentences. Property of the four parts of Grammar.

Orthographie, of the Greek word (...) right, (...) writing.

Prosodia, of (...), i. ad, and (...), cantus, that is Accentus.

Etymologia, of (...), true, (...) speech.

Syntaxii, of (...), i. con. and (...), ordino, quasi, coordinatio.

Orthographie is a right rule of true writing, as before of (...) right, (...)
writing, Definition of Orthographie. Definition of Orthopoeia.
whereby every word is to be set down with his true letters, as Cierro,
certain, not Sierto.

Heereto belongs Orthopoeia, which is a right rule of true speaking, of (...)
right, (...) word, that in speaking men pronounce not more gross or small, then
the nature of language will allow, or otherwise then the accustomed manner of
pronounciation usually permitted therein, as Vino, wine, not to pronounce it as
Englishmen do, Veino, but smaller as they pronouncethe double ce, Veeno, Dios,
God, not Deios, but Dheeos. But of this hereafter in the letters more at large.

And because Orthographie (the former part of our Grammar) chiefly consists
in the true writing of every word with his right letters: It must of
necessity follow, that whosoever speaks, or hears a tongue spoken in his
proper Idioma, and would write down the same so spoken, The force of letters.
that he know the power and propriety of each letter in that tongue (because of
letters are framed syllables, and of syllables are made words, and of words the
whole speech, and language, the which neglected, must needs bring a confusion
to the learner, and little or no fruit to the Teachers labor. Therefore to
our purpose.

There are in the Spanish tongue 27. letters, whereof 24. are single, and three
double.

The single, A. b. c. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. j. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. s. t. v.
x. y. z. Letters. Double letters.


The double are these, chapter ll. n.

If any ask the question, why the Spanish, being descended from the Latin,
has in it more letters then the Latin: I answer, Nota.
that although it be now (for the most part of words therein) corrupt and broken
Latin, yet it had at the first (as in the Proeme before going) his original
from the Caldean, Arabique, and Moors tongue, of which they reserve some c. g.
j. x. z.
letters.

But now to our letters as they are in order in the Alphabet or cross row,
without beginning with the vowels, and then skipping from one consonant to
another, distracting the memory of the young beginner in a tongue, which would
much better retain the precepts given thereon, so they might not be driven to
a new order of reckoning their letters, differing from that in their childhood
they learned, and now can hardly be drawn from.

A Is sounded plainly, with opening the mouth as in the Latin, French, and
Italian, as in English man, can: so in Spanish, Manada, a flock, Ensalada, a
salade of herbs.

B Is as the Latin, and is called litera labialis, one of the labiall or lip
letters, because it cannot be pronounced without joining the lips together. It
is pronounced as in English, baker, basket: so in Spanish, Bacia, a bowl,
Barro, clay, but in the midst of a word, except the word come of the Latin.
The Spaniards usually confounds it with V consonant, and sounds it as V
consonant, as Trabajo, travel, they pronounce Travajo: Palabras, words, they
sound Palavras: B and V consonant, written and pronounced one for another.
Cabra, a goat, Cavra: Labor, labor, Lavor: Albarda, a parkesaddle, Alvarda:
Alabarda, a holbard, Alavarda: so oftentimes in the beginning of a word, as
Baylar, to dance, Vaylar: Basquina, a peticoate, a kirtle, Vasquina: Bellota,
an acorne, Vellota: Bermejo, red color, Vermejo: Bexica, a bladder, Vexica.
Wherefore I advise the studious in the Spanish tongue, Nota.
if he find not a word in the Dictionarie, in one of these letters, let him
turn to the other: as if he find not Bayo, which is used in good Authors for
Bay colored, or Bayard, let him look Vayo, and there he shall find the same:
If not Vanar, to bathe, look Banar: If not Voz, look Boz, a voice.

B cast away.
B In the midst of a word going before another consonant, and making the
pronunciation harder, is cut off in Spanish, as Subtle, they write, Sutil,
Absente, Ausente, Obscuro, Oscuro, or Escuro.

C This letter has two manner of soundings according to the vowels that follow
it. If a o or u follow it, he is sounded as k, as in Cara, a face, Coco,
weuell, Cuch^i^a, a spoone: so likewise in the middle of a word, as Descanso,
rest, Escoria, dross, Escudill^, a dish: but going before e or i pronounce
almost as the Italian z, as Prudenza, Dis^^zo, or their t before ia or io, as
Prudentia, Iustificatione, Cecina, powdered flesh, Ciruela, a ^^um.

C cast away.
C Before t, cut off as Acto, an act: the Spaniard says, A^o, Pacto, a
covenant, Pato.

C Marked with a dash under it thus, c, called c, Cerilla, or c Cedilla, is
proper to the Arabique tongue, from whence it was first taken: it is sounded by
putting the tongue to the ranckes of the teeth, c pronounced as the Italian Z. c
pronounced as English Ths.
as the French c ^^en ca, or very near: the Italian Z, as Dilligenza,
Scienza. This c must be so pronounced, whether it be at the beginning, end, or
middle of a word, though a o or u follow: and is sounded as in English Ths, as
caraguelles, great gascoine or Spanish hose, cocobras, cross blows of fortune,
cufre, brimstone: pronounce Thsaraguelles, Thsosobras, Thsufre, in like manner
before e and i, as cenogiles, garters, ciento, a hundred: pronounce
Thsenogiles, Thsiento.

D Is pronounced in the beginning of a word, as in Latin, French, and Italian:
as in English, Dagger, Doctor: so in Spanish, Daga, a dager, Doze, a doosen:
this word Dios is except from this rule, and is pronounced as these that
follow: that is, if d come in the midst or end of a word, D pronounced as Dh.
you must pronounce him as in Greek, as dh in English, as Cada, every, Cadha,
fidelidad, fidelity, fidhelidhadh.

E Is as the Latin, and the Italian, and as in English, Bend, Lend: so in
Spanish, Bendezir, to bless, Bever, to drink: and it must never be sounded so
small as the English ee, as fee, we: nor so broad as the French do their e
feminine, as Femme, a woman, pronounced Famma, but betwixt both as first above.

F Is as the Latin and the Italian toongs, and just as the English. The
Spaniard writes him when the Latins write Ph, as Philosophus, in Spanish
Filosofo.

G Answerable to the Hebrew Gimel, and has two manner of soundings according to
the vowels which follow it, if a o or u immediately follow, it is pronounced
as in the Latin, Gabriel, Gorgias, Gubernator: Italian, Galante, Gotta,
Gustare: French, Garcon, Gourmand: as in English, Gate, Ga. Go, Gu. Gua.
Gold, Gutter: so in Spanish, Gafo, a lazare, a leapour, Gofo, rude, Gula,
guttonie.

But if after the u immediately come a, as Guante, a glove, sound Gwante: Agua,
water, Agwa: Mengua, want Mengwa.

Gue, Gui, like Ghe, Ghi.
But if after u follow e or i, pronounce as the French Guerre, Guide: as in
English Guest, guide: so in Spanish Guerra, war, Guia, a guide: sound Gherra,
Ghia, except these words following, Guero, adle, Aguero, soothsaying,
Garguero, the throat, Sirguero, a drawer or tower of a boat with a roape,
Hoguero, a woodpile, Triguero, a sparowe that lies in the wheat, Ciguena, a
storke, Pedigueno, wanton, Halagueno, flattering, Siguenca, a city of Spain,
Verguenca, shame, Aguelo, a grandfather, Deguello, a beheading, Regueldo,
belking, Vnguento, ointment: and words that come of the Infinitive mood in
Guar, as Enxaguar, to water, Enxague, Menguar, to want, Mengue.

Ge, Gi, as je, ji, which is as in English she shi.
G Before e or i is sounded as the Latin Gero: Italian, Giorno: French, Gisant:
English, Geffrey, Giles: or more like the Spanish, called j jota, or j
consonant, which is pronounced as sh in English: so they say Gemir, to groan,
pronouncing as it were written in English shemir, Gingibre, ginger, shinshibre.

For the Spaniard makes no difference in speaking of this G before e and i,
from the j consonant, G and j consonant written one for another.
and they write one for another, as Ageno, Lineage, Mensage, Lisongero,
Magestad, or Ajeno, Lineage, Mensaje, Lisonjero, Majestad.

G Before n in the middle of a word lost, as Ignominia, Inominia, ignominy,
Ignorancia, Inorancia, ignorance.

H This letter is neither vowell nor consonant, but a note of aspiration, it is
called in the Spanish as in the English Ache, which were more properly in my
opinion to be called as some nations do, Ha, because it does so import in
pronouncing as in English, Harms, Harnes, Hate, Hang.

This H in the beginning of a word is pronounced in Spanish with more
vehemency and emphasis, and in the middle or end of a word weakly and
faintly. H in beginning of a word.


In the beginning he must be pronounced with more force, or else there would
be no difference found in speaking these words, and their like, Haca, a nagge:
Aca hither: as Ven aca, come hither, Hasta, until, and Asta for a spear:
Haya, a beech tree: A'ya, a nurse: Huso, a spindle: U'so, use.

In the middle of a word not so forcible, as Ahechar, pronounce as Aechar,
Alholi, Aloli, H in middle of a word.
a barn or garner.

This H goes before all the five vowels, as Hazer, to make or do: Hecho, made
or done: Higado, the liver: Hollin, the soote of a chimney: Huso, a spindle.
But it may not in true Spanish orthographie be written before a consonant, as
Cristo, not Christo.

Besides it is lost after T, as Ortografia, not Orthografia, Teologo, not
Theologo. H taken away.


With P also it is lost, and the P turned into F, as Filosofo, not Philosopho,
which they must observe that would write the Spanish tongue aright in all that
are like these.

Where Ue follows H, it is pronounced as W, Huerto, an orchard: Huesso, a
bone: Hue pronounced as Wue.
pronounce Wuerto, Wuesso: or as if G went before thus, Gwerto, Gwesso, which I
take to be more fit for the Englishmans pronounciacion for these and the like
words.

That word which begins with H, shall not have H in the middle, except C
go before it, as in Hecho, made, Hechizar, to bewitch and the like.

I There be three kinds of I in the Spanish, that is small i, Greek y, and j
Jota, I three kinds.
or consonant. These two i, y, with a very small slender sound, as the French
and Italians do, which is as the double ee in English, we, she, fee, decree,
so in Spanish, Tirano, a tirafit, A note for Englishmen.
Teerano: Vida, life, Veeda, and not as Englishmen pronounce Teyrano, veida,
which all other nations mislike in hearing them speaking Latin, saying,
Propino tibi, they pronounce Propeino tibi, which I would wish they would but
mark, and take notice thereof: for the French, Italian, and Spaniard, do
learn and are taught by their Schoolemasters to pronounce the Latin different
from their own tongue, otherwise one nation should not understand another
speaking the Latin. But in this tongue as in the Italian and French, they must
observe except they will fall into the vice of Iotacismus and be laughed at, and
not be understood by strangers when they speak or read.

This small i is used in a word as a vowell by it self, as Tinta, yncke, and
in a diphthong, Small i.
as Nieto, a nephew.

Y is put in the beginning of a word before a vowell or consonant, as yo, ya,
yr, Y.
and in the end as Dareys, Podeys.

J jota or j consonant, which this tongue takes of the Arabique, is pronounced
as in French, J pronounced like sh.
Jamais, Deja, Jehan, in English like sh, as Jardin, a gardin, shardin, Jarro,
a pot sharro, ojo, an eye Osho: Hoja, a leaf, Hosha: Oveja, a sheep, Ouesha:
Abeja, a be, A besha: In Seuill and thereabout, they pronounce it not so much
in the teeth, but more in the throat, as Cshardin, Csharro, Ozho, Hozha,
Ovezha, Abezha.

Some authors in the Spanish write these words (yet ill) and the like, with H.
Jerusalem, Hieronimo, which should be thus Jerusalem, Jeronimo.

K The Spaniard never uses this letter but when it is required of the Greek
and proper names then founded as in the English, as Kalendas.

L, M, N, O, P. Are all pronounced as in the Latin, French, Italian, and just
as in English: But P may not be doubled in Spanish, P not doubled. P cast away.
as Aprovar, to approve, Apetito, appetite, and not Approvar, Appetito. P
before T in the middle of a word lost, as Captivo, pronounce Cautivo, captive.

Neither can L be doubled in Spanish when the word comes of the Latin, When
L not doubled. When N not doubled. Nota.
and keeps the Latin sound, as Ilustre, in Latin Illustris: Silaba, in
Latin Syllaba: Colegio, Collegium. So likewise of N, as Tirano, not Tiranno,
in Latin Tyrannus, but when these keep not the sound of the Latin, look
hereafter in double Ll, n, and there you shall find how they are pronounced.

Q Has two pronunciations, not of his own nature, but by reason of a vowell
following him.

If ua follow as in Latin and English, Quantity, Quarter, so in Spanish
Quando, when, Quartana, Qual.

But when ue or ui follow, it is to be pronounced as the Italian Che, Chi, or
the French Que, Que, Qui pronounced as Ke, Ki.
Qui, as English Ke, Ki, as Question, a Question or quarrel, Kestion, Quieto,
quiet, Kieto, except when the word is Latin, as Delinquente, Eloquente.

R With the Greeks and Latins termed Litera canina, so the Spaniard calls
him Letra perrina, the doggish letter, because dogs in grinning their teeth,
when they would bite, sound this letter R. It is pronounced as the Latin,
Italian, and French, but if it be in the beginning of a word it is sounded
strongly, as the Grecians do sound. The Spanyard says Rayo, a sun bean, Rey,
a king, or if it be doubled in the midst of a word you cannot sound with too
great vehemency, as Barro, Clay, Carro, a Cart. But if it be in the midst of
a word and single, with a gentle and mild pronunciation, as ara, an altar,
Moro, a black Moore.

S With x. z. and c. are pronounced (although the one more plain and sounding,
and the rest less) by putting the tongue to the roof of the mouth, and then
hissing out the voice with the lips open as a snake, S made like a snake
doubled with his head lifted up.
and therefore the Greeks called this letter S by that hissing name, as also
made it in fashion double as a snake, with his head lifted up, accordingly is
it made in Latin, Italian, and Spanish. In Spanish these letters are called
Culebrinas, which is snakie, of Culebra, a snake, which uses hissing.

This S in the beginning of a word as in Latin, Italian, and French, and as in
English Sand, Sees, Sin, Sod, Sudden, so in Spanish Saber, Sembrar, Sobra,
Sudor.

But if S be single in the midst of a word between two vowels, then with a
gentle sound almost like Z, as the French do, adding thereby great grace to
their tongue, as Eglise a Church, Cause, so in Spanish Causa, Rosa, uso, puso.
But if it be doubled, then strongly, as in English Crossed, tossed, so in
Spanish Fuessemos gruesso.

Nota, S never in beginning of a word except a vowel follow.
In the end of a word as Z, as Cartas, Letters, Camaras, Chambers, or going to
stool. And note that this letter cannot be in the beginning of a word when a
consonant next follows. Therefore you must write Espero, I hope, and not
Spero. Escrivo, I write, and not Scrivo.

T Is pronounced as in the Latin, Italian, French and English, except it can
never sound ci, Ti never turned in Ci in Spanish, as in other tongues.
as the Latins, Italians, French and English do when after t follows i with
a vowell, as in Latin Prudentia, Italian Amicitia, French Justification,
English Ambition, in Spanish it must be written Prudencia, Amicicia,
Justification, Ambicion, otherwise the writing were false, and you should
pronounce Ti as in Tibi.

Also if H follow T, as Theologo, Theopompo, write and pronounce Teologo,
Teopompo.

U pronounced broad as ou.
U Being a vowell not to be pronounced with a small sound as English, Stue,
Brue, Crew, Issue, but as the French does in his diphthong ou, almost as the
English ou, as Tu, tou, Buche, the maw, Bouche. But being a consonant is
pronounced as in other languages in the beginning of a word, as Vaca, a Cow,
Vena, a Vein, Vino, Wine, Voto, a Vow, Vulgo, the common people, in the mids
of a word as Avaro, Gavia, uva. Also when two ou come together, and a vowell
following, the second is a consonant, as uvo, Tuve, except Vuestro.

X pronounced as sh. X and j written often in Spanish one for another.
X Is one of the Culebrinas letras, the snakie or hissing letters, as above
said in the letter S, and is pronounced like J consonant, and the Spanyard
often writes one for another, as Xaraue, sirrup, Jaraue, and is pronounced as
the French Ch, as the English sh, as Faxa, a wastband, Bruxa, a hag, Floxo,
weak, Fasha, Brusha, Flosho.

Y As above in I.

Z Is called in Spanish Zeta, as the Hebrew Zain, from whence it is drawn, and
from the Moorish tongue, and is pronounced as the English Z, as Zangano, a
droane, Zelo, zeal, Zodiaco, the Zodiac, so likewise in the end of a word,
as Boz, a voice, Cruz, a Cross.

Ch as in English Chapter
Ch Before any of the five vowels to be pronounced as in English, Chapman,
Chiefly, Chicken, Chop, Choose: so in Spanish, Chamelote, Chamlet: Chiminea, a
Chimney: Chorro, a brook: Chusma, a company of people of the common sort.

Ll pronounced as Li.
Ll As gl in Italian, as Cavagli, Moglie, Figli, as double Ll in French, as
Fille, Coquille, as Li in English, as Llano, plain: Lleno, full: Llover, to
rain: Lluvia, rain: pronounce Liano, Lieno, Liover, Liuvia: so likewise in
the middle of a word, as Querrelloso, Kerrelioso, quarrelsome: in the end of a
word never in Spanish written double, as Mil, a thousand, not Mill.

n As the Italian and French gn, Montagna, Campagna, French Compaignon, Mignon,
in English as ni: n pronounced as ni.
as Montana, a mountain, Montania, Campana, Campania, so Dano, loss, Dannyo,
Bano, a bath, Bannyo.

Of Orthographie in Diphthonges.
A Diphthong (according to the definition of Grammarians) is a sounding
together of two different vowels, as if they were but one only, as in English,
Aid, Auditor. Definition of diphthongs.


In Spanish there are twelve sorts.

The first in ai, or ay, as gaita, andays, cantais. 1. Ai, ay.
But when two vowels come together and make more then one sound, they should
be marked over head with two pricks, to take away confusion, as Caida,
pronounced Caida, and so the rest.

The second in ao, where a is more sounded then o, as Quartao, a nag, Sarao, 2.
Ao.
a hall to dance in, Vilbao, a proper name of a town, are pronounced in the
same sort, as Cats maule.

The third in au, where a sounds more then u, as Causa, Author, Caudillo: except
Laud, a lute, 3. Au.
Ataud, a tomb: La-ud, Ata-ud.

The fourth in ei and ey, where e is more sounded then i, as Rey, a king, Ley,
a law: 4. Ei, ey.
when they are severed, write them with two pricks thus, Leistes, Reir.

The fifth in eu, where is most perceived, as Feudo, Deudo, Reuma: 5. Eu.
being disioyned write thus: Reuntar, Reungir.

The sixth in ia, in which a is more heard sound then i, as Saia, Vaia, Malicia,
Presencia: 6. Ia.
except Mia, Dia, Porfia, Desvia.

The seventh, ie, ye, where e is most heard pronounced, as Viento, Sciento,
Viene, Bien, Quien, 7. Ie, ye.
Quiera, Arriendo, Dispierto, Aprieto, Pie, Piedra, Tierra, Cielo, Infierno,
Diez, Siete, Miel, Hiel.

The eight in io, or yo, where o is most sounded, as Yo, Dio, Vio: except Mio,
Rio, Frio, Tio. 8. Io, yo.


The ninth in iu, where i is more heard then the u, as Ciudad, a city. 9. Iu.


The tenth in oi, or oy, as Soy, Doy, Voy, Oygo: except Oydo, Roydo. 10. Oi, oy.


The eleventh in ue, where e more sounded then u, as Fuerca, Muerte, Fuerte,
Cuerno, Nuevo, 11. Ue.
Fuego, Huelgo, Nuez, Vihuela.

The Twelfe in ui, and uy, where u is more sounded then the i, as Muy, Fuy,
Cuidado, Huyo. 12. Ui, uy.


Four Rules following showing how every vowell makes a several syllable by
himself, or is sounded in diphthong with another.
The first Rule.
If between two vowels come h, or a consonant, The first Rule.
such vowels cannot join themselves together to make a syllable or diphthong,
as Ahinco, Bolar, except Aure, Auras, Aura, Auremos, Aureys, where u r and the
vowell make a syllable, the like in Auria, Auriamos.

The second Rule.
Any two vowels coming together, neither of them being i nor u, make two
syllables, The second Rule.
as Neemias, Posseer, Roer, except these Hebrew words which end in two ee, as
Osee, Bethleem, Bersabee.

The third Rule.
When the first person of a verb does end in two vowels, and the first vowell
being i, The third Rule.
and the accent stand upon the same i, then that i makes a syllable of it
self without joining it self with the vowell following, as Embio, Embias,
Embia, Embiamos. Porfio, Porfias, Porfian. Espio, Espias, Espian. Confio,
Confias, Confia.

The fourth Rule.
But if the word does end in two vowels, and the first of them being i, The
fourth Rule.
and the accent not on the first, then they make both the vowels a diphthong
into a syllable, as Gracia, Justicia, Daniel, Ezechiel, Gabriel, Sentencia,
Vitoria, and in like sort do they when they have the accent on the last of
them, as Passion, Religion, Nation, Caucion, Racion, because they come of words
of the Latin that have their accent in the Antepenultima, therefore must the
Spanish have it in the Vltima. Except these words in Spanish, Anciano,
Dioclesiano, Diablo.

Of Triphthongs.
A Triphthong is a sounding of three vowels into one syllable with one breath
together, Definition of a Triphthongs. 1. iay, yay. 2. iey, yey. 3. iue, yue.
4. uai, uay. 5. uei, uey.

and that after five sorts.

The first in iai or yay, as Vayays, Espaciays, where a is heard more then i.

The second iey or yey, where e is more sounded then i, as Ensuzieys.

The third in iue or yue, where e is heard more then u, as Hoyuelo, Arroyuelo.

The fourth in uai or nay, as Guay.

The fifth in uei or uey, as Buey, Bueytre.

Of Prosodia or Accents, the second part of this Grammar.
AS Orthographie handles letters, so Prosodie treats of syllables, and the
right sounding and pronouncing the same with their true accents, which is to
make the syllable or word long or short, soft or sharp, without the which the
learner can not tell how to read or pronounce the tongue, much less to be
understood when he speaks the same, whereby he shall be not only disgraced,
but be driven to bestow longer time, in forgetting that ill touch taken up,
then he might be in going forward in learning five times so much. The which
being carefully looked unto at the first, cannot but much adorn the speaker,
make himself understood, as also giving himself exceeding comfort in going
forward, when he knows he sings true harmony, which cannot but delight
those that will listen thereto.

Description of Prosodia.
Prosodia, is a rule or knowledge, showing with what accent every syllable of a
word is to be pronounced, as Carcel, not Carcel a prison.

Many have affirmed the Spanish tongue to be subject to the Latin accents,
seeing it is for the most part derived from the same, Spanish not subject to
Latin accents.
but common speech and use show the contrary in many words, as Latin
Genesis, in Spanish Genesis, Sodoma, in Spanish Sodoma, Helena, Helena, so in
Latin amor, in Spanish amor, author, author, Cerasus, Cerezo. But yet note this,
that words derived of the Latin do keep the accent of the Latin, Of the
Latin, the Latin accent.

Words ending in D, I, N, or R, accented in the last syllable. Except these.
Nota. Opus laboris.


except some proper names or words ending in d, l, n, or r, as Abstineentia,
Abstinencia, Obedientia, Obediencia, Beneficio, Blando, Caduco, Ceremonia,
Culpa, Digno, Dote, Familia, Fecondo, Furioso, Premio.

But if they end in d, l, n, or r, then they have always the accent in the
last syllable, as Amistad, Pestilencial, Camelon, Pastor.

Except some few ending in l, n, and r, angel, abil, apostol, arbol, joven,
loor, ansar, ambar, acibar, acucar, acofar, alcacar, nacar, tibar, carmen,
cancer, caracter, carcel, Cristoval, consul, crimen, debil, deficil, mobil,
Immobil, focil, docil, Esteril, estiercol, facil, Datil, fragil, v'til,
inv'til, fertile, inabil, mastil, margen, martyr, marmol, Trebol, orden, origin,
virgen, examen, volumen, imagen, betumen, Estevan, and very few or none
besides these, for that in setting these down I ran over (as near as I
could) every word in the whole Dictionarie, whereby you may conjecture, what
pains, trouble, and time, such books of such method as this have bestowed on
them, before they can come forth to show to the learner in a moment, that
which the composer can hardly find out in a month: but if any other there be,
I have accented them in their places, as all the words generally in the whole
Dictionarie whatsoever to make the beginner, and also the well read to be
perfect in the pronunciacion, without which he shall be derided, as not
understood when he reads or speaks.

All Nounes in ion, and in or, accent in the last syllable, as Occasion,
Predicador, so also in i, s, z, as Alcauci, Cortes, Pertinaz, Cerviz, except
Adives, a beast in Barbary like a fox, which barketh and cries in the night
as loud as a fox.

2 Accents in one word.
Although in the Latin there is in no word but one accent dominant, yet in the
Spanish often are two found, as Ciertamente, Fuertamente, wherefore I will set
down the order of the Spanish accenting, first giving example of those words
which continually are accented, then of those which are sometimes, and sometimes
not; last of al, those which have two or three accents.

These words always accented, as He ha yd yr aqui aca sed soy call boz gran ay
Augustine aculla.


These words following sometime accented, sometime not, as

Al, If it be an article, it is not accented, as Dezid al Senor esto, Tell your
master this. But if it be not an article, it is then accented, as Pensad en al,
Think on some thing.

Aun, When que follows it is not accented, as Pedro aunque sepa morir no
hara, Peter although he knew he should die, he would not do it. But asking a
question it is then accented, as Aun duermes Pedro? Do you sleep yet Peter?

Ante, Being a Preposition is not accented, as Ante Dios estamos, We stand
before God. But being an Aduerbe it is accented, as Ante vino Pedro que Juan,
Peter came before John.

Cerca, a Preposition not accented, as Cerca todos dad buen exemplo, Above all
give good example. But if it be a Verb, Aduerbe, or Noune or this particle De
going before or following, then it is accented, as El Rey cerca con su gente,
que tiene, cerca de si, Nota.
la ciudad y la rodea cerca toda, y tiene la cerca de piedra, y de cerca parece
fuerte, The king does besiege with his people, which he has about him, the
city, and compasses it all about, near unto it, which has his wall of
stone, and near hand it seems strong.

De mi, A possessiue not accented, as De mi padre herede virtud, Of my father I
inherited virtue. But if it be not a possessiue it is accented, as De mi
hablays segun veo, You speak of me as I perceive.

Del, The article not accented, as Del virtuoso es la virtud amada, Virtue is
beloved of the honest. But if it be a Pronoune it is accented, as Dios es bueno
y del nos viene el bien, God is good, and from him comes goodness.

Do, Spoken indefinitely not accented, as Do estuviere el bueno estare yo,
Where the good man shall be, there will I be also. But spoken in asking a
question it is accented, as Do esta Juan? Where is John?

El, Being an Article not accented, as El bueno teme a Dios, The just fears
God. If it be a Pronoune then accented, as Cristo nos ama y el nos redimio,
Christ loves us, and he it is that has redeemed us.

Enter, A Preposition not accented, as Enter los santos desseo estar, I desire
to be among the godly. But being a Verb is accented, as Enter Pedro y no Juan,
Let Peter enter and not John.

Mas, The Conjunction not accented, as No hagais mal, mas hazed bien, Do not
evil but do good. But being an Aduerbe, then it is, as Mas queeto bive, etc.
y es mas querido, He lives more at quiet, etc. and is better beloved.

Medio, In composition not accented, as Medio en burlas, medio en veras, Half
in jest, half in earnest. If alone, then otherwise, as Tened el medio en
cosas, Keep a mean in matters.

Nos, Not accented, as Habla nos Jesus, Christ tells us. But if it be a
nominative case to the verb, then it is, as Nos queremos, We will, etc.

Un, Not accented, as Un hombre, A man. But if y the Conjunction go before,
then it is, as Di le pan, y un real, I gave him bread and six pence.

These words following not accented, as

Alo, Alos, Aunque, Con, De, Dela, Delo, Delas, Delos, De mis, Desde, Desque,
Don, Dona, E, En, En mis, Enlo, Enlos, Enla, Enlas, Fray, Y, Lo, Le, Me, Micer,
Mossen, as Micer sancho, y Mossen Pedro vienen, Master Sanches and Master Peter
comes. Ni, Os, Pero, Pues, Por, Quan, Quel, San, Si, Su, So, Tan, Tal. Also all
the Articles while they keep the nature of Articles, which are these,

A, al, ala, alo, alas, alos,

Del, dela, delo, delos, delas,

El, la, las, Lo, los, le, les.

Words of two Accents.

A'ltamente, Hartobasta, Buenamente, Bienditamente, Ciertamente,
Bienaventuradamente, Words of two Accents.
Diestramente, Gravemente, Grasiosamente, Ygualmente, Iuntamente, Luengamente,
Magnificamente, Razonablemente, Raramente, Sabiamente.

Words of three Accents.

Muy malamente, Muybuenamente. Words of three Accents.


Of Etymology and the Nowne.
Definition of Etymology.
Etymology, is a Rule of showing and searching out the original of words,
with that pertains to them.

This searching out of original and descendence of words is considered in
diverse manners: but among the rest, for the beginners in any language
whatsoever, this is so necessary, that without it, they could not understand
or learn it: The which by the Latin Grammarians has been, and is called
Declension and Conjugation (which is likewise a declination) but that the
former is of the Nownes, and the other of the Verbes.

The Spaninsh has eight parts of Speech, as the Latin.

Nowne, declined. Aduerbe, undeclined. Pronowne, Conjunction, Verb,
Preposition, Participle. Interiection.

Of the Nowne.
Nownes be divided into Substantives and Adjectives, which are likewise divided
into Primitiues, Primitive. Deriuatiue.
Deriuatiues.

The Primitive, which is not derived of any other, but is Primu^, of himself,
as Abeja, a be.

The Deriuatiue, is drawn from the Primitive, as Abejonazo, a great Be.

And of like nature to these Primitive nownes, are these Interrogatiues,
Redditiues, and Numerals following.

To the Primitive, these following, and the like are subject, as

Interrogatiue.
The Interrogatiue, as Quien? who? Qual? what manner? Quanto? how much? Quantos?
how many.

The Relative which answers to the Interrogatiue, as tal, such a one, Tantos,
so many.

Numerall. Cardinal.
The Numerall to which these kinds following do belong, as

Cardinal, from which as from a fountain the rest do spring, these do I wish
the learner to have by heart.

1 vno 21 veinte uno 1500 mil y quinientos 2 dos 22 veynte dos, etc. 2000 dos
mil 3 tres 30 treynta 3000 tres mil Cardinal Numerals.
4 quatro 40 quarenta 4000 quatro mil 5 cinco 50 cinquenta 5000 cinco mil 6
seys 60 sesenta 6000 seys mil 7 siete 70 setenta 7000 siete mil 8 ocho 80
ochenta 8000 ocho mil 9 nueve 90 noventa 9000 nueve mil 10 diez 100 cien, or
ciento 10000 diez mil 11 onze 101 cieto y vno 100000 cien mil 12 doze 200
docientos y dozientos 1000000 millon 13 treze 300 trezientos 2000000 dos
millones 14 catorze 400 quatrocientos 3000000 tres millones 15 quinze 500
quinientos 16 dies y seys 600 seyscientos 17 diez y siete 700 sietecientos 18
diez y ocho 800 ochocientos 19 diez y nueve 900 nueve cientos 20 veynte 1000
mil

Ordinall Numerals.
The ordinals, which declare the order of a place or time, as Primero, segundo,
tercero, quarto, quinto, sexto, septimo, or seteno, octavo, nono, or noveno,
decimo, or dezeno, onzeno, dozeno, trezeno, catorzeno, quinzeno, decimo sexto,
decimo septimo, decimo octavo, decimo nono, veinteno, veinteno uno, veinteno
dos, etc. Treinteno, quarenteno, cinquenteno, sesenteno, setenteno, ochenteno,
noventeno, centesimo, or cienteno, dosientenos, trezentenos, quatrocientenos,
quinientenos, seyscientenos, sietecientenos, ochocientenos, nuevecientenos,
milessimo.

Partatiues which signify many severally, as Cada vno, every one, Entrambos,
Partatiue numerals. Universal numerals. Particular numerals. Aduerbiall
numerals.
both of them, ni vno, ni otro, neither of them, or one among many, as otro,
another, alguno some body.

Universals, as todos, all: ninguno, no body.

Particulars, as Alguno, some body.

Aduerbials, joining the Cardinal Numerals with this Aduerbe vez, as v'na vez,
once: dos vezes, twice: tres vezes, thrice: diez vezes, ten times: cien vezes,
a hundred times: mil vezes, a thousand times.

Deriuatiues.
Deriuatiues, which have contained under them these following, viz.
Deriuatiues. Of countries or towns. Of the nation.


Of countries or towns, as Aragonez, a man of Aragon: Andaluz, a man of
Andaluzia: Granadino, a man of the city or country of Granada: Gaditano, a
man of Cadis or Caliz.

Of the nation, as Dalmacios, people of Dalmatia: Ingleses Englishmen, or
people of England: Escosseses, Scottishmen: Franceces, Frenchmen: Moros, black
Moors: Turcos, Turks.

Words in oso are deriuatiue of their Primitiues, as Mentiroso, lying, of
Mentira, a lie: Deriuatiues from Primitiues. Excessiues in udo, and azo.
Diminutiues.
Clamoroso, clamorous, of Clamor, clamor: glorioso, etc.

Of signifying excess in udo, and azo, as Baruudo, having a great long beard,
of Barba, jarrazo, a great blow with a cup, of jarro a cup: Papudo, having a
great wide throat, of Papo a throat: Rodillazo, a great blow with the knee,
of Rodilla a knee.

Deminutiues in ico, ito, eta, uela, illa, illo, as Bonico, Bonito, pretty,
good: vaqueta, vaquilla, a little cow or heifer, of Vaca a cow: Ropilla a
little gown or cassocke, of Ropa: Calderuela, a little kettle, of Calderon a
kettle: Cardenillo, somewhat black and blew, of Cardeno black and blewe.

Of Numbers.
To Nounes as well Substantives as Adjectives, there are these affections
following belonging, Number, Case, Gender.

The Number shows the quantity, the Case the quality, and the Gender the
sex.

There are two Numbers. The Singular and the Plural. Numbers.


The Singular speaking of one, as Libro, a book.

The Plural of more, as Libros, books.

This is a general Rule, if the singular number do end in a vowell, Nota.
the plural number is made by putting to s, as Palabra, palabras, Cuerpo,
cuerpos, Muerte, muertes, Javali, javalis.

Except some few, which must have es added to them, as Rey, reyes, Ley, leyes,
Fe, fees, Buey, bueyes, so in this manner all nounes ending in consonants must
have es added to them, as Merced, mercedes, Ciudad, ciudades, Mortal, mortales,
Pastor, pastores, etc.

Of Cases.
The Spanish has Cases as the Latin, but all in one ending or termination,
Cases.
and are declined with an article, as the Nominative with el la, the Genitive
with the Preposition De, as the Italian and French, the Dative Para, the
Accusative a, the Ablative as the Genitive de.

Of Genders.
There are three, The Masculine, as El Padre, the father. Genders. Rules to
know the gender of most part of Nounes. Nota. Nounes in l, o, r, Masculine.
Exception.
The Feminine, as La Madre, the mother. The Neuter, which is of small use with
the Spanyard, as Lo sincero, Lo malo, for they speak by the substantive, as La
Sinceridad, El mal.


To know the Genders, observe well these Rules following.

All nounes ending in l, o, or r, are commonly of the Masculine gender, as
Cardinal, a Cardinal, Cardo, a Thistle, Pastor, a Shepherd. Except la Carcel,
a prison, la Piel, the skin, la Canal, a Gutter, la Equinoctial, the
Equinoctial, la Naual, a battle at sea, la Hiel, gall, la Sal, Salt, la Mano,
a hand.

All Nounes for the most part in a, d, or ion, are of the Feminine gender, as
Manteca, Nounes in a, d, ion, feminine.
Butter, Magestad, Majesty, Deliberacion, Deliberation.

Names of trees commonly the Masculine gender, and the fruits the feminine, as
El Peral, a Pear tree. El Ciruelo, a Plum tree. El Narra^njo, an Orange tree.
El Cidro, the Citron tree. El Mancano, the Apple tree. El Camueso, the Pippen
tree. El Cerezo, the Cherrie tree. El Almendro, the Almond tree. El Avellano,
the Hazell nut tree. El Castano, the Chestnut tree. El Nogal, the Wallnut tree.
El Azeytuno, the Olive tree. El Olivo, idem. El Moral, the Mulbery tree. El
Granado, the Pomgranat tree. La Pera, the Pear. La Ciruela, the Plum. La
Narra^nja, the Orange. La Cidra, the Citron fruit. La Manca^na, the Apple. La
Camuesa, the Pippen. La Cereza, the Cherrie. La Almendra, the Almond. La
Avellana, the Hazell nut. La Castana, the Chestnut. La Nuez, the Wall nut. La
Azeytuna, the Olive. La Oliva, idem. La Mora, the Mulberie fruit. La Granada,
the Pomgranate.


Exception.
Except these whose tree and fruit are both Masculine, as El Menbrillo, the
Quince tree and Quince fruit. El Limon, the Limon tree and fruit. El
Alverchigo, the Apricocke tree and fruit. El Avercoque, idem. El Pero, the
tree and fruit of a kind of Apple, very raw, and cold by nature, good to
roste, red on one side.


Another exception.
Except these also whose fruit is the Masculine and tree the Feminine, as El
Higo, the Fig. El Datil, the Date. El Razimo, the bunch of grapes. La Higuera,
the Fig tree. La Palma, the Date tree or Palm tree. La Parra, the Vine, or La
vid.


Verbals in or make themselves feminine, by putting to a.
Verbals in or are of the masculine gender, and make themselves feminine, by
putting to a, as Hablador, a prater, Habladora, a she prater.

Likewise Nownes in o, make their feminine, by changing o into a, as Honrado,
honored, Honrada: Suegro, a father in law, Suegra, a mother in law.

Of Declensions and of the Article.
Declension of the Article.
The Spanish (as likewise the Italian and French) have but one manner of
Declension or declining, that is with the Article, which in Spanish is thus
declined: Article masculine Sing. Nom. el. Plu. Nom. los. Genesis del, de lo. Gen,
del los. Dat. Para el, Para lo. Dat. para los. Acc. a el, al, alo. Acc. alos.
Ab. del, delo. Ab. delos.

The Feminine Article thus.
Article feminine Sing. Nom. la. Plu. Nom. las. Genesis de la. Genesis de las. Dat.
para la. Dat. para las. Acc. al, ala. Accus. a las. Abl. de la. Abl. de las.

In the Spanish (as Italian and French) the Article Masculine is put oftentimes
in steed of the Feminine, when the word begins with a vowell, as el agua,
the water, el alma, the soul: to make the pronunciation more sweet Euphoniae
gratia, and it may also be put la agua, la alma.

Also in the Spanish (as Italian and French) the Article is never separated
from Nownes Appellatiues, neither in Singular nor Plural number: as Spanish,
el libro, los libros, Nota.
la camara, a chamber, las camaras. But in Nownes proper it is not used so: for
it were absurd to say, el Francisco, la Iuana: neither is it used with this
word Dios, except there be joined with it some Epitheton, as el Dios todo
poderoso, God almighty.

Declining of a Nowne.
All nownes are thus declined, Sing Nom. el maetro. Plu. Nom. los maestros.
Genesis del maestro. Genesis de los maetros. Dat. para el maestro. Dat. para los
maetros. Acc. a el, or al maestro. Acc. a los maestros. Abl. del maestro. Abl.
de los maestros. The feminine gender thus, Sing. Nom. la doctrina. Plu. Nom.
las doctrinas. Genesis de la doctrina. Genesis de las doctrinas. Dat. para la
doctrina. Dat. para las doctrinas. Acc. a la doctrina. Acc. a las doctrinas.
Abl. de la doctrina. Abl. de las doctrinas.

Adjectives are declined like the Substantives both singular and plural number.

Comparatiues and Superlatiues.
The Spanish to make comparison, in the Comparatiue degree uses this particle
Mas, Comparatiues.
as Mas diligente, more diligent, Mas vil, more vile: and to diminish, they use
Menos, as Menos diligente, less diligent, Menos vil, less vile.

The Superlatiue.
The Superlatiue is made of this particle Muy, as Muy iusto, very just:
Superlatiues.
sometime with exaggerating and magnifying a matter, they form their
Superlatiues from nownes Adjectives, as Ilustrissimo, Humanissimo,
Hermosissima, most excellent, most human, most beautiful.

These following thus compared Bueno, mejor, or mas bueno. Malo, peor, muy
malo. Grande, mayor, muy grande, or Grandissimo. Chico, menor, or mas chico,
muy chico. Mucho, mas, muy mucho, or muchissimo. Poco, menos, muy poco.


There be also Aduerbes of quality which are used with Comparatiue and
Superlatiue, as nownes whereof they come, as Muy mas elegantamente, much more
eloquently, Muy mas discretamente, much more discreetly. In like manner,
Prepositions, as Detras, behind, mas Detras, more behind, muy Detras, much
behind: Debaxo, beneath or under, mas Debaxo, more below or under, muy Debaxo,
much under or beneath.

A Pronoune.
The Spanish Pronoune is as the Latin, like a Noune, and is used in
rehearsing, of a proper name of Pro and Nomen, i. for the name and in speech is
used therefore.

Pronounes are divided into Primitiues and Deriuatiues.


The Primitiues are these, yo, tu, si, este, aqueste, el, esse, aquel, el qual,
que, quien, mismo, Primitiues.
to which Mismo all before going may be coupled, as yo mismo, I my self: tu
mismo, thou thy self: si mismo, himself: el mismo, he himself, and so may
you say yo misma, tu misma, etc. they are called Primitiues because they are
Primi, first, and not derived of others.

Primitiues divided into Demonstratiues. Relatiues.


They are called Demonstratiues because they show a thing not spoken of
before, as yo, tu, Demonstratiues
si, aquel, este, el.

Relatiues as repeating or having relation to some thing spoken before, as el,
este, que, Relatiues.
quien, el qual.

Deriuatiues or Possessiues, Deriuatiues.
because they be derived of the Primitiues and signify possession, as
belonging to something, as mio, or mi: tuyo, or tu: suyo or su, nuestro,
vuestro.

In Pronounes are chiefly to be noted, the Persons, because all Nounes and
Participles be of the third Person, but Pronounes of all three Persons, as yo
and his Plural nos, be of the first Person, Tu and his Plural vos, of the
second: and all the rest whatsoever of the third Person, according to this
rule. All Nounes, Pronounes, and Participles, be of the third Person, except yo
and tu.

The first person Yo, thus declined.
Yo declined.
Sing. Nom. yo. Plu. Nom. nos, nosotros. Fem. Plu. Nosotras. Genesis de mi. Genesis de
nos, de nosotros. de nosotras. Dat. Para mi. Dat. Para nos, para nosotros. Para
nosotras. Accu. a mi, a me. Accu. a nos, a nosotros. a nosotras. A bla. de mi.
Abla. de nos, de nosotros. de nosotra.

Nota.
This Pronoune in the singular number serves as well for the Masculine as
Feminine gender, so in the Plural does Nos. But Nosotros only to the
Masculine, and Nosotras to the Feminine.

The Spaniard in speech and writing uses this Pronoune Nos with the first
person Plural of the Imperative mood, by taking away s, from the Verb, as
Vamonos, for Vamos Nos, let us go: Dexamonos, for Dexamos Nos, let us leave.

From this Pronoune Primitive are two other derived, one from the Singular
number, as Mio, from yo, another from the Plural Number as Nuestro from
Nosotros.

Mi, and Mio.
Mio, Mia, in Latin Meus, mea, meum, in Italian Mio, mia, in French Mon, ma.

Example.

Mascul. Fem. Mascul, Fem. Sing. Nom. Mi, mio. Mia. Plu. Nom. Mis, mios. Mias.
Genesis de mi, de mio. de mia. Genesis de mis, de mios. de mias. Dat. Para mi, para
mio. para mia. Dat. para mis, para mios. para mias. Accu. a mi, a mio. a mia.
Accu. a mis, a mios. a mias. Abla. de mi, de mio. de mia. Abla. de mis, de
mios. de mias.

The learner in the Spanish must note, the manner how the Spaniard uses these
Possessiues, Mi, mio, Tu, tuyo, Su, suyo: and when he ought to use them in
speech or writing, otherwise straight he will bewray himself in using
improperly the tongue.

A rule when Mi, tu, su, and Mio, tuyo, suyo, are to be used. Nota.
Mi, tu, su, are still used, joined with another word, as Mi cavallo, my
horse, not Mio cavallo: Tu piensamento, thy thought, not Tuyo piensamento: Su
provecho, his profit, not Suyo Provecho.

But when a question is asked, and Mio, Tuyo, Suyo, put absolutely and not
joined, as Cuya es essa espada? whose rapier is this? Answer: Mia, tuya, suya,
mine, thine, his: and not Mi, tu, su: De quien es este cuchillo? whose knife is
this? Answer, Mio, tuyo, suyo: and not, Mi, tu, su. In like sort when they
make a relation of a thing spoken of before, and are placed at the end of a
sentence, clause or period, as este cavallo no es mio, mas deaquel que a milo
dexo, paraque yo fuesse a vna casa tuya: this horse is not mine but his that
left it me, that I should ride to one of thy houses, and you cannot say, este
cavallo es mi, que yo fuesse a vna casa tu.

These and many such like I wish the learner in the Spanish to mark diligently
in authors as he reads.

S. added makes Plural number.
To make the Plural number of Mi, Tu, Su, add to s, as Mis, Tus, Sus, and so of
other words whatsoever, as before of numbers in the Noune.

This other derived from the Plural Nosotros is thus declined.

Mascul. Fem. Mascul. Fem. Sing. Nom. Nuestro, Nuestra. Plur. Nom. Nuestros,
Nuestras. Genesis de Nuestro, de Nuestra. Genesis de Nuestros, de Nuestras. Dat. para
Nuestro, para Nuestra. Dat. para Nuestros, para Nuestras. Accus. a Nuestro, a
Nuestra. Accus. a Nuestros, a Nuestras. Ablat. de Nuestro, de Nuestra. Ablat.
de Nuestros, de Nuestras.

The second person Tu, thus declined.
Mascul. Fem. Second person, Tu.
Sing. Nom. Tu, Plur. Nom. Vos Vosotros, Vosotras. Genesis de Ti, Genesis de Vos de
Vosotros, de Vosotras. Dat. para Ti, Dat para Vos para Vosotros, para Vosotras.
Accu. a Ti, a Te, Accus. a Vos a Vosotros, a Vosotras. Abl. de Te, Ablat. de
Vos de Vosotros, de Vosotras.

Nota.
Note that the Spanyard most ordinarily joins to the Infinitive mood of any
verb, this particle os, which is as much as vos, as Hablaros, to speak unto
you, Veros, to see you, Deziros, to tell you.

Of this Primitive, likewise come two Deriuatiues, the one of the Singular
number, as of Tu comes Tuyo, in Latin Tuus, Tua, Tuum, Italian Tuo, Tua, French
Ton, Ta. The other of the Plural, Vos or Vosotros comes Vuestro.

Example.

Mascul. Fem. Mascul. Fem. Sing. Nom. Tu, Tuyo, Tuya. Plur. Nom. Tus, Tuyos,
Tuyas. Genesis de Tu, de Tuyo, Tuya. Genesis de Tus, de Tuyos, Tuyas. Dat. para Tu,
para Tuyo, Tuya. Dat. para Tus, para Tuyos, Tuyas. Accus. a Tu, a Tuyo, Tuya.
Accus. a Tus, a Tuyos, Tuyas. Abl. de Tu, de Tuyo, de Tuya. Ablat. de Tus, de
Tuyos, de Tuyas.

But note how the Spanyard and Italian accounts it a disgrace to speak to
any man in the second person singular either in the Nominative Tu, or in other
cases Ti or Te, Nota, how the Spaniard uses Tu, and the second Plu,
except it be to his Neager, his slave, his lackie, horsekeeper, or to some of
base and vile account. To their servants of the better reckoning, and to
artificers and such like persons they speak in the second person Plural, as
Traed aqui, bring hither, etc. Yreys a mi capitero, you shall go to my
shoemaker, Direys que me haga unos borzeguis, and you shall tell him that he
make me a pair of buskins.

To all others they use the third person, as Quiere V.M. andar, will your
Mastership go? Nota.


Ruega a V.M. que me haga essa merced, etc. I entreat your Mastership that you
do me this courtesy, etc.

And whereas Englishmen say You, the French Vous, Nota.
the Spanyard and the Italian speaks in the third person singular, as V.M.
V.S. your Mastership, or worship.

The other Deriuatiue of the plural number is this, Vuestro, of Vos or
Vosotros, Nota.
in Latin Vester, Vestra, Vestrum, in Italian Vostro, Vostra, French Vostre,
in English Yours.

Example.

Sing. Nom. Vuestro, Vuestra. Plural. Nom. Vuestros, Vuestras. Vuestro.
Genesis de Vuestro, Vuestra. Genesis de Vuestros, Vuestras. Dat. para Vuestro,
Vuestra. Dat. para Vuestros, Vuestras. Accus. a Vuestro, Vuestra. Accus. a
Vuestros, Vuestras. Ablat. de Vuestro, Vuestra. Ablat. de Vuestros, Vuestras.

The third person Si, thus declined. Si.


Sing. and Plural. Nom. caret. Genesis de si, Dat. para si. Accu. a si. Abl. de si.
Of this Primitive one Deriuatiue, which signifies in Latin, Suus, sua, suum:
Italian, Suo, sua: French, Sien, sienne: English, His, as.

Example.

Mascul. Fem. Mascul. Fem. Sing. Nom. su, Suyo, Suya. Plu. Nom. sus, Suyos,
Suyas. Su, Suyo.
Genesis de su, Suyo, Suya. Genesis de sus, Suyos, Suyas. Dat. para su, Suyo, Suya.
Dat. para sus, Suyos, Suyas. Accu. a su, Suyo, Suya. Accus. a sus, Suyos,
Suyas. Abl. de su, Suyo, Suya. Abl. de sus, Suyos, Suyas.

I proceed with the examples of all the Pronounes following by declining them,
because as I before said: it is one of the difficultest things in the tongue to
have the true use of them, and whereby a stranger or the unlearned in his
speech or writing, shall soonest discover himself to the natural or learned
in the tongue. Wherefore let not only the young learner; Nota the difference of
these Pronounes following. E'ste, Aqueste.
but also the well grounded, and those that are able to discourse and write the
tongue well, observe how and when these Pronounes following (so little differing
the one from the other) are to be used in their due time and place, as
follows:

These two, E'ste and Aqueste, do signify unto us any thing that is near us,
in that signification as the Latin, Hic, haec, hoc: in Italian, Cotesto,
Cotesta, Costuy, Costei, Questo, Questa: in French, Cestuy cy, Ceste cy, Cecy:
in English, this here, or this man here. They do differ thus. Nota. E'ste,
Aqueste. E'sse. Aquel, El.


E'ste and Aqueste, in Latin, Hic, is he, or that which is near or next to me.

E'sse, in Latin, Iste, he or that, near or next to thee.

Aquel and El, in Latin, Ille, is he, or that which is neither by me nor thee,
but a part from us both.

Example.

Mascul. Fem. Neu. Mascul, Fem. Sing. Nom. este, esta, esto. Plu. Nom. estos,
estas, Genesis deste, desta, desto. Genesis destos, destas, Dat. para este, para
esta, para esto. Dat. para estos, para estas. Accus. a este, a esta. a esto.
Accus. a estos, a estas. Abl. deste, desto. desto. Abl. destos, destas.

In the singular number of this Pronouns, the first words in e, as este,
deste, para este, etc. are of the Masculine gender: the second, esta, desta,
para esta, etc. of the Feminine: the third, as esto, desto, etc. of the Neuter:
but in the Plural, the first is the Masculine and Neuter: the other the
Feminine gender.

Nota.
In the Genitive case, we say deste, and destos, casting away the first e,
Euphoniae gratia, that it might sound the smoother, yet one may also say, de
este, de estos.

Aqueste. E'sse.
Aqueste, Aquesta, Aquesto, declined as in the example next above, and so is,
E'sse, E'ssa, E'sso: in Latin, Iste, ista, istud: the Italians and French have
no proper words to express it, but must use circumlocution: in English, he or
that, near or next to thee.

Mismo, Mismo.
Misma, Mismo, declined after the same.

Aquel, El.

Aquel, and El: in Latin, Ille illa, illud: Italian, Quello, colui, quella,
Colei: French, Celuy iceluy, Cella, icelle, he or that which is neither near
me nor thee, declined both alike.

Note that this El, a Pronoune, and El the Article do differ in declining,
specially in the plural number. Nota.
This making E'llos, and that Los, as by comparing the one with the other, the
Reader may see. Look the declining of the Article El before in the Nowne.

Mascul. Fem. Neu. Sing. Nom. el, ella, ello. Plu. Nom. ellos, ellas. Genesis del,
d' ella, d'ello. Genesis d'ellos, d'ellas. Dat. para el, para ella, para ello.
Dat. para ellos, para ellas. Acc. a el, a ella, a ello. Accu. a ellos, a ellas.
Abl. d'el, d' ella, d'ello. Abl. d'ellos, d'ellas.

Nota.
Note that the Spaniard commonly uses this Pronoune Le before a Verb thus, Le
vino a la memoria, it came to his memory: Le dixo, he told him: Que del alma
le salia, which came from his soul: Dar le lo, to give him that: Le respondio,
he answered him.

Nota.
Also the Spaniard uses this Pronoune Le joined to the Infinitive mood of a
verb, by changing r of the Infinitive into l, Euphoniae gratia, as Hablarle,
to speak unto him, Hablalle: Oil, to hear him, Oylle: Verle, to see him,
Velle.

Now follows Que, Quien, El Qual, in Latin Quis, Qui, Qua, Quod, in Italian,
Chi, Che, Il Quale, La Quale, in French, Qui, Lequel, Laquelle, in English,
who, which, thus.

Que, Quien.
Sing. and Plural. Nom. Que. Genesis de Que. Dat. para Que. Accus. a Que. Ablat.
de Que.


In this same manner is Quien declined.

El qual.
El qual.

Masc. Fem. Neut. Fem. Sing. Nom. el qual, la qual, lo qual. Plur. Nom. los
quales, las quales. Genesis del qual, de la qual, de lo qual. Genesis de los quales,
de las quales. Dat. para qual, para la qual, para lo qual. Dat. para los
quales, para las quales. Accus. al qual, a la qual, a lo qual. Accus. a los
quales, a las quales. Ablat. del qual, de la qual, de lo qual. Ablat. de los
quales, de las quales.

Verbes.
Of Verbes.
THe Spanish tongue has the same kind of Verbes, Moodes, Tonfes, Numbers and
Persons as the Latin. Verb passive.
But for the verb passive, they make of the verb Soy, in Latin Sum, es, fui,
and a participle, as Amado, Leydo, Partido, as Soi Amado, Leydo, Partido, I am
loved, read, parted, or with this Accusative case or particle Se, with the
third person active singular or plural, as Se dize, it is said, Se dizen, they
are said, as hereafter in their place more at large shall be declared.

Gerunds.
Also they have the Gerund in Do in the same manner as the Latins, as Amando,
Leyendo, Oyendo, in Loving, Reading, Hearing. But for the Gerund in Di and Dum
of the Latin, they express after another manner. For Gerund in Di the
Spanyard uses the Infinitive mood and the preposition De, as De amar, of
Loving, De leer, of Reading. For the Gerund in Dum, the Infinitive mood and
the Preposition A, or the Infinitive mood of Soy with a Participle, as A amar,
or Ser amado, to be Loved, A oyr or Ser oydo, to be Heard.

And in like manner their Supines, whereas the Latins say, Amat^^^, Amatu,
they say, A amar. Supines.
Do ser amado.


And for Participles of the Active voice, Aman^, El que ama. Participles.
For Participle of the Passive voice, Amatus, Lo que es amado. For Participle
of the Future in Rus, Amaturus, El que ha o espera de amar. For Participle of
the Future in Dus, Amandus, Lo que ha de fer amado.
All which by particular examples following shall plainly to the Reader appear.

Of Coniugations.
The Spanish has three coniugations, only both of Verbes Regular, and
Irregular.

1 The first ends in ar, as Mirar, to behold: Hablar, to speak.

2 The second in er, as Perder, to loose: Caer, to fall.

3 The third in yr or ir, as oyr, to hear: Cumplir, to accomplish.

Tenses.
The first Person singular of the Indicative mood Present tense of all Verbes
Regular, of what Conjugation soever, always ends in o, Miro, I behold,
Hablo, I speak, Pierdo, I loose: Oygo, I hear.

Indicative mood.
Every Preterimperfect of the Indicative, of Verbes Regular, of the second
and third Conjugation in ia, or ya, as Perdia, I did lose: Caya, I did fall,
etc. Oya, I did hear, Complia, I did accomplish, etc. And of the first
conjugation all in ava, as Mirava, I did behold: Hablava, I did speak. First
Preterperfect in y, or i, as oy, perdi. I have heard, I have lost: but of the
first Conjugation all in e, as Mire, I have beholden: Hable, I have spoken.
Second Preterperfect of all the three Coniugations of all Verbes with this Verb
He, and the Participle, as He mirado, I have beholden: He leydo, I have read:
He oydo, I have heard. Preterpluperfect thus, avia mirado, leydo, oydo, I had
beholden, read, heard. Future, of the Indicative of all Verbes Regular, and
Irregular in re, as Hablaie, I will speak: Leyre, oyere, hare, podre, sabre,
Dare.


The Terminations of Verbs thus varied as follows.
Every Imperfect of the Indicative of the second and third Conjugation thus
varied. ia, or ya, as Perdia, as oya, ias, yas, Perdias, oyas, ia, ya, Perdia,
oya, iamos, yamos, Perdiamos, oyamos, iades, yades, Perdiades, oyades, ian,
yan, Perdian, oyan.

Every Imperfect of the Indicative of the first Conjugation, in ava, avas,
ava: avamos, avades, avan, as Hablava, hablavas, hablava, hablavamos,
hablavades, hablavan.

Every Future of the Indicative of all Verbes of all Coniugations. re, of
first, second, and third, Conjugation in ras, ar, hablare, by adding e long or
accent to the Infin. mood r. ra, er, perdere, remos ir, oyre, reys, ran,

The Terminations of the Optatiue and Subiunctiue.
Every Present Tense of the Optatiue and Subiunctiue of Verbes of the first
Conjugation thus, by changing o, of the Indicative Present tense into e, thus,
e, as hable, es, hables, e, hable, emos, hablemos, eyes, hableys, en, hablen.
Every Present of the Optatiue and Subiunctiue of the second and third
Conjugation, by changing o, of the Present of the Indicative into a, thus, a,
perda, as, perdas, a, perda, amos, perdamos, ays, perdays, an, perdan, Every
Preterimper. of the Optatiue and Subiunctiue of Verbes of the first Conjugation
thus, ara, ria, ass, hablara, habraria, hablasse, aras, rias, asses, hablaras,
hablarias, hablasses, ara, ria, ass, hablara, hablaria, hablasse, aramos,
riamos, assemos, hablaramos, hablariamos, hablassemos, arades, riades, assedes,
hablarades, hablariades, hablassedes, aran, rian, assen, hablaran, hablarian,
hablassen, Every Preterimperfect of the the Optatiue and Subiunctiue of the
second and third Coniug. thus, era, ria, esse, perdiera, perderia, perdiesse,
eras, rias, esses, perdieras, perderias, perdiesses, era, ria, esse, perdiera,
perderia, perdiesses, eramos, riamos, essemos, perdieramos, perderiamos,
perdiessemos, erades, riades, essedes. perdierades, perderiades, perdiessedes,
eran, rian, essen, perdieran, perderian, perdiessen.

And these Preterimperfect Tenses as all other of what Conjugation soever of
Verbes Regular, and Irregular, form two voices of themselves of the second
person singular of the first Preterperfect Tense of the Indicative mood, by
taking away Ste, and by making it in the first Conjugation, ara, and ass, as
of this second person of the Preterperfect of the Indicative singular,
Revelaste, comes the Preterimperfect of the Optatiue, and Subiunctiue
Revelara, Revelasse, and of the second and third Conjugation of all Verbes
Regular and Irregular, by changing that ste, into era and esse, as of this
Indicative mood entendiste, comes the Preterimperfect of the Optatiue and
Subiunctiue, entendiera, entendiesse, of oyste, comes oyera, oyesse: of
diste, diera, diesse: of estuviste, estuviera, estuviesse: of anduviste,
anduviera, anduviesse: of pudiste, pudiera, pudiesse. And they form the third
voice of this Preterimperfect by putting to ia, to the Infinitive mood, as of
the Infinitive revelar, comes this Preterimperfect revelaria, of the
Imfinitiue entender, entenderiia, of oyr, oyria, of dar, daria, of estar,
estaria, andar, andaria.

Every Future of the Optatiue and Subiunctiue of verbes of the first
conjugation, thus are, as Hablare. ares, Hablares. are, Hablare. aremos,
Hablaremos. aredes, Hablaredes. aren. Hablaren. Every Future of the second and
third Conjugation of the Opt. and Subiunctiue, thus ere, as Perdiere, Oyere.
eres, Perdieres, Oyeres. ere, Perdiere, Oyere. eremos, Perdieremos, Oyeremos.
eredes, Perdieredes, Oyeredes. eren. Perdieren. Oyeren.

Now it remains to give a Paradigma or example of every Conjugation of their
Moodes, Tenses, Numbers and Persons, that the Student in the tongue may form
the rest by, which is the chiefest point of this our Grammar, and without the
which the learner shall never be able to write or speak but by aim and rote,
and so be discouraged from so laudable a purpose.

And for the better delight of the Reader, and for the affinity of these two
tongues, Why the Italian added to the verbes following.
as for the pleasure and profit he may reap hereby, I have here in the
Examples following, set down the Italian, that the understander of both
tongues, may with one labor (and yet at his ease) see the difference, the one
from the other, and be hereby able in understanding, writing and speaking, to
practice either of them, without using the one for the other, or mixing them (a
thing offensive to the Spaniards nature, as all know who have traveled in
Spain.) For even as two things very like one to the other, if you see them at
diverse times, and in diverse places, may easily make one miscarrie his memory,
and mistake the one for the other, when you see either of them again by it
self:

So if you see them both at one time, and in one place together, and take good
heed of them by comparing them; no doubt by one mark or other, you shall ever
after be able to discern, know and call them: even so these two languages
(sometime altogether so like) being thus laid together, will cause the Reader
easily to discern and remember them.

Aver and Ser.
And because this verb Aver, in Latin Habere, in Italian Hauere, in French
Auoir, Aver and Ser.
in English to Have, and Ser, in Latin Esse, Italian Essere, French Estre,
English to Be, do serve to the coniugating or declining of all other verbes:
They are best in my opinion first to be declined, especially this verb Aver,
which may fitly be called Verbum auxiliarium, a helpful verb, because he does
not only help to decline himself in his own preterperfect and
preterpluperfect, but does serve to decline all other verbes whatsoever in the
same tenses, as by the Examples following you may see. And this verb Ser, as
before serves, as in the Italian and French to decline all verbes Passiues,
for without it neither the Spanish, Italian or French can form or decline
their Passiues, as following you may perceive.

AVER declined.
The declining of the first Auxiliar verb Aver, in Italian Hauere, in Latin
Habere, in English to Have.
Indicative mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Yo HE, Io Ho and Haggio, Poetical. Ego HABEO,
I Have. Tu as, tu Hai, tu Habes, thou Have. Aque^a or ha. coluiha, and have,
Poetical. ille Habet. he has. Plural. Plural. Plural. Plural. nosotros Avemos
or Hemos Noi habbiamo and hauemo, Nos Habemus, we Have. vosotros Aveys. voi
Hauete, vos Habetis. ye Have. aquellos an or han. coloro Hanno. illi Habent.
they Have. Imperfect. Avia, Haueua and Hauea, Habebam, I had Avias, Haueui,
habebas, thou Had, etc. Avia. Haueua and Hauea. habebat, etc. Plur. Plur.
Aviamos, Haueuamo and haueamo, Aviades, Haueuate, Avian. Haueuano and haueano.
First preterperfect uve, Hebbi, Habui, I have had, etc uviste, hauesti,
habuisti, etc. uvo or huvo or ovo, hebbe. Uvimos, Hauemmo, uvistes, haueste,
uvieron or huvieron or ovieron. hebbero. Second perfect. yo He, Avido Io Ho,
ha^uto Habui, I have Had, etc. tu as, tu hai, habuisti, etc. aquel a or ha.
colui ha, nosotros hemos or avemos, noi habbiamo, vosotros aveys, voi hauete,
aquellos an or han. coloro hanno. pluperfect te^se Avia, Avido Haueua, hauuto
Habueram, etc. I had Had, etc. avias, haueui, avia. haueua. Aviamos, haueuamo,
aviades, haueuate, avian. haueuano. Futur Avre, Hauero, hauro and haro, Habebo,
etc. I shall or will have, etc. Avras, hauerai, haurai and harai, Avra. hauera,
haura and hara. Avremos, Haueremo, hauremo and haremo, Avreys, hauerete,
haurete and harete, Avran. haueranno, hauranno and haranno.

Imperative mood.
ayas tu, Habbitu, Habe, habeto, etc. Have thou, etc. aya aquel, habbia colui,
ayamos nosotros, habbiamo noi, ayays vosotros, habbiate voi, ayan aquellos.
habbiano coloro.

The Spaniards use in steed of this Imperative mood, this word Ten of Tengo,
I hold: which Tengo is often used of them for this verb He.

This Imperative mood, Ten of Tengo, so commonly used for ayas, aya, is thus
declined: AVER declined.
The Imperative of Tener, ordinarily used for the Imperat. of AVE'R, to Have.
Ten tu. Hold thou. Tenga aquel. let him Hold. Tengamus nosotros, Hold we, or
let us Hold. Tened vosotros. Hold ye. Tengan aquellos. Hold they, or let them
Hold.

The Optatiue mood is used with these signs, Oxala, or else Osi, or
Pluguiesse a Dios: in Latin, Vtinam: in Italian, O Dio voglia, O che, Dio
volesseche, O Dio che: French, Dieu vuelle, Pleust a Dieu: English, would to
God, I pray God; God grant. The Potentiall like the Latin, Nota.
with these signs, May, can, might, would, Should, or ought: both declined
like the Subiunctiues following: but that the Optatiue and Potentiall always
make their Future tense and Present tense all alike, as Oxala yo aya, I pray
God I have: so in the Future, Oxala yo aya, I pray God I have hereafter: Oxala
yo Revele, God grant I reveal: Future tense also, Oxala yo Revele, God grant
I reveal hereafter: and so of the rest.

And because the Optatiue and Potential have their Future tenses al one with
their Present: and the Subiunctiue has two Futures, and both differing from
the Present, I hold it needful to decline the Subiunctiue, by whom the other
two are framed.

Subiunctiue mood
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como. aya, Quando Habbia, Cum Habeam, when I
had. ayas, Habbi, Habeas, etc. when thou Had, etc. aya. Habbia. ayamos,
Habbiamo, ayays, Habbiate, ayan. Habbiano. Imperf. Como auria, uviera, uviesse,
Quando hauerei, haueria, hauessi, Cum haberem, etc. when I Had, or did have,
etc. aurias, uvieras, uviesses, haueresti, hauesti, hauessi, auria, uviera,
uviesse. hauerebbe, haueria, hauesse. auriamos, uvieramos, uviessemos,
haueremmo, hauessimo, auriades, uvierades, uviessedes, hauereste, haueste,
aurian, uvieran, uviessen. hauerebbono, haueriano, hauessero.

Or decline with H. Huviera, Huviesse, or Oviera, Oviesse.

Perfec. Como aya, avido. Quando habbia, Hauuto. Cum. habuerim, etc. when I
have had, etc. ayes, habbi, aya. habbia. ayamos, habbiamo, ayays, habbiate,
ayan. habbiano. Pluper. Como uviera, or uviesse, avido. Quando hauessi, hauuto.
Cum habuissem, etc. when I had had, etc. uvieras, or uviesses, hauesti, uviera,
or uviesse. hauesse. uvieramos, or uviessemos, hauessimo, uvierades, or
uviessedes, haueste, uvieran, or uviessen. hauessero. First Future Como uviere,
Quando hauero, banato. Cum habuero, etc. when I shall have hereafter, etc.
uvieres, hauerai, uviere. hauera. uvieremos, haueremo, uvieredes, hauerete,
uvieren. haueranno. Second Future Como aure, avido. Quando hauero, hauuto. Cum
habuero, etc. when I shall have hereafter, etc. auras, hauerai, aura, hauera.
auremos, haueremo, aureys, hauerete, auran. haueranno. Infinitive mood Present
tense
AVE'R,] Hauere,] Habere,] to Have. Preterperfect tense
Aver avido,] Hauer hauuto,] Habuisse,] to Have had. The Future tense
Espero de aver, Dover hauere, Habiturumesse,] to Have hereafter. Esser per
hauer, Gerund
Aviendo,] Hauendo,] Habendo,] in Having. Participle
Avido,] Hauuto,] Habitus,] I Had. Participle of the Future tense
El que espera de aver, Essere per hauere, Habiturus, to Have hereafter.

SER
The other verbum Auixiliarum Ser, with which all Passiues are declined: it is
in Latin Sum, es, fui: in Italian Essere, to Be.
Infinitive mood
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Yo SO'Y, Io SONO, Sum, I Am, thou Art, he Is,
etc. tu eres, tu sei, es, aquel es. colui e. est. Plu. Plu. Plu. nosotros
Somos, Noi siamo, Sumus, vosotros soys, voi sete, estis, aquellos son. coloro
sono. sunt. Imperfect. era, era, eram, I was, etc. eras, eri, eras, etc. era,
era. eramos, eramo, and erauamo, erades, erauate, eran. erano. First
Preterperfect. Fuy, Fui, Fui, etc. I have been, etc. fuiste, fosti, Fue. fu.
Fuimos, Fumo, fuistes, foste, fueron. furono, furon, and furo. Second
Preterperfect He, or uve, Sido. Sono, Stato. Fui, etc. I have been, etc. as,
or uviste, sei, Stato. a, or uvo. e. Stato. Avemos, or uvimos, Siamo, Stati.
aueys, or uvistes, sete, Stati. an, or uvieron. sono. Stati. Pluperfec. Avia,
Sido. era, Stato. Fueram, etc. I had been, etc. avias, eri, Stato. avia. era.
Stato. Aviamos, erauamo, Stati. aviades, erauate, Stati. avian. erano. Stati.
Future Sere, Saro, and sia, Ero, etc. I shall or will be. seras, sarai, sera.
sara and sia. Seremos, Saremo, sereys, sarete, seran. saranno. Imperative mood
Se tu, or sey tu, Sij, sia, and sie tu, Sis, es, esto, Be thou, sea aquel.
sia, and sie colui, sit, esto. Be he or let him be, etc. Seamos nosotros, Siamo
noi, Simus, sed vosotros, siate voi, sitis, estote, sean aquellos. siano
coloro. sint, sunto. Subiunctiue mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como yo SE'A, Quando Io SIA, Cum sim, when I
am, etc. tu seas, tu sij, sia, sis, etc. aquel sea, colui sia, sie, seamos,
siamo, seays, siate, sean. siaon, and sieno. Imperfect. Como. fuera, seria,
fuesse, Quando. sarei, fossi, fussi, Cum essem, etc. when I was. fueras,
serias, fuesses, saresti, fossi, fussi, fuera, seria, fuesses, sarebbe, fosse,
fusse, fueramos, seriamos, fuessemos, saremmo, fossimo, fussimo. fuerades,
seriades, fuessedes, sareste, foste, fuste, fueran, serian, fuessen. sarebbono,
sariano, fossero, fussero Preter perfect. Como. aya, Sido. Quando sia, stato.
Cum fuerim, etc. when I have been, etc. ayas, Sido. sij, stato. aya, Sido.
sia, stato. ayamos, Sido. siamo, stati. ayays, Sido. siato, stati. ayan, Sido.
siaon. stati. Quando Pluperfect. Como uviera, or uviesse, Sido. fossi, sarei,
stato. Cum fuissem, etc. when I had been, etc. uvieras; or uvesses, fossi,
saresti, stato. uviera, or uviesse, fosse, sarebbe, stato. uvieramos, or
uviessemos, fossimo, saremmo, stati. uvierades, or uviessedes, fosse, sarete,
stati. uvieran, or uviessen, fosser^, sarebbono, stati. first Futu. Como fuere,
Quando saro, stato. fuero, etc. when I shall be, etc. fueres, sarai, stato.
fuere, sara, stato. fueremos, saremo, stati. fueredes, sarete, stati. fueren.
saranno, stati. second Futur. Como avre, Sido. Quando, saro, state. Cum fuero,
etc. when I shall be, etc. avras, sardi, state. avra, sara, state. avremos
saremo, stati. avreys, sarete, stati. avran, saraum, stati. Infinitive mood,
Present Tense.
SE'R,] Essere,] Esse,] To be. Preterperfect and Pluperfect,
AVE'R sido,] Esser stato,] fuisse,] To have been. Future Tense.
Aver de ser, dover essere, fore, To be hereafter. hauer ad essere, futurum
esse, Gerund.
Siendo,] Essendo,] The Latin wants,] In being. Participle.
SI'DO] stato,] been.

1. Coniug. of Regular Verbes in AR, REVELAR
An Example of the first Conjugation of Verbes Regular in AR, as Revelar] in
Italian Riuelare] Latin Reuelare] in English] to Reveal or discover, as
Revelar, in Spanish is also as Rebelar, to rebel.
Indicative mood
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. yo REV'ELO, IO RIVE'LO, Reu^lo, I reveal, tu
Revelas, tu riueli, reuelas, Thou reuealest, etc. aquel revela, colui reuela,
reuelat, etc. revelamos, riueliamo, revelays, riuelate, Revelan. riuelano,
Imperfect. revelava, riuelaua, reuelabam, etc. I did reveal, revelavas,
riuelaui, revelava, riuelaua, revelavamos, riuelauamo, revelavades, riuelanate,
revelavan, riuelanam, First Perf. revele, riuelai, reuelaui, etc. I have
revealed, etc. revelaste, riuelasti, revelo, riuelo, revelamos, riuelammo,
revelastes, riuelaste, revelaron, riuelarono, riuelaron, riuelaro, riuelar.
second Perf. he, or uve, revelado. ho, riuelato reuelaui, etc. I have revealed,
etc. as, or uviste, hai, a, or uvo, ha, avemos, or uvimos habbiamo, aveys, or
uvistes, habbiate, an, or uvieron, hanno, Pluperfect. avia, revelado. haueua,
riuelato reuelaueram, etc. I had revealed, etc. avias, haueui, avia, haueua,
aviamos, haueuamo, aviades, haueuate, avian, haueuano, Futur. revelare,
riuelaro, reuelabo, etc. I shall or will reveal, etc. revelaras, riuelarai,
revelara, reuelara, revelaremos, riuelaremo, revelareys, riuelarete, revelaran,
riuelaranno,

Oftentimes for the Future of this Indicative Mood, as well of this first
Conjugation, No^e.
as of all the rest, is used the Infinitive Mood, and the Present tense of the
Verb Aver, with a Particle going between them, as Revelar lo he, Revelar lo
has, Revelar lo a. And so of the other Coniugations, as Entender lo he,
Entender lo as, oyr lo he, oyr lo has, etc.

Imperative mood.
revela tu, riuela tu, reuela, reuelato Reveal thou, be thou revealed, etc.
revele aquel, riueli colui, reuelet, reuelato Plu. revelemos nosotros, riuelamo
noi, reuelemus, reuelad vosotros, riuelate voi, reuelatis, revelan aquellos,
riuelino coloro, reuelent.

Subiunctiue mood with signs, Si, Como, or other Conjunction.

Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como Yo Revele, Quando Io Riueli, Cum Reuelem,
etc when I do Reveal, etc. tu Reveles, tu Riueli, aquel Revele. colui Riueli.
Plural. Plural. Revelemos, Riueliamo, Reveleys, Riueliate, Revelen. Riuelino.
Imperfect. Como Reuelara, revelaria, revelasse, Quando Riuelassi, riuelarei,
riuelaria, Cum Reuelarem, etc. when I did Reveal, etc. Revelaras, revelarias,
revelasses, Riuelasti, riuelaresti, Revelara, revelaria, revelasse, Riuelasse,
riuelarebbe, riuelaria, Revelaramos, revelariamos, revelassemos Riuelassimo,
riuelaremmo, Revelarades, revelariades, revelassedes, Riuelaste, riuelareste,
Revelaran, revelarian, revelassen. Riuelassero, riuelarebbono, riuelariano
perfect. Como aya, Revelado. Quando Habbia, Riuelato. Cum Reuelauerius, etc.
when I have revealed, etc. ayas, Habbi, aya, Habbia, ayamos, Habbiamo, ayays,
Habbiate, ayan. Habbiano. Quando Pluperfect Como uviera or uviesse, Revelado.
Hauessi, Riuelato. Cum Reuelassem, etc. when I had revealed, etc. uvieras or
uviesses, hauesti, uviera or uviesse, hauesse, uvieramos or uviessemos,
hauessim, uvierades or uviessedes, haueste, uvieran or uviessen, hauessero,
First future. Como Revelare, Quando Hauero, Riuelato. Cum Reuelauero, etc. when
I shall or will Reveal, etc. Revelares, hauerai, Revelare, hauera, Revelaremos,
haueremo, Revelaredes, hauerete, Revelaren, haueranno. Second Futur Como uviere
or avre, Revelado. Quando Hauero, Riuelato. Cum Reuelauero, etc. when I shall or
will Reveal, etc. uvieres or avres, hauerai, uviere or avra, hauera, uvieremos
or avremos, haueremo, uvieredes or avreys, hauerete, uvieren or avran,
haueranno, Infinitive mood Present tense.
Revelar,] Riuelare,] Reuelare,] to Reveal or discover. Preterperfect tense.
Aver revelado,] Hauer riuelato,] Reuelauisse,] to have Revealed. The Future
tense.
Aver o Esperar de Revelar, Dover Riuelare, Essere per Riuelare, Hauer a
Riuelare, to Reveal hereafter. Gerund.
Revelando,] Riuelando,] Reuelando,] in Revealing. Supine of the Active
signification.
a Revelar,] a Riuelare,] Reuelatum] to be about to Reveal. Supine of the
Passive signification.
De ser Revelado] D'essere Riuelato] Reuelatu] to be Revealed. Participle of
the Present tense and Active voice.
El que Revela,] Riuelante,] Reuelans,] Revealing. Participle of the Preter
tense and Passive voice.
Revelado] Riuelato,] Reuelatus,] Revealed.

All verbes which have their Infinitiues in A R, are declined in all points
like this here declined, except the Irregulars here following in ar.

An Example of the second Conjugation of verbes Regular in ER, as Entender, in
Italian Intendere, 2. Coniug. of Regular verbs in er Entender.
Latin Intelligere, to Understand.
Iudicatiue mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. yo ENTIE'NDO, Io Intendo, Intelligo, etc. I do
Understand, etc. tu Entiendes, tu Intendi, aquel Entiende. colui Intend.
Plural. Plur. Entendemos, Intendiamo, Entendeys, Intendete, Entienden.
Intendino. Imperfect. Entendia, Intendeua and Intendea, Intelligebam, etc. I
did Understand, etc. Entendias, Intendeui, Entendia. Intendeua and Intendea,
Entendiamos, Intendeuamo, Entendiades, Intendeuate, Entendian. Intendeuano.
First perfect. Entendi, Intesi, Intellexi, etc. I have Understood, etc.
Entendiste, Intendisti, Entendio, Intese, Entendimos, Intendemmo, Entendistes,
Intendeste, Entendieron. Intesero. Second perfect. He or uve, Entendido. HO
Inteso. Intellexi, etc. I have Understood, etc. as or uviste, hai Inteso. a or
uvo. ha Inteso. hemos or uvimos, habbiamo Intesi. aveys or uvistes, hauete
Intesi. an or uvieron. hanno Intesi. pluperfect te^se Avia, Entendido haueua
Inteso. Intellexeram, etc. I had Understood, etc. avias, haueui Inteso. avia.
haueua Inteso. Aviamos, haueuamo Intesi. aviades, haueuate Intesi. avian.
haueuano Intesi. Futur Entendere, Intendero, Intelligam, etc. I shall or will
Understand. Entenderas, Intenderai, Entendera. Intendera, Entenderemos,
Intenderemo, Entendereys, Intenderete, Entenderan. Intenderanno. Imperative
mood.
Entiende tu, Intendi tu, Intellige, Intelligito. Understand thou, Entiende
aquel. Intenda colui, Intelligat, Intelligito. Understand he or let him
understand. Entendamos nosotros, Intendiamo noi, Intended vosotros, Intendete
voi, Entiendan aquellos. Intendano coloro.

Entender.
Second Conjugation of Regular Verbes in ER, as ENTENDER.
Subiunctiue mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como yo ENTIE'NDA, Quando yo INTENDA, Cum
intelligam etc. when I do understand. etc. tu entiendas, tu intendi, aquel
entienda, colui intenda, Plu. Plu. entendamos, intendiamo, entendays,
intendiate, entiendan. intendano, Quando Cum Imperfect. Como. entendiera,
entenderia, entendiesse, intenderei, intenderia, intendessi, intelligerem, etc.
when I did understand. entendieras, entenderias, entendiesses, intenderesti,
intendessi, entendiera, entenderia, entendiesses. intenderebbe, intenderia,
intendesse, entendieramos, entenderiamos, entendiessemos, intenderemo,
intendissimo, entendierades, entenderiades, entendiessedes, intenderesti,
intendesti, entendieran, entenderian, entendiessen. intenderebbero,
intenderieno, intendessero, Perf. Como aya, Entendido. Quando habbia, inteso,
Cum intellexerim, etc. when I have understood, etc. ayas, habbi, inteso, aya,
habbia, inteso, ayamos, habbiamo, intesi. ayays, habbiate, intesi. ayan.
habbiano, intensi. Quando Pluperfect. Como uviera, or uviesse, Ente^dido
hauerei, and hauessi, inteso. Cum intellexissem, etc. when I had vndertoode.
uvieras, or uviesses, haueresti, and hauessi, inteso. uviera, or uviesse,
hauerebbe, and hauesse, inteso. uvieramos, or uviessemos, haueremmo, and
hauessimo, intesi. uvierades, or uviessedes, hauereste, and haueste, intesi.
uvieran, or uviessen, hauerebbero, and hauessero, intesi. First future. Como
Entendiere, Cum intellexero etc. when I shall or will understand etc.
entendieres, entendiere, entendieremos, entendieredes, entendieren. Quando
second future. Como uviere, or aure, Entendido hauero, inteso. Cum intellexero
etc. when I shall understand. etc. uvieres, or auras, hauerai, inteso. uviere,
or aura, hauera, inteso. uvieremos, or auremos, haueremo, intesi. uvieredes, or
aureys, hauerete, intesi. uvieren, or auran, haueranno, intesi. Infinitive
mood Present Tense.
Entender,] Intendere,] Intelligere] To understand. Preterperfect Tense.
aver entendido,] hauer inteso,] intellexisse,] To have understood. The Future
Tense.
aver o Esperar de entendeer, dover intendere, intellecturum, hauer ad
intendere, to understand hereafter. Esser per intendere, Gerund.
entendiendo,] intendendo,] intelligendo] In understanding.] Supines of the
active voice.
a entender,] ad intendere] intellectum] To understand. Supine of the passive
voice.
de ser entendido,] d'essere in teso,] intellectu] To be understood. Participle
of the active voice and present Tense.
el que entiende,] intendente] intelligens,] Understanding. Participle of the
Preter and passive voice.
entendido,] inteso] intellectus] Understood.

All Verbes whose Infinitiues end in er, are in all points declined like this
except the irregular in er following.

An Example of the third and last Conjugation of Regular verbes in Ir or Yr, as
ABRIR, in Italian Aprire, Latin Aperire, 3. and last conjugation of Verbes
Regular in Ir, or Yr.
to Open, Oyr, Italian Vdire, Latin Audire, to Hear.
Indicative mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. O'YO, y OY'GO, ODO, Audio, etc. I do Hear,
etc. oyes, odi, oye. ode. Plur. Plur. oymos, vdiamo, oys, vdite, oyen. odono.
Imperfect. Oya, Vdiua, Audiebam, etc. I did Hear, etc. oyas, vdiui, oya.
vdiua. oyamos, vdiuamo, oyades, vdiuate, oyan. vdiuano. First Perf. Oy, Vdi and
vdij, Audiui, etc. I have heard, etc. oyste, vdisti, oyo, vdi. oymos, vdimmo,
oystes, vdiste, oyeron. vdirono, vdiron, vdiro, vdir. second Perfect. He, or
uve, Oydo. Ho, Vdito. Audiui, etc. I have heard, etc. as, or uviste, hai, a, or
uvo, ha, avemos, or uvimos, habbiamo, aveys, or uvistes, haueto, an, or
uvieron, hanno, Pluperfect. avia, Oydo. haueua, Vdito. Audiueram, etc. I had
heard. avias, haueui, avia, haueua, aviamos, haueuamo, aviades, haueuate,
avian, haueuano, future. oyre, vdiro, Audiam, etc. I shall or will hear, etc.
oyras, vdirai, oyra, vdira, oyremos, vdiremo, oyreys, vdirete, oyran, vdiranno.
Imperative mood.
Imperative mood. Oye tu, odi tu, audi, audito, audiat, audito, etc. Hear
thou, Hear he or let him hear, etc. oyga, or oya aquel, oda colui, oyamos
nosotros, vdiamo noi, oyd vosotros, vdite voi, oyan, or oygan aquellos, odano
coloro,

O Y R declined.
The Third and last Conjugation of verbes Regular in IR, and YR.
Subiunctitue mood
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como. O'YA, or oyga, Quando OD'A, Cum Audiam,
etc. When I hear. oyas, or oygas, odi, oya, or oyga, oda. oyamos, or oygamos,
vdiamo, oyays, or oygays, vdiate, oyan, or oygan. odano. Imper. Como Oyera,
oyeria, oyesse, Quando Vdissi, vdirei, vderia, Cum Audirem, etc. when I did
hear, etc. oyeras, oyerias, oyesses, vdissi, vdiresti, oyera, oyeria, oyesse.
vdisse, vdirebbe, vdiria. oyeramos, oyriamos, oyessemos, vdissimo, vdiremo,
oyerades, oyriades, oyessedes, vdiste, vdireste, oyeran, oyrian, oyessen.
vdissero, vdirebbono, vdiriano Perfect. Como A'ya, Oydo, Quando Habbia, Vdito.
Cum Audiuerim, etc. when I have heard, etc. ayas, habbi, aya. habbia. ayamos,
habbiamo, ayays, habbiate, ayan. habbiano. Quando, Cum plupe. Como Uviera, or
uviesse, oydo. Hauessi, hauerei, haueria, vdito. Audiuissem etc. when I had
heard, etc uvieras, or uviesses, hauessi, haueresti, uviera, or uviesse,
hauesse, hauerebbe, hauria, uvieramos, or uviessemos hauessimo, haueremo,
uvierades, or uviessedes, haueste, hauereste. uvieran, or uviessen. hauessero,
hauerebbono, hauriano. First Future Como Oyere, Cum Audiuero, etc. when I shall
hear, etc. oyeres, oyere, oyeremos, oyeredes, oyeren. Cum Second Future Como
Uviere, or aure, oydo. Qua^do Hauero, vdito Audiuero, etc. when I shall hear.
uvieres, or auras, hauerai, uviere, or aura. hauera. uvieremos, or auremos
haueremo, uvieredes, or aureys, hauerete, uvieren, or auran. haueranno.
Infinitive mood present tense
OY'R,] Vdire,] Audire,] to Hear. Preterperfect tense
aver Oydo] hauer Vdito,] Audiuisse,] to have Heard. The Future tense
aver de Oyr, dover Vdire, hauer ad Vdire, esser per Vdire,
Auditum esse,] to Hear hereafter. Gerund.
Oyendo,] Odendo,] Audiendo,] in Hearing. Supine of the Active voice.
a Oyr,] Vdire,] Auditum,] to Hear. Supine of the Passive voice.
de ser Oydo,] d'essere Vdito,] Auditu,] to be Heard. Participle of the Active
voice and Present tense.
el que Oye,] chi Ode,] Audiens,] Hearing. Participle of the Passive voice and
Preter tense.
Oydo,] Vdito,] Auditus,] Heard.

All verbes whose Infinitiues end in ir, or yr, are declined in every respect
like this: except those in ir and yr, in the Irregulars following.

Of Verbes Passiues.
The Spaniards as the Italian and French decline their Verbes passiues with
their Verb Sum, es, fui, and the Participle of the Preter tense, as of
Revelar, to reveal: soy Revelado, I am revealed.

The Spanish forms the Participle Passive of the first and third Conjugation
of their Infinitive mood, by taking away r, and putting to do, as of Revelar,
Revelado, Pedir, to require, Pedido, required, Oyr, to hear, Oydo, heard.

But in the second Conjugation they take away as before, and change the last e
into y or i, and add to do as aforesaid, as Leer, to read, Leydo: Entender,
to understand, Entendido.

A Verb Passive thus declined.
Indicative mood
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. YO SOY, Revelado. IO SO'No, Riuelato. Reuelor,
I am Revealed. thou art Revealed. tu eres, Revelado. tu sei, Riuelato.
Reuelaris, etc. aquel es, Revelado. colui e, Riuelato. Plu. Plu. Somos,
Revelados. Siamo, Riuelati. soys, Revelados. sete, Riuelati. son, Revelados.
sono, Riuelati. Imperfect. E'ra, Revelado. E'ra, Riuelato. Reuelabar, I was
Revealed thou wast revealed, etc. eras, Revelado. eri, Riuelato. Reuelabaris,
etc. era, Revelado. era, Riuelato. eramos, Revelados. eramo, and erauamo,
Riuelati. erades, Revelados. erate, Riuelati. eran, Revelados. erano, Riuelati.
First perfect. Fuy Revelado, Fui, Riuelato. Reuelatus sum vel fui, etc. I have
been Revealed, etc. fueste, Revelado. fosti, Riuelato. fue, Revelado. fu,
Riuelato. fuymos, Revelados. fumo, Riuelati. fuistes, Revelados. foste,
Riuelati. fueron, Revelados. furono, furo, furon, Riuelati. second Perfec HE,
or uve Sido, Revelado. Sono Stato, Riuelato. Reuelatus sum vel fui, idem vt
antea, etc. I have been revealed, etc. as, or uviste Sido, Revelado. sei
Stato, Riuelato. a, or uvo Sido, Revelado. e Stato, Riuelato. Hemos, or uvimos
Sido, Revelados. Siamo, Stati, Riuelati. aveis, or uvistes Sido, Revelados.
sete Stati, Riuelati. an, or uvieron Sido, Revelados. son Stati, Riuelati.
pluperfect. Avia Sido, Revelado. E'ra Stato, Riuelato. Reuelatus eram vel
fueram, etc. I had been Revealed, etc. avias Sido, Revelado. eri Stato,
Riuelato. avia Sido, Revelado. era Stato, Riuelato. aviamos Sido, Revelados.
erauamo Stati, Riuelati. aviades Sido, Revelados. erauate Stati, Riuelati.
avian Sido, Revelados. erano Stati, Riuelati. future Sere, Revelado. Saro,
Riuelato. Reuelabor, etc. I shall or will be Revealed. seras, Revelado. sarai,
Riuelato. sera, Revelado. sara, Riuelato. Seremos, Revelados. Saremo, Riuelati.
sereys, Revelados. sarete, Riuelati. seran, Revelados. saranno, Riuelati.
Imperative mood
Se tu, Revelado, Sia, and sij tu, Riuelato. Reuelare, Reueletur, etc. be thou
Revealed, let him be Revealed, etc. sea aquel, Revelado, sia, and sie colui,
Riuelato. Seamos, Revelados. siamo, Riuelati. sed, Revelados. siate, Riuelati.
Sean, Revelados. siano, Riuelati. Subiunctiue mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como yo Sea Revelado. Quando Io Sia Riuelato.
Cum Reuelar, etc. When I am Revealed, etc tu seas Revelado. tu sij, sia
Riuelato. aquel sea Revelado. colui sia, sie Riuelato. Seamos Revelados. siamo
Riuelati. seays Revelados. siate Riuelati. sean Revelados. siano and sieno
Riuelati. Imperfect Como Fuera, seria, fuesse Revelado. Quando Fossi, fussi,
sarei, saria Riuelato. Cum Reuelarer, etc. when I was Revealed, etc fueras,
serias, fuesses Revelado. fosti, fusti, saresti, Riuelato. fuera, seria, fuesse
Revelado. fosse, fusse, sarebbe, saria Riuelato. Fueramos, seriamos, fuessemos
Revelados. fossimo, fussimo, saremmo Riuelati. fuerades, seriades, fuessedes
Revelados. foste, fuste, sareste, Riuelati. fueran, serian, fuessen Revelados.
fossero, fussero, sarebbono, sariano Riuelati. perfect. Como A'ya Sido
Reuelado. Quando Sia Stato Riuelato. Cum Reuelatus sim vel fuerim, etc. When I
have been revealed, etc. ayas Sido Reuelado. sij and sia stato Riuelato. aya
Sido Reuelado. sia and sie stato Riuelato. ayamos Sido Revelados. siamo stati
Riuelati. ayays Sido Revelados. siate stati Riuelati. ayan Sido Revelados.
siano stati Riuelati. pluperfect te^se Como Uviera or uviesse Sido Revelado.
Quando Fossi, fussi, sarei, saria stato Riuelato. Cum Reuelatus essem vel
fuissem, etc when I had been revealed, etc. uvieras or uviesses Sido Revelado.
fosti, fusti, saresti stato Riuelato. uviera or uviesse Sido Revelado. fosse,
fusse, sarebbe stato Riuelato. uvieramos or uviessemos sido Revelados. fossimo,
fussimo, saremo stati Riuelati. uvierades or uviessedes Sido Revelados. foste,
fuste, sereste stati Riuelati. uvieran or uviessen Sido Revelados. fossero,
fussero, sarebbono stati sariano Riuelati. Futur Como Fuere or uviere or avre
sido Revelado. Quando Saro stato Riuelato. Cum Reuelatus ero vel fuero, etc.
When I shall be Revealed, etc. fueres or uvieres or avras sido Revelado. sarai
stato Riuelato. fuere or uvieres or avra sido Revelado. sara stato Riuelato.
fueremos or uvieremos or avremos sido Revelados. saremo stati Riuelati.
fueredes or uvieredes or avreys sido Revelados. sarete stati Riuelati. fueren
or uvieren or avran sido Revelados. saranno stati Riuelati. Infinitive mood
Present tense.
Ser Reveludo,] Riuelarsi, essere Riuelato,] Reuelari,] to be Revealed. Pre^^^
tense.
Aver Sido Revelado,] Essere stato Riuelato,] Reuelatum esse vel fuisse,] to
have been revealed. Future tense.
Aver de ser Revelado, Dover essere Riuelato, hauer ad essere Riuelato,
Reuelatum iri vel Reuelandum esse, to be Revealed hereafter. Participle of the
Present tense.
Lo que es Revelado,] Riuelato,] Reuelatus,] that which is Revealed. Participle
of the Future tense.
Lo que ha de ser Revelado, Hauendo ad essere Riuelato, hauendo a Riuelarsi,
Reuelan^m, to be Revealed hereafter.

After this manner in every respect all other verbes Passiues Regular or
Irregular of what Conjugation soever are to be declined as of the second
Conjugation Soy Vendido, Posseydo, Defendido, and of the third Conjugation, as
Soy Oydo, Corregido, Segdido, and so of the rest.

Note that this Accusative case Se of the Pronoune joined with the third person
of verbes Actiues, make them have the Passive signification, as Dize, he says,
^e dize, Nota.
it is said.

Now will I handle and entreat of the verbes Irregular (in which is found
hardness and difficulty to the learner for their declining) in such order and
manner that he may with his ease or very little pain decline any of them
whatsoever: for which purpose and for whose ease and profit, I have to my
great labor brought them into the form as follows, and have so diligently
searched, that no one of them needful to his use (as I hope) shall be
wanting, not here following set down, that my labors may be answerable to my
desire, and the learners profit to my pains.

The first Conjugation of Verbes Irregular in AR, as DAR, in Italian and Latin
Dare, to Give. 1. Coniug. of Verbes Irregular in AR.

The verbes Irregular like as the Regular divided into three Coniugations, Nota.
the fir^^ in ar, the second in er, the third in ir or yr.

The verbes Irregular differ from the Regular before going in their first
Preterperfect of the Indicative, and Preterimperfect of the Subiunctiue, as by
the Examples following you may see.

Indicative mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. yo DOY, Io DO, Do, I do Give, etc. tu Das. tu
Dai, Das, aquel Da. colui Da. Dat, etc. Plur. Plur. Damos, Diamo or Dam^, Days,
Date, Dan. Danno. Imperf. Dava, Da^^, Dabam, etc. I did Give, etc. Davas, Daui,
Dava. Dau^. Davamos, Dauamo, Davades, Dauate, Davan. Daua^. First Perfect Di,
Diedi and Dei, Dedi, etc. I have Given, etc. Diste, Desti, Dio. Diede and
Debt, Dimos, Demmo, Distes, Deste, Dieron. Diedero. Second Perfect yo He Dado.
Ho Dato. Dedi, etc. vt supra. I have Given, etc. as next above. tu as hai aquel
a. ha hemos habbiamo aveys hauete an hanno Pluperf. Avia Dado. Haueua Dato.
Dederam, etc. I had Given, etc. Avias haueui Avia haueua Aviamos haueuamo
Aviades haueuate Avian haueuano Future. Dare, Daro, Dabo, etc. I shall or will
Give, etc. Daras, Darai, Dara. Dara. Daremos, Daremo, Dareys, Darete, Daran.
Daranno. Imperative mood.
Da tu, Da tu, Da dato, Give thou, etc. De aquel. Dia colui. Det dato, etc.
Demos, Diamo, Dad, Date, Den. Diano. Subiunctiue mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como YO De, Quando IO Dia, Cum Them, etc. When I
do give, etc. tu des, tu dia, aquel De, colui dia, demos, diamo, deys, diate,
den, diano, Imperfect. diera, daria, diesse, Quando dessi, darei, daria, Cum
Darem, etc. When I did give, etc. dieras, darias, diesses, dessi, daresti,
diera, daria, diesse, desse, darebbe, daria, dieramos, dariamos, diessemos,
dessimo, daremmo, dierades, dariades, diessedes, deste, dareste, dieran,
darian, diessen. dessero, darebbono, dariano, perfect. Como aya, Dado. Quando
habbia, Dato. Cum Dederim, etc. When I have given, etc. ayas, habbi, aya,
habbia, ayamos, habbiamo, ayays, habbiate, ayan, habbiano. Pluperfect. Como
uviera, or uviesse, Dado. Quando. hauessi, haurei, Dato. Cum dedissem, etc.
When I had given, etc. uvieros, or uviesses, hauesti, haueresti, uviera, or
uviesse, hauesse, hauerebbe, uvieramos, or uviessemos, hauessimo, haueremmo,
uvierades, or uviessedes, haueste, hauereste, uvieran, or uviessen. hauessero,
hauerebbono, future, Como diere, Quando hauero, Dato. Cum Dedero, etc. When I
shall give, etc. dieres, hauerai, diere, hauera, dieremos, haueremo, dieredes,
hauerete, dieren. haueranno, Infinitive mood Present tense.
DA'R,] Dare,] Dare,] To give. Preterperfect Tense.
aver Dado, hauer dato, dover dare, hauer a dare.
Dedisse. To have given. Gerund.
Dando,] dando,] dando,] In giving. Participle of the Present tense, and Active
voice.
El que da,] Dante,] Dans,] giving. Participle of the Preter tense and Passive
voice.
Dado,] Dato,] Datus] given. Participle of the Future tense.
El que ha, or espera de dar] Essere per dare] Daturum esse] to give
hereafter.

These here under written only differ from the Regular verbes in the first
preterperfect tense of their Indicative mood, which always change Car of the
Infinitive into que, and gar into gue, as Infinitiues. Pres. Preterperfects. A
cercar, to come near, yo Acerco, Acerque. Cercar, to compass, yo Cerco,
Cerque. Cargar, to charge, to burden, yo Cargo, Cargue. Achicar, to make
little, yo Achico, Achique. Ahogar, to choke, to drown, yo Ahogo, Ahogue.
Allegar, to come near, yo Allego, Allegue. Ahorcar, to hang up, yo Ahorco,
Ahorque. Anegar, to drown, yo Anego, Anegue. Arrancar, to pluck up, yo
Arranco, Arranque. Arremangar, to tucke up, yo Arremango, Arremangue. Arriscar,
to endanger, yo Arrisco, Arrisque. Apesgar, to weie down, yo Apesgo, Apesgue.
Assulcar, to furrow, yo Asulco, Asulque. Bogar, to row, yo Bogo, Bogue.
Bolcar, to tumble down, yo Bolco, Bolque. Castigar, to chastise, yo Castigo,
Castigue. Calcar, to kick under feet, yo Calco, Calque. Colgar, to hang, yo
Cuelgo, Colgue. Cocar, to ga^e at, to mock, yo Cueco, Coque. Cavalgar, to
ride, yo Cavalgo, Cavalgue. Chocar, to suck, yo Chueco, Choque. Denegar, to
deny, yo Deniego, Denegue. Derrocar, to throw down, yo Derrueco, Derrogue.
Descolgar, to vnhang, yo Descuelgo, Descolgue. Desfogar, to cool, yo Desfuego,
Desfogue. Embarcar, to embarke, yo Embarco, Embarque. Desligar, to untie, yo
Desligo, Desligue. Embaucar, to cast into a hole, yo Embauco, Embauque.
Embocar, idem, yo Emboco, Emboque. Desnegar, to recant, yo Desniego, Desnegue.
Enarcar, to chest up, yo Enarco, Enarque. Divulgar, to publish, yo divulgo,
Divulgue. Empegar, to pitch, yo Empiego, Empegue. Fabricar, to frame, yo
Fabrico, Fabrique. Encenegar, to dirt, yo Encienego, Encenegue. Fregar, to rub,
yo Friego, Fregue. Holgar, to be glad, yo Huelgo, Holgue. Mancar, to want, yo
Manco, Manque. Jugar, to play, yo Juego, Jugue. Marcar, to mark, yo Marco,
Marque. Mercar, to buie, yo Mierco, Merque. Mascar, to chew, yo Masco, Masque.
Mendigar, to beg, yo Mendigo, Mendigue. Navegar, to sail, yo Navego, Navegue.
Otorgar, to grant, yo Otorgo, Otorgue. Peliscar, to pinch, yo Pelisco,
Pelisque. Pagar, to pay, yo Pago, Pague. Pescar, to fish, yo Pesco, Pesque.
Plegar, to fold, yo Pliego, Pliegue. Regar, to water, yo Riego, Regue.

These here above and their like in all other Tenses vary nothing from the
verbes regular in ar before going, as Juzgar, to judge, the Indicative present
Tense Juzgo, I judge, Preterimperfect Juzgava, first Preterperfect Juzgue, the
second Perfect He juzgado, the Preterpluperfect avia Juzgado, Future Juzgare.
Imperative Juzga. The Present Tense of the Optatiue and Subiunctiue Oxala or Si
Juzgue, the Preterimperfect Tense Juzgara, juzgaria, juzgasse. Perfect aya
juzgado, Pluperfect uviera or uviesse Juzgado, Future Juzgare. Infinitive
Juzgar. Participle Juzgado.

Of Verbes Irregular the first Conjugation in AR, as Estar,] in Italian Essere,
ESTAR
] in Latin Esse,] To be, to stand.
Indicative mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. YO ESTO'Y, IO STO, Sto, etc. I stand, or I am,
etc. tu estas, tu stai, aquel esta, colui sta; estamos, stamo, estays, state,
estan. stanno. Imperfect. estava, staua, stabam, etc. I was or did stand, etc.
estavas, staui, estava, staua, estavamos, stauamo, estavades, stauato, estavan.
stauano. First Perf. estuve, stetti, and stei, steti, etc. I have been, or
have stood, etc. estuviste, stesti, estuvo, stette, estuvimos, stemo,
estuvistes, steste, estvuieron. stettero. second Perfect. yo He, Estado. sono,
Stato. steti, etc. I have been, or have stood, etc. tu as, sei, Stato. vt
supra. aquel ha, e, Stato. hemos, siamo, Stati. aveys, sete, Stati. an, sono,
Stati. Pluperfect. avia, Estado. era, Stato. steteram, etc. I had been, or had
stood, etc. avias, eri, Stato. avia, era, Stato. aviamos, erauamo, Stati.
aviades, erauate, Stati. avian, erano, Stati. future. Estare, staro, Stabo,
etc. I shall or will stand or be, etc. estaras, starai, estara, stara,
estaremos, staremo, estareys, starete, estaran. staranno. Imperative mood.
Imperative mood. Esta, sta, sta, sta, stato, etc. be thou, or stand thou,
etc. este, stia, estemos, stiamo, estad, state, esten. stiano. Subiunctiue mood
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como Este, Quando Stia, Cum Stem, etc. When I
am or stand, etc. Estes, Stij, Este, Stia, Estemos, Stiamo, Esteys, Stiate,
Esten. Stiano. Imperfect. Como Estuviera, estaria, estuviesse, Quando Starei,
stessi, staria, Cum Starem, etc. when I Stood or was, etc. Estuvieras,
estarias, estuviesses, Staresti, stessi, Estuviera, estaria, estuviesse,
Starebbe, stesse, staria, Estuvieramos, estariamos, estuviessemos, Staremo,
stessimo, Estuvierades, estariades, estuviessedes, Stareste, steste,
Estuvieran, estarian, estuviessen. starebbono, stariano, stessero. Perfec Como
A'ya, estado. Qua^do Sia, Stato. Cum Steterim etc. when I have stood or been,
etc. ayas, Sij, Stato. aya, Sia, Stato. Ayamos, Siamo, Stati. Ayays, Siate,
Stati. ayan, Siano, Stati. pluper Como uviera, or uviesse, estado. Qua^do
Fossi, Stato. Cum stetissem etc. when I had been, or stood, etc uvieras, or
uviesses, Fossi, Stato. uviera, or uviesse, Fosse, Stato. uvieramos, or
uviessemos, Fossimo, Stati. uvierades, or uviessedes, Foste, Stati. uvieran, or
uviessen, Fossero. Stati. First Futur Como Estuviere, Quando Saro, Stato. Cum
Stetero, etc. when I shall or will stand or be etc. Estuvieres, Sarai, Stato.
Estuviere, Sara, Stato. Estuvieremos, Saremo, Stati. Estuvieredes, Sarete,
Stati. Estuvieren, Saranno, Stati. second Futur Como uviere, or avre, Estado.
Saro, Stato. Cum Stetero, etc. when I shall or will be or stand etc. uvieres, or
avras, Sarai, Stato. uviere, or avra, Sara, Stato. uvieremos, or avremos,
Saremo, Stati. uvieredes, or avreys, Sarete, Stati. uvieren, or avran, Saranno,
Stati. Infinitive mood Present.
Estar,] Stare,] Stare,] to Stand or be. Preterperfect.
aver Estado,] hauer Stato,] Stetisse,] to have Stood or been. Future tense.
aver or esperar d'estar, dover Stare, Staturum esse, to Stand hereafter. esser
per Stare, Gerund.
Estando,] Stando,] Stando,] In Standing or being. Participle.
Estado,] Stato,] Status,] Stood or been.

These Verbes following make their Present tense of the Indicative, by changing
the last syllable save one of the Infinitive the e into ie, and the o into ve,
as

Infinitive. Pres. Preterperfect. Assentar, to sit, to set, yo assiento,
Assente. Approvar, to allow, yo appruevo, Aprove. Sentar, to sit, yo siento,
Sent, Sonar, to sound, yo sueno, Sone, Conservar, to keep, yo consiervo,
Conserve. Atronar, to thunder, yo atrueno, Attrone. Cegar, to make blind, yo
ciego, Ciegue. Contar, to reckon, yo cuento, Conte. Cerrar, to shut, to lock,
yo cierro, Cerre. Degollar, to kill, to behead, yo deguello, De golle.
Enterrar, to put in the earth, yo entierro, Enterre. Derrocar, to throw down,
yo derueco, derroque. Colgar, to hang, yo cuelgo, Colgue. Desterrar, to banish,
yo destierro, Desterre. Dessollar, to paunch, yo desuello, Desolle. Hollar, to
tread on, yo huello, Holle. Entesar, to bend, yo entieso, Entese. Segar, to
cut, yo siego, Seque. Resollar, to breath, yo resuello, Resolie. Resolgar,
idem, yo resuelgo, Resolgue. Temblar, to tremble, yo tiemblo, Temble. Tentar,
to assaie, yo tiento, Tente. Tropecar, to stumble, yo tropieco, Tropece.
Aderecar, to make ready, yo aderesco, Aderesce.

Of Verbes Irregular of the first Conjugation in AR, as ANDAR, ANDAR
In Italian, Audare, in Latin, Ire, Gradi, to Go.
Indicative mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Present. A'ndo, Vo, and Vado, Eo, I Go, thou Go,
etc. andas, Vai, is, etc. anda, Va, Andamos, Andiamo, andays, Andate, andan.
Vanno. Imperfect. Andava, Andaua, Ibam, etc. I did Go, etc. Andavas, Andaui,
Andava, Andaua, Andavamos, Andauamo, Andavades, Andauate, Andavan. Andauano.
First Perfect Anduve, Andai, Iui, etc. I have Gone, etc. Anduviste, Andasti,
Anduvo, Ando, Anduvimos, Andammo, Anduvistes, Andaste, Anduvieron. Andarono.
Second Perfec. He, Andado. Sono, Andato. Iui, etc. I have Gone, etc. as before.
as, Sei, Andato. vt supra. a, e, Andato. Hemos, Siamo, Andati. aveys, Sete,
Andati. an, Sono, Andati. Pluperfect. Avia, Andado. E'ra, Andato. Iueram, etc.
I had Gone, etc. Avias, eri, Andato. Avia, era, Andato. Aviamos, Erauamo,
Andati. Aviades, erauate, Andati. Avian, erano. Andati. Future Andare, Andero,
andro, Ibo, etc. I shall or will Go, etc. Andaras, Anderai, andrai, Andara,
Andera, andra, Andaremos, Anderemo, andremo, Andareys, Anderete, Andrete,
Andaran. Anderanno, andranno. Imperative mood
A'ndatu, Vatu, Ito, etc. Go thou, etc. ande aquel, Vada, or vadacolui,
Andemos, Andiamo, Andad, Andate, anden. Vadano, or vadino.

ANDAR.
Of Verbes Irregular the first Conjugation in A R.
Subiunctiue mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como ande, Quando vada, vadi, Cum Eam, etc.
When I do go, etc. andes, vadv, vadi, ande, vada, vadi, andemos, andiamo,
andeys, andiate, anden. vadano, vadino. Imperfect Como anduviera, andaria,
anduviesse, Quando andassi andarei, anderia, Cum irem, etc. When I did go, etc.
anduvieras, andarias, anduviesses, andassi, anderesti, anduviera, andaria,
anduviesse, andasse, anderebbe, anderia, Anduvieramos, andariamos,
anduviessemos, andassimo, anderem^, anduvierades, andariades, anduviessedes,
andaste, andereste, anduvieran, andarian, anduviessen. andassero, anderebbero,
anderiano. perfect. Como aya, andado. Quando sia, Andato. Cum iueri^, etc. When
I have gone, etc. ayas, sii, Andato. aya, sia, Andato. ayamos, siamo, Andati.
ayays, siate, Andati. ayan, siano, Andati. Quando pluperfect te^se Como uviera,
or uviesses, andado. fossi, sarei, Andato. iuissem, etc. When I had gone, etc.
uviera, or uviesses, fossi, saresti, Andato. uviera, or uviesse, fosse,
sarebbe, Andato. uvieramos, or uviessemos fossimo, saremmo, Andati. uvierades,
or uviessedes, foste, sareste, Andati. uvieran, or uviessen, fossero,
sarebbero, Andati. Futur Como anduviere, Quando saro, Andato. Cum iuero, etc.
When I shall or will go hereafter, etc. anduvieres, sarai, Andato. anduviere,
sara, Andato. anduvieremos, saremo, Andati. anduvieredes, sarete, Andati.
anduvieren. saranno, Andati. Infinitive mood Present tense.
ANDA'R,] Andare,] Ire,] to go. Preterperfect tense.
Aver andado,] Essere andato,] Iuisse,] to have gone. Future tense.
Aver or esperar de andar, Esser per andare, Dover andare, Hauer ad andare.
Iturum esse, to go, or about to go. Gerund.
Andando,] Andando,] Eundo,] in going. Participle of the Present tense and
Active voice.
El que anda,] Andante,] Euns,] one going. Participle of the Preter and Passive
voice.
Andado,] Andato,] gone.

Of Verbes Irregular the second Conjugation in ER, as Traer, TRAER
Saber, Tener, Poder, Querer, Poner, Hazer, Caber.
Indicative mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. yo TRA'YGO, io APPORTO, Adduco, etc. I fetch or
bring, etc. tu traes, tu apporti, aquel trae, colui apporta, traemos,
apportiamo, traeys, apportate, traen. apportano. Imper Traya, apportaua,
Adducebam, etc. I did fetch or bring, etc. trayas, apportaui, traya, apportaua,
trayamos, apportauamo, trayades, apportauate, trayan, apportauano. First Perf.
truxe, or traxe, apportai, Adduxi, etc. I have fetched or bought, etc. truxiste,
or traxiste, apportaste, truxo, or, traxo, apporto, truximos, or traximos,
apportamo, truxistes, or traxistes, apportaste, truxeron, or traxeron,
apportaron, apportaro, apportar. second Perf. he, traydo. as, etc. traydo.
ho, apportatio. hai, etc. apportato.
Adduxi, etc. I have fetched or brought, etc. Pluperfect. avia, traydo. avias,
etc. traydo.
haueua, Apportato. haueui, etc. Apportato.
Adduxerem, etc. I had fetched or bought, etc. Futur traere, apportaro, Adducam,
etc. I shall or will fetch or bring, etc. traeras, apportarai, traera,
apportara, traeremos, apportaremo, traereys, apportarete, traeran,
apportaranno. Imperative mood.
Imparatiue mood. Trae tu, Apportatu, Adduc, adducitio. Bring or fetch thou,
etc. trayga aquel. apporti colui, traemos, apportamo, traed, apportate,
traygan, apportino,

TRAER
Of Verbes Irregular the second Conjugation ER, as TRAER, in Italian Apportare,
Arrecare, Trahere, Addurere, Menare, in Latin Adducere, Afferre, Trahere, to
Fetch, to Bring, to Carry, to Draw.
Subiunctiue mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como Trayga or Traya, Quando Apporti, Cum
Adducam, etc. When I do fetch, or bring, etc. Traygas or Trayas, etc. Apporti,
Trayga, or Traya, Apporti, Traygamos, Apportiamo, Traygays, Apportiate,
Traygan. Apportino. Imperfect. Como Truxera, Traeria, Truxesse, Quando
Apportarei or Apportassi, Cum. Adducerem, When I had fetch or bring, etc.
Truxeras, Traerias, Truxesses, Aportaresti or Apportassi, Truxera, Traeria,
Truxesse. Apportarebbe or Apportasse. Truxeramos, Traeriamos, Truxessemos
Apportaremmo or Aportassimo Truxerades, Traeriades, Truxessedes, Apportarete or
Apportaste, Truxeran, Traerian, Truxessen. Apportarebbono or Apportassero you
shall find in some authors Traxesse, Traxesses, etc. perfect. Como aya, Traydo.
Quando Habbia, Apportato. Cum Adduxerim, When I have fetched or brought, etc.
ayas, Habbi, aya, Habbia, ayamos, Habbiamo, ayays, Habbiate, ayan. Habbiano,
Quando pluperfect. Como uviera or uviesse, Traydo. Hauerei or Hauessi,
Apportato. Adduxissem, etc. When I had brought or fetched, etc. uvieras or
uviesses, Haueresti or Hauessi, uviera or uviesse, Hauerebbe or Hauesse,
uvieramos or uviessemos, Haueremmo or Hauessimo, uvierades or uviessedes,
Hauereste or Haueste, uvieran or uviessen, Hauerebbono or Hauessero Futur. Como
Truxere, Quando Hauero Apportato. Cum Adduxero, etc. When I shall bring or
fetch, etc. Truxeres, Hauerai Apportato. Truxere. Hauera Apportato. Truxeremos,
Haueremo Apportato. Truxeredes, Hauerete Apportato. Truxeren. Haueranno
Apportato. Infinitive mood Present tense.
TRAE'R] Apportare] Adducere,] to Bring, to Fetch. Preterperfect tense.
Aver Traydo,] Hauer Apportato,] Adduxisse,] to have brought. Future tense.
Aver or Esperar de traer, Dover Apportare, Hauer ad Apportare, Essere per
Apportare.
Adducturum esse,] to bring hereafter. Gerund.
Trayendo,] Apportando,] Adducendo,] in bringing or fetching. Participle of the
Active and Present tense.
El que trae,] Apportante,] Adducens,] one bringing. Participle of the Passive
and Preter tense.
Traydo,] Apportato,] Adductus,] brought. Participle of the Futue tense.
el que ha or espera de Traer, Douendo Apportare, Adducturus, About to bring or
fetch. Essendo per Apportare,

These Verbes following ending in cer, make their Present tense of the
Indicative by adding an s before c, thus, Infinities, Pres. Preter. Acaecer, to
happen, yo acaesco, Acaecy. Acontecer, idem, yo acontesco, Acontesci.
Adolescer, to be sorry or sick, yo adolesco, Adolesci. Agradescer, to give
thanks, yo agradesco, Agradecy, Amortecer, to swonne, yo amortesco, Amorteci.
Desfallecer, idem, yo desfallesco, Desfallecy. Apetecer, to desire, yo
apetesco, Aperecy. Crecer, to grow, yo cresco, Creci. Encallecer, to wax hard
as brawne. yo encallesco, Encalleci. Encarecer, to augment, yo encaresco,
Encareci. Empecer, to hinder, yo empesco, Empeci. Establecer, to establish, yo
establesco, Estableci. Fenecer, to finish, yo fenesco, Feneci. Pacer, to feed,
yo pasco, Paci. Perecer, to perish, yo peresco, Perecy. Except.
Vencer, to overcome, yo venco, Venci.

In all other moodes and Tenses they are declined like the Verbes Regular of
the second Conjugation in ER.

These in ger, make their Present of the Indicative by changing g into j, which
the Spaniards in writing do much use, setting down the one for the other, as
well in Nounes as in Verbes, as in Nounes Magestad, Majestad: Mensaje, Mensage,
and the like.

Infinitiues. Pres. Preter. Encoger, to withdraw, yo encojo, Encogi. Recoger,
to gather up or retire yo recojo, Recogi. Acoger, to entertain, yo acojo,
Acogy. Escoger, to choose out, yo escojo, Escogy. Coger, to gather, yo cojo,
Cogy. Vngir, to anoint, yo unjo, Vngi.

In other moodes and Tenses like the Regulars.

These make their Present tense of the Indicative by adding i in the last
syllable save one of the Infinitive, as Infinitiues. Pres. Preter. Defender, to
defend, yo defiendo, Defendi. Dehender, to cleave asunder. yo dehiendo, Dehendi.

And these make the Present tense by turning o in the last syllable save one of
the Infinitive into ue, as Infinitiues. Pres. Pret. Bolver, to turn, yo
buelvo, Bolvi. Rebolver, to return, yo rebuelvo, Rebolvi. Soler, to be wont,
yo suelo, Soli. Coser, to sow, yo cueso, Cosy. Cozer, to seethe, yo cuezo,
Cozi. Doler, to be sorry, to grieve; yo duelo, Doli,

And these following thus, Caer, to fall, yo caygo, Cay. Roer, to gnawe, yo
roygo, Roy. Valor, to be worth, yo valgo, Vali. Traer, to fetch or bring, yo
traygo, Truxe. Oyr, to hear, yo oygo, Oy.

In other Moodes and Tenses like the Regular Verbes.

In like manner through all Moodes and Tenses are his Compounds declined, as
Retraer, to withdraw, yo Retraygo, I do withdraw, Retruxe, I have withdrawn,
etc.

SABER
Of Verbes Irregular the second Conjugation in ER, as SABER, in Italian Sapere,
Latin Scire, Sapere, to Know.
Indicative mood
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. yo SE', Io So, Scio, I know, thou know. tu
Sabes, tu Sai, Scis, etc. aquel Sabe. colui Sa. Sabemos, Sappiamo, Sabeys,
Sapete, Saben. Sanno. Imperfect. Sabia, Sapeua, Sciebam, etc. I did know, etc.
Sabias, Sapeui, Sabia. Sapeua. Sabiamos, Sapeuamo, Sabiades, Sapeuate, Sabian.
Sapeuano. First Perf. Supe, Seppi, Sciui, etc. I have known, etc. Supiste,
Sappesti, Supo. Seppe. Supimos, Sappemmo, Supistes, Sappeste, Supieron.
Seppero. second perfect. He Sabido. Ho Saputo. Sciui, etc. vt a^te. I have
known, etc. as above. as Hai a Ha Hemos Habbiamo aveys Hauete an Hanno Pluper
fect. Avia Sabido. Haueua Saputo. Sciueram, etc. I had known, etc. Avias
Haueui Avia Haueua Aviamos Haueuamo Aviades Haueuate Avian Haueuano Futur.
Sabre, Soppro, Sciam, etc. I shall or will know etc. Sabras, Sapprai, Sabra.
Sappra. Sabremos, Sappremo, Sabreys, Sapprete, Sabran. Sappranno. Imperative
mood
Sabe tu, Sappi tu, Sci, Scito, etc. Know thou, etc. Sepa aquel. Sappia colui.
Sepamos, Sappiamo, Sabed, Sappiate, Sepan. Sappiano.

Declining of Verbes Irregular the second Conjugation in ER, as SABER. SABER.

Subiunctiue mood
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como SE'PA, Quando SAPPIA, Cum Sciam, etc. when
I do know, etc. Sepas, Sappi, Sepa, Sappia, Sepamos, Sappiamo, Sepays,
Sappiate, Sepan. Sappiano. Imperfec. Como. Supiera, sabria, supiesse, Saprei,
sapessi, Scirem, etc. when I did know, etc. Supieras, sabrias, supiesses,
Sapresti, sapessi, Supiera, sabria, supiesse, Saprebbe, sapesse, Supieramos,
sabriamos, supiessemos, Sapremo, sapessimo, Supierades, sabriades, supiessedes,
Sapreste, sapeste, Supieran, sabrian, supiessen. Saprebbero, sapessero. Quando
Cum Perfect. Como A'ya, Sabido. Habbia, Saputo. Sciuerim, etc. when I have
known, etc. ayas, Habbi, aya, Habbia, Ayamos, Habbiamo, ayays, Habbiate, ayan,
Habbiano, Quando Cum Pluperfe. Como Uviera, or uviesse, Sabido. Hauerei,
hauessi, Saputo. Sciuissem, etc. when I had known, etc. uvieras, or uviesses,
Haueresti, hauesti, uviera, or uviesse, Hauerebbe, hauesse, uvieramos, or
uviessemos, Haueremo, hauessimo, uvierades, or uviesseds. Hauerete, haueste,
uvieran, or uviessen, Hauerebbono, hauessero, Cum First Future Como Supiere,
Quando Hauero, Saputo. Sciuero, etc. when I shall know, etc. Supieres, Hauerai,
Supiere, Hauera, Supieremos, Haueremo, Supieredes, Hauerete, Supieren.
haueranno, Quando Cum Second Future Como Uviere, or avre, Sabido. Hauero,
Saputo. Sciuero, etc. vt antea. when I shall know, etc. uvieres, or avras,
Hauerai, uviere, or avra, Hauera, uvieremos, or avremos, Haueremo, uvieredes,
or avreys, Hauerete, uvieren, or auran. haueranno, Infinitive mood Present
tense.
SABE'R] Sapere,] Scire,] to know. Preterpefect tense.
aver Sabido,] hauer Saputo,] Sciuisse,] to have known. Future tense.
aver or esperar de Saber, Dover sapere, Hauer a sapere, Essere per sapere,
Sciturum esse,] to know hereafter. Gerund.
Sabiendo,] Sapendo,] Sciendo,] In knowing. Participle of the Present, and
Active.
el que Sabe,] quello chi Sa,] Sciens,] one knowing. Participle of the Preter
tense and Passive.
Sabido,] Saputo,] known.

Declining of Verbes Irregular of the second Conjugation in ER, as TENER,
TENER. In Italian, and Latin, Tenere, to Hold.
Indicative mood
Present. YO TE'NGO, IO TE'NGO, Teneo, etc. I do Hold, etc. tu Tienes, tu
Tieni, aquel Tiene, colui Tiene, Tenemos, Teniamo, Teneys, Tenete, Tienen,
Tengono. Imperfe. Tenia, Teneua, and tenea, Tenebam, etc. I did Hold, etc.
Tenias, Teneui, Tenia, Teneua, and tenea, Teniamos, Teneuamo, Teniades,
Teneuate, Tenian. Teneuano. First Perfect. Tuve, Tenni, Tenui, etc. I have
Held, etc. Tuviste, Tenesti, Tuvo, Ten, Tuvimos, Tennemmo, Tuvistes, Teneste,
Tuvieron. Tennero. Second Perfec. Yo He, Tenido. Ho, Tenuto. Tenui, etc. I have
Held, etc. as next above. Tu as, Hai, aquel a, Ha, Hemos, Habbiamo, aveys,
Hauete, an, Hanno. Pluperfe. Avia, Tenido. Haueua, Tenuto. Tenueram, etc. I had
Held, etc. Avias, Haueui, Avia, Haueua, Aviamos, Haueuamo, Aviades, Haueuate,
Avian. Haueuano, Future. Tender, or Terne, Tennero, and Terro, Tenebo, etc. I
shall or will Hold, etc. Tendras, or Ternas, Tennerai, and Terrai, Tendra, or
Terna, Tennera, and Terra, Tendremos, or Ternemos, Teneremo, and Terremo,
Tendreys, or Terneys, Tenerete, and Terreste, Tendran, or ternan, Tenneranno,
and Terranno, Imperative mood
Ten tu, Tiem tu, Tene tu, etc. Hold thou, etc. Tenga aquel, Tenga colui,
Tengamos, Teniamo, Tened, Tenete, Tengan. Tengano. Subiunctiue mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como Tenga, Quando Tenga, Cum Teneam, etc. When
I do hold, etc. Tengas, Tenghi, Tenga, Tenga, Tengamos, Teniamo, Tengays,
Teniate, Tengan. Tengano. Imperfect. Como Tuviera, ternia, tuviesse, Quando
Tenessi, tenerei, teneria, Cum Tenerem, etc. When I did hold, etc. Tuvieras,
ternias, tuviesses, Tenessi, teneresti, Tuviera, ternia, tuviesse. Tenesse,
tenerebbe, teneria, Tuvieramos, terniamos, tuviessemos, Tenessimo, teneremmo,
Tuvierades, terniades, tuviessedes, Teneste, tenereste, Tuvieran, ternian,
tuviessen. Tenessero, tenerebbono. perfect. Como aya, Tenido. Quando Habbia,
Tenuto. Cum Tenuerim, etc. When I have holden, etc. ayas, Habbi, aya, Habbia,
ayamos, Habbiamo, ayays, Habbiate, ayan, Habbiano, Quando Cum pluperfect. Como
uviera or uniesse, Tenido. Hauerei or Hauessi, Tenuto. Tenuissem, etc. When I
had holden, etc. uvieras or uviesses, Haueresti or Hauessi, uviera or uviesse,
Hauerebbe or Hauesse, uvieramos or uviessemos, Haueremmo or Hauessimo,
uvierades or uviessedes, Hauereste or Haueste, uvieran or uviessen, Hauerebbono
or Hauessero First Futur. Como Tuviere, Cum Tenuero, etc. When I shall or will
hold, etc. Tuvieres, Tuviere, Tuvieremos, Tuvieredes, Tuvieren. Second Futur.
Como uviere or avre, Tenido. Hauero Tenuto. Cum Tenuero, etc. vt ante. When I
shall or will hold, etc. as next above. uvieres or avras, Hauerai uviere or
avra, Hauera uvieremos or avremos, Haueremo uvieredes or avreys, Hauerete
uvieren or avran, Haueranno Infinitive mood Present tense.
TENE'R,] Tenere,] Tenere,] to Hold. Preterperfect tense.
Aver Tenido,] Hauer Tenuto,] Tenuisse,] to have Holden. Future tense.
Aver de Tener, Dover tenere, Hauer a tenere, Essere per tenere,
Tenturum esse,] to Hold hereafter. Gerund.
Teniendo,] Tenendo,] Tenendo,] In Holding. Participle of the Present and
Active.
El que tiene,] Tenente,] Tenens,] one Holding. Participle of the Preter and
Passive.
Tenido, Tenuto, Tentus, Holden.

Like this verb simple are his Compounds in all points declined through all
Moodes and Tenses, as Mantener, to maintain, yo Mantengo, Mantuve. Detener, to
detain or stay, yo Detengo, Detuve. Retener, to with hold or retain, yo
Retengo, Retuve. Softener, to sustain or uphold, yo Sostengo, Sustuve.

PODER
The second Conjugation of Verbes Irregular in ER, as PODER, in Italian Potere,
in Latin Posse, to be able.
Indicative mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. yo PUE'DO, POSSO, Possum, etc. I can or am
able, etc. tu Puedes, Puoi, aquel Puede. Puo. Podemos, Possiamo, Podeys,
Potete, Pueden. Possano and Ponno. Imperfect Podia, Poteua or Potea, Poteram,
etc. I was able, etc. Podias, Poteui, Podia, Poteua or Potea, Podiamos,
Poteuamo, Podiades, Poteuate, Podian. Poteuano. First perfect. Pude, Potei,
Potui, etc. I could or have been able, etc. Pudiste, Potesti, Pudo. Puote.
Pudimos, Potemmo, Pudistes, Poteste, Pudieron. Poterono and Potero. Second
perfect. He Podido. Ho Potuto. Potui, etc. vt supra. I could or have been able,
etc. as next above. as Hai a Ha Hemos Habbiamo aveys Hauete an Hanno Pluperf.
Avia Podido. Haueua Potuto. Potueram, etc. I had been able, etc. Avias Haueuo
Avia Haueua Aviamos Haueuamo Aviades Haueuate Avian Haueuano Future. Podre,
Potro, Potero, etc. I shall or will be able, etc. Podras, Potrai, Podra. Potra,
Podremos, Potremo, Podreys, Potrete, Podran. Potranno.

Imperative mood wants as in the Latin.

Of Verbes Irregular, the second Conjugation in ER, as PODE'R. PODER

Subiunctiue mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como Pueda, Quando Possa, Cum Possim, etc. When
I can or be able, etc. puedas, possi, pueda, possa, puedamos, possiamo, and
potiamo, podays, possiate, and potiate, puedan, possano. Imperfect. Como
Pudiera, podria, pudiesse, Quando potessi, potrei, potria, Cum Possem, etc.
When I could or might be able, etc. pudieras, podrias, pudiesses, potessi,
potresti, pudiera, podria, pudiesse, potesse, potrebbe, potria, pudieramos,
podriamos, pudiessemos, potessimo, potremmo, pudierades, podriades,
pudiessedes, poteste, potreste, pudieran, podrian, pudiessen. potessero,
potrebbono, potriano, Perf. Como aya, Podido. Quando habbia, Potuto. Cum
Potuerim, etc. When I have been able, etc. ayas, habbi, aya, habbia, ayamos,
habbiamo, ayays, habbiate, ayan, habbiano, Quando Cum Pluperfect. Como uviera,
or uviesse, Podido. hauessi, hauerei, Potuto Potuissem, etc. When I had been
able, etc. uviera, or uviesses, hauessi, haueresti, uviera, or uviesse,
hauesse, hauerebbe, uvieramos, or uviessemos hauessimo, haueremo, uvierades, or
uviessedes, haueste, hauereste, uvieran, or uviessen, hauessero, hauerebbono,
Cum First future. Como Pudiere, Potuero, etc. When I shall be able hereafter,
etc. pudieres, pudiere, pudieremos, pudieredes, pudieren. Quando Cum second
Futur. Como uviere, or avre Podido. hauero, Potuto. Potuero, etc. vt ante. When
I shall or will be able here after, etc. as next above. uvieres, or avras,
hauerai, uviere, or avra, hauera, uvieremos, or avremos, haueremo, uvieredes,
or avreys, hauerete, uvieren, or avran, haueranno, Infinitive mood Present
tense.
Poder,] Potere,] Posse,] To be able. Preterperfect tense.
Aver podido,] Hauer potuto,] Potuisse,] To have been able. Gerund.
Pudiendo,] Potendo,] In being able. Participle.
Podido,] Potuto,] Able.

Querer.
Of Verbes Irregular of the second Conjugation, in ER, as QVERER, in Italian,
Volere, in Latin Velle, To will, to love, or to be willing.
Indicative mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. yo QVIE'RO, Io VO'GLIO, Volo, I will, or love,
etc. tu quieres, tu vuoi, Vis, etc. aquel quiere, colui vuole, Plu. Plu.
queremos, vogliamo, quereys, volete, quieren. vogliono. Imper queria, voleua,
Volebam, etc. I did will, or I did love, etc. querias, voleui, queria, voleua,
queriamos, voleuamo, queriades, voleuate, querian. voleuano. First Perf. quise,
volli, and volsi, Volui, etc. I have willed, or I have loved, etc. quisiste,
vollesti, quiso, volle, and volse, quisimos, volemmo, quisistes, volleste,
quisieron. volsero. second Perf. He, Querido. ho, Voluto Volui, etc. I have
willed, or I have loved, etc. as next above. as, hai, vt ante. a, ha, hemos or
avemos habbiamo, aveys, hauete, an, hanno, Pluperfect. avia, Querido. haueua,
Voluto Volueram, etc. I had willed, or I had loved, etc. avias, haueui, avia,
haueua, aviamos, haueuamo, aviades, haueuate, avian, haueuano, Futur querre,
vorro, volam, etc. I will, or shall will or love, etc. querras, vorrai, querra
vorra, querremos, vorremo, querreys, vorrete, querran. vorranno. Imperative
mood.
Imperative mood. quere tu, vuoi tu, Latin wants the Imperative. mood. Will
thou or love thou, etc. quera aquel, voglia colui, queramos, vogliamo, quered,
vogliate, queran. voglino,

Of Verbes Irregular of the second Conjugation in ER, as QVERER. Querer.

Subiunctiue mood
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como Quera, or Querra, etc. Quando Voglia, Cum
Velim, etc. when I will or love, etc. Queras, Vogli, Quera, Voglia, Queramos,
Vogliamo, Querays, Vogliate, Queran. Vogliano. Imperfect. Como Quisiera,
querria, quisiesse, Quando Volessi, vorei, and vorria, Cum Vellem, etc. When I
would or did love, etc. Quisieras, querrias, quisiesses, Volesti, vorresti,
Quisieras, querrias, quisiesses, Volesse, vorrebbe, vorria, Quisieramos,
querriamos, quisiessemos, Volessimo, voremmo, Quisierades, querriades,
quisiessedes, Voleste, voreste, Quisieran, querrian, quisiessen. Volessero,
vorrebbono, and vorriano. Quando perfect. Como A'ya, Querido. Habbia, Voluto.
Cum Voluerim, etc. when I have willed or loved, etc. ayas, Habbi, aya, Habbia,
Ayamos, Habbiamo, Ayays, Habbiate, ayan, Habbiano, Quando Cum pluperfect. Como
Uviera, or uviesse, Querido. Hauessi, or hauerei, Voluto. Voluissem, etc. when
I had willed or loved etc. uvieras, or uviesses, Hauesti, or haueresti, uviera,
or uviesse, Hauesse, or hauerebbe, uvieramos, or uviessemos, Hauessimo, or
haueremo, uvierades, or uviessedes, Haueste, or hauereste, uvieran, or
uviessen, Hauessero, or hauerebbono, First Futur Como Quisiere, Quando Hauero,
Voluto. Cum Voluero etc. when I shall will or love. Quisieres, Hauerai,
Quisiere, Hauera, Quisieremos, Haueremo, Quisieredes, Hauerete, Quisieren.
Haueranno, Quando second Futur Como Uviere, or avre, Querido. Hauero Voluto.
Cum Voluero etc. vt. ante. when I shall be willing or love, etc. uvieres, or
avras, Hauerai, uviere, or avra, Hauera, uvieremos, or avremos, Haueremo,
uvieredes, or avreys, Hauerete, uvieren, or avren, Haueranno, Infinitive mood
Present tense.
Querer,] Volere,] Velle,] to will or love. Preterperfect tense.
aver Querido,] hauer Voluto,] Voluisse,] to have loved or been willing.
Gerund.
Queriendo,] Volendo,] Volendo,] In being willing or loving. Participle.
Querido,] Voluto,] loved, willed.

Ad to this verb this particle Mas, and so decline it through al moods and
tenses, and it makes the signification to be in Latin Malo, in English I had
leifer, I would rather, as yo Quiero mas, in Latin Malo, I would leifer, or
love more: tu quieres mas, Mauis, thou had rather or love more,
Preterimperfect tense yo Queria mas, I would rather or loved more. Preterperf.
Quise mas, etc.

PONER.
Of Verbes Irregular the second Conjugation in ER, as PONER, in Italian, Ponere,
Porre, Mettere, in Latin, Ponere, Locare, to Put, to place.
Indicative mood
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. YO PONGO, IO PO'NGO, Pono, etc. I do put, etc.
tu Pones, tu Poni, aquel Pone, colui Pone, Plu. Plu. Ponemos, Poniamo, Poneys,
Ponete, Ponen. Pongono, Imperfect Ponia, Poneua, Ponebam, etc. I did put, etc.
Ponias, Poneui, Ponia, Poneua, Poniamos, Poneuamo, Poniades, Poneuate, Ponian.
Poneuano. First Perfect. Puse, Posi, Posui, etc. I have put, etc. Pusiste,
Ponesti, Puso, Pose, Pusimos, Ponemmo, Pusistes, Poneste, Pusieron. Posero.
Second Perfect. He, Puesto. Ho, Posto. Posui, etc. I have put, etc. as, Hai, a,
Ha, Avemos, y hemos, Habbiamo, Aveys, Hauete, an, Hanno, Pluperfec Avia,
Puesto. Haueua, Posto. Posueram, etc. I had put, etc. Avias, Haueui, Avia,
Haueua, Aviamos, Haueuamo, Aviades, Haueuate, Avian, Haueuano, Future Porne, or
Pondre, Ponero, and Porro, Ponam, etc. I shall or will put, etc. Pornas, or
Pondras, Ponerai, and Porrai, Porna, or Pondra, Ponera, and Porra, Pornemos, or
Pondremos, Poneremo, and Porremo, Porneys, or Pondreys. Ponerete, and Porrete,
Pornan, or Pondran. Ponneranno, and Poranno. Imperative mood.
Po tu, Pone tu, Pone, Poneto, Ponat, Poneto, etc. put thou, put he or let him
put, etc. Ponga aquel, Ponga colui, Pongamos, Poniamo, Poned, Ponete, Pongan.
Pongano.

Of Verbes Irregular the second Conjugation in ER, as PONER. PONER

Subiunctiue mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como Ponga, Quando Ponga, Cum Ponam, etc. When
I do put, etc Pongas, Ponghi, Ponga. Ponga. Pongamos, Poniamo, Pongays,
Poniate, Pongan. Pongano. Imperfect. Como Pusiera, pornia or pondria, pusiesse,
Quando Ponessi, Ponerei, Cum Ponerem, etc. When I did put, etc Pusieras,
pornias or pondrias, pusiesses, Ponessi, Poneresti, Pusieras, pornias or
pondrias, pusiesse. Ponesse, Ponerebbe, Pusieramos, porniamos or pondriamos,
pusiessemos Ponessimo, Poneremmo, Pusierades, porniades or pondriades,
pusiessedes, Poneste, Ponereste, Pusieran, pornian or pondrian, pusiessen.
Ponessero, Ponerebbono. Perf. Como aya Puesto. Quando Habbia Posto. Cum
Posuerim, etc. When I have put, etc. ayas Habbi aya Habbia ayamos Habbiamo
ayays Habbiate ayan Habbiano Quando Cum Pluperfect. Como uviera or uviesse
Puesto. Hauerei or Hauessi Posto. Posuissem, When I had put, etc. uvieras or
uviesses Haueresti or Hauesti uviera or uviesse Hauerebbe or Hauesse uvieramos
or uviessemos Haueremmo or hauessimo uvieredes or uviessedes Hauereste or
Haueste uvieran or uviessen Haberebbono or Hauessero First Futur. Como Pusiere,
Cum Posuero, etc. When I shall or will put, etc. Pusieres, Pusiere. Pusieremos,
Pusieredes. Pusieren. Quando second Futur Como Uviere or avre Puesto. Hauero
Posto. Cum Posuero, etc. When I shall or will put, etc. uvieres or avras
Hauerai uviere or avra Hatera uvieremos or avremos Haueremo uvieredes or avreys
Hauerete uvieren or avran, Haueranno Infinitive mood Present tense.
PONER,] Ponere, Mettere, Porre,] Ponere,] to Put. Preterpefect tense.
Aver Puesto,] Hauer Posto,] Posuisse,] to have Put. Gerund.
Poniendo,] Ponendo,] Ponendo,] In Putting. Participle.
Puesto,] Posto,] Positus,] Put.

After this manner are declined in all points Componer, to compose, yo
Compongo, I do compose, yo Compuse, I have composed, etc. Also Disponer, to
dispose, yo Dispongo, I dispose, Dispuse, I have disposed. And Anteponer, to
put before, yo Antepongo, I do put before, Antepuse, I have put before. So
Proponer, to set out, to allege, yo Propongo, Propuse.

HAZER.
Of Verbes Irregular the second Conjugation in ER, as HAZER, in Italian Fare, in
Latin Facere, to do, to make.
Indicative mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. yo HA'GO, Io FO, Facio, and. I do make or do,
etc. tu Hazes, tu Fai, aquel Haze. colui Fa. Hazemos, Facciamo, Hazeis, Fate,
Hazen. Fanno. Imperf. Hazia, Faceua, Faciebam, etc. I did make or do, etc.
Hazias, Faceui, Hazia. Faceua. Haziamos, Faceuamo, Haziades, Faceuate, Hazian.
Faceuano. First perfect. Hize, Feci, Feci, etc. I have made or done, etc.
Hiziste, Facesti, Hizo. Fece. Hizimos, Facemmo, Hizistes, Faceste, Hizieron.
Fecero. Second Perfect. He Hecho. Ho Fatto. Feci, etc. vt ante. I have made or
done, etc. as Hai a Ha Hemos Habbiamo aveys Hauete an Hanno Pluperfect. Avia
Hecho. Haueua Fatto. Feceram, etc. I had made or done, etc. Avias Haueui Avia
Haueua Aviamos Haueuamo Aviades Haueuate Avian Haueuano Future. Hare, Faro,
Faciam, etc. I shall or will make or do, etc. Haras, Farai, Hara. Fara.
Haremos, Faremo, Hareys, Farete, Haran. Faranno. Imperative mood.
Haz tu, Fa tu, Fac, Facito, etc. Do thou, or make thou, etc. Haga aquel.
Faccia colui. Hagamos, Facciamo, Hazed, Fate, Hagan. Facciano.

Of Verbes Irregular the second Conjugation in ER, as HAZER. HAZER

Subiunctiue mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como Haga, Quando Faccia, Cum faciam, etc. When
I do make or do, etc. hagas, facci, haga, faccia, hagamos, facciamo, hagays,
facciate, hagan. facciano. Imper Como hiziera, haria, hiziesse, Quando facessi,
farei, faria, Cum Facerem, etc. When I did do or make, etc. hizieras, harias,
hiziesses, facesti, faresti, hiziera, haria, hiziesse, facesse, farebbe, faria,
hizieramos, hariamos, hiziessemos, facessimo, faremmo, hizierades, hariades,
hiziessedes, facesti, fareste, hizieran, harian, hiziessen. facessero,
farebbono, farino. Cum Perf. Como aya, Hecho. Quando habbia, Fat to. Fecerim,
etc. When I have made or done, etc. ayas, habbi, aya, habbia, ayamos, habbiamo,
ayays, habbiate, ayan, habbiano, Quando Cum Pluperf. Como uviera, or uviesse,
Hecho. hauerei, or hauessi, Fat to. Fecissem, etc. When I had made or done,
etc. uvieras, or uviesses, haueresti, or hauesti, uviera, or uviesse,
hauerebbe, or hauesse, uvieramos, or uviessemos, haueremmo, or hauessimo
uvierades, or uviessedes, haueresti, or haueste, uvieran, or uviessen,
hauerebbono, or hauessimo First future. Como hiziere, Cum Fecero, etc. When I
shall or will make or do, etc. hizieres, hiziere, hizieremos, hizieredes,
hizieren. Cum second Futur. Como Uviere, or avre, Hecho. Hauero, Fat to.
Fecero, etc. vt ante. When I shall or will make or do, etc. uvieres, or avras,
Hauerai, uviere, or avra, Hauera, uvieremos, or avremos, Haueremo, uvieredes,
or avreys, Hauerete, uvieren, or avran. haueranno, Infinitive mood Present
tense.
Hazer,] Fare,] Facere, To do to make. Preterperfect tense.
Aver hecho,] Hauer fatto,] Fecisse,] To have made or done, etc. Future tense.
Aver or esperar de hazer, Dover fare, Facturum esse vel fore. To make or do
hereafter. Esser per fare, Hauer a fare. Gerund.
Haziendo] Facendo,] Faciendo,] In doing or making, etc. Supine of the Active
voice.
A Hazer,] Di fare,] Factum,] To make or do. Supine of the Passive voice.
De ser hecho,] D'esser fatto,] Factu,] To be made or don. Participle of the
Active and Present tense.
El que haze,] Facente,] Faciens,] One doing or making. Participle of the
Passive and Pretertense.
Hecho] Fatto,] Factus,] Made or done, etc. Participle of the Future tense.
El que ha, or Espera de hazer, Hauendo a fare, Facturus,] About to do, etc.
Essendo per fare,

CABER
Of Verbes Irregular the second Conjugation in ER, as CABER, in Italian Capere,
Latin Continere and Contineri, To contain, or to be contained.
Indicative mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Yo QVE'PO, lo CAPISCO, Ego contineo, tu
contines, etc. Ego contineor, tu contineris, etc. Thou containest, etc. Thou
art contained, etc. tu cabes. tu capisci, aquel cabe, colui capisce, cabemos,
capiamo, cabeys, capite, caben. capiscono, Imperfect. cabia, capiua,
continebam, etc. I did contain, etc. cabias, capiui, continebar, etc. I was
contained, etc. cabia, capiua, cabiamos, capiuamo, cabiades, capiuate, cabian.
capiuano. First Perf. cupe, capi, or capii, continui, etc. I have contained,
etc. cupiste, capisti, contentus sum vel fui, etc. cupo, cape I have been
contained. etc. cupimos, capimmo, cupistes, capiste, cupieron. capirono, second
Perf. he Cabido. Ho, Capito. continui, etc. I have contained, etc as Hai,
contentus sum vel fui, etc. I have been contained, etc. a Ha, avemos Habbiamo,
aveys Hauete, an Hanno, Pluperfect. avia Cabido. Haueua, Capito. continueram,
etc. I had contained, etc. avias Haueui, contentus eram vel fueram, etc. I had
been contained, etc. avia Haueua, aviamos, Haueuamo, aviades Haueuate, avian
Haueuano, Futur cabre, capero, continebo, etc. I shall or will contain, etc.
cabras, capirai, continebor, etc. cabra, capira, I shall or will be contained,
etc. cabremos, capiremo, cabreys, capirete, cabran. capiranno.

Of Verbes Irregular the second Conjugation in ER, as CABER. CABER.

Subiunctiue mood
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como Quepa, Quando Capisca, Cum Contineam,
etc. when I do contain, etc. Quepas, Capisci, Quepa, Capisca, Continear, etc.
when I am contained, etc Quepamos, Capiamo, Quepays, Capiate, Quepan.
Capiscano. Imperfect. Como Cupiera, cabria, cupiesse, Quando Capissi,
caperirei, caperia, Cum Co^tinerem, etc. when I did contain, etc. Cupieras,
cabrias, cupiesses, Capisti, capiresti, Cupiera, cabria, cupiesse, Capisse,
capirebbe, caperia, Continerer etc. when I was contained, etc. Cupieramos,
cabriamos, cupiessemos, Capissimo, capiremmo, Cupierades, cabriades,
cupiessedes, Capiste, capireste, Cupieran, cabrian, cupiessen. Capissero,
capirebbono, capiriano. Quando Perfec Como A'ya, Cabido. Habbia, Capito. Cum
Continuerim, etc. when I have contained, etc ayas, Habbi, aya, Habbia,
Contentus sim, etc. when I have been contained, etc. Ayamos, Habbiamo, ayays,
Habbiate, ayan, Habbiano, Cum pluper fect. Como Uviera, or uviesse, Cabido.
Hauessi, and hauerei, Capito. Continuissem, etc when I had contained, etc
uvieras, or uviesses, Hauesti, and haueresti, uviera, or uviesse, Hauesti, and
hauerebbe, Contentus essem etc. uvieramos, or uviessemos, Hauessimo, and
haueremmo when I had bin, etc uvierades, or uviessedes, Haueste, and hauereste,
uvieran, or uviessen, Hauessero, and hauerebbono Futur Como Cupiere, Cum
Continuero etc. when I shall contain, etc. Cupieres, Cupiere, Contentus ero,
etc. when I shall be contained etc. Cupieremos, Cupieredes, Cupieren. Infinitive
mood Present tense.
CABE'R,] Capere, Continere, to contain, etc. Contineri, to be contained, etc,
Preterperfect tense.
aver Cabido,] hauer capito, Continuisse, to have contained, etc. Contentum
Esse vel fuisse, to have been contained, etc. Gerund.
Cabiendo,] Capendo,] Continendo, In containing, etc. I being contained, etc.
Participle.
Cabido,] Capito,] Contentus,] contained.

VER.
Of Verbes Irregular the second Conjugation in ER, as VER, in Italian Vedere,
Latin Videre, to See.
Indicative mood
Spanish. Italian, Latin. Pres. YO VE'O, IO Vedo and VE'GGIO, Video, etc. I do
see, etc. tu Vees, tu Vedi, aquel Vee, colui Vede, Vemos, Vediamo, and
Veggiamo, Veys, Vedete, Veen. Vedem, and Veggono. Imperfect. Como Via, Vedeua,
and Vedea, Videbam, etc I did see, etc. Vias, Vedeui, Via. Vedeua, and Vedea.
Viamos, Vedeuamo, Viades, Vedeuate, Vian. Vedeuano, and Vedeano. First perfec.
Vi or Vide, Vidi, or Vidi, Vidi, etc. I have seen, etc. Viste, or Viste,
Vedesti, Vio, or Vido, Vidde. Vimos, Videmmo, Vistes, Videsti, Vieron. Viddero.
second perfect. He Visto. Ho Veduto. or Visto. Vidi, etc. I have seen, etc. as
Hai, a Ha, Hemos Habbiamo aveys Hauete, an Hanno pluperfect. Avia Visto. Haueua
Veduto, or Visto. Videram, etc. I had seen, etc. Avias Haueui, Avia. Haueua,
Aviamos Haueuamo Aviades Haueuate Avian Haueuano Futur. Vere, Vedero, and
Vedro, Videbo, etc. I shall or will see, etc. Veras, Vederai, and Vedrai, Vera,
Vedera, and Vedra. Veremos, Vederemo, and Vedremo, Vereys, Vederete, and
Vedrete, Veran. Vederanno, and Vedranno. Imperative mood.
Vee tu, Vedi tu, Vide, videto, etc. see tou, etc. Vea aquel, Veda, and vegga
colui, Veamos, Veggiamo, Ved, Vedete, Vean. Vedano, and Veggano.

In the Subiunctiue and Infinitive mood altogether as verbes aforegoing, as
the Present tense Vea, the Preterimperfect. Viera, veria, viesse, the
Preterperfect. aya visto, the Preterpluperfect. uviera, or uviesse, visto, the
Future viero, Infinitive ver, Participle visto.

Soler, to be wont or accustomed. Indicat. Pres. yo Suelo, I am wont, tu
Sueles, aquel Suele, thou art wont, he is wont. Solemos, we are wont, Soleys,
ye are wont, Suelen, they are wont. Imperfect. Solia. Perfect. Soli. In like
manner Doler, to grieve, to be sorry, declined, yo Duelo, Dolia, Doli, He
Dolido, etc.

Of the third and last Conjugation of Verbs Irregular in IR or Yr, as VENIR, in
Italian and Latin Venire, to Come. VENIR

Indicative mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. yo VE'NGO, Io VE'NGO, Venio, etc. I do come,
etc. tu Vienes, tu vieni, aquel Viene. colui viene. Plur. Venimos, Veniamo,
Venis, Venite, Vienen. Vengono. Imperf. Venia, Veniua, Veniebam, etc. I did
come, etc. Venias, Veniui, Venia. Veniua. Veniamos, Veniuamo, Veniades,
Veniuate, Venian. Veniuano. First Perfect. Vine, Venni, Veni, etc. I have come,
etc Veniste, Vennesti, Vino, Venne. Venimos, Venemmo, Veniste, Veneste,
Venieron. Vennero. Second Perfect. He Venido. Sono Venuto. Veni, etc. I have
come, etc as sei Venuto. a e Venuto. Hemos Siamo Venuti. aveys Sete Venuti. an
Sono Venuti. Pluperfe. Avia Venido. E'ra Venuto. Veneram, etc. I had come, etc.
Avias eri Venuto. Avia era Venuto. Aviamos Erauamo Venuti. Aviades Erauate
Venuti. Avian E'rano Venuti. Futur. Vendre or Verne, Veniro or Verro, Veniam,
etc. I shall or will come, etc. Vendras or Vernas, Venerai or Verrai, Vendra or
Verna. Venera or Verra. Vendremos or Vernemos, Veniremo or Verremo Vendreys or
Verneys, Venirete or Verrete, Vendran or Vernan. Veniranno or Verranno.
Imperative mood.
Ven tu, Vien tu, Veni, Venito, etc. Come thou, etc. Venga aquel. Venga colui.
Vengamos, Veniamo, Venid, Venite, Vengan. Vengano. Subiunctiue mood.
Spanish. Italian, Latin. Pres. Como Venga, Quando Venga, Cum Veniam, etc. When
I do come, etc. vengas, venghi, venga, venga, vengamos, veniamo, vengays,
veniate, vengan. vengano. Imper Como Viniera, vernia, viniesse, Quando venissi,
venerei, verrei, verria, Cum Venirem etc. When I did come, etc. vinieras,
vernias, viniesses, venisti, veneresti, verresti, viniera, vernia, viniesse,
venisse, venerebbe, verrebbe, verria, Vinieramos, verniamos, viniessemos,
venissimo, veniremmo, veremmo, vinierades, verniades, viniessedes, veniste,
ven^reste, verreste, vinie^an, vernian, viniessen. venissero, venirebbono,
verrebbono, verriano. Imperfect. Como aya, Venido. Quando sia, Venuto. Cum
Venerim etc. When I have come, etc. ayas, sii and sia, Venuto. aya, sia,
Venuto. ayamos, siamo, Venuti. ayays, siate, Venuti. ayan, siano, Venuti.
pluper fect, etc. Como Uviera, or uviesse, Venido. fossi, sarei, Venuto.
Venissem etc. When I had come, etc. uvieras, or uviesses, fosti, saresti,
Venuto. uviera, or uviesse, fosse, sarebbe, Venuto. uvieramos, or uviessemos,
fossimo, saremmo, Venuti. uvierades, or uviessedes, foste, sareste, Venuti.
uvieran, or uviessen, fossero, sarebbono, Venuti. First Futur Como veniere, Cum
Venero. etc. When I shall or will come, etc. venieres, veniere, venieremos,
venieredes, venieren. second Futur Como Uviere, or avre, Venido saro, Venuto.
Cum Venero, etc. When I shall or will come, etc. uvieres, or avras, sarai,
Venuto. uviere, or avra, sara, Venuto. uvieremos, or avremos, saremo, Venuti.
uvieredes, or avreys, sarete, Venuti. uvieren, or avran, saranno, Venuti.
Infinitive mood Present tense.
Venir,] Venire,] Venire,] To come. Preterperfect tense.
Ser venido,] Essere venuto,] Venisse,] To have come. Futur tense.
Aver or esperar de venir Dover venire, Venturum esse, To come hereafter.
Hauer a venire, Esser per venire, Gerund.
Veniendo,] Venendo,] Veniendo,] In coming. Participle of the Present and
Active voice.
El que viene,] Venente,] Veniens,] One coming. Participle of the Preter tense
and Passive voice, etc.
Venido,] Venuto,] Qui venit,] Come. These Verbes following in Ir, thus formed
in the Present and Preterperfect Tense.
Infinitiues. Pres. Preterp. Adormir, to fall asleep, yo Aduermo, Adormi.
Dormir, to sleep, yo Duermo, Dormi. Avertir, to mark, yo Avierto, Averti.
Arrepentir, to repent, yo Arrepiento, Arrepenti. Cobrir, to recover, yo Cebro,
Cobri. Concebir, to conceive, yo Concibo, Concebi. Cernir, to sift meal, yo
Cigrno, Cerni. Consentir, to consent, yo Consiento, Consenti. Elegir, to choose
out, yo Elijo, Eligi. Fingir, to feign, yo Finjo, Fingi. Gemir, to groan, yo
Gimo, Gemi. Mentir, to lie, yo Miento, Menti. Ungir, to anoint, yo Unjo, Ungi.
Salir, to go forth, yo Salgo, Saly. Diferir, to differ, yo Difiero, Diferi.

Imperfect of the Indicat. Diferia.

Imperfect of the Subiunct. Diferia.

Sofrir, to suffer, yo Sofro, Sofri.

Imperfect. of the Indicat. Sofria.

Imperfect of the Subiunct. Soffriria.

The Compounds of this verb Venir, Vengo, are declined in every respect in all
Moodes and Tenses through out as it is, as Revenir, to return, Revengo, Revine,
etc. Convenir, to agree, to be expedient, yo Convengo, Convine. Devenir, to
become, yo Devengo, Devine. Sobrevenir, to come upon suddenly, yo Sobrevengo,
Sobrevine.

Of the third and last conjugation of Verbes Irregular in IR, and YR, DEZIR.
as Dezir,] in Italian Dire,] Latin Dicere] to say.
Indicative mood.
Spanish. Italian, Latin. Pres. Digo, Dico, Dico, etc. I say, etc. dizes,
dici, or di, dize, dice, dezimos, dicemo, dezis, dite, dizen. dicono, Imper
Dezia, Diceua, Dicebam etc. I did say, etc. dezias, diceui, dezia, diceua,
Deziamos, diceuamo, deziades, diceuate, dezian. diceuano. First Perf. dixe,
dissi, Dixi, etc. I have said, etc. dixiste, dicesti, dixo, disse, diximos,
dicemmo, dixistes, diceste, dixeron. dissero. second Perf. he, Dicho. Ho Detto.
Dixi, etc. I have said, etc. as, Hai a, Ha hemos, Habbiamo aveys, Hauete an,
Hanno Pluperfect. avia, Dicho. Haueua Detto. Dixeram, etc I had said, etc.
avias, Haueui avia, Haueua aviamos, Haueuamo aviades, Haueuate avian, Haueuano
Futur dire, diro, Dicam, etc. I shall or will say, etc. diras, dirai, dira,
dira, diremos, diremo, direys, direte, diran. direnno. Imperative mood.
Imperative mood. Di tu, Di, or dice tu, Dic, dicito, etc. Say you, etc. diga
aquel, dica colui, digamos, diceamo, dezid, dite, digan. dicano.

Note that you shall find with good Authors Dezi for Dezid, in the second
person plural number of the Imperative.

Subiunctiue mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como Diga, Quando Dica, Cum Dicam, etc. when I
do say, etc. Digas, Dici, Diga, Dica, Digamos, Diciamo, Digays, Diciate,
Digan. Dicano. Imperfect. Como Dixera, diria, dixesse, Quando Direi, dicessi,
deria, Cum Dicerem, etc. When I did say, etc. Dixeras, dirias, dixesses,
Diresti, dicesti, Dixera, diria, dixesse, Direbbe, dicesse, deria. Dixeramos,
diriamos, dixessemos, Diremmo, dicessimo, Dixerades, diriades, dixessedes,
Direste, diceste, Dixeran, dirian, dixessen. Direbbono, dicessero, deriano.
Quando Cum Perf. Como A'ya, dicho. Habbia, Detto. Dixerim, etc. when I have
said, etc. ayas, Habbi, aya, Habbia, Ayamos, Habbiamo, ayays, Habbiate, ayan,
Habbiano, Quando Cum Pluperfect. Como uviera, or uviesse, dicho. Hauessi,
Detto. Dixissem, etc. When I had said, etc. uvieras, or uviesses, Hauesti,
uviera, or uviesse, Hauesse, uvieramos, or uviessemos, Hauessimo, uvierades, or
uviessedes, Haueste, uvieran, or uviessen, Hauessino, First Futur. Como Dixere,
Cum Dixero, etc. when I shall or will say, etc. Dixeres, Dixere, Dixeremos,
Dixeredes, Dixeren. Quando Cum second Futur. Como uviere, or avre, dicho.
Hauero, Detto. Dixero, etc. When I shall or will say, etc. uvieres, or avras,
Hauerai, uviere, or avra, Hauera, uvieremos, or avremos, Haueremo, uvieredes,
or avreys, Hauerete, uvieren, or avran, Haueranno, Infinitive mood Present
tense.
DEZIR,] Dire,] Dicere,] to say, to tell. Preterperfect tense.
Aver Dicho,] hauer Detto,] Dixisse,] to have said or told. Future tense.
Aver de Dezir, Dover dire, Dicturum esse,] to say hereafter. Esser per dire,
Hauer a dire, Gerunds.
Deziendo,] Dicendo,] Dicendo,] In saying. Participle of the Present tense and
Active voice.
El que Dize,] Dicente,] Dicens,] one telling or saying. Participle of the
Preter tense and passive voice.
Dicho,] Detto,] Dictus,] told, said, spoken. Participle of the Future tense.
El que ha or Espera de Dezir, Douendo dire Dicturus,] about to say hereafter.
Hauendo a dire, Essendo per dire,

The Compounds of this verb Dezir, Digo, in all points through all Moodes and
Tenses declined like the Simple, as Infinitiues. Pres. Preterp. Biendezir, to
bless, yo Biendigo, Biendixe. Maldezir, to curse, yo Maldigo, Maldixe. In like
sort these following thus, Conduzir, to conduct, yo Condulgo, Conduxe.
Introduzir, to bring in, yo Introdusgo, Introduxe. Induzir, to induce, yo
Indusgo, Induxe. Traduzir, to translate, yo Tradusgo, Traduxe. Produzir, to
produce, yo Produzgo, Produxe. Salir, to go forth, yo Salgo, Sali. Regir, to
govern, yo Rijo, Regi.

After the manner of Dezir, is this verb Salir, to go out or make a sallie,
declined, as in the Present tense of the Indicative mood yo Salgo, I go out,
tu Sales, thou go out, etc. Preterimperfect yo Salia, etc. First
Preterperfect, Sali. Second Preterperfect, he Salido, etc. Pluperfect. avia
Salido. Future, yo Saldre. Imperative Sal tu, go thou out, Salga aquel, let
him go out, etc. Subiunctiue Present tense, yo Salga, tu Salgas, etc.
Preterimperfect. Saliera, Saldria, Saliesse, etc. Preterperfect. aya Salido.
Pluperfect. uviera Salido. Future Saliere. Infinitive Salir. Gerund Saliendo.
Participle Salido.

So Seguir to follow, yo Sigo, Siguia, Sigui. He Seguido, avia Seguido,
Seguire. Imperative Sigue tu follow thou, Siga aquel let him follow, Sigamos
let us follow, Seguid follow ye, Sigan let them follow. Subiunctiue Present,
Como yo Siga. Imperfect. Siguiera, Seguiria, Siguiesse. Preterperfect. aya
Seguido. Pluperfect. uviesse Seguido. Future Seguiere, etc. Infinitive Seguir,
Participle Seguido. So in all points is Conseguir to obtain, declined.

Sumir, to drench or ouerwhelme, differing from Sumar, to sum up, thus. In the
Present of the Indicative all one yo Sumo, Imperfect yo Sumia, I did drench, yo
Sumava, I did sum up. First Perfect, yo Sumi, I have drencht, tu Sumiste,
aquel Sumio, yo Sum, I have summed up, tu Sumaste, thou have summed up, aquel
Sumo, he has summed up, etc.

Of the third and last Conjugation of Verbes Irregular in IR or YR, as YR, in
Italian Ire or Audare, in Latin Ire, to Go.
Indicative mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. VOY, VO and VADO, Eo, I go, thou go, etc.
Vas, Vai, is, etc. Va, Va, Vamos, Andiamo, Vays, Andate, Van. Vanno. Imperfect.
Y'va, Andaua, Ibam, etc. I did go, etc. yvas, Andaui, yva, Andaua, yvamos,
Andauamo, yvades, Andauate, yvan. Andauano. First Perfec Fuy, Andai, Iui, etc.
I went, etc. Fuiste, Andasti, Fue, Ando, Fuimos, Andammo, Fuistes, Andaste,
Fueron. Andarano, second perfect. He, Y'do. Sono, Andato. Iui, etc. I have
gone, etc. as Sei, Andato. a. e, Andato. Hemos, Siamo, Andati. aveys, Sete,
Andati. an, Sono, Andati. pluperfect. Avia, Y'do. Era, Andato. Iueram, etc. I
had gone, etc. Avia, Eri, Andato. Avia, Era, Andato. Aviamos, Erauamo, Andati.
Aviades, Erauate, Andati. Avian, Erano, Andati. Futur Ire, Andero, and Andro,
Ibo, etc. I shall or will go, etc. Yras, Anderai, or Andrai, Yra, Andera, or
Andra, Yremos, Anderemo, or Andremo, Yreys, Anderete, or Andrete, Yran.
Anderanno, or Andranno. Imperative mood.
Va, and Ve, Va, Vaya, Vada, Vadi, Vamos, Andiamo, yd, Andate, Vayan. Vadano,
and Vadino.

Vete, Vete, Get thee hence, Get thee hence.

With Authors this Verb is sometime written with Y, sometimes with I.

Subiunctiue mood.
Spanish. Italian. Latin. Pres. Como Vaya, Quando Vada, Cum Eam, etc. When I
do go, etc. Vayas, Vada and Vadi, Vaya. Vada and Vadi. Vamos, Andiamo, Vays,
Andiate, Vayan. Vadano and Vadino. Imperfect. Como Fuera, Yria, fuesse, Quando
Andassi, Anderei, Anderia, Cum Irem, etc. When I did go, etc. Fueras, yrias,
fuesses, Andassi, Anderesti, Fuera, yria, fuesse. Andasse, Anderebbe, Anderia.
Fueramos, yriamos, fuessemos, Andassimo, Anderemmo, Fuerades, yriades,
fuessedes, Andaste, Andereste, Fueran, yrian, fuessen. Andassero, Anderebbono,
Anderiano. Perf. Como aya, Y'do. Quando Sia Andato. Cum Iuerim, etc. When I
have gone, etc. ayas, Sij Andato. aya, Sia Andato. ayamos, Siamo Andati. ayays,
Siate Andati. ayan, Siano Andati. Quando Pluperfect. Como uviera, or uviesse,
Y'do. Fossi, sarei Andato. Cum Iuissem, etc. When I had gone, etc. uvieras, or
uviesses, Fossi, saresti Andato. uviera, or uviesse, Fosse, sarebbe Andato.
uvieramos, or uviessemos Fossimo, saremmo Andati. uvierades, or uviessedes,
Foste, sareste Andati. uvieran, or uviessen, Fossero, sarebbono Andati. Cum
First future. Como Fuere, Iuero, etc. When I shall or will be, etc. Fueres,
Fuere, Fueremos, Fueredes, Fueren. Quando second Futur. Como uviere, or avre
Y'do. Saro Andato. Cum Iuero, and. When I shall or will go, etc. uvieres, or
avras, Sarai Andato. uviere, or avra, Sara Andato. uvieremos, or avremos,
Saremo Andati. uvieredes, or avreys, Sarete Andati. uvieren, or avran, Saranno
Andati. Infinitive mood Present tense.
Y'R,] Andare, ire,] Ire,] to Go. Preterperfect tense.
Aver ydo,] Hauer andato,] Iuisse,] to have Gone. Future tense.
Aver de yr, Dover Andare, Iturum esse,] to Go hereafter. Hauer ad Andare,
Esser per Andare, Gerund.
Yendo,] Andando,] Eundo,] In Going. Supines.
Yr,] Andare,] Itum,] to Go. De ser y do,] Esser Andato,] Itu,] to be Gone.
Participle of the Present tense and Active voice.
El que va,] Andante,] Euns,] one Going. Participle of the Preter tense and
Passive voice.
Y'do,] Andato,] Gone.

Of Verbes Impersonals.
THe Spanish as the French and Italian Impersonals are of the manner of the
Latins, which want the first and second person, and are declined only in the
third person through out all Moodes and Tenses, as Indicative mood.
Present. Ay, There is. Imperfect. Avia, There was. 1 Perfect. uyo, There was.
2 Perfect. a, Avido, There has been. Pluperfect. avia, Avido, There had
been. Future. Avra. There shall be, etc. Imperat. A'ya, Let there be.
Subiunctiue mood.
Present. Aya, When there is. Imperf. uviera, avria, uviesse, When there is.
Perfect. aya Avido, When there has been. Pluperfect. uviera or uviesse Avido,
When there had been. Future. uviere or Avra Avido. When there shall be.

Note that the Spanyard almost continually uses this Impersonall Ay as the
French their Il y ya, in English There is, as by observing you shall most
usually find, as also this third person Comple thus declined, of Complir the
Infinitive.

Indicative mood.
Present. Comple, Decet, Oportet, It beseems or behooves. Imperfect.
Complia, Decebat, Oportebat, It did beseem. 1 Perfect. Complio, Decuit,
Oportuit, It has beseemed, etc. 2 Perfect. a Complido, Decuit, Oportuit.
Pluperfect. Avia Complido, Decuerat, Oportuerat. Future. Complira, Decebit,
Oportebit.

And so through the third person of the rest.

Indicative mood.
Present. E's, There is. Imperfect. era, There was. 1 Perfect. fue, There has
been. 2 Perfect. avia Sido, There has been. Pluperf. avia Sido, There had
been. Future. Sera, There shall be, etc.

And so decline forward, as in the Subiunctiue mood of the verb Ser, Soy
before going in the third person only.

Indicative mood.
Present. Es menester, Oportet, It behooves. Imperf. era menester, Oportebat,
It did behooue. 1 Perfect. fue menester, Oportuit, It has behooued. 2 Perfect.
a sido menester, Oportuit, It has behooued. Pluperf. avia sido menester,
Oportuerat, It had behooued. Future. avra menester, Oportebit, It will behooue.

And so through the rest, etc.

This verb Impersonall Plazer declined.

Indicative mood.
Present. Plaze, It pleases. Imperf. Plazia, It did please. 1 Perfect. Plugo,
It has pleased. 2 Perfect. a Plazido, It has pleased. Pluperf. avia Plazido,
It had pleased. Future. Plazera, It will please. Imper. Plega, Let it please.
Subiunctiue mood.
Present. Plega, When it does please. Imperf. Pluguiera, Pluguiesse, When it
did please. Perfect. aya Plazido, When it has pleased. Pluperf. uviera
Plazido, When it had pleased. Future. Pluguiere, When it will please.

To form an Impersonal of the Passive voice, you must take this particle Se,
and the third person of any verb thus: which particle so added makes a verb
Impersonall Passive, as Pres. Se Dize, Si dice or dicesi, Dicitur, It is said
or spoken, Imper. Se Dezia, Si diceua or diceuasi, etc. Dicebatur, etc. It was
said or spoken etc. 1 Perfect Se Dixo, 2 Perfect Se a Dicho, Plupe. S'avia
Dicho, Futur. Se Dira.

Of Participles.
Participle of the Presenttense.
IN Spanish Participles of the present tense and active signification are made
of the third person present tense of the Indicative mood of the same Verb,
putting before it the Relative, El que, as El que Revela, revealing, Latin
Reuelans: El que Entiende, understanding, in Latin Intelligens: El que oye,
hearing, in Latin Audiens.

Participle of the Preter tense.
Participles of the Preter tense and passive signification end in ado, ido, or
ydo, which in the first conjugation are formed of the third person of the
Present tense of the Indicative mood, by adding to do, as, Revela, revelado:
Ama, amado: Castiga, castigado: and in the second and third conjugation of
the same Present tense, by changing e, into ido, and ydo, as Entiende,
entendido: Lee, Leydo: Cree, creydo: Pide, pedido.

But for the Irregular (according to the nature of the word) without rule, as
Factus, fecho, made, Dictus, Dicho, said, spoken.

Participle of the Future tense.
The Future tense with this Verb Ha, or Espera, and the Infinitive of the
Verb, as El que ha or Espera de revelar, Entender, or, oyr: Reuelaturus,
Intellecturus, Auditurus, about to reveal, about to understand, about to
hear.

Participle of Present tense and active signification.

Pres.
El que revela, entiende, oye, Latin, Reuelans, Intelligens, Audiens,
Revealing, understanding, hearing.

Participle of the Preter tense and passive signification.

Preter.
Revelado, Entendido, oydo, Latin Reuelatus, Intellectus, Auditus, Revealed,
understood, heard.

Participle of the Future tense.

Future.
El que ha or espera de Revelar, Entender, oyr, Latin Reuelaturus,
Intellecturus, Auditurus, to reveal hereafter, to understand hereafter, to
hear hereafter.

Of Aduerbes.
I Have handled before the four parts of speech declined. Now come we to the
other four undeclined, called Indeclinable, beginning first with the Aduerbes,
whereof some in the Spanish tongue are formed of Nownes of the Feminine gender
in a, Aduerbes formed of Nounes of the Feminine gender in a. Nota.
as are almost all the Aduerbes of Quality, as Alta, high; Altamente, highly;
Graciosa, graciosamente, graciously; Luenga, luengamente; in Latin Diu, long:
which manner of forming the Italian likewise observes, as Gratiosamente,
Longamente, Sauiamente, so does the French, making the word to end in Meant,
as Gratieusement, Longuement, Saggement. Wherefore I think good to set down
the Aduerbes following and the rest: first, the Spanish, then Italian, after
French, next Latin, and last English: every one separated one from another
with this crooked line thus,] Aduerbes some be of Quality. Fielmente,]
Fidelmente,] Fidelement,] Fideliter,] Faithfully. Buenamente, or bien] Been,]
Bien,] Been,] Well. Malamente, or mal,] Male,] Mauaisement,] Male,] Ill. De
buena gana] Di buona voglia, Volontieri volontieremente, Volutiers, de bon
cueur,] Libenter] Willingly.
of Quantity. Mucho,] Molto,] Beaucoup,] Multum vel Multo] Much. Poco,] Poco,]
Peu,] Parum vel Paululum,] Little. Mucho mas,] Via piu,] Beaucoup plus,] Multo
magis,] Much more. Mas,] Piu,] Plus,] Magis,] More. Por de mas,] Troppo,]
Trop,] Nimis] to Much. Demasiado,] Troppo] Trop,] Nimis,] to Much.
of Time. Oy,] Hoggi,] Auiourd'huy,] Hodie,] To day. Air,] Heri ieri,] Hier,]
Heri,] Yesterdaie. Manana,] Domani,] Demain,] Cras,] To morrow. Antier,]
Antieri,] Deuant hier,] Pridie,] The other day. El dia siguiente,] Il seguente
giorno,] Le lendemain,] Postridie,] The next day after to morrow. Mucho ha,]
Molto fa,] Deja long temps,] Iamdiu,] Long since. Poco ha,] Poco fa,]
Nagueres,] Iamdudem,] A little since. Agora,] or, ora,] acest heure,] Iamiam,]
Even now. Antes] Inanzi,] Deuant,] Ante] Before. Luego,] Presto, Tosto,]
Soudainement,] Illico, statim,] Forthwith, by and by. Nunca,] Giamai,]
Iamais,] Nunquam,] Never. Quando,] Quando,] Quand,] Quando,] When. Siempre,]
Sempre] Tousjours,] Semper,] Always. Entonces,] Al hora,] Donques,] Tunc,]
Then. Mientras,] Mentre] Cependant,] Interim,] In the mean while. Subito,]
Subito,] Sodainement,] Subito,] Suddenly. Muchas vezes,] Molte volte, Molte
fiate,] Fort souent,] Saepe] Very often. Pocas vezes,] Rade volte,] Peu
souent,] Raro,] Seldom. Algunas vezes,] Qual che volte, Qual che fiate,
Quelquefois,] Aliquando,] Sometimes.
of Place. A QVI',] Qui, quia, ci,] Icy,] Hic, huc,] Here. Ay, alli, alla,]
Iui, la, cola, quiui,] La, audela,] Illic,] There. A Donde,] Dove, oue,] Ou,]
Vbi, quo,] whither, where. De Donde,] Onde, donde,] Don't, d'ou,] Vnde,] from
whence. Aca,] Di qua,] Par icy,] Hac,] this way. Aculla,] Cola per costa,] Par
dela,] Istac istuc,] that way. De aqui,] De qui, Quinci,] D'icy,] Hinc,] from
hence. De alli, de alla,] Indi, di la, Quindi,] Dela,] Illinc,] from hence.
Dentro,] Dentro, entro,] Dedans,] Intus,] within. Fuera,] Fuori, di fuori,]
Horse, de horse,] Foris, for as,] without. Delante,] Inanzi,] Deuant,] Ante,]
Before. Atras,] Dietro,] Derrier,] Post,] Behind. A part,] De banda,]
al'escart,] Separatim, scorsum,] aside, a part, by it self. Arriba,] Sopra,
disopra, In su, suso,] Enhaut,] Sursum,] Above. Abaxo,] In giu, giuso, sotto,
di sotto,] En bas,] Deorsum,] Beneath. Cerca,] Intorno, dattorno,] Enuiron,]
Circiter,] About, nigh unto, almost. Cabe, Iunto,] Apresso, dauicino,] Pressed,
aupres,] Prope,] Near unto. Lexos,] Lontano, di lunghi,] Loin,] Procul,] Far
off. Encima,] Su, sopra,] Sur, dessus,] Super,] Upon. So,] Sotto, disotto,]
Dessoubs,] Subter,] Under.
of Affirming SI, as Si Senor,] Si, as Signore Si,] Ouy, as ouy Mounsieur,]
Ita, ita Domine, Yea, yea sir. Cierto, ciertamente,] Certo, certamente,]
Certes,] Certe, certo,] Truly. En verdad, verdaderamente,] In verita, di vero,
in vero,] Vrayement, en verite, certainement,] Vere,] Truly, in truth, verily.
Tambien,] Si been, etiandio, ancor, anche,] Si bien, ainsi, aussi,] Etiam,
quoque,] as well. Antes,] Piu tosto,] Plustost,] Potius,] Rather.
of Denying NO,] Non, no, ne,] Non, neny, pas, point,] Non, haud, minime,] Not.
Nada, No nada,] Niente, nulla,] Rien,] Nihil,] Nothing, nothing at all. Ni, Tam
poco,] Ne,] Ni, ne,] Neque,] Neither.
of numbering VNAVEZ,] Vna bolta, Vna fiata,] Vne fois,] Semel,] Once. Dos
vezes,] Due volte, Due fiate,] Deuxfois,] Bis,] Twice. Tres vezes,] Tree volte,
tree fiate,] Troifois,] Ter,] Chrise, etc. as in the Pronoune before of Numbers.
Muchas vezes,] Spesso volte, molte fiate,] Beaucoup de fois,] Saepe,]
Oftentimes. Pocas vezes,] Rade volte,] Rarement,] Raro,] Seldom.
of Showing HEAQVI,] Ecco,] Voicy, voila,] Ecce,] Behold.
of Encouraging. EA, EA Pues,] Su, corraggio,] Sus, courage,] Age, perge,] Go
to then.
of increasing MAS,] Piu,] Plus,] Plus,] More. Mucho mas,] Molto Piu, molto
assai,] Beacoup plus,] Multo magis,] Much more. De masiado,] Troppo, di
souerchio,] Trop,] Nimium,] Too much.
of Deminishing. ME'NOS,] Meno,] Moins,] Paulo minus,] Less. Poco a Poco,]
Poco, a Poco,] Peu a Peu,] Paulatim,] By little and little. Passo,] Pian,
piano,] Tout bellement, Petit a petit,] Sensim,] Soft and fair.
of wishing. OXALA,] O Dio vaglia, Dio volesse,] Pleust a Dieu,] Vtinam,] would
to God, I pray God. O Si,] O se, O si,] Pleust a Dieu que,] Vtinam,] would to
God, I pray God.
of Asking. PORQVE?] Perch?] Pourquoy?] Quare?] Why? Wherefore? Que?] Che?]
Quoy?] Quid?] What? Donde?] Oue?] Ou,] Vbi, quo,] Where. Adonde,] Dove,] Ou,]
Quo,] Whether. De Donde,] Onde,] D'ou, don't,] Vnde,] From whence. Quando?]
Quando?] Quand?] Quando?] When.
of doubting. QVIcA',] Forse, a caso,] Fortuitement,] Fortassis,] Perhaps.
Porventura,] Perauentura,] Parauenture,] Fortasse,] Peradventure, Perhaps.
of Order. DESPVE'S,] Poi, dipoi, Dapoi, doppo,] A pres, depuis,] Post,] After.
Allende de esto,] Oltra a cio, oltra a questo,] Ontre ce, d'aduantage,]
Praeterea,] Furthermore. Finalmente,] Alla fine,] En fin, Finablement,]
Tandem,] At length.
of Likeness. CO'MO,] Comme,] Comme,] Sicut, velut,] As. Assi,] Cosi,] Ainsi,]
Ita, sic,] So.
of Chance. A CASO, Por dicho,] A caso,] Fortuitement,] Fortuito,] By chance,
by hap.
of Comparison. MAS,] Piu,] Plus,] Plus,] More. Menos,] Meno,] Moins,] Minus,]
Less. Mucho mas,] Vta piu, Assai piu,] Beaucoup, d'auantage,] Multo magis,]
Much more. Mucho menos,] Molto meno,] Beaucoup moins,] Multo minus,] Much
less. Mejor,] Megliore,] Mellieur,] Melius,] Better. Peor,] Peggiore,] Pis,]
Peior,] worse. Todo del mundo,] Piu del mondo,] Tout le mond,] Maxim,] Chifely.
Gathering together. IV'NTO, Iuntamente,] Insieme,] Ensemble,] Simul,] Together.
Seuering. A PART,] Seperatamente,] Al'escart,] Seperatim, seorsim,] A sunder
Chosing MAS Ayna,] Piu tosto,] Plustost,] Potius,] Rather. Mucho mas,] Molto
meglio,] Beaucoup mieux,] Potius,] much Rather.
Contrariety TODA vez,] Tutta via,] Toutefois,] Tamen,] Notwithstanding.
Aunque,] Come, che, Etiandio che, Anchor che,] Encore,] Etiamsi,] Although.
withdrawing. ALOMenos,] Almeno, almanco,] Au moins,] At the least. Solo,]
Solo,] Seul,] Solum,] Only. Porque,] Pur, accioche, che,] Pourceque,]
Propterea,] For that.



Of a Conjunction.
A Conjunction is that which knitteth and ioineth parts of speech together, and
is with the Spaniard almost in the same manner as the Latin, saving they have
not so many, but yet some are of coupling as Y, and E,] e,] et] et, And. Como,]
Comme] Comme,] Vt,] As. Tambien,] Ancor, Ancho, Etiandio,] Si bien, ainsi,
aussi,] Etiam, Quoque,] Also.



Nota.
Note that E properly is not a Spanish Conjunction, but only used for the Y,
when the word following begins with a Y, because two Y Y, should not come
together, La ley e la Justicia, and not la ley y la Justicia, but otherwise
always use Y.

of Disioyning. Ni] Ne,] Ne,] Nec, Neque,] Neither. O,] O, ouero,] Ou,] Aut,
Ve, Vel, Seu, Siue] Either.
of Causing. PORQVE,] Accioche, Percioche,] Pourceque] Propterea quod,] For
that, wherefore.
of Conditioning. SI,] Se,] Si,] Si,] If. Dado que,] Se cosi,] Si aussi,] Si
ita,] If so.
of Excepting. SINO,] Se non] Si non,] Nis^,] Except, if not. Mas,] Ma,] Mais,]
Quin,] But. Otramente,] Altramente,] Autrement,] Alioquin,] Otherwise.
of Diminishing. ALOMENOS,] Almeno, Almanco,] Au moins,] Saltem,] At least.
AVNQVE,] Ancorche, Quantunche, Benche, Etiandio, Encore,] Etsi quamquam,
Quamuis, Although. TODA via,] Tutta via, Tutta volta, Nondimeno, Nondimanco,
Nientidemeno, Toutefois,] Tamen, esto,] Notwithstanding.

A Preposition.
Preposition.
THe Spanish has the same use of Prepositions as the Latins have, sometimes by
composition with another word, as Bolver, to turn; Rebolver, to ouerturne:
Hazer, to do, Rehazer, to renew, etc. Sometime by apposition (as the Latins
do) by putting the Preposition before the Noune, as Ala corte, to the court:
Por el Rey, for the king: En la yglesia, in the church.

Nota.
Note that this Preposition De, or Des, always makes the word that it is
joined with, of a quite contrary signification, as Hazer, to do: Deshazer, to
undo: Atar, to tie or bind: Desatar, to untie: Cansado, weary: Descansado,
resting: Dicha, happiness: Desdicha, unhappiness, misfortune: And so in the
French, Fair, to do: Desfaire, to undo: Lier, to bind, Deslier, to unbind,
etc. Prepositions of the Spanish thus, A,] A,] Ad,] Ad,] To, as A fe, a la fe,]
A feed, A fe,] Par ma foy,] Per fidem,] By my troth. De,] Di, de da,] De, du,]
De,] Of or from, as De la corte,] De la corte,] Du palais,] From the court.
Para,] Per,] Pour,] Propter,] For. as Para mi,] Per me,] Pour moy,] Propter
me.] For me. Por,] Per,] Par,] Per,] For, by or through. as Por mi vida,] Por
mia vita,] Par ma vie,] Per vitam,] By my life. Contra,] Contra, Incontra,]
Contre] Contra,] Against. Contra el estado,] Contra il stato,] Contre l'estat,]
Contra statum, Against the estate. CABE] Presso, Appresso,] Pressed, aupres,]
Prope,] Near. as Cabe la ciudad] Appresso la citta,] Apres de la citte,] Prope
vrbem,] Near the city. FRONTERO,] Rimpetto, Dirimpetto, Vis a vis,] E
regione,] Over against. HASTA,] Fino, Sino, Infino, Insino, Iusques,] Vsque,]
Until. HA'ZIA,] Ver, verso,] Enuers,] Versus,] Toward. SOBRE,] Sopra,
Disopra, In su, Sur, Sus, Super,] Upon. ENCI'MA,] In il pu alto] En la
somette,] In vertice,] Upon the top. SO,] Sotto, disotto, Giu,] De soubs,]
Subter,] Under. ENTER,] Fra, Infra,] Enter,] Inter,] Between. ATRAS,] Dietro,]
Derrier,] Pone,] Behind. ADELANTE,] Dinanzi, Inanzi,] Deuant,] Ante,] Before.
Cerca, A cerca,] Circa, Intorno, Attorno,] Enuiron,] Circum, Circa,] About.
Fuera,] Fuori,] Horse, dehors,] Foris, For As,] Without doors. Dentro,] Dentro,]
Dans, dedans,] Intus,] Within. Con,] Con,] Auec,] Cum,] With. Sin,] Senza,]
Sans,] Sine,] Without. Desde,] From or since, as Desde la muerte, etc. From, or
since the death, etc.


These following are used with the Preposition De, with them, as A quende de la
casa,] Di qua de la casa,] Par deca de la maison,] Ex hac part domus,] On this
side the house. Allende,] Di la,] Par de la,] Ex altera part,] On the other
side. Al deredor, or Entorno,] Intorno, Attorno,] Enuiron,] Circum, Circa,]
About.


Of an Interiection.
AN Interiection declares a sudden passion of the mind. The Spaniards use not
so often Interiections or sudden passions of the mind; neither in their speech
nor writing, as does the French, or Italian, and yet they have these following:
Mirth or Rejoicing. Laughing.
Some be of O Bueno,] Oh been,] He bien, he dea,] Euax, vah,] O well. Hi, hi,
hi, or Ha, ha, ha.] Ah, ah,] Ah, eh,] Ha, ha, he,] Ha, ha, he. wondering.
O Jesus, or Vala me Dios, O vh, vh,] Oh, oh,] Pape,] O Jesus good Lord help
me. Grieuing.
AY, ay,] Aih, ah, ahime,] Las, ol^s, helas, ach,] Heu, hei,] Alas, out alas.


Of Syntaxis.
Definition of Syntaxis.
SYntaxis is a due coupling together of Speech according to the right Rules of
Grammar, which the best Authors, both Ancient and Modern have still used in
writing and speaking.

Syntaxis, of the Greek word (...), which is Con, and (...), ordino, quasi,
coordinatio, which is construction or agreement.

But for that the Spanish (as the Italian and French) being derived from the
Latin (as before said, and still keeps as great affinity as silver and
tin, both proceeding (as Alchimistes say) from Quicksiluer, or as no one can
gainsay from the mother earth, or as a different Plant grafted on a strange
stock or tree: It must necessarily be ordered by many Rules of the Latin,
which here to repeat were lost labor and in vain, as has seemed to the most
part of all those learned, that of any these vulgar languages have written:
Finishing their Grammars at the end of the eight parts of speech and leaving
this quite out: which order I have observed, referring the Latin Reader to the
Rules of the Latin Syntaxis for this part of Grammar, and other to due
observation in reading good Authors: wishing increase to both, to their own
contents, and my self hereby to have furthered both, to mine own chief
desire.

FINIS.
I Have for the Learners use desirous of the tongue, read over diverse Authors,
gathering out of them the hard phrases and manner of speech, the uncouth
sayings, together with some proverbs, as they fall in their places (which are
the difficulty of the tongue) and explained them in English, commonly setting
down first the English word for word as the Spanish is, then this i. for
Latin, id est, that is to say, for the sense and meaning, then the line and the
leaf of the book, that by these the Learner may the better judge of their
like when he meets with them. For the leaf I set down fol. and a.
signifies the first side of the leaf, and b. the second, lin. signifies what
line, and the figure after fol. tells the leaf, and lin. what line it is. If
you find page it is to find what page of the book. If you see 1. part. it is
for the first volume or part of the book, and 2. part. for the second, etc.

Words, Phrases, Sentences and Proverbs out of DIANA of Monte Mayor in 16.
printed at Antwerpe 1580.
Los de mas. fol. 3. b. lin. 14. The rest.

Las horas que se sobravan. fol. 4. b. lin. 2. The hours which remained, or
The rest of the hours.

Tomando a vezes. fol. 4. b. lin. 6. Taking by fits or turns.

Passar por el piensamiento. fol. 4. b. lin. 14. and 7. a. lin. 25. and 26. b.
8. To enter into the mind or thought.

Tam poco le dava pena. fol. 4. b. lin. 17. Neither did it grieve or trouble
him.

A vuestro salvo. fol. 6. b. lin. 17. Your self being safe, or without your
own danger.

Como los uviste a las manos? fol. 10. b. lin. 5. How came they to your hands?
or how came you by them?

Por tu vida. fol. 10. b. lin. 21. By thy life, i. I pray thee heartily.

Tomar de coro. fol. 10. b. lin. 23. To take by quire, i. To have by memory,
heart, or with out book.

Favorescer me a mi. fol. 11. b. lin. 5. and Me moviera a mi. fol. 2. a. lin.
8. To favor me and did move me. Here the Spanish uses two accusative cases
after the verb, both of the person: and not as the Latin, one of the person
and another of the thing.

Despues que te fuiste. fol. 11. b. lin. 21. After thou wentest.

Yo fuy, tu tu^ste, aquel fue, nos fuymos, fuystes, fueron. I went, thou
wentest, he went, we went, ye went, they went. This Fuy, fuyste, comes of the
Infinitive mood yr, to go, and the very same Fuy, fuiste, fue, etc. comes
of the Infinitive mood Ser, to be: but look back in the Grammar and compare
the two verbes together.

De ay a un poco. fol. 11. b. lin. 28. A pretty while after.

Que es del? fol. 12. a. lin. 20. Where is he? what is become of him?

Quando se pone el Sol. fol. 13. a. lin. 8. When the sun sets.

Fuera de mi, fuera de ti, fuera de si. fol. 13. b. lin. 14. Besides my self,
besides thy self, besides himself, or Out of my wit, out of thy wit, out of
his wit.

Ten punto. fol. 13. b. lin. 24. Stay, hold, stop, Give me leave a little.

Le va bien, le va mal. fol. 15, a. lin. 7. It goes well with him, it goes ill
with him. He is well, he is ill.

Mucho a. A good while since.

Mucho avia, mucho uvo, mucho avra. fol. 17. a. lin. 4. It was a good while
ago, it has been a good while since, it shall or will be long ago.

Poco ha or Poco fa. A little while ago, or a little since.

Poco avia, Poco uvo, Poco avra. It was a little since, it shall or will be but
a little while ago.

Muchos dias aca, Pocos dias aca. fol. 17. a. lin. 7. Many days since, a few
days since.

Mucho tiempo ha, Poco tiempo ha. A good while ago, a little while ago.

Grandes dias ha, Pocos dias ha. A great while ago, a few days past.

Cosa en la vida. fol. 17. a. lin. 12. Any thing in the world.

Hazer caso. fol. 17. b. lin. 21. To esteem of, to make matter of.

Muchos ay, or Ay muchos. fol. 20. a. lin. 6. There are many.

Que os tengo dicho. fol. 20. a. lin. 29. Which I have told you.

Quiso mi ventura. page 21. a. lin. 11. My fortune would have it so.

Que de oro no les llevara ventaja. fol. 21. a. lin. 20. verbatim. That the
vantage of gold did not carry it away from them. i. Gold did not exceed them
in brightness.

Y^ a l^ m^^^o ^ag. 21. b. lin. 28. verbatim. To go to ones hand. i. To stop,
to stay, to let or to hinder one from doing any thing.

Desdichado de mi. fol. 22. b. lin. 6. verbatim. Wretched of me. i. wretch that
I am, unhappy creature I, woe is me, wretch that I am.

No te haze mucho al caso. fol. 22 b. lin. 11. It makes not much matter to
thee, it concerns thee not much.

De veras. fol. 22. b. lin 20. In earnest.

De bu^las fol. 22. b. lin. 20. In test.

Toda via. fol. 23. a. lin. 2. Notwithstanding.

Hazer de industria. fol. 23. a lin. 22. To do of set purpose.

Pl^gue a Dios fol. 23. b. lin. 5. I would to God.

De ^y a ocho dias. fol. 24 b. lin. 6. Eight days hence.

No ^y cosa en la vida. fol. 25. a. lin. 14. There is nothing in the world.

Assi p^so per obra. fol. 26. b. lin. 11. So he did put it in practice.

Vaya^ so^piros a cuentos. fol. 10. a. lin. 21. Let sighs go by millions.

Y quie^a Dios que, etc. fol. 40 b. lin. 4. And would to God that, etc.

Ambos a dos fol. 46. b. lin. 5. Both.

Fuera de si. fol. 47. b. lin. 14. Besides himself, out of his wits.

Venir a las manos. fol. 47. b. lin. 16. to come to blows or fight.

Como en ello les fuera la vida. fol. 48. a. lin. 11. As if thereon his life
lay.

A bueltas della. fol. 48. b. lin. 13. Together therewith.

Mal^ya a aquel. fol. 49. a. lin. 13. Woe be unto him.

Poner el negocio a las manos. fol. 50. b. lin. 24. To bring the matter to
blows or fight.

Que en otra cosa no entendia sino en, etc. fol. 51. b. lin. 24. verbatim.
Which in any other matter understood not, i. which thought on nothing else but,
etc.

Se dexo dormir. fol. 52. a. lin. 25. verbatim. Let himself or herself
sleep, i. fell asleep.

No se qual me crea. fol. 53. b. lin. 19. I know not which I may believe.

De vio ser. fol. 53. b. lin. 25. verbatim. It ought to be, i. it could not be
otherwise.

Basta lo hecho. fol. 54. a. lin. 16. It suffices that it is done. Basta lo
dicho, it is enough that is once spoken of, or it needs no more words.

Como supo callar. fol. 54. a. lin. 19. How she knew to hold her tongue, how
well she could be mute, and not answer a word.

Ni por pensamiento en ella. fol. 54. b. lin. 13. By no means.

Quererme mas que a si. fol 55. b. lin. 1. To love me more or better then
himself, or herself.

No es de cauallero fol. 55. b. lin. 26. It is not the part of a Gentleman.

Tener en mucho, Tener en poco. fol. 56. a. lin. 2. To esteem much, or to set
much by, to set little by or esteem little.

Y quien se lo dixo, Se lo supo encarescer de manera. fol. 56. a. lin. 25. And
he that told it, could tell how to augment and amplify it in such sort.

Assi pase por obra. fol 56. b. lin. 24. So I put it in practice, or set it a
work.

Assi me fue derecha a la corte. fol. 57. a. lin. 3. And so I went straight to
the court.

Cos^s no po^o gustosas de oyr. fol. 57. a. lin. 5. verbatim. Things not little
tastefull to hear, i. Things not a little delightful to hear.

En la boz, or en la habla le conoscy. fol. 57. a. lin. 25. I knew him by his
voice of speech.

La musica d^va a otra no a mi. fol. 58. a. lin. 20. The music played to
another and not to me.

Le deva mucho. fol. 61. a. lin. 9. verbatim. Owes him much, i. he is much
beholding to him.

E'sta vellaca de ausencia deshaze las cosas. fol. 61. a. lin. 15. This rascals
absence does undo all.

No avra ninguna que no se pierde por vos. fol. 61. b. lin. 3. There will be
none which is not lost in love for you, i. which will not be ready to run
mad for you.

Moca bonita, or bonica. fol. 61. b. lin. 5. A good wench, a fine trull, maid
or girl.

Dar lexos de la verdad. fol. 62. b. lin. 13. to be wide or far off from the
truth.

Parescer me hya, or ^a. fol. 63. a. lin. 12. It did seem unto me. This manner
of speech in Spanish is by the figure Epenthesis, which is the putting in of a
letter or syllable in the middle of a word, as in this Parescer me hya, for
Pareceria me, It did seem to me.

Dar vna palmada. fol. 63. a. lin. 13. To give ones self a pat or blow on the
breast, or else where in sign of wondering.

Grangear favores. fol. 66. b. lin. 5. To hoord up favors.

Perdido per amores, fol. 67. a. lin. 22. Lost for love, mad in love.

Si fuesse servido. fol. 68. a. lin. 9. If he pleased, or liked well of.

Un desmayo con que avia dado el alma. fol. 68. a. lin. 27. A swouning or
trance, with which he had given up the ghost.

Pluguiera a Dios. fol. 68. b. lin. 12. Would to God.

Llegat al alma, fol. 69. a. lin. 7. To enter into the soul, to grieve at heart.

Tomo la mano de respondelle. fol. 69. a. lin. 9. Took upon her to answer
her, or stood up before the company to answer her.

Pusieron la mesa. fol. 71. a. lin. 15. They covered the table.

El sol se pone. fol. 72. a. lin. 5. The sun was set.

Que aya sido part. fol. 74. a. 20. Which has been the cause.

E^ har lo en burlas. fol. 76. a. lin. 5. verbatim. To cast it off in jesting,
i. To jest it out.

A todos hazia ventaja. fol. 76. a. lin. 16. He did excel all, he did exceed
or ouerpasse all.

Rogando muy encarescidamente. fol. 76. b. lin. 8. Requesting very earnestly,
very instantly.

Fulana tiene buen air, Fulano, es capateador. fol. 79. a. lin. 23. and 24.
Such a one has a good grace or countenance, such a one is dauncer of a gigge.

Puesto en tanta obligacion. fol. 80. a. lin. 20. Being so much beholding or
bound.

Echada a la sombra, Echado a la cama. fol. 82. b. lin. 2. Laid in the
shadow, cast on the bed.

Tuviesse por bien. fol. 82. b. lin. 8. verbatim. Did hold for good, i.
Thought well of, or took in good part.

Mal aya amor, su arco y su saeta. fol. 83. a. lin. 11. The devil take Love,
his bow and his shaft.

Passallos hia, or ia. fol. 83. b. lin. 7. I would pass them over. This
speech by the figure Epenthesis, which is a putting between of a letter or
syllable in the midst of a word, as Passallos hia, for Passaria los, I
would pass them over. Also in Passallos another figure called Antistoichon,
which is a writing one letter for another, by changing R of the Infinitive
mood into L, a thing most usual in the Spanish, as here Passallos for Passar
los, so Hablallos, for Hablarlos, to speak unto them: Vellos, for Ver los, to
see them: Dezillos, for Dezirlos, to tell them: Oylles, or Oyllos or Oyr les,
or los, to hear them.

Aviendo ydo quanto media legua, fol. 89. a. lin 21. Having gone about half a
league.

Se fue su passo a passo. fol. 84. a. lin. 6. Went very soft and leisurely.

Los demas de los dias. fol. 86. b. lin. 2. The rest of the days.

Yen las manos sendos vasos hechos a la Romana. fol. 90. b. lin. 3. And in
their hands each one a several vessel made after the Roman fashion.

Mesas puestas. fol. 91. a. lin. 21. Tables covered or laid.

Piedras engastadas. fol. 91. b. lin. 1. Stones enchaced.

Alcar, or quitar la mesa. fol. 91. b. lin 4. To take up the table.

Vistieron a Felismena, vna ropa y basquina de fina grana, recamadas de oro de
canutillo, y aljofar, un cuera, y mangas de tela de plata. fol. 94. a. lin. 5.
They apparelled Felismena with a gown and peticote of fine scarlet color
imbrodered with imbost or raisd gold and pearl, a cassocke and sleeves of
cloth of silver.

Escofion de redezilla. fol. 94. a. lin. 14. A coife of net work.

Las paredes eran labradas de obra Mosayca. fol. 94. b. lin. 16. The walls were
wrote Jewish work or Turkey work without images.

Duarte. fol. 98. b. lin. 19. Edward.

Miralde bien. fol. 101. a. lin. 1. Behold him well, by the figure Metathesis,
which is a changing places of letters, for Miradle very common in the Spanish
in the Imperative mood the second person plural number, as Leeldo for Leed
lo, Read ye it: Dezildo, for Dezid lo, Tell him that: or Dezildes for Dezid
les, Tell them: so Miralda for Mirad la, Behold her: Miraldas, for Mirad las,
Behold them. fol. 103. a. lin. 3.

O'jos verdes y rasgados. fol. 103. a. lin. 28. Fair and great eyes.

Desde el borea al austro. fol. 104. a. lin. 22. From the north to the south.

En quanto se hazia hora de cenar se fueron a vna alameda. fol. 105. a. lin.
16. And while supper time came they went to a grove of poplars.

Mediante la quel fol. 109. a. lin. 24. By means whereof.

Gentil hombre y bien tallado. fol. 110. a. lin. 13. A proper man and well
shaped, and not for as English men call gentleman.

Cavallo rucio rodado. fol. 110. a. lin. 15. A horse dapple graie.

Traya en la cinta un alfanje. fol. 110. a. lin. 19. He carried at his girdle a
Turkey sword.

Traya en el braco ysquierdo. fol. 110. a. lin. 24. He carried on his left arm.

Bolver sobre si. fol. 110. b. lin. 21. To come to ones self as out of a
trance, astonishment or the like.

Tocar un cuerno. fol. 111. a. lin. 16. verbatim. To touch. i. To wind a horn.

Llevarel camino de los companeros. fol. 111. a. lin. 19. verbatim. To carry
the way of his fellows. i. To take the same way, to be served with the same
sauce, to drink of the same cup.

Tuvo lo en mucho. fol. 113. a. lin 9. He much esteemed it.

De ay algunos dias. fol. 116. a. lin. 18. From hence a few days.

Tenerme campo. fol. 119. a. lin. 5. verbatim. To hold me field. i. To be able
to stand with me or fight with me.

Hazer campo. verbatim. To make field. i. To combat, to fight.

No se lo que hara de mi. fol. 119. a. lin. 18. I know not what shall become of
me.

Tened entendido. fol. 126. b. lin. 2. verbatim. Hold understood. i. Understand.

Ambas a dos. fol. 126. b. lin. 27. Both.

Plega a Dios fol. 130. b. lin. 24. I would to God.

Por lo poco que se dava por el. fol. 133. a. lin. 23. For the little esteem
he made of him.

No se me da nada. verbatim. It gives nothing to me. i. I care not.

Avra como cinco o seys meses. fol. 147. a. lin. 3. It shall be some five or
six months.

Cosa en que tan poco te yva. fol. 149. a. lin. 19. A thing which so little did
import thee.

Me a dado de mano. fol. 150. a. lin. 26. He has taken his leave of me.

Falda de unas montanas fol. 157. b. lin. 13. verbatim. the skirt. i. The side
or hanging of an hill.

Vino a dar en un bosque muy grande, de verdes alisos y azebuches assaz
poplado. fol. 158. a. lin. 2. He came to light into a wood very great,
sufficiently stored with green fallowes and wild olives.

Y de subito fue a dar con los ojos en una muy hermosa ciudad, que desde de lo
alto de una sierra, que de frente estava. fol. 158. a. lin. 6. And upon a
sudden he espied a fair city from the top of a mountain, which was right
against them.

Se fue su passo a passo pot una senda que junto a l rio yva hazia la part.
fol. 158. b. lin. 6. He went fair and soft in a path which lead near the
river toward that part, etc.

Sobre las cabecas, tenian sendas guirnaldas de verde yedra. fol. 158. b. lin.
18. Upon their heads they had each of them several garlands of green iuie.

Con cierto desden y un dar de mano. fol. 160. a. lin. 12. With a certain
disdain and putting from with the hand.

Dize pues que su muger es finada que me case con el? fol. 160. a. lin. 24.
Says he, seeing that his wife is dead, that I marry with him?

Pared en medio bivir. fol. 190. b. lin. 28. To live at the next wall, but one
wall between.

Parar mientes. fol. 193. a, lin. 21. To mark, to heed.

Plazer a cabado. fol. 226. a. lin. 12. Complete or full joy or pleasure quite
ended.

Diana de Monte Mayor 2. part.
Encaminar obras a personas de luster. fol. 2. a. lin. 5. To direct works to
persons of fame.

Si Dios fuere servido. fol. 2. b. lin. 7. verbatim. If God shall be served. i.
If it shall please God.

De mi grado jamas entendiera sino en solo loaros. fol. 3. a. lin. 7. By my
good will I would never do any thing else but praise you.

Vaya fu^ra ^oda arrogancia fol. 3. b. lin. 12. All pride set aside.

Como a cada uno complia. fol. 7. a. lin. 2. As was meet for every one.

No les comple yrse. fol. 7. b. lin. 20. It is not meet they go.

Con el si del matrimonio. fol. 8. a. lin. 26. With the answering to the
minister yea at the marriage.

Vamonos fol. 10. a. lin. 10. Let us go, for Vamos nos.

Dexemonos. fol. 19. a. lin. 22. Let us leave, for Dexemos nos.

Amatar la sed. fol. 10. a. lin. 20. To quench thirst.

Por una cuesta abaxo. fol. 11. b. lin. 11. Downehill.

A vezes. fol. 21. a. lin. 1. By turns, by fits.

O vala me Dios. fol. 22. a. lin. 6. God help me.

Pluguiera a Dios. fol. 22. a. lin. 17. I would to God.

Dado que fol. 22. b. lin. 21. Grant that, suppose that.

Merced sen alada. fol. 28. b. lin. 26. A notable courtesy.

El traydor del Cupido fol. 36. b. lin. penultima. The traitor Cupide.

Tener en mucho fol. 38. b. lin. 1. To esteem much of.

Words, Phrases, Sentences and Proverbs out of Celestina in 8. printed at
Antwerpe En la oficina Plantiniana Anno 1595.
De mas. page 1. lin. 5. Over and above, besides, moreover.

Recebido tienen. page 3. lin. 6. verbatim. They hold received. i. They have
received.

Tener la firma del author. page 4. lin. 21. To have the authors name to it.

Leeldo. page 8. lin. 9. Read it, by the figure Metathesis, which is a changing
of places of letters, very common in the Spanish in the second person plural
of the Imperative mood, as this Leeldo for Leed lo, as Castigaldo, chastise
him, for Castigad lo, Pedilde, require of him, for Pedid le, Oylde, hear him,
for oyd le.

A todo correr deveis de huir. page 10. lin. 11. verbatim. With all running
away you ought to avoid. i. With all haste possible to run or shun.

En quien quepa esta differencia. page 17. lin. 14. In whom may be contained or
found this difference.

Conseja tras de fuego. page 13. lin. 3. A tale by the fires side, an old wives
tale.

Ofrecido tener. page 22. lin. 13. verbatim. To hold offered. i. To have
offered.

Vete, vete de ay. page 23. lin. 18. Get thee hence, get thee hence.

Abatiose el girafalte. page 23. lin. 28. The Gerfaulcon bated.

Los Diablos te ganen. page 24. lin. 1. The Devil take thee.

Que cosa es? page 24. lin. 20. What is the matter?

Dexarle he? page 25. lin. 2. Shall I leave him?

Matarse ha. page 25. lin. 3. He is to kill himself, or he will kill himself.

Desbrave, Madure. page 25. lin. 15. Let him pacify or calm himself, let him
ripen or come to a head.

Si delante me tiene. page 25. lin. 22. If he have me before him.

Mudar el pelo malo. page 25. lin. 29. To change ill fortune.

Ves lo aqui. page 26. lin. 15. See it here.

De la aparencia a la existencia. page 27. lin. 14. From that which seems to
be, to that which is indeed.

No cabe en coracon de mi amo. page 28. lin. 6. It is not within the compass
of my masters heart.

Que por la boca le sale a borbollones. page 28. lin 6. But that it must bubble
out of his mouth.

Ha, ha, ha, and Hi, hi, hi. page 28. lin. 14. Voices of laughing.

Assestar tiros. page 28. lin. 17. To aim.

Escoziote. page 30. lin. 27. It touchte you, it made you smart.

Meter por los agujeros. page 32. lin. 25. verbatim. To put into holes, i. to
take in at windows.

Desque se descubren. page 33. lin. 12. From the time they discover themselves.

Cativo de mi, Mesquino de mi. page 34. lin. 20. Wretch that I am.

Assi me medre Dios, Assite medre Dios. page 34. lin. 23. verbatim. So God make
me thrive, i. So God help me or prosper me.

Duelos tenemos. page 34. lin. 28. We have mournings in hand.

Ojos verdes y rasgados. page 35. lin. 14. Fair and great eyes.

La tez liza y lustrosa. page 35. lin. 24. The skin smooth and clear.

Buen ando haze esto. page 37. lin. 8. This makes good going forward.

Dias grandes ha, or Muchos dias ha. page 37. lin. 5. A good while since.

Quede Dios con. v.m. page 37. lin. 29. God be with you, or God remain with
you.

Dios vaya con v.m. page 37. lin. 29. God conduct, or be your speed.

Vaya v.m. con Dios. Go in Gods name.

Que es del? page 38. lin. 15. What is become of him? where is he?

Hi, hi, hi. page 39. lin. 2. A voice of laughing.

Tres dias ha. page 39. lin. 4. It has been three days.

Vo, for Voy. page 39. lin. 12. I go.

Pormi vida, Por tu vida. page 39. lin. 27. I pray thee heartily.

Quedate a Dios. page 40. lin. 11. God remain with you, or keep you.

Sey, for Se tu. page 40. lin. 21. Be thou.

No pude dessear bien, de que no te cupiesse part. page 41. lin. 1. I could
not so much as desire, as wish any goodness, in which thy part was not contained
therein.

Si quiera, for Solamente. page 41. lin. 4.

Gelo prometi. page 41. lin. 28. I promised him it or that, for Se lo prometi.

Tha, tha, tha. page 42. lin. 3. The noise or beating of the knocking at a
door.

O que comedor de huevos assados. page 43. lin. 21. Oh what a eater of roasted
eggs.

De que le servias? page 44. lin. 4. In what place or office did thou serve
her in?

Curar de punto, page 47. lin. 18. To heal or cure with stitching up, as with
needle and thread.

Tengote lo en gracia, or merced. page 48. lin. 24. I thank thee for it.

Como quiera. page 49. lin. 29. Howsoever.

Dar en el fiel. page 51. lin. 4. To hit the prick at shooting.

Para mi santiguada. page 51. lin. 13. By my hallidoome.

Do vino el asno, verna el albarda. page 51. lin. 13. verbatim. Where the ass
is come, the pack saddle will come. i. where the greater does yield, the
less must of necessity come after.

AFter I had read over Diana de Monte mayor, and other authors, gathering out
the hardest speeches and explaining them for the learners use, and being come
thus far in Celestine, as you see, it came into my imagination that running
through him and such other hard authors, by unfolding so open to every ones
view the difficultest points in the tongue, might breed some dislike in men of
mine own profession (to whom I wish as to my self) as also little
thankefulnes of others, who having their turns served, do commonly verify this
proverb, (Eaten bread is forgotten.) I thought good not to deal all at once,
but to keep some to sweeten their mouths hereafter, as they shall be
desirous hereof, and the rather, for that notwithstanding all this and more
pains to, with cost out of my purse, neglecting my profession and living, I
have already before I came near the press, tasted and had some experience of
some of the greater sort (if wealth and place have that prerogative) which
never saw any thing of my doing in their life, or heard me speak, by
discourteous dealing enough to discourage me from the publishing of any thing,
to pleasure or profit many; yet for the better minded, and more courteous
disposed, I here go so far with the Englishing hereof, and some proverbs
following, whose courtesy if friendly I find, may cause me to the farther
unfolding of this language to his farther content.

Words, Phrases, Sentences and Proverbs out of La vida de Lazaro de Tormes in 8
printed in Antwerpe En laoficina Plantiniana, Anno M.D.XCV.
Lo que uno no come, otro se pierde por ello. page 2. lin. 13. That which one
eats not, another is lost for it, or longs after it.

No ser mas santo que mis vezinos. page 5. lin. 7. Not to be more holy then my
neighbors.

Achacaron a mi padre ciertas sangrias mal hechas en los costales. page 7. lin.
18. They laid to my fathers charge certain ripping the sides of the sacks.

Ar^mar a los buenos page 8. lin. 7. page 91. lin. 1. To lean or stay ones
self upon the good.

Echar la soga tras ei caldero. page 10. lin. 12. verbatim. To cast the rope
after the caldron. i. To cast the helue after the hatchet.

Vale te por ti. page 11. lin. 16. verbatim. Be of avail for thy self. i.
Shift for thy self.

Par de una cosa. page 11. lin. 26. Just even with any thing.

Mas da el duro que el desnudo. page 19. lin. 28. verbatim. More gives the
hard then the naked. i More gives the miser or curmudgeon then he that has it
not to give.

Escape del trueno y di en el Relampago. page 28. lin. 23. I escaped the
thunder and fell into the lightening.

No poder tener en las piernas. page 30. lin. 23. Not to be able to stand upon
the legs.

Dar el relox la una, Dar las dos, las tres, etc. page 49. lin. 15. The clock
to strike one, two or three.

Ha dado la una, Han dado las dos, las tres, etc. page 50. lin. 25. It has
struck one a clock, two a clock, three a clock.

En un credo. page 57. lin. 14. In the twinkling of an cie.

Una de vaca. page 62. lin. 1. A neates foot.

La bolsa sin maldita la blanca. page 65. lin. 16. The devil a penny in his
purse.

Oy dia. page 65. lin. 24. At this day.

Quebremos el ojo al Diablo. page 66. lin. 7. Let us break the neck of the
Devil.

Voto or boto a Dios. page 70. lin. 4. I s^ ear by God.

Del rey abaxo. page 71. lin. 6. From the king downward.

Romper capatos. page 77. lin. 13. To wear out shoes.

Lancar del el demonio. page 85. lin. 8. To cast out the devil from him.

Matar con un hombre. page 92. lin. 6. To fight with a man.

Quien bien te hara o se yra o se morira. page 94. lin. 7. He that shall or
will do thee a good turn, either he will be gone, or he will die.

Words, Phrases, Sentences and Proverbs out of Menosprecio de la Corte, or in
French Mespris de la Court in 16. printed An. M.D.XCI. per Iehan de Tournes.
Yr me a mia la mano. page 70. lin. 19. verbatim. To go me to my hand. i. To
hinder, let or stop my self.

Ir por el atajo. page 93. lin. 14. To go the shortest way.

Dar de mano a la corte. page 127. lin. 20 To shake hands or take leave of the
Court.

Dar la corte a Dios. page 137. lin. 10. To bid the court farewell.

Andar en cuerpo. page 197. lin. 1. To go in hose and doublet without a cloak.

No es de passar enter renglones. page 200. lin. 20. It is not to be left
obscurely, or it is to be plainly written or set down.

Verdura para la olla. page 202. lin. 19. Herbs for the pot, pothearbes.

Bever de buces. 202 lin. 5. To drink as an ox or such beasts.

Jugar al herron. page 227. lin. 13. To play at coites.

Correr un toro. page 228. lin. 3. So bait a bull.

A pared y medio, pared en medio. com. Plauto. fol. 4. b. lin. 18. page 234.
lin. 13. The next wall to one, But a wall between.

Clerigo sin breviario. page 259. lin. 8. A priest without a breuiarie.

Ruar calls. page 273. lin. 14. To gad about the streets.

A penas. 289. lin. 20. Hardly.

Embocar la bola al juego de argolla. page 360. lin. 2. To cast the bowl into
the hole of the ring at that play of Argolla, 1. A ring.

Tirar coces. page 380. lin. 10. To kick.

Traer de tema la gorra. page 388. lin. 12. To set his hat to the good aleward,
on one side the head.

Sospecho que son pocos, y muy pocos, y aun muy poquitos y muy repoquitos. page
406. lin. 1. I suspect there are few and very few, yea most few, yea fewest of
all.

Words, Phrases, Sentences, and Proverbs out of Floresta Espanola, in 16.
Printed in Salamanca, 1592.
Estoy maravillado. Epist. dedicatoria. page 2 lin. 9. I wonder, I marvel.

El lineage donde no avia corona, nunca medrava. fol. 6. b. lin 4. verbatim.
That kindred that had had a crown in it never thriued. i. a priest.

Mas pare^e chichon, que Cardinal. fol. 7. b. lin. 1. It seemed rather a whelke
or pustle then a stripe black and blew.

Rezias camaras, fol. 11. a. lin. 18. Strong stoolings.

Macho de silla. fol. 13. a. lin. 15. A nagge.

Un hombre de gran memoria sin letras, tiene rueca y huso y no estambre. fol.
21. a. lin. 1. A man of great memory without learning, has a rock and a
spindle, and no stuff to spin.

Bolar vna grulla o ave. fol. 43. b. lin. 5. To fly at the Herron.

Guisar la comida. fol. 43. b. lin. 6. To dress meat.

Desensillar. fol. 53. b. lin. 19. To put out of a chair. Also to vnsaddle.

Vnos mocos de espuelas, fol. 60. b. lin. 1 Lackeies or footmen.

A esse Page o capalde o encapalde. fol. 61. b. lin. 18. Either gelde this page
or give a cloak.

Tal cadreda vaca. fol. 74. b. lin. 2. Such a chair was vacant.

Llamo me. fol. 76. a. lin. 15. I call my self, or I am called.

Puntos de capatos. fol. 85. b. lin. 14. The stitches of shoes, or size of
shoes, as nines, tens, etc.

Al freyr lo vereys. fol. 93. a. lin. penultima, verbatim. By frying you shall
see. i. By proof you shall find.

Os demand la palabra. fol. 94. b. lin. 2. Let him challenge your word or
promise.

Hazer quartos. fol. 90. a. lin. 3. To quarter.

Parar mientes. fol. 500. a. lin 7. To mark.

Caldo. fol. 102, b. lin. 5. Broth, pottage.

Hazer la barba. fol 112. a. lin. 16 To trim the beard.

De buena gana fol. 226. b. lin. 5. With a good will.

Dezir gracias. fol. 234. a. lin. 18. To speak merry conceits.

Marco Aurelio.
Sublimar, abatir. page 11. lin. 18. To lift up and to abase.

A ley de bueno os juro page 27. lin. 28. By the faith of a good man I swear.

Conviene a saber. page 42. lin. 16. That is to wit.

Sobrepujar. page 46. lin. 11. To ouerpoise.

Pendon de taverna. page 51. lin. 9. The sign of a tavern.

Jugar al axedres. page 59. lin. 20. To play at Chesse.

Poner obligacion. page 234. lin. 26. to bind, to make one beholding to him.

Poner el aguila en los pechos. page 245. lin. 20. To put the Eagle on his
breast. i. To wear the Emperors arms the Eagle.

Armar cancadilla. page 256. lin. 2. To trip.

Cavallo de axedrez. page 279. lin. 26. The Knight at Chesse.

De Comedia de Plauto Milite glorioso in 16. printed at Antwerp M.D.LV.
Fletar vna nao. fol. 8. b. lin. 19. To hire a ship and pay passage money.

Hazer a lo largo en la mar. fol. 8. b. lin. 23. To lanch into the maine at sea.

Dios te pague. fol. 12. a. lin. 11. God reward thee.

Poner or Hazer lumbre. fol. 17. a. lin. 23. To make a fire.

El puerco muerto sabe mas quando se come. fol. 22. a. lin. 25. A dead hog
tastes best when he is eaten.

Hermano del leche. fol. 25. b. lin. 17. A foster brother.

Poco me doy por esso. fol. 28. b. lin. 19. Little care I for this.

Ordir tramas. fol. 29. b. lin. 8. verbatim. To spin webs. i. To work deceites.

Comedia de Plauto Menechmos, in 16. bound with Milite glorioso.
Para que se tenga en mas. fol. 54. b. lin. 16. That he or it may be more
esteemed.

Ambos a dos mancebos. fol. 55. b. lin. 15. Both the young men.

No perdays palabra. fol. 56. b. lin. 10. verbatim. Do not loose a word, i. Be
attentive to that one shall say.

Hazer de nueuas con alguno. fol. 67. a. lin. 19. To make himself strange with
one, when he knows him well enough.

Araucana in 16. three in one volumne, Printed in Antwerp. 1597.
Cuchilla de la montana. Elogio. page 3. lin. 8. The edge or ridge of a hill.

Rociada dar. Elogio. page 3. lin. 12. To give a volley of shot.

Como consta por sus obras. Elogio. page 7. lin. 5. As appears by his works.

Medir la pica al enimigo. fol. 3. b. lin. 33 To come to push of a pike with
the enemy.

Poblados penachos. fol. 4. a. lin. 32. Thick plumes of feathers.

Hazerse a lo largo. fol. 3. a. lin. 10. verbatim. To make himself aloof, i.
To step out as men in a quarrel to draw their weapon.

A rienda suelta. fol. 31. b. lin. penult. verbatim. With a loose rain of a
bridle, i. at liberty, freely, as Reyr a rienda suelta. To laugh freely, at
liberty.

I would go forward in this course of seeking hard places and phrases in
Authors, but for that I have now much other business that nearer concerns me,
only certain Proverbs which I have heretofore for mine own use gathered,
and here leave some of them to your use, as ye shall best like them.

Refranes. Proverbs. First setting down the English word for word according
to the Spanish, with this word Verbatim. Afterward if it have a sense
differing from the word, the meaning thus, i. for id est: that is to say.
NO puede ser mas negro el cuervo que sus alas. verbatim. The crow can not be
blacker then his wings. i. Nothing can exceed the highest degree.

Quien a su enemigo popa, a sus manos muere. verbatim. Whosoever disdainfully
dallies with his enemy, dies by his own hand. i. by making no reckoning of
his enemy, receaues damage.

Quien come y dexa, dos vezes pone la mesa. verbatim. Who dineth and leaves
for another time, couers the table twice. i. He that keeps in store, serves
his turn when he has need.

Gran sabor es comer y no escotar. verbatim. It is great sauorines to dine or
eat, and not to pay any shot or reckoning. i. Good drinking of wine of
another man's purse.

La codicia rompe el saco. verbatim. Covetousness bursteth the bag. i. never
thinks it full till it break.

Mas veen quatro ojos que no dos. verbatim. Four eyes see better then two. i.
Two heads are better then one.

Mas vale paxaro en mano que bueytre bolando. verbatim. Better a bird in hand
then a Vultur flying. i. A bird in hand worth ten in the bush.

E'ntre hermanos, no metas tus manos: Porque, quien los desparte, lleua la peor
part. verbat. Between brothers put not thou thy hands; for who so seuers them
has the woorst of it.

Ni de estopa buen camisa, ni de puta buena amiga. verbatim. Neither of hurdes
is made a good shirt, nor of a queen a good lover.

Quien ha officio ha benificio. verbatim. He that has an occupation or office
has a benefit and a benefice.

En la boca cerrada no entra mosca. verbatim. In a closed up mouth a fly
cannot get in.

Mas cerca estan mis dientes que mis parientes. verbatim. My teeth are nearer
to me then my kindred. i. Nearer is my coat, but nearer is my shirt.

Mas vale ser cabeca de Raton, que cola de Leon. verbatim. Better to be the
head of a Mouse then the tail of a Lion. i. Better be chief in a mean place,
then underling in a greater.

Da Dios havas, a quien no tiene quixadas. verbatim. God gives beans to them
that have no jaws to eat them. i. God sends fools fortune.

A cavallo comedor cabestro corto. verbatim. To a greedy eating horse, a short
halter. i. To a prodigal man mean fortune: a cursed cow short horns.

Dime con quien andas, y dezirte he quien eres. verbatim. Tell me with whom
thou go, and I will tell thee what thou art. i. Birds of a feather will
flock together; like will to like.

En la boca del discreto, Lo publico es secreto. verbatim. In the wisemans
mouth, That is manifest is kept secret.

Piedra movediza, no cria moho. verbatim. The rolling stone engenders no moss.

Mas vale saber, que aver. verbatim. It is better to have knowledge then riches.

Quien mal en horna, saca los panes tuertos. verbatim. He that sets in the
bread in the oven naughtily, draws out the loaves crushed awrie: as one
brewes so let him drink: as one plots so it proves.

Quien da presto, da dos vezes. verbatim. He that gives quickly, gives twice.

Miedo guarda vina y no vinadero verbatim. Fear keeps and looks to the
vineyard and not the owner. i. Fear makes one look about.

A muertos y a ydos no ay amigos. verbatim. To dead men and absent there are no
friends left. i. Out of sight out of mind.

La coz de la yegua no haze mal al potro. verbatim. The kick of the mare
hurts not the colt. i. A friends reproof never does ill.

A un traydor dos alevosos. verbatim. To one traitor, two traitors. i. To over
reach one crafty knave, set two crafty knaves to him and they will cony catch
him. The Italian says, A un fino, un fino and mezo.

Jurado ha el vano de negro, no hazer blanco. verbatim. The bath of the
blackmoore has sworn not to whiten. i. That which is bred in the bone will
never out of the flesh.

En casa del mesquino, manda mas la muger que el marido. verbatim. In the house
of the simple soul, the wife commands more then the husband. i.

In the house of the silly man of necessity and of fore:

The graie mare will still prove the better horse.

Es mas el ruydo, que las nuezes. verbatim. The noise is greater then the nuts.
i. More afraid then hurt.

Dos pardales en vna espiga, hazen mala liga. verbatim. Two sparrowes on one
ear of corn make an ill agreement. i. Two competitors cannot accord.

No es tan bravo el Leon como le pintan. verbatim. The Lion is not so fierce as
they paint him. i. He is such a one as he makes show of.

En hora buena nace, quien buena fama cobra. verbatim. He is borne in a good
hour that gets himself a good name. i. A good name is better then riches.

De baxo de mala capa, yaze buen bevedor. verbatim. Under a bad cloak lies a
good drinker. i. The worse outwardly attired, the better inwardly lined.

De rabo de puerco, nunca buen virote. verbatim. Of a pigges tail you can
never make a good shaft. i. Bray a fool in a mortar you cannot make him leave
his folly: a clown will never be made a king.

Que es esse hidalgo? El que ha^ze las obras. verbatim. What is this gentleman.
i. Who is to be a gentleman? Even he that does the works of a gentleman.

El asno sufre la carga, no la sobre carga. verbatim. The ass endures his
burden, but not more then his burden.

Amenezados pan comen. verbatim. Threatened men eat bread. i. The threatened
men live long.

Piensa el ladron, que todos son de su condition. verbatim. The thief thinks
that all are of his condition, i. Every one judges another by himself.

Mas vale un toma que dos te dare. verbatim. One hold is better then two I will
give thee. Once giving is better then often promising.

No se gana camora en un hora. verbatim. camora (a strong town) is not won
in an hour, i. Rome was not built in a day.

Quien tiempo tiene, y tiempo atiende, tiempo viene, que se arrepiente.
verbatim. He that has time, and looks for better time, Time comes that he
repent himself of time.

Buen coracon quebranta mala ventura. verbatim. A good heart breaks ill hap,
i. A good heart overcomes all.

Mundo redondo quien no sabe nadar va se en hondo. verbatim. Round world, he
that cannot swim let him sink to the bottom.

Malas son las burlas verdaderas. verbatim. True iestes are ill, i. It is ill
to jest at that which was done in deed.

Quien te haze fiesta, que no lo suele hazer, o te quiere enganar, o te
hamenester. verbatim. Who so makes much of thee that was not wont, either
will deceive or stands in need of thee.

Quien a solas come el gallo, a solas ensilla su cavallo. verbatim. Whosoever
eats the cock alone, saddles the horse alone, i. He that will keep his meat
and his money to himself, must do his business himself.

Haz bien y no cates a quien, haz mal y guarte, verbatim. Do good and regard
not to whom, do evil and take heed of thy self.

Quien a buen arbol se arrima buena sombra le cobija. verbatim. Whosoever
leans to a good tree, gets a good shadow, i. whosoever has a sure man to
trust unto, has a great pleasure.

Quien no parece perece. verbatim. Who appears not, perishes, i. Out of
sight, out of mind.

Biva comigo y busca quien te mantenga. verbatim. Live with me, and seek some
other that may maintain thee, i. Do me service, and get maintenance where
thou can.

Honra y provecho, no caben en un saco. verbatim. Honor and profit are not
contained together in one sack, i. If you be honorable, you must be liberal
and not respect your money.

Quien quita l'ocasion, quita el pecado. verbatim. He that takes away the
occasion, takes away the offense, i. He that remooueth the allurements, takes
away the sin.

La pobreza no es vileza mas inconveniencia. verbatim. Poverty is no vile or
vicious matter, but yet an inconvenience.

Las quentas en la mano, y el diablo en el capillo. verbatim. The beads in the
hand, and the devil in his capuch or cape of his cloak, i. God in his mouth
and the devil in his heart: good words and wicked deeds.

Palabras y plumas el viento las lleva. verbatim. Words and feathers the wind
carries away, i. words are but wind.

Ni Savado sin sol ni moca sin amor, ni vejo sin dolor. verbatim. Neither
Saboath without sun, nor young wench without love, nor an old body without
grief or ache.

Fuego de estopa, Amor de puta, Viento del culo, Todo es vno,
Fire of flax, Love of a queen, Wind from the tail, All is one.
Guardate De yra de Senor y de alboroto de pueblo. De locos en lugar estrecho,
De honra menguada, y gente que no tiene nada. De moca adeuina, y muger latina.
De persona senalada, y de Biuda tres vezes casada. De lodos al caminar, y de
luenga enfermedad. De viento que enter per horado, y de enimigo que sea
reconciliado. De madrasta, el nombre le basta.


Take heed Of the wrath of a mighty man and the tumult of the people. Of mad
fools in a narrow place. Of credit decayed, and people which have nothing. Of
a young wench a prophetess, and a latin woman. Of a person marked, and a widow
thrice married. Of foul durtie ways and long sickness. Of wind that comes in
at a hole, and of a reconciled enemy. Of a stepmother, the very name of her
suffices.


FJNJS.
PLEASANT and DELIGHTFVLL DIALOGVES IN SPANISH and English, profitable to the
learner, and not unpleasant to any other Reader.

By JOHN MINSHEU Professor of Languages in London.

Virescit vulnere Virtus.

VERITAS FILIA TEMPORIS printer's device of Edmund Bollifant

Imprinted at London, by Edm. Bollifant. 1599

Al muy illustre Senor, Don Eduardo Hobby: su aficionado servidor Juan Minsheu
dessea salud, y perpetua felicidad.
MVy illustre Senor, de aquel famoso pintor Apeles se quenta, que aviendo
acabado de pintar vna hermosa table, teniendola colgada en part publica;
inumerable gente de todas suertes combidada de la lindeza della, suspendieron
su curso, y se detuvieron a contemplarla, enter los de mas, se acerto a llegar
un rustico labrador, y como todos alabassen grandemente el ingenio del
artifice, juntamente con la pintura: el villano con boz ronca y mal compuesta,
dixo, vna gran falta tiene esta tabla; lo qual como oyesse Apeles, le pregunto
qual fuesse esta? El respondio, aquella espiga sobre la qual esta aquel paxaro
sentado, deviera estar mas inclinada, porque conform al peso que presuppone el
paxaro y la flaqueza de la cana, no podia susten^ar le sin doblarse mas, oydo
esto por el pintor, vio que teniarazon el villano; y tomando el pincel, emendo
luego aquella falta, siguiendo su parec er; soberbio pues el rustico con ver
que se uviesse tomado su voto, passo mas adelante, y dixo, aquellos capatos que
aquella figura tiene no estan buennos, a esto le respondio Apeles, Hermano cura
de tu art, y dexa a cada vno el suyo. Esta figura, muy ilustre senor, he
querido traer, por dezir, que si todos los hombres se conformassen con lo que
sauen y que su ingenio alcanca, no quisiessen passar adelante, a saber lo que
no es de su profess^onny les toca, ny ellos quedarian corridos, como este
villano, ni ellabrador se entremeterria a tratar de la guerra, ny el mercader
de la cavallaria, ny eloficial de las sciencias, ny el herrero se pondria a
disputar puntos de teologia; Sino que tratando cada vno aquello a que su
capacidad se estiende, y no mas, seria un concierto maravilloso, que resultaria
en grande vtilidad de toda la republica, y para esto devriamos tomar exemplo en
las cosas naturales, las quales perpetuamente guardan su orden y concierto, sin
entremeterse las vnas a hazer el oficio de las otras, y ansi vemos que ny la
tierra calienta, ny el fuego produze, ny el viento riega, ny el agua ventea,
sino que cada cosa tiene su calidad, y oficio particular. Pues aviendose de
guardar este concierto y orden, a v.m. conviene y toca el jusgar de esta mi
obra, como aquel que enter todos los demas, tiene el primado de la lengua
Espanola, segun la facilidad con que se le a dado, y la perfecion con que la
habla, pero tambien en otras muchas sciencias, y facultades, en que v. m.
resplandece sobre todos los de nuestro tiempo. Aqui no es de oluidar la
refulgente, rara y acabada perfecion en hermosura, doctrina, lenguas, de la muy
ilustre Senora Dona Margarita su muger de v.m. Dios sabe, si yo quisiera
dedicar le toda la obra entera y no partida en part, (pues quando no uviera
las razones dichas para hazerlo; bastava el agradecimiento y benevolencia, que
v. m. mostro al que primero emprendio lo que he yo ampliado, y hecho mas
copioso: Pero el lo dexado de hazer, por dos razones amy juyzio; la vna es la
obligacion precisa que tengo a las personas a quien va derigida, no solo de
obediencia y amistad, sino tambien de ayuda, favor, y socorro, que me han dado,
para poder llegarla a su fin; y la otra razon es, a verse comencado,
prosequido, y acabado en su nombre, y para que se apovechan della, en
suministerio. Pero ya que lo que es mayor en cantidad tengo empleado, lo que es
ygual en calidad, o fresco y dedico a. v.m. y esto mas por lo que a mi importa,
pues quedare seguro que los detractores no osen morder en lo que ha sido
censurado por tan primo juyzio y entendimiento, que no por la gloria o vtilidad
que dello se podra seguir a v. m. ultra de que con esto satisfaga en part la
deuda de agradecimiento, que devo a quien contanta voluntad favorece a mi
profession, oficio verdaderamente proprio de hombres sabios y discretos, ansi
como es de ygnorantes y poco menos que bestias, el impedir semejantes
exercicios lo qual no cabe sino en hombres gruessos de entendimiento, y de
conciencias, Suplico a.v.m. se sirva de recebir esso pequeno servicio, aunque
con grande voluntad ofrecido, y poner lo debaxo de su protection y amparo, pues
con esto, la obra queder a segura, y yo tambien lo estare, de que esta bien
empleada: y tomare alas para emprender mayores cosas en nombre de v.m. Cuya muy
ilustre persona, nuestro senor guarde con acrecentamiento de mayores estados.

Besa las manos de v.m. su servidor, JOHN MINSHEU.

Dialogo primero para levantarse por la manana y las cosas a ello
pertenecientes, enter un hidalgo llamado don Pedro y su criado Alonso, y un su
amigo llamado don Iuan, y una ama. The first Dialogue of rising in the morning,
and of those things thereunto appertaining: between a Gentleman named M.
Peter, and his servant Alonso, and another friend of his called M. John, and a
nurse of the house. D.P. OYes moco?


P. YOuth, do thou hear?


A. Senor.


A. Sir.


d.P. Que ora es?


P. What is it of the clock?


A. Las cinco son dadas.


A. It has strooken five.


d.P. Levantate y abre aquella ventana a ver si es de dia.


P. Rise, and open that window, to see if it be day.


A. Aun no es bien amenecido.


A. It is not yet break of the day.


d.P. Pues asno, como dixiste que ha dado las cinco?


P. Why then assehead, why said thou that it had struck five a clock.


A. Senor las cinco yo las conte, pero el relox y la manana no andan a una.


A. Sir, I told you five, but the clock and the morning go not together.


d.P. O tu mientes o el relox miente, que el sol no puede mentir.


P. Either thou lie, or the clock lies, for the sun cannot lie.


A. Mas vale que miento yo, que no el ano.


A. It is better that I lie, then the year prove out ill.


d.P. Que dia haze?


P. What weather is it?


A. Senor nublado.


A. Sir cloudie weather.


d.P. En los ojos deves tu de tener las nubes que el cielo yo le veo claro.


P. Belike thine eyes be cloudie, for I see the sky clear.


A. Pues no estoy ciego.


A. Yet am I not blind.


d.P. Antes creo que estas durmiendo toda via.


P. Rather I believe thou stand sleeping.


A. Se, que no soy elefante que tengo de dormirme en pie.


A. I know, I am not elephant to sleep standing.


d.P. Haze frio?


P. Is it cold weather?


A. Un cerceganillo entra por la ventana que corta las narizes.


A. Here comes in such a cold northerly wind at the window, that it bites
off my nose.


d.P. Dame de vestir que me quiero levantar.


P. Give me my clothes, for I will rise.


A. A que, tan de manana?


A. What to do so early?


d.P. A negociar, que tengo mucho que hazer oy.


P. To go about business, for I have much to do to day.


A. Aun no estara nadie en pie.


A. No body will be yet stirring.


d.P. Tu adevinas a tu provecho.


P. Thou do prophecy for thine own behoof.


A. Que vestido se quiere poner vuestra merced?


A. What apparel will you wear to day Sir?


d.P. El de velarte, que dizen que es honray provecho.


P. That of the fine black cloth, for it is of estimation and profitable.


A. Que jubon?


A. What doublet?


d.P. El de raso pespuntado.


P. That of stitched satin.


A. He le aqui.


A. Here it is.


d.P. Majadero, pues el jubon me traes, antes que la camisa, quieres me motejar
de acotado.


P. Block head, do thou bring me my doublet before my shirt, will thou
scoff me as though I had been Those that be whipped, put on their doublets in
haste before their shirts, to save them from another lash.
whipped?


A. Aun no ha traydo las camicas la labandera.


A. The laundresse has not yet brought home the shirts.


d.P. Pues, hide puta yd por ellas.


P. Whoorsonne knave, go then for them.


A. Al Ruyn de Roma, quando le nombran, luego asoma, aqui viene ya la labandera.


A. Lupus est in fabula, as soon as one names him presently he appears, here
comes the laundresse.


d.P. Esta enxuta?


P. Is it dry?


A. Como un cuerno.


A. As dry as a horn.


d.P. No os he dicho, que no me traygays essas comparaciones.


P. Have I not told thee, that thou bring me no such comparisons.


A. Esso fuera, Si fuera, v.m. persona Sospechosa que no se a de mentar la
soga, en casa del ahorcado.


A. That is true, if you were a person suspected, for a man ought not to make
mention of a halter in the house of a man that was hanged.


d.P. Dame las calcas de terciopelo acuchilladas.


P. Give me my paned velvet hose.


A. Aqui estan senor.


A. Here they are sir.


d.P. Estan limpias? mira bien si tienen algun punto suelto las medias.


P. Be they made clean? Look well if the stockings have any stitches broken
in them.


A. E'ssa es vna de las tres cosas que Ganasa dezia, que el hombre busca con
gran cuydado, y quando las ha hallado le pesa.


A. This is one of the three things which Ganasa said a man seeks diligently
after, and when he has found them it grieves him.


d.P. Y quales son las de mas?


P. And what are the other two?


A. Vna suziedad en la cama, y los cuernos, si su muger se los pone, pero estas
sanas estan.


A, Filth in the bed one lies in, and horns if they be of his own wives
grafting, but these stockings are whole.


d.P. Calcamelas, dame el sayo de velarte, quel de raxa es muy delgado para
este frio que haze.


P. Pull them on, give me that ierkin of black cloth, for that of thin cloth
rash is very thin for this cold weather.


A. Quiere, v. m. ponerse borzeguies?


A. Will you wear buskins?


d.P. No sino capatos y pantuflos, por amor del lodo: Dame primero aguamanos.


P. No, but pumpes and pantofles because of the dirt: Give me first water to
wash my hands.


A. Senor el agua esta elada en el jarro.


A. Sir, the water is frozen in the pot.


d.P. Buena senal. A. De que senor? d.P. de Caranbanos.


P. A good sign.


A. Of what sir?


P. Of ice.


A. Y aun de que hazefrio.


A. And also that it is cold.


d.P. Derritelo en el brasero, dame enter tanto el espejo y v'nas tixeras que
quiero aderecarme la barva.


P. Thaw it in the pan of coals, in the mean while give me the looking glass
and scissers, for I will trim my beard.


A. Aqui esta el estuche donde esta to do, y tambien el pain.


A. Here is the case where all are in it, and likewise the comb.


d.P. O que de canas tengo, ya me voy parando vejo.


P. O what hoare hairs I have, I begin to wax old.


A. Senor, las navidades no se van en balde.


A. Sir, years pass not over ones head in vain.


d.P. Por cierto no tengo muchas, sino como dizen en mi tierra, canas y cuernos
no vienen por dias.


P. Truly, I have not many years on my back, but as they say in my country,
Hoare hairs, and horns come not by age.


A. Ya esta buena esta agua, bien se puede vuestra merced lavar.


A. This water is now well, you may now well wash Sir.


d.P. Pues daca la fuente, y la toalla.


P. Then give here the basen and yewer, and the towell.


A. Quiere. v.m. Llever capa y gorra o herreruelo y sombrero?


A. Will you wear a short cloak and cap, or long cloak and hat?


d.P. No es aora tiempo de gorra, dame el ferreruelo largo, y un sombrero de
fieltro.


P. It is no weather now for a cap, give me a long cloak and a felt hat.


A. Que espada? Dorada, plateada o Pavonada?


A. What rapier, gilt, siluered, or sanguined?


d.P. No la quiero, sino enbarnizada por silloviere, Mira quien llama a sa
puerta.


P. None, but that varnist rapier, least it should rain: Go look who knockes
at the door.


A. El senor don Iuan es.


A. It is master John.


d.P. Corre abre presto.


P. Run, open the door quickly.


d.I. Muy buenos dias de Dios. a v.m. Senor don Pedro.


I. God give you good morrow master Peter.


d.P. O senor don Iuan. v.m. sea tan bien venido como los buenos anos: como
esta v.m?


P. Oh master John, you are as well welcome as good fortune: how do you Sir?


d.I. Muy al servicio de v. m. v.m. esta bueno?


I. Ready to do you service, and are you well Sir?


d.P. Al servicio de v. m. como estuviere, aunque algo achacoso.


P. Howsoever Sir, at your command although now I am not half well.


d.I. Pues porque madruga tanto sino anda bueno?


I. Why then do you rise so early, if you be not well?


d.P. Porque dizen los medicos que para la salud, es bueno levantar de manana.


P. Because Physicians say, that for ones health it is good to rise earelie in
the morning.


d.I. Essa salud tenganse la ellos, que para mi estos son los dias que devemos
meter en casa como dize el Refran, o que los tengamos en la cama, dixera mejor.


I. That health let them have themselves for me, these be the good days (as
the Proverb says) which we ought to lock up within our doors, nay (I should
say) within our beds.


d.P. Para dezir la verdad, yo mas lo hago, por entender en mis negocios.


P. To tell you the truth, I do it chiefly to follow my business.


d.I. Como le va a v.m. dellos?


I. How goes it with you in your business?


d.P. Senor al serve icio de v.m. mal bendito sea Dios.


P. Sir at your command, but ill enough God be thanked.


d.I. Como ansi no despachan a v.m?


I. How, do they not dispatch you?


d.P. Si Senor despechan me. Mucacho trae nos de almorzar antes que salgamos.


P. Yea Sir, they despite me. Boie, give us somewhat to breakefast before we go
forth.


d.I. Ya yo he bevido vna vez.


I. I have already eaten a bit.


d.P. Bevera. v. m. otra que no le hara mal.


P. One bit more will do you no harm.


d.I. No, que no soy tan delicado como judio en viernes.


I. No, for I am not so curious as the Jew on a friday.


A. Que quieren us. ms. almorzar.


A. What will your worships break your fast withal?


d.P. Trae vnos pasteles y un quartillo de cabrito assado.


P. Bring a pie, and a quarter of a roasted kidde.


d.I. Que bien aderecado tiene. v. m. este aposento senor don P?


I. Oh how well in order have you this lodging M. Peter?


d.P. Senor Razonable como para un hidalgo pobre.


P. Sir reasonable for a poor gentleman.


d.I. De donde uvo. v.m. esta tapiceria?


I. From whence had you this tapestrie hangings?


d.P. Senor; de Flandes vino.


P. Sir it came from Flaunders.


d.I. Tambien deven deser de alla los liencos o pinturas o Retratos?


I. And from thence also came these pictures and portraitures?


d.P. Algunos dellos, otros son de Ytalia.


P. Some of them did, others came from Italy.


d.I. De gentil mano son por cierto: quanto le costo. a v. m. este escritorio?


I. Truly they are of a fine workmans doing. What cost this deske or caske?


d.P. Mas que vale, quarenta ducados.


P. More then it is worth, forty ducates.


d.I. De que madera es?


I. Of what wood is it?


d.P. La colorada es caoba de la Havana y esta negra es evano, la blanca es
marfil.


P. The red is Caoba, a fine red wood in the Indies, of which they make checker
work and other curious works in cupboords, etc.
Caoba of Havana, and this black is Ebonie, and the white is Iuorie.


d.I. Cierto que esta muy curioso, y muy bien asentada la taracea.


I. Truly it is very curious, and the inlaying of the wood most finely set in.


d.P. Aqui vera. v. m. un bufete mejor labrado.


P. Here may you see a standing table, better wrought.


d.I. Adonde fue hecho?


I. Where was it made?


d.P. El y las sillas vinieron de Salamanca.


P. That and the chaires came from Salamanca.


d.I. Lo mejor le falta a.v.m. en este aposento.


I. The best thing is yet wanting in this lodging.


d.P. Que es, por vida del Senor don Iuan?


P. What is it I pray you hartelie master John?


d.I. Por lo que dezia don juan manuel, un sonezito de chapin.


I. That which don John Manuel said, the gentle sound of a woman's shoe.


d.P. Ya entiendo, por la muger lo dize v.m.


P. Now I understand you mean a wife?


d.I. Por la misma.


I. Even the self same.


d.P. Ami me parece que lo mejor que tiene es estar sin ella.


P. It seems unto me, that the best thing my lodging has is to be without her.


d.I. O Senor no diga. v.m. esso que es triste cosa la soledad.


I. Oh Sir, say not so, solitarines is unpleasant.


d.P. A tengo me al que dize, que Vale mas solo que mal acompanado.


P. Ah Sir, I stand to that old saying, better alone then evil accompanied.


d.I. Pues no se entiende que a de ser mala.


I. But you must not understand of a bad wife.


d.P. Y adonde le hallaremos que sea buena?


P. And where shall we find her that is good?


d.I. Muchas ay muy buenas.


I. There are many very good.


d.P. Es verdad, las que estan enterradas.


P. It is true, they which are dead and buried.


d.I. De suerte que quiere. v. m. dezir que la mujer estonces es buena quando
esta muerta.


I. So that you will say, that a woman is then good, when she is dead.


d.P. Digo senor que cada loco con su tema, yo he dado a ora en esta.


P. I say Sir, that every fool has his wilfulness, and I have lighted now
upon this.


d.I. Y se saldra. v.m. con ella, como el Rey con sus alcavalas.


I. And you shall as easily carry it away as the Without controulment.
king does his subsidies.


d.P. Se dize que una buena mula, y vna buena cabra, y vna buena muger son
tres, malas cucas.


P. It is said, that a good mule, a good goat, and a good woman are three
unhappy creatures.


Al. La mesa esta puesta bien se pueden sentar. us. ms. a almorzar.


A. The table is covered, your worships may well sit down to breakefast.


d.P. Senor don Iuan tome. us. ms. aquella cabecera.


P. M. John, sit you down at the upper end of the table.


d.I. Bueno seria, esso es per motejarme de viejo.


I. It should do well in deed, that is a floute because I am old.


d.P. No, si no por cumplir con la razon


P. Not so, but to do you right.


d.I. V.m. tome su lugar que yo tomare el mio.


I. Take you your place and I will take mine.


d.P. Bueno es que venga a mi casa, quien mande en ella mas que yo.


P. It is very good, that I should have such a guest as should command more in
my house then my self.


d.I. O si por ay lo echa. v.m. yo obedesco en su casa y fuera.


I. Oh Sir if you take it so, I not only obey you in your house, but abroad
also.


d.P. Yo soy el que tengo de servir como la razon me obliga. Muchacho daca
platos.


P. Sir I am to be at your service, as reason binds me. Boie give me dishes
here.


Al. Aqui estan Senor.


A. Here they are Sir.


d.P. De adonde truxiste estos pasteles?


P. From whence did thou fetch these pies?


Al. De la mas limpia pastelera que ay en la ciudad.


A. From the cleanliest piewife, that is in the city.


d.P. Son de nuestra vezina la hermosa?


P. What from our fair neighbor?


Al. Si Senor.


A. Yea Sir.


d.P. Bien los puede. v.m. comer sin asco que ne mujer limpia son.


P. Well may you eat Sir of them without loathing, for they are from a clenly
woman.


d.I. Mas que nunca lo fueran, nunca yo miro en miserias.


I. And if they were not, I never stick for small matters.


d.P. Pues menos mirara, si fuera tan amigo de ellos como yo.


P. Less would you stand upon it, if you did love them as I do.


d.I. Muy bien me saben, y lo mejor que yo les hallo es ser comida tan
acorrida, que a qual quier, ora, 'que el hombre la quiera la halla guisada.


I. They please my taste well, and the best is that I always find them to be
a meat so in readiness, that at what soever hour a man will have it he may
find it ready dressed.


d.P. Muchacho da nos de bever que pica la pimienta.


P. Boy give us drink, for the pepper bites.


Al. Que quiere, v.m. blanco o tinto?


A. Which will you have sir, sack or Tinto is a wine in Spain red and
blackish.
tinto?


d.P. Echa de lo blanco, que es mas caliente para por la manana.


P. Fill out of the sack, for it is more heating, chiefly for the morning.


d.I. Yaun es mas saludable que lo tinto.


I. And also is more wholesome then the red.


d.P. Brindo a v.m. Senor don Iuan.


P. I drink to you master John.


d.I. Beso, a, v. m. las manos, hare la razon.


I. I thank you sir, I will pledge you.


Al. Por qual taca quiere, v. m. bever, por la Llana o por esta hondilla.


A. In which cup will your worship drink, in the plain bowl, or in the
little deep one.


d.I. Alonso amigo, aveis de faber que yo soy muy buen borracho y se muy bien
lo que me bevo, por esso echaldme por aquella taca llana.


I. Friend Alonso you must know, that I am a very good drinker, and know how
much I use to drink, wherefore fill me that plain bowl.


d.P. Yo gusto mas de bever por esta copa de vidrio que no por ninguna de las
tacas.


P. I like better to drink out of this drinking glass then out of any other
of the cups.


d.I. Senor, contra gustos no ay disputa.


I. Sir, against ones liking there is no disputing.


d.P. Ansi es verdad, con esta pierna de cabrito bevera, v.m. otra vez, y trae
vnas aceitunas para la tercera.


P. It is so Sir: this leg of kid will make you once again have a quarrel to
the cup. Bring us some olives for the third course.


d.I. Essa ya se llamara comida y no almuerzo.


I. This is to be called a dinner and not a breakefast.


d.P. Porque?


P. Why?


d.I. Porque dizen a buen comero mal comer, tres vezes se a de bever.


I. Because to a good meal or a bad, three draughts only are to be had.


d.P. Ay dize nuestra madre celestina que esta corrupta la letra que por dezir
treze dixo tres.


P. Alas says our mother Celestine, the letter is corrupted, for whereas he
should have said thirteen, he set down three.


d.I. Aora senor bien esta lo hecho, no mas que perderemos la gana de el comer.


I. Well Sir, it suffices, we have eaten well, no more, for we shall loose our
stomachs to eat at dinner.


d.P. den nos a bever otras sendas de la calabriada.


P. Let them give to each of us once again of the Calabriada: a mixed wine,
half one wine and half another.
Calabriada.


d.I. Adonde yremos?


I. Whither shall we go?


d.P, Lo primero a la yglesia, y encomendar nos a Dios.


P. First to the Church, to commend our selves to God.


d.I. Esta muy bien, que por yr a la yglesia ni dar cevada, no se pierde
jornada.


I. It is very good, for neither in going to the Church, nor in giving
prouender to thy horse, was there ever journey hindered or lost.


d.P. cierra aquel cofre, pon en cobro essas baratijas, llama al ama que barra
y componga este aposento.


P. Shut that chest, put up safe this household stuff, call the nurse that
she sweep and dress this lodging.


Al. Tengo de yr acompanando a v.m?


A. Shall I wait on your sir?


d.P. No, sino quedate en casa, ayuda al ama y limpia todos mis vestidos y
ponedla en orden y a las onze llevame el cavallo a palacio.


P. No, but tarry in the house, help the nurse and brush all my apparel and
set the house in order, and at eleven of the clock bring my horse to the court.


Al. Esta muy bien Senor, yo lo hare ansi.


A. Very well sir, I will do it.


d.P. este mi criado Senor don juan, es como malilla que hago de ello que
quiero.


P. This my servant master John is as the Malilla a card agreed upon, that he
that has him may make of him, king, queen, knave, ace, nine, ten, or
whatsoever other card.
Malilla, for I make of him what I will.


d.I. Yaun and a. v. m. en lo cierto para ser bien servido, que quando hombre
tiene muchos criados, unos por otros nunca hazen cosa a derechas.


I. And thereby you are sure to be well served, for when a man has many
servants, one by reason of the other never do that they ought.


d.P. El me sirve de mayordomo, de repostero, de maestre sala, de guarda ropa,
de paje, y de lacayo, y a vezes de despensero.


P. He serves me for steward of my house, for a keeper of my plate, for a
genman-usher, wardrop keeper, page, and for lacquey, and sometimes for cater.


d.I. El parece buen hijo.


I. He seems to be an honest fellow, a good fellow or good servant.


d.P. Bueno senor es tan bueno que a ser mas, no valiera nada, sola vna falta
tiene.


P. Good Sir, so good he is, that if he were better, he were worth nothing,
only one fault he has.


d.I. Qual es?


I. What is that?


d.P. Que es grandissimo enemigo de el agua.


P. That he loves no water by no means.


d.I. E'sso hara lo, por el bien que le sabe el vino, pero essa no se puede
llamar falta, si no sobra.


I. That is for the good he finds in wine, but this cannot be called a want in
him, but a superfluity.


d.P. Muchacho cierra la puerta, con la llave, que a puerta cerrada el Diablo
se buelue.


P. Boy, lock the door with the key, for at a locked door, the devil
himself goes his way.


Al. Ama, trayga un caldero de agua y vna escoba, regaremos y barraremos este
aposento.


A. Nurse, bring a kettle of water and a broom, we will cast water on, and
sweep this chamber.


Ama. Toma primero esta ropa blanca que traxo la labandera.


N. Take first this clean linen which the laundresse brought home.


Al. Aguarde, sacare la memoria para ver si falta algo.


A. Stay a little, I will take out the note to see if any thing be wanting.


Am. Adonde la tienes?


N. Where is it?


Al. Aqui esta en mi faltriquera.


A. Here it is in my pocket.


Am. Lee la pues.


N. Read it then.


Al. Memoria de la ropa de mi amo que llevo la lavandera en diez de marco de
1599. primeramente quatro camisas con sus euellos de lechuguilla.


A. A note of my masters clothes which the laundresse had the tenth of March,
1599. First four shirts, with their ruff bands to them.


Am. Aqui estan A. dos sabanas, dos almoha das de cama, dos pares de calcones
de lienco, tres de calcetas.


N. Here they are. Al. a pair of sheets, two pillowes, two pair of linen
breeches next the skin, three pair of linen hose under the stockings:


A. Aqui estan.


N. Here they are.


Al. Vna dozena de pares de escarpines.


A. A dosen pair of sockes.


Am. No ay aqui mas que ocho.


N. There are but eight here.


Al. Pues quatro faltan a la labandera pedirle he que de quenta dellos, y si
ella los perdio que los pague.


A. Then four wants, I will require of the laundresse that she give account of
them, and if she has lost them that she pay for them.


Am. Anda, que valen quatro escarpines viejos y rotos?


N. Go, what are four old broken sockes worth?


Al. Yten mas dos escofi^tas y quatro tocadores, media dozena de panizuelos de
narizes.


A. Also more, two night coifes and four night kerchiefes, half a doosen of
handkerchiefes.


Am. Aqui esta todo.


N. Here is all.


Al. Dos mesas de manteles, y diez servilletas.


A. Two table clothes and ten table napkins.


Am. Aqui estan.


N. Here they are.


Al. Tres toallas, y un frutero, y dos cuellos de encaje con sus punos.


A. Three towels, and one Fruit cloth to cover the fruit when it is carried to
the table.
fruit cloth and two ruff bands wrought with their ruffes at hand.


Am. Todo esta aqui que nada falta.


N. All is here, nothing is wanting.


Al. Pues doblemos lo, y pongamos lo en el arca.


A. Then let us fold it, and let us put it in the chest.


Am. Como me Llamays para que os ayude a esto, no me Llamarades para que os
ayudara al almuerzo.


N. Wherefore call you me, that I should help you to do this, and would not
call me that I should help you to eat your breakefast?


Al. Alli tengo guardados vnos escamochos que sobraran a mi amo.


A. There have I saved certain fragments which my Master left.


Am. Quiero primero barrer esta sala y aderecarla.


N. I will first sweep this hall and dress it.


Al. Enter tanto limpiare yo la ropa, save de la escobilla?


A. In the mean while will I brush the clothes: do you know where the brush
is?


Am. Vesla alli colgada de aquel clavo, que si fuera perro ya te uviera mordido.


N. See there hanged upon that nail, that if it were a bear it would now have
bit thee.


Al. O quanto polvo tiene esta capa?


A. Oh what a deal of dust has this cloak?


Am. Sacude la primero con vna vara.


N. Beat it out first with a wand.


Al. Ama, mas que bien hechos estan estos calcones?


A. Nurse, how exceeding well are these breeches made.


Am. Tanbien entiendo yo de esso, como puerca de freno.


N. I have as good knowledge therein as a sow in a bridle.


Al. Pues que entiende?


A. What have you knowledge in then?


Am. Al lo que a mi me importa si tu preguntaras por una basquina, una saya
entera, una ropa, un manto, o un cuerpo, una gorguera, de una toca, y cosas
semejantes, supiera te yo responder.


N. In that which belongs unto me, if thou had asked of a peticoate, a
woman's cassocke, a woman's gown a mantell, a pair of bodies, a gorget, or a
woman's head attire, and like matters, I could have answered thee.


Al. De manera que no sabe leer, mas de por el libro de su aldea.


A. So then the priest cannot say mass but in his own book.


Am. Quieres tu, que sea yo, como el ymbidioso, que su cuidado es en lo que no
le va ni le viene.


N. Will thou, that I should be as the envious person which sets his mind
on that which belongs not unto him.


Al. Siempre es virtud saver, aunque sean cosas que parece que no nos ymportan.


A. Yet always it is a virtue to know, although they be things which seem not
to appertain unto us.


Am. Bien se yo, que tu sabras hazer una bellaqueria, y esta no es virtud.


N. I know well, that thou know well how to play the knave, and that I am
sure is no virtue.


Al. El saverla hazer no es malo, el usarla si.


A. To know how to do it is not evil, but to use it it is evil.


Am. Siempre oy dezir que quien las sabe las taken.


N. I always have heard say, he that can play, plaieth.


Al. No sino que quien ha las he chas ha las sospechas.


A. No but whosoever is bad, has suspicion of another to be bad.


Am. Pues vellaco que he hecho yo?


N. Why knave what have I done?


Al. No mas de hazerme reganai algunas vezes.


A. Nothing else, but make me fret and vex my self sometimes.


Ama. No me des tu ocasion.


N. Do not thou give me occasion?


Al. Estonces muchas mercedes, quando le doy ocasion, es menester que me
perdone, que quando no se la doy, poca amistad me haze.


A. Then I thank you heartily, when I give you occasion it is necessary that
you pardon me, that when I give you no occasion, you do me little Meaning
then she does not forgive him any thing, seeing he makes no offense unto her.
courtesy.


Ama. A ora hermano dexate de retoricas y has lo que tu amo te mando.


N. Now brother, leave your rhetoric, and do that thy M. commanded thee.


Al. Si hare aun que bien creo que no por esso me tengo de asentar con el ala
mesa.


A. So will I do, although I believe, for all that I am not to sit at table
with him.


Ama. A lomenos escusaras de que el no te asiente en el rabo.


N. Thou must needs bear with that, for that he does not set it on your bum.


Al. Yo voy a ensillar el cavallo, a dios paredes hasta la buelta.


A. I go to saddle the horse, farewell walls till my return.


Dialogo segundo, en el qual, se trata de comprar y vender joyas y otras cosas
enter un Hidalgo llamado Thomas, y su muger Margarita, y un Mercader y un
Platero. The second Dialogue, wherein is handled to buie and sell jewels and
other things, between a gentleman called Thomas and his wife Margaret, and a
Merchant, and a goldsmith. Th. A Donde quereis que vamos Senora?


Th. WHither will you that we go Lady?


Ma. Vamos a la plateria, y compraremos algunas piecas de plata.


Ma. Let us go to the goldsmithes shops, and we will buie some pieces of plate.


Th. Y de alli?


Th. And from thence whither?


Ma. Yremos a la lonja para comprar algunas cosas.


Ma. We will go to the Exchange to buy some things.


Th. En el nombre de Dios, entremos en esta tienda.


Th. In the name of God let us go into this shop.


Ma. Plegue a el, sea con pie derecho.


Ma. I pray God it be in good time, luckely.


Th. A Senor guarde Dios a v.m.


Th. Oh master goldsmith, God save you.


Pl. Y venga con vuestras mercedes.


Go. And God be in your company.


Th. Mande nos mostrar, algunas buenas piecas.


Th. Cause one to show us some good pieces.


Pl. Que generos quiere v.m. tacas, copas o jarros, fuentes, platos, y
escudillas, es lo mas necessario.


Go. What kinds will your worships see, plain cups, deep cups, or pots, ewers,
platters, or dishes, all these are the most necessary.


Th. Y tanbien copas de salvo, y saleros, vinageras.


Th. And also cups with couers, and saltsellers, and bottles for vinegar and
oil.


Pl. Ola moco, saca aqui toda essa plata de el arca.


Go. Ho sir, take out here all this plate out of this chest.


Ma. Veamos aquellos candeleros y despaviladeras.


Ma. Let us see these candlestickes and snuffers.


Th. Si estos braserillos de mesa estuvieran Sincelados fueran mejores.


T. If those chafindishes for the table were engraven they were better.


Pl. Otros dizen, que la sinceladura es allegadero de mierda, hablando con
perdon de vuestras mercedes.


G. Others say, that the grauing is a gathering of filth, speaking with
reverence of your worships.


Ma. No veo aqui agua manil ninguno.


M. I see no basen here.


Pl. Aqui esta vno sobre dorado y sincelado con su fuente de la misma labor.


G. Here is one gilt over, and graued with his ewer of the same work.


Th. Yo quisiera toda la baxilla de una misma labor que no diferenciaran vnas
piecas de otras.


T. I would have all a cupboord of plate all of one work, that there might not
differ one piece from another.


Pl. Por esso dizen, que tantas opiniones ay como cabecas: otros dizen que la
variedad es la que agrada.


G. Therefore they say, so many men so many minds, others say variety breeds
delight.


Th. Es verdad, pero la variedad ha de ser de cosas enteras, y por que hazer
vna capa de remiendos, no puede agradar a nadie.


T. It is true, but that variety is to be of whole entire things by
themselves, for to make a cloak with patches can please no body.


Pl. Concierte se v.m. conmigo en el precio, que yo se la dare acabada dentro
de pocas dias de la hechura que la quisiere.


Go. Agree with me for the price, and I will make it up for you within these few
days, of what fashion you will have it.


Ma. Siempre en las tardancas ay peligro, y vale mas paxaro en mano que bueytre
bolando.


M. Always delays breed danger, and better a bird in hand then a vulture
flying.


Th. Pues escoja de ay v.m. les piecas que mas le agradaren.


T. Then choose you out those pieces which best shall like you.


Ma. Este salpimentero y esta copa con su sobre copa, y este pichel, y esta
caldereta, y esta porcelana sean las primeras.


M. This salt and pepper box, and this cup with his cover, and this pot made
ewer wise, and this kettle of silver, and this broad cup to drink in are the
best.


Th. A como hemos de dar por Marco de plato is worth xxxij.s. English beside
the fashion.
el marco de estas piecas?


Th. What are we to pay for the half pound of these pieces?


Pl. Por el marco de las llanas me ha de dar. v.m. a cien reales por las
sinceladas, a quinze ducados y por las doradas a treynta ducados.


Go. For the half pound of these plain pieces your worship is to give me
fifty shillings, for the engrauing fifteen ducates, and for the gilt thirty
ducates.


Th. Si el pedir fuera dar, no se avia hecho mala hazienda oy, pero de el dicho
a el hecho ay gran trecho.


Th. If asking were giving you had not made an ill match to day, but there is a
great distance betwixt the word and the deed.


Pl Al de menos no lo dare yo por lo, que. v.m. me ha o frecido hasta agora.


Go. At least I will not give it for that you have offered me as yet.


Th. Esta tan caro, que yo no se que le ofrezca si no es vna A dance so
called. Also an abatement.
baxa.


Th. You are so dear that I know not what I may offer for it, if there be no
abatement.


Pl. Essa yo la dancare despues que. v. m. aya tanido su alta.


Go. That will I dance after your worship has struck the treble.


Th. Mi mas alta Senor, es a seis ducados la llana, y a cien reales, la
sincelada, y la dorada, a veinte ducados.


Th. My highest is six ducates the plain, and fifty shillings the engraven,
and the gilt twenty ducates.


Pl. Muy bien despachado yva yo, mas me tienen ami de costa.


Go. This business is well dispatched now, they cost me more.


Th. Pues Senor torn a dancar a ver en que para.


Th. But sir, come back and dance again, to see upon what you stick.


Pl. En cada genero, le quitare a. v.m. dos ducados y no mas.


Go. In every kind of them I will abate two ducates and no more.


Th. Muy mal danco. v.m. no le toco mas.


Th. You dance very ill, I play no more.


Pl. Pues yo le aseguro a. v.m. que no lo halle mas varato en la call.


Go. But I assure your worship that you cannot find better cheap in the
street.


Th. Call que si hallare, que donde vna puerta se cierra ciento se abren.


Th. Hold your peace, for I will find: for where one door shuts a hundred do
open.


Ma. Si ha de valor mi voto, dezir le he.


Ma. If my voice may prevail, i will strike the stroke.


Pl. Diga le v.m. que le soy muy devoto.


Go. Let your worship speak on, for I am much devoted.


Ma. Pues otro tanto como baxo el platero, suba el senor Tomas y no se hable
mas.


Ma. Then so much as the goldsmith has abated, so much let master Thomas rise,
and let there be no more words.


Pl. Porque su palabra de v.m. no buelva atras, etc.


Go. For that your worships word may be taken, etc.


Th. No queria v.m. mas, ora peselo, pesar malo le de dios a el diablo.


Th. You can desire no more, now weigh it, God give ill weight to the devil.


Pl. Lleven lo a casa que alla lo pesaremos.


Go. Carry it to your house, there we will weigh it.


Th. Moco carga con todo y Lleva lo a casa.


Th. Sir, take up all this and carry it home.


Pl. Han de bolver se luego vuestras mercedes?


Go. Are your worships to come back again this way by and by?


Th. No hasta de aqui a dos oras, que y'mos a comprar otras cosas.


Th. Not till within this two hours, for we go to buy other things.


Pl. Si v. m. es servido de que le acompane, hazer lo he.


Go. If it please you, that I go with you, I will.


Ma. Guarde Dios a v.m. que no queremos mas compania.


Ma. God keep you, we will no more company.


Th. En ninguna cosa gasto el dinero, de mejor gana que en plata.


Th. In nothing I spend money with a better will then in plate.


Ma. Lo que se gasta en plata no es gastar, si no trocar piecas chicas por
piecas grandes.


Ma. That which is laid out in plate is not wasted, but to change small pieces
for great pieces.


Th. Y tanbien por que cabe en ella lo que dizen que no cabe en un saco que es
honra y provecho.


Th. And also there is contained in it that they say is not contained in a
sack, which is Honor and profit is not held together in one bag.
i. the fine dishes of earth painted such as are brought from Venice.
honor and profit.


Ma. Si, por que si hombre se quiere servir con vidrio o china, o barro, mas
cuesta lo que se quiebra enter ano que la hechura de la plata.


Ma. Yea, for if a man will serve his turn with glass, or China metal, or
earth, that which is broken thereof, costs more in a year then the fashion of
the plate.


Th. Y con vna baxilla que hombre compra vna vez, tiene para hijos, nietos, y
visnietos.


Th. And for a cupboord that a man buieth once, he is furnished for his
children, nephews, and nephews children.


Ma. Aora vamos a la joyeria.


Ma. Now let us go to the place where they sell jewels.


Th. Esse es un camino que yo hago de muy mala gana.


Th. This is a way that I go unwillingly.


Ma. Por que razon?


Ma. What is the reason?


Th. Por que estas joyas son como las donzellas, que mientras estan
encerradasson de mucho valor, y en sacando las fuera, le pierden todo y no
valen nada.


Th. Because these jewels are as maidens, that while they are maids and kept
in, they are of much value, and in taking them abroad they loose all, and are
worth nothing.


Ma. Si pero, lo que se vsa no se escusa.


Ma. Yea, but that which is a custom cannot be shunned, custom needs no
excuse.


Th. Al mal vso quebrar le la pierna.


Th. But it is good to break the legs of an ill custom.


Ma. No querais senor poner vos puertas a el campo ni coregir el mundo, que
ansi le hallastes y ansi le haveis de dexar.


Ma. I would not have you Sir i. to do things impossible.
make doors for the fields, and correct the whole world: for so you found it,
and so shall you leave it.


Th. Ora pues corra ol rio por do suele, pues se arendo la renta con estas
condiciones.


Th. Why then let the river run where it was wont, seeing the thing was hired
with these conditions.


Ma. Entremos en esta tienda que es la mas rica.


Ma. Let us go into this shop, for it is the richest.


Me. Que manda v.m. senor cauallero, que ha menester?


Me. What does your worship command, what have you need of?


Th. Yo ninguna cosa, esta senora, muchas.


Th. I of nothing, this gentlewoman of many things.


Me. Pues pida su merced, que todo se le dara aqui a muy buen precio.


Me. Then let her require what, and all shall be given her very good cheap.


Ma. Muestre me aca algunos tocados, guirnaldillas, raposos, randas,
deshilados, tocas de todas suertes, y tan bien venga la olanda delgada,
cambray, y otras suertes de liencos.


Ma. Show me some women's head attire, garland head attire, wires of silver,
bone work or bone lace, stitched work, head attire of all sorts, and also
bring fine holland, cambrecke, and other sorts of linen.


Me. Enter v.m. que todo lo vera aqui.


Me. May it please your worship come in, for you shall see all here.


Ma. Todo esto es obra tosca mas Prima. i. chief, principal or a she cosen
german.
prima la quiero.


Ma. All this is gross work, I would see more principal.


Th. Para prima Senora no es buena la hija de vuestro tio?


Th. Will not your uncles daughter serve you for a cosen?


Ma. Es muy gorda aquella, y por esso queria otra mas delgada.


Ma. This is very course, and therefore would I have other finer.


Me. Pues en esta caxa vera. v.m. el primor del mundo, todo es obra de Milan.


Me. Then in this chest shall your worship see the principallest that is, all is
work of Milan.


Th. Obra de Milan veeme y no me tangas.


Th. Work of Milan Because they are toies, if you touch them they break in
pieces.
see me but touch me not.


Ma. Nada de esto me contenta.


Ma. None of these pleases me.


Me. Espanto me como se caso v.m. siendo tan mal contentadiza.


Me. I wonder how your worship married being so diverse to please your fancy.


Th. Fue por que vido a el nobio de noche, y como dizen entonces todos los
gatos son pardos.


Th. It was because she saw the bridegroom by night, and as they say, then
all cats are gray eied.


Ma. Muestre me otra mejor obra si tiene, y dexese de preguntar quantos anos
tengo.


Ma. Show me some better work, if you have any, and leave of to ask how old
I am.


Me. Aora esta es la ultima prueva, ve aqui v.m. obra de argenteria ve alli de
aljofar, estotra de abalorio, y esta de perlas, escoja como peras en tabaque.


Me. Now is the last trial, see here work of silver, there of small pearl,
this other of black bugles, and this of pearl, choose out as pears in a
basket.


Ma. Por cierto en ruin hato, poco ay que escojer.


Ma. Verily in a bad flock, this is but a small choice.


Me. A esto llama v. m. ruin, reo que es de peor condition que el philosopho
Democrito, que no hallo cosa en el mundo que no tubiesse falta.


Me. Call you this bad, I believe that you are of a worse condition then the
Philosopher Democritus, which found nothing in the world, which had not a fault.


Th. Esso sin Democrito lo digo yo, que no ay cosa perfecta en el mundo.


Th. I say this without Democritus, that there is nothing perfect in the world.


Me. Esso verificarse ha, en cosas naturales, que en las de el art puede aver
perfeccion cada vna en su genero.


Me. This is to be verified in natural things, for in those things of art,
there may be perfection, every thing in his kind.


Th. Pues que pensais vos que es el art, sino ymitador de la natura, y si en
la natura no ay perfecion menos la avra en el art su imitador.


Th. Why what think you that art is any thing else but a follower of nature,
and if nature has not her perfection, much less shall there be any in art
her follower.


Me. Yo senor no soy philosopho, ni quiero contender con v. m. mis mercaderias
querria que tubiessen su perfecion en el precio.


Me. Sir I am not a Philosopher, neither will I contend with your worship, I
would my merchandises had their perfection in the price.


Ma. Si no le tienen en su valor, no le pueden tener en el precio.


Ma. If they have it not in their worth, they cannot have it in their price:


Me. Aora senora vea v.m. lo que mas le contenta, y tome lo que no tengo otra
cosa mejor.


Me. Now lady, see that which best likes you, and take it, for I have no
better.


Ma. Este tocado, este cuello, esta gargantilla de perlas, este regalillo, y
este avanillo, esta dos pares deguentes de flores, y esta pretina, me parecen
bien, todo lo de mas no.


Ma. This kerchiefe, this band, this neckelace of pearl, this muffe, and But
not of feathers, for they use no feather fans in Spain.
this fan, these two pair of gloves perfumed, and this girdle likes me, all
the rest I care not for.


Th. Quanto monta todo esso?


Th. How much comes all this to?


Me. Todo monta tres cientos reales.


Me. All comes to i. Seven pound ten shillings.
three hundred rials, or six pences.


Th. Tres cientos anos este de un lado quien tal diere.


Th. Let him lie three hundred years on one side that should give so much.


Me. Pues por que no le alcance a v.m. essa maldicion dos cientos, y ochenta.


Me. Then because this curse may not light upon you, give two hundred and four
score.


Th. No entiendo bien essa cuenta.


Th. I understand not well this reckoning.


Me. Dos vezes, se refiere a ciento y tambien al quarenta.
Dos vezes ciento y quarenta.


Me. Twice a hundred, and twice forty.


Ma. Buena esta la copla, no han de ser mas que dos cientos y cinquenta en todo.


Ma. This copla is well, it should be no more then two hundred and fifty in
all.


Me. Con v. m. el perder es ganar, pues manda que se a ansi, yo no hablare mas
palabra.


Me. With your worship to lose is gain, seeing you command so, I will not
speak a word more.


Th. Para que quiere hablar mas, si con las habladas ha hecho su agosto.


Th. Why would you speak any more, if with that which is spoken you have made
your harvest.


Me. Por cierto senor de este agosto, poca cose cha he cogido.


Me. Truly sir, of this harvest I have gotten but a little fruit.


Th. Senor si hiziera buena sementera cogiera mas.


Th. If you had made your seed time better, you had reaped more.


Me. Aun tengo aqui otras muchas mercaderias muy curiosas que v.m. no ha visto.


Me. Yet have I many other merchandises very fine, that your worship has not
seen yet.


Ma. Que son?


Ma. What are they?


Me. Sartillas, joyeles, cintas de resplandor, brocadetes, rodetes cofias de
oro, arandelas, alcacuellos, gorgueras de red, camisas labradas, gargantillas
de perlas, y ambar, todo genero de afeite y de perfumes, vea v. m. si le
contenta algo.


Me. Chains of ieat amber, or such like, tablet jewels, girdles fair to see
to, cloth of gold the woorser sort, head rolls, coifes of gold, supporters,
gorgets of net work, wrought shirts or smockes, neck laces of pearls and
amber, all kind of painting, and perfumes, see if you like any.


Ma. Otro dia vernemos mas de espacio para ver todo esso.


Ma. We will come another day, more at leisure to see all this.


Th. Pareceme senor que es vuestro oficio, como el de los torneros engana
muchachos y saca dineros.


Th. It seems to me sir, that your trade is as that of the i. Make tops for
children.
turners, which deceiues boys and gets money.


Me. Pues es mi senora Margarita muchacho?


Me. Why is my Lady Margaret a boy?


Th. Basta que sea enganada.


Th. It suffices that she be deceived.


Me. A fee que no ha de saver poco quien la ha de engnar.


Me. In faith, he is not to know a little that must deceive her.


Th. Enganarse ha ella mesma a si misma.


Th. She her self will deceive her self.


Me. Como?


Me. How?


Sh. Dando dineros por estas bugerias que reluzen yno es oro todo, y quando
vaya a casa, se hallara con no nada enter dos platos.


Th. In giving money for these childish toies, which shine and yet are not all
gold, and when she goes home, it will be found nothing between two platters.


Me. Para que es el dinero si no para luzirse con ello.


Me. Why is money made, but to make show therewith?


Th. Se que esto aunque reluze no luze.


Th. I know that this, although it glitter double, it shines not.


Ma. Ya os he dicho senor, que os vais al coriente de la de mas gente, y pues
os casastes como los otros passa por donde los otros, no andeis por los
estremos que todo hombre estremado no esta un dedo de loco, estas son cargas de
el casamiento.


Ma. I have already told you sir, that you go the common course of the most,
and seeing you have married as other men have, pass that way as other men do,
go not by extremities, for every man that is in his extremities, is not a
fingers breadth from a fool, these be the charges of marriage.


Th. La ayuda de el escaravajo que dexa la carga quanto le ayudan.


Th. The help of marriage The nature of the beetle in the cow-turd when another
comes to help him, leaves all: so in marriage, when another comes to help to
maintain his wife, he forsakes her.
like the help of the beetle under the cow-turd, which forsakes the burden as
soon as they help him.


Ma. Aora senor essas son pendencias que se han de renir en casa vamonos.


Ma. Sir, these are quarrels to be chidden out at home. Let us go.


Th. Vamos senora, toma vuestro dinero Senor mercader.


Th. Let us go, take your money Master Merchant.


Me. Yo quedo muy contento y beso a v.m. las manos y vea si me manda otra cosa.


Me. I am very well content, and kiss your hands, and see if you command any
thing else.


Th. Que con salud que tengamos, nunca mas nos veamos.


Th. Sow may have health that we never see one an other more.


Me. Por cierto Senor, yo no soy tan yngrato, que cada dia queria ver a v.m.
por mi casa.


Me. Truly sir I am not so ungrateful, but that every day I would see your
worship by my house.


Th. Yo creo que queriades ver mi bolsa mas no a mi.


Th. I believe you would see my purse rather then me.


Me. No soy tan codicioso como a v. m. le parezco.


Me. I am not so covetous as I seem unto you.


Th. No digo yo que lo soys, pero apostare que quercis mas un real de a quatro,
que uno de a dos.


Th. I say not that you are, but I will lay a wager, that you had rather have
two shillings than one.


Me. Por adivino le podrian a v. m. castigar.


Me. They might well punish you for a soothsayer.


Th. Lo que con los ojos veo con el dedo lo adivino.


Th. That which with the eyes I see, I conjecture with my finger.


Ma. A Dios mercader.


Ma. God be with you merchant.


Me. Beso a v.m. las manos mi Senora.


Me. Lady I kiss your hands.


Ma. Vamos a ora a la lonja a comprar sedas.


Ma. Let us go now to the exchange to buy silks.


Th. Que quereis comprar Senora?


Th. What would you buy?


Ma. Que terciopelo, raso, damasco, tafetan, rico, gorgaran, chamelote,
lanillas para vestiros a vos y ami.


Ma. What, plain velvet, damask, tafata, uncut velvet, gogram, chamlet,
sarge, to cloth you and my self.


Th. Para esso es menester otro dia y a es tarde vamos a comer que manana
yremos a comprar esso.


Th. For all this another day will serve, it is late now let us go to dinner,
for to morrow we will go to buy this.


Ma. Vamos pues aunque yo mas quisiera que quedara oy todo hecho, que no tener
que salir manana otra buelta.


Ma. Let us go then, although I would rather that al were done to day, then to
come forth another turn to morrow.


Th. Anda, que bien os holgais depassear un rato, para que me quereis hazer
entender de el cielo cebolla?


Th. Go, for you take good pleasure to walk a while, wherefore you would make
me believe the moon is made of a green cheese?


Ma. No seais malicioso que no medrareis.


Ma. Be not malicious, for you shall thrive never the sooner.


Th. Muchacho corre, llama a el platero que venga a pesar la plata y por su
dinero.


Th. Boy, run call the goldsmith, that he come to weigh the plate and fetch his
money:


Dialogo tercero, de un combite, enter cinco cavalleros amigos, llamados,
Guzman, Rodrigo, don Lorenco, Mendoca, y Osorio, un maestre sala, y un paje, en
el qual, se trata, de cosas pertenecientes a un combite con otras platicas, y
dichos agudos. The third Dialogue of a banquet between five gentlemen
friends, called Gusman, Rodricke, sir Lorenco, Mendoca, Osorio, a gentleman
usher, and a Page, in which are handled things belonging to a banquet with
other speeches and witty sayings. G. OLa, esta ay algun paje?


G. HOe, is there any Page there?


P. Senor.


P. Sir.


G. Saues a casa de don Rodrigo?


G. Do thou know master Rodrick his house?


P. Si Senor.


P. Yea sir.


G. Pues vee alla, dile que le beso las manos, y que si le parece ora de que
nos veamos.


G. Then go thither and tell him that I commend me to him, and if he think
good now, that we may meet together.


P. Aqui esta un criado de el Senor don Lorenco.


P. Here is a servant of sir Lorenco.


G. Enter.


G. Let him come in.


Cr. Don Lorenco mi Senor, besa a v.m. las manos y embia a saber si esta en
casa, por que tiene un negocio que tratar con. v. m.


S. Sir Lorenco my master commends him unto your worship, and sendes me to know
whether you be at home, for he has a business to entreat of with you.


G. Que beso a su merced las manos, y que yo fuera a la Suya, a besarse las si
no tuviera una ocupacion forcosa que esperar, la qual tanbien toca a su merced
que si viniere, sera el bien venido y se tratara de todo.


G. I thank him, and I would have come unto his house to have saluted him, if
I had not tarried here about a business of importance, the which also concerns
him, if he come he shall be welcome, and we will talk at large.


Cr. Beso a v.m. las manos.


S. I take my leave of your worship.


G. Anda con Dios, ola Dezid a el maestre sala que haga poner essas mesas, que
vernan ya los convidados.


G. God be with you. Ho tell the gentleman usher that he make the tables to be
covered, for the guests will come by and by.


M. Senor v.m. como se quiere servir oy, ala Ytaliana, o ala Franceza, o a la
Ynglesa, o a la Flamenca, o a la Todesca?


V. Sir will your worship have your service today, after the Italian, after the
French, after the English, after the Flemish, or after the Dutch manner?


G. De todos essos estremos me sacad un medio, no quiero tantas cerimonias,
como el Ytaliano, ni quiero tanta curiosidad, como el Frances, ni quiero tanta
abundancia, como el Yngles, ni quiero que la comida sea tan larga, como el
Flamenco ni tan umida como el tudesco, mas de todos estos estremos, componeme
un medio a la Espanola.


G. Of all these extremes take me out one mean, I will not have so many
ceremonies as the Italian, neither will I so much curiosity as the French,
neither such abundandance as the English, neither will I that the meal be so
long as the Flemmings, nor so moist as the Dutch, but of all these extremes,
compound me a mean after the Spanish fashion.


M. Ansi se hara como v.m. lo manda.


V. So shall it be as your worship commands.


G. Vuestro mayor cuidado sea que la comida sea caliente y la bevida fria.


G. Let your chiefest care be that the meat be hot, and In Spain they cool
their wine by setting the flagons in snow water.
the drink cool.


M. Que vinos quiere v.m.


V. What wines will your worship have?


G. De todos generos, blancos, tinto, haloque, clarete, candia, ribadauia, san
Martin, toro, y sidra, porque aya de todo.


G. Of all sorts, white sack, deep red brackish wine, hallocke, claret,
candie, Ribadauia a whitish sack growing in Galicia about a village called
Ribadauia.
Ribadavia, Wine of S. Martin the most delicate wine of Spain growing about S.
Martina town in the kingdom of Toledo in Spain.
S. Martin, Toro, and Cider, for that there may be of every sort.


P. Aqui viene el senor don Rodrigo.


P. Here comes master Roderick.


G. O senor. v.m. y las buenos anos.


G. Oh sir you are as welcome as the good year.


R. Beso a.v.m. las manos.


R. Sir I thank you heartily.


G. Como esta. v.m. parece que coxea.


G. How do you sir, it seems you halt.


R. Dime un golpe a el apear de el cavallo en esta espinilla.


R. I hit my self a blow in lighting from my horse, in this shin bone.


G. En ora mala sea, veamos si es algo.


G. In ill time, let us see if it be any thing.


R. No senor, si no que es como dizen dolor de cobdo, dolor de esposo, duele
mucho y dura poco.


R. No sir, it is (as they say) like the pain of a blow on the elbow, or the
sorrow of a bridegroom, Because they have had small conversation together to
increase love.
it greeueth much and is quickly done.


G. Mas vale ansi.


G. It is the better.


R. Como tiene. v.m. a mi senora dona Maria y a toda su casa?


R. How does my lady Mary your wife, and all your family.


G. A servicio de. v.m. aunque ella por no aver me ynbidia dixo, que pues yo
comia con mis amigos, ella se queria yr a comer con sus amigas.


G. At your service, although she says (not because she enuies me) that since
I banquet with my friends, she would go to dinner to her friends.


R. Hizo su merced muy discretamente, en pagar le a. v.m. en la mis- ma moneda.


R. She dealt very discreetely to pay you with the same money.


M. Todos estos senores conbidados estan aqui, y la comida a punto quando
vuessas mercedes fueren servidos, se podran asentar.


V. All the gentlemen that are invited are here, and dinner is ready, when
your worships please, you may sit down.


G. Senor don Lorenco. v.m. tiene las manas de el Rey que adonde no esta no le
hallan.


G. Sir Lorenco you have the property of a king, that where he is not, there
they find him not.


L. Y v. m. quiere parecerse Alcina de quien dize Orlando que por engano,
tray'alos hombres a gozar de sus regalos.


L. And you will be like Alcina of whom Orlando makes mention, which brought
men to take pleasure in her dainties to entrap them.


G. Pero, no seran vuessas mercedes convertidos en animales como ella hazia.


G. But you shall not be turned into beasts as she turned them.


L. No me aseguro, que dexe de bolverse verse alguno en corra.


L. I am not assured of that, for some of us may suffer himself to be i. To be
drunk
turned into a fox.


R. De buen vino quien quiera se caca vna en el ano.


R. Whosoever loves good wine, i. Whips the cat, or is drunk once a year.
hunts the fox once a year.


G. Cada vno su alma en su palma, qual el tiempo tal sea el tiento. Ea Senores
tomen sillas v. s. mercedes y sienten se.


G. Every one holds free will in his hands, as the time requires so frame thy
desires. Go to gentlemen betake your selves to your chaires and sit down.


L. Dexenos v. m. ante todas cosas contenplar un rato la curiosidad de la mesa.


L. Suffer us I pray above all things to behold a while the curiousnes of
this table.


R. No tiene mas piecas un juego de mastre coral, que estan hechas de las
servilletas.


R. A iuglar has no more inventions and pieces then are made in these Table
napkins at a banquet or inuiting in Spain set out with diverse fashions, as of
beasts, birds, etc. this the Maestresala always does.
table napkins.


O. Yo aqui veo vna galera, que no le falta mas, que la chusma y palamenta.


O. I see here a gally, there wants nothing but the gallie slaves and the
oars.


M. Pues aca esta un cavalloque no se yo, si el cavallo de Troya era tan bien
hecho.


M. And here is a horse, that I know not if the horse of Troy were so well made.


L. A mi me ha caido ensuerte el escudo de Hercules.


L. And here has fallen to my lot Hercules shield.


R. Y este que esta aqui, que es?


R. And this which is here what is it?


M. A mi me parece, ques vna piramida de las de Egipto.


M. It seems to me to be one of the There were many Piramides, but two of them
were reckoned one of the seven wonders of the world.
Piramides of Egypt.


O. O es el sepulcro de mausalo, o la torre de babel.


O. Or it is Mausalus Which for the magnificence thereof was accounted one of
the woonders of the world, and was built by his wife Queen Artemisia.
Tomb, or the tower of Babell.


G. Aora dexen esso vuessas marcedes y sientense, si, son servidos.


G. Now leave off this, and sit down if it please you.


R. No se ipuede dexar de mirar el castillo de la ensalada.


R. One cannot choose but look upon the sallet made like a castle.


L. Por mi vida, que no tiene mejor vista el de Milan.


L. In faith the castle of Milan is no better to see to.


G. Si cada cosa se ha de mirar de por si, yr se nos ha el dia en flores. Cada
vna tire su silla, que esta no es mesa de cumplimientos.


G. If we must stand to behold every thing by it self, the time will be gone
without doing any thing. Every one draw his chair, for this is not a table of
complements.


O. No los deve aver enter amigos.


O. They ought not to be among friends.


G. Yo soy ynimicissimo de cerimonias.


G. I am the greatest enemy in the world to ceremonies.


R. A mi no me parecen bien ningunas, si no son las que haze la yglesia.


R. None of them seem good unto me, except it be those which the church makes.


G. Ola, platos, tome v. m. esse senor don Lorenco.


G. Hola, They eat in little dishes their meat and not upon trenchers in
Spain.
dishes. Take this sir Lorenso.


L. Haga v.m. parasi, que lo mismo hara cada vno.


L. Make a dish for your self, for every one will do the like.


R. No se qual sea mejor v'so este que vsamos en Espana o el que se v'sa en
ynglaterra.


R. I know not which is the better custom which we use in Spain, or that
which is used in England.


G. Que es el v'so de ynglaterra?


G. What is the manner of England?


R. Comer primero lo cozido, que lo assado, nos otros hazemos a el reves.


R. To eat their sodde meat first before their roast, we do quite contrary.


L. Segun reglas de medicina primero se deven comer los manjares que son mas
duros de digestion


L. According to the rules of Physic, men ought first to eat those meats
which are most hard of digestion.


G. Y esta esso en razon para que se venga a hazer la digestion en un tiempo.


G. And that stands with reason, because digestion may be made together.


L. Pues que sea mas duro de digestion, lo asado que lo cozido, es cosa clara.


L. Then that roastmeate is more hard of digestion then the sodde, it is a
thing out of doubt.


O. Yo como soy mas goloso, hallo otra razon.


O. I that am a great eater, find another reason.


L. Qual es?


L. What is it?


O. Que toda cosa assada, es mas sabrosa que la cozida, y assi, yo lo querria a
el principio por que sobre buen cimiento buen edificio se haze.


O. That every thing roasted is more sweet to the taste then the sodde, and so
therefore would I have it at the first, for upon a good foundation, a good
building is made.


Me. Pues yo aunque callo, piedras apano.


M. He that is silent gathers reasons to confute his adversary.
Although I hold my peace, I gather up stones.


R. Anda v. m. discreto, que obeja que bala bocado pierde.


R. You say very right, for that sheep that bleateth loses a bit.


G. A mi me parece que andan ya en seco estos molinos.


G. Me thinks these milles go now dry.


L. De la boca me lo quito v.m.


L. You took it out of my mouth.


G. Pues si yo lo quite, justo es que yo lo ponga. Ola, dad nos de bever, cada
vno pida lo que mas gusto le diere, que de todo ay.


G. If I took it out, it is reason I should put it in. Hola give us drink,
every one ask for that which he likes best, for there is of every sort.


R. Paje yo soy muy devoto de a quel santo que partio la capa con el pobre.


R. Page, I have great devotion to that Saint Martin gave a piece of his cloak
to a poor man, and wine of Saint Martin the most dainty of all Spain.
Saint which departed with a piece of his cloak to a poor man.


P. A buen entendedor pocas palabras, de lo de sant Martin quiere v.m.


P. To a good understander a word is enough, you would have that of Saint
Martin.


R. O como eres discreto, Dios me de siempre contienda, conquien me entienda.


R. O how you are in the right, God send me to dispute always with him that
understands what I say.


L. Pues yo un tiempo fui torero, y me holgava siempre con He alludes to wine
of Toro, wines called vino de Toro, which is a Bull, as also a towns name.
toros bravos.


L. I was once a courser of bulls, and I always took pleasure in fierce He
alludes to wine of Toro, wines called vino de Toro, which is a Bull, as also a
towns name.
bulls.


G. Senores yo brindo a quien tossiere.


G. Gentlemen, I drink to him that shall cough.


O. Vala me Dios y que resfriados que estamos todos, no se toss mas en un
sermon de quaresma.


O. God bless me, and what coldes we have all taken, there is not more
coughing in a lenten sermon.


R. Essa gracia, dizen que tenemos los Espanoles que somos como monas amigos de
hazer lo que vemos hazer a otros.


R. This fashion (they say) that we Spaniards have, that we are as apes, which
do that which they see others to do.


L. Ansi dize un refran, si no hago lo que veo, todo me meo.


L. So says the proverb, If I do not what I see, I all to bepisse me.


G. Cada vno asga de su perdiz, y la aderece como mejor le pareciere, ay astan
limones, limas, naranjas, pimienta, y todo lo demas.


G. Every one fasten on his partridge and order him as best shall seem good
unto him, there are limons and orenges, pepper, and all things else.


R. La perdiz, dizen los medicos, que se a de comer enter tres companeros
paraque no haga mal.


R. A partridge, as physicians say, is to be eaten between three companions,
that he may do no harm.


L. Tienen razon que han de ser el hombre, un gato, y un perro.


L. They say true, that is, between a man, a cat and a dog.


O. Vuestras mercedes no han notado la variedad de assados que aqui nos han
traido.


O. You have not marked the variety of the roast, which here they have brought
us.


R. Que esta debaxo de aquella enramada?


R. What is under those green boughs?


G. Vna cabeca de javali.


G. The head of a wild boar.


R. Estonces ramos de taverna son aquellos.


R. Then it is the bush of a tavern.


L. Antes a el contrario que el ramo en la taberna llama a los borrachos a el
vino, y aquellos llaman a el mismo vino, asi como la piedra yman el azero.


L. Rather the contrary, for the tavern bush inuites those that love drink
to the wine, and these boughs inuites or draws unto it wine it self, even as
the loadstone draws to it steel.


O. A Senor Mendoza parti de esse Xigote con vuestros amigos.


O. A master Mendoza, part this roast leg of mutton with your friends.


M. Senor el mio murio supito.


M. Sir mine died suddenly.


R. Parece que haveis respondido, un gran A defesio.i. disparate.


R. It seems you have answered with a speech quite beside the purpose.


O. Pues aunque lo parece, no lo es, que a su provecho ha hablado el senor
Mendoza.


O. Although it seem, it is not so, for master Mendoza has spoken it for his
advantage.


R. Pues, si no nos lo declara, no saldremos de dubda.


R. But if he do not expound it, we shall not know what it means.


M. Senor, es el caso, que dos companeros llegaron a una venta y como no
uviesse otra cosa que cenar, que una gallina assada, el uno de ellos que tenia
buena hambre, y era hombre astuto, dixo a el otro companero, entanto que yo
aparo esta gallina, contame de que murio vuestro padre: el otro se comenco a
enternecer, y con lagrimas le relato un proceso bien largo de la enfermedad de
su padre, y como avia muerto, en lo qual tardo tanto, que quando acordo ya el
otro se avia comido, casi toda la gallina, el hallando se burlado, quiso
esquitarse y dixo le companero, pues yo os he contado la muerte de mi padre,
contame vos, la, de el vuestro, el companero, por no perder La part que le
quedava y concluir presto razones, respondio, Senor, el mio murio supito: con
la qual Repuesta el otro quedo muy burlado y el le ayudo a despachar lo que
faltava.


M. Sir, this it is, that two companions came to an Inn, upon the high way,
and as there was nothing else to suppe withal, but one hen roasted: one of
them which was well hungry and a crafty fellow, said to the other companion,
in the mean while that I break up and order this hen, recount unto me whereof
your father died. The other began to be tender hearted, and with tears related
unto him a long process of the sickness of his father, and how he died, wherein
he stood so long, that when he remembered himself, the other had already eaten
almost all the hen, he finding himself mocked, would quite himself, and said
unto him, companion, seeing I have told you the death of my father, do you
tell me now the death of your father: his companion for that he would not
loose that part which remained, and because he would be short answered, Sir, my
father died suddenly, with which answer he gave his fellow a scoff, and
himself time to dispatch the rest.


R. Pues aqui no corre ese riesgo.


R. But here is not the like danger.


M. No, pero yo soy como el cuclillo que no canto bien hasta que tengo el
estomago lleno.


M. Although not, I am like the cuckoo, which sing not until I have my
stomach full.


L. Con licencia de el senor Guzman quiero ymbiar esta pella de manjar blanco a
un amigo.


L. With leave of Master Guzman, I will send this round ball of A meat made of
breasts of hens, milk, sugar, rice beaten, and spices mixed withal, one of
the daintiest meats used.
Manjar blanco to a friend.


G. Con mi licencia no yra sola si no la acompana v. m. con aquel pavo, o este
faisan o el francolin.


G. With my leave it shall not go alone, but that you accompany with it, this
peacock, this feasant, or this francolin bird.


R. Por vida de don Lorenco es amigo o amiga?


R. I pray you heartily Sir Lorenco, is it a he friend or she friend?


L. Quereis que confiesse sin tormento.


L. Will you that I confess without the rack?


G. Y quando os le den antes martyr que confessor.


G. And when they do rack you, rather prove a martyr then a confessor.


O. O que reverenda que viene nuestra madre la olla.


O. O what a reverend person comes here, our mother the meat.


R. Y bien adornada de todas sus pertenencias.


R. And well adorned with all her appurtenances.


M. Yo deseo saver, donde o porque le llamaron olla podrida?


M. I desire to know, from whence or why they called it A rotten or putrified
pot. Also a hotch-potch of many meats together
Olla podrida.


L. Metaforicamente, porque assi como en un muladar se pudren muchas cosas
diferentes, y de todas se haze la basura assi la olla que es conpuesta de
muchas cosas se viene a hazer un guizado o potaje.


L. Metaphorically, because even as in a dung hill many different things rot
together, and of all these they make dung for the field: even so the pot which
is compounded of many things is made one iellie or potage.


M. Tan buena metafora fue essa como el que llamo Rey a el que guarda los
puercos.


M. This was as good a metaphor as that of him, which called the king the
keeper of hogs.


O. Por mi passatiempo yo me quiero poner acontar de quantas cosas esta
compuesta su merced de nuestra olla, carnero, vaca, tocino.


O. For my recreation I will set my self to reckon, of how many things this
worshipful the pot, is compounded, first mutton, beef, and bacon.


d.L. Essas son las tres potencias de la olla como las de la alma, memoria,
entendimiento, voluntad.


L. These are the three powers of the pot, as the three powers of the soul,
memory, understanding, will.


O. Luego se sigue repollo, navos, cevollas, ajos.


O. Now follow cabbage, turnips, onyons, garlic.


d.L. Essas son las quatro virtudes cardinales.


L. These be the four cardinal virtues.


O. Cavecas y pies de aves, culantro verde, alcarabea, cominos, todas especias,
las de mas yervas, y no las conosco, otro las quente.


O. The heads and feet of birds, the herb carobes or S. John's herb,
comines, all sorts of spices, the most part of herbs, I know them not, let
another speak of them.


d.R. Lo que yo contare despues, sera lo bien que me ha sabido.


R. That which I will say of it shall be the good I have tasted in it.


d.L. De el marquis chapin vitelo Ytaliano, que fue uno de los mas valientes
soldados que ha tenido aquella nation, se quenta que quando fue a Espana le
dieron tanto gusto estas ollas, que nunca querria comer en su casa, si no que y
endo por la call olia en casa de algun labrador rico, adonde se comia alguna
olla de estas, y se entrava alla y se a sentaua a comer con el.


L. Of marquis Chapin Vitelo, an Italian, which was one of the most valiant
soldiers, which that nation has had, it is said, that when he went to
Spain, these hodgpots liked his taste so well, that he never would dine in
his own house, but that going in the street, where he smelt in the house of
any rich farmer, where any of these hodgpots were eaten, there he entered, and
sat down to diner with him.


d.R. Devialo de hazerpor comer a costa agena.


R. Belike he did that to dine at another man's charges.


L. No, que antes que saliesse mandava a su mayordomo pagasse toda la costa de
la olla.


L. No, for before he went out of doors he commanded his steward to pai^ all
the cost of the hodgepot.


M. Pare, mira como pones esse plato no deribes el salero.


M. Stay, look how thou put this platter, do not throw down the
salt-seller.


L. Si, si, guarda, que es el aguero de los mendozas.


L. Yea, yea, take heed, for it is the Mendozas malum omen.


R. Ya todos somos Mendozas en esso.


R. We are all Mendozas in this.


L. Essa rastra nos quedo de la gentilidad.


L. This trace does remain to us from the Gentiles.


M. Hemos visto esperiencias muy verdaderas.


M. We have seen many true examples hereof.


O. Creo en Dios y no en putas viejas.


O. I believe in God, and not in old wives tales.


M. Essas son de las que yo me procuro siempre guardar.


M. Those are they from which I always seek to keep my self.


R. O senor Guzman para que es esto que se trae agora?


R. O master Guzman, wherefore is this that they bring now?


G. Dizen que para comer.


G. They say for to eat.


R. Si, pero era menester hazer nuevos estomagos, en que e challo.


R. Yea, but it were need to make stomachs to receive it.


O. Mandarlos hazer de barro a trueco de poco dinero.


O. Cause them to be made of claie, for a small price of money.


M. Estas tortas reales, son como cuerpo que no ocupa lugar.


M. These riall tartes are as the body which fills no place.


L. Yo tengo de provar esta pepitoria.


L. I will prove this Made of the heads, livers, hearts, breasts, feet, of
duckes geese, or other birds, etc.
Pepitorio or gallimaufrie.


R. Yo conel Of paste of almondes and sugar, eggs, breasts of hens, milk,
cynamon, and diverse sorts of spices very like Manjar blanco.
manjar real me acomodo.


R. I do apply my self to this riall dish of meat.


G. No ay quien prueve esotros guisados, estos torresnos lampreados, aquel
adobado, el carnero verde, las albondigas, ni lo de mas.


G. Is there no body to prove these other meats, these hogs livers with the
hogs caul fried with the fat, that hodgepot of mutton, mutton stuffed with
parsley, the chopped meat made into round bals, neither the rest.


T. Todo esso es como Pedro por de mas.


L. All this is as Peter too much.


O. O como alla voy no hago mengua.


O. Oh as I go there I never fail.


G. Alcalo pues muchacho desembaraca y trae aquella fruta de sarten.


G. Take off boy, rid the table, and bring these fritters.


P. Aqui esta senor, y la meloja y todo.


P. Here it is Sir, and the Wine sodden to the third part for a sauce for the
fritters.
Meloja and all.


R. Esso alla a los aguados, que la borracha no quiere passa.


R. That there is for those that drink water, for one that loves wine loves
not to eat But salt meats to make them drink.
raisins.


G. Trae pues la fruta de postre, camuecas, peras, azeitunas, nuezes,
avellanas, y la caja de mermelada.


G. Bring fruit for the last service, pippins, pears, olives, wallnuts, small
nuts, and the box of marmalade.


L. Hasta quando hemos de comer?


L. Till when shall we eat?


R. Hasta enfermar, como dize el refran.


R. Until we be sick, as says the proverb.


L. Y despues ayunar hasta sanar.


L. And afterward to fast till we be in health.


O. Levanta esta mesa paje, que es ya gula tanto comer.


O. Take away this table, Page, for it is gluttony to eat so much.


M. Yo he perdido la gana, como si me la quitaran con la mano.


M. I have lost my stomach, as though they had taken it from me with ones hand.


L. El mejor remedio, que hallaron los filosofos, contra la hambre, fue este.


L. The best remedy that ever philosophers found against hunger, was this.


R. Esa filosofia algo es gruessa de hilaca.


R. This philosophy is somewhat of a gross thread.


O. Mejor se podra dezir verdad apurada que ya saveis lo que es.


O. Better may you say a refined truth, you know what I mean.


L. Ya se que verdades apuradas son necedades.


L. I know that refined truths are fooleries.


O. Mas pulido lo queria yo dezir.


O. I would give it a better term.


R. Como?


R. How?


O. Yndiscreciones.


O. Indiscretions.


d.L. Tanto monta cortar, como desatar, como dixo Alexandre.


L. It comes all to one, to cut it off or untie it, as Alexander said.


d.R. Ola paje, trae unos naipes entretengamos el tiempo.


R. Hola page, bring cards, let us pass away the time.


M. Esso me contenta, vengan que desseo esquitar me de un escudo que perdi
estotro dia.


M. That pleases me well, let them come, for I desire to quit my self of a
crown, that I lost this other day.


d.L. No me pesa ami de que mi hijo juegue, sino de que se quiere esquitar.


L. It greeues me not that my son is a gamester, but that he will go to quit
himself.


M. El tahur, chica ocasion ha menester para bolver a el juego.


M. The gamester requires but small occasion to return to play.


d.L. A mi me parece que sola una.


L. It seems to me but one only.


M. Qual es?


M. What is it?


d.L. Tener dineros.


L. That he have money to do it.


M. Ni al tahur falto que jugar, ni al goloso que comer, ni al endurador que
endurar, ni al boracho que bever.


M. Neither has the gamester ever wanted money to play, nor the gluttonous to
eat, nor the patient to suffer, nor the lover of drink to drink.


d.R. Aqui estan los naipes, que jugaremos?


R. Here are the cards, what shall we play at?


d.L. Iuguemos gana pierde.


L. Let us play at loadam.


M. Es juego de mucha flema.


M. It is a play of much patience.


d.L. Pues sea a el triunfo.


L. Then let it be at trumpe.


M. Quede para los viejos.


M. Let that be for old men.


d.L. A los cientos.


L. At mount sant.


M. Desvanece se me la cabeca, de estar siempre contando.


M. It makes my head to be in a swoune, to be always counting.


d.L. Menos os agradara el chilindron.


L. Less will the play of Chilindron like you.


M. E'sse para las mugeres de tras de los ticones.


M. That is for women by the fire side.


d.L. No es, si no que vos no quereis juego de virtud, si no de arrebata capas.


L. It is not, but that you will not have any game of virtue but sweep stake
play.


M. Para que hemos de estar gastando tiempo, sino lo que se a de empenar, venda
se, como dizen.


M. Wherefore should we waste time, but that which we must pawn, let us sell
our right as they say.


d.R. Si, por que hazienda hecha, no da priessa.


R. Yea, but ones substance made up, let there be no haste to lose ones money.


d.L. Y mas quando le ganan a el hombre su dinero, le quitan presto decuida do.


L. And moreover, when they win a man's money from him, they straightway take
him out of care.


M. He aqui estan los naipes juguemos treinta por fuerca, o los albures que
todos estos son buenos juegos.


M. Behold here are the cards, let us play at thirty perforce or Albures, for
these are good plays.


d.R. Yo no soy amigo de ellos, si no de juegos de primor, como el Reynado, el
tres dos y as, triunfo callado y otros semejantes.


R. I love not these but games of chiefest price, as the Reynado, the three,
two and ace, still trumpe, and other the like.


O. Ora por quitar todos de contienda yo quiero dar un medio y sea este la
primera.


O. Now to take away all occasion of strife, I will give a mean, and let it be
Primera.


M. Muy bien aveis dicho que es medio enter los estremos.


M. You have said very well, for it is a mean between extremes.


d.L. Yo entiendo que se llamo primera, porque tiene el primero lugar enter los
juegos de naypes.


L. I take it that it is called Primera, because it has the first place at the
play at cards.


d.R. Alto, que ha de ser el tanto?


R. Let us go, what is the sum that we play for?


M. Quatro reales y dies y seis de saca.


M. Two shillings stake, and eight shillings rest.


d.L. Pues baraja essos naipes bien.


L. Then shuffle the cards well.


O. Yo alco por mano, figura uvo de ser, no querria yo yr hecho figura sin
blanca.


O. I lift to see who shall deal, it must be a coat card, I would not be a
coat with never a blanke in my purse.


d.R. Yo un as alce.


R. I did lift an ace.


d.L. Yo un quatro.


L. I a four.


M. Yo un se is, con que soy mano.


M. I a six, whereby I am the eldest hand.


O. Vengan las cartas que yo las doy una, dos, tres, quatro. Vna, dos, tres,
quatro.


O. Let the cards come to me, for I deal them, one, two, three, four, one,
two, three, four.


M. Paso.


M. Pass.


d.R. Paso.


R. Pass.


d.L. Paso.


L. Pass.


O. Enbido un tanto.


O. I set so much.


M. No le quiero.


M. I will none.


d.R. No le quiero.


R. I Will none.


d.L. Yo por fuerca avre de querer, echad cartas.


L. I must of force see it, deal the cards.


M. Echad me quatro cartas he aqui mi tanto.


M. Give me four cards, I Will see as much as he sets.


d.R. He aqui el mio, cada uno meta el suyo.


R. See here my rest, let every one be in.


M. Buelvo a pasar.


M. I am come to pass again.


d.R. Yo tanbien.


R. And I too.


d.L. Yo hago lo propio.


L. I do the self same.


O. Yo enbido mi resto.


O. I set my rest.


M. Quiero le.


M. I Will see it.


d.R. Yo tanbien.


R. I also.


b.L. Pues yo no me puedo echar.


L. I cannot give it over.


M. Yo hize una primerilla.


M. I was a small prime.


d.L. Yo voy a flux.


L. I am flush.


M. No querria yo que le hiziessedes.


M. I would you were not.


d.L. Es essa buena promixidad?


L. Is this good neighborhood?


M. La caridad bien ordenada comienca de si mismo.


M. Charity well placed, does first begin with ones self.


O. Yo he hecho cinquenta y cinco con que mato su primera.


O. I made five and fifty, with which I win his prime.


d.L. Yo flux con que tiro.


L. I flush whereby I draw.


d.R. No juego masa este juego.


R. I play no more at this play.


M. Ni yo a otro ninguno que voy a un negocio que me ymporta.


M. Neither I at any other, for I must go about a business that concerns me.


d.L. Pajes toma cada quatro reales de barato.


L. Pages take every one two shillings a piece of the winnings.


Pa. Centuplum acipias.


P. I pray God you may receive it a hundred fold.


Pa. En el cielo lo halle v.m. colgado de un garavato.


P. In heaven I pray God you may find it hanged on a hook.


Dialogo quarto, enter dos amigos llamados el uno Mora, el otro Aguilar y un
moco de mulas y una Ventera, tratan se en el de las cosas tocantes a el camino
con muy graciosos dichos y chistes. The fourth Dialogue between two friends,
the one called Mora, the other Aguilar and a mulettier and a woman Inkeeper:
Herein are handled things pertaining to the way with very pleasant sayings,
and gracious speeches. M. OLa Pedro haveis traido mi mula?


M. HO Peter have you brought my mule?


P. Senor si, aqui esta la mohina.


P. Yea sir, here is the Mohina, signifies anger, passion, disquietnes,
churlishnes. Also a she mule with a black face or mussell, always having
iadish tricks.
Mohina.


M. Mohina es nunca buena.


M. Mohina is never good.


P. Por que, Senor?


P. Why sir?


M. Por que ni mula mohina, ni moca marina, ni moco Pedro en casa, ni Abad por
Vezino, ni poyo a la puerta, no es bueno.


M. Because neither a mule with a black mussell, nor a maid that has passed
the sea, nor a servant i. A knauish servant.
Peter in ones house, nor a neighbor abbot, nor a Well at the door, is ever
good.


P. Yo le prometo a v. m. que es mejor esta, que la que arastro a el cura
quando dezia Dominus providebit.


P. I promise your worship that she is better then that which dragged along A
curate falling off his mule hanging in the stirrup was dragged so a long, till
a laborer in the field took him out.
the curate when he said, Dominus prouidebit.


M. Es vieja?


M. Is she old?


P. Nunca la vi nacer, mas yo creo que mas vieja era su madre.


P. I saw her not foaled, but I believe that her dame was elder.


M. Tira cozes?


M. Does she kick?


P. Nunca una sola.


P. She never gives one alone.


M. Siempre son a pares, camina bien?


M. They are always by couples, does she travel well?


P. Todo lo que anda se dexa atras.


P. She never travels but she leaves the way behind her.


M. Tan buenas gracias tiene a fee que me va enamorando.


M. She has so good tricks in faith, that I am in love with her.


P. Vna tiene sobre todas que es grande Ostrologa.


P. One she has above all, for she is a great Astronomer.


M. Como ansi?


M. How so?


P. Conoce mejor que un relox quando es medio dia, y luego pide cebada, y si no
se la dan dize lunes y no ay passar de alli.


P. She knows better then a clock when it is noone, and forthwith she looks
for prouender, and if they give her none, then she says Lunes, meaning here
the grunting voice of a mule or horse, but Lunes properly signifies Mondaie.
lunes, and stirs not a foot from the place.


M. Buen remedio para esso rogar se lo con la espuela.


M. A good remedy for this to entreat her with the spur.


P. Es flaquissima de memoria.


P. She is most weak of memory.


M. Como?


M. How?


P. Aunque le hinguen un palmo de espuela a dos passos que da, se le ha ya
oluidado.


P. Although you strike into her a hands breadth of the spur, within two
steps after she has forgotten it.


M. Traelda, no se me da nada, que topado ha Sancho con su Rocino y si ella es
traydora yo soy aleboso, y nos entenderemos a coplas.


M. Bring her, I care not, for Sancho has met with his palfrey, and if she be
a A scabbed horse fit for a scalde squier.
knauish jade I am as knauish a rider, and we shall understand one another by
couples.


P. En yendo v.m. con cuydado hara de ella cera y Pavilo que ella con quien se
descuyda usa sus tretas.


P. You traveling with her, with good heed, you may agree like the The wax of
the candle, and the week of the candle, i^ al in all
wax and the week, but she with one that is not aware of her will play her
part like a fencer.


M. Echalde la silla, apretalde bien la sincha ponelde gurupera ataharre y
pretal, acorta essos estribos que yo me averne con ella.


M. Set on the saddle, girde her hard with the girts, put on the crooper and
poitrell, make shorter these stirrups, for I will make agreement with her.


P. Quiero poner, vnas aciones nuevas por mas seguridad.


P. I will put on new stirrup leathers for more security.


M. Echalde el freno, poned le bien el bocado y acortad la cabecada mirad si
esta bien herrada de todos quatro pies.


M. Put on the bridle, make the bit fast, make shorter the headstall, look if
she be well shod of all four feet.


P. Manos, i. the forefeete.
En las manos, buenas herraduras y clavos tiene, de los pies de suyo gasta.


P. On the forefeete she has good shoes and nails, on the hinder feet she
With kicking.
wears out her own hoof.


M. Echaldo el coxin y porta manteo.


M. Put the cushion on the saddle and the portemanteau.


A. Ea companero hemos ya de acabar de salir oy de aqui?


A. How now companion, shall we make an end that we may get hence to day?


M. Ya vos venis cavalgando?


M. What are you come already, and a horsbacke?


A. Vos tardais mas en componer os que vna nobia.


A. You tarry longer in setting your self in order then a bride.


M. Vuestra mula es mansa?


M. Is your mule gentle?


A. Como vna borrega no lo veis que sufre maleta.


A. As gentle as a lamb, do you not see he bears a maile.


M. De el agua manza me libre dios, que de la braba yo me guardare.


M. From the stilwater, God keep me, from the raging, I will keep my self.


A. Ala vuestra, basta le ser mohina.


A. For your mule, it is sufficient, that she is a mule with a black muzzle.


M. Mal conoceys vos aquien nunca vistes, pues a fee que esta granduada por
zalamanca.


M. You hardly know him whom you never saw, but in faith this mule has taken
degree in Zalamanca.


A. En que facultad?


A. In what art?


M. En la de la vellaqueria, bachillera en arts de tirar cozes, licenciada en
leyes de ventasy de mesones, y doctora es en astrologia y matematicas.


M. In the art of villainy, Bachelor of the kicking art, Licentiat of laws in
Innes, and doctor in Astrology, and the Mathematikes.


A. Por esso esta siempre mirando a el cielo.


A. For this cause, she looks always toward heaven.


M. Es por contemplar los astros y planetas y signos y sus cursus.


M. It is to contemplate the stars, planets, and signs, and their courses.


A. Vamos de aqui que tenemos larga la jornada.


A. Let us go, for we have a long journey.


M. Quantas leguas pensays caminar oy?


M. How many leagues do you think to travel to day?


A. Yo querria que doze.


A. I would willingly go twelve.


M. Pues ala mano de dios Pedro ten esse estribo.


M. Then in the name of God, Peter hold this stirrup.


A. Pedro of Llamays companero?


A. Friend are you called Peter?


P. A servicio de v.m.


M. At your service sir.


A. Pues no le haga Dios mas mal a Pedro de el que se le alcanca.


A. Then God do no more mischief to Peter, then that he knows himself how to
practice.


P. No ay porque Dios de salud a su merced.


P. There is no cause why God give you health sir.


A. Se que las pullas no se han de echar a los amigos.


A. I know that men ought not to flout their friends.


M. De amigo a amigo chinche en el ojo.


M. One friend to another friend, a Chinche, a little round creature with many
feet, in hot countries, breeding in beds, bites worse then a louse, and
stinketh filthily.
Cinche in the eye.


A. Yo no quiero pleito con vos Pedro que sabeis mucho.


A. I will not go to law with you Peter, for that you know so much.


P. Mas Saber i. To know. Also to savor well in taste, as meat, drink.
Sabe un torezno.


P. A rasher of bacon sauers more.


A. Moco de mulas un punto save mas que el diablo.


P. A mulitter knows one point more then the devil.


M. Pues que pensais vos que le falta a Pedro para diablo?


M. Why what think you, what wants Peter to become a devil?


P. No mas que un ano de aprendiz y un garavato.


P. No more but a years apprentiship, and a flesh-hooke.


A. Para que el garavato?


A. Why a flesh-hooke?


P. Para sacar a vuestras mercedes de la caldera quando alla vayan.


P. To pull out your worships out of the caulderne when you go thither.


M. Nosotros no hemos de yr a el ynfierno


M. We are not to go to hell.


P. No se yran mas llevaros han.


P. You are not to go, but they are to carry you thither.


M. Are dro vayas malo, ergo maledicte diabole.


M. Come behind me therefore evil spirit, Maledicte diabole.


A. Pedro amigo de que se haze la puta vieja?


A. Friend Peter, of what is an old whore made of?


P. De la puta moca.


P. Of a young whore.


M. No se haze si no de seldo y eneldo y de el cagaxon mordeldo y de el polvo
de las eras, has two significations, one for the floor where they thresh
their corn, and also thou art.
eras.


M. It is not made but of thy self and the herb dill, and of shitting eat thy
fill, and of the dust of barn floor, or of the dust of which thou art thy
self.


A. De cara me le veo y tiene alpargates, y va a pie.


A. I see him just over against me, and he has Shoes of packthred made for
footmen or lackeies to travel a foot.
shoes of packthred, and he goes a foot.


M. Pedro mira que te dize no respondes?


M. Peter, hark what he says unto thee, do thou not answer?


P. No oygo que soy sordo de vna muela.


P. I hear not, for I am deaf of one of my chocke teeth.


M. Pues a el maestro Cuchillada?


M. What has the master of Fence a blow or venie?


P. No me lastima mucho esta Herida que es dada vnas arriba, pero guarde se de
el rebes que yo tirare vnas abajo.


P. This wound hurts me not much, for it is given with the hand upward, but
beware of the swash blow, for I will draw it with the hand downwards.


A. Pedro yo entiendo que soys vos aquel que Llamavan de vrde malas.


A. Peter I understand that you are he which they called a plotter of
knaueries?


P. Pues todo el mundo ojo alerta que alguna tengo de vrdir en este camino.


P. Every one look to himself, for I must plot something this journey.


A. Pedro alli viene un, caminante echale vna pulla.


A. Peter there comes a traveler, bestow a quip on him.


P. Ola hermano por donde van?


P. Hola brother, which way go they?


C. A do?


T. Whither?


P. En casa de la puta que os pario.


P. To the house of the queen thy mother.


A. Buena a fee otra a el companero que queda atras.


A. Good in faith, another to his companion, which remains behind.


P. A senor es suyo el mulo?


P. Ho sir, is the mule yours?


C. Qual mulo?


T. What mule?


P. Aquel que beseis en el culo.


P. That whose arse kiss you.


A. Este cavallero que viene muy brabo no baya sin la suya.


A. This gentleman which goes so bodily, let him not pass without his flout.


P. A senor v.m. a caso va a londres?


P. Ho sir goes your worship to London?


C. Si voy porque lo dezis.


T. Yea, I go for that you say it.


P. Pues cagaxon para quien va a Londres.


P. Then a turd for him that goes to London.


M. Que bonito es Pedro si se lavasse.


M. Oh how proper a man were Peter, if he were washed and painted.


P. Antes despues de lavado no valgo nada.


P. Nay after I am washed I am worth nothing.


A. Quanto avremos andado Pedro?


A. How far have we iourneyed Peter?


P. Nunca buelvo a mirar atras, por no ser como la muger de Lot.


P. I never turn to look back, because I would not be as Lots wife.


A. Quanto nos falta de aqui a el primer Pueblo?


A. How far have we from hence to the next town?


P. Legua y mierda.


P. A league and a turd.


M. La legua andaremos nosotros, esotra vos la pasareis.


M. The league we will go, the other thou shall pass.


A. Pues por que se pass sin sentir quenta un quento Pedro.


A. That we may pass over this journey without wearisomnes, tell us a tale
Peter.


P. De dineros para mi le contara yo de buena gana.


P. For my part, I would tell money with a better will.


A. No, si no algun acaecido que te avino por essos caminos.


A. Not so, but some chance that has fallen out to thee on these ways.


P. Estonces contar les he vno que me subcedio el viaje passado haziendo este
camino con un hidalgo.


P. Then I will tell you one which happened unto me the last voyage I came this
way with a gentleman.


M. No sea muy largo que me dormire.


M. Let it not be too long, for I will sleep.


P. Sise durmiere la mohina tendra cuydado de despertar le.


P. If you sleep, the she mule will be careful to wake you.


M. Vos le haveis levantado mil falsos testimonios, mira quan bien camina y
quan mansa va?


M. You have raised a thousand false testimonies against her, behold how well
she trauelleth, and how well she goes.


P. A el freir lo vera.


P. A collier sold coals to a woman and putting down his coals put up her
frying pan, the woman asking if they were good coals, he answered, A freyr lo
vera, i. by the frying she should see.
By the frying you shall see.


A. Ea dexemos esso vaya el quento.


A. Well let us leave this, forward with the tale.


P. Pocos dias ha, yo vine este camino con vno de los mayores habladores que he
conocido en mi vida y como el hablar mucho, y el mentir son tan parientes,
dezia las mas terribles mentiras que se pueden ymaginar, pues como el me
preguntasse un dia que me parecia de su buena conversacion, yo le respondi que
muy bien, pero que quando contasse algun quento, se Alargasse y pasasse tanto,
que dava que mormurar a quantos le oyan, el me dixo pues sea esta la manera
quando llegueemos a las posadas, sienta se tu apar de mi, y si me vieres contar
algo que te parezca que voy fuera de camino, tira me de la halda, estonces yo
entendere, y me deterne, con este con cierto llegamos aquella noche a vna
venta, donde a caso avian llegado tanbien muchos cavalleros, y como se
asentassen a cenar y mi amo enter ellos, yo me puse a su lado conform a el
concierto, y como es costumbre cada vno comenco a contar las maravillas que
avia visto por el mundo, llego la bez a el bueno de mi amo el qual dixo que
avia estado en tierra de japon, y que enter otras cosas maravillosas que alli
avia visto fue vna yglezia que tenia mil pies de largo, a este tiempo yo que le
vide yr tan desmandado y como estava a lerta tiro le rezio de la halda, el
luego me entendio, y dixo; y vno en ancho: los cavalleros se comencaron a mirar
vnos a otros y a son-reyr se hasta que vno dellos dixo, vala me Dios senor, y
para que servia essa y glezia tan larga y angosta, de mill pies de largo? y vno
en ancho, el replico agradez can vuestras mer cedes que me tiraron de la falda
atiempo, que si no, yo les boto a Dios que yo la quadrara, fue estonces tanta
la risa de todos que a mi amo le convino aquella noche salirse de la venta, por
que enter todos quedo por refran quando alguno contava algo que parecia mentira
Le dezia el tercero quadre la v. m. que harto larga esta.


P. A little while since, I came this way with one of the greatest babblers
that I knew in my life, and as much prating and lying are near of kin, he
told the most horrible lies that could be imagined, afterward as he asked me
one day, what I thought of his good behavior, I made him answer, that I
thought well, but that when he did tell any tale, he passed the bounds so
much, that he gave occasion to as many as did hear him, to speak ill of him
behind his back: he told me, seeing it is so, when we come to our Innes, sit
thou next unto me, and if thou shall see me tell any thing that seems unto
thee that I go out of the way, pluck me by the skirt, then will I understand
and stay my self, with this agreement we came that night to a lodging on the
high way, whither by chance also many gentlemen were arrived, and as they
sat them down to supper, and my master among them, I set my self close by
his side, according to our agreement, and as the manner is, every one began to
tell of the maruels which he had seen in the world, the turn came to the
good man my master, who said that he had been in the land of Iaptha, and
among other mauellous things that there he had seen was a church, which was a
thousand foot long: then I seeing him so far out of order, as I was ready
prepared, plucked him by the skirt, he presently understood me, and said; and
one foot in breadth: the gentlemen began to look one upon another, and to
smile, until one of them said, In the name of God sir, and for what use
served this church so long and narrow, of a thousand foot in length, and but
one in breadth? he replied, thank him, that pulled me by the skirt of the
garment so soon, which if he had not done, I vow to God, I had made it four
square: then was there such a laughter among all, that my master was feign that
night to get him out of the Inn, for that among them all, it remained as a
proverb, when any one did tell any thing which did seem a lie, the third man
said unto him, make it square, for it is long enough.


M. De vna cosa me espanto yo Pedro.


M. Of one thing I wonder Peter.


P. Qual es?


P. What is it?


M. Como pudiste durar tan largo tiempo con tu competidor en la facultad.


M. How thou could endure so long time, with thy competitor in thine own
faculty?


A. Si, por que esse es tu enemigo el que es de tu oficio.


A. Yea, for he is thy enemy which is of thy own profession.


P. Es verdad que muchas vezes le qui se dexar por esso, y se lo dezia que no
queria mas caminar con el, por que era tocado de mi propria enfermedad y no me
dexava hazer basa.


P. It is true, for many times I would leave him for this cause, and did tell
him, that I would not travel no more with him, because he was infected with my
disease, and did not suffer me to take up As at cards.
a tr^cke.


A. Y que respondio a esso?


A. And what answer made he to this?


P. Luego me prometia con juramento, que callaria toda vna jornada para que yo
hablasse.


P. Forthwith he promised me with an oath, that he would hold his peace all
one journey, that I might speak.


A. Y cumplia lo?


A. And did he perform it?


P. Tan ynposible le era a el poder lo cumplir como a v. m. dijerir esse pelo
de asno, queha comido.


P. It was as impossible for him to have power to accomplish it, as for your
worship to digest this i. Calling him ass by craft or the gudgeons, or
fooleries to day you have swallowed.
asses hair which you have eaten.


M. Companero pagado os han vuestro travajo.


M. Companion, you are paid home for your labor.


A. No teneis razon Pedro ansiyo os vea zarco a poder de nubes.


A. You mistake Peter, I see you dimne sighted, by reason of clouds.


P. Antes ciegue, que mal vea.


P. Rather wish I you blind, then that I see ill.


A. Ansi yo os vea arcobispo con mitra de siete palmas.


A. Nay rather that I may have my sight to see you an Archbishop with i.
Caroca, which is a high hat of paper set on the head of a bawd, riding on an
ass through the streets for a punishment.
a miter of seven hand bredths high.


P. Ansi yo le vea a el, Papa higos de su mula.


P. Nay not so, but that I might also see you eat the shittings of your mule.


A. Echo te vna pulla Pulla a flout.
con su pulloncillo que tu muger te haga ciervo y te llamen todos cuquillo.


A. I cast thee a bone, with his young one to gnawe upon, thy wife makes thee a
heart, and they call thee cuckolde every one.


P. Echo te vna pulla venida sobre mar, que los dientes se te caygan y no
puedas mear.


P. I cast the bone to gnaw upon at sea, thy teeth fall out, and thy water hold
in.


M. Piquemos companero que se va haziendo tarde.


M. Let us spur on companion, for it waxes late.


A. Que hora sera Pedro?


A. What is it a clock Peter?


P. La de air a estas oras puntualmente.


P. Just the same, as it was yesterday at this time.


A. Esso tanbien lo dixera mi mula si supiera hablar.


A. This could my mule tell me, if she could speak?


P. Soy yo Relox, que me pregunta que ora es?


P. Am I a clock, that you ask me what it is a clock?


A. A lo menos Badajo, a clapper of a bell by a metaphor a ioulthead.
badajo, que monta tanto.


A. At least thou art a clapper, which is all one.


P. Y si doy adonde dare?


P. And if I do strike where shall I hit?


A. En la cabeca de el puto de tu padre.


A. Upon the head of the buggerer thy father.


P. Mas cerca esta la suya y sonara bien, pues esta hueca.


P. Your head is near unto me, and it will sound well seeing it is hollow.


M. Bien camina de andadura vuestra mula.


M. Your mule does go a swift easy pase.


A. Yla vuestra ha bien deportante.


A. And yours ambles well.


M. Si no la convirtiesse algunas vezes en trote que parece a el de la madre.


M. If she did not change it, sometimes into a trot, which seems like the trot
of her dam.


A. Entremos en esta venta a dar cevada y comer un vocado.


A. Let us go in into this Inn, to bait and eat a bitte.


P. Un bocado no mas, mas pienso yo comer de un ciento.


P. What one bit and no more, I think to eat more then a hundred.


M. No os sabreis passar un dia sin comer Pedro?


M. Can you not pass one day Peter without eating?


P. Par dios nuestro amo, como dize el viz caino, tripas llevan a pies que no
pies a tripas.


P. By God our master as the A Biskaine traveling a foot fainte for want of
food, filled his belly, afterward went lustely, and said, the belly carries
the feet, and not the feet the belly.
Biskaine says, the belly carries the feet and not the feet the belly.


A. Yo tambien digo que pan y vino anden camino que no moco garrido.


A. I also say, The lusty youth without eating or drinking must needs faint,
and give him that, although he be faint he goes forward.
that bread and wine are travelers, and not the lusty frolike youth.


P. Paz sea en esta casa quien esta aca huespeda?


P. Peace be in this house, who is here hostess?


V. Quien esta alla quien llama?


H. Who is there, who calls?


P. Ay posada senora?


P. Have you lodging mistress?


V. Si senor, entren y sean muy bien venidos que todo recado ay.


H. Yes Sir, come in, and be very well welcome, for all good entertainment is
here to be had.


P. Que aura que comer?


P. What shall we have to dinner?


V. Ay conejos ay perdices, ay pollos, ay gallinas, ay gancos, ay anades, ay
carnero, ay vaca, ay cabrito, ay menudo de puerco.


H. There are conies, there are partridges, there are chickens, hens, geese,
ducks, there is mutton, there is beef, kid, and hogs inwards.


P. Bien dixe yo que en su casa de v.m. no podia faltar puerco.


P. Well said I, that in your house there could not want hogs flesh.


V. Ni en la suya faltara vellaco, mientras el estuviere dentro.


H. Nor in your house shall there want a knave while you are within.


P. No en verdad senora, si no que me dixeron que los dias passados avia v.m.
renido bravamente con la limpieca.


P. No in truth mistress, but they told me that a while ago you and cleanlines
had been at bate.


V. Tambien me dixeron a mi que avia el desterrado la Verguenca de su casa.


H. And they told me, that you had banished shamefastnes from your house.


M. Huelgo me Pedro que as topado con lo que avias menester.


M. I am glad Peter that thou have met with that thou had need of.


P. Yaun ella me ha menester a mi.


A. And also she has need of me.


V. Yo por cierto, si no es para poner le en peralvillo con doze y la maestra,
no se para que?


H. I have need of him truly, if it be but to put him in Peralvillo, a mount
in Spain where they shoot malefactors to death.
Peralvillo to shoot twelve arrows at him with the i. That arrow which
hitteth on the heart.
mistress, I know not for what else?


P. Aora Senora no nos digamos mas callate, y callemos que sendas nos tenemos.


P. Now mistress, let us say no more, hold your peace and let us be still, for
we have a quip a piece.


V. Ea acabe hablador de Ventaja, pida lo que ha menester.


H. Go to, make an end babbler in grain, and demand that you have need of.


P. Deem heno, y paja, y cebada, para las mulas.


P. Give me haie, and straw, and prouender for the mules.


V. Quanto quiere?


H. How much will you have?


P. Dos harneros de heno y un zelemin de cebada.


P. Two sieues full of haie, and a pecke of barley.


V. Muy poco es para tres vestias.


H. It is very little for three beasts.


P. Aqui no ay mas que dos qual es la otra?


P. Here are no more then two, which is the other?


V. La otra soys vos y mas tragona que essotras dos.


H. The other are you, and more devouring then the other two.


P. Si soy mas, no de paxa ni cebada porque es muy dura de digestion.


P. If I be more, it is not of straw nor barley, for it is very hard of
digestion.


V. Mas duro es un garrote y suele ablandar las costillas a un vellaco.


H. Harder is a cudgel, and yet it uses to soften the ribs of a knave.


M. Bien esta no pass mas adelante senora Huespeda quanto ponen de aqui a la
ciudad?


M. It is well, pass no further forward mistress hostess, how far do they
count it from hence to the city?


V. Senor cinco leguas.


H. Sir five leagues.


M. Podremos los caminar de a quia la noche?


M. May we ride them betwixt this and night?


V. Como picaren?


H. As you shall hasten.


M. Ay algun rio en el camino o algun mal passo?


M. Is there any river in the way, or any evil passage?


V. Por do quiera, ay vna legua de mal camino.


H. Which way soever you go, there is a league of evil way.


M. Ay adonde herrar?


M. Is there any place To miss or err. Also to shoe a horse or mule.
herrar?


V. El camino no senor, las mulas si senor, vuestras mercedes mil parts ay
donde pueden herrar.


H. The way, no Sir, the mules, yes Sir, a thousand passages where you may err.


M. Si son los yerros por amores, dignos son de perdonar.


M. If they be errors for love, they are worthy to be pardoned.


A. Senora huespeda cuya es esta venta?


A. Mistress hostess, whose is this inn?


V. De un cavallero de la ciudad.


H. A gentleman's of the city.


A. Quanto pagan por ella de arrendamiento en un ano?


A. How much do you pay for the hire of it by the year?


V. Mas que ella vale, quinientos ducados.


H. More then it is worth, five hundred ducats.


M. De essa suerte, buena mana se an menester dar a hurtar para sa car la costa.


M. By this means they had need good skill to steal to get out their charge.


P. Essa no falta, el gato por liebre, la carne de mula por vaca, el vino
passado por agua todo va de esta manera.


P. That skill wants not, a cat for hare flesh, the flesh of a mule for beef,
wine mixed with water, all goes in this manner.


V. Mala pasqua de Dios a el vellaco y mal san Iuan. quando ha visto el, esso
en mi venta?


H. God send the knave an ill Easter, and an ill Midsommer, when have you seen
this in my Inn?


P. Visto lo no, gustado lo si.


P. I have not seen, but I have tasted it?


V. Vos mentis como vellaco, que nunca tal.


H. You lie like a knave, there was never any such matter.


P. Aora estemos a quenta huespeda no demos de comer a el Diablo, venga aca no
se acherda el otro dia quando yo vine por aqui con un cavallero, que le pidio
le diesse un pedaco de carne de aquello que le avia dado otro dia antes quando
avia passado por aqui, porque dezia que le avia savido muy bien, lo qual oyendo
aquel nino chiquito, dixo caro nos costaria, si cada dia se nos avia de morir
un Rocin.


P. Hostess we are upon the reckoning now, Let us not braule and fall out, and
so go to law upon words and so make the devil dine.
let us not give the devil his dinner, come hither, do you not remember the
other day, when I came this way with a gentleman which requested you to give
him a piece of meat, of that you had given him the other day before, when he
passed this way, because he said it liked his taste very well, the which the
little child hearing, said, it would be dear flesh unto us, if every day
there should die a nagge.


V. Es Verdad que aquello fue aquel Rocin que se nos murio, pero estava tan
gordo y tan lindo que era mejor que carne de vaca.


H. It is true, that there was a nagge which died, but he was so fat and so
fair, that he was better then beef.


M. Senora huespeda aunque mas lindo sea, no nos dee de el agora.


M. Mistres hostess, although he might be more fine, give us not of that now.


V. No Senor que ya se acabo, hasta aora avia de durar?


H. No sir, for he is already made an end of, what think you it could last til
now?


M. Veamos el vino que tal es.


M. Let us see the wine that is so good.


V. El vino es tal, que basta a llevar al cielo a el, que acostumbrare a bever
lo.


H. The wine is such, that it is sufficient to bring a man to heaven that shall
use to drink it.


P. Ola nuestra ama no basta ventera si no ereje?


P. What now Mistress, is it not enough to be a keeper of an Inn, except you
be an heretic too?


V. Lo que yo digo es verdad y lo provare que el buen vino, lleva los hombres a
el cielo.


H. That which I say is true, and I will prove it, that good wine carries men
up to heaven.


M. De que manera?


M. How so?


V. Elbuen vino cria buena sangre, la buena sangre engendra buena condition, la
buena condition para buenas obras, las buenas obras, llevan a los hombres a el
cielo.


H. Good wine makes good blood* good blood does engender good condition, good
condition does end in good works, good works carry men to heaven.


M. Ella ha aprovado su yntencion bastantemente.


M. She has proved her intent very sufficiently.


A. Pero no se podra dezir esso por este vino.


A. But this cannot be verified in this wine.


V. Por que?


H. Why?


A. Por que esto mas parece vinagre y agua.


A. Because this seems rather vinegar and water.


V. Agua, no por vida de mi anima, que tiene mas de la, que le echo el de lo
alto.


H. Water, by the life of my soul, it has no more water in it, then he from
above put in it.


M. Pues Dios no le vino a echar agua, que sin agua lo crio.


M. God never came to put water into wine, but without water he created it.


P. Bien, no esta v.m. en el quento, el de lo alto es su marido, que esta en lo
alto de la casa, y desde alli, echa agua en el vino, por una cebratana.


P. Well, you understand not the matter a right. He from above is her husband,
which is in the top of the house, and from thence puts water into the wine with
a long tunnell.


A. Con vos me entierren Pedro que sabeys de quenta.


A. I will die and live with thee Peter, for thou know fashions.


M. Yo entendia que llamava a Dios, el de lo alto.


M. I understood that she had called God, him that was from above.


A. En todas las cosas ay engano.


A. In every thing there is deceit.


P. Si no es en la ropa vieja.


P. Except it be in an old garment.


V. Por cierto que tienen razon, que esta ya el mundo muy perdido, por esso nos
hemos recogido mi marido y yo a esta venta, por acabar en buena vida.


H. Truly they have reason, for the world is very badde, for this cause have
my husband and I withdrawn our selves into this Inn to make an end in good
life.


M. Esta llamays buena vida huespeda?


M. Call you this a good life hostess?


P. Si Senor, que peor era la de los de Sodoma y Gomorra.


P. Yea sir, for that of Sodom and Gomorra was worse.


V. No le parece a v.m. que es buena vida estar hechos hermitanos en este
disyerto, que mas hizieron los padres de el yermo?


H. Do you not think that it is a good life to be made Hermites in this
desert, what did the fathers in the wilderness more then this?


P. Y tan virtuosos, que de limosna, a quantos passan les quitan lo que llevan.


P. And so holy that of pure alms, of, as many as pass they take away that
they carry.


V. Quitar, nunca Dios tal quiera, recebir lo que nos dan con cortesia, esso si.


H. Take away, God forbid, receive that they give us with courtesy that we do.


P. Es el caso, que llaman cortesia a la gancua, con que abren las vicacas.


P. Thus it is, they call the picklocke courtesy, with which they open the
mailes.


V. El diablo truxo a este moco a mi casa, vete con todos los diablos, espiritu
de contradicion.


M. The devil brought this servant to my house, get thee hence in the devils
name, thou spirit of contradiction.


P. Mal me quieren mis comadres, por que les digo las verdades.


P. My gossips cannot abide me, because I speak truth unto them truly.


M. Aora Pedro, haze quenta con la huespeda, y vamos de aqui, que es tarde.


M. Now Peter reckon with the hostess and let us begone hence, for it is late.


P. Que se deve de todo huespeda?


P. Hostess what is owing in the whole?


V. Esperese, contare, dos de paja, y de paja dos, tres de cebada, cinco de
vino, vno de carne y dos de tocino, veynte reales entodo.


H. Tarry I little, I will reckon, two of straw, and of straw two, three of
barley, five of wine, one of flesh, and two of bacon, ten shillings in the
whole.


P. Quenta hecha, mula muerta, escudero yos a pie, pues a mi me quiere dar
papilla senora huespeda, no save, que quando ella nacio, ya yo comia pan con
corteca: espere hare yo la mia.


P. The reckoning made, the mule dead, serving man get your way a foot why the
mistress hostess will give me pap, does she not know, that when she was
borne, then did I eat bread with hard crust, tarry i will make my reckoning.


V. Haze, veamos.


H. Make it, let us see.


P. Tres y dos son cinco, dos de blanco y tres de tinto, y otros tres de
estopas y pez, vno de la olla y dos de la cholla, y medio de la cebolla,
ochoson en todos.


P. Three and two are sieve, two of sack and three of wine somewhat black, and
other three of the hurdes of flax and pitch, one of the pot, and two of the
The hinder part of the head
nowle, and a half of the chibbowle, they are eight in the whole.


V. Malos anos para vos, pagame aqui, si no, por el siglo de mi padre que os
arane essa cara.


H. What with a mischief to you, pay me here; if not, by my fathers soul
i will put out thine eyes.


P. Quitado se ha el gato la ropa de la ypocrasia, senora hermitana, tenga
paciencia y no tanta codicia.


P. The cat has cast off the The cat faining her self a Hermit, put on a
Hermits weed and many beasts and creatures came to her for ghostly counsel, at
last came the mice, which when she spied, flong off the garment and to them.
garment of hypocrisy, mistress Hermit have patience, and be not so covetous.


V. No me quente mortuorios, si no pague me, si no, las barbas le sacare vna a
vna.


H. Do not reckon up mortuaries unto me, but pay me, if not I will pull off
the hairs of thy beard one by one.


M. Da le, lo que pidiere, la huespeda Pedro no rinas con ella.


M. Give that which the Hostess does require Peter and braul not with her.


P. En vna nao cargada de plata, no ay harto para contentarla.


P. In a ship laden with silver there is not enough to content her.


V. No pido si no lo justo, paga me hermano y dexate de palabras.


H. I require nothing but my right, pay me brother and leave of words.


P. Ansi dize la picaza, tome senora ve ay doze reales, los seis son de bueno,
y los seis de mal provecho le hagan.


P. So says the All in one song.
chattering Pie, hold mistres, see here six shillings, three of them be much
good do it you with them, and the other three the devil choke you with them.


V. Mas no, si no los seis, son de bien venidos sean, y los seys de en ora mala
vays.


H. Not so, but the one three are of welcome unto me, and the other three the
devil go with thee.


P. Maldiciones de putas viejas, oraciones son de salud.


P. Cursinges of old whoores are prayers of health.


M. Quede se con Dios Senora huespeda.


M. God be with you mistres Hostess.


V. El vaya con vuestras mercedes, aqui esta esta pobre posada para todas las
vezes que vinieren este camino, les suplico se sirvan della.


H. God conduct your worships, here is this poor Inn, for as often as you
shall come this way, I entreat you to use it at your command.


P. Sobre buen haz de paja tia.


P. i. Their money.
Aunt you do it upon a good sheafe of straw.


V. No, sino por sus ojos bellidos lo haran.


H. No, but only for your fair looks sir.


P. Quede con dios tia, y el la haga buena hermitana.


P. Aunt God be with you, and make you a good hermit.


V. Anda con dios hijo, y el os haga me jor de lo que soys.


H. Farewell son, and God make thee better then that thou art.


Dialogo quinto, enter tres Pajes, llamados el uno Iuan, el otro Francisco, el
otro Guzman, en el qual se contienen, las ordinarias platicas que los pajes
suelen tener unos con otros. The fifth Dialogue between three Pages, called the
one of them John, the other Frances, the other Guzman, wherein are contained
the ordinary speeches which pages are wont to have one with the other. I. DE
donde vienes Francisco?


I. FRom whence come you Frances?


F. De la corte Iuan.


F. From the court John.


I. Que ay por alla de nuevo?


I. What is the news there?


F. El rollo se esta adonde solia, el Rey ha mandado que quien tuviere que
comer, que come, y el otro que ayune.


F. The gallows is where it was wont to be, the king has commanded that he
that has any thing to dinner, that he eat it, and he that has not that he
fast.


I. Viste a la Reyna?


I. Have you seen the Queen?


F. Ala de diamantes con que hize el postrer flux.


F. The Queen of Diamonds with which I made the last flush.


I. Luego jugado has?


I. Have thou now been at gaming?


F. Yo no, mis dineros jugaron al trocado, y trocaron me por otro dueno.


F. Not I, my money played at exchange, and changed me for another master.


I. Ganaste o perdiste?


I. Have thou won or lost?


F. Gane y perdi.


F. I have won and I have lost.


I. Como pudo ser?


I. How could that be?


F. Perdi mis dineros, y gane escarmiento para no jugar mas.


F. I lost my money, and got a warning to play no more.


I. No seria perdida la del dinero, si tu llevasses adelante esse proposito,
pero yo digo, que quien hizo, hara.


I. The loss of money should be no loss, if thou did go forward in this
purpose, but I say, that he that has once played will play again.


F. A lo menos mientras me durare el Escozor, no jugare mas.


F. At the least, while the smarting shall last I will play no more.


I. Esse no te durare mas que hasta llegar de aqui a tu casa, o hasta que
tengas mas dineros.


I. That will not last with thee longer, then till thou come home, or until
thou have more money.


F. Pues yo para que quiero el dinero, tengo de comprar casas, o vinas con ello.


F. What should I do with money, am I to buy houses or vinyards with it?


I. Para embiar a tus parientes, o para luzirte con ello.


I. To send it to thy friends and kindred, or to make thy self trim with it.


F. Luzirme o que? malos anos, Luzgame el puto de mi amo pues se sirve de mi.


F. To make my self trim? a plague take it, let the buggerer my master trim me
seeing he serves himself of me.


I. Pues piensas que te ha de durar tu amo toda la vida?


I. Why think thou thy master is to live with thee for ever?


F. Dure lo que durare, como cuchar de pan, que quando este me falte, no
faltara otro tan ruyn como el.


F. Let him last as long as a spoone of bread, when he is wanting to me, there
will not fail another as bad as he.


I. Y quando seas grande?


I. And when thou art better grown in years?


F. Estonces ya sabemos el paradero de los pajes, o ala guerra, o a un
monasterio, o a la horca.


F. Then we know the end of Pages, either to the war, or to a monastery, or
to the gallows.


I. Esso postrero lo le renuncio en ti.


I. This last I leave to thee.


F. Pues pensais vos esca paros por y pocrita?


F. Why think you to escape because you are an Hypocrite?


I. Hermano, en mi linaje nunca uvo ningun ahorcado, no quiero estrenarlo yo.


I. Brother, in my kindred never was there any hanged, I will not hansell the
gallows.


F. Estrenada os daran la soga, no os penseys por esso.


F. They will give you a halter for hansell, take you no care for that.


I. Piensa el ladron que todos son de su condition, yo hermano no pienso hazer
obras por donde la meresca.


I. Well thinks the thief, that all are as himself, I brother do not think
to do any thing that I may deserve the gallows.


F. Pues no as oydo dezir, que el pensar no es saber, esso sin pensar se verna
antes que un colongia.


F. But have thou not heard say, that opinion is no knowledge, this without
thinking will come sooner then a canonship.


I. Yo bien c reo, que si yo trato mucho contigo, que tu me procureras pegar la
tina, porque un puerco encenagado, siempre procura encenagar a otro.


I. I well believe, that if I deal much with thee, thou will infect me with
mangines, for one hog that has wallowed in the mire will beray another.


F. Dizes verdad, que fi el ladron anda con el hermitano, o el ladron sera
hermitano, o el hermitano ladron, pero tu nunca juegas?


F. Thou say true, for if a thief keep company with a hermit, either a
thief shall become a hermit, or a hermit a thief, but do thou never play?


I. Yo no en mi vida.


I. I, never in my life.


F. Pues tente bien no caygas, porque a fee que si caes, que as de ser como los
borrachos que comiencan tarde a ser lo, que por esquitarse de lo que han dexado
de bever, nunca salen de cueros.


F. Then hold fast, fall not, for in faith if thou fallest, thou art like to be
as drunken men, which begin at length so to be, which to quit themselves of
that they have left to drink, they never get out of drunkenness.


I. Si Dios me guarde mi juyzio, yo me guardare desse vicio.


I. If God keep me in my right mind, I will keep my self from this vice.


F. Mas fuerte era Troya, y fue destruyda.


F. Troy was more strong, and yet was overcome.


I. Dexemos esso agora, y dime como te va con tu amo?


I. Let us leave this now, and tell me how your master and you agree?


F. A mi muy bien, porque como es moco, galan, y enamorado, son tres cosas que
sacan de haron al mas cuerdo, y ansi todo se nos va en fiestas, vna librea oy,
otra manana, siempre en saraos, musicas, y dancas, siempre en combites, que mal
ano para Lancarote quando de Bretana vino, si era tan bien tratado como
nosotros.


F. I like very well of him, for he is young, gallant, and in love, they are
three things which busy the wisest man, and so we are altogether in feastings,
one livery to day, another to morrow, never without good cheer, music,
daunces, and banquets, that the devil take Lancarote when he came from
Britain if he were so well entreated as we are.


I. Si pero a fee que creo, que tras buen bocado, dais buen grito.


I. Yea, but in faith I believe that after a good morsel, you pay well for it.


F. Porque dizes esso?


F. Why say thou so?


I. Porque me parece que si vuestro amo danca de la manera, vosotros no aveys
d'estar ociosos, sino que aveys de capatear, porque en casa del musico, todos
los criados son dancantes.


I. For I think, that if your master dance in such sort, you are not
altogether idle, but that you foot it too, for in a musitions house all the
servants are dauncers.


F. Es verdad que esso a cosadillos, nos trae de dia con recaudos, y de noche
con rondas, pero con el buen pesebre, todo se passa y no como tu que estas
serviendo a un pelon, que te deve matar de hambre.


F. It is true, that by reason of this love small occasions drive us in the day
time with letters, and in the night we round the street, but with good fare we
pass over all this, and not as thou do which seruest a miserable wretch,
which kills thee with hunger.


I. No mata, porque yo nunca tuve vida, despues que estoy con el.


I. He kills me not, for I never had life since I came to him.


F. No tiene buen ordinario?


F. Has he not a good ordinary table?


I. La lazeria es ordinaria en casa.


I. Wretchedness it self is his ordinary provision in house.


F. Que os da a comer?


F. What diet does he give you?


I. Esperancas y folias.


I. Hopes and songs.


F. Con esso estas tan gordo?


F. And with this art thou so fat?


I. De los Tovillos si estoy.


I. If I be fat, it is in my ankle bones.


F. Dalle cantonada.


F. Run away from him.


I. Temo de encontrar otro peor, y no querria por huyr de la llama dar en las
brasas.


I. I am afraid to meet with a worse, and I would not leap out of the frying
pan, and fall into the fire.


F. Haz te cuchillo de melonero, provar muchos hasta hallar uno bueno.


F. Make of thy self a knife to cut pumpions, prove many until you find one
good.


I. Luego cobra hombre mala fama, y le dizen Piedra movediza no la cobre moho,
y todo el mundo le da del cobdo.


I. Straightway a man gets an ill name, and they say a rolling stone gathers
no moss, and every one iustleth him a side.


F. No sino dexaos secar como palo en sarmentera.


F. No but suffer your self to dry as sticks on a pile or heap.


I. Adonde vas tu agora?


I. Whither go thou now?


F. A buscar mi amo, y temo que no le tengo de poder hallar.


F. To seek my master, and I fear that I shall not find him.


I. Adonde le perdiste?


I. Where did thou lose him?


F. Yo no le perdi, el se perdio muchas dias ha.


F. I lost him not, he lost himself a great while ago.


I. Ansi yra un perdido a buscar otro perdido, como un duelo busca otro duelo,
y una necedad a otra, porque Pares cum paribus facillime congregantur.


I. So one that is lost himself, goes to seek another that is lost, as one
grief seeks another grief, and one folly another: for like will to like.


F. Bendito sea Dios, que por tres blancas de gramatica que studio, ya no se
cabe en el cuerpo, y no vee la ora que desembuchar lo.


F. God be blessed, that for A blancke half a Maravedi, a Maravedi 34. of them
to six pence.
three blanckes of Grammar which he has studied, now he cannot keep it in his
belly, and he thinks every hour ten, till he has uttered his whole mind.


I. Digo hermano que cada obeja con su pareja, y un semijante busca a otro.


I. I say brother, every sheep with his equal, and like will to like.


F. Ansi tu amo como es miserable pelon, busca un ypocrita como tu, a quien con
dezille que es menester ayunar para yr al cielo, te tiene en dieta perpetua, y
canoniza por virtud, lo que es miseria fina.


F. So thy master as he is a miserable wretch seeks out an hypocrite like thy
self, and by telling thee how requisite it is to fast for the winning of
heaven does hold thee in continual diet, and extols that for a virtue, which
is pure miserablenes.


I. No tienes razon, que el no es avariento, pero como dizen Pobreza no es
vileza.


I. You say not well, for he is not covetous, but as it is said, Poverty is
not vileness.


F. No, mas es maestra que ensena como se ha de hazer.


F. No, but it is a mistress which does teach us how we should become nigardly.


I. Yo se, que si mi amo tuviere la renta del tuyo que gastara mas que el, lo
qual el nos dize que hara muy complidamente si dios le mejora d'estado.


I. I know, if my master had reu^nues as thy master has, that he would spend
more then he does, which he tells us he will perform with the best, if it
please God to better his estate.


F. De manera que essas son las esperancas que comeis.


F. So then these be the hopes which you feed on.


I. Mas vale que agua, como dezia la veja que mojava el sarmiento en el rio y
le chupava.


I. It is better then water, as the old woman said, which dipped a dry stick
in the river and sucked it.


F. Con essa comida no dubdo dexeis de salir buenos girifaltes al cabo del ano.


F. With this diet I doubt not but at the years end you may prove good i.
With this diet you may be light enough to fly.
Gerfalcons to fly.


I. Si pero, si bolamos tan alto, llevarnos ha el viento, como haze a todos los
que se sustentan de semejante manjar.


I. Yea but if we fly so high, the wind will carry us away, as it does all
those which do feed on such diet.


F. Por vida de tu madre, que renta tiene tu amo?


F. By the life of thy mother, what reuenewe has thy master?


I. Yo te lo dire un quento de mentiras, y otro de necessidades, y un millon de
necedades, y todo esto se gasta cada ano, de suerte, que viene a salir a rata
por cantidad.


I. I will tell thee, a thousand thousands of lies, and another of needs, a
million of fooleries, and all this is spent every year in such sort, that he
spends as much as comes in to him.


F. Quantos cavallos tiene?


F. How many horses has he?


I. Dize que cinco con quatro que se le an muerto.


I. He says five, with those four which are dead.


F. Quantos criados?


F. How many servants?


I. Nones son, y no llegan a tres.


I. They are odd, and yet they mount not to three.


F. De suerte que tu solo le sirves.


F. So then thou alone seruest him.


I. Y aun me podrian acotar por vagamundo.


I. i. In going up and down shifting for my self, and not living on my master.
And yet might they whip me for a vagabond.


F. Pues como siendo solo, no tienes mucho en que entender.


F. How so, seeing thou art alone thou have not much to employ thy self on.


I. Si tengo, en contar lastimas y calamidades.


I. But I have much to do to reckon greefes and calamities.


F. Quando tiempo ha que bives con el?


F. How long have thou lived with him?


I. Que muero con el muchos dias ha.


I. I have been i. of hunger.
dying with him long since.


F. Hermano hermano, quien si mude Dios le ayude.


F. Brother, brother, Godwil him help, that seeks for it himself.


I. Si, mas adonde yra el buey que no are, por donde quiera veo cien leguas de
mal camino.


I. Yea, but where shall the ox go that he shall not labor, which way soever
I see a hundred leagues of ill way.


F. Aqui viene Guzmanillo, veamos que nuevas trae, a Guzman que ay de nuevo?


F. Here comes little Guzman, let us see what news he brings. Hoe Guzman
what news?


G. Muchas cosas, el Turco (dizen que) se ha tornado Moro, que Venecia nada en
agua, y que Ytalia esta llena de hombres, que en Francia ay mas de cien mil
hombres de guerra, y tambien se dize de secreto que el conde de Flandes a
dormido con la Reyna de Espana.


G. Many things, the Turk (as they say) is become a Moore or infidel, i.
Stands built upon the sea, the sea compassing it round about.
Venice swims in water, and Italy is full of people, and that in France there
are more then a hundred thousand men of arms, and also they say in secret,
that the The king of Spain in his title Earl of Flaunders.
Earl of Flaunders has lien with the Queen of Spain.


F. Todo esso ay de nuevo?


F. Is there all this news?


G. Aora vinieron con este correo estas nuevas.


G. These news came now with this post.


F. De luengas vias luengas mentiras suelen venir.


F. Far fetched lies come from far.


G. Lo que yo os he dicho, todo estan verdad, como ser aora de dia.


G. That which I have told you is as true as it is now day light.


F. Luego grandes guerras se aparejan este verano.


F. Then great wars are like to be this summer.


G. Los pronosticos dizen, queste verano los que bivieren, veran grandes
maravillas.


G. The Prognostications say, those that shall live this summer shall see great
woonders.


F. Que maravillas seran, cuenta nos las.


F. What shall those woonders be, I pray thee tell them us.


G. Dizen que el sol sera mayor que toda la tierra.


G. They say the sun shall be bigger then all the earth.


F. Santo Dios, y esso ha de ser verdad?


F. Blessed God, and will this prove true?


G. Y que la luna cada noche aparece de su manera, que las estrellas sino
fuesse por el sol no ternan resplandor ninguno, que los rios corren a la mar,
que arderan muchos montes, que avra grande mortandad de todo genero de ganados,
y en todas las ciudadas avra unos monstruos que echaran llamas por la boca, y
los hombres que no comieron lo que estos vomitaren, moriran.


G. And that the moon every night does appear after her old fashion, that the
i. Stars receive their light of the sun.
stars if it were not for the sun, should have no light, that all rivers
run into the sea, that many As mount AEtna in Sicilie and others which
continually cast out fire and brimstone, etc.
mountains shall burn, that there shall be a great slaughter of al kind of For
man's meat to eat.
cattle, and in all cities there shall be monsters which shall cast i. Ouens
wherein they bake bread.
out fire at the mouth, and those men which shall not eat that which these
monsters shall vomit, they die.


F. Vala me Dios, yo pienso que todo esso es mentira.


F. God help me, I think all this to be a lie.


G. Los Pronosticos dizen, que el sol y la luna faltaran, antes que todas essas
cosas falten.


G. The Prognostications say that the sun and the moon shall fail of their
courses rather then these things to fail.


F. Dessa manera, todos los hombres moriran, porque quien ha de comer lo que
vomitaren los monstruos?


F. By this means, all men shall die, for who can eat that which these
monsters shall vomit?


G. Pues as tu comido un asno entero, y no comeras de aquello?


G. Why have thou swallowed down an Made a gull.
ass whole, and wilt not eat of it?


F. Si yo soy asno, vos soys mula.


F. If I be an ass thou art a mule.


G. Xo que te estriego que largas le nacieron a v.m.


G. Hoc, a voice that carters use to make their horses stand still.
Ho I do rub thee, for they are sprung up very i. Long ears, calling him
thereby ass.
long to your worship. Calling of him by this a Jew, which for the most part
have long noses.



F. Tan largas como sus narizes.


F. So long as your nose.


G. Va a ver a tu tia Hermano?


G. Go you to see your aunt brother?


F. No que ya vi a tu madre, en la pellejeria.


F. Not so, for I saw thy mother in a brothel house.


G. Ha and Rallame, then it is Grate me, and Harra alla then it is haight that
way as one says to an ass.
Harrallame esse queso.


G. Grate me this cheese.


F. Harrallame esse asno.


F. Haight that way this ass.


G. Toda la vida has de comer sin plato?


G. What art thou to eat thy meat all thy life without a platter?


F. Toda la vida has de comer tu cabron?


F. Art thou to eat all thy life of goats flesh?


G. O Dios te bendiga la bella alimana.


G. O God bless thee fair beast.


F. O Dios te despache deste mundo para el otro.


F. O God rid thee out of this world into the other.


G. Dizen me que es v.m. gran comedor de huevos assados.


G. They tell me that you are a great eater of hard eggs.


F. Tambien me han dicho a mi que v. m. come muy bien bacalao.


F. Also they tell me that you eat very well poor John.


G. O si todos los asnos truxeran albardas, que buen oficio era el, de los
albarderos.


G. O if all asses should carry pack-saddles, what a good trade should the
pack-sadler have.


F. Si esso fuere ansi, vna mas tenia de costa vuestro amo cada mes.


F. If it were so, your master should be at the charge of one packe-saddle
more every month.


G. Si del necio se uviera de pagar alcavala, quanto ganaran los Alcavaleros
con v.m?


G. If there should be subsidy gathered up of every fool, how much would
the gatherers of the subsidies put into their purse with your worship?


F. En essa hazienda nadie podria tratar, porque dizque es patrimonio de v.m.


F. In this goods none could meddle, because it is said it is your patrimony.


G. Todo es de un pedaco v.m.


G. All your worship is one piece.


F. Si, pero es de aguijon para picar a v.m.


F. Yea, but it is a prick to spur you forewarde.


G. Mas no creo que es sino de atun de yjada.


G. But I believe it not but that is a piece of a Tunnie fish of the belly
side.


F. Si de atun fuera ya v.m. uviera arremetido a la pieca, como el asno a la
cevada.


F. If it were of a Tunnie fish you had set upon a piece of it as greedily as
an ass on the prouender.


G. Parece me hermano que aunque tu entraste en la corte, nunca la corte entro
en ti.


G. It seems to me brother, although thou entredst into the court, the court
never entered unto thee.


F. En la de los puercos concedo, porque como es tu juridicion, no se haze en
ella, sino lo que tu ordenas.


F. In that of hogs I grant, for as it is thy jurisdiction, there is nothing
done therein but that thou do appoint.


G. Por vida tuya que me digas, quantos cursos tienes de necio.


G. I pray thee tell me how many degrees of a fool have thou?


F. Los mismos que vos de majadero.


F. As many as thou have of a ioulthead.


G. Yo pienso, que eras ya doctor en ynsensato.


G. I think thou wast doctor in sencelessenes.


F. Y vos estays graduado por cavalleriza.


F. And you taken degree in the stable.


G. A Dios hermano, y roe bien essos grancones.


G. Farewell brother, and gnaw well these husks.


F. Y rumiad vos como buen cabron esotros.


F. And brouse you as a good he-goat these others.


I. Par diez, bueno te ha parado el amigo.


I. By ten, thy friend has brought thee to a good pass.


F. Amigo sera el de v'na taca de vino.


F. He will rather prove a friend to a cup of wine.


I. E'ste es de los que aconcejava el osso, que hiziessemos poco caso.


I. This is such a friend that the bear counseled that we should make but
little reckoning of.


F. Como es esse quento?


F. How is that tale?


I. Quenta ysopo, que vna vez dos amigos van camino a pie, por un monte, y
salio a ellos un osso, el vno echando mano a su espada, se quiso defender a si
y a su companero, al qual dixo que hiziesse lo mismo, para que ni el vno ni el
otro muriessen, el companero que tenia mas cuenta con su salud, que con el del
otro, a treviose antes a sus pies, que a sus manos, y no curando del companero,
dio a huyr a un arbol alto que alli vido, y se subio en el, donde estuvo seguro
del peligro. El companero visto que el solo no se podia defenderse del osso, se
dexo caer en tierra haziendo muestras de que estava muerto, tenia el huelgo y
no resollava mientras el osso llego y le olio todo, las narizes y la boca, y
los oydos, y pensando que estava muerto, se fue de alli, sin hazerle ningun
dano. El que estava en el arbol, visto que el osso era ydo, baxo del, y
pregunto a su companero, que era aquello que el osso le avia dicho al oydo: El
otro respondio, deziame que con tan ruynes companeros como vos, nunca hiziesse
camino otra vez.


I. Aesope tells, that on a time two friends traveled a foot together, and
going by a wood, a bear came out to them, the one laying hand on his sword
meant to defend himself, and his companion whom he willed that he should do
the like, that neither one of them nor the other might not miscarrie; his
companion which made more account of his own safety then his fellows, was
more bold upon his feet then upon his hands, and not respecting his fellow,
betook himself to fly to a high tree which there he saw, and climed up the
same, where he was safe from the danger. His companion seeing that alone he
could not defend himself from the bear, cast himself down on the ground,
making shows that he was dead, he held his breath, and did not once blow
while the bear came and smelt him round, his nose and his mouth, and his
ears, thinking he had been dead went his way, without doing him any harm. He
that was in the tree, seeing that the bear was gone, came down the tree, and
asked his fellow what was that that the bear had told him in his ear: The
other answered, he told me that with such bad companions as your self I never
should travel again.


F. Respondio muy discretamente, y si yo lo supiera antes, uviera le contado
esse quento a estotro mierda en palillo, que piensa que sabe mas que Bartulo ni
Baldo.


F. He answered very well, and if I had known it before, I would have told
this tale to this turd upon a stick, which thinks he knows more then
Bartulus or Baldus.


I. Por cierto el tuvo demasiada razon, amotejarte de necio pues estuviste tan
torpe que no entendiste sus pronosticos y adivinancas.


I. Truly he had to too much cause to scoff at thee for a fool, seeing thou
were so dull that thou vnderstoodest not his prognostications and diuinings.


F. Pues tu entiendes las mejor?


F. Do thou then understand them better?


I. Yo entiendo las como el las dixo.


I. I understand them as he spoke them?


F. Pues yo bien creo que entiendo Romance, y el en Romance hablava que no en
algaravia.


F. But I believe well that I understand Spanish, and he spoke in Spanish and
not in the Moors tongue.


I. Pues quieres ver como debaxo del sayal ay al: y que aun que te hablo en
espanol, es algaravia de allende para ti.


I. But will thou see, how under course attire is some wisdom, and although
he spoke Spanish it is the Moors tongue to thee.


F. Ya lo desseo ver como es.


F. I desire to see how it is.


I. Pues lo primero que dixo que el Turco se ha tornado moro, es lo el de
profession y de ley, y suelo siempre: todos siguen la seta de Mahoma. Que
Venecia nada en agua, es verdad que esta fundada en la mar, que Ytalia esta
llena de hombres, tambien es verdad como Ynglatierra lo esta, Tambien que en
Francia, ay mas de cien mil hombres de guerra, quien no lo sabe que quando el
Rey quiera, podra sacar della mas de dozientos mil.


I. The first then that he said, that the Turk is become a Moore or an
Infidel, he is so by his profession and law, and always has been: all
follow the sect of Mahomet. That Venice does swim in water, it is true, for it
is built in the sea: that Italy is full of men, also it is true as England is:
also that in France are more then a hundred thousand men of arms, who knows
it not, that when the king will, he may draw out thereof more then two
hundred thousand.


F. Todo esso bien lo entiendo yo, pero lo de mas, como se puede entender, que
el conde de Flandes aya dormido con la Reyna despana y no se anda el mundo en
guerras.


F. All this I understand well, but the rest how is it to be understood, that
the earl of Flaunders has lien with the Queen of Spain, and the world not to
be up in arms.


I. Pues bobo no sabes tu, que el conde de flandes y el rey despana es todo una
propria persona.


I. Why fool do not know, that the earl of Flaunders and the king of Spain
is all one person.


F. Iuro a tal, que tiene razon, que no avia yo caydo en ello.


F. I swear by such a one, he says true that I did not light upon.


I. Pues lo demas que dize que el sol es mayor que toda la tierra, es muy gran
verdad, segun demonstraciones astrologicas, que yo con saber poco te las
pudiera dar a entender, si uviera lugar. Que la luna aparecera cada noche de su
manera, esso tu lo vees cada dia con sus crescientes y menguantes, nunca esta
una noche, como estuvo otra: pues que arderan muchos montes, tambien es verdad,
que ay en el mundo muchos que llaman Bolcanes, como el de Sicilia, que siempre
esta ardiendo. Que morira mucho ganado, quien lo ygnora que lo han de matar los
hombres para comer.


I. But the rest, which he says, that the sun is bigger then the whole earth,
is very true, according to astrological demonstrations, which I in knowing but
a little could easily make thee understand, if there were time and place,
that the moon will appear as it was wont, that thou see continually with
her waxing and waning, she is never one night as she was the other night, then
that many mountains shall burn, also it is true, for there be many in the
world, as mount Aetna in Sicilie, which always burns, etc. that there shall
be a great slaughter of cattle who is ignorant thereof, for men are to kill
them for to eat them.


F. Todo esso entiendo bien, pero aquello de aquellos monstruos, que echaran
llamas por la boca, y que hemos de comer lo que ellos vomitaren, no puedo y
pensar que sea.


F. All this I understand well, but that of those monsters, which shall cast
out flames out of their mouths, and that we shall eat of that they shall
vomit, I cannot think what it maybe.


I. Esso es mas facil que esotro, porque aquellos monstruos, son los hornos ado
se cueze el pan, que echan llamas, y por la boca vomitan el pan que comemos.


I. This is more easy then the other, for those monsters are ouens, where they
bake bread which cast out fire, and by the mouth of it, it vomiteth the bread
which we eat.


F. Aora digo que tienes razon, y que yo estava en babia, y que puede un necio
con vna necedad forjada en su ymaginacion dar en que entender a cien sabios.


F. Now I say you say true, and that I was in foolerie, and that a fool with
his foolishnes framed in his own imagination may give to a hundred wise men
matter to pick out.


I. Assi le a acontecio al poeta Omero, que como con la vejez estuviesse ciego
y se anduviesse passeando por la orilla de la mar, y oyo hablar a ceirtos
pescadores, que en aquel punto se estavan espulgando, y come les preguntasse
que pesca hazian, ellos entendiendo por los piojos, respondieron los que
tenemos buscamos y los que no tenemos hallamos, pues como el buen Omero no
viesse lo que ellos hazian, y por esta causa no entendiesse la Enigma, fue
tanto lo que fatigo su ymaginacion y entendimiento, por entender la y alcancar
el secreto dello, que fue bastante esta pesadumbre a hazer le morir.


I. So it happened to the Poet Homer, that as he was with age blind and went
walking by the sea shore, and heard certain fishermen talking, that at that
time were a lowsing themselus, and as he asked them, what fish they caught,
they understanding that he had meant their lice, they answered, those that we
i. Have in their clothes, i. lice.
have, we seek for, and those that we i. Have not in hand.
have not we find, but as the good Homer, could not see what they did, and for
this cause could not understand the riddle, it did so grieve his understanding
to obtain the secret of this matter, which was a sufficient grief to cause
his death.


F. El lo hizo no como sabio, sino como muy gran necio, en martarse por lo, que
no podia alcancar.


F. He did that not as a wise man, but as a very great fool, in casting away
himself for that he could not reach unto.


I. Yo bien creo que no moriras tu desse achaque.


I. I well believe thou would not die for such a matter.


F. No hermano, que no pare ya mi madre, y yo contento me con lo que buenamente
y sin mucho trabajo puedo alcancar.


F. No brother, for my mother is past child bearing, and I content my self
with that I may well and without much labor reach unto.


I. Pues quien no es mas de otro, no merece mas que otro, y quien no save no
vale, y quien ruyn es en su villa, ruyn es en Sevilla, y quien adelante no mira
atras se halla.


I. But he that is not more then another does deserve no more then another,
and he that has not knowledge, is of no worth, and he that in his own town
is vile, and is also bad and naught in Seuile, and he that looks not before he
leap may fall into the ditch.


F. Yo hermano, quiero andar por do anda el buey, y asentar el pie llano, no
tomar de las cosas mas de aquello que me dieron, y porque quiero del mundo
gozar, quiero oy'r, y ver y callar.


F. Brother, I will go where the ox has trodden, and set down my foot soft
and fair, not to take more matters then that they shall give me, and because
I will live in rest I will hear and see and hold my peace.


Dialogo sexto, que passo enter dos amigos Yngleses y dos Espanoles, que se
juntaron en la lonja de Londres, en el qual, se tratan muchas cosas curiosas, y
de gusto, son los Yngleses Egidio y Guillermo, los Espanoles Diego y Alonso.
The sixth Dialogue which passed between two friends Englishmen, and two
Spaniards, which met upon the Exchange in London: wherein are handled many
curious matters, and delightful: the English men are named Giles and William,
the Spaniardes James and Alonso. E. QVe hazeis Guillermo?


G. WHat do you William?


G. Ya lo veis Exidio.


W. You even see Giles.


E. Como estays tan ocioso?


G. Why are you so idle?


G. Quia nemo me conduxit.


W. Because no man has hired me.


E. Pues yo os conbido aun rato de buena convercacion.


G. Then I inuit you for a while into good company?


G. Adonde?


W. Whither?


E. Venid os comigo, no yreys adonde yo os llevare?


G. Come with me, will you not go whither I shall lead you?


G. Si me lo dezis primero, por que yr hombre, sin saver adonde, seria necedad.


W. If you tell me first, for it were folly for a man to go he knows not
whither.


E. Luego no hazeis confianca de mi?


G. Do you not now trust me?


G. Si hago, mas no sabeis que no todos los umores son unos, y que podra ser,
lo que a vos os da gusto, enfadar me a mi.


W. Yes I do trust you, but do you not know, that all humors are not one, and
it may be, that which likes you may very much displease me.


E. Si, pero yo conozco ya'vuestro umor, y me acomodo con el.


G. Yea, but I know your humor, and I do apply my self unto it.


G. Con todo esso, dezidme adonde me llevays.


W. But for all this, tell me whither you carry me.


E. Vamos a la lonja, adonde me estan esperando dos amigos Espanoles, muy
discretos, gustareis de su buena conversacion.


G. Let us go to the Exchange where two Spaniards very discreet men my
friends are tarrying for me, you shall have a taste of their good conversation.


G. Hablan yngles?


W. Speak they English?


E. Un poquito, pero pues vos entendeis bien el Espanol, y yo tanbien no
ymporta.


G. A very little, but seeing you understand well the Spanish and I also, it
makes no matter.


G. Huelgo me de yr, aunque no sea, mas de por aprender algunas buenas frasis
Espanolas.


W. I am glad to go, though it be but to learn some good Spanish phrases.


E. Essas se yo que las tienen buenas, porque son de Toledo donde es la prima
de la lengua Espanola.


G. Those I know they have and good ones, because they are of Toledo where is
the prime of the Spanish tongue.


G. Son por ventura aquellos, que se andan alli passeando.


W. They are peradventure those which go there walking.


E. Los propios, vamos alla, Dios guarde a vuestas mercedes.


G. The very same, let us go meet them, God save your worships.


D. Y venga con vuestas mercedes.


I. And welcome in Gods name.


E. Pass adelante la conversacion de que se tratava aora.


G. Proceed in that conference which passed betwixt you.


D. No pareze sino que la entendistes, que respondistes a ella sin daros el pie.


I. It seems that you understood it, that you made answer to it without
giving As in plays one takes the last word of another speech, and by that
knows when to speak.
you the qu.


A. Tratavamos de las salutaciones, que se usan en Ynglaterra, y de las que se
usan in Espana.


A. We entreated of the salutations which are used in England, and of those
which are used in Spain.


G. Quales son mejores?


W. Which are better?


A. Cierto en esto, adonde quiera, ay abusos, quando dize el espanol Dios os
guarde, en ora buena esteys, Dios os de salud, y el Yngles buenas tardes y
otras semejantes yo apruevola por buena salutacion.


A. Truly in that matter, there are abuses on both parts, when the Spaniard
says God keep you, a good hour have you, God give you health: and the
Englishman Godden, or good even, and the other like, I allow it for good
salutation.


G. Pues el mundo la reprueva, y tienen por toscos a los que la usan.


W. But generally it is disallowed, and they hold them rude that use it.


A. Y aun por esso se dize, que anda el mundo a el rebez, y no ay mejor senal
de que ello es bueno, de ver que el mundo lo reprueba.


A. And therefore it is said, the world goes quite contrary, and there is no
better sign that it is good, then to see it disallowed in the world.


G. De las demas salutaciones que os parece?


W. And of the other salutations what think you?


A. De las de mas digo, que quando el Yngles pregunta a el otro, como estays,
dize una gran necedad, y quando el Espanol dize beso os las manos, dize una
gran mentira.


A. Of the rest I say, that when the Englishman does ask the other, how The
Spaniard allows not how do you, but how does your worship or mastership.
he does, he vtters his own simplicity, and when the Spaniard says, I kiss
your hands, he tells a great lie.


G. Menester es que deys razon, de vuestra nueva opinion.


W. You must give a reason of your new opinion.


A. Aora dezime por vuestra vida, no os parece necedad a el que vos veys bueno
preguntar le como esta?


A. Now tell me I pray you, does it not seem unto you a simplicity, to ask a
man whom you see well, how he does?


G. Teneys razon, pero podria tener algun mal secreto que no se le each de ver.


G. You say well, but he may have some inward grief, which appears not
outwardely.


A. Estonces que remedais vos, con preguntar le como esta, No seria mejor,
rogar a Dios, que le de salud, como haze el otro.


A. Then what remedy do you give him in asking him how he does, were it not
better to pray to God to send him health as the other does.


G. Aora dezid lo de el Espanol.


W. Now tell that of the Spaniard.


A. El Espanol digo, que dize mas mentiras enter ano en este caso, que reales
da por Dios, porque dezir a el que encuentra, v^so las manos a v. m. si habla
de present, bien vemos, que miente, pues no se las besa, si de futuro tanbien
porque bien sabemos, que quando el otro quisiesse dar se las por muy amigo que
fuesse no se las querria el vesar.


A. The Spaniard I say in this case tells more lies within the year, then he
gives sixpences for God sake, for to say to one, that he meets I kiss the
hands of your worship, if he speak of the time present, we well see that he
lies seeing he does not kiss them: if of the time to come, in like manner;
for we well know when the other would give him his hands to kiss, if he were
never so great a friend, yet he would not kiss them.


G. Si pero parece que es vna manera de reconosimiento de superioridad a el que
dize.


W. Yea but it seems that it is a manner of acknowledging of superiority to
him, to whom it is spoken.


A. Assi es, pero esse reconosimiento no esta mas que en la lengua por que el
refran dize, manos beza hombre que querria ver cortadas.


A. So it is, but this acknowledging is no more, but in the tongue: for the
proverb says, A man kisseth those hands that he would see cut off.


G. Yo os dire lo que subcedio al proposito, a un cavallero viejo espanol, con
otro moco y fue, que como el moco por buena crianca, le dixo a el viejo suplico
a v.m. me de las manos, que se las quiero besar el viejo confiado en su
anciania, las alargo para que se las besasse, el otro ya arrepentido se las
asio con las suy as y con muy buen donaire le dixo senor yo y v. m. a otros dos.


I. I will tell you that which happened fit for this matter, to an ancient
gentleman, a Spaniard, with another young man; and it was, as the young man for
manners sake said to the old man, I entreat your worship that you will give
me your hands, for I will kiss them: the old man presuming upon his years,
put them out that he might kiss them, the other repenting, took him fast by
the hands with his own hands, and with very good pleasantnes, said unto him,
Sir, I and your worship against other two.


G. El moco anduvo discreto en hazer lo ansi, y el viejo necio, porque bien
savemos, que palabras de buena crianca no obligan.


W. The young man was wise in so doing, and the old man simple, for well we
know that words of compliment bind not.


D. Ansi es verdad, que essa cerimonia de besar la mano, solo la deve el
vasallo a el senor.


I. It is true, this ceremony of kissing the hand only the vassal owes unto
his Lord.


A. E'ssa sola salua guarda tiene nuestra costumbre que con dezir, beso a v.m.
las manos, parece que es dezir, reconosco a v. m. por mi Senor, y yo por
vuestro vasallo.


A. This safeguard has our custom, that with saying, I kiss the hands of your
worship, it seems it is to say, I acknowledge your worship for my lord, and
my self for your vassal.


E. Y que os parece de esta costumbre, que tenemos en ynglaterra de asir nos
las manos vnos otros?


G. And what is your opinion of this custom, which we have in England to
shake hands one with another?


A. Dos manos asidas, siempre fue simbolo de amistad, pero dar los tirones, que
aqui se dan vno a otro, tengo lo por poca gravedad, y no se si diga por
liviandad.


A. Two hands fastened together, always has been a token of friendship, but
to shake and pluck them, as here they do one to another, I hold it for small
gravity, and I know not whether I may call it lightness.


E. Antes parece que aquello es por mas confirmacion de la amistad.


G. Rather it seems that it is for the greater confirmation of friendship.


A. E'ssa confirmacion ha de ser con obras, y no con ademanes ni tirones,
quanto mas que deve aver muchos que con la mano asida y tirando, le deven de
estar con el coracon matando le.


A. This confirmation ought to be with works, and not with gestures, nor
shaking of the hands, and so much the rather, because there are many which with
hand in hand shake hands, and in heart would kill each other.


G. Que dizis de la otra de besar los hombres a las mugeres publicamente.


W. What say you of that custom of kissing between men and women and that
openly?


A. Essa costumbre tuvo su principio en Roma, en el tiempo que ella florecia,
aunque se ynvento a diferente proposito de el que aora se usa.


A. This custom first began in Rome, in the time it most flourished, although
it were invented for a different purpose, then it is now used.


G. A que fin la ynbentaron?


W. For what purpose was it invented?


A. Los Romanos aborecian tanto el vino en las mugeres, que tenian ley, en que
condenava a muerte ala que lo bevia, y porque no lo pudiessen hazer
asco^didamente, tenian licencia sus parientes de besar la, para que por el
olfato conociessen, si lo avia bevido.


A. The Romans did so much detest wine in women, that they had a law, in which
they did condemn to death that woman which did drink wine, and because they
might not drink it without being known, their kinsfolks had leave to kiss
the women, that they might know by their breath whether they had drunk wine
or no.


G. Si aora se vbiessen de matar todas las que lo beven, yo veo que quedaramos
sin mugeres,


W. If now they should kill all those women which drink wine, I see we should
be quite without women.


E. No creo, que fuera muy gran perdida, segun nos son causa de males.


G. I believe that it were not any great loss, seeing they are cause of many
evils unto us.


G. Yo para mi tengo, que la mayor causa de la desolucion en algunas mugeres de
Ynglaterra es esta costumbre de besallos en publico, por que con esto pierden
la verguenca y a el tocamiento del beso, les entra un veneno que las ynficiona.


W. I hold that the greatest cause of dissolutenes in some women in England is
this custom of kissing publicly, for that by this means they lose their
shamefastnes, and at the very touch of the kiss, there enters into them a
poison which does infect them.


A. Antes que se yntroduxesse esta costumbre en Roma, cuenta Tito Livio, que
desterraron de ella a un senador, persona de mucha quenta, solo por que beso a
su muger delante de vna hija suya


A. Before this custom was brought into Rome, Titus Liuius tells that they
banished out of the city a senator, a person of great account, only because
he kissed his wife before one of his own daughters.


G. De un estremo vinieron a dar en otro estremo.


W. They fell from one extremity into another.


E. En Espana no se vsa besar los hombres a las mugeres?


G. In Spain do not men use to kiss women?


D. Si besan los maridos a sus mugeres, y esto alla detras de siete paredes,
donde aun la luz no los pueda ver.


I. Yes the husbands kiss their wives, but as if it were behind seven walls,
where the very light cannot see them.


G. Es por que los Espanoles son demasidamente celozos.


W. It is because the Spaniards are too jealous.


A. No, si no, per que somos tan trabiessos, que no hemos menester esse
apetito, para hazer mil malos recaudos que seria si tubiessemos esse Ocacion.


A. No not so, but because we are so wanton, that we need nothing to help our
appetite, to make a thousand ill matches which would fall out if we should have
this occasion.


G. Yo creo, que antes causaria hastio, y no andarian los hombres, tan golosos,
por que vedamiento es causa del apetito.


G. I do rather believe, that it would cause satietie, and that men would not
seek it so greedily, because forbidding is cause of desire.


A. No es fuego el de la concupisciencia, que se ahoga por echarle mucha
materia, antes es como la y dropesia, que mientras mas el enfermo beue mas sed
tiene.


A. The fire of concupiscence, is not such as is extinguished by casting on
much matter, but like the dropsy, that the more the sick person drinks the
more thirst still he has.


D. Especialmente enter los Espanoles que por ser de complexion colericos, esta
Venus en su punto.


I. Especially among Spaniards, which are of a choleric complexion, Venus is
in her full force.


G. Yo entiendo esso al contrario, por que Venus consiste mas en vmedad que en
calor, por lo qual entiendo que mas aptos son para semejante exercicio los
v'medos de complexion, que los colericos que con de su naturaleza secos.


G. I take that quite contrary, because Venus consists more in moisture then
in heat, whereby it seems to me that the moist of complexion are more apt to
such matters, then the choleric which are by nature dry.


A. Si pero la humidad sin calor, seria como la tierra sin el sol, que no es
suficiente de misma a produzir cosa alguna.


A. Yea but moisture without heat, would be as the earth without the sun,
which is not sufficient of it self to bring forth any thing.


D. Por esse, los poetas, casaron a Venus con Bulcano Dios pe el fuego.


I. For this cause the Poets married Venus with Vulcan God of fire.


E. Mas Bulcano ni Venus sin Ceres y Baco no valen un Caco, a fruit in the
Indies or a small piece of money there.
caco.


G. But neither Venus nor Vulcan, without Ceres and Bacchus are worth a cherrie
stone.


G. Pues yo para mi tengo, que en las tierras mas frias, esta mas reconcentrado
el calor natural, y por esso con mayor aptitud, en los que biven en las tales
regiones.


W. But I for my part think, that in countries most cold, the natural heat
is more united in his center, and therefore is there greater desire in those
that live in those countries.


A. No es esse calor reconcentrado que esta enel coracon el que es causa de
este fuego, sino el que esta en la sangre y parts exteriores.


A. It is not that heat, which is settled about the heart, which is the cause of
this fire, but that which is in the blood and exterior parts.


G. Si pero no me negareis, que el calor de la sangre no proceed de el, de el
higado.


W. Yea but you will not deny, but that the heat of the blood does proceed
from the heat of the liver.


A. Assi es verdad, pero no obra este efecto en su origin y fuente, si no
quando se ha derramado por las. venas, y como la virtud esparzida, es mas flaca
que quando esta vnida, si quando lo esta es acometido el calor de su contrario
el frio, y esto confuerca y. vehemencia vense y resfria de suerte que no puede
obrar ni hazer su efecto.


A. It is true, but it does not work this effect in the original and
fountain, except when it has spread it self by all the veins, and as the
virtue dispersed is more feeble then when it is united; so when it is so, the
heat is set upon by his contrary the cold, and this cold with force and
vehemency does overcome and cool in such manner, that it cannot work his
effect.


D. Assi es, y la esperiencia de esto se vee en los cabrones, que es animal
luxuriosissimo, y en llevando le a tierras frias, o no puede bivir, o pierde
mucho de su potencia.


I. So it is, and the experience of this is seen in great hee-goats, which is
a most luxurious beast, and in carrying him to cold countries, either he cannot
live, or he loses much of his natural strength.


G. Los Faunos o semicapras, que los antiguos llamavan medios dioses cuentan
los autores, y poetas, que eran en estremo luxuriosos.


W. The Faunes or half goats which the ancient writers called half gods,
authors and poets tell that they were woonderfully luxurious.


E. Es verdad, que uvo o ay tales hombres en en mundo llamados faunos?


G. Is it true, that there were and are such men the world called Faunes?


A. En la vida de Sant Pablo primer hermitano se quenta, que en aquel desierto
donde el hazia su penitencia, la hazia tanbien santo Antonio, el qual como por
rebelacion supiesse como estava alli cerca san Pablo, le fue avicitar y en el
camino encontro con uno, el qual de la cinta para arriba, tenia forma perfecta
de hombre, salvo que la cabeca tenia llena de cornecuelos pequenos, y de medio
para abajo era cabron con muy largas vedijas, y pies de lo mismo.


A. In the life of saint Paull the first Hermit, they say, that in that desert
where he made his repentance, Saint Anthony likewise made his, who by
revelation knowing he was near Saint Paull, went to visit him, and in the way
met with one, which from the girdle upward had the perfect form of a man,
except that he had his head full of little horns, and from the middle
downward he was a he-goate with very long shagge hair, and feet of the same.


E. Hablava alguna cosa?


G. Spoke he any thing?


A. Si que el sancto le hablo, y le pregunto quien era y el en un lenguaje muy
barvaro, pero tal que el sancto le pudo entender, le respondio, que era vno de
los avitadores de aquel desierto, a quien la ciega gentilidad adorava por
dioses, pero que eran criaturas mortales, y dixo mas a el santo, que su gray y
gente le enbiava a el por embaxador a rogar le a el Sancto, que roga se por
todos a el comun Dios de todas las gentes, que bien savian que avia baxado de
el cielo y hecho se hombre por redimir a los hombres, y con esto se fue por
aquel desierto, con tanta ligereza que en muy breve espacio, le perdio de vista
el sancto.


A. Yea for Saint Anthony spoke unto him, and asked him who he was, and he in
a language very barbarous, yet notwithstanding such a language that the holy
man could understand, he answered him, that he was one of the inhabitants of
that desert, whom the blind Gentiles worshipped for Gods, but that they were
mortal creatures, and said moreover to the Saint, that his people and nation
sent him to him for an ambassador to entreat the holy man, that he should pray
for all of them, to the common God of all nations, for well they knew, that he
was come down from heaven, and being made man to redeem mankind, and
herewithall he went through the desert with such swiftnes, that in short space
the holy man lost the sight of him.


D. Yo he leydo tanbien, que a el emperador Constantino magno, le traxeron de
essos desiertos, otro bibo, y lo estubo muchos dias, y despues de muerto
salado, le traxeron por muchas parts de el mundo, para que todos le biessen.


I. Also have I read, that they brought to the Emperor Constantine the great,
out of these deserts, another alive, and there he was many days, and afterward
being dead and salted, they carried him through many parts of the world, that
all men might see him.


G. Bolviendo a nuestra primera platica, que os parece de esta ciudad de
Londres?


W. Turning to our first speech, what do you think of the city of London?


A. A mi me parece, en verano tienda, y en invierno contienda.


A. It seems to me in summer a shop, and in winter a contention.


G. Como se entiende esso?


W. How is this to be understood?


A. Digo que parece, en verano tienda, por que en aquel tiempo, todos los
Senores, cavalleros, y hidalgos, se salen fuera de ella, y se van a sus aldeas
a passar el verano, quedando en ella solos los oficiales con sus tiendas
abiertas.


A. I say it seems in summer a shop, for that in that time, all the noble men,
knights, and gentlemen, do go out of the city, and they go to country
villages to pass over the summer, only artificers remaining in it, with their
shops open.


G. Y por que lo de mas?


W. And why the other?


A. En ynvierno son los terminos y, como acuden de todo el reyno a ella a sus
pleitos esta, hecha toda contienda o pleito, pero vltra de esto es vna de las
mejores ciudades de elmundo a lo que yo en tiendo.


A. In winter are the terms, and out of every place of the kingdom, they come
to it to their pleadings, and so it is made nothing but contention and
wrangling in law, but besides this it is one of the best cities in the world
as far as I perceive.


G. Que dezis de toda la tierra en general?


W. What say you of the whole land in general?


A. Que es fertilissima y abundante, de todas las cosas que ella produze,
especial de ganados, deven de ser los mas gruessos y mejores de el mundo.


A. That it is most fruitful, and abounding of all things, which it does bring
forth, especially flocks of sheep, which are the greatest and best of the
world.


G. Y tanbien de semillas es muy fertile.


W. And also of seeds it is very fertile.


A. Ansi es verdad, pero como no puede aver cosa perfecta en este mundo, ya que
en esso es abundante, le faltan otras cosas necessarias, a la vida vmana, que
ella por la frialdad de su sitio, no puede produzir, y ansi tiene nececidad, de
comunication con otros reinos.


A. It is very true, but as there cannot be any thing perfect in this world,
so although in this it abounds, yet other necessary things are wanting in it,
which are required to humane life, which through the coldness of the situation,
it cannot bring forth, and so it has need of commerce with other nations.


G. Que cosas son essas, que dezis que le faltan, que yo creo que no ay cosa en
el mundo, que en ella no se halle.


W. What things are those which you say, that are wanting in it, for I believe
that there is not any thing in the world that in it is not found.


A. Es assi verdad, pero es comunicado de otros reynos, que bien veys vos, que
en ella no se cria oro ni plata, no se coje vino, ni azeite, acucar, seda,
especieria, ni frutas de las regaladas, como son cidras, limones, limas,
naranjas, granadas, almendras, y otros mil generos de ellas, muy necessarios
para el regalo de las gentes, y como digo de estas pocas cosas, pudiera dezir
de otras muchas que dexo.


A. It is true, but it is brought from other countries, for well you see that
in it, neither grows gold nor silver, nor wine, oil, sugar, silk, spice nor
fruits of the finest sort, as are citrons, lymons, orenges, pomegranats,
almonds, and a thousand other kinds of them, very necessary for the dayntie
feeding of men, and as I spoke of these few things, I could say of many others
which I leave.


G. Si, pero te nemos otras, que sirven en lugar de essas cosas, y ansi no las
echamos menos, como cerveza por vino, manteca por azeite, y otras semejantes.


W. Yea but we have others, which serve in steed of these things, and so we
want them not, as beer for wine, butter for oil, and others the like.


A. Con todo esso, seria inposible poder passar este reyno sin comunicacion con
otro, lo que no tiene Espana, que sola enter todaslas provincias de el mundo,
podria passar sin comunicacion con otra, por produzir, dentro de si todas las
cosas necessarias, a la vida vmana.


A. Notwithstanding all this, it were impossible this kingdom could endure
without commerce with others, which Spain stands in no need of, for that
alone among all the countries in the world might endure without communicating
with any other country, bringing forth within it self all those necessary
things for man's life.


G. Pues, bien os podre yo dezir v'na cosa, que Espana no produze.


W. But well may I tell you one thing which Spain affoords not.


A. Qual es?


A. What is it?


G. Especieria, que al fin lo tra eis de la yndia.


W. Spice, which you fetch from the Indies.


A. Teneys razon, que essa fola le falta a Espana, pero, como vos dixistes,
tanbien se cria en ella, con que se podria suplir essa falta.


A. You say true, for Spain only wants this, but as you have said also, there
grows in it that which may supply this want.


G. Que es?


W. What is it?


A. En lugar de pimienta, se cria vna yerua que llamamos pimiento, cuya
simiente es de tanta fuerca, y de el propio efecto que la pimienta, que viene
de yndias, en lugar de clavos, vsan muchos de los ajos, y si no fuesse por un
mal olorzillo que tienen, son mas sabrosos que esotros, de acafran gran
cantidad se coje en Espana, genxibre de pocos dias aca, se a comencado a
plantar en ella, y se da bien.


A. In steed of pepper there grows an herb which we call pepper herb, whose
seed is of such strength, and of the very same effect the pepper is which
comes from the Indies. In steed of cloves, many use garlic, and if it were
not for a little ill smell which it has, they are more sauorie then the other.
Great quantity of saffron is had in Spain. Ginger not long since is begun to
be planted therein, and it prospers well.


G. A lomenos no me negareis, ser mas fertile tierra en general Ynglaterra que
Espana.


W. At least you will not deny me, England generally to be a more fertile
country then Spain.


A. Digo que es verdad, y lo concedo, pero tanbien os se dezir, que de essa
fertilidad, viene la floxedad en las carnes, y mantenimientos de ella, que son
de poco nutrimiento y sustancia, y esta es la causa, de que los yngleses nos
notays a los Espanoles por miserables en el comer, por que las carnes de
Espana, como de tierra mas esteril, son de tanto nutrimiento que si comiesse de
ellas un hombre tanto como en ynglaterra come, sin dubda ninguna, reventaria.


A. I say it is true, and I do grant it, but also I can tell you that of this
fertility proceeds the faintness of the flesh there, and the substance of
it, which is of small nourishment and sustenance, and this is the cause why the
English men do mark the Spaniards for pinching in their diet, for that the
flesh of Spain as of a country more barren, is of such nourishment, that if a
man should eat of it so much as in England they eat, without doubt he should
burst.


D. Por esso, ay uno manera de dezir, comun en Espana, tu padre ceno carnero
assado, y acosto se, y murio se pues, no preguntes, de que murio.


I. For this cause there is a common saying in Spain, thy father supped with
mutton roasted, and went to bed and died, do not now ask whereof he died.


A. En la propia Espana tenemos la isperiencia de esto que la Andaluzia que es
tierra mas fertile que Estremadura, las carnes de ella, no son con mucho de
tanto nutrimiento, ni tan buen savor, como estas otras.


A. In Spain we have the experience of this, that in Andeluzai which is a
country more fertile then A province in Spain.
Estremadura, the flesh is not by odds of such nourishment nor of so good
taste as that of Estremadura.


E. Tanbien se vee esso en los yngleses, que van a Espana, que dizen que no
pueden comer tanta carne alla, como comian aca.


G. Also it may be seen in Englishmen, which go into Spain, which say that
they cannot eat so much flesh there, as they did eat here.


G. Dezime a ora, que os parece, de el trato de nuestra gente?


W. Tell me now, what you think of the English manner?


A. Generalmente hablando, toda la gente ynglesa, es benina, y amorosa, afable,
alegre, y amigos de regozijos, y fiestas, agenos de toda melancolia, como a
quellos, en quien predomina el humor sanguino, pero fuera de esto, he notado en
todos en general tan ynsatiable avaricia, que desdora todas sus virtudes.


A. Speaking generally, all the English people are courteous and loving,
affable, and merry, and lovers of sportes and feasts, free from all
melancholy, as those in whom does predominate the sanguine complexion: but
besides this I have noted in general, such an insatiable covetousness, as does
deface all their virtues.


G. Y de las mugeres que dezis?


W. And what say you of the women?


A. Las mugeres generalmente hablando, pienso que son las mas hermosas de el
mundo, por que tienen todas tres gracias particulares, para ser lo, que son en
estremo blancas, coloradas, y rubias, y la que con estas gracias que son
generales a todas, acierta a tener buenas faiciones, es acabada en hermosura:
pero tanbien os digo con la misma generalidad, que tienen tres faltas.


A. The women generally, I think they are the most fair of the world, for
they have all the three special graces which make the^ so, they are
woonderfully white and red, and that with these graces which are general to
all, there happens for them to have such good favor, whereby they are most
beautiful: but also I tell you with the same generality, that they have three
faults.


G. Quales son por vida vuestra?


W. I pray you what are they?


A. No las quisiera dezir, por no caer, en desgracia con ellas.


A. I would not willingly tell them least I fall into disgrace with them.


G. Yo salgo por fiador que no caireis.


W. I will be your surety you shall not.


A. Teneis razon, que quien nunca subio, no puede caer, pero las tres faltas
son, pequenos ojos, grandes bocas, no buena tez en los rostros, y de esto es la
causa el air tan frio y sutil, que corre en estas parts, que se les curte y
por esto es buena la ynbincion la, de las mas carillas, aunque yo entiendo que
no deve de bastar.


A. You say true, he that never gat up, can never fall, but the three wants are
little eyes, great mouths, and not very smooth skin in the face, and hereof
the cause is for that the air is so cold and subtle in these parts, which
does tan them, and therefore maskes were well invented, although as I perceive
they help not.


G. Vos lo aveys disputado muy bien, y yo os quedo muy aficionado servidor, y
assi os suplico, que el tiempo que estubieredes en esta tierra os sirvais de mi.


W. You have disputed very well, and I remain your affectionate servant, and
so I entreat you that the time you are in this country you so use me.


A. Yo os doy muchas gracias, por el ofrecimiento, y quedo yo no menos a
vuestro servicio, y por que se va haziendo tarde, nos vamos recojendo alas
posadas que ya es ora.


A. I give you many thanks, for your offer, and I remain no less at your
service, and because it waxes late, let us betake our selves to our lodgings,
for it is time.


G. Beso a vuestas mercedes las manos.


W. I kiss your hands.


D. Yo las de vuestas mercedes.


I. And I yours.


Dialogo septimo, enter un sargento y un cavo de esquadra, y un Soldado, en el
qual se trata, de las cosas pertenecientes a la milicia, y de las calidades que
deve tener un buen Soldado, con muchos dichos graciosos y buenas quentos. The
seventh Dialogue between a Sergegeant of a band, and a corporal, and a
Soldier, in which are handled matters pertaining to warfare, and the parts
that a good soldier ought to have, with many fine sayings and good speeches.
Sa. A Donde camina senor soldado?


Sa. WHither walk you soldier?


So. O senor Sargento hazia la tabla, si v.m. no manda otra cosa.


So. O sergeant toward the dicing place, if you command no other matter.


Sa. Lleva muchos dineros que jugar?


Sa. Do you carry with you much money to play?


So. Mi paga enterita como la recebi, que no he osado gastar un real, por no
quirar se lo a el juego.


So. My whole pay as I received it, for I durst not spend one six pence
thereof, least I should take away so much from play.


Sa. Esso es de buenos cofrades, antes falte para el cuerpo que para el juego.


Sa. This is the part of good companions, let there be wanting for the body,
rather then for play.


So. A que feria puedo yo yr, en que mas gane, pues aventuro con quatro ducados
ganar quatro-cientos.


So. To what fair may I go, wherein I may gain more, seeing I venture with
four duckates, to gain four hundred.


Sa. Y si el dado dize mal, alla van rocin y mancanas.


Sa. If the die turn ill, there A horse laden with apples passing a river was
carried away, and so both lost.
goes horse and apples.


So. Senor o rico pijado, o muerto des calabrado.


So. Sir, either hangedrich, or dead with head broken.


Sa. Essa es la quenta de los perdidos.


Sa. This is the reckoning of cast awaies.


So. Cuerpo de tal senor, que hijos o muger tengo yo que mantener?


So. Body of me, what children or wife have I to keep?


Sa. Si pero ne fuera mejor vestir se que jugar el dinero?


Sa. Yea but were it not better to apparel your self, then to play away your
money?


So. Yo he hecho mi quenta, y he menester camisas, jubon, sayo, calcones,
medias, y capatos, y sonbrero, y en quatro ducados, no ay para todo, pues
conprar vno nuevo, y traer lo otro viejo, no parece bien, quiero jugar, quica
ganare para comprar lo todo.


So. I have reckoned with my self, I have need of shirts, doublet, cassocke,
breeches, stockings, shoes, and hat, and in four ducats there is not for all
this, for to buy one thing new and wear another old, seems not well, I will
play, peradventure I shall get so much to buy all new.


Sa. Y si los pierde, quedar se ha sin lo vno y lo otro.


Sa. If you loose, you must go without one and the other.


So. Senor, preso por mil, preso por mil y quinientos, todo es estar preso,
dire estonces desnudo naci, y desnudo me hallo y desnudo morire.


So. Sir, arrested for a thousand, taken for a thousand five hundred, all is
but to be arrested, I will then say I was borne naked, and naked I find my
self, and naked shall I die.


Sa. Digame, save quando entramos de guardia?


Sa. Tell me, do you know when we watch?


So. Esta noche le toca a la compania.


So. This night it falls to the company.


Sa. Con que armas sirve con pica, o arcabuz?


Sa. What arms serve you with, a pike or shot?


So. Con un mosquete de siete palmos.


So. With a musket of seven handfuls.


Sa. Pues como dize, que no saco mas que quatro ducadas tieniendo siete depaga.


Sa. How then said you, that you had but four ducats, having seven for your
pay?


So. Vno me descontaron de polvora y cuerda los contadores, otro he dado a mi
camarada para la despensa de esta semana, y otro que se me quito de los Succors
or lendings which they give soldiers when there is no pay and when the pay
comes they take it off.
socorros.


So. One ducate defalked for powder and match, the other have I given to my
comerade for the charges of this week, and the other was taken out for
lendings.


Sa. justa esta la quenta.


Sa. The reckoning is very right.


So. Es como la de el trillo, cada piedra en su agujero.


So. It is even as a threshing floor, every stone in his hole.


Sa. Quantos son de camarada?


Sa. How many cabin mates are you together?


So. Tres y con migo quatro.


So. Three, and with me four.


Sa. Tantos pies tiene un gato.


Sa. So many feet has a cat.


So. cinco con el rabo.


So. He has five with the tail.


Sa. Tienen buen aloxamiento?


Sa. Have all you good lodging?


So. Tal sea la salud de el aposentador que nos le dio.


So. I would to God such were the health of the Furriel which gave it us.


Sa. Como no es bueno?


Sa. How so, is it not good good?


So. Peor es vna cahurda de lechones.


So. A pigstie is worse.


Sa. Tienen huespeda hermosa?


Sa. Have you a fair Hostess?


So. Hermosa senor sarjento, yo pienso que los diablos son serafines en su
comparacion.


So. Fair master Sergeant, I think the devils are Seraphines in respect of
her.


Sa. Bueno es el encarecimiento, que talle tiene?


Sa. You give her good commendations, what handsomnes is in her?


So. Ella es mas vieja que Metusalen, mas arugada que vna pasa, mas suzia que
vna mosca, mas seca, que vnpalo, diente y muela, como por la mano, la boca
su-mida, como ojo de culo, los ojos el vno tuerto, y el otro que no se le
sacaran con un garavato finalmente, toda ella es un retrato de la ynbidia.


So. She is more old then Methusalem, more wrinkled the^ a dried grape, or
raisin, more filthy then Which goes and sucketh every filthy wound or
carrion.
a fly, more dry then a stick: teeth and chock teeth as in ones hand, the
mouth sunk in as the hole of the tail, the eyes one quite out, and the other
so sunk into her head that it cannot be plucked out with a hook. In fine, all
of her together is the very picture of Envy.


Sa. Essa tal sera v'nico remedio contra luxuria.


Sa. She must needs be the only remedy against lust.


So. Pues es lo bueno que con todas estas gracias se afeita y repica.


So. But this is the best of her, which with all these good graces is painted
out and spoken of.


Sa. Y v.m. no le haze el amor?


Sa. And do you not make love to her?


So. Amor, o que boto a tal, no la acometa un Tigre.


So. Love, I swear by such a one, a Tiger would not set upon her.


Sa. A'nde, quae para un lava dientes no sera mala.


Sa. Go fool she is good enough to wash ones mouth, and spet out again.


So. Mas me los quiero traer suzios que no mal lavallos.


So. I had rather they should bring my clothes foul then ill washed.


Sa. Mas yo creo, que es como dizen, quien dize mal de la yegua, esse la lleva.


Sa. But I believe, it is as they say, he that dispraiseth the mare carries
her away.


So. Par diez, no soy si no como la zorra que quando no pudo alcancar las
v'bas, dixo vbas de parra, ansi como assi no las avia gana.


So. By this ten bones I am no otherwise then the fox, that when he could not
reach the grapes, said grape of the vine, so even so that he had no stomach to
eat them.


Sa. Aqui viene el cavo de esquadra, veamos que nuevas trae. de donde viene
senor cavo de es esquadra?


Sa. Here comes the corporal, let us see what news he brings. From whence
come you Corporal?


Ca. De la bandera.


Co. From the colors.


Sa. Queda alli el alferez?


Sa. Is the Ancient there?


C. No senor, que esta en casa de el capitan.


Co. No sir, he is at the captains house.


So. A el capitan y alferez dexo yo aora en casa de el maestre de campo.


So. The captain and Ensign I left even now in the camp-masters house.


Sa. Que nuevas ay por alla?


Sa. What news there about?


Ca. Nuevas ciertas pocas, mentiras ynfinitas.


Co. Certain news very few, lies infinite many.


Sa. Que se dize aora en el cuerpo deguardia?


Sa. What say they now upon the guarde?


Ca. Vnos dizen, que nos enbarcaremos para correr la costa, otros que que
daremos aqui de precidio, otros que yremos a Yrlanda, no ay quien lo entienda.


Co. One says, we shall embarke our selves to skowre the coast, others that we
shall remain here in garrison, others that we shall go for Ireland, none can
tell what.


Sa. Todo esso es adivinar, cada vno loque desea o le esta bien.


Sa. All this is, every one to guess at that which he does himself desire, or
likes well of.


Ca. Como dezia el otro capitan los soldados son profetas de el diablo.


Co. As another captain said, Soldiers are prophets of the devil.


Sa. Y tenia razon, porque assi como el diablo no save lo por venir, si no que
lo conjetura assi hazen ellos: y enter mil conjecturas que hazen, alguna han de
acertar.


Sa. And he said well, for as the devil does not know, that which is to come,
but by conjecture, so do they: and among a thousand conjectures which they
make, they are to hit upon one.


Ca. Tanbien se suena que el rey de Espana, arma para venir contra Ynglaterra.


Co. In like sort, the rumor goes that the king of Spain makes preparation
to come against England.


Sa. Venga en ora buena, si trae muchos dineros que dexarnos.


Sa. Let him come, if he bring good store of crowns to leave us.


S. Yo con vna cadena de oro que valga cien libras me contento.


So. I would content my self with a chain of gold, that were worth a
hundred pound.


Ca. Pues afee que no las suelen vender muy baratas los Espanoles.


Co. But in faith the Spaniards are not wont to sell them very good cheap.


So. Y yo con vna onca de plomo la pienso comprar.


So. And I hope to buie one with an ounce of lead.


Ca. E'sso es hazer quenta sin la huespeda: y quica yreis por lana, y bolvereis
tresquilado: que adonde las dan las toman.


Co. That is to reckon without the Hostess, and peradventure you will go for
wool, and return home shorn, for where men give there they receive.


So. Senor, si me mataren, tal dia hizo un ano, tanbien murio mi aguelo, ya
esta oluidado a esso jugamos, oy por mi, manana por ti, no tengo hijos que
dexar huerfanos ni padre ni madre, ni perro que me ladre muera Marta y muera
harta.


So. Sir, if they kill me, that day made up just a year, in like manner died
my grandfather, and now is forgotten, at this we play, to day for me, to
morrow for thee, I have no children to leave orphans, neither father, nor
mother, nor dog that barketh at me, A man having a wife named Marta which he
often beat for too much drinking, at last almost killing her she said, Muera
Marta, y muera harta.
let Marta die, yet let her die full.


Ca. Plegue a dios que quando llegue la ocacion no se calce vnas calcas de
villa Diego.


Co. I pray God that when trial shall be made, that you do not i. Run away.
put on the hose of the town Diego.


Sa. Senor tan buenos hombres ay por los pies como por las manos.


Sa. Sir there are as good men of their feet as of their hands.


So. Por ser mis oficiales, vuestras mercedes me pueden dezir esso, pero si
otro me lo dixera, matara me con el.


So. In that you are my officers, you may say this unto me, but if another
should say so, I would fight with him.


Ca. No dezimos aqui, que lo hara, pero podria acontecer.


Co. We do not say here, that you would do so, but it might happen.


So. Tanbien se podria caer el cielo y nos cogeria debaxo.


So. As well might El cielo, the sky. Also the tester of a bed.
el Cielo fall, and then it would catch us under.


Sa. Demanera que tanta dificultad ay en huyr v.m. como en caerse el cielo.


Sa. So then it is as hard a matter for you to run away as for the sky to fall.


Ca. El de la cama dize este soldado.


Co. This soldier speaks of the i. Testerne of the bed.
Cielo of his bed.


So. No soy menor de edad que he menester curador, senor cavo de esquadra, yo
sabre responder por mi.


So. I am not in my nonage, that I need one to care for me, master Corporal I
shall know how to answer for my self.


Ca. Siempre oy dezir, que vna buena obra sepaga con vna mala.


Co. I have always heard, that one good work is requited with an evil.


So. No sabe v. m. que esta vna higa en Roma para el que da consejo a quien no
se le pide.


So. Do you not know, that there is a floute for him in Rome, that gives
counsel to him that requires it not at his hands.


Sa. No se enoje senor soldado que se hara viejo antes de tiempo.


Sa. Be not angry master soldier, for it will make you old before your time.


So. No puede ya ser mas negro el cuervo que sus alas.


So It cannot be worse then it is, or nothing can exceed the highest degree.
The crow cannot be blacker then her feathers.


Sa. Senor cavo de esquadra, vaya digale a el atambor que toque a recojer la
guardia.


Sa. Corporal go and tell the drum that he sound to set the watch.


Ca. Yo voy aguarde me aqui v.m.


Co. I go, tarry for me here.


So. Senor sargento dexeme yr a jugar un rato antes que se meta la guardia.


So. Sergeant, let me go play at dice a little before the watch be set.


Sa. Tanto le pesa esse dinero, que tal priessa tiene por echarlo de si.


Sa. So troublesome is his money to him, that he hastes to throw it from him.


So. Yo mas querria doblallo.


So. I would rather double it.


Sa. No save como dize un refran, si quieres tener dineros tenellos.


Sa. Do you not know what the proverb says, if you will have money keep it.


So. De que sirve tener pocos o Caesar o nada.


So. What good will a little do one? either an Emperor or nothing.


Sa. Vaya con Dios, y pare lo a buen punto.


Sa. Go in Gods name, and rest when you are well.


So. Dios me libre de un azar.


So. God keep me from a hazard.


Sa. Y ami de vellacos en quadrilla, y villa nos en gavilla, de moca adivina, y
de vieja latina, de lodos a el caminar, y de larga enfermedad, de parrafo de
legista, de ynfra de canonista, de ecetera de escrivano, y de recipe de medico,
de razon de diz que pero y si no, y de sentencia de conque.


Sa. And me from knaves in my squadro^, and clownes i. Multitudes together.
in shocks together, from a maid that is a prophetess; and an old woman a
latinist; from dirt in iourneies; and from long sickness; from the paragraffe of
the lawyer; from the infra of the Canonist; from the et cetera of the
Scriuenour; from the recipe of the Physician; from that reason that says, He
says that, but, if not; and from the sentence of with which.


Ca. Ya toca la caja a recojer.


Co. Now sounds the drum to set the watch.


Sa. Vamos enter tanto a buscar a el Sarjento mayor, para que me de el nombre.


Sa. In the mean while let us go seek the Sergeant major, that he may give me
the word.


Ca. El estara en casa de el general.


Co. He will be at the generals house.


Sa. Vamos alla, que todo es camino, es menester que esta noche aya muy buena
guardia.


Sa. Let us go thither, for it is all in our way, it is needful to night that
there be a good guard.


Ca. Por que ay alguna sospecha?


Co. Why, is there any suspicion of any thing?


Sa. Ay nuevas de enemigos, y assi es necessario doblar las postas y
reforcarlas, y poner dos otres centinelas perdidas y que la ronda y contra
ronda visiten amenudo.


Sa. There is news of the enemy, and therefore needful to double the set men
to watch, and to make them strong, and to put two or three Those that lie close
under the enemy to hear that they say and do.
lost sentinels, and that the round and counterround may go very thick.


Ca. Pida v.m. a el sargento mayor, que nos den lena harta, para que aya buena
lumbre en el cuerpo de guardia.


Co. Require of the Sergeant mayor, that he give us wood enough, that there
be a good fire upon the body of the guard.


Sa. Ansi sera, y todas las armas estaran muy apunto que hombre apercevido,
medio combatido.


Sa. So it shall be, and all the arms to be very ready, for a man well warned
half armed.


Ca. Me nester sera dar a los soldados polvora, cuerda, y balas.


Co. It will be needful to give to the soldiers powder, match, bullets.


Sa. Todo se les dara y orden a los coseletes que no les falte pieca.


Sa. All shall be given them, and order for the corflets that they want no
piece.


Ca. Qual es la mejor arma de las que vsamos en la guerra?


Co. Which is the best weapon, of those we use in war?


Sa. La pica es la reyna de las armas.


Sa. The pike is the queen of weapons.


Ca. Poco valdrian las picas, sino se guar nesiessen con la arcabuceria, que
dana a el enemigo desde a fuera.


Co. Of little avail were pikes, if they were not lined with shot, which
hurts the enemy a far off.


Sa. Menos valdria la arcabuzeria, si despues de dadala carga, no tuviesse
adonde repararse de la cavalleria enemiga, y de todos los demas que le
procuraren danar.


Sa. Of less avail were the shot, after they had discharged, if they had no
place to defend themselves from the enemies horsemen, and all the rest which
should endeavor to offend them.


Ca. Si, pero bien vemos que mayor dano se le haze a el enimigo con la
arcabuzeria, y mosqueteria, que con las picas.


Co. Yea, but we well see, that greater damage is made to the enemy, by small
shot and musket, then with pikes.


Sa. Todo esse dano es poco en comparacion de el que se recibe a el desbarate
de un esquadron o exercito, el qual se siguiria luego con la cavalleria, si las
picas que es vna murallafuerte, no se pusiessen ala defensa.


S. All this damage is little in comparison of that is received at the
overthrow of a squadron or army, the which would follow straight with the
horse, if the pikes, which is a strong wall, did not put themselves in defense
thereof.


Ca. Por esso comparan a un esquadron bien formado, a el cuerpo vmano donde los
bracos, y piernas, que son los que obran son los arcabuzeros y las picas que
estan siempre firmes, y es de do viene virtud, a todas las parts de el
esquadron, el cuerpo y coracon.


C. Hereby they compare a squadron well in order, to a man's body, where the
arms and legs which are those that work, as the shot and the pikes which
stand always firm, and from whence proceed force to all the parts of the
squadron, to the body and heart.


Sa. Assi es, y aunsi mirais la forma de un esquadron de los ordinarios
formado, con sus mangas, hallareis en el, la misma forma de el cuerpo vmano.


S. So it is, and also if you mark well the fashion of a squadron of the
ordinary squadrons made with his wings, you shall find in it the very fashion
of a man's body.


Ca. Que parts se requiere que tenga un buen soldado.


C. What parts are required in a good soldier?


Sa. Muchas, y muchos escrivieron de essa materia, pero las mas necessarias y
ordinarias, yo las dire. El soldado, quanto a lo primero, deue ser muy honroso,
porque soldado sin honra seria de ningun provecho, pues ella es la espuela que
le ha de hazer obrar lo, que no bastan premios, ni ruegos, ni amenazas de sus
oficiales.


S. Many, and many have written of this matter, but the most necessary and
ordinary I will tell you. The soldier touching the first point, ought to be
honorable, for a soldier without honor would profit little, because it is the
spur which drives him on to effect that, which rewards are not sufficient to
do, nor entreaties, nor threatenings of his officers.


Ca. Por esso, deve el soldado traer, siempre escrita en la frente aquella
coplilla que dize, por la honra pon la vida, y pon las dos, honra y vida por tu
Dios.


C. Therefore the soldier should carry always written in his forehead this
verse, which says, For thy honor hazard thy life, and hazard them both, honor
and life for thy God.


S. Lo segundo deve ser el soldado valiente no temeroso ni covarde.


Sa. The second, the soldier ought to be valiant, and not fearful nor coward.


C. El soldado couarde mas propiamente se podria llamar espantajo, al qual
quando los paxaros le pierden una vez el miedo, se asientan encima de el, o
como el Rey de las ranas.


Co A cowardly soldier may better be called, a thing made to fear away crows,
that when the birds do once cast off their fear of the same, they sit on the
top of it, or as the king of frogs.


S. Como es esso de el Rey de las ranas?


Sa. How is that of the king of frogs?


C. Dizen, que en tiempo de mari castana, las ranas dessearon tener Rey como
todas las demas naciones, y pidieron a Jupiter que era Rey de los dioces que
les diesse Rey el qual viendo su necedad quiso burlar de ellas, y dixo les que
para un dia senalado les daria Rey, ellas le esperavan con grande alegria, y
venido aquel dia, salieron todas, de sus casas, muy compuestas, como convenia
para recebir a su rey y pusieron se en la superficie de el agua esperando; en
este tiempo Jupiter arrojo desde el cielo, un gran madero, que dio con el, en
la laguna donde, ellas estava^, tan gra^ golpe, y hizo tan gran ruido que ellas
fueron todas turbadas, y asombradas, y unas por aqui, y otras por alli, cada
una huyo a su casa, sin osar llegar, a hazer a su rey el devido acatamiento, ni
salir fuera en muchos dias quedo se el madero nadando encima de el agua, y
ellas con tanto temor de ver cosa tan grande, que ninguna osava salir fuera de
su casa, y alli morian de hambre, hasta que poco apoco fue saliendo la mas
esforcada, y siguiendo la las demas, cada dia y'van perdiendo mas el temor, y
se y'van llegando cerca de su rey, viendo le a el tan manso y que no se movia,
ni les dezia mala palabra, al fin tanto continuaron y (como la mucha
conversacion es causa de menosprecio) se llegaron a su rey y viendo todas lo
que era, saltaron encima de el, y comencaron a cheriar y dar grandes risadas,
haziendo burla de su Rey, y de su temor passado bolvieron pues, a ynsistir a
Jupiter que en todo caso les diesse Rey no tan manso, si no que fuesse
justiciero, Jupiter viendo su necia porfia les ymbio por Rey a la ciguena, la
qual reyna hasta oy enter ellas, cebando se y comiendolas cada dia en pena de
su loca peticion, pues pudiendo bivir libres quisieron mas hazer se esclavas y
mas un Rey cruel, que manso y benigno.


Co. They say, in old time, when beasts could speak, the frogs desired to
have a king, as other nations had, and they requested Jupiter, which was king
of the Gods, that he would give them a king, which seeing their simplicity,
would needs mock them a little, and told them that by a day appointed, he would
give them a king: they waited for it, with great joy, and the day being come,
all of them came forth out of their houses, well attired, as was fit for the
receiving of a king, and put themselves upon the upper part of the water
waiting: then Jupiter casts down from heaven a great block, which lighted
in the lake where they were: it gave such a blow, and made such a noise, that
they were all troubled, and amassed; some this way, others that way, every one
ran home to his house without daring to come near, to make their due
reverence to their king, nor to come forth a doors in many days. The beam
remained there swimming upon the water, and they with such fear, to see a
thing so great, that none of them durst once go out of his doors, and therein
they died with hunger, until that by little and little, the most hardiest of
them went out, and the rest following, every day they went more and more,
loosing their fear, and they went nearer to their king seeing him so gentle,
and that he moved not, nor said never an ill word to them, in the end they
continued so long, and (as much familiarity oftentimes breeds contempt) they
approached to their king, and seeing all of the^ what he was, they leaped upon
him, and they began to crook and to break out into great laughters, making a
jest of their king, and of their own passed fear: they returned afterward to
importune Jupiter, that by all means he would give them a king, but not so
still and quiet, but that he should be a iusticer; Jupiter seeing their foolish
importunity, sent the Stork to them for a king, the which reigns til this
day among the^, fatting himself, and eating them up every day, as a punishment
for their fond request, when they might have lived at liberty they would
make themselves slaves, and rather set up a cruel king, then a benign and
gentle.


Sa. No ha estado malo el quento, y mejor es la moralidad.


Sa. The tale has not been ill, yet better is the moral thereof.


Ca. Dexemos esso aora, y prosiga v.m. adelante con su platica de el buen
soldado.


Co. Let us leave this, and go forward with your speech of the good soldier.


Sa. Lo tercero que ha de tener ha de ser gran sufridor de travajos, y para
esto deve ser de rezia complexion.


Sa. The third that he is to have, is to be a great endurer of travels, and for
this he should be of a strong complexion.


Ca. Ya el que esso no tuviere, el diablo le truxo a la guerra, como dizen de
el moco vergoncoso, que el diablo le trajo a palacio.


Co. And he that has not this, the Devil brought him to the war, as it is
said he brought the blushfaced young man to the court.


Sa. Deve tanbien ser muy obediente a sus oficiales, y que haga de buena gana y
sin mostrar mal Rostro lo que le ordenaren siendo de el servicio de la Reyna.


Sa. He ought also to be very obedient to his officers, and that he perform
that obedience with a good will, and without showing an ill countenance to that
they shall ordain, being for the Queens service.


Ca. Quiten le a la milicia la obediencia en los soldados, y bolver se ha en
confusion Babilonica.


Co. Let them take away obedience in soldiers in war, and it will turn to a
Bablonicall confusion.


Sa. Otras muchas particularidades, ha de tener el buen soldado, que yo no
quiero tratar aora, quien las qui siere ver, lea quatro o cinco tratados que
andan de ello en lengua Espanola vno de el capitan Martin de Eguiluz y otro de
Escalante otro de don Fernando de Cordua, y otro de don Bernardino de Mendoza,
que alli lo vera bien pintado.


Sa. The good soldier is to have many other particulars, which I will not now
handle, whosoever will see them, let him read four or five treatises, which
handle it in the Spanish tongue, one of captain Martin Eguiluz, another of
Escalante, another of Don Fernando de Cordua, and another of Don Bernardin
Mendoza, there may it be seen well set out.


Ca. A qui buelve nuestro mosquetero muy cabizbajo viene, perdido deve de aver.


Co. Here comes back again our muskettier, he comes hanging down his head,
it is likely he has lost.


Sa. A senor soldado vna palabra.


Sa. Ho Soldier a word with you.


So. Dexe me v.m. senor Sarjento, basta me mi mala ventura.


So. Let me alone Sergeant, it is enough that I have ill luck.


Sa. Que ha sido, perdiose toda el armada?


Sa. What has happened, is all the fleet lost?


So. No topara yo aqui aora con el vellaco que este juego ynvento.


So. I would not meet now with that villain that invented this play.


Sa. Que le queria dezir?


Sa. What would you say to him?


So. Reniego del diablo, si no le avia de hazer mas tajadas que puntos se han
echado en los dados des pues que el los ynvento.


So. I renounce the devil if I would not give him more slashes then has set
pricks on dice, since he invented them.


Sa. Esso me parece echar la culpa de el asno a la aluarda quien le mando a
v.m. jugar?


Sa. This seems to me, to put the fault of the ass on the packesaddle. Who
commanded you to play?


So. El Diablo que no duerme, y anda tras hazerme desesperar para llevarme.


So. The devil which sleeps not, and follows after me to drive me into
despair, that he might carry me away.


Sa. Pues mire no le crea, sino quando venga, diga le que por aora no puede
y'r, que esta ocupado en servicio de su magestad, que se buelva otro dia, y si
no quisiere deshagale la horquilla en la cabeca.


Sa. Then mark what I say, do not believe him, but when he comes tell him,
that for this time you cannot go, that you are employed in her Majesty's
service, that he come another day, and if he will not, clap your musket staff
on his pate.


So. Muy bueno va esso, estoy yo rabiando y esta se v.m. burlando de mi.


So. This goes well, I stand raging, and you mocking.


Sa. Mire, yo le dare un buen remedio tomo dos oncas de jarave de paciencia, y
quatro de unguento de oluido y beualo todo, y con ello purgara essa malenconia
y quedara luego bueno.


Sa. Behold, I will give you a good remedy, Take two ounces of the sirrupe of
patience, and four ounces of the oil of forgetfulness, and drink it off,
and with this you shall purge this melancholy, and forthwith you shall be well.


So. Seran dos purgas una tras otra despues de purgada la bolsa purgar el
cuerpo.


So. That will be two purges one after anoother, after the purse is purged to
purge the body.


Sa. Pues nunca ha oydo dezir, que un clavo saca otro, y una mano lava otra y
entrambas la cara.


Sa. Have you never heard, that one nail drives out another, one hand washes
another, and both of them the face.


Ca. Pues como se dio tan presto fin ala triste tragedia.


Co. But how made you such a quick end of the sad tragedy?


So. Yo les dire a vuestras mercedes como fue, el me dio a parar a onze, pare
le quatro reales, echome un enquentro, y tiromelos.


So. I will tell you how it was, he chanced me a eleven, I set him two
shillings, he cast and drew them.


Sa. Mal principio.


Sa. An ill beginning.


So. Antes suelen dezir, que es buen pronostico perder la primer a mano.


So. Rather they are wont to say, it is a good sign to loose the first hand.


Ca. No ay regla tan general que no tenga ecepcion.


Co. There is no rule so general which has not some exception.


So. Diome a parar luego a doze, que es mi suerte, parele ocho reales, echo un
azar, dixe reparolos, o torgo me el reparo, lanco el dado, y echo otro azar.


So. He chanced me forthwith twelve which is my chance, I set him four
shillings, he cast a hazard, I said I set again, he allows of it, he throws
the dice, and casts another hazard.


Sa. Pues pecador, para que queriades mas de aver ganado con quarenta otros
quarenta, que mercader ay que gane a ciento por ciento?


Sa. Why wretched sinner, what would you more then to gain with forty other
forty, what merchant is there which does gain a hundred for a hundred?


So. Senor, yo no me content sino quise arrancar las clavos de la mesa como
dizen, y dixe siete y llevar, dixo me, digole, Relanca y echa su suerte, y
arrebuja co^ todo ami dexome del agalla, sin blanca como el diablo se aparecio
a san Benito.


So. I was not content but would pull in pieces the nails of the table as they
say, and I said I set seven times so much as he drew, he said content, I say
content. He throws again the dice, and he drew up al, and so he left me As a
fish.
hanging on the gill, without a farthing, as the devil appeared to Saint Benit.


Ca. Siempre lo vera, que quien todo lo quiere todo lo pierde.


Co. You shall always see, he that all coueteth, all loses.


So. Mas siempre despues de ydo el conejo viene el consejo.


So. But after the steed stolen, shut the stable door.


Sa. Aora bien quien erra y se enmienda a Dios se encomienda.


Sa. Now he that erres and amends, to God himself commends.


So. La enmienda sera empenar el capotillo, para bolverme a esquitar si puedo.


So. The mends will be to pawn the cassock, to go again to quit my self if I
can.


Sa. Essa no sera enmienda sino obstinacion.


Sa. This will not be an amends but obstinacy.


So. Aqui perdi vna aguja, aqui la tengo de hallar.


So. Here lost I a needle, and here hope I to find it again.


Sa. No veis pecador que se os cayo en la mar essa aguja, como la quereis
hallar?


Sa. Do you not see, that this needle fell into the sea, how will you now find
it?


So. Yo me tengo de yr a vna hechizera, que me de vna soga de ahorcado, que
dizen que es buena para hazer ganar.


So. I am to go to a witch that she may give me a rope of a hanged man, which
they say is good to make one win.


Ca. Castiga me mi madre y yo trompose las.


Co. My mother does chastise me, and I mock and mewe at it.


Sa. A ora senor vamos por aora a meter la guardia, que despues se tratara de
esso.


Sa. Now sir, let us go even now to set the watch, for afterward we will talk
hereof.


Ca. Vaya a llamar sus camaradas.


Co. Go and call your Cameradoes.


So. Yo voy, beso a vuestras mercedes las manos.


So. I go, I take my leave of you.


Ca. Yo tanbien quiero yr por mis armas.


Co. I will also go for my arms.


Sa. Yo me voy a la vandera, alli esperare.


Sa. I go to the colors, there will I tarry.




FINIS.

