Christian Oeconomie:

OR, A SHORT SVRVEY OF THE RIGHT MANNER OF erecting and ordering a Family,
according to the Scriptures.

First written in Latin by the Author M. W. PERKINS, and now set forth in the
vulgar tongue, for more common use and benefit, by THO. PICKERING Bachelar of
Divinity.

PROVE. 24. 3, 4. Through wisdom is an house builded, and with understanding it
is established. And by knowledge shall the chambers be filled with all precious
and pleasant riches. AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, and are to be sold
by Edmund Weauer. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT Lord RICH, Baron of Leeze, etc.
RIght Honorable; Among all the Societies and States, whereof the whole world of
mankind from the first calling of Adam in Paradise, unto this day, has
consisted, the first and most ancient is the Family. For if we look into the
Scriptures; The writings of Moses, which in time go beyond all the Histories
and Records of men, do evidently declare, it was the will of God, to sanctify
that first conjunction of Adam and Eve, as the root wherein man's whole
posterity was virtually contained, and whence in the ages succeeding, both
Church and Commonweal should spring and grow to their perfection. And all
those nations and Countries before the Flood, the Heads whereof lineally
descended from the two first houses of Seth and Cain, had no outward form of
civil government, by which they were ruled, nor any visible face of a Church
whereto they had relation, but the whole frame of their policy both Civil and
Ecclesiastical was confined within the precincts of private families. And from
the flood, the house of Noah became the common Mother, in which the other two
states were included, and out of whose bowels they issued afterward in the
multiplication of posterity, for number, equal to the stars of the sky,
and the sands by the sea shore.

Answerable to the voice of the scripture, has been the verdict of the Heathen
in this point. Some of the (...)
learned among them, have called the Family, (...)
the first society in nature, and the ground of all the rest. Some again have
compared it to the Bee-hiue, which we call the Stock, wherein are bred many
swarms, which thence do fly abroad into the world, to the raising and
maintaining of other States. Xenoph. ibid.
Others do not unfitly resemble the same to a Metropolis, or mother City,
which first traineth up her native inhabitants, and then (...). Cic. 3. de Not.
Deor.
remoueth some of them to other places of abode, where they may be framed as
members, to live in obedience to the laws of their Head.

Upon this condition of the Family, being the Seminary of all other
Societies, it follows, that the holy and righteous government thereof, is a
direct mean for the good ordering, both of Church and Commonwealth; yea that
the laws thereof being rightly informed and religiously observed, are
available to prepare and dispose men to the keeping of order in other
gouernements. Hence it is, that the Holy Ghost in the book of the Scriptures,
has in great wisdom commended both Rules for direction, and examples for
imitation, to Husbands and Wives, to Parents and Children, to Masters and
Servants in every point of Christian carriage touching God and man. For this
first Society, is as it were the School, wherein are taught and learned the
principles of authority and subjection. And look as the Superior that fails
in his private charge, will prove incapable of public employment; 1. Tim. 3. 5
so the Inferior, who is not framed to a course of Oeconomicall subjection,
will hardly undergo the yoke of civil obedience.

Again, the corruption or declination of this first government, must of
necessity give way to the ruinating of the rest. For an error in the
foundation, puts the body and parts of the whole building in apparent hazard.
In the old world, Genesis 6. 12.
before the flood, though all flesh had corrupted their ways; yet the first
ground of that universal ouerflow of sin, issued out of the state
Oeconomicall, and thence was derived into the whole earth. It was the fault of
the private government of Eli the Priest, that made his sons Hophni and
Phinehas, 1. Sam. 2. 12. 23, 24, 25.
of ungracious children, ungodly Churchmen. It was the error of David in the
administration and guidance of his own house, 2. Sam. 14 33.
which encouraged Absalom and Adoniah his sons, 1. King. 5. 6.
upon presumption of their Fathers indulge^ce, 2. Sam. 15
to become ill Commonwealths men, 1. King. 1.
to aspire, and usurp the kingdom by plots and practices of Rebellion.

To forbear further matter of instance in this kind; by the due consideration
of the premises, I hold it a thing both necessary and behoofefull for all
estates, to be thoroughly informed of the right manner of erecting and ordering
the private condition of the Family, whereby they may be furnished with fit
grounds for the common good in more public and open courses. For which end
this present Discourse of Christian Oeconomie, was first contrived by the
Author, and now thought fit to be set forth, for the instruction and
edification of ye multitude. Which as it commends it self by the shortness
and perspicuitie, both which being applied to understanding and memory, may
give contentment to every well-disposed Reader; so it carries a kind of
eminency above other Treatises of this nature before published, in sundry
regards.

First, whereas Experience teaches, that the Questions of conscience in
matrimonial affairs, are very many in number, and difficult in nature; here
we shall find either direct answers to some of them, or at least the grounds
of resolution in diverse cases, warranted by the word, in such sort, as little
or nothing will appear, upon the trial, to be untouched, making for the
Readers satisfaction.

Secondly, the maine scope of the Author in the several branches hereof, is,
to make plain this truth in particular, That no Family can be interessed in
the blessing and favor of God, which is not founded in his fear, and ordered
according to his revealed will. For though the Heathen in their writings of the
like Argument, Aristot. Politic. Xenoph. in Oecon.
do show, that Nature by her dim light may afford some good directions to
this purpose, and that men merely natural, have prospered in the practice of
Oeconomicall virtues; yet the true happiness of houses and inhabitants wholly
depends upon the special grace of God, and issues out of his promise; and
that is directed only to them that fear him and walk in his ways; Psalm.
128. 1
it being godliness alone which has the promises of this life and the life to
come. 1. Tim. 4. 8
Therefore to dream of a blessing in any other state, which is not seasoned
with godliness, and ordered by direction of divine law, is but a witless
presumption; considering that the family it self from whence they grow, has
no further assurance of blessedness, then it has right and title in the
promise.

Lastly, it contains here and there, some special grounds of truth, tending
to the discovery of diverse errors of Popish doctrine in points appertaining to
Marriage; as namely these; I. That this estate is free to all men, even to such
as have the gift of continency* and for those who have not the power to
abstain, it is expressly enjoined by God as necessary. 1. Cor. 7. 1. 2. 8. 9.
Which discovers that error of absolute inhibition thereof to some sorts of
men, without the least exception of ability to forbear. And in this case,
though the Church of Rome prescribes an help by prayer and endeavor, where
the gift is wanting; yet herein, she adds two more absurdities to the former;
imposing a necessity of containing, by her laws, where God has given
liberty, by his word; and causing to flee from that only Remedy which
himself has sanctified, to another, whereunto he neither gives charge by
his will, nor encouragement by promise. II. That Marriages consummate without
the free and advised consent of Parents, either explicit in terms, or
implicit by conniuence, are in the court of conscience, mere nullities. A
doctrine cleared in this Book, both by Scriptures, and by consent of
Antiquity. Wherein is challenged the Jesuits proposition, That the sole
consent of the parties is sufficient, Bellarm. de Matrim. Sacram. libr. c. 19.
ad Matrimonium firmum ac ratum efficiendum. As also that decree of the
Council of Trent, Council. Trident. Sess. 24. Decreto de clandest. Matrim.
which professes a detestation of clandestine contracts, and yet with the same
breath pronounces the curse of Anathema upon them, who affirm that Parents
may ratify or make void Marriages contracted by their children, without their
allowance. III. That Matrimony lawfully begun and consummate, is made void
only by way of divorce in the case of Adultery. So says our Savior; Matthew.
5. 32.
Whosoever shall put away his wife, (except it be for fornication, etc.) And
this liberty granted by Christ both to dissolve, and to marry again, cannot
be restrained or cut off by any humane ordinance. A point directly impugned by
two other Rules of that Council. One, that the Church of Rome erreth not, when
she teaches (as they profess, Council. Trid. Sess. 24. Can. 7.
Iuxta Euangelicam and Apostolicam doctrinam, but in truth expressly
contradictory thereunto) That the knot of marriage cannot be broken because of
adultery, and that neither party may undertake to be married again, during
the life of the other, after the dismission. The other, that the vow of
Chastity and entering into holy Orders, is of force to loose the bond of
Marriage. And in this case, separation is made and allowed de facto, by the sole
authority of the Pope, notwithstanding the refusal of the settled party to
yield consent. IV. That the judgment and determination of causes matrimonial,
as of Contracts and their impediments, of degrees of kindred, of divorces, etc.
rests originally in the civil Magistrate, in whose power it is, to ordain
and establish laws touching them, agreeable to Gods word, and to cause them to
be put in execution. For this purpose, in doubtful and difficult cases, the Sea the Code in sundry places. Lib. 5. tit. 4 de Nuptijs, tit. 5. de incesto,
etc.
ancient Church has not absolutely rested in her own decrees, but has made
recourse to the seat of Justice, specially under Christian Magistrates,
submitting her self to their laws and constitutions in that kind. Whereas
the Council. Trid. sess. 24. can. 12.
Church of Rome has determined, that these causes do simply and only
appertain to Ecclesiastical Judges; and therefore has concluded Marriage to
be a Sacrament; that the definition of cases conjugal, becoming, upon this
ground, an action of a spiritual nature, might be transferred from the Civil
to their spiritual Courts. The sovereignty whereof; in these affairs, by
their own constitutions, is greatly enlarged. For though they admit, that
politic Princes have some interest in them; yet they must hold it, Bellarm. de
Matrim. Sacram. cap. 32.
with subordination to the authority of the Church-Magistrate; and when the
Rector of the Province makes a law hereof, he must do it approbante Principe
Ecclesiastico, by the allowance of the Pope; otherwise his laws are mere
nullities. And among their reasons of policy, this is one of the principal,
that they might by this means raise a commodity to the Sea of Rome, by the
sale of their dispensations.

Now these points, together with the substance of this small discourse, I
willingly commend unto your Lordship, desiring that under the wings of your
Honorable protection, it may safely walk abroad in the world, to the view
and benefit of others. The true report of your ancient love of the truth, and
favorable inclination to the Ministers and dispensers thereof, has given me
encouragement in this action; the rather, for that the Argument fitteth in some
sort your present estate, whose house God has adorned with olive plants, Psalm.
128. 3.
a virtuous and hopeful issue, whose young years being seasoned therein, by
the sweet savor of their fathers virtues, may yield in time a plentiful
increase of Honor in this Commonwealth; and consequently advance your Name
in themselves and their posterity. To this may be added mine own desire to
give some testimony of duty to your Lordship, as holding it your due, to be
had in Honorable terms with men, whose care has been to maintain the
Honor of the Highest by your constant profession and practice of Religion. And
thus emboldening my self upon the persuasion of your Lordships favor and
acceptance, I humbly take my leave, and commend you to the grace of Act. 20. 32
God, who is able to build you up further, and give you an inheritance among
them which are sanctified. Finching-field, September. 26. 1609.

Your Lordships to be commanded in all Christian duty, THO. PICKERING.

A SHORT SVRVEY OF THE RIGHT MANNER OF ERECTING and ordering a Family,
according to the Scriptures.
CHAP. I.
Of Christian Oeconomie, and of the Family.
CHristian Oeconomie, is a doctrine of the right ordring of a Family.

The only rule of ordering the Family, is the written word of God. By it David
resolved to govern his House, when he says, I will walk in the uprightness
of my heart in the midst of my house, Psalm. 101. 2. And Solomon affirms, that
through wisdom an house is builded, and with understanding it is established,
Prou. 24. 3.

A Family, is a natural and simple Society of certain persons, having
mutual relation one to another, under the private government of one. These
persons must be at the least three; because two cannot make a society. And
above three under the same head, there may be a thousand in one family, as it
is in the households of Princes, and men of state in the world.

CHAP. 2.
Of the Household service of God.
A Family, for the good estate of it self, is bound to the performance of two
duties; one to God, the other to it self.

The duty unto God, is the private Worship and Service of God, which must be
established and settled in every family. And the reasons hereof are these.

First, because this duty stands by the express commandment of God, who by
his Apostle wills men to pray ^^ery where, lifting up pure hands, without
^^rath or doubting, 1. Tim. 2. 8.

Again, it is confirmed by the cu^^ome and practice of holy men in their ^mes;
I know (says the Lord touching Abraham) that he will command his sons and
his household after him, that ^hey keep the way of the Lord to do
righ^^eousnesse and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that which
he has spoken to him, ^en. 18. 19. To the same purpose speaks Joshua; If it
seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose this day whom ye will serve,
whether the gods whom your Fathers served (that were beyond the flood) or the
gods of the Amorites in whose land ye dwell: But I and my house will serve the
Lord, Josh. 24. 15. And Cornelius is reported to have been a devout man, and
one that feared God with all his household, Act. 10. 2.

Thirdly, common reason and equity shows it to be a necessary duty; for
the happy and prosperous estate of the family, which consists in the
mutual love and agreement of the Man and Wife, in the dutiful obedience of
children to their parents, and in the faithful service of servants to their
Masters, wholly depends upon the grace and blessing of God, and this blessing
is annexed to his worship: for 1. Tim. 4. 8. Godliness has the promises of
this life, and the life to come. Psalm. 127. 1. Except the Lord build the
house, they labor in vain that build; except the Lord keep the City, the
keeper watches in vain. Verse. 2. It is in vain for you to rise early, and to
lie down late, and eat the bread of sorrow, but he will surely give rest to
his beloved. Verse. 3. Behold, children are the inheritance of Jehovah, and the
fruit of the womb his reward. Psalm. 128. 1. Blessed is every one that
fears the Lord, and walks in his ways. Verse. 2. When thou eatest the
labors of thy hands thou shall be blessed, and it shall be well with thee.
Verse. 3. Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine upon the sides of thy house,
and thy children like Olive plants round about thy table. Verse. 6. Yea, thou
shall see thy childrens children, and peace upon Israel. 1. Sam. 1. 27. I
prayed (says Hannah) for this child, and the Lord has given me my desire
which I asked of him.

The household service of God has two parts; the first is a conference upon
the word of God, for the edification of all the members thereof, to eternal
life. The second is, Invocation of the name of God, with giving of thanks for
his benefits; both these are commended in the Scriptures. Deuteronomy. 6. 6. These
words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart. Verse. 7. And thou
shall whet them upon thy children, and talk of the^ when thou tariest in thine
house, and as thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up. Verse. 20. When thy son shall ask thee in time to come, saying,
what mean these testimonies, and ordinances, and laws, which the Lord our God
has commanded you? Verse. 21. Then thou shall say unto thy son, we were
Pharaohs bondme^ in Egypt, but the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a mighty
hand. Verse. 24. Therefore the Lord has commanded us to do all these
ordinances, and to fear the Lord our God. Psalm. 14. 1. The fool has said in
his heart, There is no God. v. 4. They call not upon God.

The times of this service are these:

The morning, in which the family coming together in one place, is to call
upon the name of the Lord, before they begin the works of their callings.

The evening also is another time to be used in prayer, because the family
has seen the blessing of God upon their labors the day before, and now the
time or rest draws on, in which every one is to commend his body and soul
into the protection of the Lord; for no man knows what shall befall him
before he rise again, neither knows any whether ever he shall rise again or
not, it is therefore a desperate boldness without praying to go to rest.

Besides this, there be other times also wherein to perform this duty, as
before and after meals; For meats and drinks are blessed to the receivers, by
the word and prayer. 1. Tim. 4. 4. Whatsoever God has created is good, neither
is any thing to be refused, if it be taken with thanksgiving, for it is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer.

Now these times, the word of God approves. Deuteronomy. 6. 6. Thou shall talk of
them, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Psalm. 55. 18. Evening
and morning and at noone, I will pray and make a noise, and he will hear my
voice. Psa. 127. 1. It is in vain to rise early, and to lie down late, and
eat the bread of sorrow, except the Lord vouchsafe a blessing, who will surely
give rest to his beloved.

To these may sometimes be added the exercise of fasting, which is (as occasion
serves) to be used both publicly and privately, especially when they of the
family be thereunto called by some present or imminent calamity. Hest. 4. 16.
Go and assemble all the Jews that are found in Shusan, and fast ye for me,
and eat not, nor drink in three days, day nor night: I also and my maids
will fast likewise, and so will I go in to the King, which is not according to
the law; and if I perish, I perish. Zachar. 12. 11. And in that day shall there
be a great mourning in Jerusalem, and the land shall bewail, every family
apart, the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart, the
family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart, etc.

Wherefore, those families wherein this service of God is performed, are, as it
were, little Churches, yea even a kind of paradise upon earth. And for this
purpose S. Paul writing to Philemon, greeteth the Church that is in his house,
Philem. 1. 2. And in like manner, he sends salutations to the Church of
Corinth, from Aquila and Priscilla, and the Church which was in their house, 1.
Cor. 16. 19. On the otherside, where this duty of Gods service is not used,
but either for the most part, or altogether neglected, a man may term those
families, no better then companies of profane and graceless Atheists, who as
they deny God in their hearts, so they are known by this note, that they do
not call upon the name of the Lord, Psalm. 14. 4. Yea such families are fitly
compared to an heard of swine, which are always feeding upon the maste with
greediness, but never look up to the hand that beats it down, nor to the
tree from whence it falls.

The other duty concerning the house it self, is, That every member in the
family, according to their ability, employ themselves in some honest and
profitable business, to maintain the temporal estate and life of the whole.
Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return to
the earth, for out of it wast thou taken; for dust thou art, and to dust shall
thou return. 1. Cor. 7. 20. Let every man abide in the same vocation wherein
he was called. Now if any one in the family starteth aside out of his calling,
and inticeth another to idolatry, he is to be revealed, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. And
again, their case is very fearful that do nothing in their houses, but go
finely and fair daintily from day to day. This is the black mark that the
Scripture sets upon the rich glutton, Luke 16. 19. There was a certain rich
man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared deliciously every
day.

CHAP. 3.
Of married folks.
A Family is distinguished into sundry combinations or couples of persons.

A couple, is that whereby two persons standing in mutual relation to each
other, are combined together as it were in one. And of these two, the one is
always higher, and bears rule, the other is lower, and yields subjection.

Couples are of two sorts; principal, or less principal.

The principal, is the combination of married folks; and these are so termed
in respect of Marriage.

Marriage is the lawful conjunction of the two married persons; that is, of one
man, and one woman into one flesh. So was the first institution of marriage,
Genesis 2. 21. which is expounded by our Savior Christ, Matthew. 19. 6. Therefore
they are no more two, but one flesh. And also by Paul, Ephesians. 5. 31. For this
cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall (...)
cleave unto his wife, (as two boords are joined together with glue) and they
which were two, shall be one flesh. Wherefore this is an eternal law of
marriage, that two, and not three or four, shall be one flesh. And for this
cause, the fathers, who had many wives and Concubines, it may be that through
custom they sinned of ignorance, yet they are not in any wise to be excused.

Marriage of it self is a thing indifferent, and the kingdom of God stands no
more in it, then in meats and drinks; and yet it is a state in it self, far
more excellent, then the condition of single life. For first, it was ordained
by God in Paradise, above and before all other states of life, in Adams
innocence before the fall. Again, it was instituted upon a most serious and
solemn consultation among the three persons in the holy Trinity. Genes. 1.
26. Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness, and let them rule
over, etc. Genesis 2. 18. Jehovah Elohim said, It is not good that the man should
be himself alone, I will make him an help meet for him. Thirdly, the manner
of this conjunction was excellent, for God joined our first parents Adam and
Eve together immediately. Fourthly, God gave a large blessing unto the estate
of marriage, saying, Increase and multiply and fill the earth. Lastly, marriage
was made and appointed by God himself, to be the fountain and seminary of
all other sorts and kinds of life, in the Commonwealth and in the Church.

Now if mankind had continued in that vprightnes and integrity which it had by
creation, the state of single life had been of no price and estimation amongst
men, neither should it have had any place in the world, without great contempt
of Gods ordinance and blessing.

Nevertheless, since the fall, to some men who have the gift of continency,
it is in many respects far better then marriage, yet not simply, but only by
accident, in regard of sundry calamities which came into the world by sin.
For, first it freeth a man from many and great cares of household affairs.
Again, it makes him much more fit and disposed to meditate of heavenly
things, without distraction of mind. Besides that, when dangers are either
present, or imminent, in matters belonging to this life, the single person is
in this case happy, because he and his are more secure and safe, then others
be who are in married state. 1. Cor. 7. 8. Therefore I say to the unmarried and
widows, It is good for them if they abide even as I do. verse. 26. I suppose
then this to be good for the present necessity, I mean, that it is good for a
man so to be, verse. 28. But if thou take a wife thou sinnest not, and if a
virgin marry she sins not; nevertheless such shall have trouble in the
flesh, verse. 32. And I would have you without care.

The end of marriage is fourefold.

The first is, procreation of children, for the propagation and continuance of
the seed and posterity of man upon the earth, Genesis 1. 28. Bringforth fruit
multiply, fill the earth, and subdue it, Genes. 9. 1. 1. Tim. 5. 14.

The second is the procreation of an holy seed, whereby the Church of God may be
kept holy and chaste, and there may always be a holy company of men, that may
worship and serve God in the Church from age to age, Malach. 2. 15. And did not
he make one? yet had he abundance of spirit; and wherefore one? because he
sought a godly seed.

The third is, that after the fall of mankind, it might be a sovereign means
to avoid fornication, and consequently to subdue and slake the burning lusts of
the flesh, 1. Cor. 7. 2. Nevertheless for the avoiding of fornication, let
every man have his wife, and every woman have her husband. verse. 9. But if they
cannot abstain, let them marry; for it is better to marry, then to burn.
And for this cause, some Schoolmen do err, who hold that the secret coming
together of man and wife, cannot be without sin, unless it be done for
procreation of children. Lombard the master of the Sentences says the
contrary, namely, that marriage before the fall was only a duty, but now since
the fall it is also remedy.

The fourth end is, that the parties married may thereby perform the duties of
their callings, in better and more comfortable manner. Prou. 31. 11. The heart
of her husband trusts her, and he shall have no need of spoil. verse. 13.
She seeks wool, and flax, and labors cheerfully with her hands.

Marriage is free to al orders, and sorts of men without exception, even to
those that have the gift of contimencie; but for them which cannot abstain, it
^s, by the express commandment of God, necessary. Hebr. 13. 4. Marriage is
honorable amongst all men, and the bed undefiled. 1 Cor. 7. 9. But if they
cannot abstain, let them marry.

By which it appears to be a clear case, that the commandment of the Pope
of Rome, whereby he forbids marriage of certain persons, as namely, of
Clergy men, is merely diabolical; for so writes the Apostle, 1. Tim. 4. 1.
The spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times some shall depart from
the faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of error, and doctrines of devils,
verse. 3. forbidding to marry.

But against this doctrine sundry things are alleged.

Object. 1. The Apostle commands the married among the Corinthes, to abstain
with consent for a time, that they might give themselves to fasting and prayer,
1. Cor. 7. 5. I answer, that Paul speaks not in that place of daily and
common service of God in prayer, but of the solemn and extraordinary exercise
thereof, which was joined with fasting and abstinence, in common dangers and
calamities.

Object. 2. 1. Cor. 7. 32. He that is unmarried cares for the things of the
Lord, how he may please the Lord; but the married person cares for the things
of the world. Answ. The place is not generally to be understood of all, but
indefinitely of those married persons that are carnal and fleshly. And he that
is married, is to be so careful for the things of the world, as that he
ought, and may have also a special regard of those things that concern God and
his kingdom.

Object. 3. 1. Tim. 5. 11. The younger widows (says the Apostle) will marry,
having damnation because they have broken the first faith. Answ. By the first
faith, Paul understands that promise and vow which they made unto Christ,
when they were baptized; and they are there said to begin to wax wanton
against Christ, by denying or renouncing that faith, and not otherwise.

Object. 4. He that does earnestly and from his heart, crave the gift of
continency, God will give it him, and therefore he need not marry.

Answ. The gifts of God are of two sorts, some are General, some are Proper
General gifts are such as God gives generally to all, and these may be
obtained, if they be asked according to Gods word, lawfully, Iam. 1. 5. If any
of you lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives to all men liberally,
and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him. verse. 6. But let him ask in
faith, and waver not. Proper gifts, are those which are given only to some
certain men; of which sort is the gift of continency and such like, which
though they be often and earnestly asked, yet they are seldom or never
granted unto some men; as appears in Paul's example, who being buffetted by
Satan, says of himself, For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it
might depart from me; but he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee, 2.
Cor. 12. 8. 9.

CHAP. 4.
Of the Contract.
MArriage has two distinct parts, the first is the beginning; the second, the
accomplishment or consummation thereof.

The Beginning, is the Contract or Espousals; the End or accomplishme^t, is the
solemn Manifestation of the Contract, by that which properly we call Marriage.
Deuteronomy. 20. 7. What man is there that has betrothed a wife, and has not taken
her? Let him go and return again unto his house, lest he die in battle, and
another man take her. Matthew. 1. 18. When his mother Marie was betrothed to
Joseph, before they came together, She was found with child of the Holy Ghost.

Between the Contract and Marriage, there ought to be some certain space or
distance of time. The reasons whereof may be these:

First, a business of so great importance as this is, would not be rashly or
unadvisedly attempted, but should rather be done by degrees in process of
time, according to that saying, not so ancient as true. Diu deliberandum quod
s^mel sta^uendum.
Actions of weight, before resolution, require mature deliberation, Secondly,
That during such a space, inquiry may be made, whether there be any just
cause, which may hinder the consummation of Marriage: considering that before
the parties come and converse together, what is amiss may be remedied and
amended, which to do afterward will be too late. Thirdly, In these cases,
persons espoused must have regard of honesty, as well as of necessity; not
presently upon the Contract, seeking to satisfy their own fleshly desires,
after the manner of bruit beasts, but proceeding therein upon mature
deliberation.

The Contract is a mention or mutual promise of future marriage, before fit and
competent Judges and Witnesses.

The best manner of giving this promise, is, to make it In ver^is de (...).
in words touching the present time, and simply without any exception or
condition expressed or conceived. For by this means it comes to pass, that
the bond is made the surer, and the ground or foundation of future marriage the
better laid. And hence alone it is, that the persons betrothed in Scripture are
termed man and wife. Jacob speaking of Rahel, who was only betrothed unto him,
says to Laban, Give me my wife, Genes. 29. 21. Deuteronomy. 22. 23. If a maid be
betrothed to a husband, and a man find her in the town, and lie with her, then
shall ye bring them both out unto the gates of the city, and shall stone them
with stones to death, the maid, because she cried not being in the city, and
the man, because he has humbled his neighbors wife. Matthew. 1. 20. Joseph
fear not to take Mary thy wife.

Now if the promise be uttered in words, In futurum.
for time to come, it does not precisely bind the parties to performance. For
example, if one of them says to the other; N. I will take thee, etc. and not,
N. I do take thee, etc. by this form of speech the match is not made, but only
promised to be made afterward. But if on the other side it be said, N. I do
take thee, and not, I will take thee; by these terms, the marriage at that very
instant is begun, Non de facto, de ^ure.
not in regard of fact, yet in regard of right and intrest, which the parties
have each in another in deed and in truth. And this is the common opinion of
the learned. Yet notwithstanding, if the parties contracting shall say each to
other, I will take thee to, etc. with intention to bind themselves at the
present; the bond is in conscience precisely made before God, and so the
Contract is indeed made De praesenti.
for the present time before God. True it is, that he which stands to his
promise made, as much as in him lies, does well: yet if the promise has or
conceiueth some just cause, why he should afterward change his purpose, the
Contract expressed in terms for time to come, though it were formerly made,
and confirmed by oath, must notwithstanding give place to the Contract made for
time present.

Those espousals, which are made upon condition, which is honest, possible, and
belonging to Marriage, do cease or depend: so far forth as the condition
annexed cease or depends. For example; If the one party promises to marry
the other upon condition, that his or her kinsman will yield consent to the
match; or upon condition of a dowry that she shall bring unto him, suitable to
her education, and the family whereof she comes: these conditions being kept
or not kept, the promise does likewise stand, or not stand.

But those conditions which are necessarily understood, or which may certainly
be kept and come to pass, do neither hinder nor suspend Marriage. As this: I
promise thee marriage, if I live; or, I promise to marie thee, if the Sun rise
to morrow.

Again, conditions that are either impossible or dishonest, are not to be
accounted as promises annexed Jn sauorem Matrimony.
in way of Marriage. Of which sort are these, I will be thy wife, if thou willt
take unto thee wings and fly, or, If thou will bring an untimely birth.

Furthermore, if the parties betrothed, do lie together before the condition
(though honest and appertaining to marriage) be performed; then the contract for
time to come is, without further controversy, sure and certain. For where
there has been a carnal use of each others body, it is always presupposed,
that a mutual consent, as touching Marriage, has gone before.

CHAP. 5.
Of the choice of persons fit for Marriage.
FOr the making of a contract, two things are requisite: first the choice, and
then the consent of the parties.

Choice is an inquiry after persons mariageable.

Persons mariageable, are such as be fit and able for the married state.

This fitnes or ability is known and discerned by certain signs; which are
either essential to the contract, or accidental.

An essential sign is that, without which the contract in hand becomes a
mere nullitie. And of this sort there are principally five.

The first is the distinction of the sex, which is either male, or female. The
male is man of a superior sex, fit for procreation. The female is woman of an
inferior sex, fit to conceive and bear children. 1. Cor. 11. 7. The man
ought not to cover his head; for as much as he is the Image and glory of God;
but the woman is the glory of the man. 1. Tim. 2. 12. I permit not the woman
to teach, neither to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence. By
this distinction is condemned, that unnatural and monstrous sin of uncleanness
between parties of the same sex, Romans 1. 26
commonly termed Sodomie; as also the confusion of the Species.
kinds of creatures, when one kind commits filthiness and abomination with
another. Leuit. 18 22. 23.


The second sign, is, the just and lawf^ll distance of blood.

Distance of blood is then just and lawful, when neither of the persons that
are to be married, do come near to the kindred of their flesh, or to the flesh
of their flesh, for so the Scripture speaks, Leuit 18. 6. No man shall come
near to any of the flesh of his flesh: or to the Ebr. (...)
kindred of his flesh. Where it is to be observed, that by a man's flesh is
meant that substance which is of himself, or whereof himself consists. And
by the flesh of his flesh, that which next and immediately issues out of that
flesh whereof he consists. Whereupon it follows, that the touching or
coming near of flesh to flesh, is not spoken of strangers, but of those only
that are of kindred.

Kindred is of two sorts, consanguinitie, or affinity.

Kindred in consanguinitie, are those which issue from out, and the same common
blood or stock. And there be certain degrees, whereby kinsmen of this sort
are distinguished one from another.

A degree is a generation or descent between two persons that are of the same
blood. For one person cannot make a degree, unless he be considered relatiuely
in regard of generation.

Now many degrees continued or derived from one and the same head, do make a
Line; And a Line is twofold, the Right line, or the Overthwart, commonly termed
collateral.

In the Right Line, look how many persons there are, so many degrees there
be, that only excepted, which upon occasion offered, is in question, and from
which we begin the account.

Abraham. Isaac. Jacob. Joseph.
Here Joseph is distant three degrees from Abraham, Jacob two, Isaac one, or
the first.

The Right line is either ascending or descending.

The right line ascending, is the race of all the ancestors; and it has
sundry degrees. Of the first whereof is, the father and the mother; of the
second, the grandfather both by the father and mothers side, that is, the
father of my father, and the father of my mother; and the grandmother, that is
to say, my fathers and my mothers mother. Of the third, is, the great
grandfather, or the father of my grandfather; and the great grandmother, or
the mother of my grandfather. Of the fourth, is the great grandfathers
father, and the great grandfathers, or grand-mothers mother. Of the fifth, is
the great grandfathers grandfather, and the great grandfathers, or great
grand-mothers grandmother. Of the sixth, is the great great grandfathers
grandfather; and the great great grandfathers, or great great grand-mothers
grandmother.

The right line descending, is the race of a man's own posterity. And that
also has sundry degrees. The first whereof is, the son and the daughter; the
second, the nephew, and the niece; the third, the nephews son, and the
neeces daughter. The fourth is the nephews nephew, or the son in the fourth
degree of lineall descent, and the neeces niece, or the daughter in the same
degree of descent. The fifth is he and she that are three lineall descents from
the child's child. And so are the rest in their order, by what names soever they
be called and known.

Now in this right line, whether ascending or descending, the person, of whom
the case or question is moved, comes near to the kindred of his flesh. And
therefore marriages in this line are prohibited infinitely, without any
limitation; so as if Adam himself were now alive, he could not marry by the
law of God, because he should come near to the kindred of his own flesh, as
Moses speaks. The reason hereof is, because in the right line, superiors and
inferiors are to each other as parents and children; and the kindred between
parents and children, being the first and nearest of all other, their
coniuction in marriage must needs be most unclean, and repugnant unto nature.

The collateral or crooked line, is that, which walks by the sides of the
right line, whether ascending or descending, in the row of the kindred. And it
is either unequal or equal.

The unequal is that, whereby the person in question and his kinsman, are
unequally distant from the common stock, or head of the kindred.

And in this line, look how many degrees the kinsman that is furthest off from
the common stock, is distant from the same, so many is he and his kinsman in
question distant one from the other.

For example,
Their. Abraham -- Nachor Bethuel Laban.


Here Laban being removed furthest off, to wit, three degrees from the common
stock Their; is likewise three degrees distant from Abraham, his great uncle,
and Abraham so many from him.

Furthermore, kinsmen in this Line are of two sorts; some are Superiors to the
person in question, some are Inferiors to him.

Superiors are such, as are a kin to his father, and mother, of some side;
and that either nearer, or further off.

Those that are of near kin to them, be these. I. The uncle of the fathers
side, or the fathers brother; the aunt of the fathers side, or fathers sister.
The uncle of the mothers side, or the mothers brother; the aunt of the mothers
side, or the mothers sister. II. The great uncle, or grandfathers brother; the
great aunt, or grandfathers sister. The great uncle, or grand-mothers brother,
and the great aunt, or grand-mothers sister. III. The great uncle by the
fathers side, or great grandfathers brother; and the great aunt by the fathers
side, or great grandfathers sister. The great uncle by the mothers side, or
the great grand-mothers brother; and the great aunt by the mothers side, or the
great grand-mothers sister. IV. The great grand-vncle by the fathers side, or
great grandfathers fathers brother: and the great grand-aunt by the same side,
or the great grandfathers fathers sister. The great grand-vncle by the mothers
side, or great grand-mothers mothers brother: and the great grand-aunt by the
same side, or the great gra^d-mothers mothers sister.

Now these in regard of their inferiors, are in stead of parents, and
therefore do come near to the kindred of their flesh.

Those superiors which are of kindred to parents on the one side, a far off,
are these. I. The son and daughter of the great uncle or aunt by the fathers
side; or of the great uncle or aunt by the mothers side. II. The nephew and
niece of the great uncle or aunt by the fathers side, or of the great uncle or
aunt by the mothers side, Sobriuo propior.
near to the cousin germane.

And these as they stand in comparison with their inferiors, do not come
near to the kindred of their flesh.

The equal collateral line, is that, whereby kinsmen are equally distant from
their head.

Kinsmen of this line, are, I. whole brothers, that is, brothers by the same
father and mother, or half brothers, that is, brethren by the same father, but
not by the same mother. Again whole sisters by the same father or mother, or
half sisters by one of them and not by both. II. The brothers children or
cousin germans; that is, the uncles sons or daughters, or the aunts sons or
daughters. The sisters children, or cousin germans; that is, the aunts sons
or daughters, which are the children of two sisters. III. The cousin german,
the son of the great uncle by the fathers or mothers side, and the cousin
german the son of the great aunt, by the fathers or mothers side. The
cousin-german the daughter of the great uncle, by the fathers or mothers side,
and the cousin german, the daughter of the great aunt by the same sides.

In this line, look how many degrees the party in question is removed from
the common stock, by so many twice-told, is he removed from his kinsman in
question. Put the case between Bethuel and Isaac, as in this example.

Their Abraham -- Isaac.
Nachor Bethuel.


Here Bethuel being two degrees removed from Their, is four degrees distant
from Isaac.

Now he that is in the second degree of this line, comes near to the kindred
of his flesh; and for that cause the marriages of brethren, and sisters are
unlawful, and forbidden.

But against this, sundry things are alleged.

Object. 1. The sons of Adam, who were the first brethren in the world, married
their sisters; marriages therefore in this degree may seem to be lawful.
Answ. The case of those persons in those times, was a case of necessity, which
could not be avoided, and thereupon was warranted by divine dispensation. For
God had given them his own express commandment in this behalf; Bear fruits
and multiply, Genesis 1. 28. Besides that, there were then no other women in the
world, by whom they might have issue and posterity, but only by their sisters.
Whereupon it is manifest, that Gods will was, to permit them to take even their
sisters to their wives. But now out of this special dispensation from God,
such matching is utterly unlawful, being an apparent breach of another
express commandment given afterward by God himself, Leuit. 18. 9. 11. To
this purpose says Augustine in way of answer to the example propounded. De
ciuit.
The practice of those first times, Dei. lib. 1^. ca. 16.
then backed by urgent nenessitie; the more ancient it was, the more damnable
it proved afterward, when it was restrained by Gods commandment.

Object. 2. Sarah was Abraham's sister, and yet Abraham took her to wife. Genesis
20. 12. Yet in very deed she is my sister, for she is the daughter of my
father, but not the daughter of my mother, and she is my wife. Genesis 11. 29.
Abraham and Nahor took them wives, and the name of Abraham's wife was Sarah.
Answ. Touching this instance, there are sundry opinions. The Jews do grant
thus much, that she was called by a name common to all kinsfolk of that sex,
to wit, a Sister; yet indeed she was Abraham's niece, the sister of Lot, and
the daughter of Haran, Abraham's brother, which Moses elsewhere calls Iischa,
Genes. 11. 29. Others think, that she was daughter in law to Their, Abraham's
father; because Abraham himself says, She is the daughter of my father, not
of my mother. Others are of opinion, that she was Harans daughter in law, and
after his death was translated into the family of Terah, her grandfather; who
was also in ste^d of her father being dead, and thence she was termed his
daughter Now howsoever in this variety of judgments, it is hard to find
certainty of truth, yet this is out of doubt, that God in those days
tolerated many things, which notwithstanding he did not altogether approve.

Object. 3. 2. Sam. 13. 13. Thamar says to her brother Amnon; Speak I pray
thee to the King, and he will not deny me unto thee. Ans. The speech of
Thamar is not simply to be taken, as if she desired that which she said, or as
if it were lawful to be done, which she wished him to do; but only that she
sought to put him off, by giving him this counsel, in respect of her own
deliverance from that present danger; wherein she was. Or at least it way be
said, that she erroniously supposed it was lawful for the King to grant such a
suit, if it had bin made unto him by her brother Amnon. Whether way soever this
speech be taken, there can no such thing be gathered thence, as is pretended.

Now out of the second degree of the equal collateral line, it should seem
that those who are joined one to another in marriage, do not touch the kindred
of their flesh; and therefore the law of God forbids not co^sobrines or
cousin-germans, that is, brothers and sisters children to marry.

Yea if examples be of force for this purpose, the Scripture approves such
marriages. For thus it is written, that Jacob married Rahel the daughter of
Laban, his mothers brother, Genes. 28. 2. Again, that Mahlah, Tirzah, and
Hoglah, Milcah and Noah the daughters of Zelophehad, were married unto their
fathers brothers sons, Numb. 36. 11. And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the
cousin of Caleb, took Kiriath-sepher; and he gave him Acsah his daughter to
wife, Ios. 15. 17.

Howbeit in this case, the rule of the Apostle is to be followed; That nothing
be done, even in things that are otherwise lawful, whereby a man's brother may
stumble, or be offended, or made weak, Romans 14. 21. Wherefore it is
convenient, that such marriages should not be, because sometimes they may give
offense in regard of the law of the Magistrate; and because they come somewhat
near to the bonds and terms of blood and stock, which God has set down in
his word. Augustine in his 15. book, De ciuitate Dei, chap. 16. says to this
purpose, Experti autem sumus, etc. that is, We have found by experience, that
in regard of that neerenesse of blood, which cousin-germans have unto the
degrees of brothers and sisters, how rarely custom has admitted those
marriages, which were warrantable by laws, because the law of God has not
forbidden them, nor as yet the law of man. Nevertheless the practice lawful
in it self, was forborne the rather, because it came near to that which was
unlawful, and therefore marriage with the cousin-german, seemed in a manner to
be marriage with a man's own brother or sister, etc. Howbeit, there is no
question, but in these times it has been well provided by laws, that such
marriages should not be undertaken. For as the multiplication of alliance is
hindered thereby, so this inconvenience also grows from them, that friendship
and love which is procured by affinity, between men that are strangers;
cannot be enlarged and increased, where men go not out of the limits, and
terms of their own blood; Yea, there is naturally in man a commendable
measure of shamefastness, whereby upon consideration of nearenesse in blo^d,
he acknowledges a due debt of modesty and honor to his next kindred, and
consequently estraineth himself in regard of them from he occasions and actions
of concupiscence, whereunto he is inclinable in respect of others. And hence
it is, that generally the modesty that ought to be in those which intend
marriage, auoideth as much as may be, these and such like conjunctions. The same
is the judgment of Ambrose in one of his Epistles to his friend Paternus,
Epist^l. li. (...) 66.
wherein he disswadeth him from marrying his son with his cousin-g^rman, upon
the grounds before alleged by Augustine adding this withal, that though it
were in it self lawful, being no where forbidden by God, yet in sundry
respects being inexpedient, it ought not to be done, according to the saying
of the Apostle, All things are lawful for me, 1. Cor. 6.
but all things are not expedient.

But it is avouched to the contrary, that God by express law forbids
marriage with the aunt, the fathers sister Leuit. 18. 12. and with the mothers
sister* verse. 13. and with the fathers brother wife, which is also the aunt,
verse. 14. therefore by the law of proportion, ^ forbids matching with the
childr^^ of these persons. For in nature it is a ruled case: If a man may not
marry the mother, much less may he marry the daughter.

Answ. The argument is faulty, and concludes nothing to the purpose. For there
is not the same reason of both. In the right line of consanguinitie, those
which are sisters to father and mother, stand in the place and stead of
parents; and their nephews and neeces are to them as children, therefore
marriages among them can stand by no law, either of God, of nature, or by the
positive laws of nations. It is not so with cousin germans. For having no such
relation, there is not in their marriages, by the law of Moses, any discovery
of shame, or breach of civil honesty. The blessing of God upon some of them
mentioned in Scripture, as upon Jacob and Rahel, and such like, do evidently
show that they were lawful in themselves, and pleasing unto him. And thus much
touching kindred by blood or consanguinitie.

Kindred in affinity, is that, whereby the terms of two kindreds, are brought
into the society of one and the same family; or whereby persons that are not
of blood, are by marriage allied each to other. Hence it is termed affinity,
because it makes an unity of terms in kindred, which before were distant.

Affinity or alliance grows by mixtion or participation of blood, in the
coupling of man and wife together in lawful marriage. For a bare and simple
contract, makes not alliance between party and party properly, but marriage
after the contract finished and consummate.

Again, the same alliance cease and determines upon the death of either
party espoused or married; yet so as the prohibition of conjunction remains,
and stands in force, for the preservation of public honesty.

Now there is a kind of resemblance and proportion between kindred of blood,
and kindred by marriage, not only in regard of degrees and line, but also in
respect of the prohibition of degrees.

Those that are of alliance, are commonly reduced to these heads. I. The father
in law, or the husbands or wives father. The mother in law, or the husbands or
wives mother. II. The mothers husband, or step father to them that come by
another man. The fathers wife, or stepmother to those that come by another
woman. III. The wives fathers father, or grandfather, and the wives mothers
mother, or grandmother; or the grandfather and grandmother of the wife. IV.
The son in law, or daughters husband, and the daughter in law, or sons wife.
V. The neeces husband, and the nephews wife. VI. The step-son, or son in law,
that is, the son of a man by another wife, or of a woman by another husband.
The step-daughter, or daughter in law, that is, the daughter of a man by
another wife, or of a woman by another husband. VII. The step-sons son, or his
son who comes of a man by another woman, or of a woman by another man. And the
step-daughters daughter, or her daughter who comes of a man by another woman,
or of the woman by another husband VIII. The husbands or wives brother, and the
husbands sister, or brothers wife. IX. The sisters husband, and the brothers
wife.

Concerning affinity, I propound these rules.

I. Look in what degree a man is of consanguinity to ones wife, in the same
degree of affinity he is to the wives husband. And contrariwise for example.

Isaac Esau. Jacob. Joseph --
Joseph

Samuel Aaron. Eli. Maria.
Leui.

Here, if Mar^e Joseph's wife, be distant from Esau Joseph's uncle by the
fathers side, two degrees, then also is Joseph himself distant from Aaron the
brother of Eli his father in law, two degrees. If Marie the wife, be distant
from her own father Eli one degree, and from her grandfather Samuel two; then
also is her husband distant from Eli his father in law, one degree, and from
Samuel his wives grandfather, two. Another example.

Herod. Herod. Philip, whose wife is Herodias.

Here Herod being in the first degree of consanguinitie with his brother
Philip; Herodias his brothers wife is in the first degree of affinity to him.

II. Rule. Cousins by marriage within the degrees, both of the right and
collateral line, do come near to the kindred of their flesh, in the same
manner that cousins by blood do, in the same lines; and the like degrees in
both are forbidden. Therefore in the right line of affinity, it is as well
unlawful for the father in law to marry the daughter in law, or the son in
law to marry the mother in law; as it is for the father to marry the daughter,
or the son the mother. Again, in the collateral, it is as unlawful for the
uncle by the mothers side, to marry the wife of his sisters son, and so in
other degrees, as it is for him to match in the same degrees of co^sanguinitie.
The reason is, because in these lines, as well as in those of consanguinitie,
superiors and inferiors, are each to other as parents and children.

From hence amongst other things, it may be gathered, that it is in no sort
lawful for a man, when his wife is dead, to marry her sister, Leuit. 18. 16.
Thou shall not discover the shame of thy brothers wife; for it is thy brothers
shame. And Leuit. 20. 21. The man that takes his brothers wife, commits
filthiness, because he has uncovered his brothers shame.

Against this doctrine it is objected. First, that God commands not to take a
wife with her sister, during her life, Leuit. 18. 18. in which place, he does
not simply forbid a man to marry two sisters one after another, but to marry
them both together, and therefore after the wife is dead, a man may marry her
sister.

Ans. The place is a flat prohibition of the sin of Polygamie. For to take a
wife to her sister in the Hebrew phrase, is nothing else but to take two wives
one to another. The like form of speech is used otherwhere by Moses, as Exo.
26. 3.

Five curtains shall be coupled together, [the woman to her sister] that is,
one to another; and the other five curtains shall be coupled [the woman to her
sister] that is, the one to the other. Ezech. 1. 9. The four beasts were
joined with their wings, [the woman to her sister] that is, the one to the
other. Again, Moses himself there alleges two reasons against Polygamie:
the one is, because the man is to love, cherish and comfort this wife; whereas,
if he should take unto him another besides her, he should greatly vex his first
lawful wife. The other, because by that means he should uncover the shame of
his wife; that is, he should play a very dishonest part with her, to whom he
was before lawfully married.

Object. 2 The Lord commanded by a special law, that the brother, in case his
brother died without issue, should take his wife, and raise up seed unto him,
Deuteronomy. 25. 5.

Answ. The words of Moses are a special exception of a general law propounded
in Leuit. 18. 16. Thou shall not discover the shame of thy brothers wife; for
it is thy brothers shame. And they are peculiarly directed to the Israelites,
upon special cause; that, when the elder brother died without seed the name of
the first borne might not be extinct, but the family might be preserved in
that name, by raising up of seed unto him, which being a privilege proper to
the Israelites, upon that special consideration, it must not be enlarged to
any other sort of men whatsoever. Neither is the text to be understood of
cousins removed only, as some think, but also of the next of the kindred by
blood; as appears plainly by the history of Ruth, chap. I. verse. II. in
these words of Naomi to her daughters in law, Turn again, my daughters; for
what cause will you go with me? Are there any more sons in my womb, that they
may be your husbands? Turn again, my daughters, go your way, for I am too
old to have a husband, etc.

III. Rule. The wives kinsman by blood, is of affinity to her husband only;
but unto his kindred by blood, the said kinsman has no affinity at all. So on
the contrary it is true, that though the husbands kinsman by blood, be allied
to his wife, yet he has no alliance to those that are kinsmen of blood unto
her. The reason is, because between the kindred of blood on the man's side, and
the kindred of blood on the woman's side, there is no affinity. For the
prohibition of the degrees of affinity, has force in those only which are the
cause thereof, and goes no further. Now the cause being only in the married
persons themselves, the effect may not in reason be enlarged, to them that are
of the same blood with either of them.

From this rule it follows, that the kindred of both married persons by
blood, may lawfully match together. The son in law, may match with the
daughter of his mother in law. The father and the son by another wife, may
marry the mother and the daughter. Two brothers may lawfully match with two
sisters.

IV. Rule. Kindred of affinity to the wife, Beza de repudijs. 82.
are also kindred of affinity to her husband; but how? not properly, but only
after a sort, and as it were, of affinity. So on the contrary. Kindred of
alliance to the husband, are, as it were, of alliance to his wife. For example.
The wife of my father in law, which is not my wives own mother, but her
stepmother, is, as it were, my mother in law, for she is (as it were) of
affinity to me, because she is indeed of affinity to my wife.

Those which are of affinity only after a sort, cannot conveniently match one
with another. And therefore the son in law may not marry with his wives
stepmother; because being of affinity to his wife, she is in stead of a
mother in law to him. Neither may the daughter in law match with her husbands
step-father, because he is (as it were) a step-father to her. Again, my
sisters husband may not marry my brothers wife; for they are after a sort,
brother and sister each to other. The reason hereof is, because the wife is
holden in law a Cuius nuptias in^re non licet, eius nec coniu^is licet.
part of her husband, and therefore if affinity hinders marriage with one of the
married couples, it hinders as well in the like case and respect, marriage with
the other.

And thus much touching the distance of blood, which in the choice of persons
fit for marriage, is most necessarily to be observed. For in the 18. chapter of
Leuiticus, there are sixteen several sorts of persons with whom marriage is
forbidden. The first is the mother. The second is the stepmother. The thid,
the sister by the same father and mother. The fourth, the half-sister, by one
of the parents only. The fifth is the niece by the son. The sixth, the niece
by the daughter. The seventh, the fathers sister. The eight, the uncles, that
is, the fathers brothers wife. The ninth, the mothers sister. The tenth, the
daughter in law, or sons wife. The eleventh, the brothers wife. The twelfth,
the wives mother. The thirteenth, the step-daughter, or the wives daughter by
another husband, or husbands daughter by a former wife. The fourteenth, is the
step-sonnes daughter, that is, his daughter who was the wives son by another
husband. The fifteenth, the step-daughters daughter. The sixteenth, is the
wives sister. And not only these, but all other answerable to them, either in
the same or like degree, are by equal proportion forbidden to be had in
marriage.

It is alleged, that the prohibitions mentioned in that chapter, are merely
Mosaicall, that is, Ceremonial, and therefore do not bind us now in the new
Testament.

Answ. It is a flat untruth; as shall appear by these reasons.

First, the Cananites long before these laws were given by Moses to the
Israelites, were grievously afflicted for the breach and contempt of the same,
as may be gathered by that which is written in the same chapter of Leuiticus,
Chap. 18.
verse. 3. According to the works of the land of Canaan, ye shall not do,
neither walk in their ordinances. And verse. 24. You shall not defile your
selves in any of these things: for in all these the nations are defiled, which
I will cast out before you. verse. 25. And the land is defiled; therefore I will
visit the wickedness thereof upon it, and the land shall vomit out her
inhabitants.

Secondly, the Prophets themselves after Moses, are wont to account these
prohibitions not Ceremonial, but Moral. Ezech. 22. 10. In thee, have they
discovered their fathers shame; in thee have they vexed her, that was polluted
in her flowers. Amos 2. 7. A man and his father will go in to a maid, to
profane the name of my holiness.

Thirdly, the same laws are also urged in the new Testament, wherein Legal
Ceremonies were determined, and had their end. Mark. 6. 18. John said to Herod,
It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife. 1. Cor. 5. 1. It is heard
certainly, that there is Fornication among you, and such Fornication, as is not
once named among the Gentiles, that one should have his fathers wife.

Fourthly, Nature it self by proper instinct, abhors such kind of
conjunctions, and the prohibitions of them, have sufficient ground, even from
her principles. For to this purpose it is, that not only the laws of the
Roman Emperors, but also the civil Canons and constitutions of men, very
skillful in that kind, have in all ages expressly bin made against such persons,
as have offended in those societies forbidden by the law of Moses.

Fifthly, The Lord himself has denounced many and great punishments to be
inflicted upon the breach of the same laws. Leuit. 20. 11. The man that lies
with his fathers wife, because he has uncovered his fathers shame, they shall
both die; their blood shall be upon them. verse. 12. The man that lies with his
daughter in law, they both shall die the death; they have wrought abomination;
their blood shall be upon them. verse. 14. He that takes a wife and her mother,
commits wickedness; they shall burn him and them with fire. verse. 16. The
man that takes his sister, his fathers daughter, or his mothers daughter, and
sees her shame, and she sees his shame; it is villainy: therefore they shall
be cut off in the sight of their people. verse. 20. The man that lies with his
fathers brothers wife, and uncovers his uncles shame, they shall bear their
iniquity, and shall die childlesse. Deuteronomy. 23. 2. A bastard shall not enter
into the congregation of the Lord, even to his tenth generation. Deuteronomy. 27. 20.
Cursed be he that lies with his fathers wife.

The third essential Sign of a person mariageable, is ability and fitness
for procreation. And this in an holy and modest sort is always supposed to be
in the party contracted, unless the contrary be manifestly known, and
discerned by some apparent infirmity in the body.

Hence I gather, that it is unlawful to make a contract with such a person, as
is unfit for the use of marriage, either by natural constitution of body, or
by accident. For example; in regard of sickness, or of frigiditie, or of the
palsy incurable, or lastly of the deprivation of the parts belonging to
generation. These and such like impediments are of force, though a contract
should already be made, yet to make it a mere nullitie, considering that God
makes known his will in them, that he approoueth not of such espousals, but
would have them to be dissolved.

Again, that which is made between two persons that are Impuberes.
under age, is to be holden and accounted as unlawful. And though it should
be done by consent, or commandment of Parents, yet it is of no moment. This
always remembered; except it be ratified by a new consent of the parties after
they be come to age; or that they in the mean time have had private and
carnal copulation one with another.

Again, put the case two be espoused, whereof the one is under age, the other
of full age; the party that is of full age, ought to tarry and expect the
time, wherein the issue of the espousals formerly made, may be manifested. And
the vnder-aged may not break off consent, either before, or when they be come
to perfect years, but must rest in expectation of the accomplishment of the
contract, when he or she shall be out of their minority.

The fourth essential Sign, is a sound and healthful constitution of body,
free from diseases incurablie contagious.

Whereupon it follows, that a promise of marriage made between those, whereof
the one has a disease so loathsome, as that the other upon good ground cannot
possibly endure familiar society and company with him; though it do not
wholly hinder the use of the body, is utterly unlawful.

Of this sort is the Leprosy, the French pox and such like. For seeing there
cannot be any matrimonial use of them that are tainted with such contagious
diseases, without apparent danger of infecting each other, and those also,
which have society with them, and others; yea and by this means the issue of
their bodies, growing of a corrupted seed, are even borne to perpetual misery,
and to the great hurt and hinderance of the Commonwealth; the case is plain,
that such marriages cannot be undertaken with good conscience.

Now if the one party have a disease, though not contagious, yet either
incurable, or so Turpi.
loathsome, as the other has just cause to abhor his company; for example, if
he be sick of a Lethargy, of the falling sickness, or such like diseases;
then, though it be lawful to match with him, because such a contract is not
expressly forbidden, neither is it apparently hurtful to the Commonwealth,
yet is it not expedient, because the disease being loathsome to the sound
party, the marriage also will become unprofitable, and the party in danger of
breaking the commandment of the Moral law, wherein God forbids to commit
adultery.

The fifth essential Sign of a person mariageable, is freedom from marriage;
whereby both the parties which enter contract, are so at liberty, that neither
the man has in present another wife, or is promised to another; nor the woman
has another husband, or is promised to another. The reason is, because God
himself esteems that marriage only lawful, wherein one man is joined to one
woman, and they both into one flesh; and consequently judges it unlawful, as
for one man to have more wives; so for one woman at the same time to have more
husbands.

Hence it follows, that it is against the law of God, and the first
institution of marriage, that a contract should be made between such persons,
whereof the one is formerly betrothed to another. For so long as the first
promise stands in force, the man can no more be betrothed to two women, then he
may be the husband of two wives; because the spouse by the bond of her promise
to the man, becomes a wife; and the man by the bond of his promise to the
woman, becomes an husband, Deuteronomy. 22. 23. 24.

Again, there can be no sure-making, and consequently no marriage with such a
one, as either has been divorced without a sufficient cause, or has
wrongfully forsaken and rejected a lawful mate before. To this purpose says
our Savior Christ, Matthew. 19. 9. I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away
his wife, except it be for whoredom, and marieth another, commits
adultery; and whosoever marries her which is divorced, commits adultery.
And Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 7. 11. But and if she depart, let her remain
unmarried, or be reconciled unto her husband, and let not the husband put away
his wife.

Hitherto I have treated of essential marks, which belong to the being of
marriage. Now I come to those that are accidental.

An accidental mark of a person fit for marriage, is that, which belongs not
to the being, but to the well being, that is, to the holiness and purity of
that estate. And of this sort, there be three that are the principal.

The first is paritie or equality, in regard of Christian religion; For in
marriage, there is a special care to be had, that belieuers be matched with
belieuers, and Christians with Christians; not belieuers with Infidels, or
Christians with Pagans. For the former sort are only and always to be made and
kept, and the latter to be avoided, yea inhibited by positive laws and
constitutions, the breach whereof in such cases is severely to be punished. The
neglect of this point was one principal cause of the destruction of the old
world by the flood. Genesis 6. 2. The sons of God saw the daughters of men, that
they were fair, and they took them wives of all that they liked. Abraham
observed it in the marriage of Isaac his son, and for that purpose took an
oath of his servant. Genesis 24. 3. I will make thee swear by the Lord God of
heaven, and God of the earth, that thou shall not take a wife unto my son, of
the daughters of the Cananites among whom I dwell. And in imitation of that
holy example, Isaac also gives a charge unto Jacob his son, that he should not
take a wife of the daughters of Canaan, Genesis 28. 1. Afterward there was an
express law of God given by Moses, touching the Gentiles that lived in that
land. Exodus 34. 15. Beware that thou make not a covenant with the inhabitants
of the land, etc. verse. 16. And take of their daughters unto thy sons, and
their daughters go a whoring after their gods; and make thy sons go a
whoring after their gods. And the same law was urged by Ezra the Priest in his
time. Ezra 10. 11. Separate your selves from the people of the land, and from
the strange wives. Lastly, S. Paul exhorts the Corinthia^s, 2. Cor. 6. 14. Be
not unequally yoked with the Infidels. And Titus 3. 10. Reject him that is an
heretic, after once or twice admonition.

But suppose it falls out, that the espousals be past, and that both parties
at the first were belieuers, or one of the^ only; or that at first both were
unbelievers, and yet afterward one of them is converted to the faith; or
further, admit that both were belieuers at the contract, yet within some time
after, the one becomes an Infidel, that is to say, a Jew, a Turk, or an
obstinate Heretic, that denies the faith, and razeth even the very foundation
of Religion; in this case what is to be done? Surely eue^ such espousals once
made and ended, if there be no other impediments but these, are to stand and
continue firm and unchangeable; so long as the unbelieving party does
willingly yield, and submit him or her self to the performance of marriage
duties, properly belonging to man and wife. My reason is, the speech of Paul,
who says; If any brother have a wife, that believes not, if she be content to
dwell with him, let him not forsake her. Again, The woman which has an
husband that belieueth not, if he be content to dwell with her, let her not
forsake him, 1. Cor. 7. 12. 13.

If it be here alleged, that the sin of adultery dissolues the bond both of
contract and marriage, and therefore much more does idolatry or infidelity,
which is a sin far more detestable then adultery: I answer, that the
question is not, whether of these is the greater sin, or more heinous in the
sight of God; for Infidelity in both respects far exceeds the other; but
whether of them is more repugnant to the nature and condition of wedlock. Now
the sin of adultery is that alone, which breaks the bond, and renounceth
the troth plighted in marriage, and is the proper cause of a divorce, and not
Idolatry or Infidelity.

The second note, is parity or equality in regard of age and condition.

First of Age; because though the marriage of persons, whose years are far
unequal, is not expressly forbidden in the word; yet is it agreeable to the
rules of expediencie and decency, that the aged should match with the aged,
the younger with the younger.

Reasons are these. First, because the comforts of this society in likelihood
will by this means always be equal, and consequently bring the more
contentment to either party. Secondly, these unequal marriages are often times
offensive to others. Thirdly, they cannot but in some cases prove offensive
even to themselves. For when a man of great years matcheth with a woman very
young, or a young stripling marries an aged woman; the elder party growing
weak and impotent, may the sooner come to be unfit for marriage duties; and the
younger being of greater strength and ability,, the more in danger of being
exposed to incontinencie, and that in the highest degree, unless he be
restrained by Gods special grace. For this cause it was a great fault,
wherewith one Apuleius was justly charged, that being but a very young man, he
was married to a wife of 60. years of age.

Secondly, of condition and estate. For this also is answerable unto the
Apostles rule, who exhorts men to think of, and to do those things which are
true, just, commendable, and of good report, Philip. 4. 8. Thus it is a seemly
and commendable practice, that, the Prince, the Noble man, the freeman, the
gentleman, the yeoman, etc. should be joined in society with them, that are of
the same or like condition with themselves, and not otherwise. For this cause
are the ancient Romans greatly to be commended, who (as we read in their
stories) had such a careful respect of their marriages in this behalf, that
they made laws and constitutions for the restraining of inequality of worldly
estate in such societies, by this means preventing much confusion and
disturbance in families, and other orders of men. Whereunto agrees that of
Tertullian, Tertul. ad vxor. li. 2.
who says, That if a free woman had affianced her self to him that was a
bondman to another, and being thrice admonished thereof, by him that had
authority over her, did notwithstanding persevere in her purpose; she should,
according to the law, lose her freedom.

The third note is public honesty and credit, whereby the contract made
becomes a matter of good report, well thought and spoken of abroad. Whatsoever
things are of good report, think on them. Philip. 4. 8. From hence I gather,

I. That it is an unseemly thing for a man to make promise of marriage to such
a woman, as has bin formerly deflowred, or has and is, or may beconuinced of
adultery and uncleanness. Nay I add further, that a contract made with such a
one, as himself has before deflowred, is by the law of God unlawful. For the
adulterer and the adulteress, by divine law should be put to death, and be cut
off from humane society, Leuit. 20. 10.

II. It is altogether inexpedient, that a woman should be married to such a
man, as has a Concubine, unless he formerly renounce her, and testify the
same by true and unfeigned repentance. The reason is plain. Such a marriage
cannot be undertaken in the Lord. And the party himself, being before
polluted with his Concubine, becomes now by marriage to another, an adulterer;
and she that is married unto him, by this her act yields consent unto his
adultery.

III. That no man professing Christian religion, much less a Minister of the
word, ought to take to himself in marriage a harlot, a defamed woman, or one
that comes of infamous parents, though she be repentant. Leuit. 21. 7. The
Priest shall not take to wife one that is a whore, or profaned, that is to
say, which has an evil name, or comes of ignominious parents. Which law,
though it was in part Ceremonial and Leuitical, and so far forth abrogate; yet
having in it some Morality, in as much as the reason thereof (to wit, because
it is reproachful to a Christian, but specially to a Minister) is still in
force, it is to be holden perpetual. For Christian profession, and the
Ecclesiastical Ministry is principally to be respected, and whatsoever may
prejudice the dignity and credit thereof, to be avoided.

Object. 1. The Prophet Hosea was commanded to take unto him a wife of
fornication, that is, an harlot, Hosea 1. 2. Answ. Hosea did it not in deed,
but in type and resemblance. For God commanded him in his prophecy, to take
upon him (as it were) the person of a fornicator, that by this means he might
the more effectually charge and convince the Israelites of their unclean and
unchaste conversation.

Object. 2. The Lord also forbids the Priest to marry a widow, Leuit. 21.
14. it may seem therefore inexpedient for a Minister so to do. Answ. The law
concerning the marriage of a virgin, and not a widow, was not enjoined to all
Priests, but only to the chief Priest, Leuit. 21. 10. And he also might
marry a widow, but such a one only, as had bin the widow of a Priest, and not
any other, Ezech. 44. 22. Now this was commanded them upon special
consideration. For the High Priest was a type of Christ, and Christ was in time
to come to call his Church, the elect, among the Gentiles, and to marry them
as a virgin espoused unto himself. Yea he was also to marry his Church as a
widow, but the widow of a Priest only, because he was to gather to himself the
remnant of the Church of the Jews; howbeit not all of them, but such only as
came of the holy Fathers, and were Israelites, not according to the flesh, but
according to the promise.

IV. That it is not meet for a man to be contracted to the sister of her that
is already affianced unto him.

And so much of the first point, required to the making of a contract, namely,
the choice of a person fit for marriage.

CHAP. 6.
Of consent in the Contract.
THe second thing required to the making of a contract, is the free and full
consent of the parties, which is indeed the very soul and life of the
contract. And this consent stands in the approbation, or (as we commonly
call it) the Sure-making of the parties contracted.

Consent in this case is twofold, either of the man and the woman, or of their
parents.

Touching the first; That the man and the woman may yield free consent each to
other, it is necessary that, in respect of understanding, their judgment
should be sound; and in regard of will, their choice should be free. And here
sundry cases are to be resolved.

I. Case. When the contract flows not from the will and good liking of the
parties, but is forced and compelled, what is then to be done?

Ans. If the espousals have bin made through force, or fear; I mean, such as
may befall a constant, and resolute man, and which has bin wrought, upon good
knowledge, and consideration; then are they of no moment, and in truth mere
nullities; because there is wanting to them the free and voluntary accord, and
assent of both parties. Nevertheless, if afterward they shall grow to a new
consent, or both yield to an after-acceptation of that which was formerly made,
the espousals shall then stand in force; without further exception, or
contradiction.

II. Case. But how if consent be past, and in process of time it appears to
the espoused persons, that they have erred, either in choice, or consent, or
both?

Answ. There is a threefold error in consent; the one of the person, the other
of the ability, or estate of the person; the third of the quality.

Error in respect of the person, is, when one person is taken for another; or
when the contract is made between two, whereof the one was taken to be such a
party, as afterward he proved not to be. Now where this error is committed,
it is a plain case, there was no consent; and therefore the contract, upon
certain knowledge thereof, is quite frustrate. For the knowledge of the party
is the ground of consent, and belongs consequently to the very substance of
marriage.

Nevertheless, if, the error being once known, the parties have had secret
society one with another; and have either again consented, or grown to an
after-acceptation of the consent before made, the contract may and does stand
in full force. For example: Jacob, by the deceit of Laban, had taken Leah for
Rachel, to his wife; so says the text, When the evening was come, Laban took
Leah his daughter, and brought her to him, and he went in unto her, Genesis 29*
23. But when the morning was come, behold it was Leah, 25. Now by the judgment
of the best Divines, Jacob might justly have renounced Leah, if he would,
because Laban had given her unto him for Rachel, and so deceived him; yet he
would not use extremity, but kept her as his wife.

If it be said, there was an error in the person, therefore no consent, and so
Leah was not his lawful wife, but Rachel. I answer, that Jacob did renew his
consent afterward, and that renewed consent following upon their knowing one of
another, made her his wife, though in extremity and rigor she was not. Again,
Rachel was indeed the party to whom he was espoused, by the former contract;
and therefore, upon their mutual agreement afterward, she also became his wife.
So says the holy Ghost, verse. 27. Fulfill seven years for her, and we will
also give thee Rachel for thy service, etc. v. 28. Then Jacob did so, and Laban
gave him Rachel his daughter to be his wife.

Error of the ability or estate is, when one of the parties to whom consent was
given by the other, being taken for rich and wealthy, in the issue proves to
have been very poor, and not sufficient to maintain that state of life.

Touching this error, it is to be considered, whether the contract was made
absolute, for the time present, and so for ever afterward, or conditional for
time to come only. If it were absolute, that is, conceived in terms of the
present time, then though the deceit be very offensive to the party deluded,
and upon his complaint ought in equity to be punished by the Magistrate; yet
it is not of force to break off the contract; because the ability of either
or both parties belongs not to the essence of marriage. But if it were for time
to come and conditionate, then he or she that made promise upon this condition,
is free and not bound in conscience to fulfill the promise; unless the
condition expressed aforehand be kept, and performed.

Error of the quality of the person, is, when she which was in the espousals
taken to be a virgin, is afterward found to be with child by another, before
they come together. By this error the Covenant is made void, and becomes a
mere nullitie; so as the man cannot be compelled, upon true and certain
knowledge thereof, to marry the woman; but may renounce her, unless both
parties come to a new agreement, or have privately known each other upon
mutual consent. For first, God did in express terms command the Jews, that
such a woman should be stoned to death: Deuteronomy. 22. 20. If the maid (that was
given to wife) be not found a virgin, verse. 21. then shall they bring the maid
to the door of her fathers house, and the men of her city shall stone her with
stones to death, because she has wrought folly in Israel, by playing the whore
in her fathers house. Therefore it was not the will of God, that she should be
retained as a wife, but utterly rejected and forsaken. Again, this was so
usual a practice in Israel upon Gods commandment, that godly and righteous
men, upon the discovery of this error, would not in conscience be persuaded,
to marry the^ to whom they had been betrothed, Matthew. 1. 18. Joseph her husband
(having found, before Marie and he came together, that she was with child)
being a just man, and not willing to make her a public example, was minded to
put her away secretly.

III. Case. What shall we think of the espousals of such, as are furious, and
frantic?

Answ. We must distinguish of these diseases. For Madness is, either perpetual,
or by fits only with intermission.

If it be perpetual, the case is clear, that whether one of the parties only,
or both be frantic, the contract made between them, is altogether
unprofitable and vain. For such know not what they do when they make a
promise, and the consent which passes betwixt the^ cannot be free, full and
perfect, but must needs be hindered and prejudiced by the heat and violence of
their disease.

Now although perpetual madness be a just impediment of marriage, and a
sufficient cause to dissolve a contract, yet it is meet that there be a
convenient space of time agreed upon, wherein all means may be used for the
curing of this disease, to the end that Gods will touching their amendment may
be the more evidently known; and both the parties themselves, and their
friends may give testimony to the world, that they have had a careful respect
of the contract before made.

Again, if it be not continual, but by Dilucida interualla.
fits, so as they have some good days, and quiet intermissio^, the case is
otherwise. For the contract shall be ratified, and stand in force: provided,
that it was manifestly known, that the said parties were both in their right
wits, before they plight their troth each to other; and themselves be willing
afterward to confirm their promise forme^ly made, by renewing their consent.

Consent of the Parents, is that act whereby they give their word and promise,
to bestow their children in marriage, and in regard of right, do indeed
presently bestow them.

Therefore private contracts, that are made without free and lawful consent of
parents, are not only unprofitable and unlawful, but even by the law of God
mere nullities. Reasons. I. They are contrary to the express will and
commandment of God: Exodus 20. Honor thy father and thy mother. II. They are
flat repugnant to natural equity; which teaches, that he who has not power,
nor right over himself, cannot bind himself by promise to another. Now
children have not power over themselves, Gal. 4. 1.
but are under the government, and at the disposition of their Parents;
therefore the covenants which they make, are not made and appointed of God, and
those which God makes not, are in deed and truth none at all.

CHAP. 7.
Of Reiection, or Refusal of the Contract.
COntrary to a complete and lawful contract, Repudium.
is Reiection, whereby the Contract is dissolved, or broken off.

A lawful Contract is then dissolved, when some great and heinous fault
follows immediately upon it, in either of the parties espoused. And from
hence arise diverse and sundry cases to be set down and resolved.

The first is this. What is to be done, when some disease befalls one of the
parties immediately after the contract made?

Answ. Those diseases which take away the use of the body, and altogether
disable the party from the performance of the promise made, in respect of
marriage duties, are very just impediments of marriage, and consequently do break
off the Contract. Of which sort are incurable palsies, frigiditie, and such
like, whereof I have spoken before.

Nevertheless a covenant once made, is not suddenly to be renounced, for
fear of breeding offense. And therefore some longer respite is to be taken
from the time of the contract, in which they are to rest in expectation of
ame^dment, before the said diseases be publicly and solemnly declared to be
incurable, and consequently that the covenant made is become void.

Now, if the disease do not for the present take away the use of the body, and
yet in time proves incurablie contagious, and so loathsome, that the one may
justly fear to keep and converse with the other; as it falls out when one
is tainted with leprosy; then the contract is utterly to be dissolved, as if
God himself should have commanded it, though the promise was formerlie made,
and the parties themselves should be unwilling. God has ordained Matrimony to
help, not to hurt either the persons themselves, or others. Where therefore
these diseases be, which may infect, hurt, or destroy others, there God has,
as it were, testified from heaven, that the act done is not pleasing unto him,
and that presently it ought to be frustrate.

The contract being thus once dissolved, the sounder party shall be at his, or
her liberty to marry again. But the diseased is by the Magistrates
authority, to be forbidden society with any other in way of marriage, and
commanded to lead his life, where he may conveniently from company, for fear
of infection. And withal he is for his own part, to sue unto God by prayer in
faith for the gift of continency. For certain it is, that he to whom God has
denied the power of using marriage with good conscience, is thereby even called
to continency and single life.

But if the disease be not contagious, yet either incurable, or so nastie, that
either of the espoused has just cause to be afraid of the others company;
then both are to be advised, not to claim their right, but willingly to
surrender it each to other by mutual consent, that they may be free again,
and not bound by any former promise to live together as man and wife.
Considering that they have no hope mutually to converse together, with comfort
and contentment, while they so remain.

Upon this advice given by their lawful Pastor, or some in his stead; if they
both yield, or one of them at the least desires to be at his own liberty, the
espousals are forthwith to be broken off. But if neither will consent to a
separation, but rather proceed as they have begun, and in probability the one
have no just cause to hold the other in suspicion, in respect of contagion;
they are not to be hindered from the consummation of their marriage.

Furthermore, though one of them should have a disease, which is continual
without intermission, and yet curable, or any other inconvenience should befall
either of them, after the sure-making, whereby they become lame, deaf, or
dumb, etc. yet this is not a sufficient cause to move them to renounce, and
dissolve the contract.

A second Case. What if it falls out, that after the finishing of the
contract, one of the espoused persons be long absent from the other, so as the
absence be prejudicial to the marriage, that should ensue upon the contract?

Answ. Inquiry must be made, whether this absence be voluntary, or against
the will of the party.

If it be voluntary. For example; if the man upon an honest and just cause,
the woman also being privy thereunto, shall go beyond seas, and being
admonished of his duty before hand, shall notwithstanding stay a whole year or
more, and will not return, but further wilfully absent himself; then may it
be lawful to the woman, to crave of the public Magistrate a dissolution of
the covenant made, and consequently marry another man, unless the former, to
whom she was contracted, be heard of. If he be, then shall it be lawful for
him to plead for himself, and tendering no just cause of his refusal, he
shall be forced by the Magistrates authority to stand to his promise, and take
the woman for his wife. And the same order is to be taken in the wilful
absence of the woman, after she is contracted.

If again, the man or woman shall upon an evil mind, and with purpose to
deceive each other, absent themselves, and depart; means must be used, that
they may be admonished of their duty. That being done, or at least undertaken,
and yet the party offending will not appear, if the other that is present,
upon certain knowledge of his, or her want in respect of continency, shall
sue to the Magistrate; after public and solemn notice given, the contract may
be broken.

But if on the other side, either of them be absent against their will, and
intends no fraud or deceit, but is violently detained, by captivity,
imprisonment, sickness, force, banishment, transportation or such like; then the
party present being desirous of the consummation of the marriage, ought either
to make means unto him, and expect his return, or have certain notice of his
death, before she promise, or have to do with any other in way of marriage.

A third Case. What if after the contract, one of the parties becomes furious,
or mad?

Answ. If the disease be continual, without intermission, in all equity and
likelihood, the espousals are to be dissolved, unless both parties after
knowledge and experience of the disease, have known one another: yet in this,
and all such like cases, it is fit that all good means be tried and used, and
sufficient time be given for the restoring of the diseased, to their former
good estate, and for the accomplishment of the marriage lawfully begun, as
before.

CHAP. 8.
Of Marriage.
Marriage is that, whereby the conjunction formerly begun in the contract, is
solemnly manifested, and brought to perfection. Marriage is consummate by three
sorts of actions; one of the parents of the Bride and Bridegroom, the other of
the Minister in public, the third of the persons coupled together.

The action of the Parents is upon the Mariage-day, to bring the Bride, and
deliver her to the Bridegroom, that they two may become actually man and
wife, and perform each to other all matrimonial duties.

And where the marriage is complete, in any other manner, so as the Parents upon
sound judgment and deliberation, shall deny their full and free consent,
either in express words, or by co^niuence and silence, and that upon just and
lawful cause; there, though in the civil courts of men, it may stand, and the
children borne therein be legitimate before men, yet the truth is, before God
it is of no force, but a mere nullitie.

And because this doctrine, touching consent of parents in these Cases, is of
great use, and avails much to the supporting and mai^^^ining of families; I
will first open the truth thereof, and then prove it by reasons.

Under the name of parents are comprehended; First, the Father and Mother.
Secondly, all Tutors and Guardians, who have the proper and sole charge of
wards, or others under years of discretion. Thirdly, all such as are kindred
of blood, who are in stead of parents to children, as the uncle by the fathers
side, the uncle by the mothers side, and such like.

Now touching the consent of parents, that is, of father and mother, I hold it
requisite of necessity to marriage: For the authority of parents must not be
resisted, or violated. As for Tutors, and such as have the place of parents,
their consent is not required of necessity, but De honestate.
of honesty at least, because the power and authority of the parent, though
it be not taken away, yet it is lessened, when it is either transferred to
another person, or in part rests in the child already bestowed.

Secondly, by parents consent, I understand that which they give, not rashly,
unadvisedly, or foolishlie, but out of good and wise consideration, and upon
true and sound judgment, of the business in hand: For otherwise, as much as
in them lies, they make the marriage void and of none effect. And they are then
thought to carry a right judgment of the thing, when they be able to yield a
just cause of yielding, or denying their consent. For example; if a father
denies to bestow his daughter Iulia upon Sempronius, because he knows him to
be an Arrian, a Pelagian, or of any other sort of Heretics; he withholdeth his
consent upon a good ground, and he does that which he does, of judgment.

Yet further I add, that where the parents do dissent, and can yield no
probable cause thereof; the marriage consummate without their consent, ought to
be confirmed and ratified by the authority of the Magistrate, who is Pater
patriae. And this seems to be the most equal course, both for the avoiding of
greater scandals, and for the preventing of wrong, that may otherwise be done
in some particular case, as to a woman that is defloured and rejected.

Thirdly, consent of parents is either expressed, or implied; Expressed, when
it is given by words; Implied, when it is yielded by silence. For it stands
with most equity and indifferency, to think that those parents do give
consent, who do not by word expressly deny the same.

Fourthly, children are either subject to the authority of their parents in
the family; or at their own liberty, and out of their parents subjection.
Those that are at liberty, are tied necessarily to subjection in respect of
marriage; but the other being still of the family, and under jurisdiction, are
bound to be ordered, by their parents in the bestowing of themselves.

This is briefly the meaning of the question in hand. Now, for proof of this
point, I will propound three sorts of arguments, whereof some are drawn from
the law of God, some from the light of nature, and some from the judgment of
the ancient Church.

For the first sort. According to the law of God, marriage is not only a civil
and politic, but also a divine and spiritual conjunction, the author and
ordainer whereof, upon special cause, was God himself: This our Savior
Christ witnesses, when he says, Those whom God has joined together, let no
man separate, Matthew. 19. 6. That therefore marriages may be soundly ratified and
confirmed, the authority and power of God himself is necessarily to be
interposed.

If it be asked, How God that is in heaven, should bring and join together man
and wife upon the earth?

I answer, that he does it not immediately by himself, as he brought Euah
unto Adam, but in and by some solemn and lawful means. And this mean, is
that great and ancient power and prerogative of parents. And the law of God
has given them this power, not in civil contracts and compositions alone, but
even in the beginning and accomplishing of marriages. Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Thou shall not
give thy daughter unto his son, nor take his daughter unto thy son. Ierem.
29. 6. Take wives for your sons, and give your daughters unto husbands, that
they may bear sons and daughters. 1. Cor. 7. 36. But if any man think that
it is vncomlie for his virgin, if she pass the flower of her age, and need so
require, let him do what he will, he sins not, let them be married.

Hence it was, that Abraham by right of this authority, gave order what wife
his servant should provide for his son; Thou shall not take a wife to my son
of the daughters of the Canaanites; But thou shall go unto my country, and to
my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac, Genesis 24. 3. 4. Sampson, though
he was inflamed with the love of the woman in Timnath, whom he saw to be
beautiful in his eyes, yet he durst not take her to his wife, till she was
given him of his parents, Judge. 14. It was an express law of God, that if a
man intised a maid that was not betrothed, and lay with her, he should endow
her, and take her to his wife: But how? mark in what manner the holy Ghost
proceeds, If her father refuse to give her to him, he shall pay money
according to the dowry of virgins, Exodus 22. 16. 17. Deuteronomy. 22. 28. 29. In
which text, Moses plainly teaches, that the consent of the two parties is not
sufficient, no not though they have had society together, unless they have
the free consent of their parents also. In like manner it was ordained by God,
Numb. 30. 4. 5. 6. That if a woman vowed a vow unto the Lord, being in her
fathers house, and her father hearing it, holds his peace concerning her,
that is, approves her vow by winking at it, her vow shall stand. But if her
father disallow her, that is, gives no approbation or consent unto the vow
made, it shall be of no value, and the Lord will forgive her, because her father
consented not. Now, if the vow of children made unto God, and pertaining to his
worship, cannot be ratified without the parents approbation; of how much less
force shall any private contract or marriage be, without their allowance?

The second argument is taken from the light of nature, and it is gathered by
proportion on this manner: A son privily alienateth and sells away his
fathers lands, either in whole or in part. The question is, whether this
alienation be good in law, yea or no? Answer is, No. And why? Because the land
did not belong to the son, but was part of his fathers substance. In like
manner, a son alienates himself, and is betrothed to a woman, to marry her
without his parents knowledge: Is this act of the son warrantable and sound? By
no means; for the son in respect of his body, is part of the fathers goods,
and may not be alienated from him without consent. A notable reason hereof we
find in Job 1. For when God had given Satan power to destroy and spoil all
Jobs goods, and whatsoever he had, the devil does not only touch the wealth of
Job, but his children also, as a part of his substance. In this respect the
Jews were permitted by God to sell their children. Exodus 21. 7.

Again, for the accomplishment of marriage, there must needs be a mutual
donation, between the spouse and the espoused. And what is that which is
mutually given? Surely their persons, or rather their bodies each to other, for
so Paul says, 1. Cor. 7. 2. Let every man have his wife, and let every woman
have her own husband. But by whom is this donation to be made? by sons and
daughters that are in the family, under the jurisdiction of their parents? It
may not be; For nature her self takes it for granted, that he which is not at
his own liberty, cannot yield to the giving of himself. The donation
therefore remains in the right of the parent, in as much as the will and
consent of the child, ought to depend upon his will and consent, to whom God
has given power and authority in this behalf.

In the third place, let the judgment of the ancient Church be observed.
Ambrose, in his first book of the Patriarch Abraham, chap. 9. requires this
consent in marriages, which he says is so equal and agreeable to nature, that
eue^ the Poets acknowledged the same. For which purpose he recites two verses
out of the Grecian Poet Euripides, in his Tragedy called Andromacha, wherein in
when Orestes desired to marry Hermion, she frames him this answer, That the
matter of her marriage wholly depended upon the pleasure and authority of her
father, and was not in her own power or liberty. Innocentius, who was both a
Pope and Martyr, in his decretall epistles, so strictly requires consent of
parents, Sub Innocent. 3. canon. 51.
as where it is wanting, he concludes the marriage to be void. In the Counsel
of Lateran, it was decreed that Clandestine contracts and secret marriages, made
and undertaken between party and party, should be holden as unlawful as
marriages in those degrees of consanguinitie and affinity, which are forbidden
by God. Tertullian says, Tertul. lib. ad vxorem, 2. ad finem.
That in this world the son cannot Rite and Iure. Basil. epist. 1. ad
Amphiloch. Canon, 42.
rightly and lawfully marry without the allowance of his father. Basil in an
Epistle to Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, affirms; That marriages which are
made without them which have power over the parties, are fornications, and
therefore that they which are joined together in marriage, while their parents
or masters live, are in no sort free from imputation of sin, until they have
approbation from them, for then marriage is ratified and confirmed, when they
have yielded allowance thereunto.

The second Action touching the consummation of marriage, is the action of the
Minister. And that is the blessing or sanctification thereof, which is a
solemn work, whereby the Minister pronouncing the parties contracted to be man
and wife before the whole congregation, commends them and their estate unto
God by solemn prayer.

This solemn sanctification is grounded upon the practice of God himself, who
having given Euah to Adam, blessed them, saying, Increase and multiply, Genesis
2. 22. and 1. 27. For that which God then gave, the Minister standing in his
room, now prays may be given to the man and wife. Yea it is agreeable to the
general rule of the Apostle, Let all things be done decently and in order, 1.
Cor. 14. 40.

Now that this action is to be approved and used in the Church, appears by
these reasons. I. Marriage as it is a public action, so it is after a sort a
spiritual and divine ordinance, whereby it differs from the contract: For
the contract being merely civil, as it stands by consent of men, so by the
same consent, it may be broken and dissolved, but with marriage it is
otherwise. II. Marriage is the Seminary of the Church and Commonwealth. III.
It was the practice of ye Primitive Church. Tertullian speaking of the marriage
of Christians with Christians, Lib. 2. ad vxorem.
acknowledges himself not to be able sufficiently to declare the happiness of
that conjunction which is made by the Church, consecrated by prayers and
Oblationem sic exponit Beatus Rhenanus. Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 55. Ambros.
epistolar. lib. 9. epist. 70. ad Vigilium.
solemn service, witnessed by the Angels, and ratified by God himself.
Nicephorus reports of one Synesius, who avouched that God and the laws, and
the holy hand of Thesphylus had given him a wife. Ambrose says, That marriage
ought to be sanctified, with the veil wherewith the Priest was wont to cover
the Bride and the Bridegroom in the public congregation, and with his
blessing.

The third and last action belonging to the accomplishment of this estate, is,
that of the parties themselves, whereby the Bride is in decent and modest
manner, brought unto the house and home of the Bridegroom. It is the law of
this estate published by God himself in Paradise, that the man, even in
respect of habitation, should leave father and mother and cleave to his wife,
Genesis 2. 24,

Here question is moved, whether marriage is to be solemnized with mirth and
feasting. Answ. I. It is lawful and warrantable to use feasting and mirth at
marriages, because these be things indifferent, and we have examples thereof in
the Scriptures. Laban made a feast at the wedding of Jacob and Rachel, and
invited all the men of the place to it, Genesis 29. 22. Christ himself did
approve the resort of people to the marriage at Cana in Galilee, both by his
presence, and by that honorable gift of six water-pots of the best wine, Ioh.
2. 2. 7. 8. II. It is not only lawful, but convenient and fit to be done, if
there be ability; according to the commendable custom of the place and
country wherein men do dwell; so as in the use thereof, these cautions be
observed. First, that in mirth and merry-making, there be care had that nothing
be done which is dishonest, profane, or of ill report. Philip. 4. 8.
Whatsoever things are honestpure of good report, think on these things.
Secondly, That joy in them be mixed and moderated with the fear of God,
without which Laughter and rejoicing is mere madness, Eccles. 2. 2. Thirdly,
That it be performed in a moderate and sober use of the creatures, without
riot and excess. Thus we read that at the great feast of Ahashuerosh, it was
appointed by the King himself, that they should drink orderly, and none might
compel another to drink more then he thought convenient, Ester 1. 8. And where
weddings are kept contrary to these directions, they are not feasts celebrated
unto God, but unto ye devil; which also may be said of all other festival
meetings.

And so much touching the point of marriage, in which this is to be remembered
for a conclusion, That where there is generally a nullitie in the contract, or
a separation following upon it, there is also a nullity in regard of the
consummation of marriage.

CHAP. 9.
Of the duties of married persons.
THus far have we proceeded in the doctrine of marriage; and now we come to
the duties which they who be married are to perform each to other.

These are principally two: Cohabitation, and Communion.

Cohabitation is their quiet and comfortable dwelling together in one place,
for the better performance of mutual duties. 1. Cor. 7. 10. And to the married
command I, not I but the Lord, let not the wife separate her self from her
husband: verse. 12. But to the remnant I say, not the Lord, If any brother have
an unbelieving wife, and she be content to dwell with him, let him not forsake
her: verse. 13. And the wife which has an unbelieving husband, which is content
to dwell with her, let her not forsake him. 1. Pet. 3. 7. Likewise let the men
dwell together, as becomes them that have knowledge; giving honor to the
woman as to the weaker vessel, even as they which are heirs together of the
grace of life, that your prayers be not interrupted.

This duty must be kept especially the first year of marriage, Deuteronomy. 24. 5.
When a man takes a wife, he shall not go on warfare, neither shall be charged
with any business, but shall be free at home one year, and rejoice with his
wife which he has taken. And the ground of this commandment, no doubt, is,
that they might learn to know one another conditions, and that they might
work a settled affection one toward another, which afterward upon no occasion
might be changed.

Yet they may be absent each from other in two cases: First, upon mutual
consent for a time, for the performing of some business, that is requisite for
the family, Prou. 7. 19. For mine husband is not at home, he is gone a far
journey: at the appointed time he will return again. Secondly, the like
absence is allowed, when some great and weighty affairs either in the Church
or Commonwealth are in hand, 2. Sam. 11. 9. 10. But Vriah slept at the door
of the Kings Palace, with all the servants of his Lord, and went not down to
his house? v. II. Then Vriah answered David; The Arc, and Israel, and Judah
dwell in tents, and my Lord Ioab, and all the servants of my Lord abide in the
open field; shall I then go into my house to eat, and drink, and lie with my
wife? by thy life, and by the life of my soul, I will not do this thing.

Hence arises a question: What if after marriage consummate, there grow upon
one of the parties a contagious disease that cannot be cured, but is so
loathsome, that the other whole party cannot endure cohabitation at all?

Answ. Both the marriage it self, and the duty of dwelling together, ought to
continue firm and sure notwithstanding: yet so as the sound party neither
may, nor ought in good conscience, to desire conjunction with the other,
whereby he, or she may bring infection upon themselves, and consequently hurt
their children, and endanger the Commonwealth.

But if either of the parties have not the gift of continency, nor cannot
abstain; they must sue for it unto God in earnest prayer, who will give it
unto them.

For there God has called a man or woman to continency, where they be
necessarily hindered from the use of the ordinary and lawful remedy of the
contract.

The contrary to Cohabitation is Desertion.

Desertion is, when one of the married folks, upon a wilful, and obstinate
mind of their own head, departs from the other, without a just, and
necessary cause.

Touching this point, there be sundry Cases expounded.

I. Case. Suppose that an husband which is an unbeliever, or an heretic in the
foundation, of his own accord, upon detestation of true religion, quite
forsakes the believing wife, and denies any more to dwell with her; what is to
be done?

Answ. All good means must be first used to bring the infected party to
repentance; and when none will succeed, but the case remains desperate, then
marriage is dissolved on his part, and the believing wife is free to marry
another. So says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. 15. If the unbelieving party depart,
let him depart; a brother or a sister is not in subjection in such things; but
God has called us unto peace. In which words observe a twofold reason: I. He
that is at liberty may marry another; now the believing party forsaken, is
at liberty; because he is not in subjection in such things: therefore he may
marry another. II. God has called us unto peace, says Paul, and this peace
cannot be kept, if the believing party forsaken cannot contain, unless he
marry. Ambrose upon the place says, Ambros. in 1. Cor. 7. 15.
That marriage cannot stand firm, which is separated from the worship and
service of God; and therefore it is no sin in the party that is for saken
for Gods cause, to be married to another; and the unbeliever departing, sins
both against God, and against the law of wedlock, because he denies to remain
in that estate, in regard of religion. Therefore he breaks the covenant of
marriage, and the other is not bound in this case to keep touch with him. Libr.
4. did. 39.
the master of the sentences, says, That the believing party in this case, is
not bound to follow the unbeliever when he departs, but while he lives may
marry another. Lib. de Fide and operib. cap. 1^.
Augustine affirms, that even the wife which is joined to her husband in
lawful society, if she will not abide with her Christian husband, because he
is a Christian, may be forsaken and left, without sin. And it is far better
that the covenant should be dissolved, that man and wife have made each with
other, then that the Covenant which man has made with God. The people of
Israel being in affliction, were constrained to break the former made with
strange women, that they might keep the latter, Ezra 10. 11. 19.

It is alleged, that the unbelieving party may happily repent, and then to make
a dissolution is in vain. But I say, that it is as likely that he will never
repent, and therefore there is cause that the knot should be dissolved.

Again, it is lawful (say some) to make a divorce out of the case of
Adultery. Answ. The believing party which is forsaken, is not the cause of
the divorce, but is a patient of the separation, wrongfully made by the
unbeliever. And Christ where he mentions the Case of Adultery, Matthew. 19.
speaks of an equal marriage, whereas Paul speaks of an unequal.

II. Case. What if there fall out a desertion between two married folks,
which are both believers?

Answ. The faulty person, who is the cause of this desertion, is to be forced
by course of Civil, and Ecclesiastical censure, to perform his, or her
duty. Upon which proceeding, if he remain obstinate and perverse in will; the
other must in patience, and earnest prayer unto God, wait the time, until his
mind may be changed, and he made to relent by the order of the Magistrate. But
if the one of them, by just occasion of fear, be compelled to depart from the
other; and cannot return again without apparent danger of life; in this case
they are not bound to return; but the delinquent party is to remain
solitary, till they be instructed and made willing to do their duties: and in
the mean while, the party innocent must be resolved that God has called him
or her to single life.

Again, be it that the one is resolutely unwilling to dwell with the other,
and thereupon flies away without any fault of the other; if the thing after a
long space be sufficiently known beforehand, and all possible means have
been used, to reclaim the guilty person; yea being called, he does not
personally appear before the Judge, to yield a reason of the fact; after
public and solemn declaration made, the Minister upon such desertion, may
pronounce the marriage to be dissolved. For he that upon malice flies away from
his mate, is to be holden in the same terms with an vnbelieuer, who departs
upon detestation of religion, and the service of God, 1. Tim. 5. 8.

Howbeit, if the place whither he is fled, be unknown, and upon his flight
there be found some fault in the Plaintiff, she is not to be heard, or set at
liberty by the Judge in this case, though she pretend want of the gift of
continency.

But suppose he that fled come again unlooked for, and requires his spouse;
then in case the former course has not bin taken, nor judgment given against
him, they may be reconciled and come together again. If it has, and matters
be concluded, he is not upon his return to be heard, but rather severely
punished.

Like unto Desertion, is malicious and spiteful dealing of married folks one
with the other.

Malicious dealing is, when dwelling together, they require each of other
intolerable conditions: and when the one does not regard nor relieve the other,
being in danger or extremity, as is meet. For this is as much as to betray one
another estate and life to their utter enemies.

Here it may be demanded, what a belieuer should do, who is in certain and
imminent danger, either of loss of life, or breach of conscience, if they both
abide together?

Answ. I. This certain danger has his original, either from one that is a
stranger, or from one of the parties: If from a stranger, then the husband
either takes upon him the defense of his believing wife, or not; if he does,
then she ought to abide with him. If not, she may depart and provide for her
own safety. II. Again, if the husband threatens hurt, the believing wife
may fly in this case; and it is all one, as if the unbelieving man should
depart. For to depart from one, and drive one away by threats, are aequipollent.

Neither may this seem strange unto any, that the belieuer in such case is
allowed to depart. For a husband that is a Christian is married two ways:
First with Christ, and secondly with his wife. The former marriage is made in
Baptism, and is a more holy conjunction, then is the latter. Therefore when
these two cannot stand together, but one of them must needs be dissolved; the
latter must rather be left then the former. Again, if the belieuer should
remain with the vnbelieuer, she should happily be urged sometimes, in case of
danger upon infirmity, to deny Christ, and make ship wrack of faith and good
conscience; which may in no sort be done of either party: and therefore
separation is to be made rather in this society, then that the conjunction with
Christ should not stand firm, and continue.

It is alleged, that if this be so, then the believing wife forsakes the
unbelieving husband, which she may not do.

Answ. She forsakes him not finally, but leaves him for a time. Again, the
desertion is not made by the person, which gives place for the time, but by
him in whom is the cause of the desertion; even as he is not to be termed a
Schismatike, which separateth himself, but he in whom is the cause of the
Schism.

Again, it is objected, that he which flies leaves his calling; and every man
must abide in his calling; according to the rule of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. 20.

Answ. There is a double calling; The general, standing in the worship of God;
The particular, as the calling of marriage, or of single life. When these two
callings cannot stand together, the latter must give place to the former, Luke
14. 26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife,
and children, and brethren, and sisters; yea and his own life also, he cannot
be my disciple.

III. Case. When the husband is perpetually absent from the wife, what is to be
done?

Answ. If he be absent either because he is in captivity, or upon malice, or
fear, or any such like cause; the wife must rest in expectation of his
return, till she has notice of his death, either by sufficient testimony, or
by apparent likelihoods. Now in the want of testimonies, and conjectures in
this behalf, if the party forsaken cannot certainly determine, that the
absence was made upon an evil mind; some have thought that it behooves her to
expect his coming again for the space of four years; others of five; some of
seven, some of ten years; after which time, she is free, and may marry
another man. And if the party do happily return again after some long space
of time, who was probably thought to have been dead, the latter ma^iage
undertaken upon necessary ignorance of such an event, may be dissolved; and it
shall not be imputed to either party, considering it fell out not by their
fault, but only by accident.

Now if the question be of wilful and affected absence, the same is to be
determined concerning that, which has bin said before touching the point of
Desertion.

CHAP. 10.
Of the Communion of married folks, and of due benevolence.
THe communion of man and wife, is that duty, whereby they do mutually and
willingly communicate, both their persons, and goods each to other, for their
mutual help, necessity and comfort, Ephesians. 5. 28. So ought me^ to love their
wives as their own bodies; he that loves his wife, loves himself.

This duty consists principally in the performance of special beneuole^ce
one to another, and that not of courtesy, but of due debt, 1. Cor. 7. 3. Let
the husband give unto the wife due benevolence, and likewise also the wife unto
the husband.

Due benevolence must be showed with a singular and entire affection one
toward another; and that three ways principally.

First, by the right and lawful use of their bodies, or of the marriage bed,
which is indeed an essential duty of marriage.

The mariage-bed signifies that solitary and secret society, that is
between man and wife alone.

And it is a thing of it own nature indifferent; neither good nor bad; and so
Paul numbereth it amongst indifferent things, 1. Cor. 7. 27. Art thou bound
unto a wife? seek not to be loosed: art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a
wife. Wherefore the Church of Rome erreth two contrary ways. First, in that it
makes marriage to be a Sacrament, and so every action of it, to be of the own
nature good. Secondly, in that they prohibit marriage of certain parties, and
the reason of the prohibition may seem to be this; that they think this
secret coming together of man and wife to be filthiness. Canon. Proposuisti,
Distinct. 82.
This was the sentence of Syricius, that filthy Pope of Rome; who determined
that marriage was the uncleanness of the flesh, and to that purpose abused the
words of the Apostle, Romans 8. 8. affirming, that they which are in the flesh,
that is, in the estate of Matrimony, cannot please God. Yea and after that
marriage was condemned by them, some began to detest and hate women, Sozomen.
lib. 3. cap. 16.
as Ephraim the Syrian, Sess. 8. Canon. 9. 10.
of who^ Ecclesiastical stories make mention. And the Council of Trent is of
the same judgment. For whereas it opposes marriage and chastity; it plainly
determines that in marriage there is no chastity.

This coming together of man and wife, although it be indifferent, yet by the
holy usage thereof, it is made a holy and undefiled action, Hebr. 13. 4.
Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled. And it is (as all
other creatures and ordinances of God are) sanctified by the word and prayer,
1. Tim. 4. 3. -- Forbidding to marry, etc. v. 4. -- And nothing ought to be
refused: -- for it is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. In which place
it is to be observed, how the Apostle applies the point of sanctification
directly to marriage.

The word of God gives direction to married folks two ways. First, by giving
them warrant, that they may lawfully do this action; because whatsoever is not
done of faith (which faith must be grounded on Gods word) is a sin. Secondly,
by prescribing the right and holy manner of doing the same.

The holy manner stands in these particulars.

First, that it be done in moderation. For even in wedlock excess in lusts is
no better then plain adultery before God. Ambros. lib. de Philosoph. citat.
ab August. contr. Iulianum. lib. 2.
This is the judgment of the ancient Church, that Intemperance, that is,
immoderate desire even between man and wife, is fornication.

Secondly, that it be used in an holy abstinence.

Abstinence from this secret society, must be used in two cases.

First, while the woman is in her flowers, Leuit. 18. 19. Thou shall not go to
a woman to uncover her shame, as long as she is put apart for her disease. And
it is made one of the properties of a good man, not to lie with a menstruous
woman, Ezekiel. 18. 6.

Secondly, in the time of a solemn fast, when some grievous calamity is
imminent. Then they are to give themselves (by mutual consent) to fasting and
prayer, 1. Cor. 7. 5. Defraud not one another, except it be with consent for a
time, that you may give your selves to fasting and prayer: and again come
together, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinencie. 2. Sam. 11. 11. Then
Vriah answered David, The Arc, and Israel, and Judah dwell intents: and my
Lord Ioab, and the servants of my Lord abide in the open fields: shall I then
go into mine house to eat and drink, and lie with my wife? By thy life, and
by the life of thy soul, I will not do this thing. Zach. 12. 12. The family
of the house of David shall mourn apart, and their wives apart; the family of
the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart, etc.

Next unto the word, this action may be sanctified by prayer, for a blessing
upon it. Children are the gift of God, and therefore married folks are not only
to use the means, but also to pray for the obtaining of them, Psalm. 113. 9. He
makes the barren woman to dwell with a family, and to be a joyful mother of
children. Psalm. 127. 3. Behold children are the inheritance of the Lord, and
the fruit of the womb his reward. Examples for this purpose are these, Genesis
25. 21. Isaac prayed unto the Lord for his wife, because she was barren, and
the Lord was entreated of him; and Rebekah his wife conceived. 1. Sam. 1. 26.
27. And she said, Oh my Lord, as thy soul lives, my Lord, I am the woman that
stood with thee here, praying unto the Lord. verse. 27. I prayed for this child,
and the Lord has given me my desire, which I asked of him.

Now the fruits, which are reaped and inioyed by this holy usage of the marriage
bed, are three. I. The having of a blessed seed. Deuteronomy. 28. 1. If thou shall
obey diligently the voice of the Lord thy God, etc. Blessed shall be the fruit
of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground. Which also is called the seed of
God, being begot in an holy manner, Mal. 2. 15. And did not he make one? yet had
he abundance of Spirit: And wherefore one? because he sought a seed of God:
therefore keep your selves in your spirit, and let none trespass against the
wife of his youth. II. The preservation of the body in cleanness, that it may
be a fit Temple for the holy Ghost to dwell in, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. 4. This is the
will of God, even your sanctification, that every one of you should know how to
possess his vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lust of
concupiscence, even as the Gentiles that know not God. III. The holy estate of
marriage is a lively type of Christ and his Church, and this communion of
married persons, is also a figure of the conjunction that is between him, and
the faithful, Hos. 2. 19. I will marry thee unto me, for ever; yea I will
marry the unto me in righteousness, in judgment, in mercy and in compassion:
I will even marry thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord.
Ephesians. 5. 23. For the husband is the wives head, even as Christ is the head of
the Church, and the same is the Savior of his body.

Here some questions are to be resolved.

Case. I. Whether may marriage be dissolved in the case of barrenness?

Answ. No. For barrenness is an hidden infirmity for the most part, and which
God has many times cured, even when it seemed to be desperate, as in Sarah.
Again, the fruit of the womb is Gods blessing; and wholly depends upon him.
He therefore that in want of children, rejects his wife, whom he has
received at the hands of God, offers wrong even to God himself.

Case II. What if either of the married folks commit fornication, or any sin
of the same kind greater then fornication, as Incest, Sodomie, lying with
beasts, or such like.

Answ. Adultery and fornication are most grievous and open crimes, which do
break the very bond and covenant of marriage, Prou. 2. 17. and therefore when
they are certainly known by such persons, they are at no hand to be winked at,
but the Magistrate is presently to be informed of them. Howbeit, if the
innocent party be willing to receive the adulterer again, in regard of his
repentance; lest he should seem to favor and maintain sin, and to be
himself a practiser of uncleanness, he is to repair to the Congregation, and
declare the whole matter to the Minister, that he may understand the parties
repentance, and desire of forgiveness.

And if the adulteress has conceived, and is in travel, the husband to avoid
the imputation of having an heir in bastardie, is to make relation to the
Church of the repentance of the adulteress; or to acquaint some certain
persons therewith, not to the end that she should be punished for the fact, but
that they may take notice of a child conceived in adultery, whom afterward he
may lawfully put off, as none of his.

The matter being known, the innocent party may require a diuorcement. For
adultery is such a sin, as does quite break off not only the use, but the bond
and covenant of marriage, Matthew. 19. 9. I say therefore unto you, that whosoever
shall put away his wife, except it be for whoredom, and marry another,
commits adultery, etc. And yet the same bond may be continued, and grow up
again by the good will and consent of the party innocent, and consequently
they may be reconciled, and dwell together still. 1. Sam. 25. 44. Now Saul had
given Michal his daughter David's wife, to Phalti the son of Laish, which was
of Gallim. 2. Sam. 3. 14. Then David sent messengers to Ishbosheth Saul's son,
saying, Deliver me my wife Michal, which I married for an hundred foreskins of
the Philistims. The same course may be taken in like cases by the innocent,
specially upon the repentance of the guilty person. But yet every man must be
left to his own conscience, and none is to be compelled to take another, from
whom he may justly be separated against his will.

Now in requiring of a divorce, there is an equal right and power in both
parties, so as the woman may require it as well as the man; and he as well as
she. The reason is, because they are equally bound each to other, and have also
the same interest in one another body; provided always, that the man is to
maintain his superiority, and the woman to observe that modesty which
beseems her toward the man.

After the diuorcement made, it shall be lawful for the harmless party, not
having the gift of continency, upon leave obtained of the Church, and the
Christian Magistrate, to marry again.

But what then shall become of the party offending?

Answ. If upon the hazard of his Conscience in want of the remedy, any
liberty of second marriage, be to be granted unto him by the Church or Civil
Magistrate; (as indeed here in England there is not;) diverse restraints, in
this Case, must be observed.

First, no such liberty is to be granted, so long as the matter remains
uncertain, whether they may be reconciled, specially while the party innocent
lives in single life. Secondly, it must evidently appear, that the said
offending party has earnestly rpented him of his sin, before he can either be
received into the Church, or admitted to a second marriage. Thirdly, this
liberty is not to be granted him either presently, or unadvisedly; but upon
frequent and serious admonition, rather to give himself to mourning and
lamentation, and still to remain alone, then to desire again to enjoy the
benefit of that state, which he has already so shamefully abused.

So much of the first way of performance of due benevolence.

The second way is, by cherishing one another: Ephesians. 5. 29. No man ever hated
his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, as Christ also does the
Church. This cherishing is the performing of any duties, that tend to the
preserving of the lives one of another. Wherefore they are freely to
communicate their goods, their counsel, their labors each to other; for the
good of themselves and theirs.

The third way is, by an holy kind of reioicing and solacing themselves each
with other, in a mutual declaration of the signs and tokens of love and
kindness. Prou. 5. 18. Rejoice with the wife of thy youth: verse. 19. Let her
be as the loving Hind, and pleasant wild goat: let her breasts satisfy thee at
all times, and delight in her love continually. Cantic. 1. 1. Let him kiss me
with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better them wine. Genesis 26. 8. So
after he had bin there a long time, Abimelek King of the Philistims, looked out
at a window, and lo, he saw Isaak sporting with Rebekah his wife: Then
Abimelek called Isaak and said; Lo, she is of a surety thy wife. Esaias 62. 7.
As a young man marries a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee; and as a
Bridegroom is glad of the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee.

This rejoicing and delight is more permitted to the man, then to the woman;
and to them both, more in their young years, then in their old age.

CHAP. 11.
Of the Husband.
MArried folks are either husband or wife.

The husband is he which has authority over the wife; hereupon in Scripture
he is called the guide of her youth, Prou. 2. 17. and they twain being but one
flesh, he is also the head over his wife.

The duties of the husband toward the wife, are these:

I. To love her as himself: Ephesians. 5. 33. Let every one love his wife even as
himself. Genesis 24. 67. Afterward Isaak brought her unto the tent of Sarah his
mother; and he took Rebekah and she was his wife, and he loved her: so Isaak
left mourning for his mother. Note, how the love of the husband to the wife,
mitigates sorrow for the death of the mother.

He is to show this love in two things: First in protecting her from danger,
Genesis 20. 16. And unto Sarah he said, behold I have given 1000. shekels of
silver unto thy brother: behold he is the covering of thine eyes amongst all
that are with thee. Let it be known amongst all, and be thou instructed. 1.
Sam. 30. 5. David's two wives were taken prisoners also, Ahinoam the Izreelite,
and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite: v. 8. Then David asked counsel of
the Lord saying; Shall I follow after this company,? shall I overtake them?
And he answered him, Follow, for thou shall surely overtake them, and recover
all. Secondly, in regarding her estate as his own, and providing maintenance
for her, both for his life time, and as much as he may, for time to come after
his death. Ephesians. 5. 28. So ought men to love their wives, as their own
bodies: he that loves his wife loves himself; verse. 29. For no man yet hated
his own flesh, but nourishes it, etc. Exodus 21. 10. If he take him another
wife, he shall not diminish her food, her raiment, and recompense of her
virginity. Ruth. 3. 9. Unto whom he said, who art thou? which said; I am Ruth
thine handmaid, spread therefore the wing of thy garment over thine handmaid;
for thou art the kinsman.

II. To honor his wife: 1. Pet. 3. 7. Giving honor to the woman.

This honor stands in three things: First, in making account of her, as his
companion, or yoke fellow. For this cause, the woman, when she was created, was
not taken out of the man's head, because she was not made to rule over him; nor
out of his feet, because God did not make her subject to him as a servant; but
out of his side, to the end that man should take her as his mate. Secondly, in
a wise and patie^t bearing or covering of her infirmities, as anger, waywardnes
and such like, in respect of the weakness of her sex, 1. Pet. 3. 7. Giving
honor to the woman, as unto the weaker vessel, seeing ye are heirs together
of the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered. Thirdly, by suffering
himself sometimes to be admonished or advised by her. It was Gods commandment
to Abraham concerning Sarah his wife; Let it not be grievous in thy sight for
the child, and for thy bondwoman: in all that Sarah shall say unto thee, hear
her voice; For in Isaak shall thy seed be called, Genesis 21. 12. Thus Elkanah was
willing to subscribe unto his wife Annaes advice, for her tarrying at home till
the child was weaned, 1. Sam. 1. 23. And Elkanah her husband said unto her, do
what seems thee best: tarry until thou have weaned him: only the Lord
accomplish his word. Hereupon the Heathen Philosopher said, Arist. Ethic. lib.
8.
That the master of the family exercises (after a sort) a power Tyrannical
over his servants, a power Regal over his children; because Kings are fathers
of their Co^mon-weales: but in respect of his wife, he exercises a power
Aristocraticall, not after his own will, but agreeable to the honor and
dignity of the married estate; and consequently, that he ought not in modesty
to challenge the privilege of prescribing and aduertising his wife in all
matters domestical, but in some to leave her, to her own will and judgment.

Here question is moved, whether the husband may correct the wife?

Answ. Though the husband be the wives head, yet it seems he has no power
nor liberty granted him in this regard. For we read not in the Scriptures,
any precept or example to warrant such practice of his authority. He may
reprove and admonish her in word only, if he sees her in fault. For, thus we
read, that Jacob censured his wife, being impatient, even in anger, Genesis 30.
2. Am I in Gods stead, which has withholden from thee, the fruit of the womb?
And Job reproved his wife, Job 2. 10. Thou speak like a foolish woman. What?
Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? But he may
not chastise her either with stripes, or stroks. The reason is plain; Wives
are their husbands mates; and they two be one flesh. And no man will hate, much
less beat his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, Ephesians. 5. 29.
Again, it is the commandment of God, that man should not trespass against
the wife of his youth, Malac. 2. 15. Chrysostom says, In 1. Cor. 11. Homil.
26.
It is the greatest reproach for any man, that can be, to beat his wife.
Plutarch in the life of Cato the Censor, affirms, that he which smites his
wife, does all one, as if he should lay violent hands upon the sacred images of
the gods, which was counted an high degree of offense among the Heathen.

It is alleged, Husbands are commanded so to love their wives, as Christ does
his Church; now Christ chastises his Church, with strokes; and therefore so
may the husband his wife. Answ. As Christ does entirely love his Church, so he
may also chastise the same, because he is not only the husband, but also
absolute Lord and King of his Church: so is not the husband absolute over the
wife.

But his authority over the wife, is after a sort civil, as is the authority
of the Magistrate over his people. Ans. It is not so. For the Magistrate has
in his hand the power of the sword, by which power he inflicteth punishment in
case of offense. But the husband can challenge to himself no such power: (...)
yea it is flatly forbidden in the Civil law, that he should scourge or strike
his wife.

Nevertheless, if she grow to extremities, and be desperately perverse, so as
there be no hope of amendment; then the Magistrate may be informed, who to
prevent scandals, and to provide for public peace, both ought and may assign
unto her necessary correction, and punishment according to her desert. Now the
husband that has a wife so stubborn and peevish, must bear it, if it may be
borne, as the portion of his cross laid upon him by God. And in this case, if
he be impatient, he may in some sort be pardoned and pitied, but he is not
wholly to be excused.

CHAP. 12.
Of the Wife.
THe wife is the other married person, who being subject to her husband,
yields obedience unto him.

Touching the subjection of the wife, the word of God me^tioneth it in sundry
places. Romans 7. 2. The woman which is in subjection to the man, is bound by the
law to the man, while he lives. Ephesians. 5. 24. As the Church is in subjection
to Christ, even so let the wives be to their husbands in every thing. Colos.
3. 18. Wives submit your selves unto your husbands, as it is comely in the
Lord. 1. Tim. 2. 12. I permit not a woman -- to usurp authority over the man.
And it was a law established by God immediately after the fall, Genesis 3. 16. Unto
the woman he said, I will greatly increase, etc. and thy desire shall be subject
to thine husband, and he shall rule over thee. Indeed the daughter, according
to the Civil law, even when she is married is In potestate patris.
in the power of her father, and not of her husband. But this is directly
against the law of Moses, and crosses the law of Nature, Leuit. 22. 12. 13.
Numb. 30. 13.

Now the duties of the wife, are principally two.

The first is, to submit her self to her husband; and to acknowledge and
reverence him as her head in all things. Genesis 20. 16. Likewise Abimelech said
unto Sarah; Behold thy brother, that is, thy husband, whom thou call thy
brother, is the veil of thine eyes to all that are with thee. As if he should
say, Thy husband is thy head, and has power over thee, and thou ought to
reverence him. For of ancient times, the wife was covered with a veil in the
presence of her husband, in token of subjection to him. Thus Rebekah at the
sight of Isaak took a veil, and covered her head therewith, Genesis 24. 65. 1.
Cor. 11. 3. The man is the woman's head. Ephesians. 5. 22. Wives submit your selves
unto your husbands, as unto the Lord; for the husband is the wives head, even
as Christ is the head of his Church. The reason hereof is good. For the wife
enjoys the privileges of her husband, and is graced by his honor and
estimation amongst men. His Nobility makes her noble, though otherwise she
is base and mean; as contrariwise, his baseness and low degree, causes her,
though she be by birth noble and honorable, to be by estate base and mean.

The second duty is, to be obedient unto her husband in all things; that is,
wholly to depend upon him, both in judgment and will. For look as the Church
yields obedience to Christ her head, and yields her self to be commanded,
governed, and directed by him, so ought the woman to the man. So Sarah is said
to obey Abraham, and to give him the terms of obedience, She called him Lord,
or Sir, 1. Pet. 3. 6. Hence it follows, that the woman is not to take
liberty of wandering, and straying abroad from her own house, without the man's
knowledge and consent. 2. King. 4. 22. Then she called to her husband and said,
Send with me, I pray thee, one of the young men, and one of the asses; for I
will haste to the man of God, and come again. Again, that she is to follow
her husband, when he flitteth or departs from place to place, unless he
forsake either her or Christ. To this purpose Paul says he had power to lead
about a wife, being a sister, as well as the rest of the Apostles, 1. Cor. 9.
5. Thus Sarah went with Abraham into Egypt, Genesis 12. 11. and out of Egypt, Genesis
13. 1. and to Gerar to soiourne there, Genesis 20. 1. 2. 3. Thus the wives of
Jacob departed with him, from their father Laban, Genesis 31. 17.

Contrary to these duties, are the sins of wives; To be proud, to be unwilling
to bear the authority of their husbands; to chide and braule with bitterness;
to forsake their houses, etc. Prou. 27. 15. A continual dropping in the day of
rain, and a contentious woman are alike. verse. 16. He that hides her, hides
the wind, and she is as the oil in his right hand, that utters it self.
Exodus 4. 26. Then Zipporah said, O bloody husband; because of the
Circumcision. It was the fault of the Levites Concubine, Judge. 19. 2. Who
played the whore, and went away from him unto her fathers house to Bethlem
Judah, and there continued the space of four months. It was the sin of
Queen Vashi, who refused to come at the Kings word, which he had given in
charge to the Eunuchs: therefore the King was very angry, and his warth
kindled in him, Ester 1. 12. Lastly, to be a cause of grief to their kindred.
Thus the proud wives of Esau, the daughters of the Hittites, were a grief of
mind to Isaak and Rebekah, Genesis 26. 35. and 27. 46.

CHAP. 13.
Of the Parent.
HItherto has been treated of the first Couple, whereof the family consists,
namely, of married folks. Now follow the other; and they are of two sorts;
either such as, whereby the family is increased, and multiplied; or such as
are helps thereunto.

Those whereby the family is enlarged, are also of two sorts; Parents and
Children.

Parents are they which have power and authority over children.

The duties of parents are especially two; One to bring up their children; The
other to bestow them, when they have brought them up.

Touching Education or bringing up of children, the parents care must be, both
that they may live, and also that they may live well, Ephesians. 6. 4.

Touching the preservation of the life of the child, there are many duties
required of the Parents, specially four. First, the mother is her self to
give the infant suck, and to wrap it up in swaddling clothes. Paul co^mends it
for a note of a good wife, to nurse her own children, 1. Tim. 5. 10. Thus
Sarah gave suck to Isaak, Genesis 21. 7. Anna nursed Samuel, 1. Sam. 1. 22. David
in likelihood was nursed by his mother, Psalm. 22. 9. Thou gave me hope even
at my mothers breasts. And our Savior Christ was also nursed by Marie his
mother, Luke 11. 27. and swadled, Luke 2. 7. Now the reason hereof is plain.
God has given milk to women that bear children, and has so appointed, that
no meat is more natural to the child, then the mothers milk. And nature it
self teaches this in the course of other creatures. The earth nourishes that
which it brings forth. The fruit which the tree bears is fed by the sap
that comes from the root thereof. Yea amongst the bruit beasts, even those that
be most savage, as the Tigres, do give suck unto the young ones which they
bring forth.

Yet in case of want of health, or ability, or any other just impediment, the
mother may in equity beforborne, and the child committed unto a nurse. And so
we read that Rebekah the daughter of Bethuel, and afterward the wife of Isaak
had a nurse, Genes. 24. 59. whose name was Deborah, Genesis 35. 8. And Pharaohs
daughter in a case of necessity, committed Moses to be nursed of an Hebrew
woman, whom she took not to be his mother, but a stranger; and her fact was
allowed by God, Exodus 2. 7. 9.

The second duty of the Parent is, to provide for his child meat, drink, and
clothing. Our Savior Christ says, that Parents even by the light of nature,
though they be evil, will not deny or withhold necessary food from their
children: Mat. 7. 9. 10. What man is there among you, that if his son ask him
bread, will give him a stone, or if he ask a fish, will give him a scorpion?
And Paul says, If there be any that provides not for his own, and namely for
them of his household, he denies the faith, and is worse then an Infidel, 1.
Tim. 5. 8.

The third duty is, when God gives ability and means, to lay up some thing
for the future maintenance of the child. 2. Cor. 12. 14. -- for the children
ought not to lay up for the fathers, but the fathers for the children. Prou.
19. 14. House and riches are the inheritance of the fathers.

The fourth is, to observe both the inclination, and the natural gifts of
body and mind that are in the child, and accordingly to bestow it in some
honest calling and course of life. Prou. 20. 11. A child is known by his
actions, whether his work be pure and right. In the Ecclesiastical history,
Ruffin. Eccles. hist. lib. 1. c. 14.
written by Ruffinus, it is recorded, that Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, saw
a far off, in a place near to the sea, a company of children playing
together, and in their play imitating himself in sundry Ministerial actions.
And when he had a while viewed them, he perceived that they examined and
baptized one another, according to the solemn order used in y^ Congregation:
which thing, when he had made some of his Clergy acquainted withal, and taken
order that the children should be sent for, and brought before him, he demanded
of them, what sport they used, and in what manner they played one with another.
The children at first, for fear, denied what they had done, yet upon further
examination they confessed, that they had made Athanasius (who afterward became
Bishop of the place) their Bishop, and that he instructed and baptized sundry
of their company. He further asked both Athanasius himself, and those which
were said to have been baptized, what questions he asked them, and what
answers they gave; and perceiving by their speeches, that they had framed
themselves, though in sporting manner, to the Church-proceedings in those
actions; upon conference had with his Clergy, he determined, that those which
had first been asked, and had given answer fully, according to the form used
in that Church, and thereupon baptized, should not be rebaptised. And for
Athanasius and the other children, which had done the part of Ministers in
their kind, he sent for their parents, and gave them great charge that they
should be brought up in learning and religion, that so they might in time be
fit for the public Ministry. The like course we read to have been taken by
the Heathen, for judgment of the inclination and towardness of their
children. Nazianz. epist. ad Eudoxam.
The Athenians made a law, that before children were bestowed in any calling,
they should be first brought into a public place, where Instruments belonging
to all sorts of trades were laid; and look in what kind of Instrument any of
them took most delight, the child was thought to be most fit for the trade,
whereunto that Instrument belonged, and afterward applied to the same with good
success.

Now the Parents first and principal care must be for the Church; that those
of their children which have the most pregnant wit, and be endued with the best
gifts, be consecrated unto God, and brought up in the study of the Scriptures,
to serve afterward in the Ministry of the Church. Thus Anna dedicated Samuel
her son unto God by vow, 1. Sam. 1. 11. And she vowed a vow, and said, O Lord
of Hosts, if thou will -- give unto thine handmaid a man-child, the^ I will
give him unto the Lord all the days of his life. And she did according to her
vow, and the Lord blessed Samuel her son, who in process of time became a
great Prophet.

The next point of Education of children, is to provide that they may live
well, and lead a godly life. To this purpose Parents must do three things.

First, they are to be careful, that the child, so soon as may be, after it
is borne, be admitted into the true Church of God by Baptism, and have a fit
name given unto it.

Secondly, they are to endeavor to sow the seeds of godliness and religion in
the heart of the child, so soon as it comes to the use of reason and
understanding; and as it grows in years, so care must be had that it grow in
knowledge and grace. To this purpose is the vow and promise made in Baptism,
which parents are bound to call upon the child to remember, when it comes to
years. It was the godly care of Timothies parents, 2. Tim. 3. 14. But continue
thou in the things which thou have learned, knowing of whom thou have learned
them, verse. 15. And that thou have known the holy Scriptures of a child, which
are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through the faith which is in Christ
Jesus. This was the commandment of God to the parents of his people, Deuteronomy. 6.
7. Thou shall rehearse these words which I command thee continually to thy
children, and shall talk of them when thou tarriest in the house. And verse.
20. When thy son shall ask thee in time to come, saying; What mean these
Testimonies, and Ordinances, and Laws, which the Lord our God has commanded
you? Then thou shall say unto thy son; We were Pharaohs bondmen in Egypt,
etc. This was observed by the Israelites in the ages ^cceeding: Psalm. 44. 1. We
have heard with our ears, O God: our fathers have told us the works that thou
have done in their days in old time.

Thirdly, the first instruction of children in learning and religion, must be
so ordered, that they may take it with delight. For which purpose, they may be
sometimes allowed in moderate manner to play, and solace themselves in
recreatio^s fitting for their years. And if they do amiss in either, they are
to be restrained by the bridle of discipline. First by reproof in word, and
when that will not help, by the rod of correction. Zach. 8. 5. The streets of
the city shall be full of boys and girls, playing in the streets thereof.
Prou. 29. 15. The rod and correction give wisdom, but a child set at liberty
makes his mother ashamed. verse. 17. Correct thy son, and he will give thee
rest, and give pleasures to thy soul. Hebr. 12. 9. We have had the fathers of
our bodies which correct us, and we gave them reverence.

Yet in this point, two extremes are carefully to be avoided; That the Parent
be not either too severe, or too indulgent to the child. For seue^itie Paul
gives his rule, Ephesians. 6. 3. Parents provoke not your children to anger, that
is, by too much austeritie in government. For lenity, we have old Eli his
example, 1. Sam. 2. 23. And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for of
all this people, I hear evil reports of you. Do no more my sons, etc. So
much for Education.

The second general duty of parents, is the bestowing of their children; This
bestowing is, when they knowing their children fit for marriage, not to have the
gift of continency, do use their best endeavor to provide matches for them in
time, or at least, do advise them thereunto by themselves or by their friends:
1. Cor. 7. 36. If any man think it uncomely for his virgin to pass the
flower of her age, and need so require -- let them be married. verse. 38. he
that gives her to marriage, does well. Ierem. 26. 6. Take ye wives -- and take
wives for your sons, and give your daughters to husbands, etc. Genesis 28. 1.
Isaak called Jacob and blessed him, and charged him and said unto him; Take not
a wife of the daughters of Canaan: Arise, get thee to Padan Aram -- and thence
take thee a wife of the daughters of Laban thy mothers brother. Judge. 14. 2.
Sampson came and told his father and his mother, and said, I have seen a woman
in Timnah of the daughters of the Philistims; now therefore give me her to wife.

This duty is now adays carelessely neglected of Parents; and the fruit
thereof is dangerous. For hence it comes to pass, that their children
oftentimes do either commit whoredom, or undertake wicked and ungodly marriages.

In the choice of a husband or wife, the Parents ought to have a greater
respect unto piety and wisdom, then unto beauty and riches, or any other
outward blessings. Yet where they all concur, the party so qualified is the
more thankfully to be entertained. Upon these grounds the Priest of Prince of
Midian, gave his daughter Zipporah to Moses, and Moses agreed to take her,
Exodus 2. 19. A man of Egypt delivered us from the Philistims, and also drew us
water enough, and watered the sheep -- And Moses agreed to dwell with the man,
who gave unto Moses Zipporah his daughter. Iosu. 15. 16. Then Caleb said, He
that smites Kiriath-sepher, and takes it, even to him will I give Achsah my
daughter to wife. Yea it is a sin to marry only for beauty, without
consideration of the better things. Thus the old world sinned, when the sons
of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and took them wives of
all that they liked, Genesis 6. 2. and Sampson, who only upon the sight of the
woman in Timnah, of the daughters of the Philistims, without further inquiry,
desired that she might be given him for his wife, Judge. 14. 2.

Again, it is meet that parents should deal moderately with their children in
this case, and not undertake at any hand to force and compel them to marry
this or that party. This was the just commendation of Rebekahs parents, who
though they were Idolaters, yet had that regard of equity, that they first
called her and asked her consent, before they sent her away with Abraham's
servant, to be married to Isaak, Genesis 24. 58. Now in case the Parents fail in
their duty in this regard, the son or daughter may lawfully declare the matter
first to their kinsfolk, and afterward (if need be) to the Minister, or
Magistrate, and sue for redress by their means and direction.

CHAP. 14.
Of the Son.
THe son is he, who is in subjection to his parents.

The duties of a son to be performed to his parents, are principally two.

First to yield them obedience, whether they be his natural parents or
otherwise, as his step-father and stepmother, and that while he lives. Ephesians.
6. 1. Children obey your parents in the Lord; for this is right. Luke 2. 51.
Then he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them.
Exodus 18. 19. Moses father in law said unto him, Hear now my voice, I will
give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee. Ruth 3. 5. And Ruth said unto
Naomi her mother in law, All that thou biddest me, I will do. Job 1. 5. And when
the days of their ba^quetting were gone about, Job sent and sanctified them.

This obedience must show it self in two things.

First in the choice of a lawful calling, wherein the child is to be ordered
and appointed at the discretion of the parent.

Secondly in marriage: For in that, the parent is the principal agent and
disposer of the child. Now although his authority be not so great, as that the
child is to be forced and compelled by him; yet the reverent and dutiful
respect which the child ought to bear toward him, ought to be a strong
inducement, not to dissent, or renounce his advice, without great and weighty
cause. Yea the child must endeavor by all manner of dutiful carriage to
overcome, or at least to mitigate his parents severity in that behalf.

Now for the daughters: They must yield obedience to their parents in all
Domestical labors, that they may be skillful in household affairs. Thus did
the seven daughters of the Priest of Midian, accustom themselves to draw
water, and fill the troughes to water their fathers sheep, Exodus 2. 16. Thus
Rebekah was seen to come out of her fathers house, with her pitcher upon her
shoulder, and to go down with it to the well to fill it, and give drink to
her fathers Camels, Genesis 24. 16. 17.

The second duty of the son, is to recompense his fathers love, and care
over him, by relieuing him in case of want, if God give ability, with food and
raiment, and other necessaries. Herein children must deal with their parents,
as the brood of the Storke is reported to do with her, by feeding her when she
is old; wherein they do no more but what she before has done unto them. It
is Paul's counsel, that childred and nephews should recompense the kindness of
their kindred in the first place, 1. Tim. 5. 4. and therefore to their parents,
the head and foundation of their kindred. When Joseph was in prosperity, and
his father Jacob in want, he first gave him corn freely; and afterward sent
for him to Egypt, and there provided for him; in so much as the text says of
him, that he nourished his father and his brethren, and all his fathers
household with bread, Even as the mother puts meat into the child's mouth, Genesis
47. 12. When Naomi the stepmother of Ruth was of great years, and her
strength spent, Ruth gathered corn in the harvest for relief of them both.
Yea when Boaz gave her to eat and to drink, she reserved part of her
victuals, and brought it home with her gleanes to refresh her mother, Ruth 2.
14. 18.

The necessity of the performance of these duties is so great, that if the
son neglects them, and does the contrary, by ill usage of his parent,
either in word or deed, he is worthy of death, even by Moses law: Exodus 21.
15. He that smites his father or his mother, shall die the death.

The law of the first borne of a man's children, that he should have a greater
portion of his fathers goods, then any of the rest of his brethren, is
perpetual, and admits no exception, but only in the case of notorious
wickedness. Deuteronomy. 21. 17. He shall acknowledge the son of the hated for the
first borne, and give him a double portion of all that he has, for he is the
first of his strength, and to him belongs the right of the first borne. This
was the law; yet we read that Ruben lost this prerogative, by reason of his
incest, and Judah the fourth son of Jacob had the dignity of the first
borne, Genesis 49. 8. Thou Judah, thy brethren shall praise thee -- thy fathers
sons shall bow down unto thee.

In the Church of the old Testament, the privilege of the first borne was
threefold; the first of government and royalty, the second of Priesthood, the
third of the double portion. And it is probable that this was for the most part
Ceremonial, and was accomplished and determined in Christ, who was the Image
of the invisible God, and the first borne of every creature, Colos. 1. 15.

Here two questions are propounded.

Quest. I. Whether is it lawful for the son to make a vow belonging either
to religion, or to civil conversation, without the consent of the parent?

Answ. A vow so made is not of force to bind the child, but by the Law of
nature and common equity, is to be made void. For it is a ruled case, that he
which is not his own man, that is to say, at his own liberty, but under the
power of another, cannot bind himself. Again, the authority of the parent by
the law of God is great; For it allows the father to make void the vow of the
child pertaining to Gods worship, Numb. 30. 6.

Quest. II. Whether is the consent of the parents to be required in the second
marriages of their children?

Answ. 1. Of ancient times, both by C. de Nuptijs. L. vidua, and L. in
co^iunctione.
Civil laws, and also by Imperial constitutions, it was provided that no
widows, though made free by their former marriages, should make any contract
again, without the good will of their parents. 2. Consent in this case, though
it be not absolutely necessary, yet it is to be thought fit and convenient,
because children in some regards exempted from parents authority, do owe
notwithstanding the duty of honor unto them, by Gods express commandment,
Exodus 20. 12. and consequently ought to testify the same, by being ordered and
advised by them in some sort, even at the after-bestowing of themselves. Hence
it is, that Beza de repud. and diuort. sect. de spo^salibus absque consensu
parfactis.
later Divines have holden upon good ground; That the espousals of widows, who
have some more liberty, then the child first married, being made without their
parents knowledge, cannot but incur just reprehension, howsoever they may
stand in force without it.

CHAP. 15.
Of the Master.
NExt unto parents and children, whereby the family is increased, is a second
sort of couples, which are helps thereunto. And they are Masters and servants.

The Master is a member in the family, which has power and bears rule over
the servant. And his duty stands principally in three things.

First, To make a good choice of his servants; which is then done, when he
inquireth first after such as fear God, and be willing to serve him. Paul
makes the service and fear of God the maine ground of true obedience in
servants, Ephesians. 6. 5. 6. 7. Colos. 3. 22. It was the rule of David's choice,
Psalm. 101. 6. He that walks in the perfect way, he shall serve me. Abraham's
chief servant of his house, was a man that feared God, as appears, in that
he made conscience of his oath, Genesis 24. 2. 3. and prayed also for success in
the business whereabout he was sent. Genesis 24. 12. O Lord God of my Master
Abraham, I beseech thee send me good speed this day, and show mercy to my
Master Abraham. Cornelius of Caesarea, the Captain of the Italian band, had a
soldier that daily attended on him, who feared God, and servants also beside
him, to whom he made known the heavenly vision which he saw, Act. 10. 7.

Secondly, To enjoin them labor, and not to require more of them, then their
strength will bear. The master is to rule over the servant in justice. And
then is his commandment unjust, when it will not stand with the course of
nature, with the ability of his servant, or with the word of God. Therefore he
is to require labor at their hands proportionable to their strength, and yield
the^ sometimes intercession and rest. Leuit. 25. 46. Over your brethen the
children of Israel, ye shall not rule over one another with cruelty. 1. Pet.
3. 8. Be pitiful, be courteous, one bear with another. And for the
furtherance of business, it is convenient that the master be oftentimes present
with the servants in their works. Prou. 27. 23. Be diligent to know the state
of thy flock, and take heed to thy herds. The good matron ouerseeth the ways
of her household, Prou. 31. 27. Arist. Oeconom. 7.
A man of Libya being asked, what it was that might make a horse fat; he
answered, The masters eye.

Thirdly, To recompense the diligence and pains of his servant, and that three
ways.

First, by giving him his due of meat and drink for the present. The good
matron gives the portion to her household, and the ordinary to her maids, Prou.
31. 15.

Secondly, by paying him his hire in the end of his service: The labourer is
worthy of his wages. Luke 10. 7. Well done, good servant and faithful; thou
have been faithful in little, I will make thee ruler over much; enter into thy
masters joy. Mat. 25. 21.

Here three caueats are to be observed. I. That the wages be proportionable to
the work. II. That it be paid in due time, without deferring. So the Master of
the vineyard, when even was come, called his servants together, to give the^
their hire, Mat. 20. 8. III. That the servant be not defrauded of any part of
his due. For this is a crying sin; Deuteronomy. 24. 15. Thou shall give him his hire
for his day, neither shall the Sun go down upon it -- lest he cry against
thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee. Iam. 5. 4. Behold, the hire of
the laborers which have reaped your fields, which is kept back by fraud,
cries, and the cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the ears of
the Lord of hosts.

Thirdly, if the servant in time of his service be sick, the masters care must
be by all means possible to procure his recovery. Equity must be the rule in
these cases; and masters are to do to their servants that which is just and
equal. Col. 4. 1. Now the servant happily falls sick by and in his service,
and his health yields not only profit to his master, but encouragement also to
himself. The good Centurion in case of his servants sickness, took the best
course to have him restored, Matthew. 8. 6.

CHAP. 16.
Of the Servant.
THe Servant, is a person in the family subject unto his master.

The duty of a servant is, faithfully and diligently to demean himself in
the affairs of his master, and to do service unto him as unto Christ, though
he be froward and hard-harted. Titus 2. 9. Let servants be subject to their
masters, and please them in all things, not answering again. Ephesians. 6. 5.
Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh,
with fear and trembling, in singlenes of your hearts, as unto Christ. Col. 3.
22. Thus Jacob served Laban, Genesis 31. 38. This twenty years have I bin with
thee; thine ewes and thy goats have not cast their young, and the rams of the
flock have I not eaten, etc.

Contrariwise, the servant must take heed that he do not his masters business
negligently, or for fashion sake, or with eye-seruice as a man-pleaser; that in
case of rebuke or controlement, he answer not again; lastly, that he be
trusty and withhold his hands from picking, and his heart from deceiving his
master.

Servants are of two sorts; either free, or bond-seruants.

A free-seruant is he, whom his master hireth for wages to do him service. To
him belongs the just payment of his hire, and in case of offense, them master
has authority to censure and correct him, provided that in the execution
thereof, respect be had unto his age, and the correction be used with
moderation, as if he were his son.

A bond-seruant, is a servant bought for money, and is commonly called a slave.
Touching this sort, a question is moved, whether a Christian may with safe
conscience, have and use a man as his slave?

Answ. The power and right of having bondmen, in those countries where it is
established by positive laws, may stand with good conscience, if it be used
with moderation. That authority in this behalf is moderate, wherein these
seven caueats be observed.

I. That the master have not over his servant the power of life and death; for
this takes away the lawful power of the Magistrate, to whom only the Lord has
committed the sword of justice.

II. That there be not liberty granted him, to use his servant at his own
will and pleasure in all things; for this was not granted by the law of God to
his own people: Exodus 21. 26. If a man smite his servant or his maid in the
eye, and has perished it, he shall let him go free for his eye: Also if he
smite out his servants or his maids tooth, he shall let him go out free for his
tooth.

III. That the power be not enlarged to the commanding of things against piety
or justice; for in these cases a man must rather obey God then man, Act. 4. 19.

IV. That masters do not take liberty to make separation of those their
servants that be married, the one from the other, or of those that be parents
from their children; considering that God himself has made these societies,
and joined such persons together, and therefore man may not separate them.

V. That the masters do not take liberty to put over their servants to ungodly
and unbelieving masters, for that is an unkind and cruel liberty, and may be
an apparent occasion to make the servant fall away from religion, and renounce
the true God.

VI. That they do not bind them to perpetual slavery, and never make them
free. Exo. 21. 5. But if the servant say thus, I love my master, my wife and my
children, I will not go out free.

VII. That the servitude be not procured and retained by force; for it is a
more grievous crime to spoil a man of his liberty, then of his riches.

Now yt the same power limited with these cautions, is lawful and warrantable
in conscience, it appears by these reasons.

I. God has ordained and allowed it, even by warrant of his own law: The
posterity of Cham was cursed by Noah, and condemned to slavery, Genesis 9. 25.
And he said, Cursed be Cham, a servant of servants shall he be to his brethren.
So were the Gibeonites by Joshua, Ios. 9. 23. Now therefore ye are cursed, and
there shall none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood, and
drawers of water, for the house of my God. So was the thief, Exo. 22. 3. If he
had not wherewith to make restitution, then he should be sold for his theft.
Again, those that are overcome in war may be held captive, and it is lawful for
the conqueror to kill them, and therefore to make them slaves: and if being
taken, they be saved from death, they owe all that they have to them by whom
they are saved.

II. The law of God gave liberty to any man that would, to make sale of
himself to another. Leuit. 25. 45. Of the children of the strangers that are
soiourners among you, of them shall ye buy, and of their families that are with
you, which they begat in your land, these shall be your possession. Deuteronomy. 15.
12. If thy brother an Hebrew sell himself to thee, or an Hebrewesse, and serve
thee six years, eue^ in the seventh year thou shall let him go free from
thee: and verse. 17. Thou shall take an aule, and pierce his ear through
against the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever.

III. The man that is ransommed from his enemy, is bound to serve as a slave
in liew of thankfulness.

IV. The examples of the godly in the Scriptures. Abraham had servants whom he
bought for silver, Genesis 17. 12. Every manchild of eight days old among you,
shall be circumcised in your generations, as well he that is borne in thine
house, as he that is bough with money of any stranger, which is not of thy
seed. Genesis 24. 35. The Lord has blessed my master Abraham wonderfully -- for
he has given him sheep and beeues, and silver and gold, and men-seruants and
maid-seruants, and camels and asses.

V. The Apostles do not disallow of such servants, but command the^ being
servants, and called to the profession of Christianity in that state, not to
change, but to abide in their calling. 1. Cor. 7. 21. Art thou called being a
servant? care not for it.

It is alleged that such servitude is against the law of nature. Ans. It is
indeed against the law of entire nature, as it was before the fall, but against
the law of corrupted nature since the fall, it is not.

But Christ has purchased liberty to belieuers, Coloss. 5. 11. Ans. Only a
spiritual liberty in this life; and a corporal only in the life to come. For
though y^ servant in regard of faith and the inner man be equal to his master,
because in Christ Jesus there is neither master nor servant, bond nor free; yet
in regard of the outward man and civil order amongst men, the master is above
the servant, and the servant is, and must be subject to the master. Theodor*
Orat. 8.
Nevertheless where this kind of servitude is abolished, it is not to be
again received or entertained amongst Christians, specially considering, it is
a far more mild and moderate course to have hired servants.

If it be said again, that the Heathen Philosopher holds servitude to be
natural, whereby some are by birth bond, and others free. I answer, That
servitude proceeds not of nature, Aristot. polit. lib. 1.
but has his original from the laws of nations, and is a consequent of the
fall. For all men by nature are equally and indifferently free, none more or
less then others.

CHAP. 17.
Of the Master of the family or goodman of the house.
THus much touching the diverse and several combinations or couples belonging
to the state Oeconomicall. From which do arise two persons of a mixed or
compounded nature and condition, commonly called the Goodman, and the Goodwife
of ye house.

The good man or master of the family, is a person, in whom rests the
private and proper government of the whole household, and he comes not unto it
by election, as it falls out in other states, but by the ordinance of God,
settled even in the order of nature. The husband indeed naturally bears rule
over the wife; parents over their children, masters over their servants: but
that person who by the providence of God, has ye place of an husband, a
father, a master in his house, the same also by the light of nature, has the
principality and sovereignty therein, and he is Paterfamilias, the father and
chief head of the family: to him therefore the true right and power over all
matters domestical, of right appertains. The duties of the master of the
family, are specially five.

I. To bear the chief stroke, and to be the principal agent, directer and
furtherer of the worship of God within his family. Ios. 24. 15. I and my
household will serve the Lord. And this he does partly by praying for and with
his household, and partly by instructing the^ in the holy Scriptures, and in the
grounds of religion, that they may grow in knowledge and reap benefit by the
public Ministry. Thus God commanded the men of Israel to walk in their
families. Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children,
and shall talk of them, when thou tariest in thine house, -- and when thou
lie down, and when thou risest up. Again, verse. 20. When thy son shall
ask thee, -- what mean these testimonies, and ordinances and laws, which the
Lord our God commanded you? Then thou shall say unto thy son, We were Pharaohs
bondmen in Egypt, but the Lord brought us out of Egypt, with a mighty hand.
This testimony God gave of Abraham before the law was given, Genesis 18. 19. For I
know Abraham that he will command his sons, and his household after him, that
they keep the way of the Lord. And this household of Abraham was very large,
for the holy Ghost says long before, that he had three hundred and eighteen,
[Ethchanicau] suos initiatos.
that were borne and brought up in his house, Genesis 14. 14. It was in likelihood
ye course of Solomon which he had learned of his father David, and given for a
rule to al masters of families. Prou. 4. 1. Hear O children the instruction of
a father, and give ear to learn understanding -- For I was my fathers son,
dear and tender in the sight of my mother, when he taught me and said unto me,
Let thine heart hold fast my words. The company of the Disciples were the
household of Christ, and he himself did administer all parts of the service of
God with them and among them. Luke 22. 15. To this purpose In Joan. tract. 51.
in fine.
Augustine says, That the master of the family, does after a sort, and in his
measure perform the duty of a Churchman, or Bishop within his house.

II. To bring his family to ye Church or Congregation on the Sabbath day, to
look that they do religiously there behave themselves, and after the public
exercises ended, and the Congregation is dismissed, to take account of that
which they have heard, that they may profit in knowledge and obedience. Act.
10. 24. The day after, they entered into Caesarea; Now Cornelius waited for
them, and had called together his kinsmen and special friends. verse. 33. Now
therefore (says Cornelius to Peter) are we all here present before God, to
hear all things that are commanded thee of God. Job 1. 5. And when the days
of their banqueting were gone about, Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up
early in the morning, and offered burnt offerings, etc. 2. King. 4. 23. And he
said, wherefore will thou go to him to day? It is neither new moon nor
Sabbath. For this very cause the fourth Commandment is given first of all and
principally to the master of the family, that he might see the Sabbath kept,
and be a principal doer in all parts of Gods worship therein. Exodus 20. 10. In
it thou shall not do any work, thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
man-seruant, nor thy maid, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy
gates.

Neither is this his care tied only to the Sabbath, but upon other days
besides it, he ought to cause them of his household, as much as in him lies, to
repair to places, where the word of God is preached. Commendable was the
practice of Marie the sister of Martha, in this case, who when Christ came to
her house is said, to sit at his feet and attend unto his preaching, Luk 10.
39.

III. To provide for his family meat, drink and clothing, and that they may
live a quiet and peaceable life, 1. Tim. 5. 8. Pro. 27. 26. The lambs are for
thy clothing, and the goats for the price of thy field. v. 27.

And let the milk of thy goats be sufficient for thy food, for the food of thy
family, and for the sustenance of thy maids. 1. Cor. 9. 9. Thou shall not
muzzle the mouth of the ox, that treads out the corn: does God care for
oxen? either says he it not altogether for our sakes? Matthew. 13. 52. Every
scribe which is taught unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto an householder,
that brings forth out of his treasury, things both new and old.

IV. To keep order, and to exercise discipline in his house, and that in this
manner:

In case of offense, when a capital crime is committed, which incurreth
public censure; he is not to punish it himself, but to bring the offender to
the civil Magistrate, to inform of his fault, that he may have his desert: It
was a course established by the Judicial law, which God gave unto Moses for his
direction in causes criminal among the Israelites: Deuteronomy. 21. 18. 19. 20. If
any man has a son that is stubborn, and disobedient, which will not hearken
unto the voice of his father, nor the voice of his mother, and they have
chastened him; then shall his father and his mother take him, and bring him out,
unto the Elders of his city, and unto the gate of the place where he dwells,
and shall say unto the Elders of his city; This our son is stubborn, and
disobedient, and he will not obey our admonition: he is a rioter, and a
drunkard. Again, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. If thy brother the son of thy mother, or thine
own son, or thy daughter, or the wife that lies in thy bosom, or thy friend
which is as thine own soul, entise thee secretly saying, Let us go and serve
other gods (which thou have not known, thou, I say, nor thy fathers) thou shall
not consent unto him, nor hear, neither shall thine eye pity, nor show mercy,
nor keep him secret. Zach. 13. 3. And when any shall yet prophecy, his father
and his mother that begat him shall say unto him, Thou shall not live: for
thou speak lies in the name of the Lord: and his father, and his mother that
begat him, shall thrust him thorough when he prophesies.

If the fault be of an inferior nature, and lesser in comparison; the master
of the family ought to proceed by private censure upon the delinquent party,
sometimes by admonition, otherwhiles by correction, and chastisement, according
to the quality of the offense, and the condition and state of the person.
Leuit. 19. 17. Thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer him to
sin. Mat. 1^. 15. If thy brother sin against thee, go and tell him his fault
between him and thee alone: If he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or
two. Prou. 29. 17. Correct thy son, and he will give thee rest, and will give
pleasures to thy soul.

When admonitions and corrections will not prevail, the party must be
brought before the Ministers, and Governors of the Church, that they may
censure him. Matthew. 18. 17. If he will not hear them, tell it unto the Church.
And the Apostle James gives order that the Ministers of the Church should come
to those that are sick, and pray for them, James 5. 14. which if they do in
case of infirmity; then they are also to be sought unto, in case of error and
offense committed, for redress.

But when none of all these means will do good; if the party be a servant,
his master may, and ought to remove him. Psalm. 101. 7. There shall no
deceitful person dwell within mine house; he that tells lies shall not
remain in my sight. Ioh. 8. 35. The servant abides not in the house for ever.

V. To give intertainment to those that are strangers, and not of the family,
if they be Christians, and Belieuers; but specially to the Ministers of the
Word. Romans 12. 13. Giving your selves to hospitality. Hebr. 13. 2. Be not
forgetful to lodge strangers: for hereby some have received Angels into their
houses unawares. This duty the woman of Shunem and her husband performed unto
the Prophet Elisha, 2. King. 4. 10. Let us make him a little chamber, I pray
thee, with walls, and let us set him a bed there, and a table, and a stool,
and a candlestick, that he may turn in hither, when he comes to us. These
are the duties.

Here if it be demanded, whether the master of a family is always, and
necessarily bound in his own person to do all these things?

I answer, that if there be just and necessary cause, either in respect of
his own inabilitie, or in regard of public employment, upon a lawful
calling, whereby he is hindered, so as he cannot do any of them himself, at
some times; it is lawful for him to have, and use a deputy. This our Savior
Christ teaches in effect, when he says, Who then is a faithful servant, and
wise, whom his master has made ruler over his household, to give them meat in
season? Mat. 24. 25. Thus Abraham had a steward of his house, Eliezer of
Damascus, Genesis 15. 2. and he performed the waightiest matters, that concerned
the establishment, and continuance of Family, not by himself, but by his
Steward, as namely the choice of a wife for his son Isaak, Genesis 24. 2.
Therefore Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, which had the rule
over all that he had; Put now thine hand under my thigh, etc. Thus Pharaoh
King of Egypt had Joseph, Genesis 39. 4. So Joseph found favor in his sight, and
served him, and he made him ruler of his house, and put all that he had in his
hands.

CHAP. 18.
Of the Mistress of the family, or Goodwife of the house.
THe Goodwife or Mistress of the house, is a person which yields help and
assistance in government to the Master of the family. For he is, as it were,
the prince and chiece ruler; she is the associate, not only in office and
authority, but also in advise, and counsel unto him. 1. King. 17. 17. And
after these things, the son of the woman, which was wife, or [Bagnalath
babbaijth.] Domina domus.
mistress of the house, was sick.

Her duty is twofold.

First to govern the house, as much as concerns her, in her place. 1. Tim.
5. 14. I will therefore that the younger women marry, and govern the house.
And that she does three ways. I. By exercising her self in some profitable
employments, for the good of her charge, Prou. 31. 13. She seeks wool, and
flax, and labors cheerfully with her hands. II. By appointing her maids
their work, and ouerseeing them therein. Verse. 15. She rises whiles it is yet
night, and gives the portion to her household, and the ordinary to her maids.
III. By ordering her children and servants in wisdom; partly by instruction,
partly by admonition, when there is need. Verse. 26. She opens her mouth with
wisdom, and the law of grace is in her tongue. verse. 28. Her children rise up,
and call her blessed, etc. Tit. 2. 5. That they be discreet, chaste, keeping at
home, etc. Act. 18. 26. Priscilla in her house, with Aquila, instructed
Apollos, in that wherein he was wanting, expounding unto him the way of God more
perfectly. Gregory Nazianzen in an Oration made for his father, says, That
his mother was not only an helper, but also a teacher or instructor, and guide
unto his father in matters of religion and godliness.

The second duty is, to give the portion of food unto her family, or cause it
to be given in due season. Prou. 31. 15. She rises whiles it is yet night, and
gives the portion, or meat to her household. Thus did Rebekah in her house.
Genesis 27. 9. Get thee now to the flock, and bring me thence two good kids of the
goats, that I may make pleasant meat of the^ for thy father, such as he loves.

Quest. Whether may the goodwife, without the consent of the goodman, give and
bestow the goods belonging to the family?

Ans. I. There are some things which are proper to her self, and not part of
her dowry which she brought unto her husband. And these she may claim as her
own, because either they were reserved upon the match made between them, or
else are peculiar unto her by their mutual consent, and of them she may
lawfully give, without her husbands knowledge. II. The goods which are common
to them both, are of another nature; and these she may not bestow, without his
allowance, either express or at least general and implicit, specially when
the giving of them does or may grow in likelihood, to the hinderance, and
prejudice of the state of the family.

FINIS.

