TWO TWINS: OR Two parts of one portion of SCRIPTVRE.

I. Is of Catechizing. II. Of the Ministers maintenance.
BY RICHARD BARNARD, Preacher of the Word at Worsop in Nottinghamshire.

1 PETER 5. 2. Feed the Flock of God, which depends upon you. 1 CORINTHIANS. 9.
11. If we sow unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap
your carnal things? LONDON: Printed for George Norton, and are to be sold at
his shop near Temple-barre. 1613.

TO HIS RIGHT Worthy, much-beloued, and singularly approved good friend,
Master James Risley, all prosperous welfare tending to eternal safe^^e.
SIR: I cannot but often think of your singular good respect toward me, in
whom, as now it appears, long acquaintance in true love has bred a constant
readiness to do me good, not only when I am present with you (as if you were,
as many be, a friend to the face, without sound affection fixed in the heart)
but also in my absence, and that a far off, when I supposed (which was mine
error) my self least in your thoughts, and therefore far enough from
expecting so great kindenesses as I have now received at your hands.

Surely, SIR, as I acknowledge that you have sufficiently witnessed on your
part, beyond my expectation, a mind fully bent to procure my welfare, so I
pray you out of this your true love, to judge me ready on my part to requite,
if I were able to recompense so great kindenesses, unto the full: but I am
indebted beyond mine hability to pay; your satisfaction therefore from me is
only my good will, and your own friendly acceptance of a thankful heart; a
true token and sure testimony whereof be this my late and last labor, which I
bequeath unto you, till there be more fit means of recompencing your far
better deseruings. In the mean space let it stand for a witness of my
thankfulness, which I have ever desired to show unto all, for every little
favor received of any friendly well-willer.

This my labor, in part concerns the Laity, wherein you may, in your place,
occasionally, be a very good instrument all means to further my intendment,
for the maintenance of the Ministry. In part also it touches many of us of
the Clergy, in our too much neglected duty of Catechizing; the Antiquity,
vtility, and right form whereof is here set down; the godly consideration of
which I humbly recommend to my Reverend brethren of the Ministry in these
parts; to whose wise and indicious censure I submit this my best endeavor in
this point, craving for it their friendly interpretation, and for my self
their favorable countenance, which I much desire, and which, if I may obtain,
I will account, as an addition of Gods blessing to my Lords most honorable
favors; and as you, one well known and approved, shall be the instrument to
effect it, so will I value it, as a part of high price in your unfeigned love
toward me.

Thus thankfully remembering my self, I commend my labor and my self to your
friendly and kind acceptance, remaining

Yours (...) much beholden Richard Barnard.
From Worsop in Nottinghamshire. Sept. 24.
THE FIRST PART. Of Catechizing.
GALAT. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the word, make him that has taught him
partaker of all his goods.
THe APOSTLE having before Coherence.
spoken of Charity, Love, and tender affection of one toward another more
generally, here he calls to their remembrance the care of the Ministry,
which may seem here by them, as now, to be too much neglected. The text is an
Apostilicall Canon and divine constitution, authorized with the authority of
God himself for reformation of the same.

The words are an Exhortation or a Charge given The title and Scope of the
Text.
by the Apostle in the name of the Almighty, the just revenger of all wrongs
done to his servants, who speak in his name, unto all that know and have
learned Christ, to maintain his Ministers. By this commandment the Hearers
are bound to care for their Teachers: by this the Pastors have knowledge of
their right and liberty to take of the people for their maintenance, and a
warrant to claim the same, and to urge the negligent to their duty herein, if
they fail of it.

This portion of Scripture contains two things, as The parts.
the parts to be considered: the first concerns, the party to be maintained,
enfolded within the Text, who is set out unto us in two things, 1. by teaching.
2. by the matter which he teaches. The second part concerns the party
maintaining the Minister, which is plainly laid forth in the words: in which
we may observe these two circumstances: First, the party exhorted: Secondly,
the duty which he is exhorted unto.

Now though this place speaks* plainly of the Prevention of an objection.
Hearers duty ^^ely, and but implicitly of the Ministers duty, yet because
the peoples knowledge of the labor and painfulness of the calling of the
Ministry, and of that equity, that laborers are worthy of their wages, may
induce them to a more ready performance of their duty; as also for that this
Preached at Southvvell in Nottinghamshire, by the appointment of the most
Reverend Father the Lord Archbishop of York, our worthy Metropolitan and much
beloved Diocesan. (...). verbum docenti vel in verbo Catechizanti. Oecumenius
^eza.
Text was given me once, by one of principal authority in the Church, to
urge my brethren of the Ministry, publicly assembled, to the duty of
Catechizing, I thought it not amiss, to speak first of our selves, and our
duty, that I might more freely press our Hearers to their duty: if we go
before, it is the more likely that they will follow after.

That which touches the Ministers in this Text, is in these words, Him that
has taught him in the word: The word translated taught, signifies him that is
Catechized properly, but yet is used and taken more generally for to teach or
instruct otherwise, Luke 1. 4. Act. 18. 25. Romans 2. 18. 1 Cor. 14. 19. and so
must it be here taken, as Divines hold, and therefore is translated, as we see
both in Latin and English, by a more general word of all translatours. The
holy Ghost uses the more special word for the general, partly to show unto
us of the Ministry, orderly teaching for the peoples edification, where we
are to begin with them; partly, perhaps both to prevent a proud conceit in some
Ministers which may think that they only are to be respected which do
Preach, as now Preaching goes with men; as also the peoples contempt of
Catechizing, and Catechizers, as if these deserved not any liberal portion;
but other persons only more excellently gifted, such as can speak, for tongue
with a plaudite, for great reading with admiration, for wit with singular
delight, and for learning beyond the Hearers common apprehension, in comparison
of whom, Caeteri, non dico, poetae, sed very prophetae sordent; while Hearers
do measure all by hearing, and not by reformation of the heart: who harken
after the tune of the tongue and labor of the lips, but not how men may be
drawn to sanctification in their lives: this is it which here the holy Ghost
preuents, by setting them to Catechizing, without which indeed the people
profit little.

Catechizing is not only, and alone, the duty of a Minister, but also other
ways of instructing and teaching. He is not only to (...), Matthew. 28. 20. as
Christ Jesus and his Apostles, our perfect examples, have done before us. Acts
20.
them up, as well as to lay a foundation; also as some need Milk, so others
strong meat: he is one that must bring forth of his treasury, both new and
old, variety of matter fitting the Auditorie, for their increase of the
knowledge of Gods will, in all wisdom and spiritual Col. 1. Heb. 5. 1 Cor.
3. 2 P^t. 3. 18.
understanding. carnal, dull of hearing, 1 Cor. 3. Heb. 5.
Babes, ^nexpert in the word of righteousness, as the Apostle says, (...),
op^^s habenteslacte, and non solido cibo, which stand in need only of Milk,
but also to give strong, meat to them that are o^ age, Paul went on with the
people, as appears by his writings, and the places quoted. Much may be said
to this purpose, but my meaning is not to stand upon the word here in the
largest acception, but according to the proper signification and special use
thereof, the doctrine or position from which, is this:

That it is a part of the Ministers duty to Catechize his people: Catechiser,
and maintenance is here allowed for that work of his Ministry from this
place: other Scriptures confirm also the same, 1 Cor. 14. 19. Romans 2. 18. Heb,
5. and 6, 1. What need reasons to persuade to acknowledge this a Reason.
duty? Know we not that every wise Teacher has his principles of his Art,
which he first delivers? Children are first to have Milk before strong
meat. But to make this point fully manifest, let us see what Catechizing is;
for this proved, will afford sufficient reasons for this truth.

Catechizing is a divine ordinance, from old time used What Catechizing is.
in Gods Church, as a necessary means, to inform the rud^r sort, summarily,
by questions and answers in the principles of Religion. In this definition we
may observe seven things: 1. the authority of it, in this, that it is said to
be a divine ordinance: 2. the antiquity in these words, from old time: 3. the
necessity of it, being a necessary means: 4. the utility of it, serving to
inform: 5. whom it concerns, what party, ruder sort: 6. the form of it,
delivered by question and answer: 7. the matter of it, the principles of
Religion.

All these points being proved, are as many several sound reasons brought
forth to prove position, or doctrine delivered; which briefly may be brought
into this one. Every necessary means of old time used and appointed by God
for instruction of his people in the ways of salvation, is to be used of every
faithful Minister, as part of his duty; but such a thing is Catechizing, as
shall in the particulars be proved: and therefore to be performed of every
faithful Minister, as part of his duty.

1. I say it is a divine constitution: for it is approved Authority for
Catechizing from God.
by the word, as the former Scriptures show, which is Gods immediate divine
voice and authority: as also by his Church which is Gods mediate voice and
authority, while it agrees with the written word of God. The Scripture
mentions both Catechizing, here Gala. (...)
6. 6. 1 Cor. 14. 19. as also the Catechized, Luke 1. 4. Acts 18. 25. 2 Timothy 3.
15. Romans 2. 18. It is compared to Milk, which the Teacher is to give from the
dugge of Gods Word, as the Apostle did, 1 Cor. 3. Hebr. 6. 1. and Saint Peter
urges such as were Babes 1 Pe^. 2. 2.
to desire it. We see by experience that it is blessed of God to the diligent
Teacher and Learner, that Satan does resist it, man's corruption is against it,
all which do argue it to be of God, and not of man: what is of man, we easily
make much of, but the natural man sauoureth not the things of God.

It has also the Churches authority, even all the Authority from Gods Church.
Churches of God, from time to time, as shall be after showed. Here I intend
only to urge the authority of our Mother, the Church of England, and
considering Gods authority, and hers from God herein, I may say with Solomon,
My Son, hear thy fathers instruction, Proverb. 1. 8.
and forsake not thy Mothers teaching. We have statute law confirming, the
Book of Common Prayer imposing See Rubricke after Confirmation.
it: here God and the King do speak unto us. We have Ecclesiastical
Constitutions in the late Queens days published, and now in the last C^nons,
Anno 1571. Can. 59.
by which Canon the negligent Minister 1. is to be reproved, 2. suspended, 3.
excammunicated; if he reform not himself. Here God and his Church speaks.
We have this established by the high Commission in the Province of Canterbury,
Anno 1576. as also by the same in the Province of York, in Archbishop Edwen^
time, Anno 1583. Here we have the highest Ecclesiastical authority speaking.
Lastly, we have books of Articles from our Ordinaries, in every Diocese, for
inquiry into this; and the Church wardens are urged upon their solemn Oaths
to present the careless neglect hereof. Thus we see the authority divine,
both of God and his Church.

Secondly, I say, it has been a most ancient practice Antiquity of
^atechising.
in the Church from time to time, unto this day. It was in Abraham's time, and
used in his house, Gene. 14. 14. compared with Cha. 18. 19. the Hebrew word
translated, brought up, signifies one entering into Rules or first principles:
which A^ias Montanus translateth expedi^^^ suos initiato^, now initiatus is one
that is a young beginner in principles. Tremel. translateth it by institutos,
and does expound it thus, de religione informatos, and so used, Proverbs 22.
6. It was in the Jewish Church, Romans 2. 18. Catechized out of the Law, and
hereto may be referred perhaps the place of Esaias. 28, 10.

It is noted by some out of the Rabbis, that in Jerusalem were 400, houses for
Catechizing, to which children at certain years of their age were sent. It
was in the days of our Savior, who used it, Catechizing his Disciples, and
other, Matthew. 16. 15. 16. as also in teaching to pray, which is a part of
Catechism. Mat. 6. Luke. 11. The Apostles used it, Hebr. 5. and 6. 1. 1 Cor.
3. 1. 2. and Histories make mention of Catechisers, as an office in the Church,
whereto some were deputed in the primitive age; such a one was Pantenus,
Clemens Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 9. 10. and 6. cap. 2. 4. Con^. Constant. 8. act. 4.
Bracar. 1. can. 35. Laodec. cap. 4. and 46. Agath. cap. 9.
Alexandrinus, Origin: yea, Saint Mark Catechizing in Alexandria, is commended
by Philo Iudaeus. Ancient Councels show this practice of the Church, in which
often mention is made of such as were Catechumenoi. Of this also speak the
Fathers, Clemens Alexand. Epist. 1. ad Iacobum Fra. Saint Cyril writ of
Catechizing. Saint Augustine a book de Catechizandis rudibus, but of these and
many more, read Zipperus his politia Ecclesiastica. What shall I say more of the
Churches of God? Lib. 1. cap. 6. de Catechizatione puerorum. 3. part. decret.
4. did. de consecrat. cap. 158. Sec. 8. lib. 1. de institu. Clerico.
the very enemies of true religion commend this course of teaching: see Pope
Nicolas his decree, and how also the Council of Trent has taken order for
Catechizing Sundays and Holy Days. Rabanus does commend Catechizing, yea, the
Papists confess, that the ground, which we have gotten of them, is by
Catechizing, in the Popes Bull, before the Catechilme of the Counsel of Trent.
Lastly, that with their Churches power, they may also make some shadow, at
least, of princely authority, even in this point, Canisius Catechism must
come forth, with the authority of the Emperor Ferdenande, and Philip King of
Spain. And thus much for the antiquity of Catechizing, with the continuance
of it, at least in judgment of all sorts, though not in practice, through the
Ministers neglect, and peoples light regard thereof.

Thirdly, I say, it is a necessary means; for that it is Necessity of
Catechizing.
the doctrine of the principles of Christianity, no Art can be learned without
his Principles; we are first babes in Christ, therefore need Milk before
strong meat: can a house be well built without a foundation? without this the
preaching of the word profits them little: what is it to exhort men to Faith,
Love, Repentance, and so forth, when they know not, indeed, what these words
mean.

Boda mentions one returning out of England to Hist. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Aidanus in Scotland, complaining that the people profited little by his
preaching; to whom Aidanus answered, that it was perhaps, because he did not,
after the Apostle, give Milk first: thereby showing, that preaching does
little good without Catechizing: therefore is it necessary, that men may profit
by preaching. Lastly, the knowledge of the Principles is a notable means to
preserve in men the purity of doctrine. Hereby they shall be grounded in the
truth, be able to judge of true and false doctrine, and not easily carried
about with every wind of doctrine, as the profane and ignorant multitude be,
who easily turn as the weather-Cocke with the vvinde, for that they have not
learned any certain grounds whereon to rest.

Fourthly, I say it is very profitable: for it does inform V^ilitie of
Catechizing.
judgment in the common principles of our faith; by which the truth may be
tried: Adversaries opposed, and strongly consuted. If the people were well
Catechized, how easily might they see their own foolish superstitions, and
Popish Idolatries, which yet many savor, through the ignorance that is in
them? The Apostle shows, that by being Catechized, they Romans 2. 18.
learn to discern things that differ: yea hence arises these excellent
fruits; grounded knowledge in the fundamental points of religion begets
right faith, and preserues it from error and heresy, setleth judgment
without inconstancy, satisfies conscience without scrupulositie: breeds
zeal, and brings forth devotion, and yet without schism or superstition,
turning neither to the right hand nor to the left; for by their grounds they
know how they stand, how they go forward, whither they incline too much to a
side, or do set sure footing in the right and ancient path of true peace. The
exercise of Catechizing will much profit our selves of the Ministry; it is as
a hedge as one says, Rubbius.
to general doctrines, and the touchstone to try them: Catechism, Common
places, interpretation of Scripture, Four general heads of study in Divinity.
and Controversies, are the four common and general parts of the study of
Divinity, but the first is Catechism: without the last we cannot well
dispute with an adversary, without the third we pass as a ship upon the sea
without a Rudder, or as a way faring man without a right guide; without the
second we cannot learn well to distinguish, and without this first we know
not what we hold certainly. Thus we see briefly how profitable it is; both
to Pastors and people.

Fifthly, I noted who they be that are to be catechized, Pa^ties to be
Catechized.
to wit, the ruder sort. There be two sorts of persons, which the Minister is
to instruct: the first are called Babes, such as be inexpert, dull of hearing,
carnal and Heb. 5. 1 Cor. 3.
not spiritual, which cannot bear strong meat, these need Milk and are to
be catechized, whither they be young or old persons. The second sort are such as
be counted strong men, being spiritual, having their wits 1 Cor. 3.
exercised, who can discern of things that differ, and between good and
evil, not only in morallitie, but in Heb. 5.
Evangelical truth; such have by long custom an habit of knowledge and
sincere judgment, and are able to bear strong meat. The first sort St.
Cyprian calls Epi. 13. 14.
Audientes; Tertullian terms them Nou^^^olos, St. Augustine, Competentes:
which are of two sorts; one of years, out of the Church, of which was
Theophilus, the Luke 1. 4. Act. 8. and 16.
Eunuch, the Jailer, so one Heron a man, and Rha^ a woman, of whom Eusebius
makes mention; these were Hist. Eccl. lib. 6. cap. 3. and 7.
catechized before they were admitted to baptism: and of catechizing such as
were out of the Church, Aegesippus says, that by virtue thereof, there was
never a Kingdom but received alteration in their heathenish religion within
forty years after Christ, such an excellent means is it to bring men to God.
The other sort of these are they which be now in the Church: which also be of
two sorts, Babes in years, and Babes in knowledge, Babes of two sorts. Heb. 5.
and 6.
though ancient for years: both which stand in great need to be instructed
in their Catechism. Every one is to be taught according to his capacity,
whatsoever years he be of: so did the Apostle deal with them, as we may see
in the Epistle to the HEBREWS. It is lost labor to teach preposte^ously; it
is absurd and foolish to take one of good years, to learn him to read by our
reading to him, and not allow him to learn to know his Letters, because he is
past a child: so vain is our labor in Preaching only to the ancient in
years, and to omit to Catechize them, because they be ancient; it was no
hinderance we see to the Apostle: no more should it be to us. And thus much for
the parties to be Catechized.

Sixthly, The form and manner of Catechizing, is a Form or manner of
Catechizing.
brief delivery of the principles of religion by way of question and answer:
And in this does Preaching and Catechizing differ: Preaching is a dilating upon
some point, bringing it some time into a treatise: but Catechizing is the
contracting of the whole into a sum: Preaching is a large discoursing, upon
some Scripture with the interpretation, Doctrines, exhortations, with
application to all sorts: but Catechizing is a short delivery of the grounds
of religion only to the more ignorant and ruder sort. Preaching is not exacted
to be repeated again (though Saint Chrysostom 4 Hom. ad Heb.
may seem even in this to have tried his negligent hearers:) Catechizing is
exacted to be repeated, a delivery by Catechizing, and a redeliuerie by the
Catechized; and that this ought to be so, the etymon of the word warrants it:
For (...) is to teach, (...), by an Echo, the Teachers voice resounding again,
yet not only the last sillables; but the whole matter: so in Catechizing there
must be a voice and a voice, he that makes the question, and the party
answering.

Thus did our Savior Catechize, asking questions of his Disciples, Math. 16.
13. 15. Luke 2. 46. so did Philip Catechize the Eunuch, Act. 8. 37. yea, the
people are charged to make an Echo again. 1 Pet. 3. 15. So did the Disciples
to our Savior Christ. Mark. 8. 27. 29. And that this is the right and ancient
form of Catechizing, we may judge by all manner of Catechismes published, set
out by questions and answers, both with us in our Church, and in all other
Churches. Which kind of instruction in this manner is much more profitable
than to discourse and dilate upon a point Sermon-wise, which is wast labor to
the Teacher, as experience shows, till the people be thus proceeded with all;
by which the Minister shall discern of either the knowledge or ignorance of
his Parishioners, yea, themselves shall hereby be made to take knowledge of
their blindness, when they shall perceive themselves simple and childish in
answering: this will set the people on work to consider what to answer,
when, in the Ministers teaching alone, they sit as careless and unprofitable
Hearers, as lamentable experience does show. This will discover themselves to
themselves, and prevent their over vveening conceits of their own knowledge:
and if they answer well, hereby they may be commended, and the Minister
comforted in administering to them holy things: yea, this will bring love to the
wise and discreet Teacher, and procure him reverence also among his people, as
the trial has made the matter known to some. In a word, no way shall a
Minister better know his Auditories beginning and growth in knowledge; nor the
people sooner learn to judge aright of their Christian faith and religion,
than by this familiar and plain manner of Catechizing by question and answer.

Seauenthly and lastly, the matter of the Catechism The matter of Catechizing.
is the principles of Religion, or a short abridgement of the holy doctrines of
our Christianity, called by the Heb. 5. 12.
APOSTLE, (...), Elementa princip^^ Sermonum Dei, the ABC of our religion, or
the rudements of the heavenly Oracles of GOD: or (...), prima principia
Sermonis Christi, the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, or the
introduction into Christianisme, which be the points that we call the
Catechism. Four maine points of the Catechism.
The heads whereto all particulars may be drawn, are these four, the
doctrine of Faith, summed into twelve Articles; our duties to God and man,
gathered briefly into two Tables, containing the ten Commandments. The matter
of prayer, collected into six petitions, set down in that pattern of true
prayer, called the Lords Prayer: the doctrine of the Sacraments, the seals of
Gods covenant, which are only these two, Baptism and the Lords Supper. And
thus we see into how few heads the principles of our Religion is summed into,
which abridgements of prayer, and obedience, Warrant for abridgements.
are made by God the Father, and Christ his Son, and the Creed by his Church,
which manner of Epitomizing is warranted in the holy Scriptures very
plentifully.

We see how God brought the Law moral into Matthew. 22. 27. Eccles. 12. 13.
ten words, and Christ the same into two heads, Solomon draws all his Eccles
into a short sum, so the Apostle Saint Paul brought the grounds of
Christianity to a few points. The Scripture is full of short Aphorisms, Heb.
6. 1.
which be summary collections of many things largely handled, see the sum of
religion in Iam. 1. 27. of the Gospel in John 3. 16. the sum of man's duty
in Eccles. 12. 13. the sum of that which shall be done at the last day in 2
Cor. 5. 10. The learned do think, that this form of teaching in so short a
manner, is to be understood in the place of Saint Paul to Timothy, (...),
Expressam forma^, vel exemplar teneto sauorum verborum: 2 Timothy 1. 13.
as if he had said, I have set thee a pattern of wholesome words, for the
manner of delivering thereof, the heads whereof are these two, Faith and
Charity in Christ Jesus. As also in that place to the Romans, Romans 6. 17. and
12. 6.
(...), formam doctrinae, so in an other place, (...), the Analogy or
proportion of Faith, according to which we must teach, secundum mensuram
nostram, after our gift given, holding the rule of the word, the form of
doctrine, and the analogy of Faith. Lastly, this course of teaching, first the
principles of religion, both Greek and Latin Fathers have followed, as Zanchie
witnesses. And thus by Lib de sac. Scrip. in orat. praefix^. page 34.
the full proof of all the particulars, in the definition of Catechizing, I
have given, I hope, sufficient reasons of the position set down, that it is
our duty to Catechize.

Hence therefore follow diverse uses to be made of Manifold uses of the doctrine.
this doctrine to sundry sorts of persons.

First, unto the reverend Fathers, and all Ecclesiastical To Ecclesiastical
Governors.
Officers, set over the Ministers for to ouer-see them, not to see over
Ministers neglecting this so necessary a duty. You are to see us perform
this: you take oaths Motives or inducements to the duty.
of Churchwardens to present this woeful neglect, if thereby the fault be
found out; God forbid you should let so great a neglect in Ministers pass
without censure and control: tithe not, I pray you, Mint and Cummin, and let
pass this most weighty point of the Law of God and our King. Your neglect to
punish will be our neglect of duty; the Canon is very strict, Canon. 59.
it thundreth in sound of words, but if you shall forbear the execution
(which is the life of good Laws) it may be terriculum, sed vix sane nostrum
cu^quam terriculamentum, it will be as a Canon without powder or Bullet,
standing for terror, but never shot off. The end of Synods is to good purpose
in their right use, for preservation of good things well established, and for
reformation of abuses: Oh let not then the end of our meeting be that you
should call, and we answer to our names, crying, here Sir, and there an end;
as if the purpose of Synodes were to know nothing else, but either whither we
had forgot or lost our names, or out run our livings. Sed quid ego edoceam
peritos? pauca Sapi(...), and therefore I proceed to the rest.

Secondly, to Churchwardens, that you present To Churchwardens.
such as continue herein negligent: it is your Oath, great is the benefit which
both you the elder, as also the younger sort, both children and servants shall
reap by Motives.
Catechizing. Care for your souls, cause Archippus to fulfill his Ministry,
rest not with reading alone (tho it be also an ordinance of God) without
interpretation, if you may have it, nor with preaching alone, without
Catechizing, together are they strong means by Gods blessing to bring you to
God.

Thirdly, to Minister, and first to such as do make To Ministers, and first to
such as do Catechize, of which 3. sorts. 1. The diligent. Motives.
conscience of this doing it with diligence and profit to the people: go on
still (my good brethren) you see it is a Divine ordinance, your duty, a
necessary means, much approved, by law established, by the Apostles practiced,
and by Christ himself: go on with the young in years, they need Milk, you
have law to compel them, and to enforce their parents to bring them (yet do
as much by gentle means as you may. Our Savior commanded children to be
brought unto him, and rebuked those, that would have kept them from him: we are
in Christ's steed, command 2 Cor. 5.
children to be brought, and rebuke such as hinder them: Saint Paul went from
house to house to them Acts 20.
in his time: familiar teaching profits much: wins the peoples love to the
truth (as they get knowledge, for ignoti nulla cupido) it emboldeneth them
much, and by your wise carriage, procures to your selves reverence.

Lastly, think how they have souls to save and are the tender lambs of
Christ, which you must feed, as you love the Lord Jesus. In going on with the
babes in years, draw forward yonglings in knowledge, the old babes in years,
as much as lies in you suffer not them to perish for lack of knowledge: win
them by favor, whom you cannot bring perforce: come to them privately, whom
you conveniently cannot deal with publicly. You (brethren) know, that
ignorant minds are a seed plot for the Papists to sow their heresies, to set
in their superstitions and to plant their abominable Idolatries. Win them
therefore to this, plant in them religious grounds, for so you shall beget in
them a love of the Word, a reverent estimation of the Ministry, and a care of
sanctifying of the Sabbath; which three, they almost make no conscience of, but
through profaneness, as Esau, set these things to sale for a mess of
pottage. Consider how without the grounds of Catechism they cannot pray, they
know not what it is, as appears by many, who account the repeating of the
words of the Creed, and ten Commandments to be a prayer. How can they examine
themselves, and prepare themselves to the Lords Supper, being ignorant of the
doctrine of the Sacraments? with what comfort can we admit such persons so
ignorant (though living in the Church) to the Lords Supper, when the Teachers
in the primitive time would admit none but the well instructed unto Baptism?
Saint Hebr. 5. and 6.
Paul Catechized the Ancient, as we have heard: and we have a commandment
in the Book of Common Prayer to admit none to the Sacrament vncatechised,
which have not learned their Catechism. I will not say therefore unto thee (my
brother) which make conscience of this excellent work, Perge in virum, play
the man, but perge precor, in bonum ministrum, perform the part of a man of
God, and a great reward shall be given unto thee. And thus much to the first
sort which do Catechize diligently.

The second sort of such as do this work, are they 2. Sort negligent. Ier.
48. 10. Reproof, with the reasons.
that do it, but as guilty of that curse in Jeremy, Cursed is he that does
the work of the Lord negligently; both in doing, and for the time they leave
it undone: for in Catechizing they do it without care of the peoples,
profiting, only hearing them repeat words, but not examining how they
understand what they do say, so as they are very little better for such
teaching, it is something, as good as nothing, as we may see where only the
people be thus taught. Again this so cursorie a course is but a little before
Easter, and all the year else are they le^t to themselves and never examined:
this childish kind of teaching brings contempt to so holy, so necessary a
work, and the negligent passing it over so long, causes youth and other to
think that it is not so necessary or profitable as indeed it is, in the hands
of a cunning workman.

The third sort of such as catechize, are they which 3. Sort diligent, but not
so profitable as they might be.
take pains, and that diligently, but yet, if I might so speak with their
good favor, without offending, not very profitably. And this is either when
one, two, or half a dozen, or as many as you please, are asked one and the
same Question, when by the first, the rest do learn to answer, though before
they never took care to commit it to memory, and so it remains not with
them, and the negligent only care to give some small contentment for the time;
or when but only one or two, and ever the same, stand forth for all, and
answer to two or three questions only, for that time; upon which the Minister
discourses, as in preaching, which all the rest sit to hear in show, but
whither they do or not, that is no more known to the Minister, then how they
hear and learn his Sermons. I think (brethren) if I might freely speak, it
were far How to profit the people by Catechizing.
better to hear every one how far they can say at the first time, then note
where they leave, and there begin with them the next time, and so on till they
come to the end, all this time hearing them only how well they can say: After
begin again with as many as can say the Catechism through, and examine the
meaning, how they understand what (...) say, never discoursing, but insteade
thereof to turn all into questions, so shall you keep the peoples minds
attentive to you, delight such as understand, with variety of questions, and
make them that are willing, to study how to answer the new question propounded
At the end to dilate, if you please, a little time, some half quarter of an
hour, but not above, for the benefit of the more judicious, it will not do
amiss. It is incredible to tell how this way both profits and greatly
pleases the people, so as both young and old willingly come thereunto, and
very willingly learn: I speak by experience, blessed be God, for evermore,
Amen. And thus much to the Ministers which do Catechize: now to them that
catechize not.



A. Surely so long as we find our people ignorant, as the holy Apostle did,
for, though as concerning time, they ought indeed to be Teachers, yet being
H^b. 5.
ignorant, we must again teach them the principles of the word. It is folly
for a Schole-maister to put his Scholar into the Psalter, that cannot learn
his Criscrosse-row, or into a Latin Author, when as yet he can hardly spell an
English word, though he has been never so long at the school. Moreover,
young ones come into the world and grow up, who must be catechized: therefore
must we continue this course till our parishes cease breeding a new increase,
and the rest be able to bear strong meat: and this is not likely to be whilst
we live, therefore the Church has provided for continuing of catechizing
without any stinting of time: but if any man's lot light in so happy a parish,
he may cease this labor, and account himself more happy than the rest of his
brethren. But now to such as do not catechize, and these be of two sorts.

First, such as do not, because they indeed cannot. Such as do not
Catechize, and these are of two sorts.
My advise to them is, that as they ran before they were sent, so they would
freely come forth before they be called, by Death, or the last judgment, least
GOD Such as would perhaps and cannot.
smite them dead, like Vzzah, for laying their hand upon the Lords A^ke without
any warrant. Woe be unto them, they be blind guides leading the blind, till
they both fall into the ditch, that is, the dungeon of hell, where they shall
perish everlastingly. These be the Canes Esai. 56. 10. 11.
mu^i, and the Speculatores caeci, of whom Esiah speaks Nesciunt docere, non
possunt latrare. But let them look for their reward; hearken how the Lord
calls for vengeance Esai. 56 9.
by the same Prophet, Omnes bestiae agrestes, et ferae siluestres venite ad
deuorandum: All the beasts of the field, and vvild ones in the Forest come and
devour. Cease therefore to do evil, and learn to do well, that the hand of
the Lord come not out against you.

Second sort of such as do not Catechize, are they Such as can Catechize and
will not: To Preach and not Catechize.
that can and will not: and these be also of two sorts, such as will Preach,
but not Catechize: and such as will do neither. For the first, which is also
many Ministers fault yea, learned and worthily gifted, I yet wish them to
consider how aw^kwardly they go to work, they set on a roof, before they lay
the foundation, or rear up the maine posts and stays of the house: they
build castles in the air, they work without foundation, they seem to feed,
but famish indeed their ignorant Hearers; what mother or Nurse will give strong
meat to the sucking child? will they teach to read, without knowledge of the
Letters? would God I might entreat them to proceed with their people, not
according to their own ability in teaching, but the capacity of their
Auditorie in learning. He that takes children to teach, though he be never so
great a Clarke, yet will he descend down to them, weighing their weakness
and not his own vvorthynesse for better employment; for so should he teach
what himself knows, but not what possibly they may understand: by which they
lose time, and he wastes his labor: and thus is it with many Congregations.
The Lord persuade these learned and worthy men to a more pofitable course for
the people, and before God more comfortable to themselves. Our Savior Christ
Ioh. 16. 12.
taught, but as his Disciples were able to learn, not after his skill, but
after their measure of concei^^ing: so 1 Cor. 3.
did the Apostle the Corinthians, who was a most learned Clarke, and able to
speak languages according to the places where he came. It is no disgrace to
Catechize plainly, learned Fathers have done it: it argues love, and desire
in us to have the people to understand us: A mother, speaking unto her little
babes, speaks not, as to the elder in years, but even as a child to
children, unto other, as becomes her to speak, and fit for them to hear: To
the learned speak learnedly, to the simple and ignorant plainly* so shall
both sorts be well fed, and well satisfied.

Some there are which will Preach, and not Catechize, Unprofitable Preachers.
but these presume to Preach only for a credit, and to prevent the name of
dumb Dogs, but, be it spoken with reverence in this place, it is Asinui ad
Lyram, the proverb they have not learned, Ne suitor vltra crepidam: they go
beyond their reach, to the great disgrace of Preaching: they do read a Text,
but fly from it after, as if it had in it the Pestilence: some have many good
words, but almost no matter, as if Preaching were an idle prate, some neither
good words, nor good matter. I speak not this in contempt of any man's gifts,
my self being the meanest of ten thousand: but to advise brotherly, that holy
things be handled reverently, that we divide the word aright (though never so
plainly; so it be to the purpose orderly) to the edification of the people,
and grace of our Ministry: so speaking with authority from the word, that we
need not be ashamed of the work. Though the word be delivered homely, yet if
it be reverently done, and the food wholesome, it is to be well approved of
all humble spirits, and of all such as be religiously disposed. But yet rather
than the time should be spent in unprofitable preaching, I could vvish that
omitted, till better preparation, and the labor bestowed in this course of
Catechizing.

The other sort of them that do not Catechize, are Such as can Catechize and
preach, but will do neither.
they that will neither preach nor catechize, though they can or could have done
both well. Such are not resident upon their Flock, because they be not cord^
cum cura animarum, though corpore, with neglect of duty: for residencie is
thus defined by the Canonists, Residentia est Clerici in Ecclesia beneficium
tenentis, cum voluntate debiti praestandi seruitij praesentia, So that it is
not enough to be present in body among his Parishioners, but that he willingly
perform such service as the Lord requires of him for their edification: and
therefore says one upon that definition, parum esset, praesentiam sui
exhibere, and curam seu seruitium Ecclesiae negligere. This wilful neglect
shows that they love not the Lambs of Christ, that they be without conscience
of their duty, without Christian compassion, which was in Christ toward the
multitude: such people having Math. 9.
such Pastors, are as Sheep without a Shepherd. If the love of God dwell not
in them that have vvorldly riches, to relieve the bodies of the needy, and do
shut up their compassion from them, how dwells it in these who shut up Gods
graces and gifts, and will not relieve the staruing souls of Christ's poor
people? The worldly wealthy may have some excuse, because by giving they
diminish their goods: but these, the more they bestow, the more may they
increase in gifts and graces. How can these men comfort themselves, when they
are charged by the Apostle, before God and his Angels, at the appearing of the
Lord Jesus, to be instant 2 Timothy 4. 1. 2.
in season and out of season; and yet do neglect wilfully Iam 4 17.
so great means of the peoples salvation? Their sin is great, and great
punishment shall be inflicted upon such as know to do well and do it not.

Now (brethren) to you of the Laity; if it be our Use to the people.
duty to Catechize you, it is your part to come to be Catechized, and to
yield your selves to be taught: you I mean, that be yet ignorant of the
principles of religion, Motives.
be not ashamed to know the truth: Godly men are commended in Scripture for
their humility herein, Luke 1. Acts 8. Acts 28. Hebr. 5. 12. 1 Cor. 15. 34.
you have an example in noble Theophilus, in that honorable Eunuch, in
eloquent Apollo^, and the converted Jews, whose grace let us follow: it is no
disgrace to learn, as we see by these, but a shame to us to be ignorant in
the very grounds of our profession.

The Ecclesiastical Histories make mention of the Eus. lib 6. cap. 3. and 7.
Catechized, called Catechumeni: remember you ancient, that you are to be
instructers and Catechisers of Heb. 5. 12. Exodus 12. 26. 27. Deu. 4 9. and 7.
7. Psalm. 78. 3. 4. 5. 67. Prou. 22. 6.
your own families, now how can you do this, and be ignorant of that you
should teach? yea, Fathers must do it, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Ephesians. 6. 4. an example
we have in Abraham, Gene. 17. 12. 13. 14 and 18. 17. 18. 19. in David also,
Proverb. 4. 3 4. 1 King. 2. 1. 3. 4. Mothers must be instructours, Proverb. 18.
example we have in Salomons Mother, Pr^u 31. in Lois and Eunice, 2 Timothy 1. 5.
and 3. 15. Hu^bands must teach their wives, 1 Cor. 14. 35. yea, every one must
admonish and edify another, (...). 18. 17. 1 7 b. s. 11. Hebr. 3. 13. Romans 13.
14. how much more then should Governors of Families have care of their own
households? If these things move you not, consider how many of you have
solem^nly promised, in being Godfathers and Godmothers, to teach other men's
children the Catechism, or see that they be taught it. If this duty were
performed, you should greatly further the public ministry, yea, by your sound
knowledge in the matters of Catechism, Sermons would be better understood of
you, 1 John 4. 1. 1 These. 5. 21. Acts 17. 11. 1 Cor. 11. 2 Cor. 13. 5. 1 Pet.
3. 15.
you would be able to try better the Spirits, to examine your selves, and so be
made fit for the Lords Table, and not rush unto it, as many do to their
condemnation. You should be able easily to answer some adversary, to give an
account of your Faith readily, as you are commanded, if you be well Catechized;
by the ignorance whereof, you cannot be but very unstable in your profession,
building without foundation: you lose the benefit of profitable hearing of
Sermons, you easily yield to bypath, and are turned about with every wind of
doctrine.

But you that are of years perhaps have gathered Answer made to such as
object against Catechizing. Object.
excuses, and think hereby to avoid this duty of learning the Catechism: you
are ashamed to be known to be ignorant: Ah, my brethren, are you more ashamed
of the knowledge of your ignorance, then of ignorance it self? Know this, that
your ignorance shall be known, if you so remain in it, and God will severely
2 These. 1. 7.
punish it, therefore now hide it not, but rather seek to remove it. Know
also, that ignorance is a great sin, and wilful ignorance a heavy
punishment of God for sin.

But that you may not be held back by this shame, consider, that all are first
ignorant before they get knowledge; that it is no cause of shame to learn that
which we do not know. In many earthly matters we can both acknowledge our
ignorance, and yield our selves to learn, why not in heavenly also without
shame? the Apostles were ignorant, and desired to be taught to pray, and many
other things; so other in the Acts 2. 37. and 16.
primitive Church, did confess their ignorance to the Apostles, and the like
did diverse after them to their Successors, whose godly humility we should
follow, for this kind of shame arises of a wretched pride, a sin hateful
to God. Does not the Priests lips preserve Mal. 2. 7.
knowledge, and are not you to seek it at his mouth?



How well they did in that ignorant estate, in their blindness, superstition,
and idolatry, I leave to show, and how they are, only God best knows: yet
howsoever they did, know you, you cannot do well if you neglect instruction,
for you have the means which they had not; their ignorance was of necessity in
those times, but yours is wicked and wilful, and so your condemnation the more
just, except you amend. But why do you stand so much upon your late Popish
forefathers, and neglect your Ancestors before them? shall the gross ignorance
of the latter more harden us in an ill course than the grace of the former in
purer times stir us up unto goodness? let this vanity and vain folly, and
madness indeed, be far from us. When these come into your mind, think
whither it is better to follow them, than our father Abraham, the blessed
Apostles, the holy Saints in their time, and our first forfathers receiving
religion, submitting themselves to be Catechized when they were brought to the
faith of Christ, before Popery took possession of them.



Remember, that old age acquiteth none from judgment, for the man that is an
hundred year old, Esa. 65. 20.
and wicked, is accursed: we may not therefore live wilfully in sin,
because we be old. Old folk, for preservation of bodily life will eat
childrens food, and are you too old to desire the Milk of the Word, for the
souls safety? Again, the older, so much the nearer the grave, and therefore
have the greater cause to learn to prepare for death, by knowing such things
as be most necessary to salvation. Old folk can learn such things as be for
the body, and can give their minds to remember them in cases of need; why not
then heavenly and spiritual knowledge? the cause is, for that indeed, they are
like soulelesse men, not caring at all what may befall them in the life to come.

But to take this excuse away, that old age is past learning, there are and
have been many persons old, which have learned the Catechism: so as all old
persons are not past learning, but such, as indeed, are past grace, and so if
they remain, are past hope of salvation. The ancient in days, and the
multitude of years, should teach wisdom; and shall old age now, not Job 32.
7.
only be full of ignorance, but also a supporter of the same blindness, in
the midst of such clear light, and so great variety of the means to bring
them to this light? God forbid; to whom I leave you, to bring you to a better
mind.

But if you be past learning, then from experience of your former lost time,
and inhabilitie now to learn, think upon such as be young under you, send
them, that they may not follow your steps, and plead ignorance and
vncapablenesse at your years; save yours, if ye cannot use the saving means
for your selves.

for by being restrained of their liberty thus, they are not vvilling to serve
them, and so hardly can either get or keep them.

(Brother:) If this be so; know, it is for want of Catech^sing: for if every
Master would discharge this duty, as they by law and conscience are bound;
whither should such i^religious servants go from the presence of the Lord? But
this is not every where so, good and godly servants will seek to good and
godly places, as for other servants, if thou thy self truly fear God, thou
will as gladly be rid of them as they would be going from thee. Abraham wanted
no servants, though he had care to Catechize them, nor Cornelius, who was a
devout man, fearing God, with all his householde. Use well servants, reward the
well-doers, and thou shall not want such as will serve thee faithfully and
constantly. As for liberty, afford it unto them out of thy own six days of
seven, seasonably and conveniently; and let them not rob the Lord of his
only one day in seven.

Remember, that thy servant should be to thee more precious than a beast; yet
what difference make thou, if not in this matter of religion? thou feedest,
yea, cloathest, give liberty, rest, warm harbor, and dressing to thy
beast, to have the use of him for thy service, and if thou neglect thy servants
soul, do thou any more esteem or make of him, than of thy beast, looking
only to his body, for bodily service? and therefore thou may not neglect
this good of his soul; for who so does, has his servant but as in place of a
reasonable beast, but not as a Christian soul. See then Masters what you do
herein, and you servants, behold such Masters to you as Turks, and your selves
as their beast-like slaves bodily, and Satan's spiritually: but of this, thus
much concerning Catechizing, or teaching, the first thing to be observed in the
person to be maintained* Now follows to show what it is he must teach, and
from what, in these words: In the Word.

By Word, here is meant the holy Scriptures, and more specially the doctrine of
the Gospel, which in the new Testament by an excellency is called the Word,
Acts (...) Acts. 14. 25.
16. 6. which in verse 10. is expounded to be the Gospel, so also used in
other places.

That the doctrine of the Gospel is a word of great excellency: therefore we
see it here by a special manner of speaking to be called the Word, as if there
were no word else besides; Word of the Ma^th. 13. 19. Acts 13 26. and 5. 20.
John 5. 25. 1 Pet. 4. 6. Heb 4. 12.
Kingdom, the Word of Salvation, the Word of Life:

Acts 13. 48.
of the Gospel, to receive it with great gladness, as the Church has done,
glorifying the Word of the Lord. discedite maledicts, Away, depart ye cursed
ones, but this venite benedicts, Oh come ye blessed of the Lord, receive the
kingdom prepared for you; that is the law of bondage; this of liberty:
therein we behold only the Justice of God, and our misery, herein our happy
deliverance, and Gods great unspeakable mercy. Bless the Lord therefore, and
let them be made much of, who bring these glad tidings of great joy unto all
his people, for beautiful are their feet. Esa. 52. 7.


That the Word of God is the matter of the Ministry, for the instruction of
the people: Matthew 28. 20. 2 Timoth. 4. 2. 1 C^rinth, 4. 6. and the example of
Christ, in teaching, John 8. 28. and also his Apostles, Acts 26. 22. Luke 11.
28. Revel. 1. 3.
effectually in all such as are ordained to be saved, and makes blessed such
as believe and obey the same.

1 Timothy 4. 13. Motives. 2 Pet. 1. Acts 26. 18.
and give attendance to the reading of them, to exhortation and doctrine out of
them: for it only is a sure Word, it conuerteth the Soul, turning man from
darkness to light, from Satan unto God, and a word 1 Cor. 14.
mighty in operation to discover man unto himself, to make him throw down
himself, and cast down every 2 Cor. 10.
imagination and high thought exalted against GOD, and to bring them into
obedience. It makes us wise, 2 Timothy 3.
and perfect to every good work, and it is sufficient for instruction,
correction, confutation and doctrine; and this only is it,

This justly condemns those of a fault, who being Ministers, yet study least
the Scriptures, as if they were too shallow for their deep wits, and too
vulgarly known for them to bestow their studies in, and therefore delight
neither in reading, nor teaching what they say, but what man says, but as
these seek themselves, so they loose the Lord, and authority in the hearts of
his people; videant ipsi, they have their reward.

The position or doctrine being true, it also condemns the practice of our
adversaries, who feed their auditories with vain Philosophy, lying Legends,
Poetical fictions, dreams, and Sophistical and School quidities, Popish
decrees, and humane Constitutions, which is to infect and poison the people
with falsehoods, errors, superstition and Idol service, fit for that
Antichrist, and not to feed the flock of Christ with wholesome doctrine, which
these little regard, and so all such as delight only to tickle the ear, to
get to themselves a praise of humane eloquence, or to deliver sayings here and
there, and every where, except the sayings of Christ, his Prophets and
Apostles, Apocrypha before, and more often then the Canon of Scripture. Which I
speak not any way to derogate from the just praises of learning and eloquence:
they are Gods excellent gifts to be honored and commended; for the Ministry
necessary, and in the Preaching of the word to be used, so it be in spiritual
wisdom, and in that holy grace of humility, for the Churches edification,
and not our own praise, so in some cases, before some kind of auditory, in
handling of some matter, to use Philosophy, testimonies humane is not
unlawful, as the learned show, and elsewhere my self In the faithful
Shepherd.
have published, which I note, lest here I be mistaken. And thus much for the
first part of my Text concerning us of the Ministry.

THE SECOND PART. Of the Ministers maintenance.
NOw follows the second part, which Second part of the Text.
concerns the people, who are to maintain the Ministry, wherein were
observed two circumstances: first, the party exhorted: secondly, the duty to
be performed.

For the first, the person exhorted to maintain the MINISTER, is every one,
without any exception, that is taught in the word: the (...), is properly meant
of such a one as is instructed by word of mouth in the Christian faith, before
he be Baptized, which was the Churches custom, when persons of years were
converted to the Christian religion: but here it is taken for all hearers, such
as be in their Catechism, and such as be more expert in the word, whither they
be instructed publicly or privately of their Pastors and Ministers: so the
word is used, as well for those in the Church, as for those that are to be
admitted into the Church, Romans 2. 18. Where the Apostle calls a Teacher of
the law, (...). And therefore here it is, as if the Apostle had said, you
Galatians, which have Teachers instructing you, giving either to the weaker
Milk, or to other strong meat, you, so taught, are to maintain them for that
their office and Ministry. That the learner is to maintain his Teacher, the
Catechized the Catechiser, the Parishioner his Pastor, the Hearer of what
degree soever his Instructour. Cor. 9.

Four principal duties people owe to their Teachers.
There be four principal duties which you the people are to perform to
their Pastors, and Ministers; the first is to hear them, which all but
Atheists and Papists will do, vain Sectaries, idle-headed Schismatickes, and
such also among us, which be in love with their sins, and so cannot away to
hear them spoken against. The second is to reverence their Persons, receiving
them as Christ's Ambassadors; which the truly converted will do, but the
proud and profane will not. The third is to obey them, and submit your selves
unto them, in the Lord; which only those refuse, who cannot away to be
restrained from their liberty of sining. The fourth is to love and to allow
them maintenance, which the covetous worldling cannot away to hear of.

But to move you, let these reasons prevail with you. Pastors are spiritual
parents, who beget men unto Motives. 1 Cor. 4. 15. Phil. Verse. 19. People must
maintain their Pastors. Deuteronomy. 25. 4.
God, who therefore do owe themselves unto them, as children unto Parents. It
is the Law of Nations, and a common equity, that such as labor for the common
good of all, should be maintained by them all: this man yields to the
laboring Ox, and the law so provided. It is a charge laid upon you by Gods
Law, Deuteronomy 12. 19. 1 Timothy 5. 17. and this is grounded upon the former common
equity, verse 18. Every trade and calling is able to maintain them, that
honestly with diligence labor therein. And is the Ministry so base, as that
it should set the Ministers on begging, which attend upon it? He that goes on
vvarrefare lives not on his own cost, the labourer has his hyre, the
Shepherd feeds of the Milk of the flock: Now, Ministers are watchmen,
laborers in the Lords Vineyard, and Shepherds set over their flocks, and
therefore are to eat of the fruit of the Vines, and to receive maintenance
from their flocks, over which the Lord has set them.

Ministers are to give themselves studiously to their 2 Timothy 2. 4.
ministry, and not to be entangled with the cares of this world: therefore
must others care for them, to prevent 1 Cor. 9. 14.
their cares. The Lord has set this down, that he which preaches the
Gospel should live of the Gospel. Is a messenger of salvation, of glad
tidings of peace, less to be regarded then the Ministers of the Law and death,
who were well and very liberally provided for among the people of God under the
Law? See then (my brethren) that Nature, common equity, and the word of God
does bind you to provide for, and to maintain your Ministers, by whom you are
taught in the word: and thus much for the person which is to maintain the
Minister, even every one, higher or lower, richer or in some meaner estate, are
to join together herein.

The second circumstance is that whereunto this party is exhorted, and that is
to make his Teacher (...)ker of or in all his goods. Whence we may observe this
Doctrine: That maintenance is allowed by the Lord or the Ministry of the
Gospel, and Preaching of the word: this is proved in, 1 Cor 9. 14. 1 Timothy 5.
17. Proof. Ephesians. 4. 2 Cor. 5. Reason. Use.
Math. 10. 10. Because it is a calling ordained of God, and Ministers are his
messengers and servants, and the labor of the Ministry is worthy of wages,
and a work deserving a great reward. Acknowledge therefore this truth. For if
you will confess maintenance due, you will then bethink your selves
peradventure how you may give them maintenance. For he that grants
maintenance, must also afford maintenance, as his judgment is informed for the
one, so his conscience should prick him forward to the other, but I take this
as agreed upon on all hands, (except any be possessed with an Anabaptisticall
spirit, denying any need of the office of a public Teacher) that it is fit
that the Minister of CHRIST be maintained; but the doubt is of the manner, and
of the means.

That this doubt may be removed, and your minds settled, if indeed you dally
not with GOD and your own consciences herein, three things will I prove unto
Three points handled concerning the maintenance of Ministers. Doct. Proof. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Ministers ought liberally to be maintained.
you: first, that this maintenance must be liberal: secondly certain, and
thirdly, that the best means is, to be maintained by Tithes.

The painful Preachers of the Gospel are liberally to be maintained, this is
a part of their double honor; in beggarly maintenance is no honor, but base
contempt; here in this Text the Apostle wills their Hearers to make them
partakers of all their goods, this is a large allowance. The Ministry of the
Gospel is more excellent than the Ministry of the Law, and therefore if the
Lord judged them worthy of a very great allowance for their labor in their
service for the Tabernacle, how much greater now are the Ministers of the
Gospel worthy of? But see how liberal The Lords liberal allowance to
maintain the Levites.
the Lord was to the Priests and Levites. The whole Land of promise, was but
as a fourth part to all England in compass, yet did the Lord allow for their
maintenance, and their families.

First, forty eight Cities with the Suburbs, to dwell Number. 35. 4. 5. 7.
in, that their families after their death might not be exposed to the cruel
world and merciless minds of men, to seek harbor and homesteedes.

Secondly, they had tithes of all things, of Corn, Leu. 27. 30. 32.
Fruit, Catle, Sheep, etc: even tithes of all, as Jacob vowed. Genesis 28. 22.

Thirdly, the first borne of Man and Beast was theirs, Exodus 34. 19. 20.
as appears by many places.

Fourthly, all the first fruits were due unto them. Ezec. 44. 30. N^he. 10.
36. Number. 18. 15. 16.
Number. 18. 13. Deuteronomy. 18. 4. Ezec. 44. 30. Neh. 10. 35. 37.

Fifthly, all oblations and vows whatsoever was dedicated to God, and separated
from a common use. Number. 18. 8. 14. 19. Ezec. 44. 29. 30.

Sixthly, sin Offerings, heave Offerings, shake Offerings, and the Shewbread.
Number. 18. 9. 11. Ezec. 44. 29. Leuit. 24. 9.

Seventhly, of the sacrifice of thanksgiving, they had the breast and the
shoulder, of other, the shoulder the two cheeks and maw: and of burnt
offerings the skin. Numb. 18. 18. Leu^ 7. 31. 32. 34.

Eighthly, they reaped benefit by the yearly appearing of the Males, Exodus 23.
15. and 34. 20. and by other occasions, Leu. 5. 15. 16.

If therefore we account double honor, partaking of all your goods, and this
the Lords bounty to the Levites liberal maintenance, then are we now
liberally to be maintained. For the Ministry of the Gospel, is as worthy of
it, as the Ministry of the law, Ministers are to be liberal, and plentiful
in good works, how can they do this, if they be not liberally maintained? It
is also not a little means to procure to them that reverence which is due to
them, and so to prevent contempt.

Michaes wages, perhaps ten shekels of Silver, Judge. 17.
a suite of apparel, and meat, and drink, and bless themselves for their
bounty, if any of these come to twenty nobles, ten, or twenty pounds, as
peradventure they will in some cases ( viz. that by such a pittance they may
possess many hundreds of pounds, as some do,) Oh how bountiful Latrones, I
should say Patrons, be they? for why? they and the like do judge out of their
charitable piety, twenty pounds a sufficient allowance. And it may be so; to
such base fellows perhaps as they present, who are almost altogether
unlearned, unfit for the Ministry, and who never knew how otherwise they could
get ten pounds without great bodily pains; no marvel, that such can be
willing to take twenty pounds yearly for a Parsonage worth fifteen score:
horrible Symonie, ex^crable The Parson and a Cheuerill conscience has met
together most worthy a Plum-tree.
Sacrilege! The Canker-worme of Gods heavy curse seize upon such possessed
prays, and eat up their substance, til they cease to do so wickedly. But
(Churchrobber) tell me, if the Incumbent be learned, and a painful godly
Teacher, is this thy allowance sufficient? I demand why then thou art so
greedy, so immeasureably gaping for more? parhaps thou have two hundred, five
hundred, or a thousand pounds by year of thine own lands and leases, a full
temporal estate (if there were in the contentment humility, and frugality,
and that thou were not either wretchedly covetous, arrogantly proud and of
hauty Spirit, or profuse and lavish in Gods blessings) and yet will thou live
of Sacrilege? The Lord judge between thee and his Ministers. Is twenty,
forty, fifty pounds, a sufficiency for Ministers of good desert, whom God
accounts worthy of double honor, and commands liberally to be rewarded,
and can nothing be sufficient for you (you wicked worldlings) but that you will
needs rob God of his right, and his Ministers of their due maintenance? Is it
his Ministry, or his person in the Ministry, which you so meanly esteem
of, that you can afford him no better respect? Surely his work is 1 Timothy 5.
a worthy work, though a profane Esau account it of no value, not worth a
mease of pottage: and for that very work sake double honor is to be given to
his person.

What Pride then possesses your hearts? is your understandings darkened? and
has the God of this world so blinded your eyes, that Gods Ministers can merit
at your hands no more, or the very best very little more (if you might have
your wills) for their sufficient maintenance, and yet you judge your selves
worthy of all that which you any way can come by, either in the Church or
Commonwealth? in former times Proverb. 3. 9.
God was to be honored with the chiese of the peoples increase and riches, and
may almost any thing now serve the turn? before times the Ministry was many
ways maintained, and had a tenth part besides, and is now nothing but a tenth
left somewhere, and instead of that tenth, scarce the hundredth part of the
Parsonage remaining to the poor incumbent? Shall we commend the law for so
well providing? or shall we condemn the Gospel? God forbid: let men's wicked
covetousness be condemned, and the persons so infected be justly censured. It
was before destruction to devour up that, which was set apart for Gods
service; Prou. 20. 25.
and think you, that no plagues, no punishments, shall be poured out from God
now upon Sacriledgious Church-robbers? Shall our fathers give liberally, and
shall we take away? they gave of their own, so do not you, neither will you
suffer (which is a greater iniquity) the Ministers of Christ to enjoy the free
gift of other men. Well, go on; buy, purchase, and possess unjustly; yet know
your sin, least a perpetual consumption come upon your substance. Surely,
upon Romans 2. 8. 9.
the unrighteous shall be indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, and
upon the wicked will the Lord rain snares, fire and brimstone, stormy
tempest, and Psalm. 11. 6.
this shall be their portion to drink. And thus much for the first point, that
a Minister is liberally to be maintained: the second follows.

It is most meet that a Ministers maintenance be as well certain, as
competent. So the Lord did ordain under the law, that the Priests and Levites
might know Ministers maintenance should be certain.
their due and right belonging unto them: so now the the Lord ordains his
Ministers double honor, that they live of the Gospel, and that their hearers
make them pertakers of all their goods. Hereby the people are certainly bound
to maintain them with an honorable maintenance, how this may be to a just
sum shall appear in the next point to be handled. Ephesians. 4. 12. 13. Mat. 28.
19. 20.
certain. The office of the Ministry is certain unto the end of the world;
the execution thereof is imposed upon him that is once lawfully called thereto,
and to perform his office therein as certainly; the charge is 2 Timothy 4. 1. 2.
1 Cor. 9. 16.
great and weighty, and a woe remains to him, if he do not. It is therefore
most meet, that with a certain office, and the Minister bound as certainly to
discharge that office, that there be also as certain a maintenance to uphold
the same, and to encourage such in the discharge of their duty.

Gal. 6. 6.
be certain. the multitude, whose minds remain as constant, as The
inconveniences to ^^ue upon mere voluntary contributions.
the vveather-cocke? Who sees not how this is to make the Minister to live
upon alms, in some men's account, to please men's humors, to lose their
authority over the people, to be basely accounted of, every day to expect their
departure, so to live unquiet, in mind discontentedly, to conclude certainly
nothing with themselves for their continuing in any place? This tyeth up their
mouths for telling the Esa. 58. 1.
people of their sins, or the house of Jacob of their transgressions, least
such voluntaries become malcontents, and turn their benevolence, into
maleuolence, This would hinder men from the study of divinity, and men of
learning and gifts would not take upon them the Ministry, if no better
provision were made for them, but to live upon men's mere good will, and at the
pleasure of the untamed lusts of disorderly and unstable multitudes. He that
has been, or now is acquainted with beneuolences, can tell what cold devotion
is in men this way. They are not like the Pharisie (though as much boasting,
perhaps, having less cause) who would give a tenth part, but as Saint
Augustine complained in his time of the peoples strait De tempo. sermon. 205.
heart and hand to the Ministry, saying, Tu vix millessimam das: so may we
complain, that neither one nor other almost will give scarce the thousand
part voluntarily. Some one, we see, of an hundredth will give somewhat largely,
some other, a few, among thousands will give, but very sparingly, so niggardly,
as is a shame to tell, and the greatest number nothing at all. The meaner sort
are found more willing, the rich able but few of them, very forward.

Therefore in these lukewarm days, when peoples hearts are so stocken, or so
variable and unconstant, so hardly well pleased, so soon displeased, so full
of fantasies, wherein yet the Ministers must follow them, or else they shall be
discarded, it is reasonable to any reasonable man, to judge it better for the
Minister to live upon certainty, than upon benevolence, voluntary contribution,
and uncertainties, for so, as a people shall desire that a Minister should
abide with them constantly, so should they be tied to maintain him as
certainly: yea, this would tie a Pastor to his flock, if he have a mind
contented, and the people to him, if they have religion in them, knowing that
neither part is at liberty, when they list, upon light occasions, either to
cast other off; but to continue together, while the one is taught and trained
up in the ways of God, and his true worship painefully, and the other
maintained in a certain competent sufficiency. But now I come to the third
and last point to Tithes the fittest means to maintain Ministers.
be proved, how such so competent maintenance may be made certain, which I
affirm to be by Tithes. The position is this.

That the best and most fit means for the certain and sufficient maintenance
of Ministers is by Tithes. Genesis 14. 18. and 28. 22.
tyth; tything out a tenth part unto GOD, as Jacob vowed, (...), decima^
decimabo, they offered of the fruits of the ground, and of the increase Genesis 4.
Leu. 27. 30. Number. 18. 21.
of their cattle. This maintenance the Lord ratified under the law by plain
precepts, which he gave to the Levites for the service of the Tabernacle.
Took not Christ aright therein in the person of M^lchisedech? Heb. 7. 8.
approving the payment thereof in his time? the Apostle, says, that the LORD
has ordained, or Mat 23. 23. 1 Cor. 9. 14. (...).
taken order for it, implying a statute for the same; now let any show what
certain maintenance did ever the Lord appoint for the Ministry, but tythe^?
other things came in according to the service then in use, for the time
present, and with the service of necessity to cease; but tithes before are not
to be judged ceremonial, Pet. Mar. com. Pl. p. 4. 236.
yet if then, not therefore now. When the Lord sent peace unto his Church, then
were tithes brought in again; the authority of Emperors, Kings, Councels,
Ecclesiastical constitutions heretofore and yet daily approving, confirming
and commanding the payment of the same; which is so well known, as I need
not here set down the same. Thus we see it the wisdom of God and his
Church, before the law, under the law, and now under the Gospel to judge
tithes to be the fittest means to maintain the Ministry, which also the very
Heathen paid to the service Plutar. Lucul. and Camil. P^in. (...). Hist. li.
12. cap. 14. 19. Reason.
of their Gods, to Jupiter, to Hercules, and other. The tenth part is a good
portion, if it be truly paid, out of Gods blessing to every man, for the
Minister. The Hebrew word Decimauit, has affinity with another, that is,
Dives fuit, for that a tenth is as a rich present, given unto the Lord, which
both God and his Church accepts as a good means for the maintenance of
Ministers.

Again how can any Hearer make his Teacher partaker of all his goods any way
better than by tything? moreover no stypend in equal value can be so
convenient for their maintenance, as tithes paid in kind; they be sufficient
at all times, howsoever the price of things do arise or fall, a Minister has
his part with the people in cheepe or dear years: which makes his living
constantly answereable unto the times, partaking with his parishioners, so as
he may have a fellow-feeling of their prosperity and adversity, and be
thereby occasioned with them to praise God, or to pray for them. By this every
one offers up somewhat unto the upholding of Gods service, howsoever deserved
on the Ministers part, yet truly paid for the true worship of God, it is
pleasing to the Lord, and such may look for a blessing. We see by lamentable
experience with us, that where tithes are not paid, there is but beggarly
maintenance for the Minister. Many hundredth of years has the custom of
paying tithes been practiced in the Church, and for any thing yet apparent, no
better course hitherto can be found. numeratis pecunijt, not sufficient to
maintain the life of a poor labourer: the Church-robbers stole away pounds
and left pence, carried away all the profits, and left a poor pittance, and
the same also sore charged with payments, which may cause many to mourn, for
the grievous oppression which lies upon them most heavily, and that without
hope of recovery, as far as they can see. O Covetous Cruelty! Sacrilegious
impiety!

Yield your selves therefore to the Lords wisdom Motives.
herein, the wisdom of Gods Church, the authority of Councels, the command of
Princes, the practice of our right meaning forefathers, the devotion of our
late Ancestors, though in other things, erring, by misleading, yet herein to
be greatly commended. They were not after our minds, but far better
disposed, though they knew less, but we will needs be held religious, and yet
live of robbing Churches. O tempora, O mores! Our Ancestors did rob
themselves to enrich the Church, (indeed in many things too much) but we rob
the Church, to enrich our selves, an ungodly change.

But it may be you will say, for who will not say somewhat for himself in
these days, to defend or excuse his wickedness? that it is a great question,
unlawful thing to maintain Ministers by tithes? but if thou have a covetous
scruple upon this question, not to pay tithes; be checked in thy conscience
likewise for with holding tithes, when sollide reasons are given against thy
Sacriledgious sin, by very many learned Divines. My meaning is not here to
dispute to and fro of this point with thee, for I refer thee to whole
treatises of this matter (written by others:) But first know, that tithes is
here in our Church the maintenance of the Minister; secondly, that our Church
(whereof thou art either a true, or counterfeite member) does hold such
maintenance lawful, and therefore till thou can either find a better
course, or convince Her of an error, let thy conscience be (if thou have any)
to yield to her determination, and beware of deciding the question thy self,
which is only a covetous conclusion, from a profane heart. But to come to
that, which I most mind at this present; thou can not deny, but, that the
Ministry is Gods ordinance, that he has appointed that his Ministers be
maintained; thou have heard also, that this maintenance should be sufficient,
and it cannot be denied, but that tithes has been given for this end, and
are paid in very many places still to this purpose, only in some places they
be kept back, and there the Minister has not in any measure a competencie. A
heavy sin, to take tithes from the Church and not to leave a competencie for
the maintenance of the Ministry.
Now this is it which I would have thee and all such to know, that by your
detayning of tithes from them (which is the only ordinary means of
maintenance with us) not leaving any competencie to them, is your heavy sin,
worse then Achans theft, for which he received condign punishment; yea, both
he and all his paid a heavy price for it: and know that Gods justice sleeps
not, neither is his revenging hand any whit shortened.

Know you not, that Ananias and his wife did withhold Mark and consider these
things you luke-warm^ Gosp^llers, t^^e serue^s, Mamonists, Hypocritical
professors, and all other of the rank of Atheists.
only a part of the whole, and that which they themselves had given to the
Church, and yet death seized upon them both for the same; what then may you
expect? what death and destruction is due to you, who not only give nothing
of your own, but rob the Church of that which was given by other men? the
dead shall rise up in judgment against you, you Canker-wormes. Consider you
not that the very name of Impropriation, tells and conuicteth you of an
unjust enjoying of such tithes, and that you are improper passessours of the
same? Plead not a grant from man, for what man can make good Sacril^dge before
GOD? plead not that thou art but only a Farmar: an inferior transgresser may
perish, though he be not the principal actour in unrighteousness.

You know that Antichrist began this Sacrilege, and will you by verbal
profession be great enemies to Popery, and yet indeed, be to it great friends
and followers in so^hell^sh a practice? deep Hypocrisy! You will none of
that religion, and yet live of robbing: you protest against their ungodliness
(for you observe the times) but you can very well digest their
unrighteousness, it is for your profit. Faithless Hearts! Mamon is your God;
whatsoever you pretend, he is Most commonly Markettown^s.
your Master. Know you not, that by this Churchrobbing, many Congregations,
and those very great, having thousands of poor souls in them are without
competent maintenance to have a preacher? Souls ^r^ precious to God, they did
cost the price of Christ's blood: and yet where there is no vision the people
perish: Oh then, shall your private profit because of their destruction? Cursed
gain, to win even a world with damnation of souls. But such places, say
you, do get themselves preachers; yea, but so is enforced a double charge upon
the people, which your unrighteousness causes, and is this lightly to be
regarded? Answer me now, I pray you, as you shall one day make an account
before God and his Angels unto Jesus Christ: how can you comfort your selves in
this damnable course? where is the word, your warrant, thus, for your own
profit, to vvithhold from your Ministers, that which should maintain them?
What love of Religion is in you? what respect of common good? what compassion
to men's souls? what feeling of the heavy burden which you cause your poor
neighbors to bear, when they pay you tithes, and yet must besides maintain
their Minister? Consider you not that the hyre of the laborers is by you kept
back, and their cries pierce the Heavens, and is entered into the ears of the
Lord? Sin you not against common equity, musling the Oxes mouth that
treads out the Corn? Is not the labourer worthy to be rewarded? Do you
labor in Gods Vineyard? if not, why hold you from Christ's Ministers their
necessary maintenance? Your manner is to lay all upon the people, and your
selves to allow nothing, or very little: this is the euilnesse of your hearts,
for the most part, that such of you, as thus live of Church-robbing, have the
least conscience of serving God, and maintayning of the preaching of his Word.
And no marvel that such a curse is upon you, for the Ministers maintenance,
the peoples misery, and great oppression, religion, reason, and common equity,
the zeal of our forefathers, the good intendements of the dead do call Heaven
and Earth to witness against this your covetousness, your cruelty to your
neighbors bodies and souls, your own hearts profaneness or hypocrisy, and
this your sin and Sacrilege, and that God would judge between you and them,
and blow upon your estates as he has done upon many already past and present;
your fair forewarnings.

Consider, how you open the adversaries mouths against our profession; how they
condemn our reformation to be but a robbing of the Church, and a devouring of
that which was set a part to the Lords service. Shame you not to bring shame
upon Gods Gospel: shall other spoil the Church, his Ministers, and people,
and fear you not to live upon the robbery!

Consider, how you, as I have said, profess hatred to Idolatry; and will you
live in Sacrilege? how dare you turn that to private profit, truly intended
and given for public good? how can you withhold from the Church, only to
maintain your pride and pleasure, that which should be for the Pastors lively
hood, and the reward of his pains in diligent teaching of his floc^e? and know
you this? and shall not the consideration hereof restrain the rage of your
covetousness, but you will yet hold the owners from their right?

Consider, how the Lord has cursed many such rob-Churches; how their estates
have had upon them a continual consumption: and shall not wrath powered out,
even before your eyes, make you afraid?

Consider with your selves, how these were given to the Ministry, how
wickedly they were taken away, what were the unjust grounds thereof, who
were the parties, and the Lords anger against them. Also, what just cause now
to restore them again, or at least a sufficient maintenance for them. Know
you, that the Lord commands you to maintain your Ministers, and that they
want maintenance, or that your neighbors must do more than they may, and dare
you live in this rebellious disobedience, not only not to maintain them, but
to rob them, and to spoil your brethren without sense of their misery? Oh
heart that cannot repent! thou heapest unto thy self wrath Romans 2.
against the day of wrath, and the declaration of the just judgment of God.

Consider, with what face you can demand the tenth part of the peoples
labors, and see them want the means of salvation, for which they pay these
tithes? Do you as you would be done unto? verily no: for sure and certain it
is, that, if the tithes were not in your own hands, you could be very well
content that they should go to the Church, and your Ministers be maintained by
them. And can your hearts judge so uprightly for your Ministers in respect of
other men? and is there no love of equity? no faith of truth? no power of
conscience? no regard of the Ministry? no neighbourly compassion? no strength
of grace, nor dread of God to make you equal and just Judges between your
Ministers and your selves, to yield them their right out of your own hands? Ah
partial selfeloue and enemy to equity and just dealing!

Consider, with what promise of a blessing, with what hope of mercy you can
commend these goods to your posterity, so unjustly taken from the Church, so
unmercifully withheld by you, so needful to be restored to the Church again,
for the peoples ease, every way too deeply charged, and the Ministers more
certain and liberal maintenance? Will you vainly think that your children
shall thrive and do well by your injustice and wrongs, and by your wicked
works of inquitie? Oppression shall bring thee to poverty. Pro. 22. 16.
He that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them Ier. 17. 11.
in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool. Pro. 13. 11. and
14. 11.
The riches of vanity shall diminish, and the house of the wicked shall be
destroyed; where is prosperous hope unto posterities in ill gotten goods?

Therefore, that at length I may conclude this exhortation, weigh these things
well, ponder them in your hearts, consider how you stand thus guilty of
Sacrilege, how the Ministers have cause to mourn, how the people grieve, and
may complain to God, and how weakly, in deed and truth, you can oppose
against that which has been said, that so you may yield liberal and
sufficient maintenance to your Ministers, that God may repent of that he has
determined against you, Pro. 20. 25. Mal. 3. 9.
and you receive a blessing to you and yours. Now be not like the fool, which
sees the plague, yet goes on, and is punished. The wise man fears, and
departs Pro. 14 16. Mal. 3. 8.
from evil, but a fool rages and is careless. The barbarous Heathen would
not spoil their Gods, and if any were so wicked among them (though God both
hated them and their Idols, nevertheless, because he would show his
detestation against such as would worship a God, though but an Idol, and yet
rob him) such would he plague and severely punish. The Heathen in their
writings, bear witness of this. The Grecians offering violence to the Temple
of Pallas, never prospered Virg. li. Aene. 2. Lactan. de Origin. error cap. 4.
after. An ancient Father reports, how diverse Heathen were grievously
punished for offering violence to holy things. Euluitu the Censour, for taking
tyles of Marble out of Juno Lacinia her Temple, was shortly after distracted of
his wits, and had two of Cap. 8.
his sons slain. Appius Claudius was stricken blind for alienating those
things which were consecrate to Justin. hiss. li. 2.
Hercules. Zerxes sending four hundredth Soldiers to spoil the Temple of
Apollo, they were destroyed and burnt with thunder and lightning. If God will
revenge the wrongs done to Heathen Gods, no Gods but Idols, in such a terrible
manner, ( because he will preserve a reverence of a conceived God head in all
men's minds, though that conceit in a particular application to an Idol be
abominable before him,) how much more will the Lord revenge himself upon
those, which thus rob his Son Christ, who is robbed in his servants and
Ministers? let the wise be judge, and let believers fear and tremble.

Consider in all this, what is said unto you, which possess impropriations so
injurious to the Church. You Patrons also of Benefices, who nibble at, and pare
away what you can get from those which you do present, either by secret
simoniacall compact, or by pretense of law, or else by force or fraud, some
way or other to live upon Church-robbing sacriledgiously. You Farmers of such
livings consider what you do, and you that gather up the labors of the
people, whereby the Ministers of Christ are defrauded of their maintenance. You
pilfering poor, and deceitful payers of Tithes, which make no conscience to
steal somewhat away closely, with Achan, from the use of the Tabernacle; or
with Hypocritical Ananias and Saphira pretend that you pay tithes justly, but
yet keep back ever somewhat from the true owners thereof. Know your duty,
weigh the equity of the cause, examine the former reasons, consider your sins,
and forsake your theft, that ye be not found written in that flying book of
vengeance, which comes forth against thieves, to revenge injustice and wrong.

If yet for all this some will not be moved to pay tithes, because they now
live under the Gospel. I demand of them, whither they mean honestly, that
they can be vvilling, in deed and in truth, to do for the Church and
Ministers according to the time of the Gospel? If you only disclaim the law
herein, because of charges, and will not indeed yield to the times of the
Gospel, you but pretend Gospel in Hypocritical covetousness, for that you
think there is nothing to move you to ^^e for your Ministers maintenance;
though the co^^rary has been already showed. But go to, I take you to speak
in a true meaning without cuasions, we will be content to let the law go, for
this present, and will be willing to stand to the Gospels reward, The Gospel
provides for Ministers.
which is either the primary extraordinary practice, and that was a voluntary
contribution, but so liberal, for the maintenance of the Ministry and
brethren, Act. 4. 37. and 5.
as many sold all they had, lands and possessions and brought the money, and
laid the same down at the Gal. 6. 6.
Apostles feet: Or the Apostolical precept, to make them pertakers of all
your goods; or else the after act of the Church resuming the payment of tithes.

Now how like you these? choose for you selves, if the Last, that is it we would
have, and you dislike because of advantage; if the First, that is the best of
all, but that we will not be so unreasonable toward you: for though you take
all from us, and the Church gave all then, yet we require but so much as is
convenient for us to receive, for us to receive, and you by duty necessarily
tied to give. We desire not to be enriched, and you thereby impouerished, that
it now should be said, as heretofore, Religio peperit diuitias, sed filia
deuorauit matrem, which I think we need not to fear on our behalf, as you,
wisely, never intend it on your parts. For it well appears, how much you love
to give, as they did, freely, but not as they did liberally. I will say for
you, that the first you dislike, and better it were to give a tenth part, than
all. But will you rest with the Second, and make the Minister pertaker of all
your goods? Surely if you would perform this faithfully, we might well rest
contented; for what is this, but to have our wants liberally supplied, and in
you a frank heart to give somewhat of what you get, of every thing a part or
share, more or less? else how can you make us pertakers of all your goods?
which, if you so would do, is it a great matter, if we reap 1 Cor. 9. 11.
your carnal things, when we sow unto you spiritual things? Thus you see
(you pretending Gospellers) that we can rest contented with the award of
either the law or Gospel, if you would conscionably stand to either; but that
indeed you are of neither, excepting as they may serve your turns, and be to
you advantage. If I falsely accuse you, convince me by following and faithfully
performing this duty you owe unto the Ministers of Christ, either according to
law or Gospel; if not, you must give us leave to say, that you are worldly
Atheists, of any religion for your profits and commodities, professing to know
God, but by works deny him, his Ministry, Ministers, and people, and to every
good work reprobate.

FINIS.

