HONI^SOIT^QVI MAL Y^PENSE


A DECLARATION OF THE TRVE MANner of knowing CHRIST CRVCIFIED.

GALAT. 6. 14. God forbid that I should rejoice but in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc.

Printed by JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge.

1596.



TO THE READER.
IT is the common sin of men at this day, and that in the very places of
learning, that Christ crucified is not known as he ought. The right knowledge
of whom, is not to make often mention of his death and passion, and to call
him our Savior, or to handle the whole mystery of God incarnate soundly and
learnedly, though that be a worthy gift of god: but first of all, by the
consideration of the passion to be touched with an inward and a lively feeling
of our sins, for which our Redeemer suffered the pangs of hell, and to grow
to a through dislike of our selves and our lives past for them and from the
ground of the heart to purpose a reformation and a conformity with Christ in
all good duties that concern man: secondly in the Passion, as in a myrrour, to
behold and in beholding to labor to comprehend the length, the breadth, the
height, the depth of the love of the father that gave his own dear son to
death, and the goodness of the son that loved his enemies more then
himself, that our hearts might be rooted and grounded in the same love, and
be further inflamed to love God again.

To further this true manner of knovving Christ crucified, I have penned these
feew lines, read them at thy leisure, and have care to put them in practice:
otherwise, thou art but an enemy of the cross of Christ, though thou
profess his name never so much.

Ian. 5. 1596. William Perkins.

OF THE RIGHT knowledge of Christ crucified.
IT is the most excellent and worthy part of divine wisdom to know Christ
crucified. The Prophet Esaisaith, The knowledge Esai. 53. 11
of thy righteous servant, that is, Christ crucified, shall justify many. And
Christ himself says, This is eternal life to know thee the only God, Ioh.
17. 2.
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. And Paul says, I have decreed to know
nothing among you 1. Cor. 2. 2.
but Jesus Christ and him crucified. Again, God forbid that I should rejoice in
any thing but in the Gal. 6. 14.
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. Again, I think all things but loss for the
excellent knowledge Phil. 3. 5.
sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, and do judge them but dung that I might win
Christ.

In the right way of knowing Christ crucified, two points must be considered:
one, how Man for his part is to know Christ; the other, how he is to be known
of man.

Touching the first: Man must know Christ not generally and confusedly, but by
a lively, powerful, and operative knowledge; for otherwise the devils
themselves know Christ.

In this knowledge three things are required. The first is notice or
consideration, whereby thou must conceive in mind, understand, and seriously
bethink thy self of Christ as he is revealed in the history of the Gospel,
and as he is offered to thy particular person in the ministry of the word and
sacraments. And that this consideration may not be dead and idle in thee, two
things must be done: first thou must labor to feel thy self to standin need
of Christ crucified, yea to stand in excessive need even of the very least drop
of his blood, for the washing away of thy sins. And unless thou thoroughly
feel thy self to want all that goodness and grace that is in Christ, and
that thou even stand in extreme need of his passion, thou shall never
learn or teach Christ in deed and truth. The second thing is, with the
understanding of the doctrine of Christ to join thirsting, whereby man in his
very soul and spirit longs after the participation of Christ, and says in
this case as Samson said, Give me water, I die for thirst.

The second part of knowledge is application, (...)d. 15. 19.
whereby thou must know and believe not only that Christ was crucified, but that
he was crucified for thee, for thee, I say, in particular. Here two ^les must
be remembered and practiced O(...), that Christ on the cross was thy pledge and
surety in particular, that he then stood in thy very room and place in which
thou thy self in thine own person should have stood; that thy very
personal and particular sins were imputed and applied to him; that he stood
guilty as a malefactor for them, and suffered the very pangs of hell, and
that his sufferings are as much in acceptatio^ with God, as if thou had
borne the curse of the law in thine own person eternally. The holding and
believing of this point is the very foundation of religion as also of the
Church of God. Therefore in any wise be careful to apply Christ crucified to
thy self: and as Elizeus when he would revive the child of the Shunamite, went
up and lay upon 2. King. 4. 34
him, and put his mouth upon his mouth, and his hands upon his hands, and his
eyes upon his eyes, and stretched himself upon him: even so, if thou would
be revived to everlasting life, thou must by faith as it were set thy self
upon the cross of Christ, and apply thy hands to his hands, thy feet to his
feet, and thy sinful heart to his bleeding heart, and content not thy self
with Thomas to put thy finger into his side, but even dive and plunge thy self
wholly both body and soul into the wounds and blood of Christ. This will
make thee to cry with Thomas and say, My Lord, my God; and this is to be
crucified with Christ. And yet do not content thy self with this, but by
faith also descend with Christ from the cross to the grave, and bury thy
self in the very burial of Christ: and then look as the dead soldier
tumbled into the grave of Elizeus was made alive at the very touching of his
body; so shall 2. King. 13. 21.
thou by a spiritual touching of Christ dead and buried, be quickened to life
everlasting. The second rule is, that Christ crucified is thine, being really
given thee of God the father, even as truly as houses and land are given of
earthly fathers to their children: this thou must firmly hold and believe; and
hence is it that the benefits of Christ are before God ours indeed for our
justification and salvation.

The third point in lively knowledge is, that by all the affections of our
hearts we must be carried to Christ, and as it were transformed into him. Whereas
he gave himself wholly for us, we can do no less then bestow our hearts upon
him. We must therefore love him above all, following the martyr Ignatius, who
said that Christ his love was crucified. We must value him at so high a price,
that he must be unto us better then ten thousand worlds: yea all things which
we enjoy must be but as dross and dung unto us in respect of him. Lastly, all
our joy, rejoicing, comfort, and confidence, must be placed in him. And that
thus much is required in knowledge, it appears by the common rule of
expounding Scripture, that words of knowledge implie affection. And indeed
it is but a knowledge swimming in the brain, which does not alter and dispose
the affection and the whole man.

Thus much of our knowledge. Now follows the second point, how Christ is to be
known. He must not be known barely as God, or as man, or as a Jew borne in
the tribe of Judah, or as a terrible and just judge, but as he is our Redeemer
and the very price of our redemption: and in this respect he must be considered
as the common Treasury and storehouse of Gods Church, as Paul testifies when
he says, In him are all the treasures of knowledge and Coloss. 13.
wisdom hid: and again, Blessed be God, which Ephesians. 1. 4.
has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ. And S. John says,
that of his fullness we receive grace for grace. Here then let us mark that
all the blessings of God, whether spiritual or temporal, all I say without
exception are conuaied unto us from the father by Christ: and so must they be
received of us and no otherwise. That this point may be further cleared, the
benefits which we receive from Christ are to be handled, and the manner of
knowing of them. The benefits of Christ are three, his Merit, his Virtue, his
Example.

The merit of Christ, is the value and price of his death and Passion, whereby
man is perfectly reconciled to God. This reconciliation has two parts,
Remission of sins, and acceptance to life everlasting. Remission of sins,
is the remoouing, or the abolishing both of the guilt and punishment of man's
sins. By guilt I understand a subjection or obligation to punishment,
according to the order of divine justice. And the punishment of sin is the
malediction of curse of the whole law, which is the suffering of the first and
second death. Acceptance to life everlasting, is a giving of right and title
to the kingdom of heaven, and that for the merit of Christ's obedience imputed.
Now this benefit of reconciliation must be known not by conceit and
imagination, nor by carnal presumption; but by the inward testimony of Gods
spirit certifying our consciences thereof, which for this cause is called the
spirit of Revelation. Ephesians. 1. 17
And that we may attain to infallible assistance of this benefit, we must
call to mind the promises of the Gospel touching remission of sins and life
everlasting: this being done, we must further strive and endeavor by the
assurance of Gods spirit to apply them to our selves, and to believe that they
belong unto us; and we must also put our selves often to all the exercises of
invocation and true repentance. For in and by our crying unto heaven to God for
reconciliation, comes the assurance thereof, as scriptures and Christian
experience makes manifest. And if it so fall out, that any man in temptation
apprehend and feel nothing but the furious indignation and wrath of God,
against all reason and feeling he must hold to the merit of Christ, and know a
point of religion hard to be learned, that God is a most loving father to them
that have care to serve him even at that instant when he shows himself a most
fierce and terrible enemy.

From the benefit of reconciliation proceed four benefits. First, that
excellent peace of God that passes all understanding, which has six parts.
The first is, peace with God and the blessed Trinity, Rom 5. 1. being
justified we have peace with God. The second, peace with the good Angels,
Ioh. 1. 51. Ye shall see the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the
son of man. And that Angels like armies of soldiers incampe about the
servants of God, and as nources bear them in their arms that they be neither
hurt by the devil and his angels, nor by his instruments, it proceeds of this
that they being in Christ are partakers of his merits. The third is, peace with
all such as fear God and believe in Christ. This Esaias foretold when he said,
that the wolf shall dvvell with the lamb, and the leopard lie with the
kidde, and the calfe and the lion and a fat beast together, and that a little
child should lead them, etc. 11. v. 6. The fourth is, peace with a man's own
self, when the conscience washed in the blood of Christ, cease to accuse,
and terrify: and when the will, affections, and inclinations of the whole man
are obedient to the mind enlightened by the spirit and word of God, Coloss. 3.
Let the peace of God rule in your hearts. The fifth is, peace with enemies and
that two ways. First, in that such as believe in Christ, seek to have peace
with all men, hurting none but doing good to all: secondly, in that God
restraines the malice of enemies, and inclines their hearts to be peaceable.
Thus God brought Daniel into love and favor with the chief of the Eunuchs.
The last, is peace with all creatures in heaven and earth, in that they cap. 1.
9.
serve for ma^s salvation. Psalm. 9^. 13. Thou shall walk upon the lion and the
Aspe: the young lion and the dragon shall thou tread under foot. Hos. 2. 18.
And in that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts of the
field, and with the fowls of heaven. Now this benefit of ^eace is known
partly by the testimony of the spirit, and partly by a daily experience
thereof.

The second benefit is a recoverie of that right and title, which man has to
all creatures in heaven and earth, and all temporal blessings; which right
Adam lost to himself and every one of his posterity. 1. Cor. 3. 22. Whether
it be the world or life, or death: whether they be things present, or things to
come, all are yours. Now the right way of knowing this one benefit is this.
When God vouchsafes meat, drink, apparel, houses, lands, etc. we must not
barely consider them as blessings of God, for that very heathen men, which know
not Christ, can do: but we must acknowledge and esteem them as blessings
proceeding from the special love of God the father, whereby he loves us in
Christ; and procured unto us by the merit of Christ crucified: and we must
labor in this point to be settled and persuaded: and so often as we see and use
the creatures of God for our own benefit, this point should come to our
minds. Blessings conceived apart from Christ, are misconceiued: whatsoever
they are in themselves they are no blessings to us but in and by Christ's merit.
Therefore this order must be observed touching earthly blessings: first we
must have part in the merit of Christ, and then secondly by means of that
merit, right before God and comfortable use of the things we enjoy. All men
that have and use the creatures of God otherwise, as gifts of God but not by
Christ, use them but as flat usurpers and thieves. For this cause is it not
sufficient for us generally and confusedly to know Christ to be our Redeemer;
but we must learn to see, know and acknowledge him in every particular gift and
blessing of God. If men using the creatures of meat and drink; could, when
they behold them, withal by the eye of faith behold in them the merit of
Christ's passion, there would not be so much excess and riot, so much
surfeiting and drunkenness, as there is: and if men could consider their houses
and lands, etc. as blessings to them and that by the fountain of blessing the
merits of Christ, there should not be so much fraud and deceit, so much
injustice and oppression in bargaining as there is.

That which I have now said of meats, drinks, apparel, must likewise be
understood of gentry and nobility, in as much as noble-birth without new
birth in Christ is but an earthly vanity: the like may be said of physic,
sleep, Consider Colost. 3. 11. and 2. 10.
health, liberty, yea of the very breathing in the air. And to go yet
further; in our Recreations Christ must be known. For all recreation stands in
the use of things indifferent: and the holy use of all things indifferent, is
purchased unto us by the blood of Christ. For this cause it is very meet that
Christian men and women should with their earthly recreations join spiritual
meditation of the death of Christ, and from the one take occasion to bethink
themselves of the other. If this were practiced, there should not be so many
unlawful sports and delights, and so much abuse of lawful recreation as there
is.

The third benefit is, that all crosses, afflictions, and judgments
whatsoever, cease to be curses and punishments to them that are in Christ, and
are only means of correction or trial; because his death has taken away not
some few parts, but all and every part of the curse of the whole law. Now in
all crosses, Christ is to be known of us on this manner. We must judge of our
afflictions as chastisements or trialls, proceeding not from a revenging judge,
but from the hand of a bountiful and loving father; and therefore they must be
conceived in and with the merit of Christ; and if we do other wise regard
them, we take them as curses and punishments of sin. And hence it follows
that subjection to Gods hand in all crosses, is a mark and badge of the true
Church.

The last benefit is, that death is properly no death, but a rest or sleep.
Death therefore must be known and considered not as it is set forth in the
law, but as it is altered and changed by the death of Christ: and when death
comes, we must then look upon it through Christ's death, as through a glass:
and thus it will appear to be but a passage from this life to everlasting life.

Thus much of the merit of Christ crucified. Now follows his virtue, which is
the power of his Godhead, whereby he creates new hearts in all them that
believe in him, and makes them new creatures. This virtue is double: the first
is, the power of his death, whereby he freed himself from the punishment and
imputation of our sins; and the same virtue serves to mortify and crucify
the corruptions of our minds, wills, affections, eue^ as a corasive does wast
and consume the rotten and dead flesh in any part of man's body.

The second, is the virtue of Christ's resurrection, which is also the power of
his Godhead, whereby he raised himself from death to life: and the very same
power serves to raise those that belong to Christ, from their sins in this
life, and from the grave in the day of the last judgment. Now the knowledge of
this double virtue must not be only speculative, that is, barely conceived in
the brain, but it must be experimental: because we ought to have experience of
it in our hearts and lives, and we should labor by all means possible to
feel the power of Christ's death killing and mortifying our sins, and the
virtue of his resurrection in the putting of spiritual life into us, that we
might be able to say that we live not but that Christ lives in us. This was one
of the most excellent and principal things which Paul sought for, who says, I
have counted all things loss and do judge them to be dung, that I may know
him and the virtue of his resurrection, Phil. 3. 10. And he says that this is
the right way to know and learn Christ, to cast off the old man which is
corrupt through deceivable lusts, and to put on the nevve man which is created
in righteous and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.

The third benefit is the example of Christ. We deceive our selves, if we
think that he is only to be known of us as a Redeemer, and not as a
spectacle and pattern of all good duties, to which we ought to conform our
selves. Good men indeed, that have been or in present are upon the earth the
servants of God, must be followed of us: but they must be followed no otherwise
then they follow Christ, and Christ must be followed in the practice of every
good duty that may concern us without exception simply and absolutely, 1.
Cor. 11. 1.

Our conformity with Christ stands either in the framing of our inward and
spiritual life, or in the practice of outward and moral duties.

Conformity in spiritual life is, not by doing that which Christ did upon the
cross and afterward, but a doing of the like by a certain kind of imitation.
And it has four parts. The first is, a spiritual oblation. For as Christ in
the garden and upon the cross, by prayer made with stong cries and tears,
presented and resigned himself up to be a sacrifice of propitiation to the
justice of his father for man's sin: so must we also in prayer present and
resign our selves, our souls, our bodies, our understanding, will, memory,
affections, and all we have to the service of God, in the general calling of a
Christian, and in the particular callings in which he has placed us. Take an
example in David, Sacrifice and burnt offering (says he) thou would not,
but ears thou have pierced unto me, then said, lo I come: I desire to do thy
will, O God, yea thy law is within my heart, Psalm. 40. 7. The second is,
conformity in the cross two ways. For first, as he bare his own cross to
the place of exequution: so must we as good disciples of Christ deny our
selves, take up all the crosses and afflictions that the hand of God shall lay
upon us, if it be every day, and follow him. Again, we must become like unto
him in the crucifying and mortifying the mass and body of sin which we
carry about us, Gal. 5. 24. They which are Christ's have crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts thereof. We must do as the Jews did, we must
set up the crosses and gybbets whereon we are to faste^ and hang this flesh of
ours, that is, the sin and corruption that cleaues and sticks unto us, and by
the sword of the spirit wound it eue^ to death. This being don, we must yet
go further, and labor by experience to see and feel the very death of it,
and to lay it as it were in a grave never to rise again: and therefore we
should daily cast new mouldes upon it. The third is, a spiritual resurrection,
whereby we should by Gods grace use means that we may every day more and more
come out of our sins, as out of a loathsome grave, to live unto God in newnes
of life, as Christ rose from his grave. And because it is an hard matter for a
man to come out of the grave or rather dungeon of his sins, this work can
not be done at once but by degrees, as God shall give grace. Considering we lie
by nature dead in our sins, and stink in them as loathsome carrion, first we
must begin to stir our selves as a man that comes out of a sown, awakened
by the word and voice of Christ sounding in our deaf ears: secondly we must
raise up our minds to a better state and condition, as we use to raise up our
bodies: after this we must put out of the grave first one hand, then the other.
This done, we must do our endeavor as it were upon our knees, at the least to
put one foot out of this sepulcher of sin, the rather when we see our selves
to have one foot of the body in the grave of the earth, that in the day of
judgment we may be wholly delivered from all bonds of corruption. The fourth
part is, a spiritual ascension into heaven, by a continual elevation of the
heart and mind to Christ sitting at the right hand of the father, as Paul
says, Have your conversation in heaven: and, If ye be risen with Christ,
seek things that are above.

Conformity in moral duties, is either general or special. General, is to
be holy as he is holy, Romans 8. 29. Those whom he knew before he has
predestinate to be like the image of his son, that is, not only in the
cross but also in holiness and glory. 1. Ioh. 3. He which has this hope
purifieth himself even as he is pure.

Special conformity, is chiefly in four virtues; Faith, Love, Meekness,
Humility.

We must be like him in faith. For as he, when he apprehended the wrath of
God, and the very pangs of hell were upon him, wholly staide himself upon the
aid, help, protection and good pleasure of his father, even to the last: so
must we by a true and lively faith depend wholly on Gods mercy in Christ, as
it were with both our hands, in peace, in trouble, in life, and in the very
pang of death: and we must not in any wise let our hold go; no though we
should feel our selves descend to hell.

We must be like him in meekness, Matthew. 11. v. 28. Learn of me that I am
meek and lowly. His meekness showed it self in the patient bearing of all
injuries and abuses offered by the hands of sinful and wretched men, and in
the suffering of the curse of the law, without grudging or repining, and with
submission to his fathers will in all things. Now the more we follow him
herein, the more shall we be conformable to him in his death and passion,
Philip. 3. 10.

Thirdly, he must be our example in love: he loved his enemies more then
himself, Ephesians. 5. 4. Walk in love even as Christ loved us, and has given
himself for us an oblation and sacrifice of svveete smelling savor unto God.
The like love ought we to show, by doing service to all men in the compass of
our callings, and by being all things to all men (as Paul was) that we might
do them all the good we can both for body and soul. 1. Cor. 9. 19.

Lastly, we must follow Christ in humility, whereof he is a wonderful
spectacle, in that being God, he became man for us; and of a man became a worm
that is troaden under foot, that he might save man, Philip. 2. 5. Let the same
mind be in you that was in Jesus Christ, who being in the form of God,
humbled himself and became obedient to the death, even to the death of the
cross.

And here we must observe, that the example of Christ has something more in it
the^ any other example has or ca^ have: for it does not only show us what we
ought to do (as the examples of other men do) but it is a remedy against many
vices, and a motive to many good duties. First of all the serious consideration
of this, that the very son of God himself suffered all the pains and
torments of hell on the cross for our sins, is the proper and most effectual
means to stir up our hearts to a godly sorrow for them. And that this thing
may come to pass, every man must be settled without doubt, that he was the man
that crucified Christ; that he is to be blamed as well as Judas, Herod,
Pontius Pilate, and the Jews: and that his sins were the nails, the
spears, and the thorns that pierced him. When this meditation begins to
take place, bitterness of spirit with wayling and mourning takes place in
like manner. Zach. 12. v. 10. And they shall look upon him whom they have
pierced, and they shall lament for him as one lamenteth for his only son.
Peter in his first sermon struck the Jews as with a thunderclappe from
heaven, when he said unto them, Ye have crucified the Lord of glory, so as
at the same time three thousand men were pricked in their hearts, and said,
Men and breethren, What shall we do to be saved? Again, if Christ for our
sins shed his heart blood: and if our sins made him sweat water and
blood, Oh then why should not we our selves shed bitter tears, and why
should not our hearts bleed for them? He that finds himself so dull and
hardened that the Passion of Christ does not humble him, is in a lamentable
case; for there is no faith in the death of Christ, effectual in him as yet.

Secondly, the meditation of the Passion of Christ is a most notable means to
breed repentance and reformation of life in time to come. For when we begin
to think that Christ crucified, by suffering the first and second death, has
procured unto us remission of all our sins past, and freed us from hell,
death, and damnation: then, if there be but a spark of grace in us, we begin
to be of another mind, and to reason thus with our selves: What? has the Lord
been thus merciful to me, that am in my self but a firebrand of hell, as to
free me from deserved destruction and to receive me to favor in Christ? yea,
no doubt, he has, his name be blessed therefore: I will not therefore sin
any more as I have done, but ever hereafter endeavor to keep my self from
every evil way. And thus faith purifies both heart and life.

Thirdly, when thou art in any pain of body or sickness, think how light
these are compared to the agony and bloody sweat, to the crown of thorns and
nails of Christ When thou art wronged in word or deed by any man, turn
thine eye to the cross, consider how meekely he suffered all abuses for the
most part in silence, and prayed for them that crucified him. When thou art
tempted with pride or vainglory, consider how for thy proper sins Christ was
despised and mocked and condemned among thieves. When anger and desire of
revenge inflame thine heart, think how Christ gave himself to death to save
his enemies, even then when they did most cruelly entreat him, and shed his
blood: and by these meditations, specially if they be mingled with faith, thy
mind shall be eased.

Thus we see how Christ crucified is to be known: and hence arises a
threefolde knowledge: one of God, the second of our neighbors, the third of our
selves.

Touching the first: If we would know the true God aright, and know him to
our salvation, we must know him only in Christ crucified. God in himself
and his own majesty is invisible, not only to the eyes of the body, but also
to the very minds of men, and he is revealed to us only in Christ, in whom
he is to be seen as in a glass. For in Christ he sets forth and gives
his justice, goodness, wisdom, and himself wholly unto us. For this cause
he is called the brightness of the glory, and the engraven form of the
person of the father. Hebr. 1. 3. and the image of the invisible God, Coloss.
1. 15. Therefore we must not know God and seek him any where else but in
Christ: and whatsoever out of Christ comes unto us in the name of God, is a
flat idol of man's brain.

As for our neighbors, those especially that are of Gods Church, they are to
be known of us on this manner: When we are to do any duty unto them, we
must not barely respect their persons, but Christ crucified in them, and them
in Christ. When Paul persecuted such as called on the name of Christ, he then
from heaued cried, Saul, Saul, Why per secutest thou me? Here then let this be
marked, that when the poor comes to us for relief, it is Christ that comet to
our doors and says, I am hungry, I am thirsty, I am naked: and let the
bowels of compassion be in us toward them as toward Christ, unless we
will hear that fearful sentence in the day of judgment, Go ye cursed into
hell, etc. I was hungry, and ye fed me not: I was naked, and ye did not
cloth me, etc.

Thirdly, the right knowledge of our selves arises of the knowledge of Christ
crucified, in whom and by whom we come to know five special things of our
selves. The first, how grievous our sins are, and therefore how miserable we
are in regard of them. If we consider our offenses in themselves, and as they
are in us, we may soon be deceived, because the conscience being corrupted
often erreth in giving testimony, and by that means makes sin to appear
less then it is indeed. But if sin be considered in the death and passion
of Christ, whereof it was the cause, and the vileness thereof measured by the
unspeakable torments endured by the son of God: and if the greatness of the
offense of man be esteemed by the endless satisfaction made to the justice of
God, the least sin that is will appear to be a sin indeed, and that most
grievous and ougly. Therefore Christ crucified must be used of us as a myrrour
or looking glass, in which we may fully take a view of our wretchedness and
misery, and what we are by nature. For such as the passion of Christ was in
the eyes of men, such is our passion or condition in the eyes of God; and that
which wicked men did to Christ, the same does sin and Satan to our very
souls.

The second point is, that men believing in Christ are not their own, or
lords of themselves, but wholly both body and soul belong to Christ, in that
they were given to him of God the Father, and he has purchased them with his
own blood, 1. Cor. 3. Ye are Christ's, and Christ Gods. Hence it comes to
pass (which is not to be forgotten) that Christ esteems all the crosses and
afflictions of his people, as his own proper afflictions. Hence again we must
learn to give up our selves both in body and soul to the honor and service
of Christ, whose we are.

The third is, that every true believer, not as he is a man, but as he is a new
man or a Christian, has this being and subsisting from Christ, We are members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bone, Ephesians. 5. v. 30. In which words,
Paul alludes to the speech of Adam, Genes. 3. Thou art bone of my bone, and
flesh of my flesh, and thereby he teaches, that as Eve was made of a ribbe
taken out of the side of Adam; so does the whole Church of Cod, and every man
regenerate, spring and arise out of the blood that streamed from the heart and
side of Christ crucified.

The fourth is, that all good works done of us, proceed from the virtue and
merit of Crist crucified: he is the cause of them in us, and we are the causes
of them in and by him. Without me (says he) ye can do nothing: and, Every
branch that bears not fruit in me, mark well he says, in me, he takes
away, Ioh. 15. v. 2.

The fifth point is, that we owe unto Christ an endless debt. For he was
crucified only as our surety and pledge, and in the spectacle of his Passion
we must consider our selves as the chief debtors, and that the very discharge
of our debt, that is, the sins which are inherent in us, were the proper
cause of all the endless pains and torments that Christ endured, that he
might set us most miserable bankrupts at liberty from hell, death, and
damnation. For this his unspeakable goodness, if we do but once think of it
seriously, we must needs confess that we owe our selves, our souls, and
bodies, and all that we have as a debt due unto him. And so soon as any man
begins to know Christ crucified, he knows his own debt, and thinks of the
payment of it.

Thus we see how Christ is to be known: now we shall not need to make much
examination whether this manner of knowing and acknowledging of Christ, take
any place in the world or no: for very few there be that know him as they
ought. The Turk even at this very day knows him not but as he was a Prophet.
The Jew scorneth his cross and passion. The popish Churches, though in word
they confess him, yet do they not know him as they ought. The Friars and
Jesuits in their sermons at this day, commonly use the Passion as a means to
stir up pity and compassion toward Christ, who being so righteous a man
was so hardly entreated, and to inflame their hearers to an hatred of the
Jews, and Judas, and Pontius Pilate that put our blessed Savior to death; but
all this may be done in any other history. And the service of God which in that
Church stands now in force by the Canons of the Council of Trent, defaceth
Christ crucified, in that the passions of martyrs are made meritorious, and the
very wood of the cross their only help: and the virgin Mary the Queen of
heaven, and a mother of mercy, who in remission of sins may command her
son: and they give religious adoration to dumme Crucifixes made by the hand
and art of man.

The common protestant likewise comes short herein for three causes. First
whereas in word they acknowledge him to be their Savior, that has redeemed
them from their evil conversation, yet indeed they make him a patron of
their sins. The thief makes him the receiver, the murderer makes him his
refuge, Calvin. (...) Gal. c. 6. 2.
the adultcrer (be it spoken with reverence to his majesty) makes him the
bawd. For generally men walk on in their evil ways; some living in this
sin, some in that, and yet for all this they persuade themselves that God is
merciful, and that Christ has freed them from death and damnation. Thus
Christ that came to abolish sin, is made a maintainer thereof, and the common
packe-horse of the world to bear every man's burden. Secondly, men are content
to take knowledge of the merit of Christ's passion for the remission of their
sins, but in the mean season the virtue of Christ's death in the mortifying
of sin, and the blessed example of his passion, which ought to be followed
and expressed in our lives and conversations, is little or nothing regarded.
Thirdly, men usually content themselves generally and confusedly to know Christ
to be their Redeemer, never once seeking in every particular estate and
condition of life, and in every particular blessing of God, to feel the
benefit of his passion. What is the cause that almost all the world live in
security, never almost touched for their horrible sins? surely the reason
is, because they did never yet seriously consider that Christ in the garden lay
groueling upon the earth, sweating water and blood for their offenses. Again,
all such as by fraud and oppression, or any kind of hard dealing suck the
blood of poor men, never yet knew that their sins drew out the heart
blood of Christ. And proud men and women that are puffed up by reason of
their attire, which is the badge of their shame, and never cease hunting after
strange fashions, do not consider that Christ was not crucified in gay
attire, but naked, that he might bear the whole shame and curse of the law for
us. These and such like whatsoever they say in word, if we respect the tenor
of their lives, are flat enemies of the cross of Christ, and tread his
precious blood under their feet.

Now then, considering this so weighty and special a point of religion is so
much neglected, O man or woman, high or low, young or old, if thou have been
wanting this way, begin for very shame to learn and learning truly to know
Christ crucified. And that thou may attain to this, behold him often, not in
the wooden crucifixe after the popish manner, but in the preaching of the
Word, and in the Sacraments, in which thou shall see him crucified before
thine eyes, Galat. 3. 1. Desire not here upon earth to behold him with the
bodily eye, but look upon him with the eye of true and lively faith, applying
him and his merits to thy self as thine own, and that with a broken and
bruised heart, as the poor Israelites stung with fiery serpents even to death,
beheld the brazen serpent. Again, thou must look upon him first of all as a
glass or spectacle, in which thou shall see Gods glory greater in thy
Redemption, then in thy creation. In the creation appeared Gods infinite
wisdom, power, and goodness: in thy Redemption by the passion of Christ, his
endless justice and mercy. In the creation thou art a member of the first
Adam, and bear his image: in thy Redemption thou art a member of the second
Adam. In the first, thou art endued with natural life, in the second with
spiritual. In the first, thou have in the person of Eve thy beginning of the
ribbe of Adam: in the second, thou have thy beginning as thou art borne of God,
out of the blood of Christ. Lastly, in the first, god gave life by commanding
that to be, which was not: in the second, he gives life not by life, but by
death, even of his own son. This is the mystery into which the Angels
themselves desire to look into, 1. Pet. 1. 12. Secondly, thou must behold him
as the full price of thy Redemption, and perfect reconciliation with God; and
pray earnestly to God, that he would seal up the same in thy very conscience
by his holy spirit. Thirdly, thou must behold Christ as an example, to whom
thou must conform thy self by regeneration. For this cause give diligence,
that thou may by experience say, that thou art dead and crucified and
buried with Christ, and that thou risest again with him, to newness of life:
that he inlightens thy mind, and by degrees reformes thy will and affections,
and give thee both the will and the deed in every good thing. And that thou
may not fail in this thy knowledge, read the history of Christ's passion,
observe all the parts and circumstances thereof, and apply them to thy self
for thy full conversion. When thou read that Christ went to the garden, as
his custom was, where the Jews might soonest attach him, consider that he
went to the death of the cross for thy sins willingly, and not of
constraint; and that therefore thou for thy part should do him all service
freely and frankely, Psalm. 110. 3. When thou hear that in his agony his
soul was heavy unto death, know it was for thy sins, and that thou
should much more conceive heaviness of heart for the same: again, that
this sorrow of his is joy and rejoicing unto thee, if thou will believe in him;
therefore Paul says rejoice, I say again rejoice in the Lord. When thou
read that in the garden he prayed lying groueling on his face, sweating
water and blood, begin to think seriously what an unspeakable measure of
gods wrath was upon thy blessed Savior, that did prostrate his body upon the
earth, and cause the blood to follow: and think that thy sins must needs
be most heinous, that brought such bloody and grievous pains upon him. Also
think it a very shame for thee to carry thy head to heaven with haughty
looks, to wallowe in thy pleasures, and to draw the innocent blood of thy
poor brethren by oppression and deceit, for whom Christ sweat water and
blood, and take an occasion from Christ's agony, to lay aside the pride of thy
heart, to be ashamed of thy self, to grieve in heart, yea even to bleed for
thine own offenses, casting down and humbling thy self with Ezra, saying,
Ezra. 9.
O my God, I am confounded and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee, my God:
for mine iniquities are increased, and my trespass is grown up into heaven,
etc. When thou read that Christ was taken and bound, think that thy very
sins brought him into the power of his enemies, and were the very bonds
wherewith he was tied: think that thou should have been bound in the
very same manner unless he had been a surety and pledge for thee: think
also that thou in the self same manner art bound and tied with the chains of
thine own sins, and that by nature thy will, affections, and whole spirit is
tied and chained to the will of the devil, so as thou can do nothing but
that which he wills: lastly, think and believe that the bonds of Christ
serve to purchase thy liberty from hell, death and damnation. When thou hear
that he was brought before Annas and Caiaphas, think it was meet, that thy
surety and pledge who was to suffer the condemnation due unto thee, should by
the high priest as by the mouth of God, be condemned: and wonder at this, that
the very coessentiall and eternal son of God, even the very sovereign judge
of the world, stands to be judged, and that by wicked men; persuading thy self
that this so great confusion comes of thy sins. Whereupon being further
amazed at thy fearful estate, humble thy self in dust and ashes, and pray
God so to soften thy stony heart, that thou may turn to him, and by true
faith lay hold on Christ, who has thus exceedingly abased himself, that his
ignominy may be thy glory, and his arraignment thy perfect absolution. When
thou read that Barrabas the murderer, was preferred before Christ, though
he exceeded both men and angels in holiness; think it was to manifest his
innocence, and that thy very sins pulled upon him this shameful reproach; and
in that for thy cause he was esteemed worse then Barrabas, think of thy self
as a most heinous and wretched sinner, and (as Paul says) the head of all
sinners. When thou read that he was openly and iudicially condemned to the
cursed death of the cross, consider what is the wrath and fury of God against
sin, and what is his great and infinite mercy to sinners: and in this
spectacle look upon thy self, and with groans of heart cry out, and say, O
good God, What set thou hear before mine eyes? I, even I have sinned, I am
guilty and worthy of damnation. Whence comes this change, that thy blessed
son is in my room, but of thy unspeakeable mercy? Wretch that I am, how have
I forgotten my self, and thee also my God? O son of God, how long have thou
abased thy self for me? Therefore give me grace, O God, that beholding mine
own estate in the person of my Savior thus condemned, I may detest and loath
my sins that are the cause thereof, and by a lively faith embrace that
absolution which thou offerest me in him, who was condemned in my stead and
room, O Jesus Christ Savior of the world, give me thy holy and blessed
spirit that I may judge my self, and be as vile and base in mine own eyes as
thou wast vile before the Jews: also unite me unto thee by the same spirit,
that in thee I may be as worthy to be accepted before God, as I am worthy in my
self to be detested for my sins. When thou read, that he was clad in
purple and crowned with thorns, mocked and spitt upon, behold the everlasting
shame that is due unto thee, and be ashamed of thy self, and in this point
conform thy self to Christ, and be content (as he was) to be reproched,
abused, and despised, so it be for a good cause. When thou read, that before
his crucifying, he was stripped of all his clothes, think it was that he being
naked might bear thy shame on the cross, and with his most precious and rich
nakedness cover thy deformity. When thou read the complaint of Christ, that
he was forsaken of his father, consider how he suffered the pangs and torments
of hell as thy pledge and surety. Learn by his unspeakable torments what a
fearful thing it is to sin against God, and begin to renownce thy self,
and detest thy sins, and to walk as a child of light, according to the
measure of grace received. When thou come to die, set before thine eyes
Christ in the midst of all his torments on the cross: in beholding of which
spectacle to thy endless comfort, thou shall see a paradise in the midst of
hell: God the father reconciled unto thee, thy Savior reaching out his hands
unto thee to receive thy soul unto him; and his cross as a ladder to advance
it to eternal glory. Whereas he cried aloud with a strong voice at the point
of death, it was to show that he died willingly without violence or constraint
from any creature, and that if it had so pleased him, he could have freed
himself from death, and have cast his very enemies to the very bottom of
hell. When thou read that he commended his soul into the hands of his
father, consider that thy soul also (so be it thou will believe in him) is
delivered up into the hands of God, and shall be preserved against the rage and
malice of all thine enemies, and hereupon thou may be bold to commend thy
spirit into the hands of God the father. When thou read of his death,
consider that thy sins were the cause of it, and that thou should have
suffered the same eternally, unless the Son of God had come in thy room:
again consider his death as a ransom, and apprehend the same by faith, as the
means of thy life: for by death Christ has wounded both the first and second
death, and has made his cross to be a throne or tribunal seat of judgment
against all his and thine enemies. When thou read of the trembling of the
earth at the death of Christ, think with thy self it did in his kind as it
were groan under the burden of the sins of men in the world: and by his
motion then it signified that even thou and the rest deserved rather to be
swallowed of the earth, and to go down into the pit alive, then to have any
part in the merit of Christ crucified. When thou read of his burial, think
it was to ratify his death, and to vanquish death even in his own den.
Apply this burial to thy self, and believe that it serves to make thy grave
a bed of down, and to free thy body from corruption. Lastly, pray to God
that thou may feel the power of the spirit of Christ, weakening and
consuming the body of sin, even as a dead corpse rots in the grave, till it
be resolved to dust.

When thou have thus perused and applied to thy self the history of the
Passion of Christ, go yet further, and labor by faith to see Christ crucified
in all the works of God, either in thee or upon thee. Behold him at thy table
in meat and drink, which is as it were a lively sermon and a daily pledge of
the mercy of God in Christ. Behold him in all thine afflictions, as thy
partner that pitieth thy case, and has compassion on thee. Behold him in thy
most dangerous temptations, in which the devil thundereth damnation, behold
him, I say, as a mighty Sampson bearing away the gates of his enemies upon his
own shoulders: and killing more by death then by life, crucifying the devil,
even then when he is crucified, by death killing death: by entrance into the
grave, opening the grave and giving life to the dead, and in the house of death
spoiling him of all his strength and power. Behold him in all the afflictions
of thy brethren, as though he himself were naked, hungry, sick,
harbourlesse, and do unto them all the good thou can, as to Christ himself.
If thou would behold God himself, look upon him in Christ crucified, who
is the engraven image of the fathers person; and know it to be a terrible thing
in the time of the trouble of thy conscience to think of God without Christ,
in whose face the glory of God in his endless mercy is to be seen, 2. Cor.
4. v. 6. If thou would come to God for grace, for comfort, for salvation,
for any blessing, come first to Christ hanging, bleeding, dying upon the
cross, without whom there is no hearing God, no helping God, no saving God,
no God to thee at all. In a word, let Christ be all things without exception
unto thee, Coloss. 3. 11. for when thou praiest for any blessing either
temporal or spiritual, be it whatsoever it will be or canbe, thou must ask
it at the hands of God the father by the merit and mediation of Christ
crucified: now look as we ask blessings at Gods hand, so must we receive them
of him; and as they are received, so must we possess and use them daily,
namely as gifts of God procured to us by the merit of Christ: which gifts for
this very cause, must be wholly employed to the honor of Christ.

FINIS.

