ORDERS, Set down by the Duke of Medina, Lord general of the Kings Fleet, to
be observed in the voyage toward England.

Translated out of Spanish into English by T. P.

depiction of a galleon

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Gilbert, dwelling in
Fleetstreete near to the sign of the Castle. 1588.

Don Alonso Peers de guzman, the good Duke of Medina, Sidonia, County of
Nebla, Marquis of Casheshe in Africa, Lord of the City Saint Lucar, Captain
general of the Occian Sea, of the Cost of Andaluzia, and of this Army of his
Majesty, and Knight of the honorable order of the golden Fleece.
I Do ordain and command, that the general Masters of the field, all
Captains, Officers of the Camp and of the Sea, Pilats, Masters, Soldiers,
Mariners, and Officers, and whatsoever other people for the land or Sea
service comes in this Army, all the time that it indureth, shall be thus
governed, as hereafter follows, viz.

First, and before all things, The cause of the Journey.
it is to be understood by all the above named from the highest to the lowest:
that the principal foundation and cause that has moved the King his Majesty
to make and continue this journey, has been and is, to serve God, and to
return unto his Church a great many of contrite souls that are oppressed by
the Heretics, enemies to our holy Catholic faith, which have them subjects to
their sects, and unhappiness: and for that every one, may put his eyes upon
this mark, as we are bound, I do command and much desire every one, to give
charge unto the inferiors and those under their charge to imbarke themselves,
Their Shrift.
being shriuen, and having received the Sacrament with competent contrition for
their sins: by the which contrition and zeal to do GOD such great service,
he will carry and guide us to his great glory: which is, that which
particularly and principally is pretended.

For avoiding blasphemy and raging oaths, and others.
In like manner, I do charge and command you, to have particular care, that no
Soldier, Mariner, or other, that serves in this Army, do blaspheme, or rage
against God, or our Lady, or any of the Saints, upon pain that he shall
therefore sharply be corrected, and very well chastened, as it shall seem best
unto us: and for other oaths of less quality, the governors in the same
ships they go in, shall procure to remedy all: they shall punish them in
taking away their allowance of wine, or otherwise, as they shall think good.
And for that the most occasions come by play, you shall publikly prohibit it,
especially the games that are forbidden: Debarring play.
and that none do play in the night, by no means.

And to avoid inconveniences that might ensue in this Army and force of his
Majesty, if that the here written were not put for remedy, by these presents
I do command, that particularly and generally, all quarrels, angers, defiances
and injuries that are and have been before this day, and until the publication
hereof, of all persons as well by Sea as land, Suppressing of quarrels.
of greater or less qualities be suppressed and suspended, so that none goes
in this Army for the time that this voyage continues and lasts, although
they be old quarrels: yet for my express commandment shall break this truce
and forbearance of Arms, directly, or indirectly, upon pain of disobedience
and incurring into high treason, and dye therefore.

In like manner I do give charge, Digraces avoided.
that abord the ships there be not any thing offered to the disgrace of any
man.

Declaring herewithall, that there cannot be any disgrace imputed to any man
for any thing that shall be offered, nor yet be a reproach whatsoever happens
abord any ship.

And for that it is known that great inconuenie^ces and offense grows unto
God, Carrying of common women.
by consenting that common women and such like go in like Armies:

I do ordain and command, that there be none embarked nor carried in the
Army: And if that any will carry them, I do command the Captains and
Masters of the ships, not to consent thereto: who so does, or dissembleth
therewith, shall be grievously punished.

Giving the good morrow.
The company of every ship, one every morning at the break of the day,
according to the custom, shall give the good morrow by the maine mast, and at
night the Aue Maria: and some days the Salve Regine: or at least, the
Saterdaies with a Lettenie.

Avoiding all occasions of Scandale.
And forasmuch as it imports for the preservation and good success of this
army, that there be between the Soldiers and Mariners much confirmed
friendship, and such amity that there be not any difference, nor other
occasions of murmuring, I command it to be published that no body do carry
any Dagger, nor thwart one another, or give any occasions, but that all do obey
the superior Officers: and if any Scandale or offense come, he that was the
beginner, shall straightly be punished.

Order for departure.
When the Gallion Saint Marten, wherein my self go, Admiral of this Fleet,
does make a sign with a piece of Ordinance, it shall be a sign of departure
for the whole Fleet, that sounding their Trumpets shall follow without losing
time, and without coming fowell of each other, and cutting sail shall do the
like: having great care of the Sands and Catchops, carrying their Boats and
Skiffes ready for any thing that may happen.

Being from the land a sea board, Order for coming to the Admiral.
every ship shall come to leyward, saluting the Admiral to know what he will
command: and demand the word, without going a head the Admiral, either in the
day or in the night, but to have great care to his sailing.

Every afternoon they shall repair to their Admirals to take the word, Taking
the word.
and to know if there be any thing to do.

And for that so many great Ships, and so great may be, cannot come every day
without bording one another: to avoid the danger that may follow, the
General of each Squadron shall have particular care, to take the word in time,
to give it unto the Ships under their charge.

The Admiral shall be saluted with Trumpets, of them that have them: if not,
Hayling the Admiral.
with their Whistles: and the people to hallowe one after another, and
aunswering them shall salute again: and if it be toward night to demand the
word, and taking it shall salute one another in time, and depart to give room
to others that follow.

The watch word.
If it happens some days that wind will not suffer to take the word of the
Admiral or Admirals, they shall have for every day in the week the words
following.

Sunday. Jesus. Monday. The holy Ghost. Tuesday. The holy Trinity. Wensday.
Saint James. Thursday. The Angels. Friday. All Saints. Saturday. Our Lady.
Disposing of their Squadrons.
And for that it imports that all the Armies do go close together, I do
command that the General and wings with great care, do procure to carry the
Squadrons as nigh and in as good order, as is possible: and the Ship and
Pinnesses of the charge of Don Antonio de Hartado de Mendosa, keep next unto
the Admiral, except six: whereof, two shall follow the Admiral Don Pedro de
Valdezi, and two the Admiral of Martine Bretendona: the other two the Admiral
of Joan Gomes de Medina: the which shall be appointed presently, and have great
care to repart themselves, without the one thwarting the other: and the
Squadron of the Hulkes shall go always in the mids.

That no ship of the Navy, Departure without license.
nor any that goes with them shall depart, without my license: And I do
command upon pain of death, and loss of goods, that if by chance with a
storm any be driven to depart before they come to the Cape Finister, that
then they follow their course to the said Cape, where they shall have my order
what to do: or else they shall sail to the Groyne, where they shall have it.

In departing from the Groyne, The Randeuous.
they shall set their course for Silley, and procure to make the Sowtherside of
it, having great care of their sounding: And if by chance in this course any
ship or ships do loose the Fleet, they shall not return into Spain, in
any manner, upon pain of death and the loss of goods, and taken for
Traitors, but follow the course, and make to the Southward of the said Island.
And if any such do think the Navy to be asterne of him, he shall detain
himself in the same height playing up and down, and not to depart from his
course.

And if it be thought that the Navy is a head, then shall you seek them in
Monts bay, Directions from Monts bay.
which is betwixt the Lands end and the Lizard, there shall you have the whole
Navy, or intelligence what he shall do: and yet for all this, if he do not
meet with the Navy, yet shall he find Pinnesses with order what shall be done.

Watching of the Admiral.
In the night there shall be great vigilance for the Admiral, to see if she
change her course, or make about. Before she goes about, she will shoot off a
piece: and being about, will put forth an other light upon the Poope a part
from the Lantern: who that does see it, shall answer with an other light.

Marks by lights.
When he does take away Bonnets, or shorten the Sails, he shall show lights,
one in the Poope, and other two shrowed high.

When that for any occasion he shall strike all Sails, he shall show three
lights, one in the top, an other in the Shrowdes, and the third in the
Fore-castle: and the rest shall show it, with putting forth a light each upon
his Poope.

Shooting off pieces.
If any Ship have any occasion to strike al her Sails in the night, he shall
shoot off a great piece, and put out a Lantern all night, and those that are
nighest unto him shall show lights, for that other may procure it, and shall
take in the Sails till day: And if necessity be great, shall shoot off an
other piece, and those that do see it, shall answer with other two lights,
making the like board.

When the Admiral will have any communication, he will make a sign, Signs by
Flagges.
putting a flagge in the after misne near the Lantern, and so they shall
repair unto him to know what he would have. If (which God for his mercy
permit not) there happen any Ship to take fire, the next unto her shall make
from her, Remedy for fire.
sending first their Boats and Skiffes to succor and help, and so shall all
the rest.

They shall have particular care to put forth their fire in every Ship, To
put forth fire.
before the Sun go down.

In taking of their allowance of victuals, Allowance of victuals.
the Soldiers shall let them that have the charge thereof, to deliver it, so
that the said Soldiers shall not go down to take it, nor choose it perforce,
as in times they have done: and for this cause shall be present the Sergeant
or Corporal of the company or companies where they are, for avoiding
disorder, and that timely they have their portions: so that before night every
body may have supped.

That no ship nor other vessel of this Navy, nor of any of those, Anckoring
or harborough, or going a shore.
that goes subject under my jurisdiction, shall not be so bold to enter into
any Harborough, ancker, nor go a shore, without the Admiral does do it first,
or with my special leave, upon pain of punishment hereof.

Armor kept clean.
The Corenalls of the field, Captains, Lieftenants, Ensign and officers, must
have particular care, that the Soldiers have always their Armor clean,
ready and in order, for time of necessity: causing the^ to make them clean
twice every week, and using themselves with them in such sort, that they may
be expert at the time of need.

For preventing fire.
And for that in the way order shall be given in what form every man shall put
himself, if we do fight, I do command that particular care be had, aduising
the Gunners to have half Buts with water and vinegar, as is accustomed, with
Bonnets and old Sails, and wet Mantels to defend fire, that as often is
thrown, as to have the like care to have shot made in good quantity, Shot,
powder and Match.
and that powder and match be ready for Ship, and Soldiers of the store by
weight, measure and length: according to the order that every Ship has to
deliver unto him that has the charge thereof according to use and custom.

Also I order and command that there be a care, Room clean of Chestes and
Cards.
that all Soldiers have their room clean and vnpestered of Chestes, and
other things, without consenting in any case to have Cards: and if there be
any, to be taken away presently: neither permit them to the Mariners: and if
the Soldiers have any, let me be advertised, that I may command them to be
taken away.

And for that the Mariners must resort unto their work, tackle and
Navigations, Mariners lodgings.
it is convenient that their lodgings be in the upper works of the poope, and
fore-castle, otherwise the Soldiers will trouble them in the voyage.

The Artillarie must stand in very good order, and reparted amongst the
Gunners, Lockers for the Gunners.
being al charged with their balls, and nigh unto every piece his locker,
wherein to put his Shot and necessaries, and to have great care to the
Cartrages of every Piece, for not changing or not taking fire: and that the
Ladles and Spunges be ready at hand.

Every Ship shall carry two Boats lading of stones, Stones and half pipes.
to throw to profit in the time of fight on the Deck, Fore-castle or tops,
according to his burden: and shall carry two half Pipes, to fill them with
water in the day of Battle, and repart them amongst the Ordinance, or other
places, as shall be thought necessary, and nigh unto them old clothes or
couerings, which with wetting may destroy any kind of fire.

Wild fire.
That the wild fire be reparted to the people most expert, that we have for the
use thereof at due time: for that if it be not ouer-seene, giving charge
thereof to those that does understand it, and such as we know can tell how to
use it: otherwise it may happen to great danger.

The Navy close together.
By the commandment that no ship shall go a head the Admiral, at the least in
the night, none shall tarry a stern the Vice Admiral, and every one to have
a care to the trimming of his Sails, according to the charge he has, and the
sailing of his ship: for the much that it imports that all our Navy do go
close as possible as they may: and in this the Captains, Masters, and Pilates
must have such great care, as of them is hope^.

Reading these instructions.
These my instructions are delivered unto every Ship, and have their copy
firmed by my hand, and regestred by my Secretary, the which shall be read by
every Purser of every Ship publicly, to come to the note of all Soldiers
and Mariners, whereby they may not pretend ignorance: and to the said Pursers
I ordain and command, that thrice in the week they be bound to read these my
instructions publikly, and that they take witness of the fulfilling hereof,
upon pain of him that does the contrary, shall receive punishment to the
example of others.

All the above said, we command to be manifested, and be kept without any
breach for the service of his Majesty, none to break them or any part
thereof in no manner, upon pain they shall be severely punished, every one
according to his estate and offense: all others reserved to our discretion.

Made in the Gallion Saint Marten, at the Road of Belline, the 28. of May.
1588. Th. N.


