SONNETS TO THE FAIREST COELIA.

Parue, nec inuideo, sine me liber ibis ad illam,
Hei mihi quod domino no^ licet ire tuo.
Trist. 1. stylized fleur-de-lis

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip, for W. P. 1594.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, whereas I was fully determined to have concealed my
Sonnets, as things privy to my self, yet of courtesy having lent them to
some, they were secretly committed to the Press, and almost finished, before
it came to my knowledge. Wherefore making, as they say, Virtue of necessity, I
did deem it most convenient to praepose mine Epistle, only to beseech you to
account of them as of toys and amorous devises, and ere long, I will impart
unto the world another Poem which shall be both more fruitful and ponderous.
In the mean while I commit these as a pledge unto your indifferent censures.
London, 1594.

W. Percy.

COELIA.
Sonnet I.
IVdg'd by my goddess doom to endless pain,
Lo here I open my sorrovves passion,
That every silly eye may view most plain,
A sentence given on no occasion.
If that by chance they fall most fortunate,
Within those cruel hands that did enact it,
Say but, alas he was too passionate,
My doom is past, nor can be now vnactit.
So may thou see I was a spotless lover,
And grieve vvithall that ere thou dealt so sore.
Unto remorse who goes about to move her,
Pursues the vvinged winds, and tils the shore.
Lovely is her semblance, hard is her heart,
Wavering is her mind, sure is her dart.
Sonnet II.
Oh happy hour, and yet unhappy hour,
When first by chance I had my goddess vievved,
Then first I tasted of the sweetest sour,
Wherevvith the cup of Cypria is embrevved.
For gazing ferme without suspicion,
Love coopt behind the charet of her eye,
Justly to school my bold presumption,
Against my heart did let an arrow fly:
Fair sir, quoth he, to practice have you naught
But to be gazing on deuinitie?
Before you part, your leare you shall be tought,
With that attonce he made his arrows hie:
Imperious God, I did it not to love her,
Ah, stay thy hand, I did it but to prove her.
Sonnet III.
Prove her? Ah no, I did it but to love her:
Then shoot amain, drad liege, I stand unarmed,
Although no hope that any thing may move her,
Some ease it is to be by beauty charmed.
Then quick, my liege, the^ quick, and end thy game,
That all the world may see how thou have plagued us,
Then cruel she shall view unto her blame,
That all men be not fickle as they'ue termed us:
May be, my words may win contrition;
If not my words, my sobs; if not my sobs,
My tears may move her to compassion;
If tears do fail, my tears, my words, my throbs,
Ay me, Ah no, tears, words, throbs all in vain,
She scorns my dole, and smileth at my pain.
Sonnet IIII.
Oh heavenly Coelia, as fair as virtuous,
The only mirror of true chastity,
Have I been against thy godhead impious,
That thus am guerdond for my fealty?
Have I not shed upon thine yu'rie shrine,
Huge drops of tears with large eruptions?
Have I not offered eu'ning and at prime
My sighs, my Psalms of inuocations?
What be men's sighs, but calls of guilefulnesse?
They show, dear love, true proofs of fermitie*
What be your tears, but mere ungraciousness?
Tears only plead for our simplicity:
When all strike mute, she says it is my duty,
And claims as much as to her deity.
Sonnet V.
Fair Queen of Gnidos come adorn my forehead,
And crown me with the lavvrell emperor,
I'o thrice sing I'o about thy Poet,
Lo on my goddess I am conqueror.
For once by chance, not sure, or vvittingly,
Upon my foot, her tender foot alighted,
With that she plucked it off full vvimbely,
As though the very touch had her afrighted:
Dear mistress, will you deal so cruelly,
To prive me of so small a benefit?
What? do you iert it off so nimbely,
As though in very sooth a snake had bit it?
Yea bit perhaps indeed: Ho, Muses blab you?
Not a word Pieannets, or I will gag you.
Sonnet VI.
Good God how senseless be we paramours,
So proudly on a nothing for to vaunt it?
We cannot reap the meanest of all favors,
But by and by we think our suit is grauntit.
Had ye observed two planets which then mounted,
Two certain signs of indignation,
Ye would have deemed rather both consented,
To turn all hopes to desperation.
Then can you waver so inconstantly,
To show first love, and then disdainfulnesse?
First for to bring a dram of courtesy,
Then mix it with an ounce of scornfulnesse?
No, no, the doubt is ansvver'd, certainly
She trod by chance, she trod not vvittingly.
Sonnet VII.
If it be sin so dearly for to love thee,
Come bind my hands, I am thy prisoner,
Yet if a spark of pity may but move thee,
First sit upon the cause commissioner.
The same well heard may wrest incontinent
Two floods from forth those rocks of adamant
Which streaming down with force impatient,
May melt the breast of my fierce Rhadamant.
Dearest cruel the cause I see dislikes thee,
On us thy brows thou bends so direfully;
Enioine me pennaunce whatsoever likes thee,
What e're it be I Will take it thankefully.
Yet since for love it is I am thy bondsman,
Good Coelia use me like a Gentleman.
Sonnet VIII.
Strike up, my Lute, and ease my heavy cares,
The only solace to my passions,
Impart unto the aires thy pleasing aires,
More svveet than heavenly consolations.
Rehearse the songs of forlorn amot'us
Driv'ne to despair by dames tyrannical,
Of Alpheus loss, of vvoes of Troilus,
Of Rowlands rage, of Jphis funeral.
Aim, what vvarbles yields mine instrument?
The bases skrieke, as though they were amiss,
The Means, no means, too sad the meriment,
No, no, the music good, but thus it is,
I loath both Means, meriment, Diapasons,
So she and I may be but Unisons.
Sonnet IX.
Whilst others vveene sole hopes to be a sauue,
Sole hopes I find to be my corosiues:
Whilst others found in hopes an harbor have,
From hopes I feel a sea of sorrovves rise:
For when mild hopes should ease my raging fires,
They fester more, in that they are but hopes:
Then whilst I touch the port of my desires,
A storm of hate does burst mine anchor ropes.
Were I but once resolved certainly,
Soon should I know which point my helm to stere,
But she denies my suit most vvomanly,
As hidden documents for us to hear.
Lo this the cause my hell forsakes me never.
Tell me, (dear svveet) thus shall I live for ever?
Sonnet X.
A MYSTERY.
To win the Fort how often have I assayd,
Wherein the heart of my fair mistress lies?
What Rams, what mines, what plots have I not laid?
Yet still am frighted from mine enterprise.
First from the leads of that proud citadell,
Do foulder forth two fiery culuerines,
Under two red coats keep the Larum bell,
For fear of close or open venturings.
Before the gates Scorn, Fear, and Modesty,
Do toss amain their pikes, but boue them all
Pudic'itie vveilds her staff most manfully,
Guarded with blocks that keep me from the wall,
Yet if this staff will ford me clear the way,
In spite of all I Will bear my Dame away.
Sonnet XI.
TO POLYXENA.
Of all the women which of yore have been,
Alcest for virtue may be glorified,
For courage Teuce', for features Spartaes queen,
For all in one Polyxen' deify'd.
If true it be by old Philosophy,
These souls to have since destin entered,
To other bodies of like simpathie,
Thou art the last of these Metemps'chosed.
Thy courage vvoonderous, thy virtues peerless,
Thy features have the fairest Ladies blamed,
Then if thou scorn'st not such a Monarchesse,
Henceforth by reason good, thou shall be named,
Not Teuce', nor Alcest, nor fair Helena,
Thou shall be named my dear Polyxena.
Sonnet XII.
Coelia, of all svveet courtesies resolve me,
For wished grace, how must I now be doing,
Since Ops the co^plet'st frame which did absolve thee,
Has made each parcel to my sole undoing?
Those vvires which should thy corpse to mine unite,
Be rays to daze us from so near approach,
Thine eyne which should my nighted sailers light,
Be shot to keep them off with foul reproach.
Those ruddie plummes embrevv'd with heavenly foods,
When I would suck the^ turn to driest currall,
And when I couch betvveene her lilly buds,
They surge like frothie water mounts above all:
Surely they were all made unto good uses,
But she them all vntovvardly abuses.
Sonnet XIII.
With grievous thoughts and weighty cares oppressed,
One day I went to Venus Fanacle,
Of Cyprian dreams which did me sore molest,
To be resolved by certain oracle.
No sooner was I past the temples gate,
But from the shrine where Venus wont to stand,
I savv a Lady fair and delicate,
Did beckon to me with her yu'rie hand.
VVeening she was the goddess of the Fane,
With cheerful looks I toward bent my pace,
Soon when I came, I found unto my bane,
A Gorgon shadovv'd under Venus face,
Whereat afright, when back I would be gone,
I stood transformed to a speechless stone.
Sonnet XIIII.
When once I savv that no entreats would move her,
All means I sought to be delivered,
Against white Cupid and his golden mother,
In hie contempt base words I uttered;
When both from clouds of her bright firmament,
With heavy griefs and strong disdain surmounted,
Upon my thoughts and me did shoot reueng'ment,
Whilst in our highest prides we were amounted.
Nor be they pleased to give us all these vvounds,
To make me languish as a dying liver,
But from her orbs they fling their fiarbronds,
Thereby to quite consume both heart and liver:
Pardon, drad povv'rs, pardon my rash offense,
By heavens bright veil, t'vvas against my conscience.
Sonnet XV.
ECHO.
What is the fair to whom so long I plead? Lead,
What is her face so Angel like? Angellike.
Then unto saints in mind sh'is not unlike. Unlike,
What may be hoped of one so evil nat'red? Hatred.
O then my vvoes how shall I open best? Hope-best
Then she is flexible. She is flexible.
Fie no, it is impossible. Possible.
About her straight then only our best. You're best.
How must I first her loves to me approve? Prove.
How if she say I may not kiss her? Kiss her.
For all her bobs I must then bear, or mis her? Yes sir,
Then will she yield at length to Love? To love.
Even so? Even so. By Narcisse is it true? True.
Of thine honesty? J. Adieu. Adieu.
Sonnet XVI.
What may be thought of thine vntovvardnesse,
That moouest still at every motion?
What may be hoped of so strange vncouthnesse,
That scorns all vows, scorns all devotion?
If I but sue, thou would relieve mine anguish,
Two threatening arcks thou bendest rig'rously;
Then if I swear thy love does make me languish,
Thou turn'st away, and smilest scornfully;
Then if I vvish thou would not tyrannise,
Of Tyranny thou make but a mock'ry,
And if I weep, my tears thou do despise,
And if I stir, thou threatenst battery:
Froune on, smile on, mock me, despise me, threat me,
All shall not make me leave for to entreat thee.
Sonnet XVII.
Relent my dear, yet unkind Coelia,
At length relent, and give my sorrovves end,
So shall I keep my long wished holy day,
And set a trophey on a froward friend,
Nor tributes, nor imposts, nor other duties,
Demand I will as lavvfull conqueror;
Duties, tributes, imposts unto thy beauties,
My self will pay, as yielded seruitor.
Then quick relent, thy self surrender us:
Brave sit and why, quoth she, must I relent?
Relent, cried I, thy self does conquer us,
When eftsoons with my propper instrument,
She cut me off, ay me, and ansvvered,
You cannot conquer and be conquered.
Sonnet XVIII.
I cannot conquer and be conquered:
Then whole my self I yield unto thy favor,
Behold my thoughts flote in an ocean battered,
To be cast off, or vvafted to thine harbor:
If of the same thou vvilt then take acceptance,
Stretch out thy fairest hand as flag of peace,
If not, no longer keep us in attendance,
But all at once thy fiery shafts release.
If thus I die, an honest cause of love,
Will of my fates the rigor mittigate,
Those gracious eyne which will a Tartare move,
Will prove my case the less unfortunate,
Although my friends may rue my chance for ay,
It will be said, he died for Coelia.
Sonnet XIX.
It shall be said I died for Coelia;
Then quick thou grisly man of Erebus,
Transport me hence unto Proserpina,
To be adiudg'd as vvilfull amot'us:
To be hong up within the liquid air,
For all the sighs which I in vain have waste,
To be through Lethes waters cleansed fair,
For those dark clouds which have my looks or'ecasted,
To be condemd to everlasting fire,
Because at Cupids fire I vvilfull brent me,
And to be clad for deadly dumps in mire:
Among so many plagues which shall torment me,
One solace I shall find when I am over,
It will be known I died a constant lover.
Sonnet XX.
Receive these writs, my svveet and dearest friend,
The lively patterns of my liuelesse body,
Where thou shall find in Hebon pictures pend,
How I was meek, but thou extremely blodie.
I Will walk forlorn along the vvillovv shades,
Alone complaining of a ruthlesse dame;
Where are I pass, the rocks, the hills, the glades,
In pittious yelles shall sound her cruel name.
There I will vvaile the lot which fortune sent me,
And make my mones unto the savage ears,
The remnant of the days which nature lent me,
I Will spend them all, conceald, in ceaselesse tears.
Since unkind fates permit me not t'enioy her,
No more, burst eyes, I mean for to annoy her.
FINIS.
To Parthenophil upon his Laya and Parthenophe.
MADRIGALL.
When first I heard thy loves to Laya,
I wished the gods to turn it to good hap,
Yet since I hear thy blessed flight away,
I joy thy chance for fear of afterclap.
Vnwily man, why could not keep thee there,
But must with Parthenoph' thee'gaine entrap?
I little rue thy well deserved tears,
The beast once escaped will ever shun the trap.
What tel'st thou me by spells thou have won thy dear?
Believe her, friend, no more then Laya past,
Charmed love endures but whilst the charm does last.

