An excelent comfort to all Christians, against all kind of calamities: No
less comfortable, then pleasant, pithy, and profitable: Compendiously compiled
by John Perez, a faithful servant of god, a Spaniard (in Spanish) and now
translated into English by John Daniel, of Clements Inn, with diverse addicions
by him collected and thereunto annexed.

MARK. XIII. All men shall abhor you for my names sake (says Christ) but he
that endures to the end shall be saved.

Perused and allowed.

AT LONDON. Printed by Thomas East, for William Norton: The.ix day of August.
An. Do. 1576.

blazon or coat of arms SCENTIA EIVS MVNDVS TRANSIT ET CONCVPI 157^

O thanckes be given to God our Lord,
that of his grace has given:
A key for us to open the lock
and let us into Heaven.


TO THE RIGHT reverend Edmonde by the divine grace of the deity, Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of England, and Metrapolitane of the same: Grace and
peace from God the father, and from our Lord Jesus etc.
Remembering my self (right Reverend) of the conjunction or knitting together
of the members in one perfect body, and finding that by the health some health
that is had in every of them, they have the greater joy together with their
head, and so plu^ged in mule of the same, I called to mind the maimed and
bruised body of Jesus Christ (whereof we all are members) And when I had
well considered the goodness of almighty God our purest and principallest
Physician, and seen that he had ministered such medicine thereunto, as made
such true health so flantingly to flourish in so many and such a number of the
members thereof, I was moved to an exceeding delight: And as one delight
oftentimes brings in an other, so did it happen unto me, because of the
perfect health and soundness (which I assured my self of by faith) that I
with all the rest should see in the end, to come and be upon every perfect
limme, of the said spiritual body, from the head to the foot. But when I
had perused and perfectly beheld, how our most merciful father was
glorified, in that Sodomitticall country, so sinful a sincke of sin, the
country of Spain, by so faithful a fellovv as was and is the Aucthor of
this my travail, in whom so valiantly the fountain of faith did flow, I
was wholy rauyshed with joys: But as the foot helps the left hand, the
left hand the right hand, and so all together do help their head: Even so I
an inferior member, thought it good to perticipate parcel of these my joys
unto your grace: whom I know to be a principal member in Christ's church for
a certainty. I could declare wherein if Ars Adulandi, had not abhorred me,
whom also I have been alvvayes at defiance with. But he needs not here, for
that it has pleased the almighty Jehovah that self said Phisitio^ so to
increase your spiritual health, that such like fruit has so corespo^dently
proceeded, as by fame has been manifested to many: and especially in that it
has pleased him the fountain of all goodness, so to blase your faithfulness
to the Queens most excelent majesty, that her highness setting you in that self
same seat, which your grace (under God and her excelencie) now sits and
possesses most worthily, your perfectnes is made manifest to all. I am sure
that some amongst such a multitude as shall and will scan my doings herein, will
account me fond, rude, and prodigally presumptuous, because that I (so simple)
have taken upon me to present my self unto your grace, with this so vvorthie
a work so rudely translated and penned: and so esteem the less thereof
because it is done by me, who of late (vvhilest mine exhibition lasted) did
study the common laws of England, and say by me as I have heard a number of
them say by others the professors of true religion: Lo, behold I pray you,
here is to be seen a sedicious sour of errors in the church, he was of
late a student at the law, a lusty youth, and now for lack of living he is
become a clavvebacke amongst the heritikes and a prating protestant, (as
though it were not possible for a youth, or a student at the law to be a true
professor of christian religion) although that a great number of Lawyers be
obstinate Papists (the more is the pity) yet thanks be to God, a many of
them (to small) are very zealous of the true Religion (In Clements Inn the
most part are) But for an answer to all such as shall thus impude^tly
defame me, I say as follovveth. Am I fond do they say, because I have
dedicated it to your grace, no surely: for why, I am well advised and do
know that you will accept it in good part, for that I have seen and marked
very well, ever sithe^s your G. coming to the Bishopric of London, how
that all the enemies to idleness and vice (or as many as you knevv) were
advanced, and for the contrary the lovers thereof and abhorrors of virtuous
exercise, were supressed. Your setting forth of virtue, and punishing of vice
has much moved me to look upon my self, and made me to forget that brain
sick and that lewd rule of life which I have led in the company of some of
those that vvil so play the gnatoes against me behind my back: and has
altogether moved me to this enterprise. I (though rude) have not done it upon
any point of prodygall presumption, but most humbly have I done it, bending my
self with all humility to a bide the gentle correction of your grace, if in
any thing I have offended thereby (which my hope is I have not) And although I
be poor, do lack the worlds goods to live with all, and therefore do
now and then abide the bitterness of the cross of poverty, yet what then,
it has not made me a clavvbacke of heritickes. A clavvbacke I abhor, and so
I do an heriticke also: the want of living, I thank God for, if it were his
pleasure I should have it, he has enough for me, I seek not for it by
flattery, neither am I a flatterer. And again, I know that by so honest a
quality, so godly an exercise as this is, there is very little to be gotten
of the world, or of any of the ministers thereof: as of late I proved by
dedicating of a small translation out of Spanishe (as this was) to the Lord
Mayor, and maiestrates of the City of London, it is entitled a general
pardon for sin, it was well vvorthie to be received, and so it was of a
certain of the chiefest of them, and I contented therewith: but yet there
were some, that when I was so ready to deliver it, they were as slow to
receive it, and had as little leysor as those which are spoken of by Christ in
the xiiij. Chapter of S. Luke: they were so busied with buying and assuring
of land, of farms, of yokes of Oxen, with marying of vviues, and with
usury, that they had no leisure to look upon my book, nor yet to give me God
a mercy, and much less any part of their pursse for my pains, but have
rather hated me euersithens. The which has not made me to think to gain any
vvorldly living to enrich my self hereby, neither have I done it to please
heritikes with all, nor yet do I think that my profession herein is herisie:
for why I am sure that heritikes will be angry with me for it: And as for
the book I will justify it with and against all Baalits, that will any
way backebite me therefore) to be true and perfect religion (under your graces
correction) according to the truth and true meaning of Christ our head. And as
for the name of a protestant (though not a prattling protestant) I am very glad
to bear it at their hands: for in deed, I do protest and before god do utterly
aba^do^ and forsake the diuil and all his works as I have professed in my
baptism: and also I do protest, forsake, and (by the help of God) for ever
do renounce Antichrist and all his members with all their diuilish doctrine
and delusions: in such sort that if (as S. Paul says) my soul be not
ouersoone desolued from my body, by the grace and favor of God I will
compyle and translate together greater volums, notvvithstanding that the
dispite of my backebiting enemies be never so great. And yet surely there be
these and such like cou^terbuffetings of Satan, as are sufficient (if the
strength of Gods spirit were not) to discourage me, and one cause is amongst
the rest, for that here in England, we are grown to be like unto the
children of Israel, they did loath and abhor Ma^na, a most precious food
sent them down from heaven: and we do begin to loath the divinity of the
scriptures, as svveet a food for our souls sent us from the same place: so as
the vvryters of divinity can scarce obtain to have their coppies printed: for
why, the printing of paganicall histories and toys to mock Apes with all,
are more profitable unto the printer toward his charges, then are the books
of godly instruction, such is the vanity of us, the Lord for his mercyes
sake amend it, and grant your grace some polliticke deuyce to redress it if
it be possible. Amen.

It may be, now that I have made this answer, to these and such like good
fellows as I have before spoken off: that they will assalt me a fresh and
say, that I have spent this travail for an other purpose, and that is,
because I would show my skill, and so find falte with me, for that I have
used no more eloquence. But yet they are deceived, I have not done it to any
such end, because I have it not. I want the eloquence of Tullie, A God of the
Poets fayning.
and the help of Mercury the God of that Art: And again we need none of
them not their helps herein, for that a professor of divinity ought to speak
properly and not eloquently. And also it is not skill but good will that
brings men unto God. And therefore they that shall say, that I have don it for
any of those causes do me great wrong. I have don it for three other causes,
which is to say, for policy, love, and hope: for policy, because I have seen
proved by experience, that he which is a weak Soldier, speedeth best under the
enfeign or ba^ner of the best, stro^gest, and valyantest Captain: I thought it
good to play the like part, and so to shroud my self under the banner of your
Graces protection, thynkyng thereby to be sufficiently armed at proof, to
defend my self from the worst that either Zoylus, Momus, or Baalit, Romans
12.13. 1. Cor. 13. Ephe. 5. John. 15. 1. Pet. 2. 1. Ioh. 3.4.
with all their company can do to me. For love, because of the exhortations
that the Apostles Paul, Peter, and John, have in diverse places of their
Epistles, incited me unto: S. John in the first Epistle and the third Chapter,
after that he had strongly persuaded that we should love in verity, and not
in words, said: that whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his brother
have need, and does shut up his compassion from him, has not (and is without)
the love of God in him. I have none other riches, wherefore I thought it good to
bestow and distribute this among my brethren, trusting they will take it in
good part. For hope, because I am persuaded that your grace vvil so well like
of the book, that my hope is I shall be greatly encouraged, so well to spend
time hereafter, that in all godly doings I shall reap the commodity of so
godly a patron. And that although my well doing be not so well as I vvish,
yet that your grace vvil say for me, in magnis et voluisse sat est. And thus
because you should not say unto me, ne quid nimis, I will grovve to an end:
And though I have not nor ca^ not so purely pollish it as I would, yet what
the^, I do not dout but that it will be uttered well enough, because vino
vendibili suspensa hedera nihil opus, wherefore I do fully finish. Praying,
you of your gracious pardon for my tedious rudenes, and that it may please God
to grant you as much joy, and felicity as may be wished to any, the true
teaching of the scriptures, the love and favor of God and our most gracious
Queen, long life, prosperous success in all your graces affairs. And after
the change of this life the greatest happiness of all, which is life
everlasting. Amen. The.ix. day of August.

Your graces most humbly to serve obediently, John Danyell.

Egroto dum anima, spes est.
To the Reader.
MY mazed mind (O friendly Reader) is so fearful yt I am half afraid to let
you see this my finyshed travail: not for that I have any doubt of your
joyful receiving of the same, because I know the title thereof, will draw you
to the perusing of it through out: the which don, I presume it will be ye rather
excepted and detained, in especially of such as be or have been afflicted with
any kind of the crosses of Christ whatsoever. Because yt any such a one, should
find great profit thereby: for why, in deed it is an excelent comfort against
any kind of calamity. But surely if it happen into the hands of some such as I
know: it will be esteemed eue^ as pearl among swyne, and so to be compelled
either to frye in the fire, or else to rotte upon the donghell. This (gentle
Reader) is the cause of my fear: for that in the translatyng of it, I did
find so precious a Jewel thereof as for a certeintie, if I should by fortune
see it so euilly entreated, it would bring me into an exceeding grief and
collor for the same: the cause why, is for that I am in a merueylous love
therewith, for the great profit I have had thereby. This time twelve month by
the great goodness of God, I was visited with a grievous sickness, the which
(as many a one can tell) did tie and compel me to keep my bed and chamber
viij. or ix. weeks, I had read this book in Spanish diverse times before, and
had begun to translate a part thereof, the which, with the whole matter
(dear friends) in the book contained, was no small pleasure for me to
remember: Surely it was my exceeding comfort. I vowed then to finish the
translation thereof, the which now I thank God is done and ended, with a
general publication thereof among you: beseeching you and every of you to
whose hands it shall come, to pervse it diligently over, that ye may perfectly
have the same in mind, so that if need be, you may thereby receive consolation,
and answer in my behalf against as many as shall reprove me in mine absence
for my trauail therein. I am sure that some will reprove me and say, quam
quisque norit artem, in hac se exerceat, let every man exercise him self in
the art or faculty which he knows, Sed stultus stulta loquitor, but a fool
speaks foolish things. And therefore as one that passes not greatly what be
said against me by any of them, I do banish all fear and wax sturdie,
considering that Audaces fortuna Iuuat, fortune helps men of good courage,
for Timidi nunquam Statuerunt ad tropheum, cowerdes never got victory. And
therefore as one thus imboldened, I rest to abide the battery of any assalter
whatsoever, trustyng of your aid as necessity requires, the which if I have,
you make me yet more boulder to give a greater attempt.

Thus fare ye well. John Daniell.

Faults escaped in the printing.
Leaf line page fault. Correction. 7 9 1 Ioquitor Ioquitur 14. 16 2 not our
selves we our selves, 15 20 2 satissie satisfy, 16 24 2 know knew, 18. 11 2 is
mercy, his mercy, 36. 14 2 see him, see in him. eodem 27 unhappy happy, 40. 3
2 toss, toase, 50. 5 1 as us, 52. 9 1 dootst dooest, 57 8 1 we deprived we be
deprived, 87 6 2 captivity, captiuate, 110 8 1 tried, tiered 112 6 2 so to be
poped so all to be poped, 113. 6 1 masters, master 215. 25 1 were are 128 6 1
we die it die 132. 2 2 by their by the 134 10 2 deserneth, deserves, 137 17 2
blasphemy blasphemors, 142 23 1 Hrophet, prophet, eodem 20 2 cares, cares from
us 145 5 2 triant, tirant, 148 22 2 perishes, perished, 152 11 1 also, and
also, 153 20 1 There is, (we be not ignorant of that) which is superfluous
because it is printed twice. 154 9 1 does he, he does, 155 27 2 sudden, so
disdain, 157 10 2 sheets, sheates, 158 3 1 by^ause, because, 159 14 1
Membrothe, Nembrothe, eodem 5 2 much, is much, 160 2 1 to the Israelits his
Israelits,

The Argument of the Book.
THe Aucthor hereof was a Spanyard, and lived in Spain a country of great
persecution, by the spirit of God he did rightly understand the scriptures,
being greatly persecuted, he does very divinely comfort him self, giving
hereby the like unto others in any kind of calamity, exhorting therewith
patience, and does prove that patience brings experience, and that
experience brings hope, and so love etc. with a conclusion that great
blessedness is the end of all. Also he does express by shadows, diverse
kinds of cruelties practiced by diverse Tyrants in parties beyond the Seas:
with a plain declaration of the constancy of diverse Martirs, that have dyed
by many kinds of death, truly testified by authority sufficient, so
comfortable and delightful as is possible. etc.

In Mundo in coelis in perpetuisque tenebris est labor est requies et sunt sine
fine dolores hunc fer, vt hanc speres illos conamene vites.
G. R.

Of the will of God, an entry into the comfort, with a persuasion to know the
will of God perfectly.
The first Chapter.
THe grace and peace of God our father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with
you all that trust in his mercy, and that call upon him with a pure heart, desire
his coming, and the setting forth of his glory. By the which may it please him
to comfort us all, and to give us strength by ye virtue of his holy spirit,
against all the common temptacions, that we (which are partakers of his
reconsiliation) are afflicted with in this world. 1. Peter ^. and. 1.9.10.
For that by the^ we might not be discouraged, but rather made constant til the
end, in the grace yt god has given us to know his son Jesus Christ for the
aucthour of our salvation: Hebr. 7. and. 25.
and everlasting aduocat before his divine majesty, because we might have by
his only righteousness, a firm and sure hope, to enjoy wholly ye eternal
inheritance, promised to all those which are sa^tified by the word of truth.
Amen.

1. Cor. 10, and. 13,
God is so faithful that he will suffer nothing to touch us, without his express
will, Math. 10. and, 29 30.31 Psalm. 113, and 4.5,
whose pote^cy and might, is without any determinate end, equal with his will,
for that he may and can all yt he will, and will nothing that does not serve for
his honor and glory, Romans 8. and 17, 29,
and for ye health of his chosen, which makes yt al things how aduersse so ever
they be, do serve us for our health, Collo. 1. and. 18, Ephesians. 1. and, 22.
wealth, and prosperity. And for ye god has given us of his cleme^cy Jesus
Christ his son to be our head, and made us all me^bres of his holy body, it
is not possible (so being) but yt one of us should feel spiritually ye pain and
trouble of another, how far soever we be distant a sondre corporally, because
ye spirit of Jesus Christ (by the which we his me^bres do live) has co^ioined,
knit and united us more nigher and closer together the^ is ye soul to ye body

Forasmuch dearly beloved brethren, (according to my hope) yt I am partaker of
the mercy yt we all shall receue, in the name and behalf of ye lord yt did give
his life for ours, I have thought it good to comfort you in your afflictions,
with the which you are troubled and oppressed in this world, 2. Timo. ^. and.
11.12,
only because you would live faithfully in Christ Jesus. For ye quickened and
stre^gthened by ye word of truth, I am partaker of the joy of your consolacion
and comfort, and also of the firmness of your faith, for ye I have hope in his
goodness, Romans 14. and. 8,
yt he will make perfect his work in every one of us, Philip. 1. and. 20.21.2^.
in such manner and sort that by all ways and means possible, he may be
glorified, all be it we live or dye, because yt in life and death he is our
gain and we his glory. The persecution yt we suffer now at these days is
cruel, very perilous and dangerous, for that they which persecute us, are no
Turks nor Paga^s in their profession, but baptized as we are, and that say
they have a zeal and love to god as we have, and in that they use and put in
ure to afflict us with, they do it to serve god and to merit or deserve
Heaven. (But greatly deceived no doubt) wherefore we ought to procure to be so
much the more certain and sure of our vocacion and calling, and of the good
will that God had and has unto us, and that we do not doubt by no way nor
means of the immutabilitie and firmness of his divine council, Ephesians. 1. and
4.5 Collo. 2. and. 5.15. John. 17. and. 5.
with and by the which he did determine before the beginning of the world to
save us in Christ Jesus, in knowledge of whom does concist all our wealth,
comfort, and consolacion.

The want of knowledge and the doubt had hereof, is wont to, and does engender
great amasednesse, dismayinges, and troubles, in the minds of some of the
faithful, it does make them fearful, weak, full of cowardice, sad,
discomforted, mistrustfull, and does put them into great forgetfulness of the
benefits which they have received of God. From hence does also arise, grow,
and spring, those deep moorninges, groninges, and sighinges, with the which
many seeinge themselves afflicted for the truth, do repent them that they
have used their ears, heard, and believed the voice of the Lord. Because that
they seeinge the adversities that do succeed and follow, by reason of
professing and confessing the name of Jesus Christ, they call it guile and
deceit, and do return again to wallow in the dirtie mire of their old
errors, 2. Pet. 2. and. 22.
and supersticions in which they were before their calling, and do become more
enemies to God, and more cruel against the truth, Math. 12. and. 45. 2. Pet.
2. and. 20.
by means whereof their last ending is worser then their beginning. And for
the contrary, to know the truth thereof aright, and well, and to have the same
printed in the heart, it does make the good christian the stronger against all
kinds of adversities, and the more mighty to war and fight, magnanymousely
and manfully, against all the might and force of hell, and never more to turn
his shoulders to the enemy, but does become from day to day ye more enriched
with heavenly gifts whereby he is made the more exceptable to god. All that is
against Jesus Christ in ye world makes war and contradiction against him, but
yet he overcomes all victoriously, and most triumphantly, by the virtue and
strength of his perfect knowledge thereof. And how much ye more as it is
printed in his heart, so much ye more shall be increased his comfort in the time
of affliction and persecucion, more strong firm and constant in adversity,
Math. 7. and, 24
more burning in desire to be with god, greater in disdain of the world,
Luke, 6, and. 48.
and of all the delights ye reigns therein, and know the better how to
sanctify the name of the Lord, and to demand with more fervent zeal that
his kingdom may quickly come, because his enemies might be destroyed wholly,
and that he alone might be obeyed and reign in the consciences of all those
which he has redeemed with his most precious blood.

What we were before our being reduced to God. Cap. ii.
IF we did understand how the sin which we did commit against God in the
beginning did leave us, after it had once gotten power and emperye over us, we
should understand as well how great the love and goodness of him was, that did
redeem and take us out of the same, and deliver us from ye conde^pnacion, so
justly due unto us for it. The devil by sin did break in and destroy all
goodness that God had endued us with, by the which we were clearly known to
be his own workma^ship, he did blot out ye Image of god which was graue^ in
our souls so that ye likeness of him by whom we were created, was taken quite
from us, Genes. 3. and 2.3, 4. etc.
and we deprived of all kind of holiness and righteousness, and also made
strangers to all truth and cleannes. He did leave us without ye direction and
liberty yt we had to comfort our selves with, in all things by ye divine will of
god. Finally we did remain void and emptied, of all those gifts and graces,
with the which God had adorned, bewtified, and enritched us, to be served by:
Because we might have him evermore to be our god, and yt we might be known to
be his children, and by ye effect of those his wicked works in ye world, he did
destroy in us all ye good that god had given us: Fruits of the Image of the
devil
so that we remained full of all evil, that is to be abhorred, and contrary to
god. For that the devil in place of the perfect picture, Image, and likeness,
of him that was in us, did put his own. And so we were full of all
unrighteousness of life, hypocrisy, Romans 8. and 29.30. etc.
fornicacion, malice, covetousness, envy, guyle, hatred, wickedness,
abominable abhorrours and haters of god and his truth, Titus. 3. and 2.3. etc.
proud, vain glorious, disobedient, unfaithful, without understanding,
altogether blind and without mercy, made at the last a pestilent picture even
like unto the devil, whose captives we were.

Ephesians. 2. and. 1 2.3. Collos. 2. and. 22.23.
In the Epistle to them of Ephesus, Saint Paul declares, and in them to us,
that such was our condition before God did call us. And you says he were dead
by your own delights of sin, in the which sometime ye walked according to
the course of this world, after the prince and gouerner that rules in the
Air, which is the spirit that now worcketh in the children of unbelief,
among the which we all in times past have been conversant, in desires of the
flesh, and fulfilled the will and mind thereof, so that by nature we were the
children of wrath. And thus he concludes that in us there was not one spot of
goodness, nor righteousness, but that we were in all subject to the devil,
and that all our delights and pleasure, was in naughtiness and infidelity,
so that all our works were of ye flesh, corrupted and accursed. Romans 8. and. 8
Because that if the flesh be an enemy to God, and not subject to his law,
nor may nor can be. All the worckes that proceed thereof is so likewise, and
plain demo^stracions of the hatred of ye truth, wherewith the heart should be
possessed. And if that all human thoughts (or thoughts of men) do from the
beginning tend to evil, Genes. 6. and. 2.3.
all works done by them, be of the same quality, evil, condemned, lost, and
prouokers of gods great indignacion and ire: so that all our evil comes by
nature. At the first we were the children of god, now by sin we are the
children of his wrath, Ephesians. 2. and. 1.
that is, wholly lost, banished, and disinherited of his riches and goodness,
and moreover enemies to all that does please him. Psalm. 14. and 2 Psalm. 53.
and. 2.4.
All of us are corrupted and abominable (says ye Prophet) there is none that
does good, there is none, no not one. Then being by sin and ye flesh al
corrupted, what may spring and come thereof but curssed stick of such efficacy,
ye it corrupts all goodness by ye which it passes. By reason whereof we are
compared by the same prophet to an open sepulcher where there is nothing but
bodies dead and rotten, Psalm. 5. and. 10.11.
and full of worms, Psalm. 104. and. 3.
from whence may nor can come nothing, but such cruel stincke as does infect,
corrupt and kill. The mouth of this sepulcher is our throfe, as the said
Prophet says, Psalm. 10. and. 7.
and ye we carry ye venom of waspes under our tongues, because all ye comes
out of the mouth is of such force that it kills. Our mouths are full of
curssing and bitterness: Prouer. 1. and, 16.
we have our feet swift to run to shed blood, Psalm. 14. and. 5, 6,
our ways and manners of living are mortal and deadly as well for that they
kill, as also for that there is nothing in them but calamities and griefs,
misaduentures and mischiefs, which are plain testimonies of our perdicio^.
Romans 3. and 16, 17, etc,
For in yt miserable servitude of sin, in ye which we were tied and deceived,
we did not know the way of peace, for yt we did know nothing that might please
god, whereby we might be reduced or brought again to his freendship, we were
destitute of the fear and righteousness of God. We did run like unbridled
horses, into all kind of wickedness, if it had not been for the vain fear
of men, we had committed openly and publicly all kind of vice, which was
hidden in our hearts.

A man after that the soul is departed from ye flesh, there rests nothing but
to bury the body, for that it is worms meat. Even so we, being dead in
sin and sinful delighte, and God separated from our souls, there remains
nothing but to be buried in Hell, and to be made food for eternal Death
which we have most justly deserved, in such wise, that if god would give
sentence definitive against us, and shut us from the process of his goodness
and mercy, we should be constrained, by our own proper consciences, to
confess and yield our selves, to be well and rightuously condemned. Because
our works, our thoughts, our desires, hearts and all that we have within us,
has condemned us and forced God unto it: who will not suffer so much
vnrightuousenesse, nor yet tolerate so great and monstrous slanderours of his
truth, and bewty of his work, the which were not our selves, before our fall
into that estate so miserable, all that was in us, was matter and cause of just
condempnacion, and to stir up the wrath and judgment of God, by ye which all
shall be destroyed and consumed, John. 1. and 5.6.7. etc.
because that all was darcknesse, malediction, sin, and the fruits of sin,
deformed, and extreme contrary, to that which God does require of us, in such
manner that we had not nor cold not, do any thing that was good: Math. 12. and.
33,
for that we were evil treese corrupted and rotten, which cold not bring forth
good fruit, by reason whereof we have been wholly subject to all the foresaid
pains and punishments, curse and malediction that was due unto us, and there
has rested nothing but to be cut of from all the goodness of God, and put in
the company of the devil and of his ministers all ready condemned.

Of our blyndnesse in times past. The third Chapter.
THose works which we hild for good, wherein we busied our selves most
earnestly, in those times passed when as we did thinck to do god good service
thereby: they were of such condition and quality, that by them we did so
offend him, yt we brought our selves more deeply into the lake of perdicion.
Then we fasted, Math. 15. and. 7.
we used disciplines of men's tradicions, Esai. 2^. and. 1^.
we caused masses to be said, and often times we did hear them, we erected
chapels and cha^teries we prayed with prime and hours, we were full of
devotion for souls in purgatori, we did choose dead saints to be our advocates,
to ye deity, that we might escape from ye wrath and conde^pnacion thereof, by
means of them. We did make unfaithful promises and unlawful vows, we took
Bulls, we walked stacions and pilgrimages, we sought for pope antichrists
pardons, we were awriculerly confessed, and did receue the Sacrament the
oftener, that we might be accounted the more holy, and merit salvation the
rather. We had them yt would lend or sell us merits or deseruinges, because
that Death should not take us unprovided. But what had we hereby to present to
god for to satisfy him for our sins, these and other the like things we did
for to serve him with, and to obtain grace and glory at his hands. But with
the^ all, although they were seen and allowed of men, yet it did not open the
kingdom of heaven, but rather cause it to be shut up, and the gates of hell to
be set wide open. Because, that all that is most high, sublimate, Luke, 16,
and, 18,
and supreme, in estimacio^ amongst men, is greatest abhominacion before God.
Who does neither allow nor yet is well pleased with any thing that he does
not command. Deuteronomy, 12. and, 8, 16,
Esai. 1. and 14.
Neither does any man do any thing at all according to his will without his
spirit and norishment. Those things which we do to serve him cannot please
him, because he has conde^pned them by his word already for sin. Romans 14.
and 1.2. etc.
For that they proceed of our own opinions, and the opinions of our fleshly
teachers, and not of the knowledge and love of his holy will. For all that
comes not thereof is sin, as the holy Apostle does testify. Math. 22. and.
37.
The sum of all that the law divine does ask and require of us, Math. 23.
and. 23,
is to love God with all our heart, and our neighbors as our selves, to do
right, to love mercy, and to have faith. The works yt we do under yt title and
name of holiness, Hebre. 11. and 1.2. etc.
are not comprehendid in the law, they proceed not of righteousness, mercy
and faith, without the which it is impossible to please God, and therefore he
does throw them away as wicked and evil, and we our selves for most wicked
and evil with them. E^a^. 1. and. 11. Iere. 6. and. 20.
And then if the worcks and sacrifises that he does commau^d in his law, be
not done according to his commandment, he does cast them out for evil and
abominable, and says that he is angry with them, and so angry at them that he
can suffer them no longer. How much the more then may he be angry, and account
for evil, those worckes which he does not command, Math. 5. and 19. etc.
but by his word does rather expressly forbid them. So that all our feigned
holiness, is testimony or witness against us, of our greater blyndnesse and
condempnacion, and will cause the wrath of God, to come the sooner to rest upon
us. John. 9. and 18.19. etc.
Because it was all idolatry with the which we did our devotion. It was not to
the true God, Gal^. 4. and. 8.
for that we know him not, but to those which were gods of our own
imaginacion, feigned according to our own inuencion and false gods, yet did we
bear the marcke of the true God, which was his holy Baptism, in sign of
faith and fidelity, and not to have none other gods, but one, (the true living
god) nor to serve him by none other rule, the^ by that which his word teaches,
yet we were to him traitors, rebels, unfaithful Idolatours, alyed and
confederate with his enemies, and given to all unrighteousness and
wickedness. So that we might say with ye Prophet, that if the only mercy of
God were not, we had been for ever utterly consumed and perished together.

Of the love of God, and of our calling, and the cause thereof. The.iiii.
Chapter.
But persisting and going forewarde in such estate as then was ours, Ephesians. ^.
and. 12.
which was without Christ, reputed as alients and strangers to the common
wealth of Israel, and to the couenaunts contained in the testament and promise
of reconciliacion, void of hope, and without God in this world. Ephesians. 2,
and. 4, 5, 6,
It pleased him who is most ritche in mercy, thorough his great love wherewith
he loved us, even when we were dead by sin. To quicken us again in Christ
together with him, by whose grace we be saved, raised up and made to sit
together in heavenly things through him, and notwithsta^dinge (as I say) that
we were dead by sin, We were called by the mercy of God.
and at the brimme or brincke of our condempnacion, yet he called us to his
knowledge that we might have life together in Christ Jesus, and being so far
from him, he called us nigher by the power and virtue of his most precious
blood: Romans 5. and 8.10.
And so says Saint Paul in another place, that God did set out and confirm
his love and charity in us, for that we as yet being sinners, enemies unto
him, and so justly condemned, he did give his own son to most direful
death, to reconcile us unto him thereby: and to make us partakers, of his
righteousness and sanctificacion. So that the whole cause of our perdicion, was
in our selves, because that by us, sin had his first beginning, for that we
did throw our selves, Genesis 3. and. ^
so voluntaryly into his cursed hands, who did dispoile and rob us of all
goodness. Wherefore God so loving unto us, thought it most necessary for our
salvation, to take all upon him self, for that we might thereby, obtain
remission and forgiveness of all our transgression for ever. And that being at
the first true, the condempnacion that we had deserved, it might as well be
true, the health and salvation granted to deliver us from the same. So the
holy Ghost does testify unto us by the Prophet Osea, saying, Osea. 13, and.
9.
from thee thy self O Israel, doothe proceed thy perdicion, and from me
only doothe come thy salvation.

And by the holy Apostle saint Paul it is said: Titus. 3. and. 4.5,
that when the beninge kyndenesse and love of our Savior God to man ward
apeared, Ephesians. 9. and. 2.
he saved us, 22. Tim. ^ and. 10
not by the works which we had done (and are unrighteous) but conformable to
his mercy, by ye washing of the regeneracion or new birth, and renewing of the
holy ghost, the which he has shed abundantly upon us by Jesus Christ our
Savior, From hence does proceed our salvation.
for ye justified by his grace, we should be made heirs thorough and according
to our hope, of the life eternal. Whereby it apeareth that of ye calling by the
which God did by is mercy most pitifully call us unto him, does proceed all
our health and salvation. Because as at the beginning God did make us of
himself (without receiuinge any help of our parts) and so gave us ye being
of men, Genes. 3. and, 7.
that we might be wholly his own pure woork. Even so has he now called us,
and now that we be called, he has reformed and sanctified us, without our
help in any thing, that we might be his children. John. 11. and. 17, 39.
If Lazarus were dead, four days buried and stinking in his grave, and
could not free himself therefro, but ye God did raise him from death, and
give him a new life. Much less may we free our selves from death, for that we
be captiuated and buried so, by ye help of sin that we are much more dead
and stinking before God, then was ye corporal body of Lazarous to the sight
of men. But as by the might, strength, virtue, and power, of that voice, with
the which Jesus Christ did call him, he was set free from ye prison and stinge
of death, purifyed of all corrupcion, and restored to a new life: even so we,
by the voice of the same Lord, are raised again to a new life. Romans 4. and
17, 19, 24.
Because god does call those things which are not, as though they were. Ezech.
39 and. 21,
For by the efficacy and strength of the voice with which he does call, he
does give a new being. For the evil being of a sinner, is as no being before
god. But in calling himself to mind to call upon God, with a fervent,
fearful, and loving heart unfeigned, his louinge almightifull kindness will
give him a divine essence, participated and joined with the same word, with
the which he called him, when as he had no sufficiency at all, to do ye
woorks of life. We our selves, in the estate which we were, could not by any
means do any kind of thing, that might be pleasant or acceptable to God:
Psalm. 55. and. 2.4. etc.
but did continue still sleeping, possessid of death, without any feeling of
life. We did not call nor seek upon God, but were of the number of those which
David has spoken of before, which have not known God, because we called those
dead which live, and did seek the things we knew not. And therefore it was
said by the Prophet Esaye, Esai. 65. and. 1.2. Romans 10. and. 20.22,
I am found of them that have not sought me, and have apeared manifestly to
those which have not asked after me. For that we should understand yt he only
did seek us, did call us, and give him self to be known unto us. Yet we in
ye mean time were dronken with oblivion, John. 8. and. 1 ^.3. etc.
buried in sin and in all kind of wickedness, and also were possessid with
the devil, whom we did obey: in such sort, that we accounted his counsel and
works, for the vphouldinge and rule of our life.

The cause why, that God did so call us, Osea. 2. and 23.
out of that duskye darckenesse in the which we were, to his admirable light,
1. Peter. 2. and. 9, 10.
was only the love that he had to us in his son Jesus Christ: by whom he
did determine to save us. By Christ Jesus says S. Paul we are chosen, to the
inheritance, Ephesians. 1. and. 4.5.
predestined according to ye purpose of him, Colos. 1, and 26, 27,
which does and will all things, conformable to ye council of his divine
will, so that we which do put our trust in him, should be in all things for ye
setting forth of his honor and glory.

Of the cause of our calling and redemption. Cap. v.
BY the purpose and counsel of GOD, which he did ordeyne before the beginning
of the world, that we might be partakers of his health and salvation, is the
cause why he suffered us to fall, that we might be made known unto his son:
by whose merittes we should be made acceptable unto him. 2. Peter. 1. and, 2.20.
Saint Peter says, that we have been elected and chosen according to ye
foreknowledge of God the Father in sanctificacion of the spirit, to obey him
and to be cleansed and washed in the blood of his son Jesus Christ. Saint
Paul considering ye goodness of god, for his benefits (so much undeserved of
men) does give thanks unto him for himself, Ephesians. 1. and, 3 4.
and for all the faithful, that have been called to the participacion thereof,
and says: 2. Cor. 1. and. 3.4,
Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ which has blessed us
with all manner of spiritual blessing in heavenly things by Christ according as
he had chosen us in him before the foundation of the world was laid, 1.
Peter. 1. and, 3.4.
that we should be saints without blame and irreprehe^sible before him through
love, and ordained us before through Jesus Christ to be heirs unto himself,
according to the pleasure of his good will to praise the glory of his grace,
wherewith he has made us acceptable in his beloved.

Our calli^g is grounded upon the election of God.
So by the means that god has elected and chosen us from ye beginning in
Jesus Christ, is the foundation upon the which is grounded our vocacion, by ye
which we were called in time, to enjoy a participacion of that joy and those
good things, Math. 26. and 1.2.3, etc.
for the which we were elected, whereby we may perceive that how firm soever
the foundation of our blessedness is: even so firm and sure is our vocacion
and calling, so firm and true is also the justice, righteousness and
holiness, of heaven, which by means of our calling is communicated unto us.
We could give nothing to god for our election, because that he did elect us
before our essenciall being, and when as we were not. All the whole cause of
our election was only in Christ Jesus, Christ is ye only cause of our
election.
there was nothing in us whereby we might be called, nor yet nothing whereby we
might be justified. Because (as it is before said) we were so fully possessed
of the devil, and of sin: that even of justice we were allotted to an
estate, so naked and miserable as might be thought. Wherefore of force we must
needs conclude, yt it is only the grace and good will of God, that has called
us by his Gospel, for although we be callid, we may not come to Christ Jesus
if that the Father draw us not, give us ears to hear his voice and a heart
to conceive and understand what is his will. John. 14. and 6, 21,
For that he himself says, none can come to me if my Father draw him not, he
does draw us unto him because we should be pardoned by his righteousness,
Colos. 2. and. 23.
and that the bond should be broken wherewith we were so surely bound to
everlasting death. Ephe. 1. and. 7
For that (as the Apostle says) by the blood of Christ Jesus, we had our
redemption, which is remission of sins, according to the riches of his grace,
which he is most abundantly full of. 1. Cor. 1. and. 30.
He was made to us by God, only wisdom, righteousness, sanctificacio^ and
redemption, for that he which never did sin, 2. Cor. 5. and. 21
was made a sacrifise for our sins: because god would have us made rightuous
by him, so that he is our whole righteousness, and full satisfaction before the
divine judgment of his Father. Esai. 51. and 6
Because (says Esaias) the everlasting God did put upon him all our sins,
which by the potencie, power, Romans 4. and. 25
and might of his death, he did destroy, and did satisfy wholly to the divine
judgment of God the Father, and so obtain full forgiveness and Remission of
sins for us. Tne righteousness of Christ is more mighty then the malice of
the devil.
Thus that by him we are made rightuous and beloved of God, for that if the
devil were so mighty to put us in such condempnacion, against the which we
had no remedy in our selves, much more mighty without comparison, is the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, to give us true and perfect liberty and
forgiveness, of all the wickedness with the which the devil had fraught and
filled us. Because (as Saint Paul says,) if for the delight, Romans 5. and 10,
12.13. etc
offense and transgression of one, death did rule and reign by one, much
more they which receive the abundance of grace, and the gift of righteousness
shall rule and reign in life by one, only by Jesus christ. As by ye offense and
transgression of one man, condempnacion did come upon all men: even so by the
righteousness of one man, is come iustificacion of life unto all men. And as
the sin of Adam did condemn to eternal death, all that did discende from
him: Romans 8. and, 1.4.
even so the righteousness of Christ is cause by the which are justified,
Gala. 4. and. 7.
all that believe in him, and are made heirs with him of his heavenly kingedome.

Of our iustificacion, by the righteousness of God. etc. The.vi. Chapter.
By faith we do embrace christ
GOd did not only call us and give us his word, but also by mean of the
operacion and workinge of the holly ghost, he did ingendre faith in our hearts:
the which is arms and hands, unto us, to embrace Jesus Christ, with all his
riches and blessings. And in this manner we are brought unto him, Gala. 3. and.
13,
the which doothe confirm in us the saying of Saint Paul, Christ did
redeem us from the curse of the law, and made himself a curse for us,
because we should receive by faith, the promise of the holy Ghost, for that we
had sinned all, and were naked of the glory of God, Romans 3. and 24.26, etc.
we were graciously justified by his grace, and by the redempcio^ gotten by
Christ Jesus, the which God did purpose for propitiacion by faith in his blood,
to the end that he would be found just, and a iustifier of them that have
faith in him. Of grace you have been saved by faith (says Paul to them of
Ephesus) and this doothe not come of your selves, for it is the gift of God,
Ephesians. ^. and. 8,
not by our works for that we should not boast, because we are his works
created in Christ Jesus. Whereby it does and may apeare that our iustificacion
is a new creacion, and a work only of god, who, as at ye beginning he did
create us by the sound of his word: So now by the virtue, potency, and might
of the same, he does form and make us a new in his son. John. 1. and,
12.1^.
He did give them says S. John, power to be made the children of God, to as
many as do receive him by faith, that is to say, to as many as do believe in
his name. The which are not borne of blood, of the will of the flesh, nor of
man's will, but by the will of god. Whereby we see that to be just and
rightuous, comes not by nature, nor by human industry, but by the free
gift of our Lord God that of his own proper good will doothe regenerate us by
the word of truth. Romans 5. and 15.
Ieam. 1. and 18.
All of us (says S. James) be the children of god, because we have believed in
Jesus Christ, and for that we do know that man is not, (nor cannot be)
justified by the works of the law, but by faith in Christ Jesus. Gala. 2.
and 16,
And Saint Paul says we have also believed to be justified by faith in him,
and not by the works of the law, for no flesh shall be justified by the works
of the law. And so the Apostles do conclude, that the benediction of Jesus
Christ, which was promised to Abraham and his seed, should perteine only to
them which do receive him by faith, believing in his divine promises and do
aply unto him all that is contained in them. Gala. 3. and. 9
(Saint Paul to ye Galathia^s says again) all those that have faith, are
blessed with faithful Abraham: because all that are of the works of the law
are under the curse and malediction thereof. So that it remains manifest,
that all those which do not receive Jesus Christ, the remission of sins,
and the reconciliation that is gotten for us by him, with the hands of faith,
may not nor cannot receive him by means of any other woorcke that they can
do: but are evermore in their sins and subject to eternal malediction.

We may not have peace with GOD by any other way or mean, then in that we are
acceptable unto him, by faith: we are acceptable and admytted unto his favor
and grace by faith in Jesus Christ. He is by and by (and always) pleased with
us, and we have righteousness before him? as the Apostle teaches saying: we
being justified by faith have peace with God by our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.
and 51
by whom we have a way through faith unto this grace, the which must be firm
and surely fixed in us. Whereby it is declared that Jesus Christ, is the only
aucthour of our righteousness, and that we be made partakers of his health, by
the faith we have in him. By the which we be surely certified, that we be all
ready reconsiled to God, and that he is in peace with us, and by this reason we
are assured that we possess life everlasting. The divine Scriptures do teach
us the same, all the Prophets (says saint Peter) bear testimony of Jesus
Christ, Acts. 10. and. 43.
and that through his name, all that believe in him shall receive remission of
sins.

Also S. Paul in the Acts of the Apostles, Acts. 13. and. 38, 39.
(speaking of Christ) says, by him is preached unto you remission of sins,
and by him all that believe are justified in all things, from ye which ye could
not be justified by the law of Moses, wherefore all that believe in Christ
Jesus are justified by faith in him. So that it must needs be that remission
of sins, and all other benefits promised of God, we receive them of him, by
faith in his Gospel. David taught by the holy ghost, Psalm. 142. and. 2.
did see that all that was in him, and that he might do, was cause of
condempnacion at the hands of God: being severely examined by the rigor and
justice of his Law. He had his recourse to the Almighty God and did take him
for his Patron in judgment, and did pray to him with great vehemence,
besechinge him that he should not judge him according to his law: enter not
into judgment (says he,) with thy servant, because that no flesh is to be
found righteous in thy sight. So that he confessith that we are justified
only by grace, and mercy, and by the pity and love that god behouldeth in
his son Jesus Christ for and toward us. For that by the love that he has
to us in him, he has called us and put from before him quite away, all our
sins, offenses, and wickedness that ever we committed, and has forgiven us
all our disobedience and granted us true obedience and satisfaction neither
more nor less then as if we had gotten it our selves. For to take us out of
all doubts, and to the end to deliver us from our old wicked lyinge errors,
in the which until now we have lived, Esai. 43. and 1.25.
the Lord and mighty Jehovah, says, by ye Prophet Esaias, it is I, it is I my
self (O my people) that have blotted out all thy misdeees and wickedness, for
the love of my self, and for mine own sake, I have done it, and will never
remember them again. So that it is he that delivers us from our sins, and
iniquities, without any merit or desert on our behalf, Ezech. 16. and. 60.61.
Iere. 3. and. 12 13.
yt is any thing auailable at all. And of his own free will, love, and
liberality doothe use ye same toward us.

Of an excelent comfort by the love of God. Cap. vii.
SO it restith, yt all that men can do, or may or can invent to work, by any
kind of mean: by this scripture it is excluded and conde^pned for most
horrible, wicked, and abominable. For why: there is but one Jesus Christ who is
the pardener of our sins by god ye Father, there is no cause why without
Christ, that we should be pardoned by god the father for them. By Christ only
are we pardoned, we are the unrighteous, and he ye only aucthor of
righteousness. In us there is no cause why, but that we should be most justly
condemned, and in him only is there great cause why, we should by him be
saved. S. Peter says, Acts. 4. and. 1^
there is none other name under heaven given unto men whereby we should be saved
but only ye name of Jesus Christ. In an other place. S. Peter says again,
Acts. ^. and. 10.
yt neither we can not, nor our forefathers could not, bear the weighty yoke
of the Law, yet we are in beeleefe to be saved by our Faith in Jesus Christ
our Lord, and by his grace as well as they. For as by faith God did purify
their hearts, John. 15. and. 3, 4. etc.
so likewise does he purify ours. Christ said unto his disciples that by the
word which they had heard and believed, they were made clean, and thereby had
purified them of their sins, and made them freindes with God. So that we have
righteousness and divine holiness by faith that doothe remain to us in the
promises of god, and the hope that we have in his mercy and truth, with yt
which he doothe promise us to be our freendly Father and pitiful for the love
of Jesus Christ: From hence it is that the Prophet David doothe acknowledge that
there is but one righteousness, Psalm. 61, and. 16,
that is of any valor at all before god, and that may apeare and come
valiently before him in his divine judgment. The Prophet says, I will think
and all ways have in remembrance thy only justice and righteousness. By
which reason he does reckon, houlde, and account, all human and carnal
righteousness and holiness for most wicked and unrighteous. Because they are
so filthy, Esai, 64, and, 6.
foul, and spotty, that men may have no help of them, to satisfy in part nor
in all, before the divine judgment of God. But of necessity they are to
return again condemned eternally, because they join ye clean works of the
Law, with the unclean and filthy foul spottid works of the flesh.

Whereby we see derely beloved brethren, that there is no more but one Jesus
Christ redemer of the world, wherefore we can have no more righteousness but
that which is his, by the which we are to be saved. Nor there is no other mean
and way to obtain a pardon general for our sins, and reconciliacion with
God, then the faith and hope whereby we do believe his divine promises, and do
assure our selves of all that, which by those promises are declared unto us.
Whereby we have free liberty given us to call and say, O our Father. etc. The
holy ghost doothe teach us in his Church, the doctrine of this true catholic.
And therefore as taught and guided thereby, let us embrace and follow him, by
whose word we have receued this reuelacio^ and clearness. For this cause did
Jesus christ give thanks to god ye father in the name of all his faithful,
Math. 11. and. 25.
and therewith together did show ye cause of so supreme a benifit. Saying,
Luke. 10. and. 22.
I give thee thanks O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou haste
hidden these things from the wise and prudent of the world, and openid it unto
babes, even so father, for so it pleased thee. The cause of this benefit and of
all joined with it, comes to us by the great good will of God, and the
delight which he has in his son. (As before it is said,) and forasmuch as
we do know it is so, let us desire that we may be of that number of the
little ones, that our Savior Christ did give thanks unto his Father for, and
not lean to any false and variable doctrine, Hebre. 13. and. 9.
whose end is to bring them that do believe in the same from the unity of
the true faith, which the prophets, Apostles, and Jesus Christ himself has
taught us.

Wherefore, being partakers of the fruit of redemption, that our savior and
Lord Jesus Christ has redeemed us with, and by faith that we have in ye Gospel:
let us concider well what we have to do: that to our best power, we may
persevere and increase, in that righteousness and holiness that he has
communicated unto us. Before we were called, and when we had not received
pardon for our sins, we were such, and even the like as the children of
perdicion were.

But now being reconciled to GOD by his son Jesus Christ we are taken
forth of the Empire, rule, and dominion of the devil, and received of GOD by
the holy Ghost: Ephesians. 1. and. 22.
and by the virtue of the same, joined with Jesus Christ, and made one body with
him. From whom as from our head there is deryued into us members with life and
spirit, by the which we ought to do the works of life, for that thereby is a
plain testimony, yt Jesus Christ who did pardone us of our sins, and pay
his most precious blood for a ransom for ye same, does live in us, and that
he only is ye foundation of our hope and affiaunce, and also that of him and
by him we are beloved of god the father as his children. As teaches saint
Peter saying, 1. Peter. 2 and, 4.5.9, 10,
that Jesus Christ is the living Stone, refused of men, but elected, chosen,
and precious with god, and says further, you also as living stones, are built
in one spiritual buildinge, and one holy presthoode, for to offer a spiritual
sacrifice acceptable to god by Christ Jesus, and a little after that, you (that
believe and trust in Jesus Christ) which in times passed were no people, are
now the people of God: but before now you had not obtained mercy, yet now you
have, and are a chosen lynnage, a royal presthoode, a holy nation, a peculiar
people, for yt you preach and show the virtues of him that called you, from the
darcknesse in which you were, to an admirable and most merueilous light. In
this he does give us to understand, how we ought to spend our whole life time:
and that is in perpetual sacrifise of praise unto the Lord, for that he has
been so merciful and pitiful toward us, so that all our woorks ought to be
with a cheerful voice singinge and making proclamacions, of his glory, and of
his virtuous praise. Titus, 2, and, 12, 13,
For to do this (says Saint Paul) we ought to renounce and deny, the
ungodly and worldly desires of the flesh, and in this transitory life to live
temperatly, in righteousness and godliness, tarying and looking for that
blessed hope and glorious apearing of the mighty God our Savior Jesus Christ.
So that we ought to put away all kind of supersticion, false religion, all
desires and concupisences of the flesh, and the world, and to live a godly
life according to ye will of God: the which is declared unto us by his word. 1.
Peter. 1. and. 18.19,
But since that we are bought with the inestimable price of the most precious
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ his son, and so made his servants, we ought
not to serve him in any other manner, nor with any other things then those
which he has commanded by his word and law.

The Lord did call and elect us for that we should be holy, and without
reprehencion, Ephesians. 1. and, 1.2. etc.
but we be profane before him, and no such saints, if we serve him with any
other thing then that which his law does command, or by the rule of his
commandments. For that we be called in Jesus Christ, (as Saint Paul says in
the same Chapter) because we should do the good works that God did ordeyne
for hs, Note which are good works.
and that we should walk in them, for those only are good that he has
commanded by his word: we ought also to employ our whole studies in those
works. Titus. 2. and. 14.
For the apostle does teach us, that Jesus Christ did give him self for us,
to redeem us from all kind of wickedness, and to purify us that we might be
a peculier people unto him, and that we might be only dedicated to his service
and fervently given to good works. All true beleuers says the Prophet Esaias are
treese of righteousness, and planted by the heavenly Father, Esai. 61. and ^
that he might be glorified in them.

Wherefore we ought to adresse our whole minds, all our affections, and all
our desires and thoughts, to glorify him: with all those things which we are
sure and certain he does and will allow. But since he, even our God, has
opened our eyes for to see the light, it were not just nor reason that we
should walk any more in darcknesse, (that is to say, Romans 14. and 2.3.4. etc.
) thincking falsely that those things will content his goodness, which does
content us, or those things which are allowed of men, without the holy Ghost.

Of the cause of Christ's coming, and of the fruits of christians. The.viii.
Chapter.
Math. 17. and. 18.
GOd has given us Jesus Christ to be our only master and teacher, Mar. 9.
and. 29.
and doothe command us to hear him, Luck. 9. and 21.22.23. etc
because he is the only expositer and declarer of his will and most mighty
power, and to direct us for the accomplishment of ye same. So yt they yt do
hear ye word of god and keep it for a rule in their doings and works, do
show themselves to be treese of righteousness, planted and beloved of him:
and that his spirit is resident and remaining in them. But of them that teach
and do to the contrary, Mat. 15. and. 13.
(he says by Saint Mathewe,) they are plants that his heavenly Father has
not planted, and although they florishe for a time and be seen, yet in thend
they will be withered dry and rotten. Thus Jesus Christ doothe testify, that
those which are governed and seek to serve him by the commau^deme^ts of men,
are none of his pla^ts. We ought to abhor and houlde for abominable, all
such manner of services, for that we are instructed by the word of truth, that
al they which do delight in them, are subject to the condempnacion wherein
they were first borne. The hatred of them with all the rest that god has
forbidden, and the obedience of his commaundeme^ts divine, are those fruits
which we ought always to account for his pla^ts, with a daily study to be of
that number which the Prophet David speaks of, Psal^* ^. and. ^.^.
that have all their affection and delight in the law and ordinance of ye
Lord, and do meditate and walk in the same both day and night, because we
might fructify and bring forth good fruit in dew season. God did plant us
in his son, giving him unto us, to be our redeemer, the footesteppes of whom
we should follow, and with whose righteousness our faults were covered. And
therefore we ought to have a constant faith and belief, that he is such a one
as we confess him to be in our Creed or twelve Articles of our Faith, and
rejoice that we have him to be our eternal high Priest, King, and Savior,
Hebr. 7. and 2.21.25.
that lives eternally to be an intercessour for us, and to fulfill for us all
that God does command or ask: Colos. 2. and. 3,
for that in him is hidden all science, treasure, and wisdom. This is the
faith that must be in our hearts by the which we are joined to Christ Jesus,
and do know the sufficiency that we have in his riches by him, to whose
goodness we must be appendant, but not as in the time of our blindness,
Titus. 1. and. 16
when we confessed him with our mouths and denied him in our works. A lyinge
layth and false religion.
We confessed that we did love and believe him but it was a lie, false, and
nothing so. We said that we did believe he was our savior, but it was not
true: for why, we sought healpe and health in vain things, that he did,
neither command nor yet allow, and also did live in the belief, and follow
those vain vanities until now of late. We confessed him to be Christ, King of
all Kings, and principal high Priest, and yet we gave no place unto the
fruit of his Gospel in our hearts, where it should have been, and he also
have lived.

We said he was a high Priest, but yet we accounted better of Antechrist,
and made him our high Pressed. Of him only did we seek pardon for our sins
and sinful delights, we set a side Jesus Christ our true remitter, whom by
his most precious death and passion did make and fulfiill such satisfaction
to our GOD his Father for our offenses, as none but he could do the like.

Yea, although the wrath and heavy displeasure of GOD, were never so fully
satysfied, yet we did thincks, our selves to make satisfaction by our own
devised merittes, and nothing esteemed the merits of Jesus Christ which were of
a most infinite and unspeakable valor for the health of his elected
beleuers. Yet (now dearly beloved) let us account for vain, all our own
deseruinges, and all men's merits so full of unrighteousness, and trust only
to his mercy in his divine judgment, in which none may perfectly percist but
only his own. He was given unto us for our only everlasting Advocate to God
the Father: commau^ding us that we should ask any thing that we have need of
at ye hands of god ye Father in his name. John. 14. and, 13, 16.
But making little price hereof, and less regarding him, we sought other
mediators: as to this saint, and by the diuillish help of that relic. etc.

What was this, but to deny ye faith by ours works which we confessed with
our lips, because therein we would be accounted christians, and yet in our
hearts we were condemned for ungodly. For why with our mouths we made
confession to serve and honor Christ, when as in deed with all our works and
studies we served curssed Antichrist and walked in errors, Hier. 2. and 28.
every man after his own way and according to our own inventions, as says
the Prophet Esaias. Esa. 53. and ^


But now since it is so apparent, that by the great goodness and singular benifit
of the almighty God, we do believe truly in Jesus Christ his only son our
savior. Let us accordingly live in that godliness and truth, that he has
taught and showed unto us, by his word and spirit: he has marked us for his
own, with ye same sign and seal, the which he has marked his chosen? They
which do persecute us, do not know us, but do both hold and account us for
aliaunts and strangers unto themselves, they may nor can not suffer us in the
world, no more then they might suffer our Lord Jesus Christ who has done such
a benifite for all mankind, and of whom assuredly we are. The cause of the
faith fuls afflictions.
So that we ought to understand, and account for most certain and sure, that
all the causes of our troubles wherewith we are so hated, afflicted, and
persecuted in this world, 2. Tim. 4. and. 3.
is as S. Paul says, because we trust and believe in the living God, who is
the savior of all ye faithful. Notwithstanding the false colors which they
use in their quarelsome war yt they make with us, they cover themselves with a
cloak, and say yt we are heritikes, and that they are holy, it is so in deed,
but yet it is but a feigned holiness, ye which God by his word has condemned
for abominable. Wherefore let us arm our selves with a firm and sure hope, ye
God, yea, our God, will be our sure helper and defender against the^ in all
our troubles, for that we be ye work of his hands, he has made us, redeemed
us, and we be his own, the cause is his, and will suffer no harm nor evil to
touch us. Let us not fall from, nor yet be weak in this truth which God has
revealed unto us, To. 1. and. 18.
but let us be fully assured yt it is his might, power, and will, ye delivers
us and saves all beleuers. We are set sure thereby from all perils and dangers,
and taken out of all afflictions. S. Simon in ye gospel of S. Luke does
prophecy, Luke. 2. and. 34.
that Jesus Christ was sent for the rising and falling of many people in
Israel, and that by him are revealed the thoughts of meny hearts, and that we
should be saved from all that hate us. Even now in these days is this
prophecy fulfilled. As Soon as ye word of the Gospel was preached amongst us,
and yt it did reveal unto us and the^ our lord Jesus, both they and we might
have seen the effect of this prophecy, 1. Pet. 1. and. 12.
(even so it may be still,) some of them he did please to condemn, for that
they did resist furiously, and did persecute and condemn him: Others, which
were the^ that did believe, were raised, edifyed, and saved by him, for whose
sake they are hated, held, and accounted, for abominable in ye world. And ye
thoughts of some yt were holy hallowers and sanctifiers of me^ were, and are
discovered and showed to be of such co^ditio^ and quality, that they cannot
suffer ye holiness of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, but do so rebel
against him that they use their vttermoste force with crueltye to throw him out
of the world.

Of a great cause of comfort, by reason of the crosses of Christ. etc. Cap. ix.
But since it has pleased God, that our lotte has been so luckye and our hap
so happy, as to make us of the number of them that do believe, and are
builded in Jesus Christ: let us not doubt the causes of our afflictions, for
before yt he did give us his light to believe in him and to know him, the
diuill did possess us in peace, so that we had a very perfect friendship with
the world. Luke. 11. and. 53.54.
But he who is most strong, being come as he is, has gotten the victory, and
taken his spoil from him, for which cause that enemy does so bray, bluster and
roar out his wars against us: and to make a recovery of us, he does arm
all his army with so great cruelty as we see. So that the cause of our
persecution is not as they profess which are the ministers thereof, Math. 13.
and 37.38. etc.
it is but only for the word of the Gospel, as testifyeth Jesus Christ, in his
own preaching to them that he has called to him self. And for that we be most
assured and certain of his truth, we may well sustain and bear, the
extremity of the cross that is laid upon us by ye hands of God: and never
be dismayed nor fainte, for although that we of our selves be weak, we
shall be strengthened by his force and magnificall might: with his wisdom
shall be overcome our ignorance and foolishenesse, Psa. 52. and 7.
with his righteousness shall be blotted out our sins and wickedness, with
his light shall be lightened our blind darkness, with his blessing shall be
overcome and undone our curse and malediction, with his might shall be
distroyed our infernal hell, with his holiness we shall be made holy, and
finally by his merits, and with his benifites, we shall be made rych in such
manner of wise that it is impossible of our selves, to be such like as he will
make us. And therefore let us not be hindered by any kind of cross, but the
rather made more perfect and clearer with constancy in belief of the truth
which he has taught us.

To this end does the Apostle set out our estate in this manner and form.
Ephe. 2. and 19 20. etc.
You be (says he) Pilgrims and strangers (as we were in time of our
ignorancy) and you are now saints and citizens with ye household servants of
god, builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, yt is Jesus
Christ: in whom you are builded together jointly to be the house and dwelling
place of God in spirit. Whereby we may see that all the virtue that is in us,
whither it be by good works which are the fruits of faith, or by suffering the
griefs and afflictions of this world, the which we are subject unto: yet both
the one and the other came from our foundation, which is Christ our head.
Yea, and also they do, both ye one and ye other, serve to cleanse us from all
the contaminate filthy foulenes of the flesh, 2. Cor. 7. and 1.2.3. etc.
and perfectionate and make perfect our minds and spirit with the fear of
God, and the sanctification of his holy name, whereby we might be clean and
clear from any kind of thing, yt may offend ye eyes of his divine majesty that
dwells in us. So yt we have ye entry made plain unto us, Hebr. 3. and
1.2.3. etc.
to enter and treat with God familiarly, and ask of him all those things,
Leuit. 11. and. 44. Leuit. 19. and. 2. 1. Pet. 1. and. 15
which be necessary for us to follow Jesus Christ with, and to be wholly holy as
he has commanded us by his spirit, saying: be ye holy because yt I ye Lord
your God am holy.

God did know says S. Paul and predestinate all his chose^, to make the^
comfortable and like to the image of his son, because they should be, To. 8.
and. 29.
(Primogenitus) the first begotten among many brethren. So yt in making us
conform and like unto him, he did justify us, when he pardoned us of our
sins, and did make us pertakers of his redemption. Even then he did begin to
reform in us the image of his son, which reformation is yet but begun: But
yet it goes forward from day to day, increasing by degrees until we be all
together like unto him, yea even to be a very perfect pictor and lively like
him. For ye as by Christ ye father is known, so by us should ye son be known
also: for we should be like unto hi^ in all things as well spiritually as
te^porally, celestially as terrestrially, and as we did bear the Image of the
earthly Adam: 1. Cor. 15. and 49.
even so should we bear the image of the celestial Adam, which is Jesus Christ
that came down from heaven. All that God does unto us is to the same end and
purpose: and therefore Christ does incite us, Math. 5. and. 48.
saying: be ye perfect as your father in heaven is perfect. It is notorious to
see and wonderful to consider, how far of we be from this sanctitude, and
perfection, to the which we have been called. Every man may see him self a
great contradiction, in coming to the same: we may see also what great
resistance the world and all the ministers thereof, does make against us to
keep us from it: for which cause God has taken us in charge, to make his
work perfect in us.

What thing more amyable, may there be, or what more may be desired, then to
have ye image of ye son of God, conformed and made perfect in us: there is
nothing that can be more blessed and unhappy for us then this, that God
does love us so much, as to show and cast upon us such copious aboundancies
of his heavenly pleasures and good will: if we love riches and honors those be
the true ones: If we desire to be sure against all euilles and temptations of
the diuil, ye world, and the flesh, in this does consist the suertie thereof.
How much the more that we are like unto God, so much the more mighty we are
by him in our own defense, against all manner of temptations, afflictions and
persecutions. If we will inioye the riches that God has prepared for his
faithful, this is the way to come to the possession of them. And therefore we
ought not to be fearful off: nor to refuse any thing that God does chastise us
with. And since he has given us Christ his son to be our head, it is a thing
convenient that we which be his members be like unto him, and that we go
together with him, treading in his own steps: Because the self same end that
he had him self, his members must have also, and for that cause, and to the
self same end, that we should pass both by one way, and have one end and
inheritance, God did so unite and knit us in him. The purpose of god
Wherefore we ought to understand well the purpose of God, and to have always
in remembrance ye effect thereof, because we should not faint, wax weak, nor
fear ye troubles and afflictions, that the striving therewith, and mistaking
thereof, does bring us unto. The end whereof being well and rightly considered,
with the knowledge of ye same, we ought rather to embrace, the^ stiffly to stand
against it.

How that the estate of Jesus Christ is common to the faithful, and does
exhort us to an excelent comfort. The x. Chapter.
Our conditions, qualities, and estates in this world, is common and according
to ye same, which Jesus Christ him self had when he was therein. For that ye
same causes yt he did suffer for, even the like do we suffer for also. The
cruel entreaty, that was used and done unto him in the world, was because
that he was ye son of God, faithful to his father that sent him, did seek
in all things his glory, and teach unto men such holiness and righteousness as
God his father did allow. John. 1. and. 12
For the same cause do we suffer also, Romans 6. and 11.22.
for that by him made the sons of God, we do allow none other holiness and
righteousness, then that which he does incite us unto. So that according to the
communion yt we have with him, we do seek in all things his glory, do hate
them that abhor it, and do condemn by his word all ye which he holds
condemned. Math. 5. and. 10. Luke. 6. and. 20.
This is ye only cause that he commanded his discyples, and in them us to
rejoice: saying, and assuring the^ with us, that theirs and ours is ye kingdom
of heaven. We ought to ponder this in our minds, and to think of it in our
afflictions, that although they be never so great, our afflictors can not let
us from the kingdom promised unto us, for ye God is disposed and has purposed
that we shall inherit it by them.

Christ Jesus is the chiefest and the greatest amongst the children of God,
which are his brethren: Even so he is the first, principallest, and greatest
in all things. The afflictions, passions and persecutions yt he did suffer were
in the supreme and superlatyue degree, greatest of all: his dishonor greatest,
his poverty most deepest, all kind of hatred was had against him in most
brauest manner, his persecutions most violent and cruel, the wrath of God
wherewith he was charged, did lie most heavily upon him, and so heavy a
burden in deed, Luke. 21. and. 44.
as even the very toil and trouble in bearing thereof, did make him to sweat
by extremity water and blood. Esai. 53. and. 12.
He was not only held and accounted for wicked with the wicked? Marc. 14. and
36.
but amongst them, he was thought to be most chief and principal,
chiefteine of sin, wickedness, and unrighteous. Though he were the only
wisdom of the deity: yet they entreated him as one most ignorant and
diuilishe. Col. 2. and. 9.
Yea, and although it was he only, that was, chief and principal pacifier
and accomplisher of the law and maker of peace and amity with God his father
for all mankind, Ephe. 2. and 15.16.
yet he was condemned for the chiefest breaker of the law, and greatest
rebel to God. And also: though he were the first begotten son of God, his
best beloved, Psalm. 2. and. 2.4. Psalm. 69. and. 7.
and the Lord of all: yet he was accounted for such a stranger and so unknown
to the people, that he said of him self I am a shadow and no man, but am
rather a mocking stock to men and cast out of my people. Psalm. 22. and 7.17.
Phi. 2. and 7.
And S. Paul says of him, he did adnichilate him self, taking upon him the
form of a servant, and made him self a man amongst men, and humbled him
self to be obedyent unto death: yea, the death of the cross. He was brought so
low, that he descended to the deepest of all evils, and did abide the
extremity of all pain and punishment, that was due for our sins and
offenses. We did see him says Esaias, Esai. 53. and. 3.4.5. etc.
and he was disfigured, we did desire him, and he was the last, and the most
simple amongst men, full of griefs and infirmities, there was nothing in him
whereby he might be known. So that we did not know what he was, he was laden
with all our sins and offenses, he was whypped and wounded for us, as though
he had been the only offender, and that none had offended the majesty of God
but he. Here we may see that he was ye greatest passioned and persecuted that
could be, whereby as by degrees he did ascend to god, to be also the greatest
in glory, John. 1. and. 14.16.
ye fullness whereof he does participate to all beleuers.

And therefore for that he has been so passioned for our causes, sins and
offenses, it is just reason and necessary that we do not will nor desire to
be of better estate then he was him self in the world, and since he was injured
and mocked it were not reason yt we should be honored and praised, since he was
so poor that he had not where on to lay his head, Mat. 8. and 20 Luke. 9.
and 85.
but was forced to wear a crown of thorn, it were not convenient that we
should abound in riches that do perish, Mat. 27. and 28.29. etc.
nor yet that we should go apparelled in delicate, royal and gorgious
raiment. He was reproved of meny, in seeking the glory of his father, we
ought not therefore to think to be allowed and praised of men in seeking of
the same, let us be contented that God does allow us and account it good to
favor ye righteousness of our cause. And also let us not pervert ye ordinance
of God, since he does give us a co^forter in our passions, for yt we should be
imitators and folowers of his son: because in allowing yt which ye world does
allow, we should forsake ye imitatio^ of him, and the effect of our doings
therein, Math. 10. and 24. Luke. 6. and 40. John. 13. and 16. Luke. 9. and 23.
were none other but to leave our being his servants, and seek to be his
superiors: or being but disciples, to show our selves to be more favored and
greater the^ our master. We cannot have more honor nor more firm and certain
security, the^ to tread the steps, and to pass ye same way yt he himself
went. Although to our fleshly judgment, and to ye judgment of ye world yt in
ye way which we have to pass after our Lord, and savior Jesus Christ, there
be many stones, blocks, and briars to stumble at, and more ready to toss and
tear us in pieces yt are to pass by them, then to let and suffer us to
atteine to the end of our journey: yet in truth, there is none more certain
sure and substanciall passage then the same is, to bring us to that blessedest
end and most glorious inheritance. And since our sweet savior has gone and
made the same so plain before us, John. 10. and. 4.27.
there is no cause at all that should make us to doubt of any danger therein.
Let us consider that the cross and bitterness thereof is ended quickly, and
in bearing, passing, and coming forth of the same with love and charity, we
do presently enter into an inestimable glory as our most loving sweet
savior has promised, and does undoubtedly accomplish and fulfill the same
daily from day to day, in all those that do suffer persecution and are slain
for the profession of his holy and blessed name.

It is greatly necessary that all the ordinances of god, The cross of Christ
and of the faithful is ordained of God.
be fulfilled in and by us, as was by Jesus Christ, all that god had determined
in his divine counsel from the beginning, and before any thing happened unto
him. It was said by the Prophets, that God did ordeigne Jesus Christ to be
glorified and lifted up above all creatures: So that it was convenient that he
did suffer before he entered into his glory, or took possession of his
kingdom. He himself did declare the same to his desciples, saying: Luke. 9.
and. 22.
it is necessary that the son of man do suffer many things and that he be
reproved of the elders and high prestes, that he be slain, and do arise
again the third day. Luke. 14. and. 26.
After that he said to them that went to Emaus: that it was convenient that he
should suffer, and so enter into his glory. Acts. 4. and. 10,
All the church do witness the same by the holy ghost: when Christ was
grievously afflicted he used this prayer and said? Act. 4. and. 24.
O Lord thou that art the God of heaven and earth, the sea and all that is
therein, which did say by the mouth of thy servant David, Psalm. 2. and 1.2.
why have the Gentiles fretted, and showed the people vain things, the kings
of the earth have conspired, and the princes have gathered themselves together
against the Lord and against his Christ.

I pray you sweet fellow members, is not this truly come to pass: did not
Herod, Poncius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel, conspire and
gather themselves together to do all that God in his divine council had
determined, against the holy anointed Christ Jesus. For why: it was only by
the determinacion and ordinance of God, that Christ did suffer, and also that
all those which be his members should do the same, and so be like unto him in
all that may be. And as he did suffer a many of persecutions, passions, and
tribulacions before that he could reign in his kingedome: even so must we
suffer a great moultitude of persecutions, afflictions and troubles before that
we be glorified and reign with him, because he did predestinate us to be like
unto him in the same.

For if we did not bear many crosses and tribulacions, we should then in no
point bear his true similitude and likeness: so that then there would be
great dysconformitie between him our head and us his members. But suffering
first with him, and so made like unto him by bearing of his cross, of
necessity we are to reign with him in glory, 2. Tim. 2. and 3, 10.11. etc.
because that those which do accompany him in suffering, may not be separated
from his company in reigninge, for that both the one and the other is the
ordinance of God, the which he will not let to fulfill to the uttermost, as
he himself has said by the Prophet Esaye, Esai. 46. and. 11.
that his council shall be firm and sure, and all his will shall be done, the
Lord of Hosts did ordeigne it, and who can derogate his ordinance.

Of the providence of God for them which are called. etc. The.xi. Chapter.
THere is nothing more saludable or healthful for us then to submit our selves
wholly to the divine counsel of god, because he did determine by the same to
make us partakers of his heavenly kingedome. And for that, that god did
ordeigne for us, that we should pass by this way, we must needs believe that
there is nothing in ye world whereof he doothe make so particular account, nor
whereof he does esteem so much, as of his beleuers. Of all living things that
he created he has a care: yet much more greater care without comparison, has
he of us which be called to his knowledge, and that do trust only in his
mercy. So likewise does the Lord declare to all his faithful (saying) that
the celestial and heavenly Father has such an inestimable care of them, that
he has numbered even ye very heirs of their heads, Math. 10. and 29.30. etc.
so carefully that he will not one of them shall perrishe. Act. 21. and 34.
And says further, if your father which is in heaven have so much care over
little Sparrowes, whereof two are soulde for one farthing, and that he will not
suffer one of them to fall from their nest or perch and perish without his
will: much more greater care without comparison will he have of you, which are
of much more vallew and estimacion then many sparrowes. If the diligence of ye
fawckners or fowlers do not prevail, except God do help them to their
game, much less shall the persecutours of the Gospel prevail against us, if
the ordinance of God be not to permit them accordingly: for his own glory,
and for our health and salvation. In the general government of this world,
nothing may be done if it be not first determined in the consistory of god and
do pass by the consent of his own will: much less can or may any thing
hurt or much them which he has elected and called, onelesse that he will and
command it. Sapi. 14. and. 3.
The book of wisdom does declare, thy providence O Father does govern all
things. From the beginning, Sirac. 11. and. 14.
the Lord has made all things and they do come to us by his will, both good
and evil, life and death, poverty and riches, come from him. Esaias. 45. and.
7.12.
I am the Lord (says Esaias the Prophet) and there is none but I, that formed
the light and created the darckenesse, that did make peace and create the
evil: I am the Lord that did all these things. And it is said further,
behoulde: I am only, and alone, and there is none other gods but me: I will
kill and make a live again, I will wound, and will make whole. Rejoice in thy
riches in the time of prosperity (says the wife man) and have thou patience
in the days of adversity, Eccle. 7. and. 14.
because as god made the one, so did he make the other. The holy Ghost does
teach us, that all and every thing that does happen unto us, as well
adversity as prosperity, the good as the evil does pass and come, by the
providence and will of God: and that without his ordinance nothing takes
effect. Colo. 1. and. 9
Ephe. 1. and 4.5.7.
Because he does all things in all, according to the counsel of his divine
will and pleasure.

And therefore since it is so, that he is the author of all, and does nothing
without it be first ordained, and that his providence is so vigila^t over us:
it rests then yt all is saludable and healthful for us, yt he of his good
will doothe make to take effect in us, and that we must take all in good part
which does succeed and happen unto us (not as of or from the hands of an
enemy or tyrant) but as of and at the hands of a true loving father, which
does love us most tenderly. We must take al our afflictions from the hands
of God.
When we do see our selves oppressed with diverse kinds of calamities and
afflictions, let us surely think and be resolved yt he himself does afflict
us, he does imprison us, he does make us poor, he does deprive us of our
worldly honors, he himself does make us sick, and does heal us again, he
does kill us, and revive us again, there is nothing that doothe happen unto
us, (how aduersse or cruel so ever it be,) but is by him ordained, to that
end that we might thereby be brought to great joy and felicity. Let us not
deteigne nor withoulde our selves from them that do execute unto us our
afflictions, griefs and calamities. Let us not do so much as lowre or look
with an evil countenance therefore: because they are but instruments very
necessary, that God does use as scourges and ministers of his will. For that
we may behold yt he doothe chasten us but as his children with them, for his
vncurelesse care and thought is otherwise toward us, then our persecutours
do think for: because all that God does unto us is for our everlasting
delighte.

That which they do unto us is nothing but evil. God does chastise us
because he loves us, they do afflict and persecute us, because they horribly
hate and abhor us, and to the end that they would utterly and wholly destroy
us.

Great were the losses, troubles, calamities and causes of calamity, Job. 1.
and. 15.16.19.
(to the sight of men in this world) that happened to that holy man Job, Job.
2. and. 8.10.
and diverse were the afflictions and persecucions that he did suffer, the
ministers whereof were the devil and his servants. But that faithful fellow
of ours, did take it neither of him nor them, but at the hands of God, because
that he knew that all did proceed from him. If we receive (says he) the good
things from the hands of the Lord, why should we not receive the bad also,
yea how aduersse so ever they be, the Lord gives and also takes away,
blessed be the name of the Lord, and so he did conclude with giving of
thanks, as well for the worst, as for the best. So likewise let us do, no less
for our afflictions and troubles, then for our joys and prosperity, because
all are the benefits of god, and given to one selfsame end, for them that be
called and elected to his knowledge and grace.

Jesus Christ our redeemer and savior, did acknowledge his father to be the
only author of all the troubles, Math. 16. and. 23
crosses and passions that he did suffer, he did take them as from ye hands of
him, and not from the hands of his enemies. He said to S. Peter, when as he
went about to resist against, and to let his adversaries, John. 18. and. 11.
and to make other lets yt he should not suffer (as it were rebuking him, and
being angry and offended) what Peter I say, would thou let it: shall not I
drink of ye cup yt my father has given me. Surely with a hearty and singular
good will did he drink it, for that it came from ye hands of his Father. So
that we may see, he looked for, nor desired nothing at all, but even as his
father would, and that he ordeigned, that he himself should bear and suffer.
1. Pet. 2. and 20.21.22.
He was not angry, he did not persecute again, he did not speak evil, nor
used any kind of injury for any part of revenge to them that crucified and
entreated him so cruelly and ungodly. Luc. 23. and 24.
But he was rather sorry for them and loved them, although they were wicked,
Luke. 22. and. 41.
and with a great affection did pray to god ye father for them, in taking the
cup or challis from the hands of his Father, he neither did, nor said any
thing contrary to his will, nor yet contrary to the health and salvation of
them for whom he dyed, (see and behoulde my dearly beloved brethren and
fellow members (what an example this is yt he has here showed unto us, (so
divine) if we understand well what pains and passions he our head did suffer,
we that are his members of force shall understand what we ought to do. His
very footesteppes must we follow, travail and pass by, if we will be in
conformity with him. We be now afflicted as evil doers, we are condemned for
common barratours, and curssed and abhorred so horribly as may be. Shall we
curse, abhor, and do ye like to the^, no, no, not for thought: god for bid
we should. As they desire all the mischief that may be to us, shall we do ye
like unto them, no: in no manner wise. But rather since yt we be ye sons of
god, let us keep his co^maundeme^ts which are clean to the contrary.

Math. 5. and 44. etc.
Love (says the Lord) your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them which abhor you and do you harm, Luck. 6. and 26.27. etc.
pray for the^ which persecute you, for that you be sons and children to
your Father which is in heaven, that makes the Sun to shine upon the good
and evil and does send his reign upon the just and unjust. Let us consider
how lovingly our Lord and savior Christ Jesus, did answer to so and such
curssed works, and to such obstinate and evil minds, and how truly he did
love his evil doers. Although they were guilty and had greatly offended, he
did excuse them before his father, sayi^g, they know not what they do, Luke.
23. and 34.
O Father forgive them for thy name sake. Oh immensable charity of God, Oh
celestial and heavenly example worthy to be followed. The vocacion of god
If we do consider attentively, our vocacion and calling with the which God
has called us to his knowledge, we shall find it in this like manner that he
does teach us.

Of the property of persecutours with a persuasion to patience. etc. Cap. xii.
GOd did call and unite us to his flock, John. 10. and 1.12.15.
and did put us in his fowlde which is his Church catholic, 1. Peter. 3.
and. 14.18.
for that we should be his sheep, and might have his son Jesus Christ to be
our sheepeheard. We were wolves before we were called, but now are we sheep,
and the sheep cannot, nor does not know how to do any kind of evil, but
yet is subject to take and receive any evil that is offered. She has no
tongue to curse nor speak spitefully, no teethe to byte, no nails to
scratch, no anger to be irefull, no hatred to abhor, and finally she has
nothing wherewith to do evil but has many things wherewith to do good.

Even so it ought to be with us, because we bear the name of christians, the
which doothe import in all points as much as I have spoken of. Men do persecute
us like fearce Lions, they do afflict us with fury like raueninge Wolves, they
do tear us in pieces like Tigers, they search us by suttelties and wyles
like fine fickle Foxes. They do leave neither art nor cruelty unused, nor
unpracticed against us. Is it meet or were it well that we should pay them
with their own money, or with the like again. No, God forbid, for why we were
not called to be like unto them, but for that we should be like unto himself.
John. 1. and 21.27.
He did call us to be his children, John. 3. and 36.
so that we must be like unto his son Jesus Christ, he is our head, God has
bidden and commanded us to be guyded by him. Mar. 10. and. 29.30.
And because we should learn of (and follow) him, Christ (says Saint
Peter) did suffer for us, 1. Peter. 3. and. 14.
giving us example to follow his footesteppes. In what should we follow them:
mary in suffering ye evil which our enemies offer us, and in answeringe them
again the best we can therefore: 1. Peter. 4. and. ^
what with envy: no, none, but with charity, for that is our calling, Hebr.
12, and. 7.28.
and therein are we taught, both by the words and works of Jesus Christ our
sweet savior, redemer, pastor, and sheepeherde. Let not us take any regard
at all of the evil and harm that our persecutours use toward us, but let us
chiefly regard and look diligently to that which Jesus Christ did amongst
us, and command us unto. The imitacion of him let us not abhor, condemn,
nor speak evil of, but rather let us do the contrary. Let us love to imitate
him, and let us do the works of love. The cause why that our enemies and
afflictours do persecute us, is declared by our Savior and Lord Jesus
Christ, who says, 1. John. 2. and 15.16.
they shall cast you out of their Sinnagogs, excomunicate you, John. 16. and.
3.3.
and persecute you unto death for my name sake, and shall think they do
therein to God very great service, and they shall do these things because they
have neither known me nor yet my Father.

There is not nor can not be a greater mischief, then to be ignorant of (or
not to know at all) our God and Father almighty, nor yet his son Jesus
Christ. What it is to know God.
The want of knowledge hereof makes all them which lack the same, to be
possessed of the devil, servant of sin, and heirs and inheritours of
hell. And also does make them to bear, carry, and maintain continually, a
curssed and cruel capital war, against god, heaven, and all yt is his. The
which does bring unto them their utter destruction and perdicion for ever.
Their hell, they do alwayse carry with them, their own consciences do
condemn them, because the worm thereof, ever dying and never dead, doothe
and will for ever accuse them. The judgment of GOD doothe lie very heavy upon
them, the Law has curssed them, and the woorckes and deeds which they do
in persecutinge the faythefull, are evident tokens and testimony of their utter
condempnation. Because that those whom they persecute, (with persecutions,
slanders, condempnations, curses, clothed with saint Benits crosses, shut up
in close prysons, and afterward burned,) are little or nothing touched thereby,
Jesus christ persecuted in his members.
but Jesus Christ in them. It is he, it is he that bears the spitefulness of
their passions and Persecutions: as he himself did declare to Saint Paul
before his conversion, for when that he had cruelly persecuted the Christians,
(our savior Christ said with a terrible voice) Saul Saul, Act. 9. and. 4.
why persecutest thou me. What greater evil may be thought then to persecute
our sweet savior and redeemer, how can the wrath of God be more evident unto
to them, then when they may see that he cares not for them, but suffers them
to fall and run headlong into that loathsome lake of perdition, and yet in
using ye same, they think themselves in such security of salvation, that they
solemnise their tiranycall dispositions, as if they did solemly halow some
festival feast. And do think they do God good service. Oh lamentable case
that they know not ye truth in those their wicked doings. 2. These. 2. and.
3.12. Esaias. 5. and 20
Sin has so captiuated and blinded them that they esteem light for
darkness, the truth of God for deceyueable errors, and the righteousness of
heaven for iniquity. And therefore with the bowels of pitiful compassion we
ought to pray to God for them, beseechyng him of his mercy, that he will take
them out of that so mortal, deadly, and dampnable estate. Now then since it is
God that is the aucthor of our afflictious, Psalm. 115. and 12.
calamities, and griefs, if we take them at his hands, they will be healthful
for us, and make us to be true imitators and folowers of Christ his son, so
that we shall not at all dysdaine our enemies, nor shall in no wise use them
euilly for evil, but rather desire that they may be brought into the bowels of
his love, and so reduced into the way of health.

With faintnes are we filled with edible wrath and indignation against the^,
because we think yt with their irefull hatred, their caluminate strifes, and
flau^derous reports, their false testimonies and burning desires to shead our
blud, they do, or can do as much grief or harm. But if we do understand
Gods divine counsel a right, and do not look a wrye from his word, we shall
and may know perfectly well, how impossible it is for the^ to do us any kind of
damage, with all yt ever they can do or imagine, whatsoever it be. If we do
but hear the words that the holy Ghost speaks by the Prophet David, we may
well understand and see, that they can not prejudice us in any thing at all.

An excelent comfort to the afflicted. Cap. xiij.
HE that dwells (says he) under the defense of the highest, Psalm. 91. and
1.4.10.
shall be sure under the shadow of the almighty. The security of the
faithful.
The defense wherein does consist our sureste securitye, is the fyrme trust
and affyaunce that the Lords has given us to have in him. By the which we are
made partakers of his omnipotency, and as his omnipotency is in security
from all kind of evil, even so are we thereby because he is only our hope,
our foretresse, our strength, and God in whom we chiefly trust. And the chief
ground of his promise is, that he will deliver us from all euilles, and that
his truth shall be unto us a buckler and shield. And also the Prophet says in
ye same Psalm, Because thou haste put thy self under the guarde and custody
of the most highest, there shall no evil happen unto thee, neither shall any
plague come near thy dwelling. Whereby it appears plainly, what vain
traueyles our enimyes take in hand, when they seek rather to afflict us, or
fight so furiously as they do, against the truth. Mat. 16. and. 24.28.
For that as they can not prevail against the truth, so shall they not
prevail against them that follow it, because the auctthor thereof is their
mighty defendor. Here the Lord does promise and certify that no evil shall
happen unto us, nor plague come to our dwelling or Tabernacle, if we know and
fear him. So that it follows the euilles and mischiefs that our adversaries
do seek toward us, The faithful members of Christ.
cannot hurt us if we be faithful. Because the elected whose tutor and
governor is God, are not, neither riches, honor, dignity, high estate, bodily
or corporal health, life, nor any thing else, whereof there is any virtue or
power given to the wicked. But are the living members, of Jesus Christ united
and knit unto him most surely, and therefore invisible to the children of this
world, as is the same Lord. And because the wicked should not see how to do
them harm in that true being which they be, God did so favor them, that by
him they were incorporated in Jesus Christ, for that as he is firm sure,
substanciall, strong, and may not be thrown out of the throne of his
majesty. So be those his members of such strength and force in him, that they
may in no wise be separated from him.

That which by tirannie of Tirants is to be taken from us, is but lent us in
this world. But that which God has given us for our own, I mean ye
celestial riches which we are heirs unto, to inherit for ever, they can not
be taken away, although they do the worst they can. That is the riches of his
kingdom.
That which is ours is given us for our own with a pryuiledge, irreuocable,
that we be his children, inheritors of his kingdom, and partakers of his glory.
That we also be his inheritance, and a dwelling place for him to dwell in for
ever, with our selves also in him. 1, Pet. 1. and. 3.4.5.
S. Peter does rejoice yt we do live in him eternally, and do hold and
account him for our God and father, and does give thanks, saying: Blessed be
God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, ye which according to his abundant
grace and mercy, has regenerated us again to a lively hope, by the
resurrection from death of our Lord Jesus, to enjoy an inheritance immortal,
not contamynate but incorruptyble and undefiled, reserved in the heavens for
those which are kept by the power of God thorough faith, to obtain salvation.

So that being kept by the power of God which passes strength of castles, or
any thing else, what evil or harm can come or happen unto us.

Thou dootst hyde them in the secret of thine own presence privily, Psalm 30.
and. 22.
from provoking the pride of men (says the Prophet David) also (further) thou
do hide them as in a tabernacle from the stowte caluminate, Psalm 27. and. 5^
strifes of evil tongues.

So that the great bravery and boysteous bragges that the wicked do brave
with all, it cannot hurt us. For that their pride, their peevishness, their
caluminates, their strifes, their subtilties, nor yet their general and wicked
cou^sells cannot grieve us. No more cannot the greedye grievous rauuen, nor
hawtie hate of the devil, pearce nor penitrate the place where GOD does hide
us.

That which did happen or fall out to Jesus Christ, Jesus christ is always a
God almighty.
the same shall happen unto us. For as he was whipped, spoiled, spitted on,
blood drawn from, nailed upon the cross, otherwise injured, and blaspheemed,
and did remain the son of God, and could not be taken away nor let from
calling and acknowledging of his God and father, and continued the redeemer of
the world. So likewise the faithful, the more they be dishonored, The
faithful are always the children of God.
dispoyled, condemned, cursed, and iniurioustie handled, the more they remain
always the children of God, and his spirit does live the rather always in
them, Romans 8. and 15.
by the which they invoke, call, and acknowledge him for their father. So
that it follows that the world and all the greatness thereof (I mean the
tiranous tirany of the persecuting wicked worldlings) with all the tirany and
cursed cruelty they can do, Gala. 4. and 5.6. Hebr. 3. and. 1.
can not hurt us.

To confirm and make us more strong in our faith, the holy ghost by the
prophet David does declare unto us, that all which our adversaries do
commit, thonder out, and threatten against us and the Gospel is in vain. (For
he says) the gentiles fret, rage, Psalm. 2. and 1.2. etc.
and fume furiously, and the people invent vain things. The kings of the
earth do conspire, and the princes and rulers of the Earth do gather them
selves together, against the Lord and Christ his anointed. It is vain and
shall take none effect at any time in us, nor yet nothing at all, that they
can afflict us with, be it interior or exterior. John. 16. and. 14. Apoc. 17.
and. 14.
Because the Lord our god has overcome all our enemies, as well those which are
visible and seen, as those which are invisible and not seen. And has
ouerthowne them in such sort that they shall never more lift up their heads
against us. And thereof it accreweth and grows, that all is in vain that
they do or can do against him, that has overcome them. All that the wicked
do against the faithful is in vain,
And moreover all is in vain that any fury can do against the faithful, so
that their judgments and condempnacions are all in vain. For that if the
judgment of God can not prevail against them, because they (as the Apostle
says) are knitte in Jesus Christ. Romans 5. and 2.3. etc.
How can any of the judgments of their enimyes in any point prevail against
them. Vain are their sentences and excommunications against them, for that God
has communicated them in Christ, and made them partakers of his riches. It is
a common practice among them to confiscate, spoil, and rob the faithful of
their perishing riches. But yet in vain, because that Jesus Christ who is
their true riches will not be robbed from them. Their bodies are imprisoned,
yet he reigns in their liberties, to joy, rejoice, comfort, and recreate
their hearts.

Moreover, they are burned, and receive other kinds of death, to the
imaginations of the persecutors, because they should not live: but they shall
never dye.

Romans 6. and 7.8.9. etc, Colos. 3. and. 3.
For Saint Paul says, your lives are hydden with Christ in God.

Finally, their instruments and other weapons the which they take up to use
their cruelties with, Psalm. 2. and 4.
it is but in vain against them (I mean against the faithful) for that he
that sits and is resident in the heavens (says the Prophet) shall deryde
and make a mock at their folly: the Lord will laughe them to scorn for their
great foolishnes. They do think them selves to be of the number of his chosen,
and yet the more they do impryson and kill the very chosen in deed, so much
the more soouer they think to recover his heavenly kingdom: a great mockery no
doubt: and is no more but as it were an Emmet should fight with an Elephante,
or a foolish flea with a foul Cammell. Were it not also foolish phoprie for
a man to fight with a shadow, thinkyng it to be a man of might. Surely they
do none other, which persecute and fight against the faithful.

Of whom the Prophet speaks: saying, God has put his faithful in safety,
so yt no harm can touch them, and where in no wise they may perish by the
peevishness of any pelting persecuter. There is none that seeks to hurt or
harm them, but plays the part of him that pusheth and fights with his own
shaddowe. 2, Cor. 7. and. 5.
Against the Gospel, the kings, princes, the wise, learned, and holy, in the
world have discovered and showed openly, some of them their knowledge,
suttelties and threats: othersome their valiency and might: and all of them do
affirm and say, that they do nothing but upon a zeal of christianity. But
that is such a zeal, as he ye governs the Gloabe and in the heavens
dwellith, does deride, Psalm. 2. and 4.
laugh and make a mock at. And does threaten that in place and lue of the
same, he will speak to them in his ire, and vex them in his heavy displeasure.
And also chastise them with an horrible and terrible chastiseme^t, as he has
done from the beginning, and that has been seen in our days. But since it is
so, and that all is vain that they do or can invent against us that do
know and believe in Jesus Christ, and that he does deride and mock them in
their doings. Let us not fear their foolishness and folly in their
co^spiracies which they use against us, to divide apart and separate us thereby
from gods truth. But let us laugh at their folly with our good father who does
nothing but laugh at, and deride them for the same.

Of gods exceeding love greatly to the comfort of his people. etc. The.xiiii.
Chapter.
ANd also, since that those fond foolish fools cannot harm nor grieve us, and
that we cannot be harmed nor grieved by any kind of calamity. For that we be
in such security with God, and that we be not made by our natural weakness
to follow their vanities, and so brought with them to be subject to the wrath
and ire of God. Let us assure our selves of the great love that god has
toward us, and consider the causes of our afflictions, and so give him
thanckes accordingly. And also let us love him as his true children, for the
love of Jesus Christ, with ye same love that his father has loved him. John.
17. and. 11.10.^^. etc.
Of all those that were and should be his disciples he spoke to his father, the
night before he should suffer, saying, O Father thou have loved them with ye
same love yt thou have loved me. The love with the which God loved his son is
perpetual and everlasting, and yet with the same love has he loved us. As it
is said by Jeremy the prophet I have loved you says the Lord with a love and
charity everlasting. Iere. 31. and. 3.
Though all things perish, vanish, consume, and vade away, yet this love
neither perishes nor vanishes, but indureth for ever in one most mighty force
and being, whether it be in prosperity or adversity, God does love and
except us as his own. The which is verified, experienced, and proved, by the
Prophet David: Psalm. 1. and. 7.
which being in the top and chief of his tribulacions, GOD did know him and
deliver him.

So that he puttinge his trust in him, said, although my friends have
forsaken me, Psalm. 27. and. 2.3.4.
and my parents have cast me forth, yet the Lord my God will deliver me and
take me up. Jesus Christ was laden with all the sins of mankind, and with
pains and passions most bitter, intolerable, and cruel for the same: he was
forsaken of his friends, overwhelmed with enemies, and extreemely persecuted,
Psalm. 21. and 6.7.8.
yet GOD did love him most dearly, was always with him, and did not nor will
not, never forsake him, but did hear him in all his agonies and troubles. Also
he said to his Disciples, John, 16. and 32.
every one of you shall be afraid of me and scattered away and I shall be left
alone, yet I am not alone because the Father is with me. Psalm, 16. and 9.
Also the Prophet says: since god is on my right hand, I will not faint nor
fear what men do to me. Whereby it apeareth that God does love them that be
his, and will be always on their right hand, when they be in greatest agonyes,
troubles and distresses. How Jesus Christ does love us he himself does
testify and say, John. 15. and. 9.
as the father has loved me, even so have I loved you. He loved me most
dearly upon ye cross, even so do I love you. He does love us as himself,
Ephe. 5. and. 30.
because we all which believe, be members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
boanes. There is no man that will forget and abhor his own flesh, for when
any part or member of the body is wounded and most sick, then, yea even then,
is his love the greater and greatest of all, and with greatest tenderness,
doothe show his might, and love without forgetfulness. So that in our greatest
calamities and afflictions, we are of him best beloved, for that, he cannot nor
will not forget us. Esaias. 49. and. 15.
By the Prophet Esaias he says, can the mother by possibility forget her self
of her own only son which she did bear in her belly, and bring up with
milk even from her tender breast. Is it possible for her so to forget him,
Esaias. 49. and. 16.
yt she should never more take pity upon him. If she do forget her self,
yet will I never forget you. Because I have you written in my hands at my
fingers ends. O worthy words spoken with such a majesty, let us not be
mistrustful of the^, for that God does speak them himself: and to us he
doothe direct his speech. And therefore when we deprived of our wealth and
worldly riches, most cruelly afflicted, and heeld and accounted for
abominable. Let us think that God does and will govern and help us, and
will not forget but remember us, as a thing most dearly beloved of him. He
says, that he did write us in his fingers ends and hands, because that as
the hands and fingers ends be always in sight, and cannot be forgotten: So
thereby doothe be give us to understand, that he does always look upon his
elected and will never forget them. Because he does love them with an
affection more tender a great deal, then is that of the Mother toward her
child. John. 13 and 33.34. etc.
The which he declared right well to his disciples, when he should depart from
them by death, he made a great many of very loving and comfortable
countenaunces unto them, and did promise great consolacion and comfort, in all
their griefs and calamities, though they were never so great after his
departure. And therefore as assured of this great love and charity that the
Lord our God has toward us perpetually. Let us not give place to any thing
that is (contrary to us) against him, for that our firmness, co^stancy, and
perseverance does concist therein.

The conformity which god does pretend, that we which be his should have
with Christ, by mean of ye crosses and afflictions that we are to pass
through: is a sure and manifest sign and token of this his great love with the
which he loves us. Because the effect thereof is so admyrable, Colos. 1. and
^8.24.
that it cannot proceed but from so high principle, Ephesians. 1. and. 4.18.
ground or beginning as is our election, and the vocation with ye which God
did call us, doothe proceed from the love which he has toward us in Christ.
So yt all ye means and practices, that he does use toward us, to bring us to
the end of our election, which is to be gloryfied with him, of necessity must
needs proceed from ye same original. When he did open our eyes to see our
perdicion in the which we were, and did give us the power and virtue of his
spirit to embrace and receue his saving health, it was a perfect sure sign
that he did love us, and that we should not doubt thereof, because he had done
so great a pleasure for us. And therefore let us now not fear that, which the^
we were put out of doubt of, because that all those afflictions and calamities,
which now we suffer from our Lord god, are fruits and a confirmacion of our
calling. And because we are so called and beloved of him we are therefore so
afflicted and hated of the world. Yet let us not faint nor fal^ from ye truth,
because that which the holy ghost does testify to all ye me^bres of ye holy
body of Christ in general, he does testify and say ye same to every one of
them in particular. And therefore every one perticulerly ought to apply and
assure himself to him, in none other manner nor form, then of him only it was
said and spoken, by Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 2. and. 21.
who says, we have not received the spirit of this world, but the spirit
which comes of god, because we might know the things which are of him, that
he doothe give us, and not be ignorant therein, nor yet doubt thereof.

Of Purgatory and the causes of calamity. etc. Cap. xv.
Because we that are of the nu^bre of the faithful, are such a particular
work of GOD, that of his goodness he will not that there be any thing in us
which he loves not, but that we be wholly clean: and also that with our
holiness and cleanness of life and doctrine, we do declare our selves to be
his children: and therefore will destroy in us all the works of the devil,
John. 3. and 16.19.20.
which are so repugnant unto him, as are the wicked inclinacions of the flesh,
and all whatsoever else that doothe let our true obedience to his holy heavenly
will. To end and consume it altogether: he does lay his crosses upon us, to
be as it were a Purgatory in this world to purify us, No Purgatory but in this
life.
and he will there with that we take it as a testimony of his love, and that we
be his very familiars and friends. I, says the Lord, Pro. 3. and. 11.12.
do reprehend and chastise those whom I love. And hereof it grows, The
causes of calamity to the faithful.
that the more he loves us, so much the more he hates and abhors the sin
that is in us, and also so much the more he will correct and chastise us. And
as there is none that he does more love then those which he has called and
incorporated in Jesus christ, so is there none yt is more afflicted in this
world.

Even as a careful Father that has many children, and one among the^ more
beloved then the rest, whom he will make his heir, and the more he loves him,
so much the more vigilant he is, to keep all vice and danger from him, that
might deprive him of his inheritance, and yet the son with doleful dollour
and grief that he does feel, does bewail and think in feelinge his
fatherly correction, that it doothe proceed of ire, and doothe not consider
his fathers pure pretense, but rather takes it for a sign of hatred, which
for a most sure certeintie, is a true testimony of love and good will. Even so
it does fall out, between god the celestial father and us, for that we do
not understand the intent of him in his fatherly reprehensions and
chastisements, ye which of truth (dear fellow members) are because he does
love us most singulerly, as children to dispose unto us, his most inestimable
and blessed inheritance, and to destroy in us all ye vices yt should let or
hinder us from ye same. We do sorrow and grieve at his friendly and fatherly
correction, we do not esteem it as we ought to do, nor as instruments ye
tend to so joyful an end. And therefore let us hear and follow the counsel of
ye holy ghost, spoken by and out of ye mouth of ye apostle S. Paul. Hebr. 12.
and 5.6.7. etc.
My son despise not ye chastini^g of ye lord, neither faint when thou art
rebuked of him, Prou. ^. and 11.12.
for whom he loves him he chasteneth and scourges every son yt he
receueth. If we can endure his correction, he offers himself unto us as unto
his sons, for what son is yt whom his father chastises not, and is
beloved. He yt is not under correction (whereof we all be partakers) is a
bastard and not a son. Whereby it appears, and we may plainly see, yt it is
he ye scourges us, because he loves us, and does certainly assure us yt we
are his children, for yt by his crosses and calamities with ye which he
scourges us, he will distinguish us from those which are none of his, but are
reprobats. So yt if we should be free from his paternal or fatherly correction,
we should also be set void and free from ye inheritance of his blessed kingdom.
And moreover it were then made manifest unto us, yt we were bastterds
illegittimate and not sons lawfully begotten of our loving father. But since
that by his singular and infinite mercy, he has made us legittimate. Let us
like lawful loouing children put aside all pusilanimitie, weakness, and
cowardice, and withal earnestie and firm zeal, submit our selves, to the
ordinance and will of the eternal God our heavenly father, Romans 8. and
15.16.17.
and let us understand further the saying of S. Paul. We have not received
the spirit of bondage to fear any more, but we have received the spirit of
adoption, by the which we cry and call Abba, father, the same spirit
certifieth us that we are the sons of god, and thereby heirs with Christ, and
therefore let us suffer with him that we may be also glorified together. And
forasmuch as we do know the effect of the benefit of his amorous and lovely
correction, let us suffer as sons and heirs, to the Imitacion of his eldest
son our head and eldest brother Jesus Christ, which being best beloved did
suffer most excessive pains and passions. And as the greatness of the same
was a true testimony of the love with the which he loved (and was beloved of
the) father: Even so, how much ye greater our afflictions, troubles and
calamities are, so much the more testimony have we of his exceeding love and
good will toward us. Sirach. 2. and. 2.6.12.
For it is written (by Jesus ye son of Sirache) that the cross is mercy. So yt
the more greater yt our crosses and calamities are, so much more ye clearer
demonstracion have we, ye god does love us the more profoundly, has the more
pity of us, and makes us live in disdain with ye devil and all his works.
From whence it springs, that how much more we be oppressed with persecucion
or any kind of calamity, so much the nigher are we at an end of ye
consumption and destroy of all ye evil and mischief yt is in and toward us,
against the which ye Lord our God does make batteile, war, and fight for us.
And for this cause, in the most extremity of al our troubles and calamities
whatsoever. We ought to have greatest content, comfort, and joy, 1. John. 3.
and. 2.7,
because then our most frank, free, and full liberty, for the knowledge of God
draws near, whereby we shall see him face to face, and shall know him as he
does know us. Let us not the^ as young babes, blush, fear, stop or stay,
from the feeling of those troubles and calamities, which are present in the
world. But let us pass to the consideracion yt god doothe pretend by them,
Colo. 1. and. 5
which is to make us wholly rightuous, Ephe. 5. and. 9.
and that there remain not one spot of unrighteous nor corruption in us,
Hebr. 12. and 10.11.
but yt we should be the irreprehensible sons of god, without spotte or
wrinckle. So that we might come to enjoy ye most blessed fruit thereof, which
is as a thing of inestimable vallew appendant and regardant or belonging to the
excercisours of the same.

A great comfort to the Christian, with a terrible threate to the ungodly and
wicked. etc. Cap. xvi.
ALso God would have us to understand thereby, how great and how vile a
villainous evil, sin is. And how great without measure the reward thereof is,
to those unfaithful ones that will not know him, for that thereby, of a suerty
they are set a far distance from god, and brought in hatred with him. For if
god have loved us so much, yt he has all ready pardoned, Romans 5. and 10.
and reconsiled us to him by the death of his son, then for the rest of the
sin that remains in us, he does with the greater justice, treat and deal
with us so severely, as to make us live and dye in crosses and calamity. And
therefore what a wonderful correction or punishment, may we thinck that he will
use, to them that are so fully fraught with mischief, that they be even the
servants of sin, and of the devil, and enemies to all kind of righteousness.
But yet for all this god does not punish us for sin, because that Christ
has been punished therefore already. But he does punish ye sin that does
always reign in us, not for the hatred he has unto us, but for ye malice
that he has unto sin.

And if we being sons and children, be put in such a straight by our father,
that for the sin that is in us we be judged of men to be stranges and
forriners to him, what shall be come of those, or them that believe not ye
gospel, but are rather enemies thereof. He will not only punish the sin yt
is in them, but also will of necessity consume them and their sins together
to everlasting destruction, for that they cannot abide so rigorrous a judgment
of God, (who most horribly hates sin) as is due for the same.

1. Peter. 4. and. 17.18.
The time is already come (says S. Peter) that judgment must begin at the
house of God. If it begin first with us, what end will then come of the^,
which have not nor do not believe his gospel, nor yet will be none of his
household. If the rightuous can scarsely be saved, what will then become of
sinners, or where shall they appear. If amongst us (I say) which are his
temple and holy habitacion, he do begin to punish with such rigor: what
will he then do when as his wrath and ire shall be inflamed against all, both
one and the other. That is to say, as well the househould of god, as the
household of the devil. When he begins to take vengeance of that house
where the devil dwells, is obeyed, and all his will fulfilled, Psalm. 75.
and 9.10.
he will take in his hand the cup of his wrath against sin, and all shall
drink thereof, for all are sinners. But the children of God shall drink and
taste of the first, best, and purest thereof, because they may understand what
enmytie they ought to have to sin. Since god does abhor it so much that he
will punish it first in us, it is a great significacion, that the rest (I
mean the reprobate) shall be also punished, taste of his wrath, and shall not
escape, although they think themselves at liberty, and loose there from. And
if we the sons of God be subject to suppe the first and best thereof, it
cannot be but that the other must needs drinck and swallow up the dregs,
last and worst. But for the children and sons of God (I mean ye faithful) to
drinck of that cup in such manner of wise, and to that end that God has
determined: Psalm. 115. and 12.13.
me thincketh it is more saludable and healthful to them, Psalm. 116, and. 12.
for that the lord will use such moderacion and so much alay the extreme
bitter taste thereof: because he gives it them to none other end, but to
bring them to humility, yt being humbled and brought low in mind, they might
with more greater earnestie in christian affectes, embrace the benefits of him
already received, and open their eyes with such clearenesse, that they might
the more sooner see and behoulde, how dearly and lovingly he loves and
favors them. So that thereby he has made them more capable of his riches
(as David says) although ye Lord do cast them down never so deep, Psalm,
119. and. Esaias. 23. and. 6. Luke. 1. and 5.52. Psalm. 145. and. 14. Psalm. 113.
and. 6.
yet he leaves them not therein but lifts and exalts them thereby into his
great glory, because it is his condition and qualite to exalt the humble and
meek, and to reise the poor from the dounghill.

Since the determinacion of the almighty Jehovah, is so fatherly and fre^dly
for us, let us drink with a good will of ye cup that he does give us, be they
crosses or griefs, whatsoever, for yt thereby he does call us to his
knowledge, which for our ingratitude and other vices were separated from him
for a season, with deserving of most rigorous pain and punishment for ye same.
And therefore I say we ought yt rather too take in good part ye bitter taste of
being tossed in the flood of any affliction. We have deserved to be chorlishly
cheined in perpetual prison world without end, yet god is so merciful and
loving unto us, yt without respect of any thing, he has allotted us but a
light penance, with suffering a few, of short sorrows and calamities. But we
most stobbernly refuse the^ with al our stro^gist forces yt we have. Math. 16.
and. 22.23.
Yet for all that since Jesus Christ has called us to ye cross we ought not to
grudge at ye bearing thereof, Luke. 9. and. 55.56.
but accept it pacie^tly, because of ye co^dicio^ with it, already performed. If
we would look and see about us, we should see, find, and know, yt it is not we
our selves yt bear these crosses alone, Esaias. 9. and ^
but he himself in us: for (the prophet Esaias says) yt it is he, it is he
himself, that does carry his kingdom upon his shoulders. Whom shall we
understand for his kingedom: but the persecuted, ye imprisoned, the abhorred,
and condemned, that are killed for his name sake. It is he him self that they
persecute and punish in us his members, for the hate they have to his
inheritance which he bears on his shoulders. So ye although he do give us
to drinck of his wrath, yet he does mynister with it, such moderacion and
gentleness as is possible: for in the end all comes to rest upon his own
shoulders, and so we by him are vnleaden and discharged. And therefore let us
love him and give him thanks, since we have deserved to drink of the extreme
bitterness of his wrath, and yet he gives us the purest with the most
lenity and gentleness that may be. But the dregs, which is all the rigor
of his wrath, of his indignacio^, his fury, his condempnacion, his curse
eternal, and sentence irreuocable are kept for the^ to drink which have not
believed the Gospel: but in steed of the worship, and due obedience to be
done thereby, they did afflict and grieve with persecutions, him in his members.
The which will take effect (as S. Paul says, 2. These. ^. and. 7.8.
) when our Lord Jesus shall manifest and show him self from heaven, with his
mighty holy Angels in flames of fire: then will he take vengeance of those
that do not know him, nor obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ his
son: and will give them punishment of eternal dampnation from the presence of
our Lord God, and from the glory of his potencie, when he shall come to be
glorified in his Saints, and be made admirable to all those which
steadfastly believe.

An Inuectiue against the wicked, with a merueylous comfort to the godly
Christian, etc. Cap. xvij.
ALthough that God for a time do stay, and does not show his vengeance
presently, that he has prepared against them that condemn his
righteousness: yet he does not allow any thing which they say or do against
him. His patience and long suffering, is no certain sign nor seal that may
confirm them any sufficient acquittance from him, for condempning of them whom
he does best love in the world: nor yet for any other kind of their
wickedness used. But he is merciful to all: yea even to them, although they
despise and disdain him, his mercy and all that is in him: and do trust to
their own penitenciary merits. They do think to have a prosperous success
in all their doings, Iere. 19. and 15
and why: mary, because sin is so settled in the^, and has such rule,
Lordship, and power over them. But all their prosperity and good successes,
Romans 2. and. 2 3.4. etc.
is nothing but a heapyng up, of the fullness of the measure of the Lords
wrath, till it be so full in deed, as upon the sudden when they look not
for it, it must and will run over (or turn the bottom upward) upon them:
and destroy and drive them to the deepest dungeon in hell: and they shall be
suffered still to rise the higher, that their falls may be the greater. And
therefore the holy ghost does commau^d the faithful, that they should not fly
from the truth, although their adversities be never so great, nor though the
prosperity of their adversaries be never so sublimate and high. By the Prophet
David he says: Psalm. 37. and 1.2.3. etc.
Fret not thy self against the ungodly, neither be thou enuyous against the
evil dooers, for they shall suddenly be cut down like grass, and withered
like the green herbs. Sirach. 2. in all.
Obey the Lord with patience, because the wicked shall be devoured and
destroyed, and they that trust in the Lord shall inherit the earth.

And therefore let us be firm in righteousness and fear, as the spirit of
God does command us. For sith that we can not, nor may not, escape the
afflictions and calamityes in this world, much less shall our persecutors
escape: but our temporal tribulatio^s are nothing to be compared to their
pains eternal. Temporal tribulations, are but momentary, to the eternal
troubles, which are to touch the ungodly in time to come, for that they
believe not the Gospel, and are persecutors of the rightuous. (As S. Peter
says) be ye merry and glad to be persecuted, 2. Pet. 4. and 12.13.
that you may be partakers of Christ's passions, and so be glorified in him:
for by that mean shall we be strengthened to withstand the fear of any present
evil. Esaias. 30. and. 20. Esaias. 30. and 29.
Silence and hope (says the Prophet) shall be your foretresse and bulwark.
How much the more we are sylent and trustfull in tolleratyng of trouble in our
trials. So much ye more are we stre^gthened and anymated to drink of the
clearenesse of the cup which the Lord shall give us. So that it shall be no
detrime^t nor harm to us, more then is already spoken of by his word.

1. Cor. 11. and 32.
The Apostle S. Paul in the Epistle that he does write to them of Corinthe,
says: when that we be judged of the Lord, we are but chastised, because we
should not be dampened with the world. In this the spirit of God does testefie
unto us, that by the means of those tribulations which we do suffer, we be
made free from the condempnation of the world, the which of necessity is to
be condemned. So that the punishments and persecutions which we suffer, God
does not suffer us in them to loose us, or separate us from him and his
truth, as our flesh and the world do judge or imagine: but to correct and
consume in us, all those things which are lets and stumbling blocks, to put us
from the similitude or likeness that we ought to have unto his son Jesus
Christ our Lord and redeemer. Because that how much the more we be afflicted
and troubled, with so much the more affyance and trust in his mercy, we should
deplore and bewail our sins and wickedness: like his children of mercy, and
so be banished from the participation or part taking, of the condempnation of
the world. John. 17. and 11, 20.23. etc.
And this is the effect of the supplication or prayer, that our Lord Jesus
Christ did make at his last supper, when he did pray to his father, for the^
only which did believe in him by his word, and he was heard. But sith he did
not pray for the wicked which he calls the world) we ought not to merueyle
at their perverseness, for that all the peruersitie which they do use, does
lead them with stealyng steps, to the brincke of their perdition and
dampnation.

He did pray for us that we might be delivered from evil: and even now
boholde how by afflictions, he does deliver us from the condempnation, due
for sin and wickedness, and does reserve the same only for the children of
unbelief. And therefore it is said by the Prophet, Psalm. 94. and 12.
Blessed is the man that thou haste chastened (O Lord) and instructed in thy
law: that thou may give him patience and rest in the time of aduersitye,
until the pit be dygged up for the ungodly.

Herein are we surely certified of our blessedness, by the afflictions yt we
suffer, for yt we are corrected of the Lord, that we should not be cast of but
enjoy our porcions of his saving health. And therefore ye holy woman Judith
said: Iudit. 8. and. 27.
Let us believe that the Lord does correct us but as his servants, not to our
loss, but to our gain: not to spoil us, but to amend us. 4. Esdr. 16. and 20.
And Esdrasse a man of God says, the hunger, the plagues, the tribulations,
and the vexation of mind, with the which the Lord does scourge us: they are
but to correct and purge us, of and for our sins. And therefore the Apostle
Paul says to the brethren of Thessalonia, 1. These. 5. and 6.8. etc.
ye are the children of light, and of the day: and not of the night, nor of
darkness. Wherefore let us not sleep as others do, but let us watch and
be sober, armed with the breast plate of faith and love, and with the helmet of
hope of salvation. For God has not appointed us to wrath and condempnation,
but to obtain salvation, by ye means of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ
which died for us: ye whither we wake or sleep we might live together with him.
2. These, 1. and 4.5.6. etc.
Also the same Apostle says to us: The persecutions and troubles which you
suffer, are tokens of the rightuous judgment of God, that ye may be counted
worthy of his kingdom for the which you also suffer. It is (verily) a
rightuous thing with God, to recompense them with tribulations again, that
trouble the faithful, and rest unto them so troubled, with his chosen at the
last day, when the Lord shall come in the majesty of his glory to judge the
world. Whereby it appears: that the persecutions which we suffer, are to us
a sure and most firm zeal, of the salvation and health that we have by
Christ, that we be free from fynal and everlasting dampnation, 1. Pet. 1. and
6.
and also, they are sure testimonies of the sweet rest, which is for us to
have after this life in our Lord Jesus. And therefore we ought to suffer them
with a joyful mind, because it is a privilege not incident to all, but to us
only which believe. For which cause the Apostle says to them of Philippia,
Phil. 1. and 29.
it is not only given to you, to believe in Jesus Christ: but also that you
suffer with him. Because as faith is not given (says S. Paul) to all: 2.
These. 3. and. 20.
no more it is not given that all should suffer for him. The Privileges of
the^ which suffer for the gospel.
Wherefore it is most manifest, ye to suffer for Christ's sake, is a great and
principal pryuiledge, given to us by God, by means whereof all they which
suffer are assured of their free liberty in Christ Jesus. And for this cause
it is granted unto them that are faithful to suffer in him, and to be so evil
entreated and desolued of and from eternal dampnation, before his dyuine just
judgment. As every father does give to his children that which he knows to
be most best and profitable for them. So God does give unto us that be his,
pains, calamities, afflictions, and persecutions, because he by his divine
wisdom does know, that they be most best and commodious for us. Adversity and
persecution is much better then prosperity: because affliction for the word
of God is only particular and private to the rightuous, but prosperity in
worldly delights are public and common to all people wicked and sinful.
What things may or can be more profitable and healthful to us, then those by
ye which we are certified and assured, of the great good will and love, which
god has toward us: and ye we are free of and from, the condempnation due unto
the world, what thing is there better, that we can desire here whilst we live
in this vale of misery, then to pass our time in the company of Jesus Christ,
clothed with his livery, coat, and cognisaunce: which is faith and love, to
suffer, in, for, and with him. What greater prosperity can be imagyned or
thought of, the^ to be saved with eternal salvation, and to have a deed (as ye
common lawyer of england says) of co^firmatio^, to assure us yt we shall enter
into a full possession of his holy heavenly kingdom: purchased and fully bought
of him for us, by the most precious blood of his son our savior Jesus Christ.
God our blessed father, in se^ding us calamities, afflictions, and
tribulatio^s: and in suffering us to be persecuted for his name and gospel sake,
does it to none other end, but upon purpose, to confirm unto us all his
promises, and to assure us yt it is necessary for us to suffer as his son
did. And therefore S. Peter does admonish us to rejoice, 1. Pet. 4. and. 13.
in as much as we are partakers of Christ's passions, yt when his glory
appears we may be merry and glad: if we be railed on in ye name of Christ, we
are happy: because ye spirit of glory and the spirit of God rests upon us.
S. Ieames, James. 1. and 1.2.
considering the great riches, that God does communicate unto his people, in
their afflictions, and griefs, says my brethren: account it great joy when
ye fall into diverse temptations, because that you know, the trial of your
faith brings patience. Let us rejoice (says S. Paul) in ye hope of ye
glory of God for yt he has made us, Romans 5. and 2.3.4.5.
partakers of the grace and reconsiliation of Christ, and yt we believe in him.
And not only this: but also yt we rejoice in tribulation, because we know ye
tribulation brings patience: patience brings experience: experience
brings hope: The which hope shall never be confounded.

Of patience and an exhortation thereunto, etc. Cap. xviii.
NOw (dearly beloved brethren and sweet fellow members) let us see and behold
how God loves us: in giving us such a benifite accompanied with so many
riches. Surely there is nothing that we have so great a necessity of in this
life, as of patience: that we might fructify and increase in the fruits of
the Gospel, to the obedience whereof we are called. Mark. 4. and. 20. Luke. 8.
and ^. etc.
There be many that do hear the word of God: yet for all that there is none
that does fructify thereby, but those which are armed with patience and do
suffer the hand and chastisement of the Lord. Wherefore the Apostle says:
truly you had need of patience, Hebr. 10. and 36.
because that after you have done ye will of God you may obtain the riches of
his promise. Whereby appears that without patience we cannot obtain them: and
also if we have not pacyence we can not do as we ought. But because we should
have patience, God does suffer us to be troubled, Tribulation does engender
patience.
for that by tribulation, is wonted to spryng and grow patience in those that
be his children: who knowing the good will and love of him wherewith they are
beloved, do persuade themselves that from his hand can come nothing, how
adverse so ever it be to ye world, but of force it must be to a profitable end
unto them, and serve greatly to the glory of God: and also as they do see
them selves beloved: they do love him, and do accept all things in good and
joyful part that he does mynister unto them, be it affliction, trouble,
calamity, sorrow, persecution, or other passion whatsoever. For by his Gospel
is revealed unto them and us, all his good will, if we do receive it: and the
full certeintie thereof to some more, to some less, even as it pleases him,
and sees convenient,

Of this patience is begotten experience: the which is ye touchstone from
whence and whereby our faith is examined, Patience brings experience
proved, and tried: whither it be weight and measure, yea, or no. Dearly
beloved (says S. Peter, 1. Pet. 4. and 1^.13.
) be ye not troubled, nor do ye not merueile when you do see your selves
tried by fire, as if there had happened any strange thing to you which were
not commen to the faithful? For by the patience which God does give us, is
proved, experienced, and tried, whither our faith that we have of him, be
true or feigned. Because we be ye children of light he will not yt we walk in
ignorance and darkness, but yt we have experience, to know wherefore we should
love him, and he love us. For so did God prove Abraham, Genesis 15. and. 5.6.
and found him faithful. And he was so faithful in deed, as was possible:
Romans 4. and. 9.13.
whereby he understood that by the same faith which God had given him he was
made rightuous before his divine majesty, and that it was a true faith, and
did use all his love, and procure all that he loved, and did delight in all
things, to do and fulfill his holy commandments. In Matthew and Mark, Mat.
13. and 4.5.6. etc. Mark. 4. and 3.4.5. etc.
upon the Gospel of God which they did write: it is said: that there be four
kinds of people which did, (and do,) hear ye word of God, and all of them
said they believed: but when tribulation came upon them for ye words sake, and
that they were tried thereby, there was but one part of them found yt had
received ye truth, and they were thoroughly tried by passing the pikes of
persecution with patience, and did fructify abou^dantly, some thirty fold,
some sixty fold, some more, some less. So that in such manner (I mean by
persecution) ye Lord does try out and distinguishe the true believers, from ye
false and feigned. As when by a blast of wind ye wheat is discovered from the
chafe, and so known to be perfect: Even so by puffes of persecution, care, and
calamity, trouble, and other the scourges of God: a perfect and true Christian
is certeinely and surely tried and known. Wherefore it is written in Jesus ye
son of Syrache, Sirach. 54. and. 10.
as follows: what knows he that was never tempted, and he that was never
tried nor experyenced. What can he understand: such a one is as a man that
sleeps, and does not know nor esteem christianity without a trial or
experience. Thus comes experience
Before that we be experienced by patience in bearyng the cross: will any of
us, be so bold as Peter was, to resist against the enimyes of our master, and
the truth: till he see himself out of danger of imprisonment, peril, and
persecution, by such like persecutors, no surely: it is much to be doubted.
But yet when God has sent upon us persecutions and troubles, and of his mercy
has given us patyence and constancy, whereby we have confessed before our
adversaries, the faith which by the gospel we have received: and when that to
follow our Lord and master we have put in proof to adventure our lives, and so
pass thorough all the evils and afflictions that can be offered to us: Even
then (and not til then) we do remain, tried by the touchstone of truth, and
do know by experience, that our faith is firm, true, and of great effycacie
and valor before God. Because then we are by him so united in Christ, that
neither Castles, prysons, torments, threatenings, dishonours, losses of
substance, nor yet the same death that he him self dyed, can separate us from
him. So that then have we such experience as Peter had, Iere. 9. and. 24.
and then dare we to strike of Malchus (ye high priest his servant) his right
ear if need were. But yet the experyence that Peter had, was not altogether
by the persecution which he suffered himself, but rather by that which he had
seen his pure good master to suffer, etc. So that this experience and firm
knowledge that we have to know the good from the evil, and whereupon to
ground our faith, that we might boast and rejoice in God for: it is engendered
and begotten of that constant patience which by faith we have to tolerate and
bear the tribulations that we are brought into for the profession of his name.
Patience also brings unto us experyence of the pure goodness and truth of our
faith: and does assure us yt we are not deceued, nor live by ye vain
imaginatio^s of men: but by the word of God. Whereby Christ is revealed unto us,
and we do know our salvation. Also there is verified herein, that which is
spoken by S. Peter: 1. Pet. 1. and 6.7.
in the last time ye shall rejoice, though now for a season ye be in many
temptations: yet your faith once tried, being much more precious then Goulde
that perysheth, (though it be tried with fire) you shall be found in land,
glory, and honor, at the appearing of Jesus Christ our savior.

How that good experience brings forth hope, and of a shadovv of certain
persecutions. Cap. xix.
EXperyence gotten by patience, does beget and bring forth hope, for having
experience in the might and potencie of God, we come and grow to have a sure
hope in him, because that how much ye more and greater our trial and experience
is: so much the more firm, certain and sure is our hope: as David, Danyell,
and many other holy men, which having proved, and being experie^ced by great
and terrible tribulatio^s, have passed thorough ye pikes of the^ with great
hope: for yt they had a feeling of ye power and presence of God in them, and
thereby assured of ye favor of him, yt they were imboldened and brought into
so sure a hope, yt none enemy nor nothing, could ouercom nor prevail against
them. David being moved with the feeling of this favor, and full of firm hope
in the goodness of the Lord, which did sustain him against his enemies, and
bring him forth of all his troubles with victory, said: Psalm. 18. and 1.2.
with all my heart have I called on thee O Lord, and I will love thee O my
strength: O Lord thou art my strength, my Rock, my defense, my liberty, and
my god. And I will put my whole hope and trust in thee my buckler and my shield,
I will call upon thee, and so I shall be delivered from mine enymyes. The
troubles and sorows of death have environed and compassed me round about, but I
called upon the Lord, and he has hard me from his holy Temple. In like
manner it happens and falls out to all the faithful: for after that our
faith is proved, experienced, and found good, by the patience and sufferance
that God has given us: Even then our hope does so increase, that we conceive
a most firm security and certeintie of our salvation. And so: by means
thereof, we begin to feel and know without doubt that we can not be lost nor
forsaken: but that for a more certeintie, we shall obtain and come to ye pure
port of eternal health. And hereof S. James speaks and says. James. 1. and
12.
Blessed and happy is the man that suffers temptations: for when he is tried
he shall receive the crown of life, which God has promised to them that love
him. In varyable and firm is this hope, because it is founded and grounded
upon Jesus Christ, of his words and promises. Whereof it is spoken in Matthew
and Luke, Mat. 5. and 5. etc. Luke 6. etc 20. etc.
(in Christ's Gospel by them written) Blessed art thou that mournest, for
thou shalt be comforted: Blessed art thou when men reuyle and abhor thee,
persecute thee, and speak all manner evil sayings of thee, for my name sake:
Blessed art thou ye weepest, for thou shall laugh: Blessed art thou when men
hate thee, thrust thee out of their company, and rail and abhor thy name as
an evil thing, for the son of man's sake. 1. Pet. 2. and 4.5.6.
Rejoice you all then and be glad for behold your reward is great in heaven:
For so persecuted they the Prophets.

The foundation of our hope being grounded upon these promises and such like:
The Apostle says it shall never be confounded. For that if we believe and
trust firmly in the fulfylling of the^, we shall never be defrauded from the
fruits of our hope, nor shall not be confounded before the children of this
world: nor yet have shame of our hope and trust, in those divine promises. For
that we shall be assured to obtain the fulfilling of them, and besides remain
without fear of our worst enimyes: for they shall not be able to say yt our
hope is had in vain, but shall with their own eyes, full surely see us saved
thereby. Psalm. 31. and 1. etc. Psalm. 71. and 1. etc.
David does declare and confirm this unto us by his own experience, saying,
in ye Lord have I trusted, and I shall never be confounded. Esaias. 28. and 16.
And Esaias says, he that believes in the Lord shall not be co^fou^ded. Romans 8.
and ^4.
And by S. Paul it is said, by hope we be already saved. Finally by the holy
ghost it is pretended, to give us all to understand, that as many as trust in
God, shall be saved and set free, from all tribulations both temporal and
eternal by Jesus Christ. So that being anymated and imboldened by this hope,
we may rejoice in them and say with Saint Paul, Romans 8. and ^1.32. etc.
if God be with us, who can be against us. He that spared not his own
son, but gave him for us all: how is it possible that he should not give
us all things in him. Who shall accuse or lay any thing to the charge of the
chosen: it is God that justifies, who shall then condemn: it is Christ that
is dead, yea rather risen again: which is also on the right hand of God, and
makes intercession for us.

Who shall separate us from the love of him: shall tribulation, anguyshe,
persecution, hunger, nakedness, peril, or the sword. No: God forbid, Psalm.
44. and 22.
for that it is written, for thy sake are we killed all ye day long, and are
accounted as sheep appointed to be slain. And yet in all these things we are
victors, and victorious, by yt good god our father who so loves us. Thus if ye
foundation of our hope be by faith, we are the^ perfectly sure we shall never
come to confusion: Romans 8. and 35.39.
and that no creature can part nor separate us from the love and charity of
God, which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. Because of necessity by his
righteousness, he is to fulfill in us all things, as the holy Ghost has
spoken. That is to say: ^. Tim. 2. and. 7.10. etc. Romans 8. and 11.12.17. etc.
if we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him, and if we be dead
with him, we shall live together with him also.

And therefore if we do communicate together in his passions, and do suffer and
be killed with him, we may assure our selves, that we shall also live with him
for ever. So that the tribulatio^s and persecutions which we suffer for his
sake, with patience, is a free confirmation, and full assurance of our hope in
his eternal kingdom, of the which he has already taken possession, is
glorified, and does reign therein to his own use, and ours.

So that we may see, that all that God does, is to assure us, (and to make
confirmation accordyngly) of our salvation: the which he has given us in
Christ. And to confirm in us also, the rest of the effect of his divine
counsel which was determined before the beginning of the world. And as this
his counsel is mutable, so much the more is the fuming fury of his enymyes
and of the diuill their capteyne, set against us: who as he is the principal
minister of all the mischief and tribulatio^s that we suffer. So he does as
much as in him is to obtain the victory of us, as well in administering
temptations to us interiorly, as exteriorly: whereby he would by one mean or
other, pluck and separate us from the right way. When he does come to the
combat to fight for victoorie: the villayne is so nymble, dylige^t, and
subtle as is possible: all his army of Soldiors and warriors are armed and
set in array for the best advantage as he thinks: And all to derive us from
the firmness of our faith that we have in Christ. He does show us the
greatness of his estate, and of all his furniture, for that he would make us
afraid, to faint, and be dismayed at the full fiersenesse of his force. And
when as this is thus showed unto us, there is a certain number of us, that are
troubled, and do think them selves as sheep among Wolves, and in ye mouths
of Wolves. When as they see them selves forsaken of their friends and
famyliars, abhorred and denied of their kinsfolks, forsaken and without help
of them that were deepest in debte for their friendship. And that all the world
does rejoice to see them so afflicted, as when the sentences of their
condempnors thunder out so terribly against them, as though it were from the
mouth of almighty God pronounced. The^ great are the troubles and sorrows that
they suffer in their minds: it seems then unto them, that both heaven and
earth is beset with ire and wrath against the^, O great Ire of the diuil and his
servants.
and that god and his creatures make mortal war even to distroy them. The^ for
another practice may they see ye kings Princes and rulers (which ought to be
their defe^dors in Gods causes) to rise and stand up against them, and do say
all with one voice together: kill the^, kill the^, as traitors and enemies to God
and our kingdom. On the other side they see torments, tortures, and stout
sturdy stomackt torme^tors, stand ready prepared for them, with shame, infamy,
confusion, and reproach, to be received before their friends, familiars, and
enemies, they do see ye terrible and fearful face of direful death, and the
slavish ha^gman or executioner ready to light ye fire to burn them, and to
stretch ye roape to stra^gle them. In all these troubles, there is not one to
comfort them, but in stead and place of comfort, they do use exortatio^s to
blaspheme (or speak blasphemy of ye redemption obtained by) Jesus Christ.
These I say: these are wonderful anguishes, sorows, and troubles in their thus
troubled minds. And yet they do increase from degree to degree, for all this
time, Psalm. 43. and. 1.2.
they either think ye God is a sleep, there is no God, or else yt he has
forgotten them. And then the diuil plyeth him by all the means he may, to
bring them to despair: he does procure persuasions unto them yt they would
deny, abhor, and curse God: the^ he does leave to entreat them in this
manner, and will suffer no man to succor them. So yt more grievous is this
anguish to ye mind of those members, the^ were present death to their bodies.

A pure proof unto us, that we are beloved of God in our greatest griefs etc.
The xx. Chapter.
ANd yet al these mischievous things are but mystic clouds of darkness, cast
out by the diuyll him self, by means of the miscreaunts his ministers: and
can not be encountered to any aduau^tage, but only by the light and presence of
the promise of God. If we happen to fall into any of these clapses, or to com
into such a straight: the first thing that we ought to do is, not to stop,
impope our selves with popery, nor to dasell our eyes with any thing yt we
see, but to pass with expedition as much as may be, to those things which
with corporal sight may not be seen. (Which is to a sure hope and trust in
God,) and the^ no doubt of necessity we shall be succored in the midst and
extremity of all our sorrows and troubles, such like or whatsoever. God says
by the Prophet David, Psalm. 91. and ^4. etc.
I am with the afflicted in all their troubles. I will deliver them and bring
them to honor, and they shall glorify me. So that, the^ it is not God that
seems to make this war against us, but assuredly he is with us and does
aid and assist us therein, giving us a secret power, virtue, and strength,
which in the end does deliver us. Luke. 12. and 32.
Christ said to his disciples, and in them to us: fear ye not my little
flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom. So that all the
mischiefs and evils, as many as we see or feel, whither it be interiorly or
exteriorly: and all that Satan and his mischievous ministers do or can do,
cannot let us, from entering thereinto. We shall never feel our selves
forsaken: but if we do lean to him and to his divine promises with a sure
faith and hope we shall find and feel that God is always within us, and will
never fail us. Iosu. 1. and 5.9. Hebr. 13. and. 5.
As it is written, I will not leave nor forsake thee says the Lord. Let us
hear that which he does command us by the Prophet Esaias: Esaias. 26. and. 20.
in times of tribulations go my people, enter into thy chamber and shut thy
door after thee, hyde thee a little for a moment, until mine indignation be
past. To withdraw our selves into our chamber, is to flee unto the promises of
God, in the which he has promised us, that he will love and favor us
perpetually. Mat. 6. and 6.7.
To shut the door is to renounce and forsake our corporal feeling and senses
in time of affliction. And not to be ouercom by any thing yt the^ we feel
interiorly or exteriorly, inwardely or outwardely. Nor doubt of gods truth, but
suerly be leave yt he will fulfill and accomplish all his promises: for yt we live
eternally with Jesus Christ by whom they were promised, when and in such times
as we can see nothing but darkness, heaviness, sorrow, and the wrath of God,
and we do judge yt al of it is for and against us. But then, yea even then: he
does acknowledge us for his people, and does co^mau^d us yt we shut ye door a
while that his anger may pass over. Wherefore does our good God thus much for
us: For our deseruings, no truly: but even of mere love. So yt it follows,
though he be angry yet he loves us, and is not wrath with us, but with our
adversaries and condempnors, of whom he will take vengeance for their unbelief
sake, although for a time he suffer them to use their worst cruelties. Esaias.
27. and 3.4.
By the Prophet Esaias this is confirmed unto us, that the Lord has no wrath
nor indygnation against us.

But to the thorns and thistles he has a furious dyspleasure, for that they
are enimyes both to him and us. 2. Cor. 12. and. 7.
Saint Paul was greatly afflicted and buffeted with many counter buffettes of
Satan. But even then was he favored and beloved in God. As he heard him
self with his own ears, when the Lord said unto him, my grace is
sufficient for thee. David feelyng him self in the like favor of God said,
Psalm. 31. and 26. Esaias. 27. and 3.4.
the Lord does love all his saynctes, and does keep all the faithful. And
also does recompense the proud abundantly for their pride. By our hope in his
promyses we do find this light and comfort in the midst of the darkness
of our tribulations. But when in the understanding and following of his
precepts, we do use and take our own reason, of necessity we must give a
wrong judgment, for that if we feel not favor divine, we think presently yt
god is fallen a sleep, far dista^t from us, and has forgotten us. Psalm. 53.
and 1.2.
And because we see not openly the liberty that we desire, we judge even the^
that he does not see us. Psalm. 31. and 1.^.14. etc.
As David did which being grievously troubled. He then presently according to
the judgment of the flesh, said: that God had forsaken him. But presently by
the word of God, he was showed the error and falsitude of his judgment. When I
was in have I said I am out of thy sight, but thou nevertheless have hard the
voice of my prayer: when I called upon thee. David held him self cast out and
forsaken: but God did hear and deliver him, when he was in greatest trouble,
and thought least of help. So in our judgments (which are fleshely) we
think that all our tribulations are long without measure, and that they will
never have end. But the Lord has said unto us, they shall endure but a while:
for that in commanding us to shut the door a moment, he does give us to
understand that they are but momentarie and shall end very quickly. Psalm.
30.^5.
As David says also: his ire shall pass away in a moment or the twinkling of
an eye. Our tribulation (says S. Paul) indureth but a little, 2. Cor. 4. and
17.18.
and is lightly passed over. And therefore we ought to suffer it constantly,
not considering the things visible to be seen, and that perish: but the
things invisible, and eternal. Genesis 15. and 6. Romans 4. and 2.3.4. etc.
For that if we be the sons of Abraham, because we believed as he did, let us
then appear in deeds as he did, or like unto him, for he was extreemely
tempted, but yet he: put his trust wholly in God, and did not doubt of his
promise. And therefore was strengthened in his faith, and did give thanks to
God. And was persuaded that although he saw nothing (that showed apparent
cause) wherein to trust: yet he did consider ye God which had promised, was of
power almighty: and therefore of power suffitient to perform any thing
promised. Eue^ so we, when our tribulations seem most grievous, and that we
do think there is least possibility to get out of them: let us then think it
but momentary, and the rather have hope with the greater firmness, and be
assured that the potency of God is always ready to perform his promise, and
let us not give any heed at all to our own reason, understanding, and
judgment. And although we see not our liberty, yet let us be assured and make
full account yt we are free. God is not angry with us that are his.
Let it be that it seem that God do hate us, and that his creatures make war
against us. Yet for our own parts, let us believe with faith (although our
troubles be of never so great a show) that it is not against us: nor yet that
he is angry with us: John. 3. and 15 16.17. etc.
because he cannot let be, nor leave bear, the fatherly affection that he has
toward us. Let us enter into the withdrawyng place or chamber that he does
command us, and then although he seem never so disformed outwardly, yet we
shall find him inwardly, such as he has showed him self to be in Christ,
that is to say, a father full of mercy, whose bowels do burn with love (for
and) toward us. So that then we need not to despair, nor yet be dismayed in
our selves. Although the wars and contradictions of the wicked worldlinges
and the world beee never so great against us, or the misformed and the
ilfauored face of death be never so grievous to our bodies which are mortal:
yet our most loving father God almighty: will not leave, but be with us in the
midst (and greatest) of all our temptations, troubles, vexations, calamities,
and outrageous griefs: yea even to their utter confusion.

To all the faithful that are vexed, troubled, and surcharged, or ouerloade^
with the cross: the holy ghost does give advice by Esaias the Prophet in this
manner. Esaias. 37. and 4.
Say unto the weak and faint of heart, comfort your selves and do not fear,
behold the Lord your God that will take vengeauce on your enimyes, and give
unto them payment according to their deserte: the same God shall come in proper
person and save you.

This is as much as if he had said, I pray you hear me my dearly beloved
friends, the troubles which you do suffer is because you are mine, and
governed by my word: and for that you have cast away the yoke of impiety and
false religion: and have received mine: look not in exterior things which are
troubles unto your flesh only, but know for a certeyntie that as there is
nothing that the world does more abhor, (or that does more suffer the rage
and furye thereof) then you: So for the contrary, there is nothing in the
world that I love better then you. John. 17. and 4.9.20.
And therefore my children, have you a sure trust in me, for I have already
overcome, all those things that do torment you, and since your enimyes do not
fear to molest and make war against you: do not you cease to receive
comfort in the riches of my promyses which are yours, and are for you. If
they do account you for cursed and abhomynable, do you pray for them, I say
pray and be not weery, let not your hands be loosed, but hold fast ye sword
of your defense, which is my word: be of good cheer, fear not, be stout
and of a good courage, for why your enimyes do fable and lie in all that they
tell you, I am not absente from you as they say: but am always with you
present, apt and ready to defend yon as I have promised. I do not abhor
you, nor yet I have not forsaken you, but do love you, and am so nigh: that
those which touch you, do touch even the very balls of my^^ eyes. I even I
says the Lord: Zach. 2. and 5.9.
will take vengeance of them that trouble you. I my self in mine own person
will deliver you: persevere and go forward constantly in a sure faith and
affiaunce in my love, for your adversaries have done what they can, and yet
know not what they have don against you in me, let the eyes of your heart be
settled in me. Although your senses be shut up with smoke, ashes, and flames of
fire: yet do not think that I am fled or from you one ynch, or any thing at
all. For I will not leave you, but be always present with you, although you
see me not, I my self am he that does fight for you: although you feel it
not, fear you not that your enemies shall overcome you, according to their
determinations assure your selves that I will give you the victory in the end,
I have promised it: and I my self will fulfill it. These and such like are the
loving words of our good God and savior, unto us that be his chose^, such
loving and sweet amorous speeches does he use unto us, notwithstanding that we
be persecuted and afflicted with fire and other kind of crosses before we can
come to him.

A persuasion to trust only in God, and to avoid all vain trust, had in any
humain help. etc. The xx. Chapter.
Sith therefore, that we see that our sweet God is so present with us, when we
think him to be farthest of: that he does love us dearly, when we think our
selves forsaken and abhorred: and that he does not forgette us, when we
think our selves far out of favor and remembrance. Let us put our whole
trust and confidence only in him, for that he is altogether sufficient to
(and will) stand with us for our defense in all our troubles and adversities.

And also let us say with holy Job, Job. 13. and 15.
Although he give me unto death, I will not leave to trust in him. As our
flesh is the greatest enemy that we have, so is it that, Romans 8. and 1 3.5.
etc.
which does make the greatest war with us. Because it does not only deny
this favorable presence of God, but also does not let, to fight against it:
that is to say, against the promises of God: and do lean, and trust to things
which are vain, thinkyng to be defended, and delivered by the help thereof,
from all the harm, calamity, and grief that it does feel.

And so does not only fall out to the contrary, but also is an occasion why,
that greater griefs do follow: And therefore it behooves us to be vigilant and
to take heed that we do not tempte God, with puttyng any vain trust or hope
in men, (whither they seem or show to be good or bad, faithful or
unfaithful) for any thing touching salvation or dampnation. For so the wicked
by their wickedness, would devise and be of strength and efficacy sufficient,
to blind and bring us into doubts, and like to despair by means of our
doubtful and weak belief. Because that all of us are full of that monstrous
mass of sin, ever falling, and in deed fully subject to fall, into all
kind of misery. But let us give heed to that which the holy ghost does
command by the Prophet David, Psalm. 146. and. 2.
do not trust in Princes nor in the sons of men, because there is no health
nor help in them. Miserable are the successes of such as put their trust in
men. For that (as the Prophet Jeremy says) cursed is he that puts his
trust in man. Iere. 17.^5.
Therefore let us put our trust only in God, and depend and put our trust
only in his most faithful promises. And so shall we be sure that he will
fight for (help and defend) us, against ye world, the flesh, and all other the
snares of the diuill. As the Prophet Esaias says, Esaias. 32. and 13.17. Iosuah.
1. and 5.6.7. etc. John. 5. and 4.
if we believe this word of the Gospel we have obtained victory already.
Because as S. John says, our faith is the victory that overcomes ye world.
Act. 6. and 11 13. etc. Act. 8. and 51.58.
Saint Steue^, being armed with this faith, which was communicated unto him by
the Gospel, did overcome his enemies furies so, that they could not resist the
wisdom and spirit with the which he spoke. 1. Sam. 17 and 32.33. etc
David a very young man, of small age: what manner of weapon had he to fight
against Golias that mighty captain of the Philistines: he sought no help of
Saul, nor could not abide his Armor and weapons, nor yet did not favor any
kind of human counseile, nor his own force which was nothing in comparison,
to the strength of that mighty Gyaunt. But only armed with a sure faith,
affiance, and hope, in God, he fought courageously, did overthrow him, cut of
his head, and so set the chosen, (his fellow members) at liberty. In this is
and shall be for ever, verified to all the faithful, that God will fulfill and
perform his promises. And so he says by the Prophet David: Psalm. 91. and
1.2.3. etc.
he that trusts in me, I will keep and deliver him for that he has known
my name.

John. 4. and 2.3.
And therefore, since he is greater that is in us, then he that is in the world,
let us forsake all humayne counseill, strength, industry, prudencie, and
wisdom in the same, for that how much the less we esteem and depend upon
them, so much ye more is the efficacy, strength, and power of God in us: and
our sight ye clearer and perfecter, to see the great and admirable works, don
in his elected by his most mighty potencie, and might. Even then does God
discover to our weakness, the greatness of his most mighty power and
strength, to our health and salvation. For when we think our selves most
strong, 2. Cor. 12. and 7.20.
and depend most upon terene and earthly defense: eue^ the^ are we most
weakest, and our hope most frustrate. Because those things in the world, we
account and hold most sure for our relief, in our greatest necessity
falls from us: and so we left at the worste, and in displeasure with God. For
that we so vaynely did forsake him, and slay to vanity (which are the things
of this world) for our help and defense: and so are we left and forsaken, both
of God and man. Because we made a God of those things, the which we trusted
in, and therein did forsake ye true God. Those which do put their trust in
worldly things, do it because of the fair show thereof to their carnal or
fleshly eyes: but so they make a division of that hope, which they ought to
have in God, and put aparte or piece thereof into those which are of the world:
which is vanity, and of no value at all. Our filthy flesh is fondly led to
trust, and hang all hope on creatures, in place and stead of that hope which
is due unto God the creator. Suerly it is such a subtle snare of the father of
all subtelties and lies, that it often deceyueth many, and continually it
deceives it self. For it has always a custom to cover infidelity and
hypocrisy, with some one crafty cloaked color or other, that may not easily
be known. So that when we be beguyled by the same, we do think our selves
in such security that we sleep therein, as though fortified with such
humayne help, furniture, and favor, as none might be the like: when as in
very deed by the end of experience, we may and shall, find our own weakness
to be such, as is of no validity at all. Whereby is manifested that these
carnal furnitures, weapons, and armor, in which we hope and trust to be
succored by, do not only serve us nothing at all for our help and defense,
but also is and are extreme lets and hynderances, to keep us from ye doing of
that, which we ought and are bound to do, by the commandments of God. And
therefore in this life, which is a time of trouble, tirannie, battle, and
warfare: 1. Sam. 17. and 32.3^. etc.
let us be imitators and folowers of David, who never did bear other arms nor
weapons against his enimyes, then only his sure trust in God, wherewith he
always got the victory, and overthrew them all.

How we ought to do and behave our selves, to our enimyes as well visible as
in visible, corporal as spiritual: God does teach us by his Apostles. All
the wise, holy, and mighty of the world: All the riches, authority,
dignity, exelencie, greatness, human strength, and policy, that was in the
same: was against them, in such sort that it seemed inuinsible. There was very
few (scarce none) neither Lords, Earls, Dukes, Princes, Kings, and
Emperors, kingdoms, nor countries but were against them: with most cruel
wars and persecutions. But yet they (I mean the children and disciples of
God) armed with confidence and affiance in God, and patience by the only
words of the Gospel, did convince and overthrow to the ground, all the power
and potencie of them all: John. 14. and. 1. Ephe. ^ and 13.16.
as well the principalles as the rest. And by beleeuyng truly in the Gospel,
they did fight with (and overthrow) all the sublymate and supreme highness,
that did rise and repugne against them: and Christ their head in them. They
did overcome captivity, and bring a great number to be ruled, by (preaching ye
pure Euangelie of truth in the Gospel: and to the obedyence of faith therein.
By force whereof: they made ye world to tremble, and did work marvelous works
most worthy of memory. The world was not so strong, nor Satan so mighty, nor
yet his ministers so subtle, that they altogether with their strength, might,
policy, and subtlety, could let or hinder ye small grayn of musterd seed,
Mat. 13. and 32.
(the faith in the Gospel) but that it did increase, florysh, and grow, into
a great and mighty tree, the branches whereof did extend into all parts of
the world, so, that the birds of heaven might build their neastes therein at
his pleasure.

The diuill and all his vaseilles and bo^dslaues are beaten down daily and
overcome, with that Armor and weapon wherewith God has armed the faithful,
and elected. If those, Apoc. 13. and 17.
which serve the prince of darkness, and that are marked with the mark of the
beast, which S. John speaks of, could make that the son did not arise and
show it self so, that daily he did not or might not drive away the darkesome
nyghtie clouds, and so spread his beams into all parts of the world, whereby
ye force may be felt of the heat and light of the same: they might as well,
let and hinder the shyning son of the Gospel, that the splendant light
thereof, Luke. 1. and 31.33.79.
should not shine and show his inestimable brightness, to give light unto the
blind: that they might go and be guyded thereby, in the right way of truth.
Esaias 9. and 2.3. etc. Esaias. 60. and 1.2. etc.
And also let that the potencie of God therein, should not take the captyue
out of captivity, open the prysons to the prisoners, and that the contrite of
heart should not receive free liberty thereby.

Let them go to heaven if they can, Psalm. 52. and. 2. etc.
and throw the son down out her place usual, unto the earth: or let them
let and hinder the shining of the Gospel of glory, 2. Cor. 4. and 3.4.5. etc.
which does manifest that God is the Lord, and that by his word he ought to
be served and worshipped of all mankind: I say, let them do it if they can:
but in despite of them I say again they cannot. For all that ever they do,
is no more: but as if by spetling, they should prove or go about to pearse the
heavens, and so spitte upward accordingly, and then the same fall back again
into their own faces: whereby they are filthily fouled to their own reproach.
Wherefore let us not fear them in none of their bragges, but let us put on the
armor of the Apostles, and throw away all humain affiance: Let us assure our
selves that by our afflictions and death, are distroyed and overthrown the
enemies, contradytors, and geinsayors of us and the Gospel. For God does
deal with our enemies now in the same order, manner, and form, as he did with
them in times past, which persecuted and spoke against the Prophets and
Apostles: because that they taught the same gospel of life, which we now have
and teach: by Christ we live, and for him we suffer persecution, even so did
they: yet he has always gotten the victory, as well for them, as for us. And
therefore let us not tempt God, but let us trust wholly in him, his mercy,
power, and strength: And also have in hatred all human helps and favors
whatsoever.

What is the cause that so many do fainte, fall, and become amassed in their
minds so, that they can not persevere in that truth which God has commanded:
And also that some other being wonderfully lighted with the clear and pure
light of the Gospel, and seeing the works and wonders so admirable, that God
does show unto them by the same, are so sluggyshe and cold that they stand at
a stay, and care not whither they go forewardes yea or no: Surely and without
doubt there is none other cause, but that only by the instigatio^ of the
diuill, they are so deceived, that they rob. God of his honor, and put their
trustes wholly one in an other, taking men for their staff to stay upon, to
the end they might stand in all their troubles: regardyng humayne favor so
much, that they leave God, and fly thereunto for refuge, in all their
adversities and calamities. Some do trust in their riches, others in their
honors: some in the friendship of great men, other some in that they be
Gentlemen and of the noble blood: and so forth in other the like
prerogatives. What other thing is this, but as if one should trust in a shadow,
or a smoke which vanysheth, almost so soon as it is seen. When that we
consider the causes, for which we are afflicted, Esaias. 36. and 5.6.7.
(whereof God is the author from whom we flee) and do put our trust in men, or
in any thing that they can do for us: is as much in our aid as to trust
unto Egypt or to the strength of the Egyptians, or as in a broken Reed which
one holds to stay him self by, and it does not only suffer him to fall,
but also with the slyuers thereof, does so prick and hurt his hands, as
makes him repent, that he had no more understanding in time, then to trust
thereunto. It belongs to one that is a Christian and faithful, to be builded
and firmly founded, upon that fyrme Rock or stone which is Christ, and not
to flee from the same, to any human help or succor that perishes: Math. 7.
and 24.26.
for that against this true foundation, the wyndes of tribulations, tempests of
torments, nor storms of mischiefs and wickedness, cannot prevail against it,
or make it to remove or alter.

And therefore having so sure a foundation as Christ, let us assure our selves,
that there is nothing in the world, that can remove us from it. As the holy
Ghost does testifye, saying, Psalm. 125. and ^. etc.
he that trusts in the Lord, shall never be confounded, but shall be always
firm and sure as the holy hill of Syon.

How we ought to be instructed in truth and verity, and to have no
confidence in men's traditions. The xxij. Chapter.
GOd will that we beliue, trust, and be ruled by him and his word, only, and
not in no manner of wise, by the authority of men, although they seem never
so wise, holy, and faithful: if they teach and instruct not, by the prescript
word of God, wherein is all truth. Because if our trust in God, be according
to (and had by) their outward fained holiness and goodness, it serves for little
or nothing, but to make us so weak and feeble, that we cannot taste the drink
of the liquor of life: which is the fruit of the Gospel: with so stiff and
stout a stomach as we ought: And also yt the rather our weakness shall be
made more weak, and our infirmity more infirm and sick. But if we believe
only in Jesus Christ, and trust steadfastly in him, we shall be necessarily
instructed and strengthened: not to dismaye us, but to be more firm and
strong, against all kind of evil and wickedness. Yet for all that the
ministers of God will only teach according to the word, that me^ should
repose their trust wholly in Christ (as aforesaid,) and that he is the aucthor
of all truth and righteousness. Their intent is nothing but to be faithful to
the Lord which sent them. And to prepare his way, teaching and showing unto
men by the law the condempnation in which they were by sin, and how severe
God is in his judgments to the unbelievers, and superstitious aucthors, Luke
3. and. 4.
of guyle and deceit, (and the folowers thereof) contrary to true religion:
they will reduce, and induce as many as they can, to Jesus Christ their master
by the gospel only, as to one in whom is always a remedy for any kind of
mischief. For that from him the elected do receive all things, and do know
by him yt God is their father almighty: they do not, nor will not, sell nor give
them selves for gods, nor yet maintain themselves for gods Viccars general
upon earth: nor one of them does not challenge more authority in bynding and
loosing, blessing or curssing, nor in distributing ye word of God then an other
does: they show them selves for men, subject to all human infirmities, as
well one as another of them. They do teach and preach yt our faith must not
come from men, from them, but from God: the word of truth does teach them this
doctrine and us also. And therefore let us not attribute any kind of thing unto
any manner of man, neither faithful, holy, nor Saint, but unto God who gives
life to ye dead, and some time conuerteth the hearts of (and calls) our
persecutors into the way of righteousness and truth.

Although ye men be weak, lacks strength, and does often stumble, to do any
thing that is good, yet Gods truth which they teach is not so: Although they
be discoraged and afraid, because of the persecution which they see, yet the
word of truth is almighty, and fails not. Mat. 26. and 62.63. etc.
All ye disciples themselves fainted and feared at ye death of ye redeemer of
the world, Luke. 22. and 51.52. etc.
and yet he fainted nor feared not in his truth to show what he was: nor yet
did his truth loose any part of the valor, for all ye terrible trouble, and
pagan passions, and persecutions that happened unto him. So true, so good, so
just a iustifier, so immutable, so almighty was he, as was none: and yet his
own denied him, and were in such fear and doubts of his doings, as though
they had never known him. So yt the truth of God depends nothing upon men,
although they be even his very disciples and ministers: but on him self
only. Although they fainted, feared, and doubted of him, because of his
passions and persecutions which he suffered: yet for all yt did not he forget,
put out of knowledge, abhor, nor deny the^, but did most lovingly reduce
the^, and bring them again unto ye truth and true knowledge thereof: And there
where now he is, sitting on ye right hand of his father, he has not altered
his condition, nor yet hydden his accustomed love from them that be his.

Although they were weak, strayed out of ye way, stombled, and fell with the
weight of the cross of cruel persecution, yet did he make them partakers of
his mercy, with a free forgiveness or pardon general, and did give them
strength and force a fresh, to overcome all their weakness. And therefore he
being such a one as he is, that did love the weakelinges so, that he would nor
did not cast them away, for all their weakness and rebellion. Romans 14. and
8.2. etc.
We also being like unto them, ought to love him and not to forget nor
forsake him: but to hope and trust that he will do with us as he did with his
first disciples, which had the first fruits of the spirit. Let us not be of
the number of ye enemies of God, nor of those which have any enmity unto him
or his, which do take and use all his works so, that it is an occasion why
they are set farther distant from him, do refuse to love him as he ought, and
in the company of his adversaries do blaspheme his holy name: But rather as
obedient and faithful children, let us understand the intent of our celestial
father, and take and gather out of his works only, all such fruit as he does
pretend in them. Which is the better to know him, the more to submit our
selves to his good pleasure and will, and not to fly further from him as the
wicked do, but to cleave more nigher unto him by faith, that by recovery of
new force, we may persevere in the way of truth.

Now if there be any weakness in any of us, (as no doubt there is, contrary
to our expectation,) that weakness comes not of nor from ye truth: but from
our selves and our filthy flesh. Let us not think it a strange thing, that
there is such weakness in man, for that all of us in as much as we are men,
and of the flesh, our delight is in nothing but in weakness and things of no
validity nor force but of ye flesh. Here we may all of us understand and see,
what great necessity we have (as well those which stand upright, as they
which bend and fall) of the help and power of Christ, without whom we can in
no wise endure to do any part of our duties. And therefore let us be vigilant
and look upon the weakness and falling one of another as in a glass:
because thereby we might know our own weakness: and so humble our selves
before God as we ought, for of our selves we are clean repugnant unto him and
to all goodness whereof he is the author. And since that we are all called to the
cross of affliction and calamity, and to fight against the pride and
presumption that is in us, and so to be occupied in contemplation therefore: Let
none of us judge a wrye or amiss of those which are fallen or do fall, but
let him which is upright and on his feet, take heed he fall not also. Because
that God is almighty, and will raise up and cast down whom him lifts, and
will not forsake, but raise up them that fall, will exalte the humble and
meek, and knit and close their cracks and breakings most sure. The cause why,
he does not forsake them that are fallen, is for that they be his children,
and that he will make his glorious works to illustrate and appear more
brighter in the^ by the means thereof, Romans 5. and 20.21.
because where as sin does abound there does grace superabound, and his
mercy and goodness is shining the brighter.

The wicked world cannot abide that any man should repugne or geinsay against
his judgment: nor yet allow any thing that is condemned therein. But the
children of God, 1. Cor. 2. and 8.9. 1. Ioh. 5. and 4.5.
as they have a sense and feeling of Christ, so they do allow by Christ, all
which God does command. And so likewise by him do they reprove and co^dempne
the judgment of the world for abominable and wicked. And therefore the world
and his worldlings together do against them, all the mischief they can: to the
end to banish from them this feeling of the truth, and so by consequent to
dispoyle them from God whose they are. But in consideration thereof he will
confound both the world, worldlings, and their judgments altogether.

And if it happen that the children of God, do stumble and fall with the
weight of the cross of cruel persecution, and give wrong judgment,
disalowing the truth which they ought to allow, and do allow a lie, which they
ought to reprove: yet their loving god and father will bring it so to pass,
that it shall serve them for their best and greatest commodity, to bring them
to be enriched with true humility: Psalm. 33. and 20.11.
with their only trust in God, whose goodness is wont to rise, stir, and
take out of greatest euilles and wickedness, most great blessedness and
happiness. For that those which love him, Romans 8. and 9.11.13. etc.
he does convert unto them all things for the best, yea even out of sin he does
take great riches to glorify them with. As he did to Noah, Genesis 9. and 21.
David, and to Peter: after their falls, he took such occasion thereby, as he
turned many things to their great goodness, Psalm. 51. and 1.2.3. etc. John.
21. and 7.^. 2. Cor. 2. and 6.13. Gala. 6. and 14.
and commodity, and did make to shine in them great light out of the
darkness the which they were in. By means hereof, we being forsaken of the
world, and crucified therein. And also the world being forsaken of us, we
shall come to great knowledge by experyence, that neither honors, riches,
noblenes of birth, humayne favor, wisdom, nor yet estimation had of men, is
of no force nor valor in our spiritual batteile. But only a sure faith and
hope in God our Lord.

And so being made mighty, meek, and humble, in this manner, we remain united
and suerly knit with the vine, which is Jesus Christ, John. 15. and 1.2.3. etc.
and more prompt and ready to receive his gifts then at the first. The cause
why ye father does so pick, prime, purge, and make clean the branches (which
are we his faithful) by ye way and mean, is only that we might bear and bring
forth, more copious, plentious, and abundance of true fruit. Ioh. 15. and 2.
So that Christ is he by whom we gain, and Antichrist is he by whom those that
follow him do loose. And Christ is he that gayneth, and Antichrist he that
loses. Because yt where he thought and thinks, yt by his tira^nicall
means, he had and has gotten, a number for his own, of those persecuted
lambs out of the hands of God, he was and is deceived: for that Jesus Christ
does possess them most mightifully, who will in no wise loose them. He does
unity and knit them with him self most straightly, in and with the cheine or
bond of most unfeigned love, for that he will not vary from the truth of his
promise: with the which he says, Ioh. 10. and. 5. A promise of great comfort.
that neither the force of hell, the diuil, death, sin, Antichrist, and all
that they can do, with the help of all their mynisters, is not so much to
prevail against them that be elected, Ioh. 8. and 12 23.31.32.51.
as is his strength to prevail in defense to keep them for the inherytance of
life everlasting, which he has already given them from the first day of
their calling.

The wisdom of God is such, that he knows perfectly that of or among all
those which he has called, there is none without sin: but are most subject
and apt thereunto, and to all kind of wickedness.

Romans 14. and. 1.7.6.
And yet notwithstanding he does accept them for his own: and knowing of their
great feeble weakness, will not the loss of one of them. Jesus Christ did
know right well, that all his disciples would fear, faynte, Ioh. 14. and. ^.3.
etc. Ioh. 15. and 7.8. Ioh. 16. and Ioh. 17. and. 1.2 4. etc.
forsake, and deny him, yet although he knew it, at his last supper with most
firm love and favorable affection, he made them promises of performance of
the whole sum of his goodness till the end: and in the end life everlasting.
Hebr. 9. and 11.26.27. etc.
And did also declare unto them that his death and passion, should be to
distroy sin in them, and their discendentes or successors, and that they with
them thereby should receive eternal life. How be it for all that, afterward
they did all fall, fear, faint, and did have a doubt in him: But yet for that
he had taken charge over them with promise of forgyuenes, he did not deny and
forsake the^, but had regard unto them with such a love, yt he would not suffer
them to perish. Mat. 26. and 31.45. etc. Marc. 14. and 27.41. etc.
Although yt wilfully with a wavering mind they had given them selves into the
perdurable estate of perdition: yet he with a francke, free, and everlasting
pardon, did restore them to strength from thencefoorth, against all kind of
weakness and infirmytie.

Upon what condition God receives us, with an excelent comfort to the
Christian. etc. The xxiij. Chapter.
SO that now, although ye overcome with weakness, we have fallen underneath
the cross of froward and furyous affliction and persecution: yet God will not
forsake us, because he has elected, accepted, and taken us for his own, Ioh.
15. and 7.8.
with promise of life everlasting. Those which he at any time of his mercy does
take charge of, he will not at no time suffer to perish, but will help them in
all their necessities, and cure their wounds to the glorification of him self
therein: and also give them life everlasting.

Ioh. 6. and 35. etc.
Because that when he does receive us, he does it not with any such condition
yt we should do any good of our selves, be faithful, or persevere in any
goodness for it: for that he knows our natures, to be to, to much corrupted,
whereby of force it does and will do, to to much to the contrary. 2. Cor. 2.
and 6. etc.
But he does receive us with condition, that we should only trust in him
that he will be our life, remittour, pardoner, John. 10. and. 5.
and forgeuer of our sins: our strength and perseverance, our Physician,
Esaias. 61. and 2.3.7.
and medicine, our master, our teacher, our salvation, and perpetual redeemer.

It is a most grievous offense, to deny the truth of God, and to give our selves
unto lies and errors: It is most execrable before God to bereave him of all
worship due unto him, and give the same unto a beast: Apoc. 13. and. 4.12.
it is a true testimony of our ingratitude, and that we have forsaken the
lord, Unthankfulness.
by whose liberality we have received so great and mighty a multitude of
benifits. Iere. 2. and. 20.11
Go my people (says the Lord by Jeremy the Prophet) into the Ilelandes a far
of, see and consider attentively, and behoulde? If the people there do like
unto you, if any of them do change their own proper gods for others, which in
deed are no gods: yet you have changed the glory of your god for an Idol.

God did call us because we should account him for our father, that we should
love and worship him as our father: he did take us out of the most darcke and
drowsy clouds of deceit and errors, and did discover unto us, that only
Jesus Christ is our most gracious salvation. Act. 14. and 15.16.17.
When that we went like children of perdicion, Acts. 17. and 30.31.
worshippinge of stocks and stones, he did reduce us into the right way: when
we were possessid of the devil and of sin, he did deliver us from their
mischeuous tyranny: Deuteronomy. 4. and^ 20.
being a lost people he made us his people, treated and used us, as his own
people, Psalm, 14^. and 3.6.
geuinge us his word for our spiritual sustenaunce. He being our only Lord
GOD and Father, we did deny him in an Idol: the glory which he had given us
being his people, we changed for vainest vanity, taking in and allowinge of
false doctrine, and forsakinge of the truth.

We have left and forsaken our true and lawefull spouse Jesus Christ, with
whom we did contract matrimony by faith in him (as says the Prophet Oseah)
and have committed fornicacion, Oseah. 2. and 5.6.
in seperatinge our selves from and denyinge the faith that we did vow to
have in him, when we received our Baptism.

The Turckes, nor the Mores, do dot refuse their religion, no more do the
Indians, nor the slauishe subjects of Antechrist deny theirs, and yet is it
false, abominable, and full of lies.

But we having a religion, True religion.
so divine, and pure as is possible, and also such a benefit thereby, as is
wholly holy and trwe, even come down from heaven: (the author whereof is the
LORD GOD almyghtie, maker of all things,) do deny it most shamefully, for a
vain fear of loosing our lives, and yet our lives without gods true religion
what are they better then lives of brute beasts, (surely nothing at all) what
do we differ from all other nations under heaven, but only in that we do
know Jesus Christ the son, by the reuelacion of the father, Esaias. 45. and. 24.
and that we have by him life everlasting. And where as they walk in the
darcknes of their mystical errors, we (if we be ruled by this true doctrine
which he has given us) do walk in ye light of life by the word of truth. By
virtue whereof, and to be conserved and kept thereby, 2. Pater. 1. and, 12.13.
God created all things. If God had been our enemy at any time, if he had
been a tyrant or had been cruel unto us, Esaias. 8. and 14.20.
or if he had at any time deceived us, then had we had some reason to forsake
him, to flee from him, and to leave him: to the end we might get out of his
wily deceits and tyranny.

Psalm. 67. and. 1.2.3. etc.
But being always a God unto us, so loving as he has been, a God that has
sauid us, and brydeled the devil, so that he cannot hurt us. God is our
savior.
He that has commanded his creatures for our sustenaunce, (when we were his
enemies) he that has delivered us from so many great perils and dangers of
death, and has been always our tutor, governor and defe^dour: and we
without shame so to deny and forsake him, most grievous is our folly and falte
therein: and so grievous that we have deserved thereby, that he should for ever
forsake us and condemn us to be under the tyranny of the devil and antichrist
eternally. To forget so many undeserved benefits, as he has preferrid us
unto, and to leave him for so small and light troubles and afflictions, as are
those which we have suffered and are to suffer for the profession of his name:
it is a thing worthy of most grievous punishment. If Jesus Christ had not been
first crucified himself, and made a curse for us, Math. 10. and 19.24.
and for our transgression and sin, and so callid us to the cross of worldly
tribulacion, Luke. 12. and. 11. etc.
we might well have been deceived or thought our selves so: Gala. 3. and and.
1.2. etc.
but that is most infallible and certain, for so he called us to the
profession of the same, and therefore to crosses and tribulacions, and not to
worldly honors, riches, and delights of this life.

What a grievous thing were it therefore to deny him: from whence may or can
there arise, accrewe, or grow, and proceed, such a mass of misery as that,
and that we do not (nor have not) understand and known aright the end of
our calling: which was especially and upon purpose to make us like unto
himself by passions, persecucions and afflictions surely it is a most
monstrous offense. For that to forsake the truth, thereby to eschew the
cross: is none other but to forsake Christ our only Savior, because there is
no way to Christ Jesus, without heavy crosses of affliction and persecution:
nor yet no true cross of calamity and persecucion, but is a way to pass by
unto him.

So that it rests, and is most fit and convenient for us, to have a great
and grievous grief in mind, with repentance, that ever we did forsake or deny
him: Perpetual penance.
and to lead the residue of our life in a perfect and perpetual repentance
for the same.

And therefore let us be converted and torn unto him, and behoulde attentively
that he (although offended with us) is not our enemy, nor doothe not desire,
nor procure our perdicion: but is our good GOD and Father, which doothe desire
(and wyill perform) our perfect health and salvation.

As truly as I do live (says the Lord) I will not the death of a sinner,
Ezech. 18. and. 21.^2.
but rather that he torn from his wickedness and live. It is god our Father
that we have denied in our dooinges and sore offended, we have most worthily
styrred his wrath to be wreaked upon us, and yet he spares us.

He is always our Father, and loves us as a most louinge Father, and also
does greatly rejoice at our conuercion from wickedness, he does seek and
use great means to induce, reduce, and bring us again unto his house and
presence, after the wasting and quite consuming of that good portion, that he
did give us for our parpetuall patrimony. We do imitate ye apostles
altogether in fainting and fearing at ye cross of Christ, and do flee from
it, and deny him as they did, for the vain fear of death: let us also do as
they did in converting again unto him, for as he did receive them, even so
will he receive us, and will comfort and embrace us with no less love, then he
did use and show unto them, for that he is as well our master and redeemer now,
as he was theirs then, he is our good God, a god almighty, and doothe love us
as well since we fell, as he did before we did fall: for that the naturalnes,
and burning bowels of love that is in the father, is not nor will be removed, by
the infirmities and weakness of the children. The prodigal child after that he
had consumed and wasted quite, Luke. 15. and 18.20. etc.
the goods and substanciall riches of his father, (or that his father had
given him,) did return again unto him, with a most humble submission and
confession of himself with repentance, to be unworthy to be called his son.
A token of true repentance.
But the father seeing him come a far of, did meet him on the way with such
a fervent joy, that the son, had scarce opened his mouth to confess his
sin and dysobedience, when he fell upon his neck, embraced and kissed him with
great joy, most zealously and gladly, and commaundyd him to be clothed with
new and costly ritche garments, making most merueilous feast with rejoicing,
for his so penitent a conversion.

Behoulde here the father was found no less loving to his son being
penitent, at the last, then he was at the first, notwithstanding so great a
disobedience and contemptuous offense. He was always a father unto him, as well
before his folly in falling and offending, as afterward: he was not thereby
removed nor altered one jot from his fatherly goodness, neither in love,
quality, nor condition: he did not vpbraide nor cast him in the teeth with
his falts, although they were most grievously great in his sight, but did rather
rejoice for his penitit conuercion: so much that his joy would give no place
to his son to confess his faltes and offenses. Because he had already
(pardoned and) put them quite out of memory, Ezech. 18. and. 22.
and did will and command that he, with all the rest in his house should
rejoice with him for the happy recovery of his son that was first dead and
then alive. Iere. 31. and. and. 34.


An excelent kyndely and comfortable persuasion of the faithful to rejoice in
any calamity. etc. The.xxiiii. Chapter.
TO us (my brethren and fellow members) that have played the part (upon this
worldly stage) of ye Prodigal child, in wasting, spoiling, and consuming of
our porcions of the riches, goods, and goodness of God our father, the holy
ghost does speak. Propou^ding this example, the which we ought to follow after
our fallinge, because we might feel by experience, the love so ardent which he
has now toward us, I say now, when as we be wounded so full of shame and
confusion, that we do abhor sin and convert.

Therein he does confirm and assure us, of our francke and free pardon and
remission for all our sinful fallinge, how great so ever it be or have been,
as a thing due unto all that are penitent. Because if our hearts he wounded
with true grief, and repentance, and do with a heart unfeigned earnestly loath
and abhor the sins that we have committed, he does presently pardon us for
them with such a dexterity, that he is so redye to embrace, kiss, and
otherwise to comfort us, with his pure peace, that we cannot so soon open our
lips to confess our offenses, as he is ready to perform the effect of his
grace, and to give the guardon thereof unto us. By the which he does discover
himself to be no less our father then, then he was before our falling. His
joy is such for our salvation then, that the account which he has of our
offenses, Ezech. 18 and. 28.
is as if we had never offended. Have we lost and spoiled our spiritual
riches and substance that he has given us for our patrimony? yea: it is even
so, we have most retchlesly done it, yet what then, in his heavenly house or
habitacion he has much and many more riches, to help and enrich us with. And
therefore let us remove our eyes from our own misery and nakedness, and leave
the regard that we have thereunto, and let us firmly fix our sight and look
wholly on him with heart, mind, and strength, for that he is our only life,
health, remedy, redeemer and salvation, and none but he. For in us there is
nothing that is any thing available thereunto.

It is a bitter torment of mind and christian conscience, to consider how many
are made affraide, discouraged and driven to doubt, by our denegacion or
denial of our Christ. (For although they were tender younglings in the
knowledge of him at the first) now condempninge (through us) the truth which
before they did allow. This will wound our weak consciences wonderfully
which do so revolt. And therefore (I mean, to the end we should do so)
doothe satan make such continual war against us. But therein (to such like
reuolters) it happens as it did to the Apostles which did deny their master,
and made many to faint, fear, and doubt (in and) of him. But although as weak
and untrained soldiers to such like wars we be often put to scilence and
made to break array by our enemies. Yet it is very convenient and fit that we
gather a new force unto us, and once again to confess the truth stoutely
which we have staggered, fallen from, and denied: and with a couragyous mind
and constant faith, adventure our lives for the same, as the Apostles did.

Although before they had denied it, yet they converted and did return again
to reedifie by their dealinges that which they had distroyed (in seekynge
mortal life) by denegation of their master. If with weakness we do commit
this as they did, we have the like virtue, and as full power to repent, pray to
God and convert as they had.

And therefore the holy Ghost says, (and does command us by Saint Paul,
Hebr. 5. and and. 1.2.3
) we have not a high priest that can not take compassion of our infirmyties,
but we have such a one as was tempted in all things like unto us: and yet
without sin.

Let us go therefore boldlye unto and before the throne of that good high
Priest, Hebr. 4. and 16.
that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in time of need.

Math. 9. and. 12.
And Christ him self says that the whole or healthful need not the
Physician, but they that are sick.

And therefore he does call them unto him saying, Math. 11. and. 28.29.
Come unto me all you that labor and are laden, and I will ease you, take my
yoke upon you and learn of me, that am gentle and meek in heart, and you
shall find rest (or refreshing) for your souls. So that when we are sick
and oppressed in conscience, let us run unto him, that the rather we may come
to our remedy, because we are those which are called of him, that he might
unload and heal us.

If they have taken away our honor, or spoiled us of our goods.

If they have shut us up in prisons and strong Castles, or have condemned us
for heresy (as they term it) yet for all that, it is no let at all, but that
we may come unto him: and receive other goods, honors, and liberty, much
greater without comparyson, then are those which are visible.

For although that of men we are condemned as enemies, yet God does love and
allow us as his children and friends. And therefore does commau^d us to come
to be refreshed of his son. If he did not love us, he would not deal so
diligently for our remedy, our sins cannot be so great, as is the health and
help that he has already provided for them: he has destroyed and overcome
sin, and will that we enjoy the benefit of his victory. If we think our
selves unworthy, yet our unworthiness shall not hinder us, for that his
worthynesse is sufficient. 2. Cor. 1. and 20.21.22
Let us therefore shut our ears to the reasons of the world and the flesh,
and let them be only opened to this amorous voice which doothe call us so
lovingly.

And since that only in God (who is the fountain of all goodness) there is
mercy, let us not think to find it in any other but only in him, in those
that have his spirit, The condition of the mercy of God.
and be members of Christ his son. It is the property of true mercy to
deliver ye miserable from their myserie and evil, and in place thereof, to
communicate unto them abundance of true riches and goodness. And also it is
most certain, Prou. 11. and 17.
that how much the greater, the evils and miseries are, of the which he does
deliver his faithful of: So much the more brighter does remain the show and
setting forth of his glory in them, who is most worthy of the same.

Then how can we call that mercy, that does (all that may be) depryue us of
so many benifites as is possible, and does put us into a deep dungeon
amongst a mighty multitude of massy myseries and euilles.

In good sooth, this can be none other, but a most strange and curssed
cruelty, The mercy of men.
clothed but with a coat or cloak and name of mercy, the aucthor whereof for a
certeintie, is the diuil and his members. The persecutors of the gospel do
account and call it merciful dealyng to constrain the elect and chosen to
deny both God and his word, to spoil them of the fruits of their redemption,
and in place thereof to put them into the hands of the diuill. Is this any
thing else, may we think: the^ to depryue them of an innumerable number of
benifites, and to put them into an infinite and unmeasurable many of
mischiefs: for that in place and steed of inioyning and having the lives of
their bodies, they do nothing but reap the benifite and fruit of vanity it
self.

Which indureth not a moment, but vanysheth away with them selves like a scrow
in the fire, or as a vapor in the air: and so they with it, is consumed and
comes to naught for ever. How can there rest, remain, or be any mercy, in
place where as the truth and righteousness of God is condemned: How can
those be merciful that condemn the innocents, and do account it as a most
curssed crime (worthy of the most spytefull death of the cross) to profess
the name of Jesus Christ, Colos. 1. and 14.15.16.
and to acknowledge and confess that he only is the redeemer, head, and
quyckner of his church.

Amongst such audiences and judgment places of mischievous mercyful (nay
rather merciless) men, there does arise, spryng, proceed, Ephe. 1. and 4.16.
etc.
and grow, nothing but homicyde, and suckyng of blood from the beginning. And
therefore there can be nothing in them but unrighteousness and cruelty, which
shines in them according to the doctrine which they teach. And how much the
greater and more their tyranny is, and braueth against ye faithful, and their
doctrine which is a most pure truth: So much ye more pure, celestial, divine,
and comfortable is it to the author thereof, who is Jesus Christ. Ioh. 8. and 44
Colos. 2. and. 4.
And therefore (my dearly beloved,) be no more deceived by reposing any trust
or confidence at all, in their mercy so mischievous. For whereas they so
mercifully (nay mercilesly) do suffer you to enjoy ye lives of your bodies,
they do therein dispoile you of the lives of your souls, which is the true
faith of the Evangelical Gospel.

The manner of part of the persecution in Spain, with a comfort against the
like. etc. The xxv. Chapter.
THe signs tokens and fruits that comes, grows, and are shown of them,
is very like unto the mercy which is in them. They give for a livery Saint
Bennets coat, which is in sign of penance, about a yard and a half of
yellow cloth with a hole cut in the midst thereof, where through ye
recantantes do put their heads, so that the one half thereof is worn before
on the breast, the other half behind on the shoulders, the which has two red
crosses, called by them S. Be^nets crosses, the one before, the other behynd,
this they do appoint to be worn for certain years, within a certain
precinct, upon pain of death. To signify that by them and the wearers
thereof, the faith of Christ is denied, that they be wholly guided, by the
diuilish doctrine of Antichrist, and the devil his fellow, to whom they are
faithful with a faith unfeigned, most unfaithful to God, Prou. 11. and. 19.
that they have changed the joys eternal, for vain joys and vanity it
self, Prou. 26. and. 11. 2. Pet. 2. and 22.
which perishes, and have (according to the proverb) like a dog, turned
again to their vomit: or like a sow well washed, turned again and wallowed
in the mire. So that this sign or livery is a perfect show, sign and token,
of ye mischeuous mind that is in them, and of their merciless mercy so
unequal to the true mercy which GOD does show unto his elected, persecuted by
them, (being his enemies) wherefore we ought not to seek, nor trust to any
other for mercy, but only to god, nor to change his mercy for any fear,
flattery, or cruelty, whatsoever of men, nor the devil: although they do
thonder it out with their dissembled sound or voice never so fiersly.

Let us understand that the mercy which god does show unto his people is
very great: when that for his name sake our lives are taken from us, by such or
those which ought to do their best to keep life in us, we may be bold to
take it to be a substancial and most certain and sure sign that we are
partakers of, (and do perteyne to) the kingdom of God: when that for his
love, or for the confession of his name, we be evil entreated, and condemned
of men and the world, Mat. 5. and 11.12. Luke. 6. and 22.23.
let us not fear nor flee away so fast from death, yt for to live eight days
longer in this life, we will loose the life everlasting, which is ye true life,
a life perdurable which never will have end. What other thing is ye life which
they grant us by their mercy, (as they say) but a cruel continual death,
full of sorrows and troubles, and of no continuance to true life, but many
times taken away and dispatched by light occasions. Mat. 5. and 6 ^0. Luke. 6.
and 21.22.
Wherefore, for yt for so short a thing, a thing of so mome^tary a being, we
adventure our humayne lives, for eternal blessedness, and a life yt never shall
have end, our lot or hap is ye better, and more blessed in yt we dye with such
dishonors, the^ is ye lotte of our persecutors, though they live with never so
much peevish popish pomp. Our death here, John. 11. and 16.25. etc. 2. These.
5. and. 5.
is a true testimony of ye life which we have in christ with eternal
resurrection by him: and where as they cruelly kill, and craftily co^dempne us,
it is an infallible sign, and testimony most true, yt they be clean from
Christ, and have no part with them. Blessed are they (says S. John) ye dye in
ye lord. And ye prophet David says, Apoc. 14. and 13. Psalm. 116. and 13.
the death of ye Saints, are precious in the presence and sight of God. And
therefore (our death) being a thing which ye Lord does love, and a testimony
yt we are blessed, we ought not to fear it in no manner of wise, being his
children: John. 21. and 7.8.9. etc.
but rather to glorify him in the same, to the imitation of the Apostles.

Let us give attentyue ear to the words of our savior Christ Jesus, directed
to them yt will follow him. Mat. 10. and 37.38.^9.
He that loves father or mother more the^ me, is not worthy of me: and he yt
will not take up his cross and follow me, is not worthy of me: Mar. 8. and
34.35. etc. Luke. 9. and 23.24.25.
For whosoever will save his life shall loose it, but he that will loose his
life for my sake, the same shall save it. For what avails or profits it a
man to win the whole world, and then to loose his own soul, or what may a man
give to redeem his soul from death. What it (...) to be ash^^ed of Christ.
Romans 1. and 16.
And also he that shall be ashamed of me or of my word, before the men of
this adulterous and sinful generation, the son of man shall be also ashamed
of him, when he shall come before me in his glory, accompanied with holy
Angels. So that the form and order of keeping and saving our lives according
to ye doctrine of Jesus christ, is to loose them by affliction for his sake,
and for the profession of his name. And thereby it is manifest, yt we kee^^ and
save our lives most sure, when as, and at such time as they do take the^ from
us: for that by the means thereof we are put in the hands of God. Let us not be
ashamed of Jesus Christ nor of his word, although they dishonor us never so
much therefore, but let us rather account their most dishonored spite used
toward us, for our most triumphant honor and victory: yea let us account
even the very sweardes, axes, fleshookes, stranggeling stringes, painted
myters, liueries of mockery, faggots, fire, rackes, boiling lead, pitche,
rosen, and tar, tortures, and all other their instruments of torment, to be
enseignes of honor unto us, and badges of the eternal kingedome, to the which
we be brought by bearing and sufferinge of them. Esaias. 61. and 1.2.3. etc.
Psalm. 72. and 6.7.8. etc.
Jesus Christ was the son of God and king of all creatures, such a one as
was promised by the Prophets. Psalm. 45. and 2.3. etc. Esaias. 35. and 9.10. Mat.
27. and 28.29. Marc. 15. and 16.17. etc.
But yet his crucifiers in most dispiteous or spightfull manner and sign of
mockery did make him naked, dispoiling him of his apparreile, and cloth him at
their pleasures with purple, and put a reed in his hand and a crown of
sharp thorns upon his bare tender head, they did wound and boffet his
tender body with most cruel blows and strypes of fistes and whips, they made
as it were a may, game of him, a king in mockery, misconstruing the account
which ought to have been had of him, and accounted him a man deceived in his
opynion, a deceyuer of the people, and not the son of God. Sap. 2. and 1.2.3.
etc.
Of the same sort and in the like manner do they deal at this day with and to
the faithful, the members of his blessed body our brethren: only because
they call them selves the children of God, (as in truth they are) they do
spoil and persecute the^ even unto ye death. But they shame not to show
themselves (if they be faithful in deed,) and therefore they be not apparelled,
nor do not were (nor yet delight in) ye ornaments of honor, which are used in
the world: because they be not thereof. They do only apparel themselves with
the spiteful dishonors used unto Christ in the^ and nothing ashamed thereof,
they are hidden thereby, covered and shadowed from the spite of wicked
worldli^gs, as he him self was: they are clothed by their foes ye enemies of
God, with S. Bennets livery coat in signification yt they are only allowed and
known of god, though the world do ye contrary, yt he does love them as
children though ye world do abhor them as fools full of folly, deceived in
their opinions of the truth, and great deceyuors. Then are they tried with a
certain kind of thing on their heads like unto a myter, and that is painted
full of diuilles, which does signify the kingdom that Christ Jesus gained for
the elected, when as he did were the crown of thorn, and did suffer his
passion and precious death so spiteful upon ye cross: by the diuilles
painted thereon we may understand, ye sin, hell, death, and the diuil are
already overcome and killed: they have no more force against them, nor can do
no more harm unto them, then those vain painted pictures. Because even as
Jesus Christ did live here upon earth, and did wear those (or such like)
cognisa^ces or badges of dishonor himself. So now he does live and reign
under those ornaments and apparels in the^ his own: so scorned, spited, and
crucified for his love and professyng of his name. Since he then is thus living
in them, then by him in them, is distroyed all the works of the diuill:
Because (as S. John says) Christ came into the world to the same end. 1.
John. 3. and ^.1.5.
Whereby it is manifest, that those things by the which our persecutors do
think to drive us from ye knowledge of God, (for that they know him not them
selves,) are sure signs and perfect tokens of our probation and trial, and of
the certain inheritance of his blessed kingdom. Wherein after the end of a
few hours (a moment or twinkling of an eye in effect) we are to enter, and
shall reign most trivmphantly in great glory for ever world without end.

It is grievous unto us (the faithful) when in being persecuted with the
perverse and crooked cruelty of men, if any of us do happen to faint, and for
fear renounce to trust unto the mercy and aid of God, The mercy of God to the
penitent is always ready.
yet by the gift of his holy spirit we do not only repent presently, and are
greatly greeved in deed, to think that so fondly we followed the foolish
fleashly folly of our enemies, and forsook the blessed banner of Jesus Christ
our careful captain. But also we are then fresh of force in faith and are
little or nothing discomforted thereby, nor do not think that much is lost,
(though we did stumble, stagger and fall by the cross as aforesaid, and so
did doubt in the truth of Christ) no nor yet we do not look for our
redirection from men nor momishe mamotes the piuish puppetly pelting patchery
priests of Baall. Of the love of God.
It is altogether by the good will and love of God, that we do remember our
selves, how that we were not only without sin, but also subject greatly unto
ye same: and not only to the evils of us, had in experience, but also to all
kind of wickedness by us vnexperimented. And also by his like love we do
remember, that God did make promise unto us, that his mercy should be
everlasting to the humble and penitent, with a special pardon and forgiveness
of sins, without any more remembrance of them. For as the father has pity
and compassion upon his children: Psalm. 105. and 21.22. etc.
Even so has the Lord almighty pity and compassion, upon all them that
fear him.

Because he does know right well of what a myschyeuous massye moulde or
metal we are made off, and does consider that we are but dust.

And therefore since that our Jehovah, our most almighty God, as a most loving
father has always had mercy upon us, let us be most certainly assured that
even so he will have now: and always for ever. Wherefore let us forsake and
cast of that curssed and execrable mercy offered of our adversaries the
condempnors of the Gospel, otherwise we are to forgo our parts and porcions
of the true mercy of God, which is at as great enmytye and contrary (with
and) to their mercy as can be.

Of the true similitude of the true church. The xxvi. Chapter.
FRom he^ceforth (neither) let us not fear nor doubt the truth of Jesus Christ
that is crucyfied, nor yet believe as the blind do: for amongst the
christians at this day, the condition of Christ, and the true doctrine of the
Gospel, is even as it was when he him self was conversant on earth amongst
our predecessors. The righteousness and truth preached and taught unto us now,
is so, and the very same, that it was then, and all one: Abhorred and evil
spoken of by the world, now as then. Of those that be given to superstition and
holiness, such as the world does allow, he is condemned to be false and
fained: 1. Cor. 1. and 26.27.28.
And of those yt be fully freight with worldly affects and wisdom, he is
condemned to be foolysh and very full of folly, and all of the^, both one and
other do conde^pne him for an heritike and full of errors. And also, as at the
first he was condemned by the said holy and wise of the world, the doctors of
the law, the learned, the Bushoppes, Prouisors, Inquisitors, Pharisees, and
Judges of religion. Even so now, are their others like unto them, so to be
poped, that they condemn both him and his gospel together, Mat. 21. and
37.38.39. Mar. 12. and 6.7.8.
and as much as in them is, they use and set abroch to kill the heir (our
principal menber) and to throw him out of the Viniarde. Psalm. 118. and 13. 1.
Pet. 2. and 4.5.
And such as go about to reedifye, and build again the Temple so long
laid waste, they do reprove and seek to dispoile them, of the chief and
principal cornersto^e of their buildi^g. Also those which have already
finished their building: and reedificatio^, they do grievously gainsay and
persecute: for why ye gospel has never ben, yet is, nor never shall be till
the end? without Annasses, Caiphasses, Pilates, Pontifices, high Priests,
Iudasses, and Pharisees: to kick and sporne against it. And therefore do the
Discipls of Jesus Christ, even now go on begging ^itting from place to place
without any worldly abiding, and driven to hyde them selves because they have
professed and confessed the truth, of their master, the Iudasses do abhor
them and their masters so much, that they do what they can to the vttermoste
of their power to betraye them, and to make a great gain thereof. They do use
their greatest cruelties, not only against them, but also even against the
very walls of the secret houses where they have preached the Gospel, if
they take them, they put them in prisons with great extremity, till they have
done what in them is to overthrow them quyte. And therein it is to be seen that
the church of ye faithful (which is ye true church) is of and in the same
estate and condition that it has been from the beginning in the world, and
therefore the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 54. and 1.2.3. etc.
does call it a poor afflicted and beaten batred church, with the tempestuous
storms of persecution, without all comfort and consolation, even like unto the
church which was of the Apostles sometimes in Jerusalem.

And therefore when it shall happen or fall out at any time to any of us the
members of the same church, to be imprisoned and presented before the audyences
and curssed congregations of cruel persecutors: Let us not look to find any
other piety, nor pity amongst them, the^ Jesus Christ did amongst his
condempnors: when he was tied before them, and most cruelly passioned. But let
us remember the words which our Lord Jesus Christ spoke to his disciples,
when as he commanded them to preach the Gospel of his word throughout the
whole world. Math. 10. and 16.
Behold (said he) I do send you forth as sheep among Wolves: It is the
property of the Wolf to show very little mercy, favor, or courtesy to the
sheep, if he do show any at all, it is but feigned to bring his mischievous
minded purpose to pass, the sooner to make a spoil of his pray. Let us
remember also that (as before repeated) we be called to be conformeable and
like unto Jesus Christ. As he, after he was taken, and until he had aspyred
to ye cross, he did find no hamanitie, no charity, no compassion, no pity,
comfort, nor consolation amongst men, more then if they had been most wild,
fierce, cruel, and brute beasts. Even so it shall happen unto us, if as we
ought, we be folowers of Jesus Christ in all our persecutions and crosses.

But contrariwyse: if thieves, robb^rs, runnagates, Sodomites, committers of
Symony, homicides, murderers, committers of Sacryledge, fornicators,
adulterers, and such like, when they be taken and put in prison there is one or
other found presentlye that prays for them: with works of charity,
vysiting them in prison, helpyng them in their business and travail, gyuing
them comfort, counsel, and strength toward their discharge or setting at
liberty. But if any of the children of God, happen to be had in their hands,
they put the^ presently in prison, where they can neither see nor be seen of
any man to help them: there is no man that does or dares help, aid,
counsel, comfort, or strengthen them: there is none that may humainly help,
speak, use any kind of friendship, pity, gentleness, or other good
entreaty (as commonly is used among the worldlinges one to another) to them.
But contrariwyse, they are shut up alone, one of them separated from an other,
used and entreated with a kind of cruelty as if they were Turks, or among
Turks. And for what cause, crime, or offense I pray you? Surely none at all,
but only because they be rightuous and just, and have their whole faith, hope,
and confidence only in Jesus Christ, and do trust to be saved by his mercy and
merits in the blood which he shed for them.

But then if they be brought and do appear before the Judges, they find them
furious, fierce, and merueilous wild: even like unto rampant Lions, full of
subteltie like Foxes, with wyles to take them in trips by words and so to
gather and get greater matter and cause against them, then before they were
accused of: And do forbid all, and command that none, shall visit them
neither with words, works, nor merciful mean to help them any way, although
that God so straightly have commanded it. If that any man (which is not
altogether spoiled of all humanity) do speak friendly unto them, and so
visit them with friendly communication: they are presently had in suspicion,
and punished therefore. If there be any known to be so, or otherwise moved
with compassion and do pray for them, they are taken for complisses, consorts,
and confederates of the same crime, which is nothing but to confess the name
of Jesus Christ, and not to be ashamed of him being crucified in the^. And even
as Christ was covered with all kind of heaviness and trouble upon the
cross, so were they made naked and uncovered of all humayne consolation and
comfort, and as he having great thirst and dryness by the agony of death,
had given him by them to drink vinager and Gall, So all yt those faithful
afflicted ones, Math. 27. and 48.
receive of their persecutors, tormentors, and troublers in the time of their
agony and thirst, is nothing but gall and bitterness, the more and rather to
grieve them, for that they be as sheep of Christ's flock, among the Wolves
of this world, who can give them none other thing, because of the enmity they
have unto them, and their pastor or sheepeheard.

Yet all that they do or can do against us though it be never so much, it is
so regestered and set down in Gods divine cou^seil that they cannot nor shall
not, varrie one jot, nor yet pass on whit beyond it. Wherefore with all
humylitie let us run unto him, who will turn all their tiranie, and
cruelty so pagan like used against us, to our comfort, health and profit,
notwithstanding all our solitary shuttyng up never so seperately and secretly
alone.

Let us imitate and follow the children of Israel, and do as they did when
they were captyues in Egypt: who being used and entreated with as much cruelty
and tira^ny as might be, without having on their behalf, either king, prince,
lord, or other earthly maiestrate, ungoverned of humayn help, and banished from
all manner of fleshely favor, yet they had recourse unto god only: and with
such sorrowful sighs and tears did confess and bewail their sins, wickedness,
and offenses, (and did desire help and aid for his promise sake so faithfully,
Exo. 2.3.4. Chap.
) that all of their means together both of penitencie and prayer, did ascend
up to ye throne of the most highest: and with those cries (I say) and heavenly
hope yt they had, did pearce the boiling bowels of his love and mercy: And did
obtein the fruit of their faithful desires. So that when the curssed cruelty
and tirannie of the Egiptians, was at the full, ye highest, and the greatest,
even then did God extend his mighty arm from heaven so: that they being
without any humain help or remedy at all, he did deliver them, only by his
own mighty potencie and power. There is no tirannie nor persecution that can
continue long, for look how much the more it is malicious out of measure, so
much the nigher is the end and destruction thereof. As did appear by Pharao:
for when that the cruelty and tirannie of him and his ministers was most
extreemest against God and his people, even then did it perish and end with
most cruel distroy thereof, and the executioners together: for there is
nothing that will more sooner distroy and consume the evil tyranny and
cruelty of the tiranicall persecutors, then the patience and humility of the
Saints, with submitting themselves, in heart and mind, to the only will and
pleasure of God: askyng of him succor and aid with faith in his promise.
There is no such whetstone to blunt nor beat down the rasor, sharp edges of
the sweards of the Tirantes, nor no such water to quench the burning flames
of fire which they use for the faithful, as is a sure faith and hope in the
Lord: because as all the enimyes that do afflict and torment us be dead: Even
so (although we see it not with our bodily eyes) he does kill them still for
us. And notwithstanding that they do seem to our carnal fight to be alive,
yet for the hatred they have to the truth, they are dead in the presence of
God. And how much the greater their frenzy fury is toward us: So much the
surer is the sign that their utter destruction is at hand. Exo. 14. and 3.4,
5. etc.
The people of God were so occupied and driven up against the read Sea, and in
such a straight thereby, that the weaklings amongst them faynted, feared, and
began to yield them selves for dead men, by the hands of their enimyes the
men of war: who so fiersly followed them as was possible, making account of
the same: they were armed in all points for the purpose, but God provided a
present remedy for his people, to put their appointment clean to the
contrary. He divided the hugie heaps and waves of waters, so that they stood
still on each side like stone walls, till his people (the children of Israel)
had passed through the myddest thereof dry footed: And presently passing the
same, (and lookyng back to behold the huge army of Pharaoes host their
furious foes, that followed so fast for filthy thirst they had after blood,)
they saw the waters again keepyng their course in a most swifte manner, and
could see nothing else, but the overwhelmed and drowned bodies, of those
furyous fightyng fellows who followed them so fiercely. Those fond furyes were
blinded so, that they could not see till they came to that destruction, the
which then they would have fled from, but it was to late, they were mighty and
most magnanimous and valiant till then. But being thus killed dead, distroyed,
and overcome by him that mighty Jehovah, he discovered the same to them his
most loving people: because they should not fear nor fainte at the like
again, though it seemed never so mighty or terrible. Psalm. 82. and 3.4. etc.
Even so, those (which persecute us at this present time so trimly, like as
they would root and cast out the name of God from the earth, yea and out of
heaven also, that he might never be neither known nor professed) are dead and
killed by the same our most myghtie and eternal God: though to our foolish
flesh it seem to the contrary and to the sight thereof. And therefore
(dearly beloved) there is no cause at all, that may make us, (by any just
reason, that our enemies can use,) to fainte, fear, or leave, the true
professing of our faith in our master Christ, though they do threaten it out
never so lustily: for that we being once passed the seas of sorrows in this
world, by such crosses and calamities as it shall please God to use for a
mean to pass us over the same. Shall have likewise discovered and showed unto
us, that those which now seem unto us living, and do entreat us so evil
without piety or pity, blaspheeming ye name of Christ and his holy Gospel,
are not in truth but dead bodies which can nothing hurt us. If it should be
great and foolish folly to fear the pictors painted (in parish churches) of
images, or the puppetly Idols set up in popish temples, as though they might
help us to good, or save us from evil. It were and should be ten times treble
greater folly without comparison to leave and renounce the friendship and
obedience of faith in him, which is an everlasting mansion for us in all joy
and felicity. If there were any cause at all, to fear those dead bodies, which
can do us neither good nor harm. The holy Ghost would not give such counsel
clean to the contrary: 1. Pet. 3. and 14.15.
Saying, fear you not any thing that they can do, nor be you not troubled,
but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts. So that it is a plain consequent,
that as (by sure faith and hope that the children of Israel had in almightye
God, with their incessant and humble prayers and petitions which they used unto
him,) he did distroy and overthrow ye Egiptians, Exo. 14. and 27.28. Exo. 15.
and 2.3.4. etc.
(Pharaoes host) and that they were so set at liberty, celebrating of
Sacrafice with himnes and songs of praise and thanks gyuing unto him the
only aucthor thereof. Even so now in these present times, by the like faith
and hope which they had, and that we ought to have in his mercy. And by the
power and strength of the same God, shall perish all those that persecute us
for the profession of his name and Gospel, for they are no less enimyes and
rebels to him and his people, the^ was Pharao and his vaseils or subjects.
Hebr. 10. and 22.35.
Wherefore let us be firm and constant in the truth, and in no wise leave the
communion or congregation of ye true catholic church, but with a sure hope
believe in Christ Jesus: By whom we shall as well be defended and delivered
from harms, as were ye children of Israel. Psa. 7. and 14.16.17. Psalm. 9. and
15.
And all those mischiefs which our persecutors do threaten and thunder against
us, ye most mighty God will confound, and convert or turn them upon their
own heads, as the holy Ghost has promised by the Prophet David.

Of Predestination and of glorification thereby. etc. The xxvij. Chapter.
JF we consider the end, and what stop and stay we are brought unto by
abiding so bitter crosses and persecutions: no doubt we shall find thereby great
occasion to pass in sufferyng them with great joy. Romans 8. and 50.
S. Paul does declare unto us ye effect of ye end thereof and what it shall be:
Those whom I justify (says he) do I also glorify. So that the end
thereof is to be glorified, as Jesus Christ was when God the father did put
him in his kingdom, and there made him Lord over all his enimyes, by the
afflictions and crosses which he had suffered and passed. And as ye way which
our redeemer Tetragramato^ took to be glorified by, was crosses of
persecution: whereby he passed and took possession of his heavenly kingdom.
In like manner by those persecutions which now we suffer, is the most perfect
way for us to be glorified by also. As we may be well assured, by Jesus
Christ our head who is already gone before us by the same way: whose
footesteps of force we must follow. This way is so direct yt whosoever passes
by it, it is not possible (so he do it with faith) that he should miss, but
with all perfectness enter into his kingdom.

Because as those that pass any other way, do walk till they loose them
selves, so those that keep this way which is the true way, cannot but be
glorified (in suffering) with Christ: for that they did persevere in his truth
and true religion till the end.

And therefore all those which shall suffer and die for so just a cause, let
the^ rejoice and be glad, assuri^g the^selus of their glorification with Christ
Jesus for ever. For why: Math. 19. and. 6.
Gods truth cannot alter nor change, nor yet any thing yt is joined therwt,
cannot be separated by man. The holy ghost says by ye apostle S. Paul, Romans
8. and 29.30.
that all those which God did know and acknowledge, he did predestinate,
because they should be conformable and like in shape unto the image of his
son. And those which were predestinate he did call, those which he called,
he also justified, and those which he justified, he did glorify. So that of
necessity those which he did predestinate, he did also glorify, and the way
and means to come to be glorified, is to be called and justified, by passions
and crosses, to be conform and like unto his son. Wherefore those two things
be so united and knit together, that the one is comprehended within the other,
for that in suffering with Christ, and to be made like unto him, is
comprehended the ioyntely being glorified with him. And therefore all them that
suffer afflictions and calamities in this world, may assure them selves that in
the end they shall be glorified in Christ, for whom they were afflicted.

Beloved brethren we have been already called of God by the Gospel. And
although that before our calling we were lost, yet now, we are washed,
sanctified, and justified by ye blood and name of our Lord Jesus: and by the
spirit of our God. This is a plain testimony, that we have all our secret
election from one, and that is Christ, by whom we do certify our selves
thereof. Also the world, by the persecutions and sorrows that we suffer in it,
1. Cor. 6. and 11.
and by the hatred that it uses toward us, does manifestly show, that by
the divine mercy of God we are called and justified. For why the world can not
abide us, nor none but his own. Whilst we were of the world, he made us
many delycate deintie delights, and trimly entreated us, as if we had been his
own. But afterward when God had given us the true light of his Gospel, and
so separated us a sunder, that it was evident and apparent unto all, yt we were
the true members of Christ our head, and none of his. Then he blustered and
blowed against us: he rufled, roared, brayed, and rayled at us, and did so
extreemely abhor us: that he did (nor will) not rest, to use all kind of
cruelty that he can, to cast us out quyte from him. And so our savior Christ
does confyrme unto us by Saint John, Ioh. 15. and 19.20.21.
saying, if the world do abhor and hate you, then remember how that first
it hated me. If you were of the world, the world would love you as his own:
But because you be not of the world, and that I have chosen you to my self,
the world does hate and abhor you.

Remember the words which I have said unto you, the servant is not greater
then his Lord, if they have persecuted me they will also persecute you.
Whereby it rests manifest, that those which be persecuted, killed, and
abhorred of the world, are already taken and called by God from the world to
him self, and washed and purified with the blood of his son Jesus Christ: So
that we are to acount our selves glorified, if we be hated and do suffer in
such manner. And therefore since we be so certified, and showed by such signs
and tokens so evident, that we be elected and chosen eternally in Christ Jesus,
and that we be partakers of his righteousness, let us also be assured of it,
that we shall atteine to the end of our election in dispite of the world and
all the ministers thereof, Our election and galling.
and of all their false and curssed religion.

When that men without God and his Christ will (and do) burn us, or give us
any other kind of death: let us understand that it is the checkmate and end
of all our troubles and calamities, and that then is set open unto us the gates
of the glory of God, that we might enter in and enjoy with him for ever, the
inestimable riches of his eternal kingdom. When the enemies of God and his
Gospel persecuted S. Steven to the death, even when he was in ye most chiefest
checks, He^. 7. and 5^
tauntes and troubles, amongst them he saw the glory of God, and did see
heaven open, and Jesus Christ sitting on ye right hand of ye father, ready to
receive him and to crown him as his martyr and faithful witness. So that in
the strongest torments, and most cruel deaths, heaven is opened unto us. And
therefore we ought not to be abashed, to faynte nor to fear at any of their
torments, but to stand strongly, and go forward with a good stomach and
courage, and never to look behind us: that we might overtake, attain to, and
apprehend (or comprehend) the resurrection of Christ Jesus, Luke. 9. and 62.
Phil. 3. and 11.12.
according as we be in him comprehended. Our enemies are unwilling herewith,
but god wills and has ordained that there is nothing that may or can, be any
let, hinderance, or impediment, to keep back that his election and eternal
counsel, Romans 6. and 5.
wherein he loved us, should not take effect accordingly: that we might be
made conformeable and like unto his son, as well in his death as also that we
should be pertakers of his glorious resurrection. All the evil that men do
against the faithful, is to none other end, but to let and hinder (if they
could) the predetermination of God. Thinking to make them believe that there is
no other way to bring the same to pass, or that it passes by none other mean
or rule, the^ by those which they do allow, (and not by ye truth which they
co^dempne,) after their own fantasies and delights. No, no, God, nor no point
of his government and will, is not nor shall not be directed by them: neither
he, his people, nor yet his doctrine, is, nor are not guided by any part,
piece, or point, of their ways or teachings. As great distance are, Esaias. 5^.
and 9.10.
between my ways and yours (says the Lord,) as is between the heaven and
the earth. God will not have to deal with the wicked, least it be to use them
as the vessels of his wrath, Romans 9. and 20.22.23.
for the health and wealth of his chosen. For whn, by their ways,
institutions, and decrees, they go about to blotte and raze us out of the
memorial of God, that we might not attain to the land of the living. But in
that mansion and most mighty monarchy God has us in remembrance, and does
lift up, enriche, and glorify us, with his inestimable gifts and riches,
Psalm. 45. and 6.7.8. etc.
where our end will be to rest shyning in great joy and glory, lightened by
the light of truth in all heavenly felicity.

Genesis 37. and 18.28.
The brethren of holy and blessed Joseph, what did they leave undone and not
put in practice, to punish, let, and hinder, ye coming to pass of ye counsel
of God, whereby he had determined to lift on high and glorify his servant: they
persecuted him, Genesis 45. and 8.
injured him, mocked him, stripped him, and sold him as a slave: he was carried
into strange countries, and there used and entreated most extreemely and
hardly: Genesis 41. and 40.41.42. etc.
But when they thought no more to have hard of him, behold, he remained lifted
up by the hands of God, and made a mighty maiestrate in Egypt, and a superior
Lord and ruler over his buyers and sellers. All yt they did against him, was
only and upon set purpose, a pretense to hinder him, that he should not
atteyne to any part thereof (I mean that glory) but they could not in no one
jot, Psalm. 79. and 7.
let or hinder the good will of God, nor yet could use no impediment in his
love toward Joseph, nor in guyding him (as a sheep that had been among
Wolves) from all his troublesome enimyes and persecutors, till he had
performed his great glorification in this world, and in the world to come
inherited hyporsio^, of those inestimable treasures prepared (by the love and
good will of God) for the faithful from the beginning. Thus it appears, how
he took his steps into all his troubles, and doings by degrees, as it were
up a ladder or pair of stayers) til God had assumpted and lifted him up, into
the top of all his glory, according to his determination before the
foundation of the world. So that, as these carnal and worldly brethren did
against Joseph, even so at this day do the children of this world against the
faithful: in beating down and persecuting them by all the means and ways
which possibly they can: but therein God does lift them up till they be
glorified in Christ Jesus.

Of the mighty power and exceeding love of God. The xxviij. Chapter.
Ioh. 11. and 47.50.57.
THe Hipocrites, scribes, Pharisees, and other the enimyes of God, were greatly
against the glorifycatyon of Jesus Christ: and to conclude him from the same,
they persecuted him with so great and grievous fury, Ioh. 15. and 28. Ioh. 19.
and 1.2.3. etc.
and also condemned him to death, beastly believing that after ye same, there
would nor could be no more noise of his name, that wholly he should peryshe
for ever, and so be (most out of memory) altogether in oblivion: that they
should hold his kingdom in peace, and have his people subject to their
tirannie. But the dyuyne meaning of God and his providence was clean to the
contrary. By those means and ways which they wrought to overthrow him, he
lifted him up in such manner that there is nothing in heaven nor earth more
high, sublymate and supreme then he. Where they sought all ye mischievous
means they could, to darken and hinder his glory, it was to no purpose, God
made it with majesty the more to shine, and did spread the beams thereof the
farther throughout the universal world. Esaias. 53. and 1.2.3.4.5. etc.
They did crucify him in most cruellest and most spytefullest manner, and
killed him with the most vylest death, and such as was most infamous: because
he might be the more hated, and the less accounted vail^able for the health
and salvation of his chosen. But in this was fulfilled that which was spoken by
Esaias the Prophet, Esaias. 53. and 11. Psalm. 21. and 5.6.7. Psalm. 22. and 7.8.9.
Esaias. 61. and 9.11. Hebr. 2. and 8.12. Psalm. 46. and 7.8.9. etc.
the father shall draw unto him an innumerable number of disciples that
neither shall nor will love nor seek after none other help, holiness, nor
righteousness but his own. And also it is written, that God by his death
upon the cross did cause that his son should have imperial, rule, and be
the only Lord, over all his enimyes. It was a thing which they could not
conceive in their hard hearted hearts and minds: But in that they thought by
their doings to deface and foredoe for ever, the name of our sweet savior
Jesus Christ, it is fallen out quyte to the contrary: and so altered and
turned, that there is none other name in the world, where to, or to which, all
creatures shall bow but only his. P^il. 2. and 9.10. etc. Ioh. 12. and
16.23.28. Ioh. 13. and 31.32. Ioh. 12. and 32.
So that where they did their best endeavor, to spoil all his honor and
dygnitie, it is now so come to pass, that thereby he is most gloriously
glorified, has greatest supremisie, and a name above all names the greatest.

As it is (of his own words) written by S. John? If I be lifted up from (or
above) the earth, I shall and will draw unto me all things. Meaning that by his
death he should gain and win the victory, and bring all things in subjection
under him. As his enimyes and rebellious adversaries, could not with all the
force and power they had, preiudise or hinder his glorification: no more can
those terrible tormentors, that seek to persecute and kill us, let nor
preiudise ours. Because it is dependant upon him, and altogether his own: for
that the glorification of the head, 1. Cor. 12. and 12.26.
is also common to the members united and knit thereunto.

Even as at those days the cross and passion of our Lord, did Annunciate, and
declare his glory, potencie, and might, to all believers? So ye persecutions,
calamities, and afflictions that we do suffer, and also those which an
innumerable number of our fellow members and brethren, have suffered since,
have been, be, and shall be for ever, publishers, proclaymors, and preachers
of the same glory. The enemies of ye gospel, advised and taught by ye spirit of
Satan, when they do lead us to the place of the execution of our death, they
do tie our tongues (an act as diuilish and pagan like as possible) because that
we should neither speak, nor yet that they would hear, the laud and praise
of Jesus Christ our master: but those tyinges or strings wherewith our said
tongues be restrained, shall be tongues to talk and speak against them, as
against the greatest enimyes to the glory of God: and use a new language,
whereby shall be understood and known, the virtue and mighty power of the
highest, unto them that he has ordained to health and salvation. It is greatly
necessary that all be fulfilled that the Lord has spoken of, Luke. 19. and.
40.
to or against his enemies: he him self says, I say unto you that if my
disciples hold their peace in preaching, yet the very stones in the streets
shall give their voices, and sound my glory. And now is the same in fulfillyng
among the faithful, for that, our adversaries, enemies, and persecutors, do
what they can, and do use as many lettes and impediments as may be, to defend
us from speaking with our proper tongues, the commendation, praise, and glory,
of our savior and iustifier Jesus Christ. But he himself in place of one
tongue which they tie, will loose, untie, and command, a number innumerable to
speak, praise, and glorify him, world without end. The long beardes of the
persecuted over grown so greatly: their garments to unclean, rotten, and
torn, with the filthy unclean filthiness of the prison: the biting bitter
taunts their enimyes byte them with, the cords halters, and stringes, they tie
them with, and the engines they use to strangle them with: they all, will God
co^uerte into tounges, which with one voice shall use so great a harmony as is
most wonderful, to the superlatiue praises of our most benifitiall brother
and head Jesus Christ: And shall discover that he only is our Lord and
redeemer: and we so persecuted, the faithful witnesses of his truth and
righteousness. Those tyranicall tirantes and pestilent persecutors can not
hear this heavenly harmony that so highely sounds with so excelent an
accord, because their own impiety has so deadly be deafed them. Yet all
those which are sanctified by Jesus Christ shall hear it, and also some of them
being waked by it, will desire to be consortes, complisses, and companyons with
us in our crosses, upon condition they might be made mates with us in so
great delight, and witnesses of so beautiful a righteousness and dyuine
sanctification, the which the Lord has given us to possess.

1. Pet. 2. and 21.
Our death shall be no more barrein the^ was the death of Jesus Christ whose
footesteppes we must follow. God will make that the very ashes of our bodies,
shall fructify and be a cause, to make many faithful chosen children to
show themselves. Because that many hearing and seeing our firmness in faith
of the gospel, and understanding our constancy (at our death) wherewith we are
strengthened from above: Act. 1. and 8.
will open their eyes for to see it, and so acknowledge him the author thereof
for their father. And reduce themselves to his obedience, renouncing ye service
of Images and Idols, and leave altogether ye false religion of Antichrist and
his co^federates. For that the words of our savior Christ must needs be
fulfilled (who says) if a grain of wheat being cast into the earth do not
dye, Ioh. 12. and 24.
it remains alone whole and fructifieth not: but if we die, it brings
forth much fruit (as to us is well experie^ced) likewise if it be in the
garner, or sheafe in the barn, it abides barren, and bears no fruit. So
that to die and suffer in ye Lord, increase comes thereof, as of a grain of
wheat, that dies in the earth: and more abundantly manifold. To the judgment
of the world and of our flesh, by our death we are drawn into perdition: but
it is very false and an untruth, for in very deed we die, to arise again, to
bear and carry most copious and abundant plenty of fruit, to our
glorification with God the father, and to the imitation of his son Jesus
Christ, who brought forth more aboundancie and plenty of fruit by his death,
then he did by his life.

So that those which suffer do fulfill that which the holy ghost speaks, of
the faithful: they which have been called and justified (says he,) it is
convenient that they be also glorified, because that by their death they might
fructify to the glory of God, Ioh. 21. and 19.
and be joined together and glorified with him.

God has ordained to sublimate and exalt them that be his, So that not only
their persons be living instruments of his and their glory, but also their
passions serve to the same effect. And thus every one of them does verify
that which the Apostle S. Paul speaks of him self, Colos. 1. and 24.
saying: I do suffer and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my
flesh, for his bodies fake which is his church or congregation. So that the
passions that every one of us his members do suffer is to the filling up of
ye measure of conformity, that every member of the same body ought to have
with the head. Wherefore every one that is persecuted and killed for the truth,
ends the filling up of his part of that measure, and remains wholly made
conformeable unto Christ: he has distroyed the whole body of sin, Romans 6.
and 2.6. Romans 7. and 4.
and left a confirmation to the rest (his fellow members) of his patience and
constancy, because they are to pass by the same way after Christ, and so come
together to be gloryfied with him, in his kingdom. It appears how our
troubles, pains, and passions are dignified, by reason of the communion that
is between the head and his members. Act. 9. and 4.
The holy Ghost does call and term them the afflictions and passions of
Christ. For as by the calamities which he did suffer in his own proper person,
God was glorified and he him self lifted up on high: So that by those which we
suffer being his faithful, shall we be gloryfied together in (and with) him.
Because that as he did suffer being our head, we must also suffer that be his
members.

An excelent comfort against the fear of death, with a confutation of his
power. etc. The xxix. Chapter.
ANd therefore sith he has thus honored and exalted us, Act. 10. and 3
9.11.28.34.^5.41.42.
yt he has made us witnesses of his truth, and of the saving health that his
son did bring into the world, and has sublimate our passions in such sort,
(as consecrating them in his own person) that he does call them his own, Psalm.
125.
and will be glorified in them: And also for that our death is so precious before
him, that he will take from the world so many living instruments (into his
presence to his glory: there is no cause to the contrary, but that we should
stiffly stand to the profess^on of his truth, and the giving of our lives
joyfully for ye same. There be some which for the vanities and things of this
world, will ventour lives, goods, and all that they have, and yet it sodeinly
perishes. The truth of God never perishes, Ioh. 12. and 28.
no more can none ye trust therein. Why do we then fly from being glorified
with him, since we are no less certain thereof, then we are of our passions,
persecutions, troubles, and death. He loved us with so fervent an effect, Romans
4. and 24.25.
and so served us, that he did not rest till time that he dyed with wounds of
our love. And shall we be so ungrateful, as to save or keep our lives from
him, and not to venture them with the like love, to honor him likewise with
them, (if we could. Romans 8. and 29. Colos. 1. and 5.20.
) Shall we so forget God, (that did remember and know us, before the beginning
of all things visible, and did determyne all these his blessings for us,) yt we
shall for ever be buried in oblivion, and refuse so small a thing as worldly
affliction. Ephe. 1. and 4.5. Iere. 2. and ^.34.
I pray you dear friends and brethren, wherefore serves our lives (if we will
be saved) but to glorify him: did we not promise him to adventure all things to
his glory and honor, wherefore then shall we reserve any thing to the
detriment thereof. He him self went before us and did pass first, thorough
the pikes of persecution and affliction in the world, he is our head, shall we
the^ stagger, stop, or stay, Colos. 1. and ^4.16. Hebr. 2. and 8.14.
in following him, being his members: whose is the wealth and riches that we
have? whose is our life? or who did give us our honors: did not he give us
all, because we should glorify him, as his chosen faithful and beloved, then
for what cause should we let to glorify him in all that ever we can or have.
Have we not said that with all (and in all) things Jesus Christ did glorify
his father, and that we were chosen to be conform and like unto him. And
therefore since we see it is our duties, let us do (and endeavor our selves) all
that possibly we may, to accomplish the same: at the least a part that we
might the sooner attain to the whole, in imitatyng, that we might be
glorified alyke with him. For when we serve him doubtfully, and follow him
waveryngly, as if we thought all to no purpose, all that we do in such sort,
is but in vain, of no validity nor effect, but rather falls out clean to
the contrary, for that in doubtful dealing, can no true service be done, nor
yet he be glorified. So that all manner of doings or works which are not to his
glory, are lost, of none effect, nor valor: but yet all that is done in true
faith, is of much validity, and very effectual thereunto. The which he will
never forget, because he does so love us that he is very unwilling we should
loose our labors in any thing, or spend our traueils in vain. He accepts
all that possibly may agree with his justice, for the great desire and good
will he has to be our guarder, savior, keeper, and defender. He asks of
his father for us, all things, as well honor, wealth, and riches, as health,
life and salvation. There is nothing that he takes into his hands for us, but
it takes effect in us, there is nothing in the hands of our persecutors that
has any effect at all or security. Why do the foolish phoppes infected with
fylthie incredulity and misbeliefe, loose their lives everlastingly, but
only, because they trust not in God, and rather would save their lives to
serve the world, then lightly to loose them, and to glorify God: and yet
therein they loose for ever, both life and love of him. By ye ryghtuousnesse of
faith, (says Saint Paul) we are constituted and chose^ heirs of the world,
Romans 4. and 20.22.
even like unto our father Abraham. Then being heirs thereof, why do we fear
to put into the hands of God, all that we have: Since we are sure to receive
it again, bettered with so great advantage.

Apoc. 21. and. 7.
He that shall overcome (says the same Lord) shall possess all things, I will
be his God, and he shall be my son: Thus if we dye for his love, we do
overcome, and in ouercommyng, we enter into ye possession of all things, we
have God for our God, Romans 8. and 15.17.18. Gala. 4. and 6.7.
and we be his true children: if we be children, we be also heirs, both in
heaven and earth. In what then should we doubt, sith to make so great and good
an exchange, we give him nothing, yet we remain with him, and receive all
things. We give nothing unto God, because we have nothing that is our own, all
that we have is his, 1. Cor. 4. and. 7.
so that in giving him all, we give him nothing. And therefore let us not be
unwilling to yield all that we may unto him, since he is so liberal and
magnificall in giuyng unto us all things, yea even till he had given him self
for us: but let us love him according to our calling, as Jesus Christ our only
savior and redeemer, health, salvation, and reconciliation, and in any wise
let us love his honor, and glory, more then any worldly thing.

Have we not heard of many of the Gentyles, that did offer them selves unto
death and so desire it, that they killed them selves with their own proper
hands, only upon desire to be delivered from the pains and trauayles of
ye world, and their lives in it. And upon some vain hope which they had, and
thought to find by their immortality of ye soul. This they did upon a
certain opynion, which was foolish, and had amongst a number of them: yet
they were not only free from worldly traueils, by this immortality, but also
by their desperate dealinges to depart from their lives in such wise, they
en^ered a new into ten times treble more torments, (yea a number infinite)
everlastingly. God does not commau^d of us any such manner of death, but does
most ernestly forbid it: yet being animated by true faith, (as thus,) if we
believe that our life is his, and that he is our life, so that when our time
shall come, and he shall call us, to render our lives again to him of whom we
hold them, (as tennants at his will) that then we do obey him, and yield them
up, be it by fire, sword, halter, press, Rack, by wyld horses, Tigres,
Lions, wild beasts, or any kind of cross, we do but our duties, and no
more then we are bound unto. And in so doing, we show ye fruits of our faith
and hope in him, proclaim, cry out, and preach unto the world, and show unto
the brave ministers thereof, that we be none of theirs, but his own who has
bought and best paid for us. In this manner we shall also openly appear, to
have more estimation of his glory, and rather to fulfill his heavenly holy
will, then to seek the maintenance of our lives in this world, which perishes
together with the people thereof.

He will not in any manner of wise, that we run into any kind of danger rashly
to procure our death. Nor yet that we deny and so blaspheeme him to eschew or
escape the same. Luke 12. and 32.35.36. etc Luke. 22. and 14.
But rather that as tied on a string we should be prompte and ready like
faithful servant to follow him, Mat. 24. and 22.34.
so soon as he plucketh or calls us: we may certainly assure our selves,
that he has counted and numbered our days, and has made such a determination
for us, as we may in no wise pass. He has put and enclosed our souls in our
bodies, as in a tabernacle to the end they should be well kept and preserved,
until he him self which put them there shall return again to call and
receive them. So then, in being called, we ought not to refuse our filthy
lodginges in this world, for that we are to receive a far better in the
world to come both in being and suffering. It is not lawful nor requisite to
depryue our selves of our lives, nor yet to desire death for any evil that
happens whatsoever, for why, it perteyneth only unto God, to take and give
life according to his good will and pleasure. He did make us, and can unmake
us when it pleases him, he wills and desires nothing, but only that we
be ready, and do give our selves wholly, to his honor and glory, in such
sort as he has prescribed unto us by his word. Whyther it be with loss of
life (if need require) or worldly possessions. Luke. 14. and 26.27.
It makes no matter, because that so is executed the office (indeed) of true
and perfect disciples.

What reason have we the^ to fear death, for a thing so holy and of such
righteousness, if it were not for that we think that he with his vglye and
loathsome looks would have seignorie over us, and take us into his rule or
Lordship, when they so cruelly kill us. If we will give credit to the word of
ye Lord, we shall clear and plainly see, yt then we die not and we can not die.
Ioh. 5. and 24.
(These same are ye words) verily verily I say unto you, he yt hears my word
and believes in him ye sent me, shall have life everlasting and shall not come
in co^dempnation. But has already escaped from death to life. Ioh. 11. and
25.26.
He says also I am the resurrection and the life, he yt believes in me
although he were dead yet shall he live. And also, all that live and believe
in me shall never (taste of,) see death, nor yet dye.

These are the true words of Gods own mouth, by the which we be fully
assured, that there is no death at all, to them that believe in Christ Jesus,
and that in being his, he has already dyed for us, and we shall dye no
more. For that by him death is already distroyed, and has no more but as it
were the name thereof, only to the faithful. Apoc. 14. and 13.
S. John in his revelation, calls death to the faithful a rest from traueils.
And in deed to die or depart this life, is only to us, a rest most
comfortable with God our Lord. The life which we live in this world, diserneth
not the name of life, because it is so full of perils and dangers, but by
death (as our enimyes term it) we are upon a sudden taken forth of them and
delivered from all, and so brought into rest and joy eternally. Phil. 1. and
20.21. 2. Cor. 5. and 1.2.3. etc.
And therefore S. Paul right well, did desire to be desolued or loosed from his
body, and to be with Christ, to joy of that full liberty already spoken of.
Jesus Christ did distroye death, and as death had no power over him, no more
has he in none of his members. He him self says by the Prophet Osee, Osee.
13. and 14. 1. Cor. 15. and 54.55. etc.
death, I will be thy death, and S. Paul writes, that death has lost the
victory and is swallowed up therein. And death where is thy sting, hell where
is thy victory, 1. Ioh. 5. and. ^
the sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law. But thanks
be to God that has given us the victory by our Lord Jesus Christ. So that
death has no power nor naught else wherewith to hurt the faithful, for sin
is the weapon wherewith he wounds, the which is distroyed by Christ, and so
is death overcome, thus the life that is in us is eternal and we shall never
dye. And that which our adversaries offer unto us is but a representation of
death, the which already we have overcome by our conseruator and head Christ
Jesus, by whom we possess the victory.

Of the cause that Christ did fear death, and how constant diverse martirs
have been since in their martyrdom etc. The xxx. Chapter.
THe cause why that our savior seemed to fear death, was only to show him
self in his manhood, and that he had taken upon him the sins of all
mankind, because he would win the victory of all his enimyes, and so drive
away the doubt that was in ye amassed minds of the faithful.

And also to show that because de dyed, death was killed thereby, and could
have no more power over us. The true credit and belief hereof (dearly
beloved) is very requisite and necessary for us.

It has been seen, that many servants of God animated by belief or faith in
the truth of the same, have taken their crosses with great courage, joy, and
contentment of mind, as if they had gone to feasts of great honor: or as if
they led a tryumphant Bryde by the hand to set her in some beautyfull
throne with the Brydegroome.

Agatha.
That virtuous Virgyne Agatha, when she was carried to death out of prison where
long she had been (with no great worldly delyghtes I warrant you) for
professing the truth in the Gospel which faithfully she believed, said: that
even then, she went to feasts or a feast of great joy.

Saint Vincent or that good holy confessor, Vincent.
being laid upon hot burning coals a broyling for the same truth, made a
mock at his masking persecutors, and said: that the like cross and death to
any Christian was great cause of joy to him, and all his companion members.
The godly man Ignacius Bishop of Antyoche (in the persecution that the
terrible Tyrant Traiano committed and used against the christians) being by him
an Infidel, Ignatius.
and his fidell confederates, condemned to be thrown unto wild beasts, to
the end that most terriblie he should be torn in pieces by their terrible
teethe: He hearing the roaryng of the Lions prepared amongst other their
panyons, to execute the sentence given so against him, said: with great joy, I
am ye wheat of Jesus Christ, which shall be ground by the teene and sharp teeth
of those execrable beasts, to be made pure and clean unto the Lord. And by
report of an english man my friend, (this translator,) there was in Essex where
as he was borne (in England) diverse faithful witnesses, as, Wats, Hawks,
Pigot, Cawson, Ardely, Sympson, with many others, (there: and as well in other
countries with in the said Realm,) did most joyfully receive, (and valiently
stand to their trial by) the fire: and in the myddest thereof, with great
gladness of their forewardnesse in getting the victory did embrace the golden
flames of the same, each of them saying, with great courage: O Lord receive my
soul: and Lord into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me
O Lord God of truth. Moreover, many of them in going thereunto, gladly, and in
a most triumphant manner, like men going to most gladsome joys, would with
great and mighty good will bid their friends farewell, and so in token
thereof, and of the sure hope which they had in the meeting of God and his
heavenly company, (as well those gone before as they that were to come after)
would drink a cup of burned wine unto them, as well therefore, as also to moist
a little their senses whereby they might be the more ayte to set forth wholly
together, the glory of him for whom they suffered. But herein a number of
Papists and diuill Antichrists companions, found great occasion to use many
false reports, saying (of such a one as did so) surely it is easy to be
judged the faith of such Heritikes, see I pray you, does (or did) he not drink
wine to be dru^ken and so to dye desperately, (such blasphemy, my translator
tells me, he ca^ find out an number: to many.) But truly, truly, Mat. 15.
and 13.
such Trees such fruits, by the diuill planted, and by him they bear and
bring forth. What: mary abominable lies, whereof he, that filthy feend and
diabolical beast is the author and father. Likewise and the very like has
been, in most parts of the world, as well here with us in Spain, as in
Italy, Germany, Portugal, France, Flanders, Brabant, Zellond, Hollond, and
other countries many mo.

This virtue and strength comes unto them by Jesus Christ, and by ye faith
they have in him and his Gospel, which will always continue amongst them
that be his. What a number more have we seen with our own eyes consumed with
the fire, what admyrable works of God have they showed in the midst of their
greatest passions, and how have they gone to their martyrdom.

Surely many, as well men and women in old age, as younglings, and tender
impes, both young men and maids, chaste bachellers, and damsel vyrgines. The
men, as if they had gone to great Tryumphes, the maidens, as if they had been
led to be married unto the greatest Lords and Princes in the world.

Yea, even in the midst of the fire, and torments, did they eleuate their
hands to the heavens with great joy, singyng Psalms of thanks gyuyng unto
the Lord, for that he had made them worthy for to suffer for his names sake.

What is this but fruits of belief in the truth of the Gospel, Act. 5. and
29.41.
and also that both the one and the other of them were fully assured by the
holy Ghost that they went to be glorified, and to joy of the whole fulfilling
of the dyuine promises of God.

Those had effectually, perfectly, and fully prynted and graven in their
hearts, that Jesus Christ is the resurrection and the life, Ioh. 11. and 25.26.
and for that they have believed in him, they shall never die.

Whereby we may see that the effycacye and force of Gods word is of no less
effect, nor does work no less in them that receive it, at this day, then
it was to those which received it in old time, for that it is the same now
that it was then.

So that there is no cause to fear death at all: Mat. 11. and 28.31.
and therefore Christ says unto his disciples, that they should not fear them
which kill the body, and have no power to touch ye soul. The power of the
Tirants our adversaries is so weak, that it can not reach nor touch but our
bodies only, which are mortal and must needs dye by one mean or other. And
yet not neither, till the time which God has appointed, and the days which
he has numbered, be fully determined and ended. Jesus Christ has promised and
assured us that they shall not kill our souls. Then what does it avail or
profit them though they kill our bodies, or what regard need we to have
thereunto, considering that in so little a time being separate from the soul,
it joins therewith again to immortality, and to be no more subject to the
trauayles and troubles of life in this miserable world. 1. Cor. 15. and
38.52.53.
When we have a Jewel of gold or silver, if it be old or broken, of a very
good will we deliver it to the workman that made it, for him to put in his
furnace and so to try it, and forge it again a new. So likewise our bodies
whither they be old or young, yet so crooked and subject to sin, Math. 13.
and 21.
and to fall on every side as is possible, wherefore should we doubt to give
them unto God that made them, that they may be forged and framed a new, for the
soul to receive again to immortality, to be incorruptible, Dan. 12. and
1.2.3.
void of all corruption, shyning as clear as can be. The celestial and
heavenly truth teaches us, yt our souls are in safety, so that they can in
no wise perish and dye, nor yet be hurt with all the tyranny that our
tyranicall persecutors, Ioh. 6. and. 35. Romans 6. and 8.11.23 Colos. 3. and
1.2.3. Genesis 4. and 8. Hebr. 11. and 4.
the Pope and his darlings do or can do. Because as God can not dye nor be
killed, no more can they kill our souls the members of his son our head,
for that the life that we have, is by and of him. Rightuous Abell was killed in
his body, by the cruelty of his curssed brother Caine, yet his soul did live
by the faith and hope which he had in God. So at this present day, the seed
and posterity of Abell, Romans 8. and 6.7.8. etc. Apoc. 6. and. ^ 10.
are killed and slain by the cruelty and tirannie of Caines successors, but
for all that, their souls do live by the faith and hope which they have
always had in God, abiding the glorification of their bodies. And therefore
since our souls can not dye nor be killed, why should we fear them which can
but kill the body for a time. There is none but God only that did give us
this life, why should not he then have it when and how it pleases him.

Because that he only is both life and death for all, without his license and
good will, our enimyes can not harm nor grieve us if they do ye best and
worst they can: for he has so restrained them in such a bridle, that unless
he loose and let flippe the reins thereof, they can do nothing. For the Lord
has said, Dan. 3. and 17.22.2^.
I will kill, and I will give life: So that as we have our lives from him, even
so comes our death.

Wherefore let us only fear him and not the^, for yt if they do their worst,
yet they can not do that they would. The diuill that mischievous malicious
old Dragon, Apoc. 12. and 1.2.4.6. etc.
does always desire wholly to distroy and overthrow quyte the church or
congregation of Christ: but God by his mighty potencie does so restrain the
reigns of the bridle wherewith he has brideled him, that he makes him
evermore to recoyle and stand back, and in no wise will suffer him to have
any part of his will: nor yet pass nothing that God has appointed.

Of the goodness of God in our defense against our persecutors. etc. The xxxj.
Chapter.
HOw often would the adversaries of Jesus Christ have killed him: into how many
cou^sayls and co^sultatio^s have they entered, to ye same effect, but they could
not bring any part of their purposes to pass, Luke. 22. and 53. Math. 26. and.
55.
until his hour was fully come, and that God the father had let loose the
power of darkness. How many times, or how often (says he him self) have I
been with you in the Temple, teaching and talkyng with you, and ye have not
taken me. I am sure they had such hatred to him and his Gospel, that there
wanted no good will in them to have done it, but (they had no power to do it)
their strength failed them. Do thou not know said Pilate that I have power
to loose and free thee, Ioh. 19. in all.
and also to crucify and kill thee. He answered and said, thou had not
(if it were not given thee from above,) so much power as to touch me. No
more can those which now do seek to afflict the faithful, they can not so
much as filloppe them with their finger, if God would to the contrary: for
that he has not so little regard unto their lives corporal, that he will
deliver them over to their foes, until their full course be come, run out,
and expired. From the time that Jesus Christ did first manifest himself (by
preaching) unto the world, they did abhor him till they had most cruelly
condemned him, and delivered him unto death, yea, even the spiteful death of
the cross. The will and mind they had to kill him, when he was crucified, had
contine wed of old, but the execucion thereof was then newly invented, but yet
they could not atteine unto it without the will of God.

Even so ever since the first hour that the word of God, and the true light
thereof, entered into Iermany, England, France, and this our realm of Spain,
and did begin to shine as the Sun, there were persecutours which did abhor
it, and so do continewe until this day, most mortally and cruelly: and did,
and do, kill all Christians, which are quickened thereby with most extremity.
They did always will and wish that which now they do most wickedly, they were
evermore enemies and contrary both to him and us, but they could not at no time
conclude their desires, till such time as God had let loose the power of
darkness: 1. Pet. 1. and 4.7.
because thereby we might be examyned, purified, and tried, and then put into
eternal glory, prepared for us from the beginning. And our persecutors,
afflictors, and killers, in all their persecutions and tirannie, do no more
but fill up the measure of impiety and sins of their fathers so full, Mat.
23. and 31.35. Luke. 13. and 24.34.35.
that they will make it run over and bring upon them selves, all the blood
of the Saints which have been since the death of rightuous and just Abell.

And therefore since that men can do nothing, and that man is no body nor
nothing of him self, and also since the power which they have is given them
from God, only to execute his will, let us not fear them.

Because that God has commanded us not to fear men, for that they can but
kill the body, we can not fear them without great offense.

Wherefore let us give ear and hear that which the Lord says by the
Prophette Esaias, and assures us of: Esaias. 4. and 9.10.
thou shalt be my servant (says he) I have chosen thee, fear not for I am
with thee, do not declyne from me, for that I am the Lord thy God, and will
fortefie and strengthen thee. Thus we se that there is no cause why, we
should fear any human power, he does surely certefie us that we are his
servants, that he has chosen us, and that he is our God: So that we do
iniure him greatly, and filthilie offend him, when that in any point we do
fear the mynisters of death corporal.

What other thing comes by fearing of them, but in giving honor unto them,
to dishonor God who does defend and forbid it: But let us believe his
promise and say with the Prophette, Abac. 1. and. 12.
thou art our GOD, and we shall not die though our killers and persecutors
do never so much against us. Let us bear this faith as a shield, Ephe. 6. and
13.14.15. etc.
and let us not declyne from ye right way, nor yet be dismayed neither for fear
of death, nor yet of our persecutors. For that therein is fulfilled all which
is spoken of by S. John: Ioh. 6. and. 2.3.20.
which is, that our heaviness shall be turned into joy. By death is ended all
our heaviness and mournyng, and there does succeed such joy as no tongue
can tell, the which can not be taken away. So that when the world does make
greatest accounte, that we are killed, lost, and for ever utterly distroyed,
and has raised up enseignes of our greatest dishonor and infamy. Esaias. 25.
and. 8. Apoc. 7. and. 12.
Even then (says the holy Ghost by his Prophet) God will wype the tears from
the cheeks of us his chosen: and will take all our dishonours and cares.

He will turn all dishonor to the dishonorers, and infamy to the infamors,
and the abhorrors shall be possessed with their own hatred. The co^dempnation
shall reuert to ye co^dempners, and their, curse, maledictio^, and death to
the termygauntes their executioners. But the faithful delivered from all kind
of calamyties and adversities, 1. Ioh. 3. and 14. Esaias. 25. and 5.6.7.
and the couertures of their holiness and righteousness being distroyed, and
they wholly taken out of the power of their enemies, shall be put where shall
be no more death, no more plaintes, cries, calamities, nor griefs: but where
shall be the throne of God and of the Lamb, and where they shall serve him,
see his face, and have his name in their foreheades.

And the Lord God shall lighte^ them, Apoc. 2^. and. 3.4.5. etc.
and reygne for ever with them, as it is written by Saint John.

And since it is so, what is there lost by leaving so tenebrous and dark a
dungeon, as is the filthy prison of our bodies, so stinkyng as they are, and
by leauyng the world where all things are corruptible.

Shall we fear those which seek to kill us for. Christ's cause, seeing they
procure us thereby so blessed an exchange, that our corruption shall be turned
into incorruption, our mortality into immortality, poverty into riches,
dishonor into honor, imprysonment into liberty, confusion into glory,
heaviness into joy, and our solitary being into the company of God and his
Saynctes for ever, and to be of the same number and equal with them in glory.

Wherefore shall we refuse to go from this life so abominable, to go to
that goodly mount Syon: to go to that beautiful City of God, the new and
celestial Jerusalem, Hebr. 12. and 22.23.
into and among that innumerable many and multitude of blessed Aungelles and
Archaungelles, the holy and true common wealth of the chosen: where as without
contradiction is always done the good will of God.

Shall we fear to come to this felicity, to the which we were borne and
redeemed by the inestimable good will and love of God, whereas we shall be made
perfectly like to him who did redeem us: No, let us put away all those vain
fears of the evils present in this world, Hebr. and. 3. Hebr. 12. and. 3.
and of the ministers thereof, and assure our selves to be joined with Jesus
Christ which is ascended into heaven, where as he sits on the right hand
of God in his majesty, with his right hand extended ready to take hold and
receive us unto him.

We hold it impossible, in our carnal sense of understanding to suffer the
fire and the terror thereof that they use in persecuting ye little flock of
us at this day, for that in burning us, they do it by little and little, the
more to increase our torments, for their revenge: only because we confess the
truth of Christ our master whom they can not abide.

How can it be (says our blind fleshsences) but that such cruelty must
needs overcome our patience.

What other thing may this be called, but a blasphemy wherewith we deny, the
myghtie potenciall power of God, yt which he is to use to all ye trust in him:
and a mean to separate us from his cross, to which he does call us so
amorously and lovingly, because we might be gloryfied with Christ.

And therefore let us not hear, nor yet give credit to any such leasinges and
errors. Worldly men do easily suffer those things wherein they feel some
grief for their gain. By these fiery torments, whereof we have such horror,
there can be no kind of harm nor grief that is evil, but rather a great and
mighty blessedness, much more to our gain: wherefore we ought not to believe
nor think that our patience which God gives, will be overcome thereby.

From syx trybulacions the Lord will deliver thee, and in the seventh no manner
of evil shall touch thee, (says the holy ghost by just Job) the seventh is
the very last instant hour or time of death. Job. 5. and 19.26.
So that, when it seems to sight that al our evils are heaped upon us, and
that our enemies, do use their greatest tyranny, and make account to have
gotten the victory, and that we remain overcome and swallowed up with all
manner of mischief: Even then the same holy Ghost does assure us, that no manner
of evil does touch us.

What occasion is there the^ for us to fly from yt which hurts nor touches
us not, or to make account yt humain persecution will or can overcome our
patience, or th^^ our patience is not able to abide (...). Mar. 9. and 23.
All things are possible to them that believe (says the Lord). So that unto
such, it is also certainly possible to have patience to abide the extremity
and fury of the fire, and to suffer the same with great constancy. It was
patiently passed over by the Prophets in the old time: Even so it is now to
them that be holy, faithful, and believe. Because that which the Apostle says
concerning ye same, 1. Cor. 16. and. 13.
must needs be true therein. God is faithful (says he) and will suffer no
man to be tempted, more then he will make him able to bear: but rather with
our temptations he sends good success, because we may suffer. Whereby it is
most manifest and plain, that christian patience does not only overcome death
executed by extremity of fire, but also all the most cruel kynds of deaths
and torments, that any Triant and all the Tirants in ye world can use and
devise. Because that with all ye tyranny they can execute, God will not alter
his purpose, from according to his word, nor leave to admynister some one
secret virtue or other, to them that be his, whereby they shall overcome death,
tirannie, hell, sin, the diuill, and all other kind of mischiefs.

Hebr. 4. and 14.15.16. Hebr. 2. and 17.18.
So full of compassion and pity is our high priest Jesus Christ, that as he
ouerpassed temptations which happened to him self, so will he also, by his
power and might aid and strengthen all those which are tempted.

As the Apostle says: if Jesus Christ in whom we believe and for whom we
suffer, do know by experience our griefs and troubles, and is not only
most myghtie, loving, and good to us in our help, but also does suffer with
us as the head with the members: shall he be so weak in us that he can not
abide the fire, or (being strong as he is) will not he help us in the midst
thereof, Act. 9. and 4.5.
being principal in persecution and suffering the same with us.

Is it possible that God will forsake and leave us, (or that we should fear or
doubt the same) when that for professyng of his name we are by our enymies
thrown into the myddest of the fire, or that we should think God to be
forgetful of his loving children, and that he loves us in words and not in
deeds, and truth: Surely in so dooyng we should much iniure him, and give him
great cause to be greeuouslie offended with us for it.

For us to think that his almightinesse will forsake us in any necessitye, it
were an abhomynable actyon of us, if he have not (as in deed he has not)
forsaken but remembered us in the greatest matters, of a suertie he will not
forsake but remember help and deliver us in and from such trifles: it were
abominable to think the contrary, much more worsser to believe it. Well, my
dearly beloved brethren and sweet fellow members, I trust there is none of
us, that does either believe or think any such thing, but rather my hope is
that we think and surely believe, to feel his goodness, Esaias. 43. and 1.2.3.
etc.
according to the saying of the holy Ghost, by Esaias the Prophet: who says,
the Lord God thy creator says, fear thou not, for I have redeemed thee, and
called thee by thy name, thou art mine, and when thou passest by the water I
will be with thee, the ryuers shall not ouerwhelme thee, when thou passest by
the fire thou shall not be burned, nor the flames thereof shall not bend them
selves against thee, for I am the Lord thy holy God of Israel, which keeps
thee God has always in remembrance the benifite which he used, in calling and
making us partakers of his redemption, and in adopting us his children never to
leave us. Psalm. 91. and 5.6.7. Psalm. 33. and 12.17.
So that when it shall seem to the judgment of the world that he has left
us, (and that is when he suffers us to pass into the midst of ye fire or
any other torment) even then is he most nighest unto us, and so nyghe in deed,
that he is closely joined with us, and temperating the fury of the fire,
because it should do us no harm: and for that it might appear that he is both
God and father to all his, and will keep and defend us from all evil in all
times of torment and tribulation. Mat. 16. and 18.
If the gates of hell may not prevail against us, how can the fire which is
visible and corporal preuail against us: if eternal and everlasting death have
no part in us, how can any thing that is temporal and mome^tarie harm us:
will God deliver us from the greatest euilles, and suffer us to perish in the
little ones, no for a certeintie, his everlasting promise is to the contrary.

A marvelous comfort to those that are afflicted either by fire or otherwise.
The xxxij. Chapter.
THe fire and all things terestriall are creatures of God, and serve for the
health and wealth of his chosen, and also for the destruction of his enimyes.
(As it is written in the book of wisdom, Sap. 16. and 16.22.23.
) Because the just should be sustained and vpholden, the fire does loose his
force and fury, (for that it being a creature, in serving him that is his
creator and maker, does use his furies and inflame him self to the
destruction and torment of the unrighteous and wicked only.) And does
mittigate his mood, only because they trust in the Lord.

Whereby it appears, that the poor afflicted children of God, are not burned
with the fire, nor hurt with any kind of torment: no not scarce touched
therewith, and therefore nothing grieved. (As says our Lord God, his creatures
every one of them are in such a consorte, and so agreed together amongst them
selves, yt all of them with one common accord and consent, will be and are
ministers for us of great health and comfort: Osee. 2. and 18.21.22.
and also will and do use them selves unto us with a gentleness most loving:
because being faithful, we are so well beloved of god, that he binds all his
creatures so, that of force they can not be, but for our benifit in all things
according to his will. Gold burns not in the fire, but is fined and purified
thereby from all things that are of less value, and so it self made more
precious and of greater value and substance, then before. Even so the good
christian brought to the fire by persecution, burns not, but is the rather
purifyed from all that fowleth, blotteth, or burns his christianity, and so
remains more precious and beautiful in his substance the^ before. Whereby it
seems yt the children of God, when they suffer ye force and heat of ye fire,
they feel it not, or else it hurts them not, but rather harmeth the
executioners thereof. The fire to the faithful is as it was in the bushe,
which Moses saw: it flamed and yet it burned not, Exodus 3. and. 2.
because that the Lord God was in it. The fire has a force and virtue that
burns and consumes utterly, but whom: mary, even the impious, unjust, and
ungodly. And although they seem living (these which are the afflictors of the
faithful) and without harm, yet for a certainty with the same fire, which
they provide and make for others, they are (before God) burned and consumed
them selves: Although they believe it not, Dan. 6. and 16.26.
yet it is so. The Prophet Daniell when he was thrown into the den among
the Lions which were made extreemely hungry upon purpose to have devoured
him: because he was found faithful before God, he perishes not, they touched
him not, nor did him harm: but rather in their kind reioysed and made great
feasts and joy with him, for that God upon whom he did invoke and call, and
in whom he trusted did deliver him (as in the vj. Chapter of the same Prophet,
and the xvj. and xxiiij. verse is well declared) but those which had been the
executioners of all his trouble and torment, being thrown into the same place,
even among the very same Lions: they could scarce fall among the^ so soon as
they were torn and plucked in pieces and devoured utterly. The three young men
of Babilo^, Dan. 3. and 13.16.17. etc.
Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, servants of God, did not perish when they were
put into a hot burning furnace, made seven times hotter then ever it was,
because they would not worship wicked King Nabuchadonaser his Idol, which he
had caused to be set up: they surely trusting in the living God, feared not his
furyous fury in all his threatninges nothing at all, but answered him saying,
we are not careful to answer thee (O King) in any thing concerning this
Idol, for let thy highness understand, that our God whom we serve, can
deliver us from thy whot burning furnace, and from thy hands, but if he will
not (the which we do not doubt off) yet (O King) hold thou for a certainty
yt we will not worship thy Gods, nor yet the Image of gold which thou have
caused to be set up, being for this cause put into the said furnace so hot,
they were not only free from all kind of harm by fyrie, flame, or smoke, but
also they were refreshed from heaven by the hands of ye son of the living
God, who was him self among them, in the likeness of an Angel: Even in the
midst of the most whottest flames, wherefore it hurt them nothing at all: but
yet it burnt and consumed quyte the myschieuous ministers ye makers thereof. So
that thereby was approved that the fire could not harm them in no point, no
more can it not (nor nothing else that God has created) do any thing hurtful
against the children of God, for why all yt ca^ be done against them, be it
with fire or any other kind of torture is for their comfort. The^ wherefore
should we faint fear, or flee, at or from the cross of the Lord: for yt he
will examine and purge us therewith, from all kind of causes of corruption: So
that it may be consumed quite by the means thereof: that we might be enryched
and remain glorified with God for ever.

All that is written, Romans 15. and 4.
is written for our learning, because that by patience and comfort in the
scriptures we might have hope.

And therefore let us understand that as in times paste it passed and happened
to Danyell and the rest the servants of God, (and also to his enimyes) Even
the like comes to pass at this day both wc the one and other, for that
nothing can hurt them that put their trust in the Lord: but all serves them
for the best. Job. 5. and 17.19. etc. Osec. 2. and 18.21.22. Romans 8. and 28.
And as for the wicked, all things are to the contrary, they provide nothing
to punysh the rightuous with, but they peryshe therein themselves.

Wherefore let us be imitators of the saints, as of Daniel, and of ye three
young men of Babylon, and others more a great many, which nothing esteemed
torments, tyronous threats, killings nor commandments of any ungodly Tyrant:
but constantly continued in confessing of Gods true religion for ever, without
any looking back. And as they did honor him in being faithful, so did he
honor them in being by the^ in all their distressed dangers, to their aid,
strength, consolation, continual comfort, and delivery most merueilous: in
such sort that no part of their hope was frustrate in any thing. Even so will
he do and deal for us if we be faithful. Let us not fear therefore the
tirannie (that so potencially appears of princes; Mat. 11. and 12.28.29.
nor the cruelty of Kings, the tyranny of any kind of Tyrant, of
inquisitors, of correctors, of Judges, nor yet the torment of the executioner,
the infamy of me^, nor any other kind of cruelty that in our eyes is evil:
least that so we forsake and renounce our faith, and the true knowledge of our
savior Jesus Christ the son of God. Let us only fear God, Mat. 10. and
19.26.28.
who can and will deliver us from all kind of torments, and from the hands of
all Tyrants. And although that we do not see this liberty of delivery, with
our corporal eyes, yet (for the love of our savior Jesus Christ) let us not
consent unto them, nor follow their impiety and ungodliness: let no brave nor
gallant show of or from them allure us unto them, Deuteronomy. 12. and 2.8.11. etc.
Math. 15. and 9.13.
let us not worship the creatures, nor yet trust in any other then the
creator: Let us not accept any other rule to serve him by, then that which he
does command and teach for a rule, by the holy ghost: Let us not fear the
creatures, but the creator only. Let us not take heed nor make account of
things that be visible, but of things which are invisible: Let us not marvel,
be dysmayed, nor afraid, 2. Cor. 4. and 17.18.
of the cruelty of men: but let us behold, and be inamored of the clemency
and goodness of God our good and loving father. Because that he in all things
is true, let us be lovers faithful and true unto him. Romans 8. and 29.30.
He did not forget that he did know and elect us, to be made conformeable
and like unto his son, he does always remember and will never forget that
he called us, Romans 3. and 1. 1. Cor. 6.11. Ephe. 2. and 14.16.
of his own singular mercy to us ward, and did let others alone in the same
condempnatio^ in the which we were: and being unrighteous as we were in deed,
he did justify us and wash us by the blood of Christ, because we should be
holy in his presence. Let us remember all this, and how he loved us in Christ,
when we were his enemies and would not pardon him in his passions one jot. Yet
he did pardon us, and give him self unto death, yea the most vile death on the
cross to distroy sin, the which but for his mercy and love had distroyed us
utterly: and all because we should have life in him.

Romans 5. and 1.8.9. Romans 8. and 17.30.
Sith he loved us so, then being so horrible sinners, and his cruel enymies,
it is most sure and certain that he loves us now much better, for that he
has so rebuked and killed sin in us, yt we are reconsiled unto him: and has
also made us the children of his mercy. And therefore for that he does so
love us, with the burning bowels of his true love, he will also gloryfye us in
Christ, for why all that he does unto us is to the same end: wherefore he
will that we suffer whilst we live in this world, Romans ^^ and. 5.
that we might be partakers of the cross and death of Christ, also of his
resurrection and gloryficacion. So that to be like unto him in suffering here,
2. Tim. 2. and 3.9.10. Act. 14. and 12.
he gueth us to understand that we shall be with him, and like unto him in his
kingdom: and therefore it is very necessary that we pass many tribulationes
in entering therinto.

Wherefore with shuttinge our eyes to all the impedimentes of our
glorificacion, Hebr. 12 and. 2.
and with giving no ear to the resons of our flesh and the world, let us run
with patience to the battle whereunto we are so lovingly pressed, lookinge to
our chieftaine Jesus Christ, who having before him (as we have) such joy as is
unspeakable, did willingly suffer his cross: nothing regarding the dishonor
of his death, and is set on the right hand of God in his inestimable glory.
Thus considering the contradiction that his enimyes used to him self, whilst
be was on earth amongst them, let not us be troubled nor faint in our minds at
any kind of calamity: but with a great and stout courage let us go forward
and not stay to rest, 1. Cor. 9. and 24. etc. Mar. 13. and 13.
till that we have gotten that Jewel which is his blessing, and set up for a
pryse or reward for all those which persevere vpryght and in the true knowledge
of his truth and obedience of the same till the end.

An entry into the conclusion with many godly exortations. The xxxiii.
Chapter.
ANd therefore let us have always before our eyes, the admonytion and counsel
that our only savior Christ did often exhort his disciples with: saying,
Luke 21. and 19.
let your minds be possessed with patience and be ye prudent and wise as
Serpents, Mat. 10. and 16.
and simple and innocents as Doves. Let us be therefore, so wise and prudent
that we do use all things at all times to the glory of Christ our redeemer.

Wherefore let not our wysedom be cautelous and subtle with malice against
God, according to the world, Romans 11. and 25.
but according to the knowledge that we have from God by his good will, so that
we may be guyded by the holy Ghost in all that we do or suffer.

And let our innocencio be no otherwise, but in such manner as we may
vouchsafe with good will to taste of the bitter gall, hatred, and enmity
offered us by men, so that we be not ignorant of that we be not ignorant of yt
which belongs to christianity, because that to be otherwise simple, were but
rudeness and bestiallitie and no simplicity evangelical.

Let us not be slow nor cold in the works of the Lord, Phil. 2. and 1.2.
Man. 10. and 8.11. Mat. 7. and 6. Col. 4. and 6. Ephe. 4. and 25.29.31. 2. Tim.
2. and 16.23.24.
but with a feruente zeal to GOD with knowledge and Christian modesty: Let us
follow our forefathers the Prophets and Apostles in our vexatio^ and calling,
that we may have all, one selfsame feeling in Christ Jesus: Let us all and
every one of us confess him in all places, and the rather that edification
might come thereby, so that we cast not pearl among swine: Let our
communication be seasoned with salt of knowledge, of faith, and with the word
of god, so yt it may be gracious and acceptable to ye hearers: And let the^ not
be to scorn, mock, and murmour at the ignorant, blind, and such as be always
under ye clouds of errors and curssed captives under ye emperie and government
of ye diuil: 1. Pet. 2. and 11.
but always let us speak with gravity and christian honesty in ye fear of ye
Lord. Let us use our words with all honor and reverence, 1. Cor. 6. and 20. 1.
Pet. 4. and 11.
because we may stop ye mouths of evil and curssed speakers, and constrain
the^ to say and confess ye God has his dwilling in us. Behold what ye Apostle
Peter writes and says, ye he that speaks, let him speak ye words of God,
and let him not only pronounce with his mouth, but also let ye same come from
his heart. So yt when we speak we should think bona fide from our hearts to be
believed thereby, and not to be hard only: 2. Cor. 4^ and. 2.
because God is neither contented nor any thing pleased, yt we should only
have him disse^blingly in our mouths, and nothing in our hearts, wherefore does
he co^mau^d us earnestly to engraue and print his picture, law, and gospel most
deeply in our best book of reme^bra^ces, (which is our hearts) for yt from
thence it might come to our tongues, because it should not happen to us, as it
does to many, which for ye there have him but in their tou^gs to talk of, if
they chance to be examined by their enemies what Christ is, Mar. 4. and
17.18.19.
they do easly deny, forsake, fear, (and remain doubtful of) him, and are
occasion by their inco^sta^cie for others to do ye like, because so shamefully
and sle^derly they let slip their faith, and do doubt of Gods most mighty
power. But although ye some of these weaklings do so, let us be firm in our
faith, and not fail to show the same in profession of true religion, which
assuredly came down from heaven.

It is not the religion of men, which is contented with words only and
outward shows, but it is of God which asks first and principally the heart,
Pro. 28. and 20. Gal. 6. and 7.
and secondly all that his word teaches to belong unto it. Let us hear the
words of the Apostle attentively, who says, be you not deceived, for God will
not be mocked as men are, if be have ordained that we shall profess Jesus
Christ openly and publicly, and that we shall suffer for his righteousness,
let us do it in such order as it may appear ye Gods good admonishion has
taken place in us.

1. Pet. 4. and 15.16.
As Saint Peter exhorts: saying, let us lead a life so holy, and worthy of
the Lord which called us, that none of us be afflicted as an homicide or a
thief, blaspheemer, adulterer, or one that has committed sacraledge, one full
of strife, an evil doer, or a person that is covetous of the goods of other
men, least our harms happen to us by a just occasion: for if we suffer for any
of these crimes, we do dishonor and use great injury to our father which is
in heaven: because being his children we must needs dishonor him greatly,
Mat. 6. and 9
where as otherwise we ought to honor and sanctify his holy name, according
to our calling by him. Let us so rule our selves that the wicked have none
occasion to persecute us, but only because we do abhor vice and love
virtue, do seek and desire the light, which they flee from, and because we
flee from that filthy darkness which they desire to embrace.

Let us so do, that they may have no other cause to abhor us, 1. Pet. 4. and
3.4.
but because we will not be conversant with them in dissolution, in
concupiscence, in surfeting, in gluttony, in drunkenness, and abominable
Idolatry: and that we do not run with them in that unbridled life so full
of insolency and dissolute, that we be like to them in nothing, nor that we
be not as they are which can not suffer the light of Gods truth, Ioh. 3. and
19.20.21.
because it discovers all their wickedness and vice, as the su^nne does
discover the drousie darkness of the night. Also let us take heed that we be
not like to many, that be so wise, and prudent, that they will suffer nothing
for Christ's sake in his beloved church, and so being full of fleshly
prudencie, Psalm. 94. and 3.4.7. 1. Cor. 3. etc Mat. 25. and 18.24.25. Luke. 19.
and 20.21. Romans 8. and ^0.
they do account it christian and spiritual wisdom, as though God did not
know how to find out the subtelties of those wise and subtle dissemblers,
as if Jesus Christ had allowed them place among the lovers of the gospel, or as
if they might bury their tale^ts which God had given them in ye ground of
forgetfulness, like unto the slothful and disobedient servant spoken of in
the euangelical scriptures. Because by such kind of bestiall blindness we may
see a many of them, use ye knowledge that God has given them so peruerslie,
that they think themselves satisfied in their own opinions, and so do yield
them selves every day most beastlye and blyndly to bend their knees before
blockish Baal: and sudden Jesus Christ, being most shamfully ashamed both of
him and his gospel. And not contented with this mischievous and monstrous
doings in this dishonoring of him and his truth, they do the worst and best
they can to drive by their diuillish dealings (in that order) all those which
are the simple ignorant and know little, into merueilous doubts. And moreover
we may see the^ with great rage and rashenes, judge and condemn the
innocents, only for their firmness in faith, and constancy (to maintain
the same by Jesus Christ) who yield their lives therefore most magnanimously.
Therefore let us run away and flee most ferue^tly from them, and let us not
allow their counsels and prudencie, nor yet follow none of their works.
Because that all their pretense is nothing, Mat. 16. and 6.11.12.
but to pluck and appart us secreatly from the cross of Christ, and from our
glorification thereby. Let them alone in their way by wicked Antichrist: let us
keep our way, by our savior Jesus Christ who has called us to ye same. Let not
us use ye grace and goodness of god wickedly, 1. Pet. 2. and 1 ^^.
for a cloak to cover our vice and iniquity, Romans 2. and 8.9.
and so make our concupiscences full of lycencialitie, which the spirit of God
does command us to refrain: Colos. 3. and 5.8.
But let us mortefie our terestriall and earthly members, and cast of our old
corrupted Adam, Psalm. 90. and ^.2.3. etc.
so that in time of tribulation when we be tempted out of the way on the left
hand, we may call upon God and desire of him strength to stand, that we fall
not under the fardell of affliction, nor fainte not in the work of the Lord.
The which is not better for us to be thought upon and done, in the time of
adverse necessity, then when we are in purest prosperity. Because it is much
more difficult and hard, to continue in fyrme faith in times of prosperity,
then in the cruel time of adversity. Amongst the people of Israel (which
are as a myrrour or glass for us to look in so, for the government and
guyding of our human lives) we have diverse examples of the like, ^ King. ^.
(...) etc.
(one of David) which suffitiently and singularly shows, the vnloyall or
desseall truth that he used to God in the times of his princely prosperity,
many crimes of adultery, incestious fornication, and homicide, did he most
wickedly commit, whilst he forgot his loving Lord who had elected him to
glory notwithstanding.

Very godly exhortations for all men that are afflicted, and also for those
which are in prosperity. The xxxiiij. Chapter.
ANd therefore if it happen that we live in rest and quiet without any
adversity or persecution, let us not forget ye Lord, but follow his counsel
devised and published by his divine wisdom: Eccle. 18. and 23.24. etc.
let us then remember also the dangerous days of dollor, trouble, and
adversity, Deu. 16. and. 1.12.
that the children of Israel had in the land of Canaan: let their bondage and
captivity in Egipte be had in remembrance of us: let us be vigilant, watch,
and pray more then in ye prosperity of ours, Mat. 26. and. 13.
then at any other time. Let us not live to our selves in leasings, sleeping in
ye cradle of security, as some of the Israelites did, promising themselves
rest fantastical: Let us be always as men on the Seas which are good and
expert sailors, although it be calm and that no wind do blow, yet they have
their hallyards, sheets, sails, tackes, and bowlines in a readynesse, yare to
strike, hoyse, hall, and set, in any tempestious time of tossing ye troublesome
Sea of tribulation most dangerous. Likewise let us watch and be in a readiness
what (tempest of tribulation) so ever shall happen in these dangerous seas ye
world, Mat. 7. and 15.
wherein we do live and sail, let us set hope to the healme, let faith stand to
let fly the sheat, let humility strike the sail, and let our f^re affiance
and trust in God be our pilat to invocate and call for help to the tacke and
Bowlyne to strain and grype through ye tempest of troubles into the port and
haven of health. Let us not let slip this provision, least we be taken void
and without those helping mates our mariners to stand by our tackling. 1. Pet.
5. and 8.9.
Biiause our adversary the diuil goes rampa^t about like a roaryng Lion
seeking whom he may devour, whom we ought to resist by force of faith in
christ Jesus. Let us remember our selves of the days of Noah, and of Lottes
wife. Mat. 24. and 37. Luke 17. and 32. 1. These. 5. and. 3.
And let us be afraid that when they say unto us peace and security, that even
then death and destruction is at hand, will run upon us hastily, and kill
us without repentance, like as a womon with child whom her travail takes
upon the sudden, and turns her to sorrow, or as careless birds that fall
in the Net unawares. Least that when we think nothing of it, we be taken with
some horrible tempest that may trouble and distroy all. Let us be as
Souldyors, wise, prudent, well exercysed and trained up in war, that we
run not out of arraye, but that we always be pressed in order lookyng to our
chiefetain: and listen to ye alarm, if it be stricken up by our enemies) that
we be not taken upon the sudden, as no doubt they will if they can: when we
think our selves most surest. And also let us always lay upon our shoulders
our beardes lookyng back to see when our Lord comes: And moreover, in time
of adversity when any thing happens unto us, whyther it be oppression by
poverty, misery, infamy, imprisonment, sickness, or any other exyle, or any
other kind of calamity, let us understand, that first we have deserved far
greater griefs and troubles then (any whatsoever or) we are able to bear:
Secondly, to consider that we ought to use for our remedy a sure trust in
God, with repentance, confession to him, and contrition. Finally, let us accept
them as gentle scourges, a fatherly chastysement, gyuyng hearty thanks for
them, that they tend to our joyful and comfortable end: and also let us be so
firm and constant, (that whatsoever terror or trouble do show him self unto
us,) that we do not faint in our true faith. What a number of enemies has the
Gospel had from ye beginning, Psalm. 9. and 5.6.
that God has punished, caused them to be lost, to be consumed and perish
with great myserie, and little or none the memory that is had of them. But
those which were in faith, and did persevere constantly in the truth, Psalm.
111.6.6.7.
and did not separate them selves from the Lord, do remain in eternal
memory before him in his heavenly habitation. Genesis 4. and 13. 1. Paral. 10.
and 1, 4.13. and ^ 3. King. 22. and 34. 4. King. 15. and 5.3.21. and 1.16. etc.
and 24. and. 9.15. etc. and 25. and 7.8. etc.
In old time, what became of Caine, Membroth, Saul, Senacherib: and also of
many others that were ye Emperors of Room. What was the end of Herod, Achaz,
Antiochus, Achab, Zedechias, and many others of their tiranicall fellowship,
that persecuted the faithful Prophets and children of the Lord: what was the
end of all these furious fellows: Surely by the true scriptures it is made
most manifest, that they were all utterly distroyed, by the same word of God,
for whose truth they persecuted his people. Wherefore let us not dismay our
selves, be faint hearted, nor weaks in mind, how mighty and magnificall so
ever they show them selves, that so persecute us: Sap. 6. and. 4.6.8. etc.
because that God who does and will defend us, much more mighty the^ they
are. And those mighty monsters will he make the vesseils of his wrath, and
distroy most mightifully. Let us with all bening humility follow ye example of
Jesus Christ, so that if we be persecuted even unto the death with most vylest
persecutions, let us not be troubled at all, but be assured that the last day,
1. Pet. 5. and 3.4.
we shall resuscitate and rise again in immortality, Romans 8. and 11
and incorruptio^, with the prince of pastors Jesus Christ our Lord: because yt
he him self is the resurrection, Psalm. 93. and ^.3.
he shall quycken our mortal bodies, by his spirit yt dwells in us.

Although that sometimes we be so evil entreated by our enemies, Eze. 7. etc
Psalm. 102. and. 19.
with many kinds of calamities, yet let us not think that God is a sleep, or
has in any point forgetten us: but be we all fully assured, yt he will not
close an eye nor winck on whit, but will watch always to keep, save, and
deliver us to ye Israelites. Although their halles or house of audience and
judgment, (grounded upon unrighteous) where they most greeuouslye hear,
condemn and judge the faithful for confessinge and professinge the truth
(come down from Heaven) be never so fully fraughte with curssed cruelties, Psalm.
37.8^ 12.13. etc.
yet what then they are to no purpose at all: for that our father which is in
heaven, has such an auditory, as also far passes theirs in all points as
is possible, where as we may fully assure our selves that he will sit in
judgment, and confound their devises, who will ese our griefs, and co^dempne our
condempnors, alloting them their porcions among the scribes and pharasies and
hipocrites. Mat. 23. and 29.^0. etc.
And whereas he our mighty god has chosen his church, his faithful people, and
appointed the^ to judge and co^dempne the impious and ungodly which now are
their condempnors as it is writby S. Mat. Wherefore with patience let us bear and
suffer our present condemnations, Mat. ^9. and 28.
because in time to come we may judge our condempnors, for by that truth which
now they condemn in us, they remain for ever condemned.

Psalm. 3. and 1.2.3. etc.
Let not us meruell at the persecutors which at these days do trouble us, nor
yet at the innumerable number that rise against us, neither let us faint nor
fear to see that we are in number nothing to be compared against them: Let us
content our selves only (and thereby be encouraged) that we are acceptable to
God, and yt he has looked upon us in Christ, for whose sake we are always in
favor with him.

By the same way that we do pass many saints have passed before us. All the
faithful (says holy Judith) have bin acceptable to God, Iud. 8. and 22.23.24.
etc.
and passed by many tribulations.

Genesis 4. and 8. Genesis 9. and 22.25.
Righteous Abel was persecuted and killed by his brother Caine: Noah was mocked
of his son Cham: Sem, how was he afflicted.

Genesis 12. and 6. etc. Genesis 13. and 14.
What a number of troubles did Abraham suffer, who was faithful and the father
of all believers: Genesis 19. and 4.5. etc. and 22. and 6. and^
How was Loath, tormented and afflicted in Sodom? what sorrows suffered Isack,
when his father went about to sacrafise him? Genesis 22. in all. Psalm. 28. and
5.7.8
what persecution did Jacob suffer by his brother Esau? what an innumerable
number of noysom troubles did Moses suffer, Judge. 16. and 12, 21. etc.
because he was faithful to God? Did not the foolish Philistians afflicte
Samson so sore, that they put out both his eyes? Job. 3.4.^. in all the Chap.
That holy and just man Job, was not he terriblie tormented and troubled, both
of friends and foes? 3. King. 17. and 4. etc
was not the Prophet Elias wonderfully vexed and persecuted by curssed Queen
Iesabell, 3. King. 1^. and 2.3.4.
and wicked King Achab her ungodly husband? what troubles was there, that King
David (so beloved of God) was not subject unto? how the Prophets were murdered,
1. Sam. 19.20.21.22,
the Apostles persecuted and killed, all ye scriptures do declare. How
bravely did the diuill, the world, and the flesh, bestirre their stumps
stobernly to strike and beat down Jesus Christ, till they had taken away his
life, yet for all yt they remained vnpossessed of his death, Osee. 13. and 4.5.
for that he him self triumphed always over that, and lo passed to his
kingdom, where he reigns in glory with all those his members, which have
followed him, since the beginning, in crosses of passion and persecution: And
therefore though we be but a little flock, let us be firm and constant till the
end with patience, for that Jesus Christ is our only victory and victor. So yt
although our adversaries be never so many in number, Romans 8. and 31.38.39.
and of never so great a degree in the world, yet of necessity they must
perish and pass after their forefathers which persecuted the Prophets, Mat.
13 and 29.30.31. etc
Apostles, and the rest the faithful servants of God. They do not presently
see any thing of all this, they do neither see our glorification, nor their
own perdition, and yet the scripture does discover the same both to us and
them. Whereby we may be as sure both of the one and the other, as we be of
their cruel persecutions which we suffer. Thereby do they pluck the just
judgment of God with vengeance and ire upon their own heads, So, that they
shall feel his heavy displeasure, and in the end shall see our blessedness now
covered with mourning, and their own perdition and dampnation now covered with
pagain and popish pleasure. For proof whereof, let us pervse that which is
written in the book of wisdom as follows in the next Chapter.

An end, with a true declaration what the being shall be in the end, as well
of the faithful as the reprobate. The xxxv. Chapter.
THen (says the wise man) shall the rightuous appear with great constancy,
Sap. 5. and 1.2.3.4, etc.
before those which did persecute the^, and those wicked ones seeing the
rightuous, shall be tormented with great fear and horror, and shall be astonished
to see them saved, and them selves without any hope thereof. Sore sighing for
sorrow, and their mynds full fraught with bitterness, saying behold, these are
they which sometimes past, we mocked and scorned and against whom? we made
songs and sonnets of great dishonor as we thought, and we, insenssed with
errors accounted their lives and doctrine for fond foolishnes, and procured
their spoils with spyte most spiteful. Yet we may see them here accounted
among the children of God, and have their part with his Saints. But we have
gone a stray far from the way of truth, the light of righteousness has not
lighted us, nor the son of understanding has not shyned upon us, we were
weried in the way of wickedness and walked in by paths, and did not know the
way of ye Lord: what has pride profited us? or what wealth has our worldly
riches and arrogancy wrought us. All these things have passed away as a
shadow, as a correo that runs post, or as a ship that sayleth on the Seas
full before the wind, and no print or pathe are seen when she is once
passed. So that we as soon as we were born, wexed weak, and now we can show
no sign of virtue the which is according as a speiciall friend of this
translator did write in his absence, (as an old proverb) upon the first page
of the coppie hereof. As follows.

Who so believes as he is borne in hand,
Forovveth in the Sea, and sows in the sand.
It may be judged he meant this text (for that it is so with the wicked) but
to the purpose, if does not greatly degresse from the meaning of ye wise man
who says further, the wicked are consumed in their wickedness, Sapi. 5. and.
5 6.7 Psalm. 1. and. 5.
and their hope is as the dust or chafe which the wind scatters abroad, or
as the remembrance that a well guested host has of every guest that comes to
his house, which can not be possibly. But the rightuous shall live for ever,
their reward shall be in the world, and the highest shall have charge over
them. Wherefore they shall receive a kingdom of honor, and a beautiful
diadeame at the hands of the Lord. For he will cover them with his right hand,
and will defend them with his holy arm as with a shield.

Here we may see that those which now persecute us for the truth, shall be
forced and driven to confess them selves incenssed with errors, and lost,
allowing the cause, for which so cruelly they persecute us. And therefore since
they shall allow our righteousness and truth in such manner, and co^dempne them
selves and their doings for wicked and unjust. And sith it is so manifest a
testimony, that our cause is such now, as they shall confess to be true and
just then: And that now we be such by Christ as they shall see us then. And
also for that we shall be equal parteners in common with the Saints
already gone before us: Let us (dearly beloved) persevere always in Jesus
Christ and his truth, without fayntyng or fearyng till we have obtained his
eternal kingdom: because the Saints our brethere^ are gone before us, (...)
6. and
and do tarry till the time that we and the rest do come and fill up the
number that God has appointed, and that then we might together enjoy (and
rejoice of) the riches and possession of the same, with Jesus Christ who is
there, already abydyng to crown us with celestial glory for our victory.
Very short are the pleasures and prosperities of our adversaries, as they shall
their give testymonie, (according to the saying of the book of Sapience) but
much more shorter are our troubles and adversities, Sap. 5. and 7.8. etc. Esaias.
54. and 7.10.
(as the holy Ghost gives testimony by the Prophet, Esaias,) he says they
are but momentarie. And also, he says further (to his people) I will leave
thee a little, says the Lord thy God.

But with great mercyfulnesse I will receive thee again, a little, (as it were
a moment or ye time of twincklyng of an eye) in indignation I will hyde my face
from thee.

Yet I have pitied thee with mercy sempiternall, says the Lord thy
Redeemer, for although the mountains should remove, and the valleys should
tremble and fall down, yet shall not my loving kyndnesse be removed, nor the
bond of my peace shall not fall from thee. Here God does confirm unto us, that
all our tribulations endure but a moment, and that his mercy and peace with us
is sempeternall. And although yt all things in the world do perish, yet his
blessed promyses unto us shall never have end. Therefore let us not change the
mercy and peace of God which is eternal, for the prosperities of ye wicked
world which are short, and so suddenly pass away. Let us content our selves
though they florishe never so al la flanta and gallantly, that are of of the
world. Let them reign lustily, for that the more high they arise and clyme
against God, so much the greater will be their fall at length. The holy Ghost
says by the mouth of the Prophet David, Psalm. 90. and 6.7.
the wicked shall flourish as the green grass, and so shall all the works of
iniquity, but sodeinly after shall they perish together for ever. The
prosperity which they pass in, is but a slumber, in awakyng out of the same,
Esaias. 29.2.
they shall see themselves perish, without the view of arms or hands to
touch them. If we fortune to fall into any other kind of adversity, as by
mischance to be maimed in our flesh, to be sick, oppressed with poverty, or
banished into exile, yea, or otherwise punished for hate the world has unto
us. Let us consider that it is but the loving chastisment of the Lord our
father, who does and will scourge and correct every son that he receueth, as
before is said sufficiently.

And since all and every kind of calamity that happens or can come unto us
is momentary, Psalm. 75. and 9.10.12.
let us suffer the same with patience and thanksgeuing, Esaias. 54. and 10.
and put our sure hope and trust in god, who has sworn will he never be so
angrye that he will take away his mercy from us, but at all times power it
upon us abundantly.

And therefore for that he is our father by Christ for ever, let us like loving
children, be faithful unto him accordingly in all times and places. Because
that after life lost for his love, and the conquest so overcome, we shall find
life in him, whole, safe, and sound, free from all kind of dangers of
calamity, and from all kynds of grief or annoy. And shall hear from his holy
mouth, Man. 25. and 24.
the words wherewith he will receive all that be his: saying, to all and to
every one of us, I am contented with thee mine own good servant, because thou
haste continued faithful unto me over much. Enter into the joy of the Lord
which has been prepared for thee from the beginning. 1. Pet. 5. and 10.
The God of all grace who has called all his chosen by Jesus Christ to his
eternal glory after that they have suffered a little time of persecution and
affliction, do make you all perfect, and do incorporate and establish you in
him self. To whom be all Emperie, rule, dominion, power, laud, praise, honor,
and glory, for ever and ever, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF all the Chapters in this Book.
OF the will of God, an entry into the comfort, with a persuasion to know the
will of God perfectly. Cap 1. Fo. 9. What we were before our being reduced to
God. Cap. 2. fo. 11. Of our blindenes in times past. ca. 3. fo. 15. Of the love
of God, and of our calling, and the cause thereof. cap. 4. fo. 17. Of the cause
of our calling and redemption. cap. 5. fo. 20. Of our justification by the
righteousness of God. etc. cap. 6. fo. 22 Of an excelent comfort by the love
of god. cap. 7. fo. 25 Of the cause of Christ's coming, and of the fruits of
christians. ca. 8. fo. 30 Of a great cause of comfort, by reason of the crosses
of Christ. ca. 9. fo. 34 How that the estate of Jesus Christ is common to the
faithful, and does exhort us to an excelent comfort. ca. 10. fo. 37 Of the
providence of God for them which are called. etc. cap. 11. fo. 42 Of the
property of persecutours, with a persuasion to patience. cap. 12. fo. 47 An
excelent comfort to the afflicted. cap. 13. fo. 50 Of gods exceeding love,
greatly to the comfort of his people. cap. 14. fo. 55 Of Purgatory, and the
causes thereof, etc. cap. 15. fo. 58 A great comfort to the christian, with a
terrible threate to the ungodly and wicked. cap. 16. fo. 61 An inuectiue
against the wicked, with a merueilous comfort to the godly christian, etc.
cap 17. fo. 65 Of patience, and an exhortation thereunto, etc. cap. 18. fo 70
How that good experience, brings forth hope, and of a shadovve of certain
persecution. cap. 19. fo. 75 A pure proof unto us, that we are beloved of God
in our greatest griefs, etc. cap. 20. fo. 78 A persvvasion to trust only in
God, and to avoid all vain trust had in any humain help. etc. cap. 21. fo. 83
How we ought to be instructed in truth and verity and to have no confidence
in men's tradicions. cap. 22. fo. 90 Upon what condition God receives us,
with an excelent comfort to the christian, etc. cap. 23. fo. 96 An excelent
kyndely and comfortable persvvasion of the faithful to rejoice in any
calamity, etc. cap. 24. fo. 101 The manner of part of persecution in Spain.
with a comfort against the like. Cap. 25. fo. 106 A true Simylitude of the
true church etc. cap. 26. fo. 112. Of predestination and of glorification
thereby. etc. cap. 27. fo. 119. Of the mighty power, and exceeding love of god.
cap. 28. fo. 124 An excelent comfort against the fear of death, with a
confutacion of his power, etc. cap. 29. fo. 129 Of the cause that Christ did
fear death, and how constant diverse Martirs have been, since in their
martyrdom. ca. 30. fo. 135 Of the goodness of God in our defense, against our
persecutours, etc. ca. 31. fo. 140 A merueilous comfort to those that are
afflicted, either by fire or otherwise. cap. 32. fo. 147 An entery into the
conclusion, with many godly exhortacions. cap. 33. fo. 152 Very godly
exhortacions for all men that are afflicted, and also for those which are in
prosperity. cap. 34. fo. 157 An end, with a true declaracion what the being
shall be in the end, as well of the faithful as the reprobate. cap. 35. fo.
162
FINIS.

