THE SINNERS SAFETY, If here he look for assurance.

By Richard Barnerd, Preacher of Gods word, at Worsop in Nottingham-shire.

Coloss. 3. 1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. AT LONDON Printed by H.
L. for T. M. and Jonas Man, and are to be sold at his shop at the West door
of Paul's.

Anno Dom. 1609.

To the Chief Officers, the Gentlemen domestical Attendants, and to the rest
of the Family of the most Reverend Father, Tobias, the Lord Archbishop of
York his Grace, the chiefest good is heartily wished.
GEntlemen, I vvish you well, I hope you doubt not; in my love to you all I
offer this my labor: to some, as desired, in lieu of good will and kindness
received. My best thoughts are toward you in the best things. Natural
fauorits, vvorldly friends, wish good to the body: that do I; but vvithall,
the souls safety: without which, no good.

You do hear the excellent truths of God, by one of whom it has been said, He
does regnare in pulpitis. I do grant it, who can deny those gifts? yet let
your love pardon my folly; and reject not my well meaning, though I set before
you a candle at noone. The matter is not amiss, if the rudeness of speech
make it not distastefull: if so, it were a fault. Love does not loath what is
good: wholesome meat meanly cookt, is acceptable to a hungry stomach. What
has been heard with the ear, may now be seen with the eye: a double
remembrance; the other less, this of more continuance. I hope the fruit will
be answerable.

The text is a special jewel, set forth with precious pearls. The argument
is of weight, How a poor sinner may have assurance of the greatest happiness.
The exhortation shows our slowness, but the necessity of the thing requires
our diligence: good reason therefore. What matter so worthy our travel? to
gain all without this, is but loss. We live here in pleasure and ease: is
this our comfort? are we at home then? is there not to come a weal
unspeakable, or a woe intolerable, with sorrovve to live in pain, both in
time, and ever beyond all time? Sinners we be: hence conclude vv^e must death,
and that double. By this apprehension, is nothing but horror of Hell. Assurance
of happiness, concludes safety, and joy of Heaven: One of desert; but this not
within compass of merit: it is Gods gift in mercy, comfortable, a joy
unspeakable.

We all shall see the Lord in the last day (albeit Atheistical Athenians
mock at the doctrine of the Resurrection): but we al shall not alike behold
him, as we do not alike desire his coming. Some shall see him a lamb, and
apprehend fierce wrath, and say; Oh mountains cover us. Some the lion of
Judah, and conceive joy; and in comfort, cry aloude, Hosannah. Good cause why:
they have peace by assurance of pardon and it is the day of their redemption;
that did they seek for diligently; this they expected, and desired earnestly,
and in the end enjoy the revvard.

To stir you up hereunto, is the drift of my present endeavor. We all need
spurring; heavy hearts, and leaden heels, laden we are with iniquity: so
slovve to goodness, that all our days we hardly get any grace permanent.

Gentlemen, accept I pray you my kindness: read with a mind aiming at the end
which I propose. Serious meditation helps memory, and settles judgment; but in
practice stands the life, which gets also commendations. You are in eminent
place: tongues on both sides talk at liberty; our defense is innocence. No
way can ye so glorify God, as by practical profession; nor advaunce, before
the enemy, the honor of the most Reverend your Lord and Master more, then by
a holy conversation: so do, and it shall be also your glory. If herein my
labor further any thing, it shall be my joy: and if we continue in well
doing, it it doubtless we shall obtain mercy. Which the Lord grant, even
so. Amen. From my Study at Worsop. Nouemb. 12.

Your loving Friend ever in the Lord, Richard Bernard.

The Sinners safety, if here he seek for assurance.
2. PET. 1. 10. Wherefore, Brethren, give rather diligence to make your calling
and election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.
THE Apostles desire The Apostles drift, with the coherence.
is, that with Profession, men should join Sanctification: and therefore in the
5. verse he exhorts those, to whom he writ, that they should give all
diligence to fly the corruption which is in the world through lust; and this is
the maine proposition or lesson intended. And to bring the^ thereunto, he first
teaches them the means how to attain to a holy conversation, by adding virtue
to virtue, one grace to another, as he shows in the An instruction to
ministers.
5. 6. and 7. verses. A duty of a minister who is a spiritual Physicia^ of
the soul, not only to show the malady, or advise his Patient to have care to
his health; but also to prescribe the means how diseases may be removed, and
health preserved. Solomon commends the fear of God. Pro. 1. 7. The fear of
God is the beginning of Wisdom: and in Chap. 2. prescribes the means to come
to the understanding thereof, in the 1. 2. 3. and 4. verses: My son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my commandments within thee, etc. In the fifth
verse he concludes, and says, Th^n shall thou understand the fear of the
Lord, and find the knowledge of God. In like manner Peter, (in Act: 2) after he
had accused the Jews for putting Christ to death, rests not in manifesting
their misery; but readily teaches them how they may acquit themselves, and
escape the deserved, judgment for such a sin.

To show misery, without remedy; is to lodge the heart in sorrow, without
relief: means must be showed with the matter; the way with the appointed
journey: the mind possessed with the one, testeth not content without the
other. Therefore must ministers after the Apostles example observe this order;
as both reason and necessity it self requires.

After the Apostle has prescribed the means, he urges reasons to enforce
the practice of the doctrine, by use of the means: the reasons are, because
we should not be idle and without fruit in our profession, verse 8. because
else we are blind, and cannot see afar of, and also forgetful of a great
and incomparable benefit, that we are purged from our old sins, verse 9.
because otherwise we cannot have assurance of our salvation; which reason is
in my text, verse, 10.

In which again to us ministers is An other instruction to ministers.
commended with the Apostles wisdom (to be able to show means to attain to
that he would have them do) his godly care also, to have them to use and not
to neglect the means which he has prescribed unto them. Therefore does he
press them with so many reasons, and urge them with such arguments, least they
should be wanting in this duty. For indeed men are loath to lay good things
to heart; and more loath to practice.

We are like Balaam; heaven can we wish, O that we might die the death of the
righteous: but we would not live their life. Flesh seeks after ease, and the
way to life is strait: we would not be as Lazarus here, but like Dives fare
deliciously every day, and yet like Lazarus look for heaven at our ending.
Therefore it is needful for ministers to urge and to set us on forward, and to
follow our sluggish nature with reason upon reason, as so many goades pricking
our consciences, to cause us to stir our feet, and so go on in the way of
salvation.

Bare narrations to slow dispositions are of no force. And, if words take
place without weight of reason, it is either the work of faith, which is rare;
or leuity of affection, which is too common; and to which agrees well the
proverb, Soon ripe, soon rotten: A Jewish intertainment of Christ, to day
Hosannah, to morrow Crucify.

Let us then say, and show why: that understanding may be informed, and
judgment settled with reason.

Suspect the ground sandy, where the house is built with sound of words: a
little storm will shake it, and easily overthrow it.

Such as are won sou^dly (as a diseased member perfectly healed) will abide
constant. And thus much for the Coherence.

The words divide themselves into The division of the Text.
two general parts:

1. An exhortation: wherein note, 1. The ground of it, in the word; Wherefore.
2 The parties exhorted; Brethren. 3 The matter of the exhortation, in the words
following;

Give diligence to make your calling and election sure.

2 A reason, wherein is contained a promise: wherein note, 1 The condition
thereof: If ye do these things. 2 The thing promised, in these words; Ye
shall never fall.

needs spue them out of his mouth: Lord or Baal. And if affection be alone, it
is but folly, running into schism or superstition. Therefore must men be urged
to affect that which is taught.



Without assurance, though we have possession of the best good, we are not in
perfect joy. Uncertainty of cont^nuance of happiness in a happy estate, makes
the same less comfortable, the mind often charged with fear of too sudden
an end. No man hireth, but he seeks to know a certain term: and he that
has a Lease for many years, would also make it his own by purchase for
better assurance.

Assurance is a salve to cure fear, it is a stay in wavering and distrust, and
the best safety against desperation, that dreadful souls misery.



For assurance of Land, we will be at cost to pay money: for certain gain,
we do travel far: to be sure of promotion, we will serve long, even hard
Masters, in drudgery; great men, and not without slavery. And is a virtuous
life, a service to the Almighty, the father of mercy, nothing worth? is it so
loathsome or irksome that we cannot endure it, to have assurance of heaven, the
gain of Glory, and the honor of Angels with Christ for ever?

Oh! hearken and consider the one and the other. What is the assurance of all
the world without hope of heaven? The bodies bliss; caryon: the souls death;
damnation. Now to the words.

Wherefore: that is, because, unless you (...). Paraphrase, explaining the word,
for to raise the doctrine
have these virtues, you shall be but idle professors, fruitless, blind,
unthankful to God, and without any assurance of salvation: therefore give
diligence to live virtuously, and to make your calling and election sure. It is
a word, showing how that which follows, does depend on that which goes
before: from which we learn, That the discommodities The doctrine.
of the want of these virtues, and the good ensuing by them, should make us
seek to be endued with them.

To avoid danger bodily, and to get Reasons to enforce it.
advantage to our selves in earthly commodities, we are moved to seek after
those things, by which we may escape loss, and gain some good.

Men study to become learned, men labor for friends, they travel for riches,
and seek for promotion, only for that the benefit of them is so much for
man's welfare; and the want thereof held so greatly hurtful, as without them,
men are but judged miserable: and yet learning and friends, riches and honor,
are nothing at all either so available to make him happy that has them, as
he that has grace; or so miserable, that wants them, as he which is
without grace.

Holy virtues are a pledge of Gods love, the fruits of the spirit, the hand
writing The benefit of ver^he benefit of virtues and heavenly graces and what
they ^re.
of God in our hearts, witnessing his love, and confirming his covenant with
us. They be so many stays from slyding in slippery prosperity; so many
potions, purging out vices; so many pull-backs from vanity; and so many
comforts in adversity. They be marks of Gods children, and pleasant flowers to
deck up sweetly our Temples the dwelling of the holy Ghost.

What comparison between humane learning, and heavenly virtues? between
riches of the world, and this wealth of the soul? between these friends here,
and Gods good favor? between earthly greatness, and spiritual grace? none at
all. And is there any equality in the loss? nothing less. A man that has
grace and virtue, may be and is happy, though he want learning, riches, honor
and friends: But enjoy all these without grace; see the end. Hamans honor
occasioned his hanging: Absoloms beauty was his bane: the young man's wealth
held him from Christ: Achitophels learning and wisdom was his destruction;
and all this came to pass through want of grace and these heavenly virtues. To
conclude, when men are wicked, yea in a high degree of ungodliness, we show
the cause in one word, when we say they are graceless.

Therefore, if the fear of the greatest The use with exhortation.
discommoditie, or desire of the benefit of the greatest good in any thing may
move us to seek for it, to avoid the one, and possess the other; let then
the goodness of virtues move us to seek after them, to attain unto them: let
us embrace them, and evermore live in the holy practice of them: for, nothing
worse then to want them; and nothing more profitable then to have them. It
follows;

Brethren; The parties exhorted: all those he means as had attained (...)
Fratres vterini.
to faith in Christ, and did make profession of the Lord Jesus, verse the
first, whom here he calls by The meaning.
the name of brethren; as usually the Apostle Saint Paul also does in his
Epistles, who terms those to whom he writ (even the Gentiles) brethren; not
by nature, not by nation, nor by kindred, but by profession.

Note well.
they did call upon the people by the name of Israel: Children of Israel,
Inhabitants of the land, and so forth: but never by the name of brethren, as
Peter begun in the Act. 2. 19. and the Apostles elsewhere: to show a difference
of the law and the Gospel even in the messengers: the one sort, messengers of
the law, were severe, and spoke further off from affection of love: the other,
publishers of glad tidings, were loving messengers of peace, and spoke as to
children of their father, and brethren in Christ, as the Apostle does here. In
which he shows first his love to them whom he wrote unto: In which grace,
ministers must Instruction for ministers.
teach, if ever they will do good.

Rancor and malice are not fit for preachers of peace: neither choleric
passions, in proclaiming joy by the promises of the Gospel: love abandoneth
the one, and bridleth the other; yet so as there remains a godly zeal to
rebuke sin, as we see the Apostles did.

A pattern for ministers.
of incomparable estimation: It is the stadle where God will cock up his
graces; a chest for his secrets, his own lodging place, there delights he to
dwell. It is Humility commended. Esa. 57. 15 Mat. 11. 29
the grace which has the promise of grace; and one of the virtues by which
Christ himself commended himself unto his disciples, and therein to be
followed of them. It procures love, it allureth men's hearts to have a good
liking of such, yea and wins reverence: for he that humbles himself shall
be exalted.

This is not spoken to take away order Preuentio^ of an objection.
in superiority; but only to beat down pride, that men may walk in humility.
Neither may hence the inferior presume to challenge equality, because the
superior descends lower then his place. It is humility in the better, when
he makes himself meaner then he is: but it is arrogancy in the other to
advance themselves thereby beyond that they are. If men in authority find any
so presumptuous; let them claim their due, to suppress that pride: which they
may do with commendation.

Iam. 1. 18.
in a fraternity and brotherhood. They have God to their father, who has
begotten them by his word; the Church is their mother that bare them, for she
is called his wife: they have all one elder brother the Lord Jesus, and al in
him taught by Christ to call God, father.

Mat. 6.
Therefore let us acknowledge this brotherhoode, not only by calling so Use
and exhortation.
one another, as the custom was in the primitive Church, but by living as
brethren in the duties of love. Let us not be called Rabbi, for we are
brethren: Mat. 23. 8
Let there be no dissension amongst us, as Abraham said, for we are brethren:
Be Genesis 13. 8.
at peace one with another: O how amiable Psalm. 133. (...)
a thing is it for brethren to dwell together in unity!

But ah alafle! has our profession brought us to any such practice? where is
any thing less then love? seek for unity, and behold enmity. Love is not
Every man for himself, as we now use: but it is careful for other, whom we
little regard.

The life of love is brotherly kindness: but what shall I say more? we have lost
this goodness: kind to none, no not to our own kindred; careful for none, but
for our selves.

Self love has withered up all brotherly compassion, that we cannot show
forth any works of mercy with co^misseration. But where love is wanting, there
God is lost, for God is love: where this brotherhoode is neglected, there the
commandment of love is not regarded; and where this is out of use, there is
nothing rightly performed.

Therefore let us better bethink our selves hereof, remembering our profession,
to mind this duty: believe we cannot our union with Christ, without
communion of his Church: and pray we cannot to GOD, but with regard of
brotherhood, saying, Our father. If then we have either truth in professing,
soundnes in believing, or a right mind in praying, we must walk in love
toward our brethren for preservation of this holy fellowship, even unto the
end, Amen.

Give rather diligence. This word rather (...). The exposition. Luke 11. 28
is not here a note of choice, as if men might choose whether they would be
diligent or no: but it is a preferring of one thing before another; and is also
a secret correction of the ill disposition of nature, which has a rather, that
is a will and desire to the things of this life, then to seek diligently after
heavenly virtues, the good things of the life to come. And it is, as if he had
said; Though by A Paraphrase.
nature you be apt to be diligent for the things here, for bodies welfare; yet
I advise you for souls safety, to give rather diligence to get heavenly
graces. Adam and Eve, who believed Satan before God, in hope of earthly good;
and adventured the Lords displeasure, and the loss of Paradise for the gain
of an apple. Esau would despise his birth right, for a mease of pottage: the
Gadar^^s would want Christ, rather then their swine: Israelites desire the
flesh pots in Egypt, before the heavenly Manna: Demas bids adue to the
Gospel, and embraces the present world: And the Rulers love the praise of men
more then the praise of God.

Thus hold we byasse in this course, as we have a natural inclination: but to
heavenly things we may find altogether in us an indisposition: yet ought we
rather to give diligence unto that which may better our estate hereafter for
ever, as Abraham did, who respected Heb. 11.
not the world; and therefore obeyed he the voice of the Lord, and went hither
and thither as a stranger and a pilgrim whither God thought good. And
assuredly, till we can prefer heaven before earth, grace before goods,
happiness before honor, we neither will nor can be zealous in profession, nor
upright in practice.

This Rather giving diligence to heavenly things, and nothing else, made Enoch
walk with God, Noah to live righteously, Moses to refuse his honor, to fly
the pleasures of sin, and to suffer rather affliction with the people of God.

This preferring of soul before the Dan. 3.
body, and eternity before mortality, made Daniel resolute without daunt of
spirit to serve his God; and the three children not to be fearful to answer
the king boldly, even when his countenance was changed for anger against them.
And therefore let us here take The exhortation and use.
the Apostles counsel, and follow after a true and perfect good, rather then
that which is false and but deceivable.

The more we love that which is above us, the less shall we like that which
is below. Increase in the spirit, kills the flesh: and a desire to be with
Christ, works a contempt of the world. Choose rather the better, and it will
withdraw easily affection from the worse. Affect to be with the faithful, and
thou will soon hate the society of the wicked. Light will not endure
darkness, truth falshoode, virtue vice: Christ will not suffer communion with
Beliall: where the Arc comes, Dagon ^alleth down.

We see then to conclude, If we be ill; why we are no better, the cause is, for
that we care not to be diligent for the best things: the virtue whereof is
such, as it ever forces men to amend that which is amiss, more or less, at
one time or another. And of this, thus much.

Diligence. The Apostle uses a (...)(...). Exposition. Paraphrase.
word of great emphasis; Study, do your endeavor, and seriously: as if he had
said, bend your wits to bring this matter about, set your minds upon it, be
musing of it, and do your endeavor, go about it as much as lies in you, and
that in good earnest, attending thereto; considering it not as a light thing,
but as a matter of great weight and importance. with all our Heart, with all
our Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
Mind, with all our Soul, and with all our Strength. David says: O my soul,
Psalm, 103. 1.
praise the Lord: and he adds, and all that is within me praise his holy
name. Deuteronomy. 4. 9
Moses commands to keep our soul, but adds with diligence. This Apostle
wills us to fly the corruptions which are in the world, verse 4. and he
exhorts to do it with all diligen^e, verse 5. so as our best endeavor is
required. All that thine hand shall Eccles. 9. 10
find to do, do it with all thy power: and the reason is given, because there
is neither work, nor inue^tion, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
whither thou go. Be not lither, says the Apostle, in thy business, Romans 12.
11
but fervent in the spirit serving the Lord. Cursed, says the Prophet Jeremy,
is he Ier. 48. 10.
that does the work of the Lord negligently.

We see then that we are bound, upon a great penalty, to be diligent in the
Lords business. We should so love the house of God, that the zeal thereof
(with David) should eat us up. It should, (as Christ said of himself) be food
unto us, to do the will of our father. We must not only desire, but hunger
after righteousness.

We are not only to take occasions to serve God, when they are offered, but
seek till we find the means. Seek the Mat. 6.
kingdom of God, says our savior: labor for the food that endures to
eternal life. Ioh. 6. 27
Seek those things, says the Apostle, which are above: so as we are to take
great Col. 3. 1
pains to go to God, and ardently affect good things without weary somenesse,
Therefore Solomon, in exhorting men to get the fear and knowledge of God,
Prou. 2.
does use words of great force, with instances of likeness in things wherein
men do use the greatest endeavor to attain the^, Pro. 2. 2. 3. 4. he says
not Hear, But cause thine ear to hearken; not have a liking, but incline
thine heart, force it with violence and might; not pray for know^edge, but call
for it; not speak, but cry for understanding: not get wisdom, if thou may
carelessly stumble upon it, but seek her as fil^er and search for her as
treasure: then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and come to the
knowledge of the most highest.

Wherefore, hence justly are reproved Use of reproof to diverse worldlings.
diverse sorts of ill disposed persons. First those that are up early and do
go to bed late, eating the bread of carefulnes for the world: to it, they are
violent in affection; for it they neglect no time, they omit no season* they
muse upon it; they, like moles, make their habitation in the earth, and can
savor nothing but it; day and night these worms do worship this their God
Mammon, and in their travel they have all their wits about them (as we say) to
manage their business: But for their future being in bliss hereafter, they
have no care, they think all time misspent that way; of religious duties they
make no conscience at all: If they speak of religion, it is but by the way, no
point of set purpose; If they pray, it is but in words, their hearts are far
from it, fast a sleep in their bed-ridden prayers, before they have half made
an end; wander they do in their thoughts, no stabilitie of mind toward GOD.
They are ripe of tongue in worldly affairs: and for wit therein, can none go
beyond them; but in matters of religion, they be as Idols, or as the people
that have eyes and see not, ears Mat. 13. 14. 15.
and hear not, and hearts but perceive not: But why is all this? Least they
should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand
with their hearts, and should return, that God might heal them. So then, if
we be such, it plainly appears, that we run the way of death, and walk
in the path of perdition, except we do amend.

Let such worldlings consider that the world they must leave, going as they
came, naked, with nothing; and the^ receive, not as they were in wealth here, a
place there: but as they were religious, so shall they be rewarded. And
therefore since this world vanishes, and cannot help, but even as we have
sought the Lord, so shall we find comfort; let us be more diligent in seeking
after that, which will maks us ever happy without alteration everlastingly.

Again, the voluptuous liver is nothing Voluptuous livers.
less, then of this mind to seek diligently those things that are above: but
he, as a beast, makes his belly his God; and the satisfying of his lust, his
chiefest life. Nothing savors with him but pleasures: therefore spends he
his days in cursed delights, and says as the careless Rich man, Soul live
at ease, eat, drink, and take thy Luke. 12. 19
pastime: when in his strength, and in the midst of his pleasures he thinks
of death, he thereby stirs up his mind the more to his evils, saying as an
Epicure and Atheist, Let us eat and drink, for 1 Cor. 15.
to morrow we shall die: he makes a league with death, and a covenant with
the grave: if all die, he dreameth to live; though God threaten damnation, yet
he will presume of mercy, until the very days of evil come, wherein he
will be forced to say, I have no pleasure in them. When sickness has sommoned
him, and fear of present death has taken possession, then happily will he say:
Oh I have sinned, pray for me; I have spent my days leudly, what shall I do?
and if in this agony, conscience seize upon him, then he will roar for fear
of hell, then houle and cry out in dread of damnation, oh save; but none shall
succor: oh hear, but God will not hearken; woe is Pro. 1. 28.
me for my wantonness, woe is me that I have wrought such wickedness: goodness
I regarded not, I therefore now feel no comforts of grace: oh that GOD would
let me live again, how would I then seek after him? fie upon filthy lust,
cursed pleasures a due, vanity of vanities and vexation of spirit.

Beloved, if we but felt what men feel for sin in trouble of conscience and
without comfort, we would not for the world be in their place: we escaping the
danger would soon leave sin, and give all diligence to do good, in which
only rests all our comfort; then with gladness and alacrity of spirit we
would set forward to the work of the Lord, embrace goodness and live
virtuously, that we might not come into the like misery any more.

Therefore let the fear of it aforeha^d move us to give all diligence to do
well, that we may never taste of that dreadful torment, the apprehension of
Gods wrathful displeasure, for which Christ sinneles, for our sins
sustaining, fell into such an agony, as in the garden he swet drops of blood
(wretched man remember thou this) and on the cross cried, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken Mat. 27. 46
me? and shall we sin rebelliously, and presume of mercy? shall he
(forsaken, as it were) fear, who was without sin, and that day and night
sought after good things? and may we be drowned in voluptuousness, and
(careless of religion) be wholly without dread? O vain imagination,
Sathanicall delusion, cursed presumption! Let us be otherwise minded I beseech
you, and think better of it.

There are also an other sort (to conclude) Careless professors, cold
Protestants.
who though, as these forenamed* they be not wretchedly addicted to their
wills, running headlong into wickedness, and wholly careless of religion to the
very end: yet are they idle i^ their profession, and not careful to use their
time so well as they might, but will be content to let occasions, offered,
slip; and do think that men may be too curious, too precise, making more ado
then needs, that they can serve God and hear not the word twice on the
Sabbath: once a forthnight, or once a month may content them: that businesses
may withdraw from these too sometime; so as a little likes them well, yea and
less then nothing now and then shall not displease them. But these work not
out their salvation with fear and trembling: these do forget how the five
foolish virgins let their lamps go out for want of watchfulness, and did knock
too late when the gates were Mat. 25. 11 12.
shut.

The spouse in the Canticles, losing the Cant. 5. 3. 6. 7.
present opportunity, in her sluggish and careless disposition, had almost
lost Christ: who yet after sought him, and found him; but not without strokes
and wounds given by the watchmen.

It will be just with God to punish our carelessness: we have the word
offered, we may enjoy it: be not loathing of this Mannah, be diligent in
searching the souls safety. It may come to pass, that when we would, we shall
not have it: and whilst we seek and happily find, we shall have no small
trouble before we enjoy again our peace.

We should follow religion and religious exercises (in the compass of our
calling) as Elisha did Eliah; neither tarry at Gilgall, nor at Bethel, nor at
Jericho, 2 Kings. 2.
though we be entreated: that is, by no means, nor by any occasion to leave
off, for fear of losing the blessing, if we be but a while absent.

Let us, as Ruth protested to Naomi, Ruth. 1. 16 17.
so say for religion, we will not be entreated to leave it, nor depart from it,
whither it goes we will go; the Lord do so to us, and more also, if ought but
death depart it and us. It is Eliah to double blessings upon thee: It is Naomi
fair and beautiful to the soul, though sometime Marah to the flesh. Hence is
it, that David Psa. 1. 2.
says, Blessed is he that meditateth in the law of God both day and night. He
was not of the mind of these vain professors, nor of their practice: who,
not content with the day, would rise up at midnight to praise the Lord. The
spirit of God in godly men has taught them to think, that they should give
all diligence to be religious, and that they should not content themselves with
formal and customarie service, nor at their leisure now or then from worldly
business or carnal delights, to think of heaven; but daily were they in
exercise of religion, what estate and calling so ever they were in. David a
King did not neglect it: Cornelius a Captain was a devout man, and Act. 10. 2.
30
prayed God continually: Hannah was in the Temple day and night: Peter was in
his holy meditation and prayers at noone: and Daniel a great Statesman, Dan. 6.
became so curiously precise in his holy devotion and service unto God, that he
would not, (in the peril of his life, plotted by all the Nobles of Persia by
an irreuocable decree) cease off to pray, as he was wont to do, three times a
day: and yet was he not (as men religiously affected now are termed) a good
plain simple man, one of Gods fools, of a good meaning, but of no great wit;
for by Ezechiel the Prophet, he was called the wise Daniell. Indeed he
employed not wholly his wisdom after the world, as men now do: he suffered
religion to have in him the rule; which men in these days have least regard
of: He would not be politic to lose the peace of a good conscience, which
carnal men for honor and wealth care not to make shipwreck of.

If these examples be of no force to persuade men to think that we can never
be religious enough, nor ouer-precise, so we keep within the compass of the
word for a warrant; let them consider the Lord Jesus, who was without sin,
incapable of evil, and prone to all goodness, yet did he addict himself to
holy exercises, praying whole nights through; then assuredly ought we to do
much more then we do, yea more then we can should we do, and as much as we
can is too little: for when we have done all that; yet still are we
unprofitable servants.

For the world, we think we do We keep no measure in earthly things.
never enough: to satisfy our wills, or our selves in wilful pleasures, we
judge it not amiss to keep no measure: delight draws us to spend much time,
to be at much cost; yet nothing too much, nothing too dear: ^ustfull
appetites set us to labor, both long and tedious; yet to attain the purpose
proposed, we can endure the pains: in a word, nothing after our corruption is
at any time beyond that which is meet: where Will rules and the heart
delights, there nothing for that is untunable, nothing unmeasurable, though
in superstition and setting up of Idols. Israelites will give their earerings,
and appoint a day for cost and expenses, because they will have a golden calfe.
Papists practice herein does show this plain: they go far on pilgrimage;
they burden themselves with infinite number of prayers; they are at great cost
to maintain many Priests and many orders of their religion; they night and day
ty themselves to their task; thrice a week they fast; many days in a year
they keep (after their fashion) holy, and do strive to do more then ever
God commanded, that they might merit. And shall the pure religion of Christ,
the truth of God be held so little worth, as we wickedly should imagine that
we therein can do too much? that we may therein be too holy? Surely these
enemies of God, this antichristian generation, shall rise up in judgment
against us, except religion be of more precious account, we better in practice,
and cease to be so too too profane, as too many be; whom the Lord God of
heaven amend in his due time, Amen.

To make your calling and election sure.
THere are diverse ends of our virtuous (...). Firmam vel certam, rata^ vestram
vocatione^, and electionem faccre. Eight ends of good works.
living in religion; To show our love and thankfulness to God in obedience; to
win such as are not yet called; to confirm the converted; to stop the
mouths of the wicked, shaming them by well doing when they speak ill of us; to
make our calling and election sure, as the Apostle here exhorts; to assure to
our selves that inward graces in us are true, and not counterfeit; to show that
we are truly ingrafted into Christ; and lastly, for the mutual benefit one of
another, for our quiet peaceableness in the Church and Commonwealth. These
ends of good works we find in the word: these we acknowledge and know to be
attained by well living; but that popish point of good works we may not
approve, to do good works to merit heaven by in any sort, a devise of man
without the word. It takes away Many reasons against justification by works.
from the sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction: it lifts up the heart of man
in the imagination of his own worthiness: it is contrary to Christ's words, When
you have done all you can, you are unprofitable servants.

The godly are commended for good works, but not said thereby to merit;
rewarded they are, but it is only in mercy: our best deeds are imperfect; and
so far as we rely upon works of the law, so far are we accursed, and
have lost righteousness by faith in Christ: before God we stand just in Christ's
justice, the form of our justification is the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, or the mutual donation and acception (the giving and receiving)
of Christ Jesus, between God in his mercy and a poor sinner by faith. Our
goodness is a menstruous cloth, and none wholly sanctified in perfection. In
Adam we lost our spiritual life: In Christ and by him only and alone, we
purchase our primarie happiness, but not perfectly till we be in heaven in our
own persons. Accursedly blind, therefore, as beetles are our Antichristian
adversaries, who having so many ends of good works prescribed plainly by the
Word, yet cannot see them, but have added one of their own, against all truth,
against the honor of Christ, yea and a man's own salvation.

And thus much to prevent the adversary in his heresy of merit by works: of
which we had occasion to speak both from the Apostles scope, urging to a
virtuous life by the argument here laid down, the gaining of assurance of
salvation thereby; as also from the diverse reading of this text; for in some
copies (...).
it is thus: To make sure by good works your calling and election, and so it is
in the vulgar which is commonly called Ieromes translation: which may well
stand with the drift of the text and truth of divinity in this point; as that
very reason added to this exhortation sufficiently confirms. Let the
adversary pervert good things as he pleases, verity is warrantable: Words of
good works sound well ever to religious minds, though perverse spirits wrest
them heretically to an ill end. But to proceed;

Two general lessons may be collected from this matter of the exhortation:

in the way of life; because the Apostle urges us to so great diligence, care,
and endeavor about it: which if it were easy needed not. Light things ask
not much labor; easy things are soon done, and wisdom requires not to be
much about a little: therefore in that, whereunto the spirit presses with such
reason, and urges with so earnest an exhortation, as here; there is
difficulty, and to attain thereunto it is not easy? And for proof of this
doctrine, let us weigh I beseech you, how hard a thing it is to enter How this
doctrine is confirmed.
into the way; to abide in it being entered; how easy to decline from the right
way; and what trouble is in the recovery, if ever we return back at all.

Before we come to God, sure we are John. 8. Ephe. 2. 1. 2. 3. 2. Tim. 2. 26
the devils; no child so like his father, as we be like Satan our grand fire,
who does rule us, and that as he pleases: strong hold he has of us: easily he
will not let us go. In our saviors time, he tormented, rent and tore the bodies
of men, whom he possessed, before he would let go his hold; so loath is he to
lose us, not of love, but to devour us. If thus he strive to keep possession
of the body, how hard it is to win out of his hands body and soul? whereto if
we add our own madness herein, that we unwillingly are delivered, rather
resisting the means, and persecuting the messengers sent to recouver us that
would bring us into the state of grace, then any way willingly yielding our
selves for our bettering; we cannot but grant it true, that it is hard for us
to enter into the way of salvation.

We are naturally like wild beasts, Hard to win men to God.
loath to be tamed; we can better away to be savages, to live in our corruptions
after our lusts, then walk in any orderly course, if unpleasing to the flesh.
What ado is there to win men from their wickedness? some of us from our
whordome, some from drunkenness, some from blasphemous oaths, some from
greedy covetousness, some from superstition, some from one thing, some from an
other, but especially from our beloved personal sin? God may thunder from
heaven against rebellious Israelites, but they will not amend: Christ may lay
lode upon the conscience of Judas, and tell him, that it were better he had
never been borne, then to be a traitor to the son of man; but it cannot
stay him, covetousness so has taken hold upon him: John Baptist may call the
Pharisees a generation of vipers, yet will they still eat out their Mothers
side, and keep their conditions: And he may perhaps by long and much labor
bring Herod to do this and that, but Herodias will he not forsake: So love we
to live in sin, least Satan should wholly lose v(...)nd God fully enjoy us.
We need n(...)her confirmation herein, but the witness of our own hearts.
Many Sermons have we heard, some after one manner, some after an other, to
bring us into the right way: our consciences have accused us often, and caused
us to fear wrath and destruction: good examples of other before us; Gods
mercies motives over us; his chasticeme^ts upon us; and the rule of reason
within us to reduce us; yet have we not left off to do wickedly: as if we had
sworn with a high hand to resist both God and all good men, to bring upon our
selves deserved damnation: forlorn caitifs and accursed wights may we think
our selves, and hence condescend to this infallible truth, that it is very hard
to begin to be good.

As it is not easy to enter into the Men hardly abide in the way; when they
are entered.
strait gate: so is it a thing of no less difficulty to abide, having set
foot into that path of peace. For we being in the state of grace, though we
have true graces, yet are we not therein perfect; and the imperfection of good
argues so much of corruption; this affects corrupt things, and pulls us
from the desire of that which is holy. Hence is it, that a man finds in him a
continual combat, sometime the flesh prevailing, sometime the spirit: with
faith is doubting: with will is an unwillingness, a pronesse to evil; but to
do good is not present with us: whereupon it comes to pass, that we sin
often, and every sin interrupteth the comforts of a peaceable conscience; which
makes us call into question the assurance of salvation, and works much
sorrow of heart: so that every man may with the Apostle cry out saying, O
miserable man that I am, Romans 7.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Upon this our imperfect
state and corruption, Satan does take advantage, he lays baits to allure
us, and snares to entrap us, according to our personal infirmities, from our
natural disposition; he makes motions by internal suggestions, or else
prepares external objects for the senses to draw away the heart: by both or
either are we deceived; he tempting, and we either yielding, or but weakly
resisting. Thus brought he out of the way perfect Adam, just Lot, faithful
Abraham, meek Moses, holy Aaron, zealous David, strong Sampson, and that wise
Solomon. What man was ever encountered and not overcome, if GOD did not aid the
best graces with his second grace? We then see it to be as hard, to abide, as
to make entrance into the way of salvation.

Easily we slip out of the way, Hard to recover after relapse.
hardly go we on, back can we run fast: but when we are gone from home, we
make small haste to return again: long lay David in his sin, ere he
recovered, till the Prophet Nathan came and awoke him in these plain terms
saying, thou art the man. Satan gives such attendance, 2 Samuel 12. 7
if a child of God be taken wandering, as he can scarcely find the way home
again: He either bewitcheth us so with pleasures, that we cannot return, or
affrigheth us with fear, as Adam, that we dare not. If we get out of his hands
again, and by Gods good mercy outrunne him, yet is it with such striving, as
we almost faint between fear to be held, and hope to escape: weighing Gods
justice with our sin, we dread damnation; considering our back slyding,
scarcely dare we look for mercy, but with sighs, groans, and tears, we come
lamenting to the throne of grace, confessing sometime with the prodigal son,
Father I have sinned against Luke 15.
heaven and against thee, I am not worthy to be called thy son, make me as
one of thy hired servants: sometime confessing Luke 18.
with the Publicane and crying, Lord have mercy upon me a sinner, acknoledging
with Esra our unworthiness, saying, O my God I am confounded, and ashamed
Esdra. 9. 6. 7
to lift up mine eyes unto thee, o my God: and praying with David, Have Psalm.
6. 2. 4.
mercy upon me (O Lord) for I am weak: O Lord heal me for my bones are
vexed: return, O Lord, deliver my soul, save me for thy mercies sake. And
thus it may be, after many tears, loud cries bitter weeping, and long suit
made, we find at the length favor and pardon: He that comes the easiliest,
returns with confession of vanity of vanities; all is but vanity in his
mouth, and with vexation of spirit in the heart: but many cry, and weep.
pouring down many a salt tear from the eye for their former folly, before
they obtain mercy. Much trouble then and difficulty is in the recovery of a
sinner.

To conclude, many men of excellent Many of singular note have fallen, and
never could return again. 2. Kings. 9 10.
gifts, of great note in the Church, famous for worthy acts, have fallen, and
never returned again: as appears in courageous and valiant Iehu, a captain
for the Lord of hosts against the house of Ahab, who slew two kings, Iehoram
and Ahaziah, of Judah and Israel: by him was Iezabel cast down that cursed
Queen, and the dogs did eat her in the gates of Isreel; he overthrew Baall,
his Priests and temple, he was zealous for the Lord and took Ionadab to be a
witness thereof with him. So Demas Col. 4. 14.
entertained the Gospel, accompanied the Apostle in his afflictions, saluted
the Saints, and was famous in Churches. Ioash long lived religiously; he
honored 2. Kin. 12.
godly Iehotada, and was counseled by him, he repaired the Temple, and did
many things worthy praise. Judas was a follower of Christ three years, he
preached Christ; in his name cast out devils, Mat. 10.
and was an Apostle, one of the twelve, chosen by Christ out of all the world;
yet was not Iehu his heart upright, but he embraced Ieroboams calves, and fell
from God and claue to his Idolatry: yet did D^mas forsake the Gospel and
entertained this present world, and no mention of his return again: yet did
Ioash fall to Idolatry and cruelty, overthrowing Gods worship, and persecuting
yea murdering his prophets without repentance: And lastly Judas became a
miserable miscreant, a thief, a traitor, and in horror of mind so desperate,
as after the fact, being hopeless of mercy he hanged himself: Who reads and
fears not? who hears and trembles not? we see our beginning; is it easy
thence to conclude our ending. Do we see such, so qualified, so famous men to
fa^^ utterly? and shall we presume of a better end without any such tokens of
grace?

The^ are deceived that think assurance of salvation easily atteined.
is more then manifest that it is not easy to attain assurance of salvation.
It is therefore altogether a fault in such, as labor the least in this matter.
Of the world we fear to want: heaven we make no question of. For the body
here we take care, and do upon every light occasion distrust and fall to
shifts in fear of want: but for the soul we make our selves sure that it is
well, albeit it does want all the means of salvation, and we our selves live
in our natural corruption unreformed. What is this but carnal presumption? it
comes from Satan's suggestion; A motion from the divine spirit it is not,
where this gives hope of heaven, there it moves to goodness; this teaches
that the assurance of things above after death is beyond reason, and therefore
more hard to be attained, then things below in this life present. Many ways
are here to make supply for the body in earthly things; but one way for
heavenly. Men may bestow upon thee for this time* but God only for the time to
come: Thine own labor here may procure thee maintenance; and what thou can
not get, other may give thee: but no man can redeem a soul and give life, man
must let that alone for ever: here we are led by sense, but in the other by
faith: money can here purchase, but only mercy there: man may deserve well of
man, but nothing can he merit of God: We may be superiors amongst men, and yet
touching the future good of the soul may be worse then beasts: Dives may fare
deliciously every day, and yet be so far from assurance of life, as that he
is damned at his death: All the world may we win, yet lose our own souls:
David can tell us, that he never saw the righteous forsaken touching the
things of this life, but the wicked flourishing, and yet come to a fearful
end. The way is broad, and the gate wide, that leads to destruction, and many
run that way; but the gate to heaven is straight, and the passage narrow,
leading to life, and many seek it, but few find it: many set foot in the
way, few go on any time; and of these few, some turn back again, and a very
small number persevere to the end. Of the world we are, and the world will
love her own: but we are incapable of grace, and enemies to goodness, so as God
in justice abhors us. In the world we may live, though we have offended in
many things, (keeping them secret from men) and never make satisfaction, but in
an other we cannot, if but one sin be unrepented of and God not satisfied,
and the price of blood paid to redeem us by faith in Christ. Here offenses
committed, may be pardoned by many (the King not taking notice of them) but
there is no evil in the soul (though never so secret) but the King of heaven
is acquainted with the same, and a pardon must be procured from his own
person, and by none but by his own son: else that offender shall utterly be
condemned, and pay the punishment duly for ever, according to the trespass.
Therefore if all these things be well considered, and the weight of the reasons
seriously weighed, we may rather suppose our selves to be deluded by
imagination, to think the assurance of salvation to be so easily attained,
then to be the settlednes of our judgment from a grounded persuasion. And thus
much for the first lesson.

Peter here would not have exhorted us to labor for this assurance; which the
Apostle S. Paul attained also Romans 8. 38
unto in this life: which he publishes not only singularly in the behalf of
himself, but plurally for the rest of all those whom God loves in Christ
Jesus. Neither do I say that it is that fullness (...).
of faith, but a certain measure; nor at once, but by little and little; nor
to every professor, but to such as are ordained to eternal life. And this is
effected by How to get assurance. By meditation.
meditation, inspiration, and sanctification.

To have assurance, we must meditate of Gods inchangeablenes, both in his own
nature ( Iam. 1. 17.) as also in his gifts and calling which are without
repentance ( Romans 11. 29) we must think upon Gods everlasting decree without
alteration: of his promises made irreuocably with the manner of delivery, in
the time present ( Ioh. 3. 36) He that believes Ioh. 3. 36. (...).
in the son has everlasting life, to take away doubting, and to establish
our hearts in an assured possession thereof.

No less gain arises, by remembering the Lords covenant which he makes with
his, and how it is a covenant everlasting, Ier. 32. 40
not for a time: and with such as he makes it, he gives them grace, and
puts his fear in their hearts, that they never depart from him. Ier. 32. 40.

Lastly we may establish our thoghts upon the ground of a man's salvation: The
foundation of God remains sure, his 2. Tim. 2 19.
free mercy in Christ Jesus choosing some to everlasting life: no inducement in
man: before we have being, our end is appointed: nothing good foreseen in us
moving God: no way in us is there cause at all of our happiness, but begun from
Gods free good pleasure, and established in Christ; out of whom we may not
suppose any least thing that may be beneficial to work man's salvation, or to
procure good to us, which is not freely given of God, and obtained by Christ
alone without any respect of us at all. Whence, a penitent sinner may thus
co^fortably reason; Gods I was, before I had my being, in my being by
corruption of nature he found me his enemy, yet did he not hate me, but showed
his mercy unto me: he ordained me before the world, that caused him in time to
bring me into the world: my sins did not hinder the passage of mercy, because
in Christ he would be satisfied for me: I will therefore surely conclude, that
God remaining one in mercy, and Christ Jesus always wel-pleasing to his father,
the cause of my salvation being still one and the same, I will not doubt
damnation, for falls of infirmity; when as Gods mercy and Christ's merit
prevented the same in mine obstinate standing in rebellion. Thus by meditation
may we strengthen and settle our selves in assurance to be saved. Praise the
Lord.

It pleases God to afford his children By divine inspiration
more in musing on heavenly comforts, then when men's thoughts are bestowed upon
other things: he aydeth them with his spirit, who opens our eyes to see the
secrets of the kingdom of God, and to know the things that are given us of
God: 1 Cor. 2. 12. Romans 8. 10.
who gives testimony to our spirit, that we are the children of God: which
witness also is true and not lying, (as John says). This is the spirit of
adoption, by which we are sealed; and the earnest which he gives, when he
takes us to be his. Have I then the spirit of Christ? I am Christ's; and in him
there is no condemnation* ( Romans 8. 1.)

Now least we be misled by Satan's delusion, and take it for the holy spirits
inspiration, By sanctification. How to know the persuasion of Gos spirit, from
Satan's delusion. see Romans (...). 2. 5. 11. 15. 16.
there is a third thing to be added, that is sanctification. For if we have the
spirit of God, we are led by it; we walk not after the flesh, but savor the
things of the spirit, which quickneth our mortal bodies; by it we do
mortify the deeds of the flesh; by it we are without fear, and dare come to
God and cry Abba father: this spirit helps our infirmities in prayer, it
makes request for us with sighs that cannot be expressed. This is the
witnessing of Gods spirit with our spirit: it is not a bare motion, but a true
persuasion from the effectual graces which it works in us, causing us to
live in newness of life. This spirit witnesses not to our spirit, if it be
adulterous, nor to our drunken spirit, nor to our sweating, lying, blasphemous
and railing spirit, nor to our profane and mocking spirit (if such we be) that
we are the sons of God: no, no, for our conscience tells us, that such are
the sons of the Devil, and all persuasion of salvation is but Satan's
deceivable delusions to secure us in sin.

The holy spirit will not say we are coheires with Christ and certain of
heaven, whilst we walk on in wickedness; he teaches in the scripture the
contrary, and shows that there is no peace Esai. 57. 21. Psalm. 9. 17. Mat.
25.
to the wicked, they shall go into hell, and all the workers of in^quity.



We see, that assurnace may be had by the foresaid means, it must make us
strive by these means for it: which if we obtain; O blessed are we, salvation
is come unto us, the comfort of all comforts. Through this assurance, though we
fall, we rise again, and doubt not of The benefits which arise unto us by
having assurance.
mercy when we repent. We joy to heat of death, because we are persuaded to
be with Christ, which is best of all; we fear not man, that only can kill the
body, for that our souls are in safety: This makes us desire to be taken
from hence, and to be dissolved: This makes us love and long after the coming
of the Lord Jesus; saying how long Lord, when Lord, O come Lord Jesus, come
quickly: Reave. 6. 10. 22. 20.
This (to conclude) freeth us from all dread of any evil that may befall us,
from the rigor of the law: it cannot condemn us; if it do, Christ Jesus
acquiteth us* from terror of conscience: it dare not accuse us; if it do,
Christ will speak for us: from deaths sting and dead stroke; it has not right
to rule over us: if it do, its but a while, Christ has got the victory: from
the fierce wrath of the Judge in the last day, when he shall be before us,
Angels on one hand; devils on an other; about us the world burning; in million^
of thousa^ds conscience accusing, crying out to the mountains to cover them;
hell gaping ready to devour all to whom Christ shall say, Go ye cursed with
the Devil and his angels: Math. 25*
But what terror can this be to the penitent, assured of life? none at all.
The Devils cannot daunt us, the repentant has his pardon: Angels will not
disclaim us, they here have waited upon us: God will acknowledge us, we have
his spirit the assurance of his love: And can the Judge Jesus Christ condemn
us, who is our savior, and has by his death acquitted us?

Lastly, we are freed from the horror of hell, where Devils and damned ghosts
be; where pain is endless; the place darkness; the persons punished with
fire and brimstone remediless; their noise is hydeous; weeping and wayling for
time lost and not recouerable; howling and lamentably crying for time present
and pains intolerable, they gnash with their teeth one upon an other, their
conscience accusing and co^ntinually tormenting: They languish with pain,
wishing to die: but they shall remain and ever be, though liueles^e, that
their torment may be endless.

Sithen assurance of salvation here delivers us from the dread of these
things, what cause have we to use all means to get so great and unspeakable a
good? Oh let us then meditate seriously, pray for the spirit ardently, and live
here conscionably, that we may be therefore certain of our salvation, and so
live eternally, Amen.

Your calling and election sure.
How to make our calling sure.
by good works, that is by knowing, feeling, and ever retaining such graces as
are Gods good works, wrought in a man effectually called, at the time of his
conversion. The true knowledge of By knowledge.
the Lord Jesus is a work of God in a man's conversion ( Act. 9. 5. 18) who
opens the eyes of the blind, turns men Ier. 31. 33
from Satan to God, from darkness to the light ( Act. 26. 18) True sight of
sin, with humiliatio^ for the same is an other: Humiliatio^.
when certain were converted, they saw their sins, confessed them, and left
them. Act. 2. 37. and. 19. 18. Faith in the Lord Jesus is an other; the first
grace of one truly standing in the state of grace: for he is not by the word
called effectually, that believes not faithfully; for hearing bring^
believing: and such as are Romans 10, 14
called of God, believe in the son ( Ioh. 8. 30. Act. 8. 37). After this
follows a pliable heart to obey God: the stony heart removed, in stead thereof
God gives a heart of flesh, yielding subjection to God, his word and spirit. (
Eze. 36. 26. 27.) This will make Paul going to persecute, ignorant of Christ,
after one question made and answered, ( Who art thou Lord? I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest), Act. 9.
in the next place to say, Lord what will thou that I do? not making any more
resistance. This made David ready to do any thing willingly at Gods bidding;
yea, and it causes us humbly to condescend to his good pleasure, and say with
Ezechias, The word of the Lord is good; with Ely, Its the Lord let him do what
seems him good; and always with Jesus Christ, Father not my w^^ ^ut thy will
be fulfilled. Lastly, the Union with Christ.
Lord works an union of heart and spirit with other in Christ ^er. 32. 40
: whereby it comes to pass that we do conioine in one together one with
another: thus, Act. 2, 42, the church is set forth, and in that verse are 8:
graces of the Church; their constancy in this word they continued, in the next
word The eight graces of the Church.
daily their seruencie, with one acord their unity, in the Temple their
audacitie, in other words following, their charity, familiarity, alacrity and
sincerity, unto which by the voice of Christ they were called, and wherewith we
must be endued and therein continue, else we cannot make our calling sure.

they may live in the Church, but yet are none of it; tares they be, but none
of the Lords wheat: they are in that number of the many called, but not of the
few that shall be saved: they are like the guest coming in without his
wedding garment, whom the Lord one day will command to be bound hand and
foot, and to be cast into utter darkness, where is weeping and wayling, and
gnashing of teeth.

Calling and election. In the order of Exposition.
causes, election is before vocation: for therefore are we called, because we
are elected. Romans 8. but in searching out our salvation, according to the work
wroght upon us, and the same felt in us, calling must be before election; so is
it in justification and sanctification, that is before this, if we note the
cause and effect; but this must we find in us, before the other, for our own
assurance: sanctified we be in our own persons, but justified only in Christ's
righteousness: Election is secret in God, and by effectual vocation known and
revealed to us, and the first sensible work of GOD upon us touching souls
safety: God comes forward, beginning in and from himself to do us good;
we, to find this, must go backward, from within our selves, by sanctification
to justification, by vocation to election, and thence conclude our eternal
salvation. Therefore Esaias, 43. 1.
is it that here the holy Ghost has thus set down the words, and the like
else where. The wisdom of God does nothing without just cause: he breaks not
order, as ignorant of order: neither sets down matter as mistaken; but ever to
teach us from thence somewhat, which by the help of Gods spirit we
understanding may further to salvation.

Romans 8. 30.
calling, follow the means, the ministry and preaching of Gods word; the
ordinary means to bring men to Christ. It pleases him by the foolishnes
thereof to 1 Cor. 1. 21. Romans 1. 16
save them that believe. It is the power of God to salvation: where this is
carelessly neglected, such shall find no other means to be saved; and such as
persecute it, may fear justly to be damned.

Sythen our election is made sure by our calling, and our calling confirmed to
us, as is said; I need not say more of this: yet because the word affords us
more marks to settle our selves in better assurance, a word thereof or two,
also.

Our election is further made sure by Marks of election.
other marks of the elect, if we find them in us, and they ever remain upon
us: which is, to be sanctified (1. Pet. 1. 2) fruitful in good things, (
Ioh^^. 16) sequestered from the world ( Ioh. 17. 6. and 15. 19) a note which is
notto be loved of the me^ of the world, perseverance ( Ioh. 15. 16) following
after Christ ( Ioh. 10. 28) without departing from him (1. Ioh. 2. 19) love to
the godly, (1. Ioh. 3. 14) faith in Gods promises, and a holy reverence to Gods
ordinances, his word and sacraments: and he that continues herein unto the end
shall be saved.

Again this order observed preuenteth Another use, how to prevent the abuse of
that holy doctrine of Predestination.
presumption in the doctrine of predestination. If I be ordained to a certain
end, says the wicked wight, and that Gods decree must stand, the^ its no
matter how I live, its all one to serve God or to live as I like best: if I be
ordained to be saved I shall not be damned; if to damnation, its in vain to
hope for heaven. It is true that Gods decree shall stand, but its a desperate
spirits collection, to hold therefore that we may live as we list. Election is
secret, and so Gods decree, his will unrevealed: whence we may gather nothing,
but as the scripture, the written word, his revealed will teaches. It
avouches predestination, and Gods unchangeable decree: but it says, Work out
your salvation with fear and trembling, and so bears down presumption. It
talks of reprobation, but not to make me^ desperate: for touching every man's
self in particular, he is to hope the best, and may say with the king of
Niniuie, Who can tell if God will turn and repent and turn away Jonah. 3. 9.
from his fierce wrath that we perish not? Every man in particular by the
revealed will of God is commanded to live religiously, and so bound to believe
his own salvation: this word are we to live after, and strive we must to go
in at the strait gate, hoping to find passage. Math. 7.
No man is to judge himself to be damned, whilst he here lives in the way to
be saved, if he wilfully refuse not the means. None will so reason from Gods
decree concerning the body; It is said, that man's days are determined, the
number Job. 14. 5.
of his months are with God, and that he has appointed the bounds which man
cannot pass: who hereupon will thus resolve? then will I be careless of my
life, I will neither eat nor drink, nor use means of life, because I cannot
live beyond my appointed time. Herein is none so mad; but for all this, will
use the means which God has appointed to live by, for that his time is kept
secret from him, and only known to God: even so should we do in this case,
for our souls, use the means to live for ever, so are we commanded: this we
know; but whither God has rejected us before the end, we know not: neither may
any one herein make search, but understand in sobriety that which is meet,
obey what is commanded, believe what is promised, and cease to imagined
desperately, and sin not presumptuously, and hope well in the end. And so
shall we make sure to ourselves that which is ever certain and unchangeable
with God: this note. And thus much for the exhortation: the reason follows.

For; a note of a reason of the exhortation (...). Enim.
which goes before, concluded as an use from the former arguments: a
gra^maticall observation in this conjunction, to be well marked; there is
difference between for and therefore; both in this verse: (...). Quapropter.
for shows the reason of that which goes before, and therefore concludes
somewhat from the antecedent by necessary consequent. The thing chiefly herein
to What to be observed as the doctrine, from the Apostles practice.
be marked is, that the Apostle neither ex^or^eth to practice, but upon
manifold instructions before; neither ends the use in the exhortation,
without showing also further reason why: Thus he guardeth before and behind
his words, urging by reason as did John Baptist and our Savior, to well doing;
that so they might take place. He well kn^w men's slownes to practice, and that
they need have good grounds laid before them to build thereon the exhortation
to obey, and also reasons after to persuade thereunto. All of us naturally
affect to know; but without love to do: whence it is, that men unregenerate
can run to hear sermons of controversies, (such as preach by sentences, that
can now and then satisfy fantasy with some novelty) and return with their
mouths full of praise, applauding the person, who has ^ailed happily to
press all to practice, and sanctification of life. Learning is Gods good gift,
eloquence a singular blessing, wit and memory rare ^auours, to make men
amongst men honorable: but unless these be employed in the ministry to make
men virtuous, as the Apostle does here, Saint Paul in his Epistles, and as the
Prophets did, and profound I see with his admirable eloquence, we may hear,
learn, speak and admire, as without obedience, so without hope of that
heavenly inheritance. gain great comfort by our labors in winning souls,
which only we ought to aim at, and therein rejoice.

If ye do these things. The conditional word, If, in the Original is not
expressed, nor the person Ye; the words (...). Haec faciet^s.
being, These doing: but the person and the condition is necessarily
understood, and therefore expressed in the translation very fitly: which we
following in the division of the Text, do take as granted implied in the text.

GOD first bestows freely, without any thing on man's p^^t: so he gave Adam
first (...) pre-eminence over all his other creatures, and placed Genesis 1. 26
him freely in Paradise, without any forenamed condition, then afterward
expresses he man's duty to be performed, not as a cause procuring or
continuing Prevention.
goodness, but as an effect of love in hearty thankfulness, or as a token and
sign by which we may know God to be so long in us, and with us* God promised
Christ, of his mere good pleasure; Adam never once desiring, no^ at all
deserving Ioh. 3. 16.
that fauour^ Christ came in the appointed time, and was freely given for us,
of love in mercy and compassion; all this done truly, fully, and absolutely
on Gods part: yet after commanded he the obedience of faith, and promises
salvation, with condition of believing, Mark. 16. 16.
on our behalf; not as a cause, but as a sign by which men may know to who^
Christ is freely given of the father, and in him have eternal life.

It is then, as if ^eter had said; If ye do these things, you thereby have a
true sign and token from God of his love everlasting and shall never fall from
him: the like is that in the Psalm 15, 6. He that does these things shall
never fall.

condition; which is, carefully to exercise our selves in these virtues before
mentioned. First well doing, keeps us from evil; every gift of grace is a
sentinel to First reason.
watch against the opposite vice, seeking entrance to the heart. Hold sobriety,
drunkenness gets no place: chastity preserves from dishonesty; feruency of
spirit cannot abide lukewarm to lodge with it; light likes not of darkness;
righteousness of unrighteousness; knowledge of Ignorance; nor godly humility of
Sathanicall pride and arrogancy; and look how much we have of goodness, so
much advantage get we against wickedness: every virtue advancing it self and
keeping it proper place in the soul, when the contrary vice as^aileth it;
Satan suggesting, and by outward objects enticing the heart to yield thereunto.

Secondly, these virtues are the fruits Second reason.
of the spirit: whence a man may conclude, that he has the spirit; and he
which has this has Christ, without whom no redemption, no salvation. These
virtues are pleasant flowers, which gathered, are asweete nosegay to garnish
our souls with, for the Lords delight. They are the guarison of the holy Ghost
lodged in the soul, to keep out such evils, as yet have not entrance, and to
bridle ill motions of the heart, daily arising, that we perish not. Thus much
of the^ in general. But let us, if but briefly weigh them in particular; and
the goodness of them, will more allure us to love them.

Faith is the crown of graces, and the The commendations of several virtues:
Faith.
root of virtues; it makes morality by the law, to turn into Christianity
by the Gospel: without it we cannot please God: by it we make the word
preached profitable: and by it we apprehend Christ, who satisfies justice,
asswageth wrath, brings down mercy, and heaven gates are open for us, and
we enter, and take possession.

Virtue, integrity; the general word Virtue.
for a special, which is the breast plate of righteousness, keeping countenance
without blushing; it is the joy of the spirit, and makes men bold as a Lion:
it dare answer at the bar to the best, and say truly, Not guilty; it
desires trial, and therein always gets approbation, and credit of every
cause; not fearing malice, though lying and deceit manage the matter with all
the friends that may be made: it makes man look up chearefully unto God, and
so rests quiet in his own innocence.

Knowledge; it is the candle of the soul, Knowledge.
the rule of actions, the discerner of causes, the Judge of controversies, the
guide of affection, the bridle for the tongue, and the life of conscience, and
the first motor to obedience: it saves from error, condemns heresy, and
stands always for verity, if perverseness of spirit turn it not into
sophistry.

Temperance; knowledge is the first motor, this is moderator: it qualifieth and
Te^perance.
allayeth extremes; it is in nothing violent: it preuenteth liking before
lookeing; it stops rage of lust, and brideleth appetite; it discusseth
causes with deliberation; it orders words with discretion; hot spirits by it
may expostulate injuries done without contention: by it, knowledge tells his
tale wisely, and integrity is bold with safety.

Patience, is the mother of peace, a strong back to bear all burdens; it
Patience.
says nothing to reuiling speeches, and is not an auenger of private injuries:
it waits for accomplishment of promises long; it is the daughter of humility,
and the safe conductor of integrity: by it we possess our souls, and the
enemy gets not advantage; it is never in want, dwelling always with
contentment.

Godliness, this is the chief goodness; Godliness.
by sense we are better then the creature senseless; by reason, better then the
beast; by religion, better then man only having reason; but godliness is the
quintessence of religion: it is the especial fruit of faith, sincerities
comfort, the principal end of all learning, the perfection of all knowledge,
the creatures admiration, and here to the mightiest in the world their highest
exaltation: godliness is great gain; it has the promise of this life, and of
the life to come.

Brotherly kindness, the procurer of love, Brotherly kindness.
the disposition of the heart, to do good to other; it grants favor to
every frined; it lives ever in charity; it is merciful and lends, it is
ready to do pleasures, and liberal without delay; it is the goodness of a
merciful heart, pliable to every good work.

Love is the last, which is the fruit of Love. 1. Cor. 13.
brotherly kindness; the grace which the Apostle so highly extolles, and need
not here to be stood upon: but I will conclude it, with that absolute
commendation, that Love is the fulfilling of the law. And thus we see, what
reason there is for us to have these excellent virtues, and to exercise our
selves in them, that we may never fall: otherwise we are without certainty of
our salvation and tokens of eternal comfort.

The loose and careless liver, the vicious Reproof to the lewd and vicious.
and lewd man is here utterly left hopeless; he cannot look for heaven; the
scripture tells him, that there he has no enheritance: he that commits sin
is of the Devil, the reward is death, the 1. John. 3. 8 Romans 6. 23. Psalm. 9. 17.
wicked shall go into hell and all the people that forget God. If any, for
better satisfaction, would know for what sins in particular death is
threatened, and for which men are denied heaven; they shall find, that every
sin unrepented of procures damnation; but it pleases the holy Ghost to
number up many particulars: the places not unfit to be mentioned, to see and
consider of them, Romans 1. 29. 30, are reckoned up Romans 1. 29. 30. reckoned up
23 sins.
three and twenty sins, Unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, couetousness,
maliciousness, full of envy, of murder, of debate, of deceit, taking all
things in evil part, whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, doers of wrong,
proud, boasters, inuenters of evil things, disobedient to parents, without
understanding, covenant breakers, without natural affection, such as can never
be appeased, merciless; for which, not only they that do them, but also that
favor them that do them are worthy of death. In 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. are set
down ten kinds 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. ten sorts of vicious persons.
of vicious persons; Fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, wantons, buggerers,
thieves, covetous, drunkerds, raylers, and extortioners, which shall not
inherit the kingdom of God. In Galathians. 5. 19. 20. Gal. 5. 19 20, works of
the flesh 17.
are particularized seauenteene works of the flesh; Adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations,
wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness,
gluttony: which who-so does, shall not inherit life. In the second of
Timothy, 3. 2. 3. 4. 5. are reckoned up nineteen sorts of the 2. Tim. 3. 2. 3
4. 5. Ni^eteene sorts of ungodly.
wicked and ungodly, who will rise up in the last days, when times shall be
perilous: lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce
breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, no lovers at all of them which
are good, traitors, headie, hye minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God, having a show of godliness but have denied the power thereof: from whom,
such as truly profess Christ must turn away. In the Revelations, 21. 8. there
are eight sorts threatened with the second death, and Reu. 21. 8. Eight sorts.
to be tormented in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone: Fearful,
unbelieving, abominable, murderers, whoremongers, sorcerers, idolaters, and
liars. The spirit says, Revelations, 21. 20, None defiled shall enter into
heaven. But our savior in Mark. 7. 21. Mark. 7. 21, 22. are 14.
22. whereto ad Math. 15. 19, tells us of fourteen evils which defile a
man. Evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, couetousness,
wickedness, deceipts, uncleanness, a wicked eye, backbiting, pride,
foolishnes, false testimonies, and slanders. And therefore such shall not
inherit the kingdom of God and of Christ. These six be the chiefest places
Sixty and od distinct sins mentioned in six places.
in all the new testament, setting forth so many particular vicious persons
and hate full sins: wherein albeit, in some the same be again repeated; yet
in all, there be distinct and several in number three score and odd, besides
other sins mentioned in several places elsewhere, which without repenting of
and forsaking, deprive men of life and salvation. If any of us yet bless our
selves in our hearts hearing so plainly these things, then consider what the
Lord says to such, Deuteronomy. 29. 20. Great and fierce is the wrath of God against
such a one. Ma^ke and consider thou that read, and presume not.
First he says plainly that he will not be merciful unto him: secondly, that
his wrath and his jealousy shall smoke against that man: thirdly, that every
curse written in the book shall light upon him: as if the curses in the former
chapter mentioned, above forty and three, were too few to plague such a
presumptuous Catiffe; but all the curses in the book must light upon him; and
lastly, the Lord will root out his name from under heaven, and separate him
unto evil out of all the tribes of Israel. What is this, but to deprive him of
the communion of saints, and to pronounce sentence of damnation against him,
in the last day? O therefore thou that hear consider, as some that have heard
it: If Gods truth herein may be taken for truth with thee, if the anger of God
may prevail to fear thee, if the fierce-wrath of God may terrify thee, if
all the curses in Gods book denounced may work any dread in thee; hope not
vainly of mercy whilst thou live unrepentant of any sin: let not conceit
of pardon make thee put far from thee the evil day; for, surely else in one
sin thou shall be punished, and thine end confusion: mark, understand and
pray.

Ye do. The condition is, if we do Doctrine.
these things; not hear, learn, profess them: doing is that which has with
God approbation; after our deeds shall we be rewarded, Romans 2. 6. Math. 16.
27. 2. Cor. 5. 10. Math. 25. 35. 42. is approved the reading in the
exhortation, make your calling and election sure by good works: for the
reason of assurance here, is from deeds: If ye do these things; that is, If
ye show the fruits of these eight Christian virtues in good works, ye shall
never fall.

This is seriously to be noted; for that most think to have eternal life, and
yet are no doers of these things; but upon false evidences claim a right in
that which without good works they shall never enjoy. For as assurance here,
is upon condition, that we be doers: so there is nothing otherwise approved,
though we do bring in many things to persuade Eighteen deceive able
euide^ces which men presume to clame heaven by, without good works.
us otherwise. 1 Thou art baptized, what then? Neither circumcision avails
any thing, nor uncircumcision, but the keeping of the commandments. 1. Cor. 7.
19, but a new creature. Gal. 6. 15. 2 Thou art a hearer: what of this? Not the
hearers but the doers of the Law shall be justified. Rom 2. 13. He that
hears and does not, is a fool. Math. 7. 26, and deceives himself, ^ames.
1. 22. Thou know the vvil of God. never a whit better without obedience,
thou shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12. 47. thou increasest thy
sin. Ia. 4. 17. and the scripture says: He that says he knows me, and
keeps not my co^mandeme^ts is a liar and there is no truth in him. Thou
beleeuest: show it by thy works, Iam. 2. 8: else its dead, and thou a dry tree
for the fire. Thou love God: then hearken: This is the love of God, that we
keep his commandments. 1. Ioh. 5. 3. Thou hopest yet well; but without cause
at all: for he that has this hope in him purges himself as he is pure. 1.
John. 3. 3 Thou fear God: Eccle. 12. 12.
Solomon to it, fear God and keep his commandments; for they are never
separated. Thou do profess Christ the Lord: Not every one that says unto me
Lord, lord, shall enter in^o the kingdom of Mat. 7. 21
heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. a sou^ding
brass and tinkling Cymball without works: many will say in the day of the
Lord that they have prophesied and cast out devils, yet as workers of
iniquity, God will reject them, and send them packing with devils. Mat. 7. 23.
Thou use to pray: but where no practice is, there is but hypocrisy; Let
every one that calls on the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. 2. Tim. 3.
19: else may we call, but God will not hear us. Isai. 1. 15. Thou happily do
fast: but it is no fast that God requires, without obedience. Isa. 58. 6. 7.
more of fashion then of sincerity, without doing Gods will: God requires it
not at thine hands to tread in his courts, whilst thou live unreformed ^^ai.
1. 12. Thou make the house of God a den of thieves. Ier. 7. 10, 11. Thou
payest duly tithes and offerings, and obseruest the appointed days to keep
them holy: Without subjection to Gods will and commandment; he is wearied with
the^, he cannot suffer them, and to thy self they are iniquity, Isa. 1. 13.
Thou have often good motions and flashes, making thee wish well to thy self;
so had and did Balam that wicked wisard. Thou have more then so, Thou can be
moved to weep now and then: so could Saul. 1. Sam. 24. 17, and Esau found no
place to repentance, though he sought the blessing with tears. Heb. 12, 17.
Thou can bow at the name of Jesus and often be made sad by the word, and
can in countenance and gesture carry thy self religiously: So Devils did
fall down and worship Christ. Felix, he at the word trembled, and Ahab humbled
himself before the Lord. 1. King. 21 27. 29. Scribes and Pharisees looked sad,
and were in show full of gravity and holiness. Judas did show reverence to
Christ and said, Hail master: yet Devils are damned spirits: Felix a heathen
miscreant, Ahab an accursed Idolater, who had sold himself to work wickedly
in the sight of the Lord, Scribes and Pharisees notorious hypocrites, and
sworn enemies of Christ, and Judas was a devil and a traitor. And therefore
its not bowing nor becking, nor lookeing sowrely upon the matter, neither any
gesture or fawning fashions, that can without holy obedience make men persuade
themselves truly of their happiness.

Thou do speak well of God and his ministers, praise them and commend them
as they deserve: So did the Herodians commend Christ, with most high
commendations, Mark. 12. 14.
so as they could not speak better: So did the Pythonist so commend Act. 16.
Paul and Barnabas, as no man can say more of the worthiest servants of God,
nor more truly; yet the one sort Christ his enemies and the other possessed
with a devil. Good words then cannot go away with it: we may like Sermons now
and then, we may commend the preachers of Gods word, and yet be out of the
state of grace: to conclude, Thou musest of thy good meaning, though thou do
amiss: but remember, Vzza had 2. Sa^. 6. 7.
no ill meaning, To save the arc from falling, yet against Gods word; for
which it cost him his life. Mean well, but let the word rule thee, and live
thereafter, and then doubt not to find peace for ever.



Doing. The word is in the time present, (...) Doctrine. Exodus 3.
to show that only present doers may look for a blessing; God is I am; not I
was, or will be: so must we all be now, that which we ought to be, Psalm. 15,
the question pronounced in the first verse, Lord who shall dwell in thy
tabernacle, Psalm. 15.
who shall rest in thy holy hill? the answer is made in the time present, he
that walks, works and speaks; to show, that such (as is in the verse 5)
shall never be moved.

This serves to reprove two sorts of Use of reproof against backslyders.
persons: first such as have done well, men of the time past, but have fallen
away from that which they were; these are hopeless of heaven, except they
return again, because they have lost that which should give them assurance,
Well doing; also for that the scripture says, that such can look for nothing
but vengeance: Heb. 6. 10. Therefore if we have left off, either in whole or in
part, let us return to our first love, else we shall never be able to Reave. 2
5
answer it; for what do we dislike, that makes us not either at all
religious, or not so much as we have been? the Author, Nothing in religion
should cause us to leave it.
that is God, the everliving God: matter, that is Jesus Christ, verity and
holiness and virtue: manner, that is, in spirit and truth: the end, that is Gods
glory and our eternal sasafety: we therefore have no cause from religion it
self to leave it; but the cause must be found, to be either the devil, as in
Judas: or in the world, as in Demas, or the cursed corruption of our flesh, as
in Solomon, that has drawn us away from God to the Devil, from heaven to the
earth, from the spirit to the flesh, a mad and miserable exchange: neither
let any of us dream to be better for that we have been, except we be as we
ought: For the righteousness of Eze. 33. 12
the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression. They that
forsake the Ier. 17. 13
Lord shall be confounded: they that depart from him shall be written in the
earth. Dogs are such as return to their vomit, 2. Pet. 2.
and swine to wallow again in the mire. It will not serve Judas turn to say,
I was an Apostle, no^ Demas that he was a disciple, nor Iehu that he had a
zeal for the Lord God of hoasts, nor Ioash that he was a good king for a time:
for then would Satan shuffle in amongst the rest and hope to have a share, and
might say; Lord let me have entrance, for I was an Angel in heaven, and so
never were any of them. Brethren know this, If our lamps light go out before
the bridegroom come, we may call, the gates being shut; but the Lord will
say, Go ye cursed I know you not. Therefore let Heb. 3. 12.
us take heed brethren, least at any time, there be in any of us an evil
heart of infidelity to depart from the living God.

Second sort are such as be all for the time to come, who have not yet attained
Reproof to such as defer off their ame^dement.
to well doing, living in hope for hereafter; youth dreaming to see old age,
and then think they, it is time enough to repent, as if it were not said:
Remember thy creator in the days of thy Eccles. 12. 1.
youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years approache wherein thou
shall say I have no pleasure in them. May we give the first of our life and
best of our years to the service of Satan? and think we that God will
receive us in old age, when sin has forsaken us and not we it? old persons
suppose to live yet longer, and so defer off till the last gasp, when the
general su^moner has called them upon their death bed; but late and
constrained repentance is seldom true. Our time is not, when we will, but when
God does call; hear we must when he Pro^. 1. 28
speaks, or else he will not hearken when we pray. The first and best is his
due; the last and worst of us, he justly may reject; our yielding to his will
by his word, is voluntary subjection, which he accepts; but to his will by
his work, is constrained obedience for fear of destruction, which he little
regards. God indeed received to mercy the thief in the last hour; this
cannot be denied; but yet one only, though there were two; one, that a true
penitent sinner may not despair; and but one, that ungodly wilful
tra^gressours, may not presume. Many cannot hear the threats of the Law, for
fear of desperation: yet can they willingly run on in sin, and so perish by
presumption. By this, many millions of thousands have fallen headlong down
into hell (remember what Christ said of Luke. 17. 27 28.
Sodom and the old world) but the Scripture mentions few that have gone to
destruction by desperation, Cain, Sau^e, Achitophel, and Judas. Do thou hope,
to speed as did the good thief? and why rather do thou not fear to be like
the bad thief? they both were in one case, had the like punishment, Christ
between them, and death before the^: nay the worse thief had the good thieues
rebuke and admonition to warn him of his wickedness, and to cease to sin; yet
he had no grace to repent. Means will not prevail in the latter end, where God
vouch safeth not the gift to amend: If thou do persuade thy self, that God
will give thee grace then to repent; thou art deceived, if now he offer grace
and thou refuse it. At what time so-euer a sinner does repent from the bottom
of his heart, at that time will GOD freely forgive; but that time is not when
we lift, God is not at our beck, but the time is at his call. To day if ye will
hear Heb. 3. Psalm. 95.
his voice harden not your hearts: to day if we be not ready, we shall be less
apt to morrow: the longer we continue in sin the older it is, and the more
strength it gets: It is not as other things, the older the weaker; but daily
it grows stronger. If we say we can repent when we will, that is not in our
power: and if it be, then if thou do not repent now, and can, thou encreasest
sin by wilful transgression, and so make more just thy deserved damnation.

Therefore let us now amend, and not defer Conclusion.
off till he eafter, when at death there is no remedy but either to heaven or
to hell, to God or to the devil; in which case men hardly or never find that
comfort which presumptuously they have exp^cted, but do dye as they have lived
in sin without sense or taste of ioies everlasting, prepared only for the
righteous: for, He that believes in John. 3. 36
the son has everlasting life; but he that obeys not the son, has not
life, but the wrath of God abides upon him.

These things: that is which before he (...).
has mentioned. Men do many things; some, the inventions of their own brain;
some, the custom of forefathers; some one thing, some another: but not these
things, that is which the word teaches, Men do, but not what they should do.
the perfect rule of righteousness, from which we may not decline to the right
hand or to the left; neither adding thereto nor taking there from: for if we
do, we keep not our standing, we lose our comfort, and wander without our
guide we know not whither; some wholly as Aposta^ates; some in part persisting
obstinately as heretics; some against love as schismatics; and most as
lawless, for our lives like profane Esaus, will despise our birthrights and
sell heaven, souls health, conscience comfort, the words of eternal life for a
mease of pottage, even for our momentanie pleasures, lusts and liking in this
life.

Many there are which will do this Men do some things but not all things.
thing and that thing: these singularly, but not these things plurally; when a
man desirous of the assurance of salvation, must be studious of every virtue,
which helps thereunto: It is the nature of virtue to love virtue: whence it
is that one virtuous man imitateth an other, wherein one sees another to go
before him any way. One, two, or few virtues cannot live, where other virtues
are either hated or not sought after: one depends upon another, as links in a
chain, and cannot be sundred; we may not be like Agryppa almost a Christian,
for almost is not a Christian; neither content our selves with many things, as
Herod, though with gladness; whilst we nourish some sin, and be infected but
with one notorious vice. God will have all of us or none of us; though Satan
desires but any least part, he well knowing that where he has any thing at
all, God will have there nothing at all. He that breaks one of the least of
these commandments shall be the least in the Mat. 5.
kingdom of God: James says, He that James. 2.
breaks one is guilty of all; and one vice is enough to ouerthrow^s, though
we have some virtues: one sin of couetousness overthrew Judas; the desire of
a bribe got Gehezi the leprosy; Sampson his lust, lost him his strength and
eyes: Caines envy made him so to sin as he became accursed: Ismaels mocking
cast him forth: Esaus profaneness lost him his birthright: Ely his
indulgency was his breaknecke: Michols deryding spirit made her barren: and
Ananias, for hypocrisy, was a spectacle of judgment to others: Herod, albeit
he do many things, yet will have his Herodias, his beloved sin still, for
enjoying whereof we are content to leave other vices. I We will leave any sin
to keep our beloved sin.
will, says the boon companion, do any thing and let me be but drunk: And
I says the carnal caitiffe, and let me but satisfy my lust, be wanton,
live in dalliance and commit filthynesse: And I says the covetous man, and let
me gain goods and wealth: And I says the proud man, and yield me honor;
little knowing that such a maister-sinne is not without his many attendants: It
rules; but the other have their power, to which the miserable is also in
bondage unwittingly: for we must know that no one vice will be singled out from
his fellows: but if one get head, other have gone before as harbengers, and
other wait and follow after as Assistants: one breeds an other, and one
nourishes an other continually. Examples hereof, not only in the wicked, who
heap sin upon sin, as Ioash murder to his Idolatry, Judas treason to his
covetousness: but even in the falls of the faithful children of GOD; David
his lying in the bed and gazing idly abroad, bred his lust, lust adultery,
and adultery murder.

Therefore such as suppose to walk with a party colored coat, between
virtue and vice, or rather with some virtues, and some vices, these men yet
know not that virtue will dwell alone, as God; or vice alone; they are
contraries, they never can accord in one; where virtues are carelessly
neglected, there no one virtue has full possession; and where any one sin
bears sway, there viciousness is Lord and master.

Therefore let us not do this or that The mere civil honest man is no
commendable Christian.
virtue, for so may we sinisterly; but endeavor to do all, and this is right.
Many men go under a good name by civil honesty, either through restrained
nature, or good education in commendable manners of ciuility, who are far from
sanctification and the graces of the spirit. They do many actions of virtue,
either of a custom or by imitation, or respectively for this or that person,
for this or that by-end; but not for virtue it self: neither do they show
fruits of virtue, other then may preserve common honesty, their credit to live
amongst me^, and to procure them praise; secret or less public they regard
not: duties of holiness, prayer, reading the scripture, sa^ctifying of the
Sabbath, instruction of their family, countenancing of the word preached, and
such like, they be so far from, as they mock at men herein zealously
affected: for vices which they shun, they be such only, as be disco^modious,
or odious amongst men that have but common honesty: but to swear in ordinary
communication, to be companions with men superior in place, how wicked soever,
they make no conscience of, neither of many other evils which by the rule of
godliness are odious to God and such as sincerely seek him. A sanctified
spirit does not thus shuffle things together, neither makes a mixture of that
which cannot be compounded: but they truly hate all vice, and are affected to
every good thing; and become in their place, after the measure of grace given
them, doers of these things.

But least natural men should carp and Preuentio^ of objection.
say, Belike I would have men here without sin, or else to be without grace;
and unless we do all things, we do nothing: I answer, It is not mine
intendment to teach any such thing; but that me^ should leave sin to the
utmost, and not dally with any; that they should do virtuously and live in
purpose of heart, and will, without sin. Legal obedience is beyond what is
legal obedience.
our power to perform, which is after the exactness of the law, the
commanders holiness, and man's perfection by creation, which we have lost, and
is not here in our own persons recouerable, whatsoever the Phari^a^cal Papists
say to the contrary: but I speak of obedience Euangelical obedience.
and virtuous living Euangelically; which is an earnest endeavor in love and
thankfulness to God for his mercies in Christ, in faith apprehending his merits,
in whom we be acceptable and welpleasing to God, in truth and sincerity of
heart to do whatsoever we are commanded, and is commended unto us: which will
appear by our joy in well Sig^es of (...)rity.
doing, by our prayers and holy desires to do well, by our fear to offend,
and by our sorrow when we fail in our duties; wherein stands the perfection
of the best Christian: we can neither be equal to the law to fulfill it, nor
go beyond to do more any way to merit. S. Paul in his Apostolical estate found
imperfections: And Hezechias could speak of vprightness, but of no perfection.
And thus much for the condition of the promise.

Ye shall never fall. Ye shall never s^ip or slide down, ye shall not come to
any (...). The exposition.
hurt: the word here used is drawn from the body to the mind, and is
diversely taken in scripture; sometime for sin; Prou. 24. 16. therefore is the
word so translated in the vulgar translation: sometime for destruction. 2. Sam.
3. 38. 1. Cor. 10. 8. sometime to be down on a sudden, so as a standing and
course is not kept; which is the common signification thereof. All these three
may here very fitly stand, Ye shall not sin, ye shall not be destroyed, ye
shall not decline from your standing, to fall away from the state of grace,
whereunto ye are called. And therefore here I will speak of them all, as
reasons to spur us on to a virtuous life, which is the scope of the words.

Ye shall not sin. Virtuous men sin 1. John. 3.
not. He that commits sin is of the Devil, and he that is borne of GOD
sins not: yet he that says he has 1. John. 1.
no sin ^s a ^yer, and the truth is not in him. It is true nevertheless,
that he which abides in Christ sins not, such do commit Psalm. 119. 3
none iniquity; to wit, first in Gods acceptance, according to that saying, He
saw none iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression How godly are said not to sin.
Number. 23. 21. Ier. 50. 20.
in Israel: their sins shall not be found says Jeremy: and the reason is,
because the Lord will be merciful unto them; secondly in Christ's satisfaction,
in whom we are the righteousness of God, and in him there is no condemnation.
Thirdly 2 Cor 5. 21 Romans 8. 1 Romans 7.
in a godly man's will; for as the Apostle says, good they would do; and
wherein they do evil, they sorrow and would not do; and herein the will
stands for the deed. Lastly in respect of time; for as the child of God
sins not wholly, so neither finally; for God has put his fear into him,
that he shall Ier. 32. 40. Ps. 37. 24.
never depart from him; but if he fall, he shall not be cast off, for the Lord
puts under his hand. Thus the virtuous sin not: and this grace shall be
attained unto by such as do these things, says Peter.

David affirms in Psalm. 32. 1. 2. This blessing can we not better know, then
to consider What it is to sin, and to live therein.
what it is to sin, and to live in it. It is the state of corruption, service
to the Devil, contempt of Christ's death, the resistance of grace, the racing
out of Gods image, the bearing upon us the D^uels likeness: it is cause of
calamities, the curse in our calling, the eating canker in the soul; the
object of Gods wrath, and deaths sting: it breaks the union between God and
us, it makes conscience to accuse, and the law to condemn, it makes our
life miserable, death fearful and the last day terrible: and to conclude, by
it we lose heaven, Angels attendance, saints society, and all celestial
comforts eternally; and we purchase hell; fiends attend us, devils accompany
us, the cursed crew of damned souls abide with us, and we utterly deprive our
selves of all good, and live in woe and pains everlastingly; This is to sin,
this is to live in sin; and not to sin is to be acceptable to God, in
Christ righteous, our will pliable to his bidding, and our end comfortable as
we to goodness are conformeable.

Ye shall not be destroyed. The virtuous, as they sin not, so they perish
not. Godliness has the promise of this life, and of the life to come: there is
no cause of fear then; A great inducement to live virtuously, we all
naturally fear destruction, we desire to prevent it no greater joy then to be
sure of safe^^ Gal. 6. 16.
mercy to Syon and upon the Israel of God. Let Pharao be drowned, the
Israelites shall pass over safely: wicked Israelites may be destroyed, yet
faithful Caleb and Joshua shall live: Lotte shall escape, when Sodom shall
flame with fire, and all the inhabitants thereof: And Noah with his shall be
alive in the Arc, when the whole world shall have an end.

Thus, virtuous men have a Supersedeas against Gods justice, not of merit but
in mercy: their souls be sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, so that the
Angel of wrath must pass over their persons: they are aforehand marked Eze. 9.
in the forehead, for that they mourn and cry for the abominations which they
see: these, the Angel must not so much as touch, when they be comanded to
smite other without pity. O let us therefore live virtuously, and be doers of
these things.

Ye shall not leave your standing. You D(...)e. Psa. 15. 5
shall never, as David says, be moved, you shall not like dogs return to the
vomit again, nor like swine to the Ioh. 10. 28
mire: it is Christ's promise, None shall pluck them out of his hands whom he
has chosen: the more they exercise virtue, the more they love it, and grow
more zealous in it. David finds the Psa. 19.
words of God sweeter then honey, and the keeping of the commandments more
precious then pearls: so is it with every one, that seeks GOD in
righteousness.

It is to run from under Gods protection, and to seek death and destruction:
who therefore would not live in doing virtuously, to keep his standing in the
state of grace that he fall not away?

Doubt not of falling, if thou live in Evangelical obedience, and in these
virtues: thou have a perpetual pledge of Gods love, even by thy godly life,
his promises are annexed to such a one; by well doing thou have assurance of
deliverance, and art in Gods service; and he that has called thee, will
mercifully reward thee in the end. But many have fallen thou will say: true;
from what they Objection answered.
seemed to be, but not indeed from what they were: their gifts were common
favors, but not the special graces of election: they never attained unto the
aforenamed Evangelical obedience; secretly they were hypocrites: none fall
finally, but the good things they do, are done sinisterly, as appears in
Iehu; and they nourish some sin which does break out at the length openly,
as in Judas is manifest. Search therefore thy self how thou stand: if
uprightly with fear, love, and in humility; fear not to fall finally. The
elect fall for a time, as we see in David: but they so continue not ever; this
is the fall of a reprobate.

If you demand how in falling we may know the difference between the elect A
quest.
and reprobate, it may appear thus to a man; first by the truth of grace
before the fall; by the remainder of grace in falling, with a kind of fear and
with some struggling unwilling to yield, and yet through infirmity and violence
of affection, forced to yield; for the godly truly converted cannot sin after,
with full consent: Lastly, after the fall to be checked in conscience; and
though for a time they do lie in sin, yet then, not without the Lords external
chastisements to make them remember themselves, and when a faithful messenger
comes, as Nathan, to say thou art the man, David yields and says I have
sinned; which the reprobate do not.

If further through fear, thou that art in the state of grace do object
Satan's Elect need not to fear, they shall no way be overcome.
power; he shall not prevail; Christ has overcome him. Math. 4. And his
triumph is thy victory, so read it and believe. If thou dread the world,
Christ says, Be of good comfort I have overcome the world. John. 16. 33. If
the flesh which overthrew Solomon, and conquered Sampson: he that is in Christ
has mortified Romans 6.
the deeds of the flesh; and why was Christ pure, but to subdue thy
corruption? If yet thou say, But for all this, thou may be overcome by many
temptations and fall away in time of persecution, remember that God will not try
thee above thy strength. 1. Cor. 10. 13. And for other afflictions for Christ,
in them thou shall be more then a conqueror through him that loved us. Rom 8.
37. And I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to com, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love
of God which is in Christ Jesus. verse. 38. 39. But many false teachers shall
arise: true to deceive certainly the reprobate, and to beguile the elect, if it
were possible. Math 24. 24. But therefore it may be inferred that it is an
impossible thing; be humble and meek, for them that be m^^ke will he guide in
judgment, and teach the humble his way. Psalm. 25. 9. Love the truth for the
truths sake, and God will not give thee over to believe lies, as he does those
that have not a love of the truth. 2. These. 2. 10. Oh, but I fear, my daily
offenses will cause the Lord to cast me off, to take his grace from me, and so
shall I fall finally. For this know, that the best sins often* and it is not
sinning but the lying in sin that da^neth: If thou can confess sin and
forsake Pro. 28. 13.
it, thou shall have mercy. Prou. 28. 13. though thou do fall, thou shall
not be cast off, for the Lord puts under his hand. Psalm. 37. 24. To
conclude, the Lord will not forsake his people for his great names sake, because
it has pleased the Lord to make them his people. 1. Sam. 12. 22. Thus said
Samuel to Israel to comfort them, even when they had greatly offended God.

Therefore let Satan roar, and compass the earth, Job is hedged about: let A
comfortable conclusion.
the world lie in wickedness, the elect shall see light to come out; the flesh
is strong, but the spirit of God is stronger to cast it out, to subdue and kill
it: persecution shall not overcome; the love of Christ will constrain us to
hold. False teachers shall not mislead us so, but we shall see and return, or
prevent them before: and though we sin, yet this does not condemn us, for no
Christians; but that we are weak, and not wholly freed from corruptions. Here
is no perfection, here is uprightness to be had; hold this, beware of
hypocrisy; strive to perfection, that thou may after attain it in glory. So
beloved shall no sin reign over us, grace shall grow in us, peace shall be upon
us, faith shall set comfort before us, this wretched world shall not bewitch
us, pleasures shall not deceive us, nor any thing cause us to miscarie, but
that we shall run on and run out our race with joy, until the full end of our
days. Which, the Father of mercy, and the God of all comforts grant unto us,
for his sons sake, Christ Jesus. To whom with the Father, and the holy
Spirit, be everlasting praise and glory, for this his grace, and all other his
mercies, now and henceforth for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

