A DICTIONARIE IN SPANISH and ENGLISH, first published into the English tongue
by Ric. Perciuale Gent. Now enlarged and amplified with many thousand words, as
by this mark * to each of them prefixed may appear; together with the
accenting of every word throughout the whole Dictionarie, for the true
pronunciation of the language, as also for the diverse signification of one and
the selfsame word: And for the learners ease and furtherance, the declining of
all hard and irregular verbs; and for the same cause the former order of the
Alphabet is altered, diverse hard and uncouth phrases and speeches out of sundry
of the best Authors explaned, with diverse necessary notes and especial
directions for all such as shall be desirous to attain the perfection of the
Spanish tongue.

All done by JOHN MINSHEU Professor of Languages in London.

Hereunto for the further profit and pleasure of the learner or delighted in
this tongue, is annexed an ample English Dictionarie, Alphabetically set down
with the Spanish words thereunto adjoined, as also an Alphabeticall Table of
the Arabicke and Moorish words, now commonly received and used in the Spanish
tongue, which being dispersed in their several due places throughout the whole
Dictionarie are marked thus: by the same John Minsheu.

For the right use of this work, I refer you to the directions before the
Dictionarie, contrived in diverse points differing from other Dictionaries
heretofore set forth.

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London, by Edm. Bollifant. 1599

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS, AND THRICE worthy, Sir John Scot, sir Henry Bromley,
sir Edward Greuel Knights, and Master William Fortescue Esquire, their humble
devoted JOHN MINSHEU wishes health to their persons, increase to their
possessions, and everlasting felicity to their souls.
RIght virtuous and woorthily worshipful, after I had spent some years past
in this kind, the most unprofitable and unpleasant study of searching words
for a Dictionarie, in such sort, Vt nec tempori, nec rei familiari, nec mihi
parcerem: but Come la candela, far' ben' a gli altri and male a mi stesso; with
the candle to light others, and burn out my self: at last looking back to
repentance, I began to address my endeavors to some good hap, and found
you among many as four principal pillars that have supported my declining
estate, and given life by your liberalities to my dying pen. Wherefore I think
reason bids, nay duty rather binds, or your due challenges, what I
presume here to dedicate. And although each of you deserve much more then ever
my ability will be able to reach unto, yet according to the common custom of
badde debtors, I divide my substance, desiring my creditors every one to take
his part. If any cavil about the number of four; let him be advertised,
There be four elements placed in the world: likewise four seasons in the
year: also four humors that possess the body; and four virtues that
should govern the mind: and you four principal corner stones to support
the building of this present work, without which it could not have yet been
finished: Wherefore let the honor be yours, and the labor mine. When I had
waded so far in it, as without help I could not get over, nor without danger
and shame return back: then did you courteous entertainer of virtue, right
worthy and valorous sir John Scot, of your own good nature, bounty, and
kindness (the like whereof in one person is hardly to be matched) play the
Unicorn for the rest to drink. Next you courteous and virtuous sir Henry
Bromley, lover and liberal to all good letters, whose purse and pains is
always open for your Prince and country; so is it never shut to the
advancement of virtue, who as you are endued with an excellent memory, and
well read in all kind of learning, so are you a true Mecaenas of learning and
virtue, and a bountiful benefactour to the same, as sundry scholars at the
university (some whereof at your own charge you maintain) can better
testify. You the third, not second to any, well accomplished and worthy
knight, sir Edward Greuel, beloved in the court, and honored in the country,
among the great, great, and ouermatching your equals with the greatness of your
bright shining virtues, give exceeding cause to all, especially to me, not to
forget the honor of your name: for who knows not that knows you, that the
four cardinal virtues, upon which the rest do depend, have their abundant
influence into your mind. Last, you the mirror of a good mind, right virtuous
Master William Fort Escu, for all virtuous actions and goodness, a strong
shield as your name in French does import; whose right honorable father endued
with singular memory, learning, and excellent virtues, (by which especially
he has been advanced) in those gifts of the mind you succeed and follow:
have bound me by your bounty and exceeding courtesies to make some public
testimony of the same. But what go I about to decipher that which is
impossible sufficiently to be set down, and to praise them whose peers as yet
I have not found, whose many qualities and exceeding virtues do so far
surmount the greatest part of men, as the glorious sun with his bright beams
the lesser celestial bodies: whereof for me to speak with condign praises,
is a thing more due to your deserts, then easy for my rude pen, and rather
appertains to my duty, then stands with my ability: but as the French
says, Bonne volonte supply a la faculte: if your worships receive me and my
meaning with that virtue which is wont to be in you, I shall not only be
encouraged hereafter, but others will labor to honor you for this example. And
herewith I do most humbly and faithfully commend unto you my self and these
my labors with an unfeigned heart, and humble devotion, to be commanded as best
pleases you: Whom God long keep and preserve to your Prince, country, and
friends.

Yours bound and assured JOHN MINSHEU.

To the Reader.
THreefold Reader, for so thou will divide thy self, into good, bad, and
indifferent; whom I likewise compare to three kinds of creatures, the Be, the
Spider, and the Cameleon: The first, only I hold in account, and I hope he will
account of me and my labors, as that it may not be said, Perit quod facis
ingrato. The second, whom I as little regard, as he the credit of others;
because like the Spider, converting all to poison; or as cupping glasses
drawing out nothing but corrupt blood, he thinks himself graced to have only
a grace in backbiting. But let me ask him this one question, whether he ever
published his own labors in Print? If he answer yea: then I say with the
Italian, Chi vuol dir' mal d' altrui, prima pensi di lui, He that will speak
ill of another, let him first look into himself: and Chi semina spine, non
vadi discalzo, He that sows thorns, let him not go barefoot; then may he
find, that Nemo sine crimine viuit, or Nemo sine crimine scribit: so that Been
audire qui vult, been dicere oportet. To other moat-finders, that never smelt
the oil of the press, I say with the Poet, Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede
tua, and let them consider this is my first work; and as Seneca says, in
every first work there must be of force some imperfection and error, which if
he believe not, I say with Terence, Tu si hic sies, aliter senties. They that
busy themselves in reprehending the faults of other men's writings, their own
are likely never to come to light: wherefore I wish them to deal gentleman
like and not upon ods; then may we see, if El dezir y el hazer comen juntos a
su mesa, If speaking and doing dine together at their table. Besides, I have
undertaken more then one work at one time; as first the Spanish Dictionarie
with English following; then an English Alphabet with Spanish following; then
another little Dictionarie with general heads, showing the particular parts,
as a man and his parts, a house with the implements therein, ships at sea,
officers in war, trades and occupations, and diverse other things, quae nunc
perscribere longum est, etc. which is left out being somewhat prevented by
time, besides Dialogues Spanish and English: and I have done as the Italian
Proverb says, Chi tutto abbraccia, nulla stringe, or Chi due lepri caccia,
vno perde altro lascia. Qui vbique est, nullibi est. Furthermore, the work is
long and my time but short, and as the Poet says, Tantum opere in magno fas
est obrepere somnum, that is, In a great work it is tolerable to let pass
diverse errors which time and perusing might have corrected; and therefore
says Horace in his Art poetica, that a work that is finished, should be nine
years after in the Authors hands, to the intent, he might blot out, add to,
alter and amend: And I want nine years yet to come, before I should thereof
make an end, as those that be well experienced in this kind can best deem.
Yet some that presume much, and can judge little, have affirmed that a
Dictionarie in a year might be gathered complete enough, I answer, that in
conceit it may so be, and in much less time. And herewithall it comes now to
my mind, that talking hereof with a gentleman well read in the Greek, Latin,
and vulgar toongs, which entered into a work, protesting and vowing to me, that
he thought when he began, it could by no means possible hold him a months
time, and since that, he has continually dwelt thereon almost this three
years, and thinks he has scarce half done. Before we begin, we lay down
our plot in conceit only, and think we may as soon make an end, as our
imagination or thought (which is the swiftest thing in the world) can fly over
it. I confess my self I was seduced by this error, till practice brought me
into the right path, and repentance scourged me for going astray: if he take
not my word herein, which have tried, how would he have his taken which never
proved. I acknowledge these works Abortiues, borne before their due time into
the world, which being so full of trouble and sickness consumed the fathers
substance thereon, for Moult despendre, rien gaigner n'acquerir: fait l'homme
en fin son pain querir. Therefore means was made in great haste that it was
brought forth as you see, which if the fathers wealth had been answerable to
his will, it would have bin better able to have done his country service:
Notwithstanding all this the envious, who canker and eat up themselves in
their own rust (seeing they are of most continuance and antiquity in the
world, taking their beginning from the Serpent which seduced Eve,) so labored
that it might not be printed, that they left no stone unturned which they
thought might any way hinder the same: a strange nature, to seek to stop that
should run to the public good; besides to some of their helps, to pull them
out when they stick fast, and to other some to reap other profit by. Which
drove me into remembrance of a fable, how Jupiter disposed to survey the earth,
sent his messenger down, who met with a covetous and envious man, for whose
company at their parting, he promised to give either of them, what he would
ask, and the other forthwith should receive double the value: the covetous
would not demand first, because he would have double so much; neither would
the envious, because he could not abide his fellow to do so well: and being in
this conflict who should ask first, knowing a demand must be made, the
envious demanded one of his own eyes to be pulled out, that the other might
receive double: the malicious are never sad, but when some harm is happened
to themselves, or some good to another man, therefore says Antisthenes,
Inuidos tam ciuitati esse inutiles, quam lolium tritico aut ignauum bello;
Envious persons as unprofitable in a city as darnell or cockle in the wheat,
or a coward in the war: they resemble the Viper, which first gn^awes out his
dams guts, afterward stings and poisons others; or muzeled dogs, which when
they cannot bite themselves, they set others on, and oftentimes like the
serpent Porphirius, who is full of poison, but being toothlesse hurts none but
himself; but let them pass as they are, and prosper as they wish to others.
Another sort of people which are so puffed up with pride, and swollen with fat
of fortune, and riches so metamorphosed, and looking so proudly as if they were
borne to be princes companions, and lifting their heads so high as if they had
been bred to lock no lower then stars, hold in beggarly and base account
learning and art, forgetting now as the priest that ever he was parish clarke:
yet as the peacocke wrapped in all the pride of his plumes is known to be but a
dunghill bird by his foul feet; so though the high looks, and costly suits,
argue to the eyes of the world, they were men of worship, yet the churlish
illiberalitie of their minds bewraie, that fish that is bred in puddle, will
always stink of mudde. This sort would think it a fantastical humor to
honor greatly grauers in stone, as Romulus did, or priests as Numa Pompilius
his successor did: or goldsmithes as Caius Caesar: or writers as Claudius: or
good painters, as Vespasian: or to respect learning as Alexander did, which
neither in peace or war left Homers Iliades (together with his sword) from
under his beds head: or to write Commentaries as Caesar. And here I cannot
forget a gentleman of rare wit, and excellent learning, sir Edward Hobbie
knight, who as he has gotten the perfection of the Spanish tongue in a short
time, so has he publicly in print manifested it in like sort, as also in
courtesy vouchsafed due praises, to the helps he had for the same: well
knowing, that Honos alit arts; and Ars non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem. The
third sort of Readers which are as John Indifferent, and resemble the
Cameleon, which changes it self into any color according to the object that
is near it; so these men not able to judge themselves, or not looking into the
matter, Quien quiere mula sin tacha que se ste sin ella. He that will have a
mule without a fault, let him be without her.
harken what another says of it, and so he affirms the same, not weighing
whether the other spoke of malice or ignorance: he that would hold esteem of
them, were not worthy to be esteemed himself. Yet do I notwithstanding
submit my self and doings, to the judgment of the discreet, learned, and
wise, that whatsoever is amiss, being advertised thereof, I promise to labor
with my best endeavors to correct and amend: for no doubt many things may
escape in Printing, and much the more, for that I was in the country upon
necessity, when the Dictionarie was at the press, and there remained till it
was all done: Note, Pero as it is in the Grammar, page 14. l. 20. for a sower
apple tree.
wherefore I mean to peruse the whole work over, which shall be augmented,
and if any thing be amiss it shall be amended: As for the captious (which take
up matters before they fall) let them allow me maintenance, and I will make it
to their liking: knowing it is hard to please few, harder to please many,
impossible to please all: I leave these my labors to the view of all, so to
be censured as they shall find themselves profited by them. Vale.

John Mynsheu.

Directions for the understanding the use of this Dictionarie, contrived in
diverse points differing from other Dictionaries heretofore set forth, for the
speedier furtherance of the learner in this tongue.
FIrst I have declined all the Irregular and hardest Verbes through this whole
Book as they viz. the Present tense, the first Preterperfect tense, and the
Future tense of the Indicative mood. The Present tense, the Preterimperfect
tense, and the Future tense of the Subiunctiue mood, to make the learner and
desirous of the tongue exact and ready with little or no labor in any of them.
The manner of setting down thus. Praes. for Present tense, 1. Praet. for first
Preterperfect tense, Fut. for Future tense. Sub. for Subiunctiue mood.
Imperfect. for Preterimperfect tense, etc. as for example this Verb, Traer, to
fetch or bring, Indicat. Praes. Traygo, traes, trae. 1. Praet. Truxe, truxiste,
truxo, or Traxe, traxiste, traxo. Fut. Traere, traeras, traera. Sub. Praes.
Trayga. Imperfect. Truxera, Traeria or Truxesse, or Traxera, Traeria or
Traxesse. Fut. Truxiere.

Also for the more ease of the learner, and to make use of this Declining hard
and Irregular Truxe, Truxo, Truxera, Truxesse, and say, vide Traer, and there
he shall see him declined at large, lest he might mistake and think Truxe,
Truxo, Truxera, Truxesse, might come of Truxer, or the like, and not of Traer.
In like manner I say Cupe, Cupo, Cupiera, Cupiesse, vide Caber. also Quise,
Quisiera, Quisiesse, vide Querer. Dixe, Dixo, Dixesse, Dixera, vide Dezir, and
so of all the rest: so that by this means he shall not only find every one
of these and their like in their right Alphabet as they shall look, but also
know the true signification and declining them to make him most perfect in any
or all of them.

Likewise I accent every word in the whole Dictionarie to cause the learner to
pronounce Bacia, a bowl, a basen, a trey, not Bacia: as Barrio, a ward, not
Barrio: as Dificil, hard, difficult, not Dificil, nor Dificil: as Amor, love,
not amor: Pastor, a shepherd, not Pastor: as Religion, not Religion: Caridad,
dearnes, charity, not Caridad: as David, not David: as Tener, to hold, not
Tener, and so of an infinite company of the rest.

This accenting serves also and makes one and the self same word of diverse
significations amo, a master, or I love, amo, he has loved. Cerco, a siege,
Cerco, he has besieged. Hazia toward, Hazia, I or he did make. Baxa, a
dance so called. Baxa, a Bassa or commander among the Turks. esta, she or
this thing. Esta, it stands. este, he. Este, let it stand. De, of or from.
De, let him give. Pero, a pear tree; Pero, but, etc.

The two letters for two genders m. for masculine, and f. for feminine. The
neuter is of

Further to show wherehence the compounds do arise, to know their Radix and
original, I abs Tener, to abstain, of Tener, to hold, and abs, from and so
abs Tener, to hold from or abstain: so ab Suelto, loosed from or absolved. des
Atar, to untie: des Armar, to unarm: des Dicha, mishap: des Ventura,
misfortune. re Tener, to retain: re Hecho, made again.

Besides, I would have those that have not read much in this tongue to be
advertised, that in Ballesta or Vallesta, a crossebow. Vandera, or Bandera, an
ensign, a banner, a flag of a ship. Bisarma, or Visarma, a weapon with two
pikes. Visabuelo, or Bisabuelo, a great grandfather. Bogar, or Vogar, to row.
Volumen, or Bolumen, a volumne of a book: so in the middle of a word, as Cabo,
or Cavo, an end. Wherefore I advise the Reader if he find not the word in B
turn to V: if not in V look to B. In like sort these following, as c cerilla
for z, and z for c cerilla, as Hacer, for Hazer, to make or to do; as Rezelo,
for wary fear, or suspicion, for Recelo; as Corcilla, or Corzilla, a little
row bucke: so e for i, and i for e, as Desfavor, Disfavor, Disfamar, Desfamar:
also o and u, as Mochacho, Muchacho, a boy, a lad: so f and ph, as Filosofo,
Philosopho, a Philosopher: g for j, and j for g, as Magestad, or Majestad: j
for x, Desar for Dexar, to leave: and x for j, as Tixeras for Tijeras, or
Tigeras, sheares or scissers: also x for ch, as Cartuxo for Cartucho, Patache,
Patage, or Pataje, a pinasse: Algedrez, Aljedrez, or Axedrez, chesse-boord or
chesse-play. The like to these would I wish the Reader if he find them not in
one letter or Alphabet, to turn to the other, and no doubt he may be satisfied.

Efeto, or Effeto, effect: Asalto, Assalto, an assault: Atonito, Attonito,
astonished, etc. But take heed you take not this double letter with a crooked
line over him thus n^: for this single n, as Pen^a, a rock, pronounced Pennia
for Pena, punishment or pain: nor the single l for the double ll, nor the
double for the single: both which letters always make a differing
signification and pronuntiation.

Encasa, for en Casa, in the house: Enefeto, for en Efeto, in effect: Decada,
for de Cada, of every: Defuera, for de Fuera, without: Del, for de El, of him:
Delexos, for de Lexos, from far.

Amalle, for Amar le, to love him: Castigalle, for Castigar le, to chastise
him: Hablalle, for Hablar le, to speak unto him: Creelle, for Creer le, to
believe him: Dezille, for Dezir le, to tell him.

Castigalde, for Castigad le, do ye chastise him: Leeldo, for Leed lo, read
ye it: Dezilde, for Dezid le, tell ye him.

Nebrissensis, Cristouall de Casas, and M. Perciuals in English: which place
next Ca Cl, and not Ce Ch, and place Ch after the end of Cu, etc. And for the
giving notice of what I have done without defrauding any thing from the labors
of any that have traveled in this kind, I have made a difference of the words
I have merely added by a star thus*, whereby it may be seen what and how
much I have enlarged by my long labor and pains: and for the most part of the
rest of the words I have augmented with diverse Englishes more then heretofore
has been set down, as I have found them in Authors, which the nature of the
word may and will contain: as also put out, and quite altered the English of
sundry of them mistaken: which, if gentle Reader desirous of this tongue, it may
further thy knowledge to thy good liking, it shall further encourage me (after
this my first beginning) hereafter to do my best to satisfy thy desire.

JOHN MYNSHEU.

A DICTIONARIE IN SPANISH AND ENGLISH.
A, The first letter in the A, B, C, and the first vowell A. A, a Preposition,
signifying for, to, at, toward. * A, a sign of the Infinitive mood of
verbes: as a Sufrir, to suffer, a Hazer, to make or do. * A, the third person
singular of the verb He, as Mucho tiempo a, it has been much time: or it is a
good while since. A, A, an Interiection of dreading, of one suddenly frighted,
in Latin At at. * A, A, A, an Interiection of laughing, as Ha, ha, ha. Aaron,
m. the herb Wake-Robin, Cuckowpintle, or Calves feet, or a proper name Aaron.
* A'ba el lobo, beware the wolf, or behold or take heed of the wolf. Abad,
m. an Abbot, or Prior, or religious man. * Abada, m. a beast in the Indies of
the bigness of a great bull, skinned over as it were with scallop shells, which
with going and moving makes a noise: it has but one horn, and that is placed
under his eyes upon his nose. It is an enemy to the horse, so that when he
sees him, he makes al haste, and with swift running ouertaketh and kills
him. Vide Rinoceronte. Abadengo, m. pertaining to an Abbot. Abadejo, m. a kind
of green and blew fly called Cantharis, breeding in the tops of Ashes,
Olives, etc. raising blisters, the juice of it is venomous. Also a bird called
a Wagtaile. * Abadejo piece, a kind of Newlande fish. Abadessa, f. an Abbess,
or Lady over a Nunnerie. Abadia, f. an Abbotship, the dignity of an Abbot, or
Lady Abbess. Also the Abbie it self. * Abahado, m. the reeking or fume kept
in. Abahar, to keep or stop in the reeking or fuming of any thing. * aBajo,
vide aBaxo. Abalancai, to thrust into the midst of a company. Aballar, to
remove with pain or much ado, to depart away, or to put away. Also to set
price on a thing. * Abanderado, m.v. Avanderado, an Ensigns servant which
carries the ensign for his master. * Abandero, vide Abanderado. * Abandonado,
cast off, forsaken, abandoned or given over. * Abandonar, to forsake, to
abandon, to cast off or give over. * Abaratar, to make good cheap, to sell for
low price. Abarca, f. a high shoo such as country men use of undressed
leather, a startvp, a wooden shoo, a wooden patten. Abarcado, shod with such
startups, high shoes, or wooden shoes. Also trussed or tucked under the
arm. Abarcar, to embrace or claspe with the arms, to seek, to get, to
incroach. Also to trusse up under the arm. * Abarrado, flung against the wall,
or dashed against any thing. Abarraganada, f. a leman or concubine, a strumpet
or queen given over to the flesh, keeping still company with one man.
Abarraganado, m. a married man that keeps a harlot for his leman or
concubine, a leman keeper. Also any man keeping a queen at rack and manger.
Abarraganamiento, m. leman keeping, looseness of life, wicked fleshly living
together betwixt two keeping together in fleshie filthiness at rack and
manger. * Abarraganar, to leave the use of the lawful husband or wife, and to
follow whooredome unlawfully with another. * Abarrajado, m. dashed against the
wall, spoiled, destroyed, scattered, ruinated, confounded, subverted,
dispersed. Abarrajar, to dash against the wall, to destroy, to spoil, to
ruin, to vnbarre, to havoc, to disorder, to scatter, to do violence.
Abarrancado, m. standing on a steep hills side or on a rocks side.
Abarrancadero, m. a steep downfall, a dangerous hill or rock to be on, for
fear of falling. Abarrancar, Praes. yo Abarranco, 1. Praet. Abarranque, to
throw down headlong, to overthrow or tumble down dangerously, to deal rashly
or unadvisedly. * Abarranque, vide Abarrancar. Abarrar, to dash against the
wall, to strike or beat violently or vehemently. * Abarratar, vide A'baratar.
Abarraz, m. an herb called Stauesagre, or Lowse bane. Abarrisco, wholly,
altogether, utterly, perfectly or thoroughly. * aBastada cosa, f. a matter good
enough or sufficient, a substantial thing, a copious matter, such a thing as
may content with reason. * aBastada casa, f. a sufficient house well furnished
with all manner of implements and necessaries. * aBastado, m. sufficient, good
enough, large, reasonable. aBastanca, or aBasto, as much as need, enough,
indifferently, sufficiently, well enough. aBastancar, vide aBastar. *
aBastanza, vide aBastanca. aBastar, to be sufficient enough, to satisfy or
content, to serve with. * Abastecer, yo Abastesco, to furnish, strengthen,
fortify, fence, repair or amend. aBasto, vide aBastanca. * abatanado, m.
fulled or thicked as woollen cloth. * aBatanador, m. a fuller of cloth. *
aBatanar, to full cloth. aBatidamente, faintly, feebly, basely, without heart,
negligently, desperately, demissely. aBatido, m. cast down, undone, forlorn,
base, abject, out of conceit, desperate, lowly, sent packing, submisse,
demisse, discouraged. * aBatidor, m. a debaser, a caster down, a maker of men
in heavy case, a driuer out of heart, a cooler of men's courage, one that
keeps under, etc. a discourager. aBatimiento, a discouragement, a making
hartlesse, a driving out of conceit, a suppressing and keeping down, a
debasing, etc. * aBatiose el girafalte, the Gerfalkon bated, or hoong from the
fist or perch, etc. aBatir or aBatirse, to beat down, to discourage, to
debase, to drive out of heart. Also to stowpe as a hawke or such like, to abase
or veil bonet. * Abaxadero, m. a place of descending, a side of a hill, a
down coming. Abaxado, humbled, brought down, prostrated, diminished,
alighted, abased, submitted, etc. * aBaxador, m. a suppressor, maker to stowpe,
humbler, diminisher, maker to fall prostrate, etc. aBaxamiento, m. an abasing,
humbling, prostrating, alighting, submitting, going down, costing down.
aBaxar, to humble, to abase, to prostrate, to stowpe, to alight, to descend or
come down, to cast down, to alay. * aBaxo, below, underneath, of less value
or price, near hand, fast by. * Abbreviatura or Abreviadura, f. a short note,
an abridgement or brief setting down of a matter, etc. * Abece, the cross
row or Alphabet of all the letters. * Abecedario, m. the first book to learn
children the letters, to spell and read. Also a teacher to spell, read, and
the use of the A b c, etc. Abeja, f. a be that gathers honey. Abejera,
Torongil, or Cidrera, f. balm gentle or Beewoort, an herb that bees delight in
wonderfully. * Abejeria, f. a company of bees, or a place where many bees are.
Abejeruco, m. a bird that uses to eat bees called a Witwall or Woodwall,
whose nature is to keep and feed their parents when they cannot fly abroad.
Abejon, m. a great be that having lost the sting flies up and down, and
makes a buZZing noise. * Abejon, juego, a kind of sport or play when they
cry buZZe, and so hit one another a box on the ear, except quickly he pull
away his head. Abejonazo, m. a great be. Abejoruco, vide Abejeruco. Abenus,
Abenuz, or E'bano, Hebene tree, the wood whereof is as black as ieat, and this
tree bears no fruit nor leaves. Also the Hebene wood. * Aberiguacion, vide
Averiguacion, f. auouching or verifying a thing to be so. * Aberiguado, vide
Averiguado. * Aberiguar, vide Averiguar. Abertura, f. an opening, a chinke or
breach, a yawning, an vnclosing of that which was close, a leake made in a
ship, etc. Abestruz, vide Avestruz, an Oistrich. Abeto, m. a Fur tree.
Abezado, or Avezado, taught, instructed, accustomed or enured. Abezar or
Avezar, to accustom, enure, to bring to pass by long usage and continuance.
Also to teach, instruct, or persuade to, etc. * Abiertamente, openly, plainly,
manifestly or evidently. Abierto, m. open, clear, manifest, plain, evident,
uncovered, etc. A'bil or Habil, apt, fit, able, handsome, convenient, capable.
Abilidad or Habilidad, f. ableness, handsomnes. fitness, power, meetnesse,
capacity. * Abilitado or Habilitado, made able, fitted, qualified, become of
power, enabled, made capable. Abilitar or Habilitar, to make able, to qualify,
to fit or make handsome, etc. Abilmente, aptly, fitly, sufficiently, of
capacity, like one of ability. Abiltadamente, basely, vilely, like an abject,
shamefully. Abiltar, vide Aviltar, to make vile, to debase, to cast down, to
set at naught, to cast off, to hold scorn of. * Abintestato, m. one that dies
without making a will. Abismo, a bottomless pit, a deep gulf where many seas
or waters meet, a place in the sea so deep as it cannot be sounded, a
whirlepoole, a place in hell. Abispa, f. a waspe. Abispillo, vide Obispillo,
the rumpe of a bird. Abispon, vide Tavarro, a hornet or great waspe. *
Abitacion or Habitacion, f. a dwelling place, a mansion, habitation, a
soiourning or abiding place. * Abitador or Habitador, m. a dweller, inhabiter,
or one that has some place of abode. * Abitado or Habitado, m. one that has
dwelt or inhabited in a place. * Abitar or Habitar, to dwell, inhabit, lodge
or abide in a place. * Abitillo or Habitillo, m. a little habit, a little
form or fashion of attire. a light custom or manner. Dimm. of A'bito. A'bito
or Habito, the habit, form, fashion, attire, apparel, custom or manners of
people. Abituado, m. grown to a habit, fashioned in manners, become a
custom, enured by long practice. Abituar, to become so as by nature, to
fashion in manners, to grow into custom, to enure by daily practice. *
Abivado, m. quickened, rowzed, awaked, stirred up. * Abivar or Avivar, to
quicken, to awake, to rowze up or make to stir. * Abla, vide Exe, an axletree
of a cart, wagon, etc. * Ablandado, m. smoothed, softened, pacified, appeased,
assuaged, made gentle. * Ablandador, m. a smoothbootes, a fine tongued fellow,
a softener, pacifier or appeaser. Ablandadura, f. a smoothing, softening,
asswaging, pacifying, winning by gentle means, flattering. Ablandar, to
soften, to smooth, to flatter, to win by gentle means, to pacify, to assuage.
* Ablentador, m. a fan to fan corn with, or a fanner or winnower that
makes clean corn. * Ablentar, to fan or winnow corn. * aBobado or
aBovado, m. become foolish or amazed in gaping or gazing on a thing. * aBobar
or aBovar, to become foolish or to make a fool. * Abocadado, bitten or snapped
with the mouth as horses snap one another. * Abocadar, vide Abocadear. *
Abocadear, to bite with the mouth, to snap with the mouth as horses do or any
other living thing. * aBocadillos, by little morsels or mouthfuls, by little
bits or piece meal. aBocados, by mouthfuls, morsels or bits, peecemeale. *
Abocar vergas de nao, to tie up or fasten the yards of a ship, in battle at
sea used least a shot of ordinance should make them fall on their heads. *
aBofeteado, m. beaten on the face, buffetted, cuffed, boxed, stricken about the
ears. * aBofeteador, m. a buffetter, one that beats about the ears, or
strikes on the cheeks, that cuffeth with fistes like a boy. aBofetear, to
buffet, to cuffe or box about the ears, to strike on the cheeks or face, to
fight with fistes as boys do. * Abogacia or Avogacia, f. the office or duty
of a counselor at law. * Abogacion, f. the pleading as a counselor, the
handling of a matter like a cunning lawyer. Abogado or Avogado, m. a counselor
at law, an advocate. * Abogado sin lettras, a pettifogger, a solicitor, an
advocate without learning. Abogar or Avogar, Praes. yo Abogo, 1. Praet. yo
Abogue, to plead as a counselor or advocate. Abolengo or Abolorio, m. a
pedigree, stock or descent of kindred. Also a patrimony. aBollado, m. dented
in with blows, bruised, beaten together or crushed. * aBollador, m. a bosse
maker, one that beats together, one that indenteth with beating or striking.
aBolladura, f. an indenting with blows or striking, making of bosses, crushing
or beating together. aBollar, to beat in or indent with blows, to make bosses,
to crush together or to batter with strokes. aBollonado, bunched or bumped out
with blows, having knobs or bunches with beating or buffetting. aBollonar, to
make bunches, knobs or knops with blows, strokes or buffets. Abolorio, vide
Abolengo. Abominable, abominable, detestable, loathsome, execrable.
Abominacion, f. detestation, loathing, abomination. * Abominado, abhorred,
loathed, detested. Abominar, to detest, to abhor, to loath, to think vilely
of. Abonado, m. that has put in sureties, that goes under bail, one that is
sufficient to answer a matter. * Abonador, m. a putter in of bail or sureties,
one that undertakes for another. * Abonamiento, m. a putting in of sureties, a
bailing of one out of prison, undertaking for another to make good a matter, a
making good. aBonanca, f. vide Bonanca, fair or clear weather, calmnesse,
quietness. Abonancar, to wax fair weather, to become calm and quiet.
Abonar, to make good, to put in sureties, to make perfect, to bail out of
prison, to put in bail. Abonarse el tiempo, to wax fair weather, to become
calm and quiet. Abondamiento, m. plenty, abundance, great store, fullness. *
Abondante, vide Abundante. Abondar, to be plentiful, to abound, to have store,
to be full. Abondosamente, plentifully, abundantly. Abondoso or Abundante,
plentiful, abundant. * Abondo, idem. Abono, vide Abonamiento. * Abordadura, f.
boording of a ship. * Abordar vna nao, to lay aboard a ship, or to enter into
another bodies ship making prize thereof. Abordatura, vide Abordadura, f. *
aBorrar, vide Borrar, to blot, to blurre or deface. * Aborrascar, Praes. yo
Aborrasco, 1. Praet. yo Aborrasque, to swell or puff up, as weather when there
begins a tempest. Aborrecedor, m. one that abhors, loatheth or detesteth,
hates. Aborrecer, yo Aborresco, to abhor, loath, detest, to hate for to
think, utterly to mislike. Aborcecible, detestable, loathsome, worthy to be
abhorred, hateful. * Aborrecido, m. abhorred, loathed, detested, hated,
utterly misliked or despised. Aborrecemiento, m. a detesting, loathing,
abhorring, utter misliking. Aborrescido, vide Aborrecido. Aborescer, vide
Aborrecer. * Aborrir, vide Aborrecer. Abortado, m. that which is borne or
brought into the world before the time. Abortadura, f. an untimely birth, that
comes into the world before the due season, the suffering of such untimely
deliverance. Abortar, to bring forth young before due time, to be delivered
before her season. * Abortivo, a child borne before the time, an abortiue.
Aborton, m. a young creature borne or brought into the world before due time.
* aBotonado, m. buttoned, clasped, hooked. aBotonadura, f. a button or claspe.
aBotonadura de oro o plata, a claspe, or button of silver or gold. aBotonar, to
button, to claspe, etc. to bud. aBotonar los arboles, to bud, sprout, or begin
to blossom as trees and herbs do. * Abovado, vide Abobado. * Abra, i. Avra,
shall or will have: the future tense of the Jnfinitiue Aver. * A'bra, a place
in Antwerpe so called, where is a haven coming from sea. * Abracada, f. an
embracing, hugging, or clasping in the arms. Also a fathom. * Abracada vid. a
vine wreathed one with another. Abracado, m. embraced, hugged, or clasped in
arms. * Abracador, m. one that embraces, huggeth, or claspeth in his arms. *
Abracamiento, m. an embracing, hugging or clasping in his arms. Abracar, to
embrace, hug, or claspe in arms. * aBraco, m. an embracing, hugging or
clasping in the arms. * Abrasado, m. fired, set on fire, burned, burned to
coals. * Abrasador, m. a setter on fire, one that burns coals. Abrasamiento,
m. a setting on fire, a burning to coals. Abrasar or Abrassar, to set on fire,
to burn to coals, to consume half with fire, sindge or half burn, to blast,
to scorch. * A'brego, the south wind. * Abre, J shall or will have. Vide Aver.
* Abremos, we shall or will have. Vide Aver. Abrevadero, m. a watering place
for cattle, a poole. Abrevado, m. made to drink, watered. Abrevar, to cause
to drink, to water. * Abreviado, m. abridged, shortened, drawn into a brief
method or note, cut off short. Abreviadura or Abbreviatura, f. an abridgement,
a cutting off short of the matter, a drawing of it into a short course.
Abreviar, to abridge, to cut short, to draw into a brief course. * Abri, m. a
sun shining place, a shadowie place from extremity of heat. Abridor, m. one
that opens. Abrigado, m. set on sun shining, warm, nourished, cherished.
Abrigan^o, a warm sun shining bank. Abrigar, Praes. yo Abrigo, 1. Praet. yo
Abrigue, to set or place in the sun for warmth, to foster, to cherish.
Abrigo, m. the warm sun shine, a cherishing, a fostering. * Abrigue, vide
Abrigar. Abril, m. the month April. * Abrimiento, m. an opening, a
discovery. Abrir, to open, to show, to discover, to bewray, to reveal, to
disclose, to declare, to cleave asunder, to expound, to lay abroad, to
vnfasten. * aBrochado, m. laced, tied, fastened, buckled, clasped. aBrochadura,
f. lacing of clothes, or tying of them, fastening, buckling or clasping.
aBrochar, to tie or lace clothes, to fasten, buckle or claspe them. *
Abrogacion, f. an abrogating, a taking away, a disanulling. * Abrogado, m.
abolished, abrogated, taken away, made void or of none effect, disanulled.
Abrogar, Praes. yo Abrogo, 1. Praet. yo Abrogue, to abolish, abrogate,
disanull, make void or of none effect. Abrojos, brambles, a kind of sharp
thistles, Caltrops with pricks to hinder the enemies horses from entering. In
the Caltrop four pricks of iron are so set, that which way soever it turns,
some of the pricks are upward. Abrotono, vide Lombriguera, Southernwood the
herb. * Absencia or Ausencia, f. absence, or being away. * Absolucion, f. an
absoluing, a remission, pardon or forgiving, assoyling, discharging. Absolver,
Praes. yo Absuelvo, Sub. Praes. yo Absuelva, to pardon, absolve, forgive,
discharge or assoyle. Abstenencia, f. abstaining or refraining from meat, or
from other things, temperance, shunning of vices, etc. * Abstener, Praes.
Abstengo, abstienes, abstiene, 1. Praet. Abstuve, abstuviste, abstuvo, Fut.
Abste^dre, abstendras, abstendra. Sub. Praes. Abstenga, Imperf. Abstuviera,
abstendria, or abstuviesse. Fut. Abstuviere, to abstain or refrain from
meats, drinks, or delights, to hold his hands, to use temperance. * Abstenga,
abstengo, vide Abstener. * Abstenido, m. that has abstained from meats,
drinks, and all vicious delights, that has stayed himself. * Abstuve,
abstuviesse, abstuviera, abstuvo, vide Abstener. * Absuelva, Absuelvo, vide
Absolver. * abSuelto, m. absolved, pardoned, forgiven, discharged or assoyled.
Absynthio, m. an herb called Wormwood. * Abubado, m. full of the French ill
or pockes. Abubilla, f a bird called a Hoope. Some think it to be the Lapwing.
* Abucaste, m. a kind of ducke. Abuela, or Aguela, f. a grandmother. Abuelo,
or Aguelo, m. a grandfather. Abuelo segundo, or Bisabuelo, m. a great
grandfather. Abuelo Tercero, m. a grandfathers grandfather. Abuelos, ancestors.
* aBuelta dello, together with that. aBuen tiempo, in very good season, fitly,
in due time, even as one would wish. Abuhado or Abuhetado, m. mumpesicke,
swollen about the face or other part of the body. Abuhannento, m. a swelling
about the cheeks, the mumpes. Abuhetado, vide Abuhado. * Abultado, m bulked
out, great, gross. * Boz Abultada, f. a great voice or big voice. * Abultar,
to bulk or bumpe out, to be great, huge, or big. * aBulto, m. a bulking out, a
gross bigness. Abundancia, f. vide Abondamiento, plenty, abundance, copy or
store. * Abundante, plentiful, copious, abounding. * Abundar, to abound, to
have store or plenty, to have copy, to exceed or ouerflowe, to be rich. *
Abondosamente, copiously, plentifully, abundantly, richly, exceedingly. *
Abundosidad, f. copy or abundance, great store or plenty. * Abundoso, m.
having plenty at will, furnished with store. Aburado, m. burned, scorched,
sindged with fire. Aburar, to burn, scorch or sindge with fire. Aburrido, m.
desperate, forlorn, Aburrimiento, m. a desperate or forlorn case, despair.
Aburrir, to despair, to be forlorn, to be past all hope. * abVsado, m.
misused, spent vainly, prodigally or ill, not applied to the right use.
abVsar, to misuse, to spend prodigally, not to use as he ought, to bestow ill
or vainly. Abusion, f. an abuse, misorder, misspending, or ill bestowing of any
thing. * Abuso, m. vide Abusion. Abutarda, f. a Bustard. Also a Horneowle. *
Abuvado, vide Abubado. * Abuvilla, a bird called a Hoope. Some take it for the
Lapwing.
A C and A c
Aca, hither. Aca, Aculla, hither and thither. Acabadamente, finally, to
conclude, to make an end, precisely, perfectly, absolutely. Acabado, m.
finished, ended, brought to a good pass, concluded, fully dispatched, deceased
out of this life, perfected, consummated. Acabador, m. a finisher, concluder,
dispatcher, ender of matters. Acabamiento, m. an ending, finishing, concluding,
bringing to some good pass. Acabar, to make an end, to finish, to conclude, to
cut off a matter, to bring to a good pass, to make perfect, to accomplish or
consummate, to depart out of this life. * aCabo or aCavo, at the head or end.
Acacan, m. a waterbearer, in Spain one that carries water up and down the
streets upon an ass, and cries the same, and so sells the water. * Acacan
en el real, a drudge or slave to carry water or wood into an army. Acacia, a
kind of shrub with prickles, whose leaves are like rue. Also a liquor drawn
out of the seed of Acacia, in steed whereof the juice of sloes is commonly
used. Acada, f. a spade or pickaxe, a mattocke. aCada, in, at, or by every one.
aCada barrio, in or at every ward. aCada casa, at every house. * aCada trecho,
at every space of time or place. * aCada passo, at every step. Acadarrado, m.
rheumaticke, subject to catarrhes. * Academia, f. an university. Platoes
school in Athens was first called by that name. Now every notable place of
learning is so called. * Academico, a student of the university, or a teacher
there. * Acadonada, f. a picking of the spade, pickaxe or mattocke into the
ground. * Acadonazo, m. a great spade, mattock, or pickaxe, or a blow with a
spade or mattocke. * Acadoncillo, m. or Acadonzillo, a little spade, mattocke
or pickaxe. * Acadon, m. a mattocke, spade or pickaxe to dig withal. *
Acadonero, m. he that labors with the spade, mattocke or pickaxe, a digger,
a deluer. * Acadonzillo, vide Acadoncillo. Acaduz, Alcaduz or Arcaduz, m. the
scoupe or scuppet of a water wheel, the pipe that leads water to a conduit.
Acaecer, vide Acontecer, to happen, chance or fall out. Acaecido, vide
Acontecido, m. happened, chanced or fallen out. Acaecemiento, m. vide
Acontecimiento, a hap, chance, etc. Acaescer, vide Acaecer. Acafran, m
saffron. Acafranado, m. dressed with saffron. Acafranar, to dress with
saffron. * Acagaya, vide Azagaya, f. a borespeare or half pike. Acaguan or
caguan, a porch or gallerie, a pond, brook or place where women wash. *
Acahar, vide Azahar. * Acahescer, vide Acaecer. * Acaleja, vide Azaleja, f. a
towell to wipe with. * aCallado, m. stilled, quieted. aCallar, to make still or
quiet. * Acalorado, m. made very hot. * Acampado, m. encamped, laid siege
unto. * aCampar, to encampe or lay siege. * Acampear, idem. aCanalado, m. made
with gutters or with channels, half round like a guttertile or roof tile,
chamfured. * Acanelado, m. done or dressed with cinnamon or the color of
cinnamon. aCanales, by gutters. * Acanillado, made after the manner of canes or
reeds. Also cloth wouen uneven with some greater threads then other some. *
aCan^avereado, m pearsed or wounded with canes or great reeds. *
aCan^avereador, m. one that pearseth with canes or reeds. aCan^averear, to
pearse with canes or great reeds. * aCanonear, to shoot off canons. *
Acantarado, m. measured with tankards or cans. Also beaten or strooken with a
tankard. * Acantho, m. a kind of white Thistle in Spain called Yerva gigante,
in France Blanca vrsina, in English Bear foot or Bear clawe. * Acapado, m.
hid under the cloak, stolen on by creeping privily. * Acapar, to hide under the
cloak, to steal on by creeping privily. * Acaparrado, come under another man's
cloak, defended, protected or shrouded by another man. * Acaparrarse, to come
under an other man's cloak, to shroud, protect or defend himself by or under
another man. * Acar, vide Azar. * Acarcon, vide Azarcon. * Acarear, vide
Acarrear. * aCariciado, cockered, dandled or much made of. aCariciar, to
cocker, dandle, make much of, or entertain with all courtesy. * Acarnania, f.
a province in Albania famous for horses. Also a part of Greece called Epirus.
Also a country in Egypt, and a city by Syracusa in Sicilie. * Acarote, vide
Azarote. the name of a tree in Persia like the incense tree. Acarreadizo, any
thing brought or carried. * Acarreador, a bringer or carier of any thing.
Acarreadura, a carriage or bringing. Acarrear, to bring, to carry, to convey any
thing by carriage any way, or by any mean. * Acarreo, m. any thing brought,
carriage. aCarreto, m. vide Acarreadura, a carriage. * aCaso, by chance. *
Acatado, reverenced, respected, regarded, honored. aCatadura, the countenance,
presence, aspect, view, show or semblance. aCatamiento, reverence, beholding,
regard, marking, noting, aspect. Acatar, to reverence, to honor, to behold, to
regard, to look to, to mark. * aCavallo, on horse back. * Acavar or Acabar,
to make an end of, to finish, to conclude, to die. * Acaudalador, m. a summer
up, a bringer to a head. aCaudalar, to sum up, to set forward, to bring to a
head. Acaudillador, m. a commander or leader of soldiers. aCaudillamiento, the
leading or guiding of soldiers, the command over men at arms. aCaudillar, to
lead, guide, or have command over soldiers. * aCavo or aCabo, at the head or
end. * Acebo, vide Azebo. * Acebuche, vide Azebuche. * Accepcion, allowance, an
accepting or taking in good part. * Accessor, m. an accessarie, a consenter
unto. * Accessoriamente; accessarily, consentingly. * Accesso, an adding to, an
addition. * Accessorio, m. any thing that is accessarie or second, and not
principal, that is more than ordinary. Accion, a deed, an action. *
Accomodado, vide Acomodado. * Accomodar, vide Acomodar. * Accreditado, m. vide
Acreditado, having good credit or reputation. * Accustumbrado, vide
Acostumbrado. * Acechado or Assechado, watched, marked, eied, lien in wait
for, entrapped. * Acechador or Assechador, one that lies watching or spying,
one that lies in ambush to entrap. * Acechadora cosa, or Assechadora cosa, any
thing lieng in wait, spying or prying into any thing. * Acechamiento, m. vide
Assechanca. * Acechanca or Acechanza, f. a lying in wait, a watching to
entrap. * Acechando, by eying, peering or prying, by lying in wait. * Acechar
or Assechar, to eye, mark, peer or peep, to lie in wait or ambush. *
Acechia, f. a gutter or conduit to convey away the water. * Acecinador, m. one
that salteth flesh. * Acedar, vide Azedar. * Acedia, vide Azedia. * Acedo, vide
Azedo. * Acedura, vide Azedura. * Aceleracion, f. a haste making, a speeding or
making speed. * Acelerado, m. hastened speeded. * Aceleramiento, m. a
hastening, a speed making. * Acelerar, to make haste, to hasten, to make speed.
Acelga, f. an herb called a Beete. Some say it is Birch. * aCemitarra, vide
Cimitarra. Acemite, flower of meal, the finest of the bran. * aCena, vide
Acen^a, also at supper. Acendrado, excellent, perfect, clear. * Acendrar, to
make very pure, clear, perfect, excellent. Acen^a, Hacen^a, or Hazen^a, a
water mill. * Acender, vide Encender. Acen^ero, m. a miller keeping a water
mill. Acento, m. an accent, the tune, or manner of pronunciation of a syllable
long or short. Acentuar, to accent, to tune, or note the accent. * Acepillado,
m. smoothed or planed. * Acepillador, m. one that smootheth, shaueth or planeth
as a Ioyner uses. Acepilladuras, f. shauings, rindes or scales of wood,
metal, etc. remnants, fragments, scantlings, etc. Acepillar, to shave,
smooth, or plane a thing, to sleeke. Aceptable, worthy the allowance,
acceptable, welcome, well thought of. Aceptacion, f. allowance, acceptance,
welcoming, taking in good part. * Aceptado, m. allowed, well thought of,
accepted, welcome, taken in good part. Aceptar, vide Acetar, to accept, to
allow, to take in good part, to think well of. Acepto, vide Aceto, m.
acceptance taking in good part. Acequia, f. a trench, furrow, gap or ditch to
convey water, a kennell in the streets for a water course. aCerca, near by,
close by, fast, or hard by. * aCercado, m. come near to, approached, pressed, or
ready at hand. aCercamiento, m. a coming near to, an approaching or drawing
near to. aCercar, Praes. yo acerco, 1. Praet. yo acerque, to approach, to draw
near, or to come nigh to. To be pressed or ready at hand. * aCercateme, come
thou about me, or, be near me, or ready at my hand. Come hither. *
Acerbamente, sharply, sowerly. * Acerbo, or A'gro, m. sharp, sower, tart,
eager in taste, etc. * Acero, vide Azero. steel. * aCerravelas, or Aserravelas,
coards in a ship called the mark lines. * Acertado, m. assured, undoubted,
being so without fail. * Acertador, m. he that does a thing without fail. A
good shooter, a hitter of the white. Acertamiento, m. a hitting right, hitting
the nail on the head, not failing. Acertar, yo acierto, to hit the nail on
the head, to happen right, not to fail. To be out of doubt. * Acessorio, m.
any thing that is accessarie, and not principal. Acetado, or Aceptado, m.
allowed. * Acetar, or Aceptar, to allow, to accept, to like well of. * Acetosa
yerua, f. a kind of herb. * Aceto, or Acepto, m. an acceptance, an allowance,
or taking in good part. Acetre, m. a bucket of brass, a copper kettle, such as
brewers take up water with. Acetreria, f. the place where are sold or made
kettels, brass buckets, or such like, etc. A brasiers shop. Also vide
Cetreria. Acetrero, m. a brasier, one that sells or makes kettles, etc. Also
used for a fawlconer. aCevadado, m. cloyed with meat, crammed, made to loath
food. aCevadamiento, m. a cramming or cloying with meat. * aCevadar, to cram,
or cloy with meat. aCevadarse, or aCevastarse, to be crammed or cloyed with
meat, to loath, to be ouerfull. Acevilado, m. wretched, miserable, base, of
small reputation. * Acevilarse, to be base, wretched, miserable, or of no
reputation. Acezar, to breath, to fetch wind hardly, to gasp for breath, to
sigh, to pant. Acezo, m. breathing, fetching of wind hardly, sighing, panting.
Acezoso, m. he that breaths, pants, sigheth, or fetches his wind hardly.
* A'cha, or hacha, f. a torch, a hatchet or battle axe. Achacar, Praes. yo.
Achaco, 1. Praet. yo achaque, to excuse, to find an errand, or some excuse, to
find occasion, to lay to ones charge, to bear witness. Achacoso, m. one that
finds excuses or occasions, a cauiller. Achaque, m. an errand, excuse,
occasion, cavil. * Acheron, m. a river by the hill Auernus, called the
infernal lake: the Poets feign Acheron to be the son of Ceres, and that
as soon as he was born, not daring to behold the light, he ran down to hell,
where he became a bitter river: Acheron also signifies sad, heavy. aChicado,
m. diminished, made small, shortened, drawn together into a little compass.
aChicadura, f. diminishing, making small, curtalling, bringing into short.
aChicar, Praes. yo Achico, 1. Praet. yo Achique, to lessen, diminish, make
little, or short, to couch together briefly. * Achocado, m. stricken down,
laid along, felled. * Achocador, m. one that strikes down, felleth, or lays
along. Achocar, Praes. yo Achueco, 1. Praet. yo Achoque, to strike down, to
fell, or make fall, to lay along. * Achuchar, to press or strain close
together. * Achueco, Achoque, vide Achocar. * Achuecado, vide Achocado. *
Achuecador, vide Achocador. Acibar, m. a bitter herb, or juice of an herb
called Aloes. * Acibarrar en la pared, to dash against the wall. Acicalado, m.
polished, burnished, or trimmed up. Acicaladura, f. polishing, burnishing, or
trimming up. Acicalar, to polish, burnish, trim, or smooth up. * Acidalia, f.
the surname of Venus. Acidental, chauncing, happening, or casual. Acidente, a
chance, accident, or that happens. Acidia, f. sloth, lasines. * Acidiolo, m.
slothful. * aCiegas, blindfold. Aciel, vide Azero, steel. * Acierte, Acierto,
vide Acertar. Acion, f. an action, also a styrrup leather. Aciones, f. stirrup
leathers. Acipres, m. cypres trees. * Acipreste, an archpriest, a chief
priest. Acitara de silla, the saddle tree. Acitara, signifies the wall or
railes that are made breast high in a turret of a wall or house. Aclaracion, f.
making manifest, clearing. Aclarado, m. manifested, cleared, made evident. *
Aclarador, m. a, declarer manifestly, one that clears or makes the matter
plain, a quieter of controversies. Aclarar, to clear, to make manifest, to
open, to explain, to make fair, to quiet. * Aclavilla, f. a kind of
instrument, which diers use in dying their cloth or stuff. * Acobardar, or
Acovardar, to play the coward, to be timorous or fearful. * Acocar, to eg,
to set on, to incite, provoke or stir up. aCoceado, m. kicked, spurned.
aCoceador, m. a kicker, a spurner. aCoceamiento, m. kicking, spurning. aCocear,
to kick, to spurn, to trample underfoot. * aCodado, m. vide Recodado, leaned
on the elbowe. Acodadura, leaning on the elbow, striking with the elbow.
aCodar, to lean on the elbowe, or to strike with the elbowe. aCodar vides, to
joint vines, to plant them in the ground. aCodadura de vides, f. the taking
root, or the roots of vines under ground. Acofar, m. brass as it was mined.
* Acofarado, m. done or laid on with brass, brased. Acofeifa, Azofeifa, or
Acofeyfa, f. a fruit called of apothecaries Iujuba. * Acofeifado, or
Acofeyfado, m. a kind of meat dressed with Iujuba. * Acofeifar, or Acofeyfar,
to dress meat, or any thing with Iujuba the fruit * Acofeifo, or Acofeyfo,
m. the tree that bears the fruit of Acofeifa, id est Iujuba, the Iujuba
tree. aCogedor, m. one that does entertain, one that retireth. aCoger, yo
aCojo, Sub. Praes. aCoja, to entertain, to retire, to bring back, to provide.
* aCogido, m. entertained, returned, provided, brought back. aCogimiento, m.
entertainment, return, provision, bringing back. * Acogue, vide Azogue. *
Acohombrado, m. made like a cucumber. * aCoja, aCojo, vide aCoger. Acomado,
provoked, moved, stirred up, incited. Acomamiento, a stirring, provocation,
incitement. Acomar, to provoke, to stir up, to move, or incite. Acombre, vide
Acumbre, a measure about three wine quartes in England, it contains four
Quartillos in Spain. aCometedor, m. one that sets on, assaileth, or takes
a thing in hand. aCometedora, cosa, f. an inuasiue matter. aCometer, to
assail, to set upon, to take in hand, to invade. * aCometida, f. an assailing,
a setting upon, an inuading. * aCometido, m. set upon, assailed, undertaken,
invaded. aCometimiento, m. an inuading, assailing, setting on, or taking in
hand. * Acomodado, m. fitted, made handsome, settled, made apt for the purpose. *
Acomodamiento, m. fitting, making handsome, settling, etc. * Acomodar, to make
fit, meet, convenient or handsome, to settle, or place well. * aCompan^ado, m.
accompanied, followed, borne, or kept company with. aCompan^ador, m. one that
uses company, fellowship, goes or comes with, etc. aCompan^amiento, m. a
keeping company, fellowship, going or coming with, etc. aCompan^ar, to
accompany, to associate, to be fellowlike with, to go or come with. *
aComplimiento, m. a supply of soldiers, a supply of any matter else. *
Aconito, Libbardes bane, or Wolves bane, an herb to poison. * aConsejado, m.
counseled, advised. * aConsejar, to counsel, to advise, to direct. aContecer,
yo aContesco, to happen, to chance, or fall out. * aContecido, a Contescido, or
aCaecido, happened, chanced, or fallen out. * Acontecimiento, vide Acaecimiento.
* aContesca, aContesco, vide aContecer. * aContescer, vide aContecer. *
Acopado, arbol. m. a tree whose boughs grow, or are made to grow round together
as a cup. * Acor, m. a hawk, a goshauke. Acorado, m. fierce, wild. *
Acoralado, m. done with corrall. Also vide Acorralado. Acorarse, to wax
fierce, to be wild. * Acordado, remembered, thought upon, agreed, tuned, or
agreed as in music or harmony. Acordar, yo Acuerdo, to remember, to awake,
to call to remembrance, to agree, to put in mind, to agree together, to sound
well in harmony, to determine. Acorde, m. agreement, consenting in opinions,
or in musical harmony. * Acordelejo, m. an instrument to pluck hairs from
the head or eie-browes. Also a jesting, mocking, or scoffing at one to withdraw
him from any thing. Also a racking with coardes. * Acores, hawks. Also the
Islands Acores, where many hawks are. Acoro, m. sweet Cane, Galingale. *
Acorralado, m. driven up, or closed up in a corner, pounded up. Also dressed or
done with coral. Acorralar, to close up, to drive into a corner, to pound up.
Also to dress with coral. aCorrer, to run to, to help, to succor, or aid.
Acorro, m help, succor, or aid. * aCortado, shortened, clipped, cut off,
abridged. * aCortar, to shorten, to cut off, to clyp, to abridge, to diminish,
to abate, to defalke. * aCossado, or aCosado, m. pricked, spurred on stung, set
on, incited. aCossador, m. one that pricketh, stingeth, urges much, inciteth,
etc. * aCossamiento, m. pricking, stinging, urging. aCossar, to prick, to
sting, to incite, or urge vehemently. * aCosta. i. a Costa, f. at cost, charge,
or expense, or at the sea coast. * aCostado, m. leaned, or layne down upon the
side, belonging to, attending on. aCostamiento, m. sitting, lying, leaning upon
one side. Bribes, waiting or attending on. Acostar, Acostarse, to sit, to lie,
to lean on one side. Also to bribe. * aCostumbrado, m. accustomed, woonted,
usual. * aCostumbrar, to accustom, to use, to be wont. * Acotacion, f.
marking down, or quoting of a thing. Acotadizo, m. he that is whipped, or one
subject to whipping, * Acotado, m. whipped or scourged. * Acotado, m. quoted,
marked, noted as a book. Acotador, m. a whipper, a scourger. Also a whip, a
scourge. Acotamiento, m. whipping, scourging. Acotar, to whip, to scourge. *
Acotar, to mark down, or quote a thing. * Acotation, v. Acotacion, f. a
quoting of any thing. Acote, m. a whip. Acotea, f. a flat roof covered with
lead or plaster: a leads. * Acotejado, m. quoted or compared together.
aCovardado, or aCobardado, made a Coward. aCovardar, or aCobardar, to make
cowardlike, hartles, whiteliuered. aCrecentado, m. augmented, increased,
enlarged. * aCrecentador, m. an inlarger, increaser, augmenter.
aCrecentamiento, m. increase, augmenting, enlarging. aCrecentar yo aCreciento,
to augment, to increase, to enlarge. * aCreciente, aCreciento, vide aCrecentar.
* aCreditado varon, m. a man of good credit, reputation, or wealth. *
aCreditar, to countenance one, to give him credit. To help one to office or
place. * aCreedor, m. a creditor. * aCrescer, or aCrecer, to grow, increase, or
augment. * aCrescimiento, m. vide acrecimiento, an increase or growing. *
Acrevillado, m. pierced through with diverse holes. Also one wounded with diverse
stocadoes. * Acrevillar, to pierce through with diverse holes. To wound with
diverse stocadoes. * Acrisolado, m. purified in a melting pan, or pot of a
goldsmith. Also purified, refined, as gold and silver. * Acrisolar, to put into
a goldsmithes melting pot. To refine or purify gold or silver. * A'ctimo, m. a
small distance in measure. * A'ctio, vide. Accion. * A'cto, vide. Auto. *
Actor, a dealer, an actor. * Acuar, vide Acucar. Acucar, m. Sugar. Acucar
piedra, or Acucar candy, sugar candy. Acucarado, m. dressed with sugar.
Acucena, white Lilly. aCuchillados, with blows, with cuts or slashes. *
aCuchilladizo, one that is slashed, cut or wounded with cuts and slashes. *
aCuchillado, m. cut, slashed, wounded, hewed. * aCuchillador, m. a hackster, a
cutting fellow, a swashbuckler. aCuchillar, to cut, to wound, to hew, to slash,
to kill, to fight. Acucia, f. sharpnes of edge, quicknes of wit, diligence,
curiosity, heedfulnes. Acuciar, to sharpen, to make quick conceited, to make
heedfull, or diligent. Acuciosamente, sharply, wittily, heedfully, diligently.
Acucioso, m. sharp, witty, heedfull, diligent. * Acuclillas, on the buttocks as
dogs or diverse beasts sit. Acuda, f. a trench, a great wheel to cast water
with, or draw water withal from any place. * Acudido, m. repaired unto,
drawn near unto, assembled, approached to, come unto, yielded to, restored.
Acudimiento, m. a gathering to, repayring unto, assembling, approaching near,
coming unto, restored, or yielded unto. Acudir, to come to, to repair unto,
to assemble, to approach or draw near unto. To restore, to yield unto. Acuela,
or Hacuela, f. a little pickaxe, a little axe, a hatchet, a coopers ads or axe.
* Acuerde, acuerdo, vide. Acordar. Acuerdo, or Concierto, m. a decree, an
ordinance, a determination, an agreement. * aCuestas, upon the shoulders, on
the back. * Sessenta an^os aCuestas, three score years on the back, or three
score years old. * aCueste, aCuesto, vide aCostar. * Acufrado, m. smoked,
perfumed or done with brimstone. * Acufrar, to smoke or do with brimstone. *
Acufre or cufre, m. brimstone. Aculla, there, thither, thence, that way. *
Acumbar, vide Azumbar. Acumbre, m. a kind of measure about three wine quartes
of England. aCumulado, m. heaped on. aCumular, to heap on, to lay one upon
another. * Acuncador, m. one that polisheth any thing, sets in order or
trimmeth up. * Acuncar, to polish, set in order, or trim up. * Acun^ado, m.
coined as money, cleaued with wedges, forged with hammers, etc. Acun^ador, m. a
coiner. Also a cleauer with wedges, one that strikes a stamp into a thing.
Acun^ar, to cleave with wedges, to coin, to forge as Smithes do, to give a
stamp unto. * Acurtidor, vide Curtidor, m. * Acurtir, to steep, to make
ready, to tan leather. Acusacion, f. an accusing, blaming, laying to ones
charge. Acusado, m. accused, blamed, found fault with, laid to his charge,
complained of, reproved, guilty. * Acusador, m. an accuser, a finder of
faults, a blamer, a reproouer, a promoter, a plaintiff. Acusadora cosa, f. a
matter procuring blame, or belonging to accusation, reproof or complaint.
Acusar, to accuse or lay to ones charge, to blame, find fault with, to
reprove, promote, or commence plea against. * Acusativo, m, accusative, full
of accusations or finding faults or blames, full of complaints. * Acusativo
caso, m. the accusative case. * Acustumbrar, vide Acostumbrar. * Acutea. f. the
roof of a house covered with Lead or plaster, or a high walk or gallerie on
the top of a house, as in Spain they for the most part have: the Leads.
A D
* Adagio, a proverb. * Adahala, f. vide Adehala, any thing or gift given or
taken over and above the price agreed upon in a bargain. Adalid, m. a leader
or governor of men, a guide. Adarga, f. a short and light target or buckler,
which the Africans and Spaniards do use. Adargado, m. a targettier, one that
carries or uses such a target or buckler. Adargar, Adargarse, Praes. yo
Adargo, 1. Praet. yo Adargue, to use such a target or buckler. Also to make a
stand, or prepare for defense. Adarme or Adareme, m. a dram in weight. Also a
certain piece of money used of some for a grote. Adarves, m. battlements of
walls. * Adautan bever, to carowse in drinking. * Adbertido, vide Advertido. *
Adbitrio, arbitriment, award, judgment, advise, opinion, will, pleasure. *
Adehala, f. any thing or gift given or taken over and above the price agreed
upon in a bargain. * Adejar, id est, aDexar, to leave, to forsake, to forgo,
to let pass. Vide Dexar. * Adelande, vide Adelante. Adelantado, m. a Lord
deputy or president of a country for the king, a princes lieutenant in a
province, or any great place of charge. Also preceded, gone before, exceeded,
advanced forward. Adelantamiento, m. the authority and office of such a Lord
president or deputy. Also a going before, an aduauncing forward, a preceding.
Adelantar, Adelantarse, to excel other, to go before other, to lead other the
way, to be the principal man. Adelante, before, aforehand, beyond. * alli
Adelante, thencefoorth. * mas Adelante, furthermore, moreover
Adelfa, f. the herb called Enula campana. Adelgacar, vide Adelgazar.
Adelgazado, m. made small, fine or slender, drawn out in length. *
Adelgazador, m. one that makes small, fine or slender, one that draws at
length. Adelgazamiento, m. making small, fine or slender, drawing at length.
Adelgazar or Adelgacar, to make slender, small or fine, to draw out at length.
* Adelgazar la pluma, to make a pen to write small. Also to write or endite
curiously with skill and finenesse. Ademan or Ademanes, m. behavior, gesture,
carriage of a man. * aDemas, over and above. aDentelladas, f. by bites, by
mouthfuls, bitingly. * aDentellado, m. bitten, gnawed with the teeth. *
aDentellador, m. a biter, one that gnaweth like a dog. aDentelladura, f.
biting, gnawing. aDentellar, to gnaw, to bite. aDentro, within, inwardly,
privately, in secret. Aderecadamente, directly, readily, prouidently, orderly.
* Aderecado, m. made ready, prepared, furnished, provided, directed.
Aderecamiento, m. readiness, preparation, furnishing, ordering. Aderecar yo
Aderesco, to prepare, to make ready, to make straight, to provide, to direct.
* Aderecos de casa, furniture for a house. Adereco, m. preparation, making
straight, direction, order. Adesoras, f. or Adezoras, out of time, out of
season, unlooked for, unthought on: upon a sudden, in have. aDespecho, m. in
despite, despightfully, maugre his bearde, will he, nill he. * aDestrar yo
aDiestro, to direct or guide into the right way or course, to make dextrous or
ready. aDeudado, m. indebted, bound to another in sums of money. aDeudarse,
to be indebted, to be bound or in danger to another. * aDevinar, to prophecy,
to tell aforehand, or to tell strangely. * aDevino, m. a soothsaier, one that
can prophecy or tell things strangely. * aDiafano, or aDiaphano, vide Diafano,
a thing transparent or to be seen through, as water, air, etc. * Adicion, f.
an addition or putting to of any thing. * aDiestrado, m. directed or guided
into the right, made ready or dextrous in any thing. * aDiestrador, m. one
that directs or guides into the right. A maker ready, or dextrous in any
thing. * aDiestra, Adiestro, vide aDestrar. * Aditamento, an addition, a
supply. * Adivas, the quincie, or squinancie in a beast. Also crooked pinnes
that put into dogs meat kills them. Adives, dogs in Barberie, which in the
night do bark continually. aDivinacion, f. prophesying, foretelling of things
to come, or strange revealing of matters. * aDivinador, one that can prophecy,
foretell things to come, or can reveal strangely. * aDivinanca, f.
soothsaying, prophesying, or revealing of things strangely. aDivinar, to tell
of things to come, to prophecy or reveal strange things. aDivino, m. a
soothsayer, a teller of fortunes, a reuealer of strange matters.
adMinistracion, f. hearing an office, managing of affairs, exploiting of some
thing. adMinistrador, m. he that bears and uses an office, manageth
affairs, or exployteth any thing. adMinistradora cosa, f. a matter that may be
ordered by government. adMinistrar oficio, to bear or discharge an office.
adMinistrar la hazienda, to manage affairs, to exploite a matter, to govern a
household, to dispose of goods. * adMirable, wonderful, marvelous, admirable,
excellent. * adMirablemente, wonderfully, in marvelous manner, admirablie,
miraculouslie, excellently, honorably. * adMiracion, f. woondering, maruelling,
admiration, surpassing common reason. adMirado, m. woondered at, admired,
holden in great estimation, honored. * adMirador, m. one that maruelleth,
woondereth at, or holds in great account. * adMirar, to wonder at, to hold
in admiration, to honor, to account miraculous. * Admitido, m. allowed,
admitted, received, liked, permitted. * Admitir, to allow, to admit, or
permit, to receive in, to bring in, to commit, to approve, to like. * aDo,
where. Adoba, f. vide Adobo, sauce, dipping, mending, or botching of things.
Adobado, m. mended, patched, or botched, dawbed, or plaistered, dipped in
sauce. * Adobador, m. a botcher, mender, or patcher. Adobar, to mende, to
sauce, to botch clothes, or cobble shoes, to daube, or plaster. Adobar
manjares, to dip meats in sauce Adobe de barro, mortar, clay, etc. * Adobio,
vide Adobo, m. * Adobo, mending, repairing. Also sauce for meat. Adobo de
manjares, m sauce for meat. Adolecer, to wax sick, to become feeble, or ill
at ease, to grieve, to be sorry, or ill apaide. Adolentarse, to be sick, to
be sorry, to be grieved, to be ill at ease, or full of pain. aDonde,
whither, where. aDonde quiera, whither soever, wheresoever. Adopcion, f. taking
for his child, challenging for his own. Adoptado, m. taken to be as a
natural son or heir, challenged or taken to be his own. * Adoptador, m.
one that takes another man's child to be as his own, a challenger of other
men's works to be his own. Adoptar, to take another man's child to be as his
own natural, to arrogate or challenge another man's praise as his own, to
take from another to himself. Adoracion, f. worshipping, with great
submission. * Adorado, m. worshipped with great submission. Adorar, to worship
with kissing the hand, and in most reverend and humble sort. To reverence.
aDormescer, or adormecer, to nap, to sleep, to bring a sleep. aDormecido, or
aDormido, m. brought a sleep, napping, lulled a sleep. * aDormideras, f. a
certain herb provoking or causing sleep, growing much in the field, called
wild Poppie aDormido, or aDormecido, sleepie, given to sleep, sluggish.
aDormir yo aDuermo, to fall on sleep, to sleep. * aDormimiento, m. a drowsy
sleeping, a sleepie slugging. * adOrnado, m. decked, trimmed up, adorned,
garnished. * adOrnador, m. a decker, furnisher, trimmer up of things.
adOrnamiento, m. decking, garnishing, trimming up, making fair to the show, or
burnishing. adOrnar, to deck, to trim up, to adorn, to burnish, to apparel,
to advance, to furnish, to honor, to make fair, to show, to beautify. *
adOrnato, m. decked, furnished, made fair to look to, apparelled, honored, or
a decking, trimming, furnishing, beautifieng. * adO'rno, m. garnishing,
furniture, beautifieng. * adO'rno poetico, m. poetical grace, handling the
matter like a poet. * Adovado, vide Adobado. * Adovar, vide Adobar. * Adovar,
to amend, to botch, to cobble, to sauce, to dawbe or plaster. adQuerido, or
adQuirido, m. Gotten to, fastened thereto, made fast, procured, purchased,
obtained. * adQuiere, adQuiero, vide adQuiar. adQuiridor, m. a procurer, getter
to, obtayner, purchaser. * adQuirimiento, m. getting thereto, purchasing,
obtaining, procuring, tying, or fastening to. adQuirir yo adQuiero, to get or
win to, to purchase, obtain, or procure. To tie or fasten unto. Adrada, f.
rare, that which happens sildome. * Adrecar, uide Aderecar. Adrede,
purporsely, wittingly, of set purpose. Adrianes, corns in the feet or toes,
called of some wragnailes. Aduana, f. custom, toll, a custom house, a
toll-house. Aduaneros, m. customers, takers of toll. Aduar, m. a village of
tents remooueable. A street of boothes or tents in faires. A shepherds house
or cottage. adVenedizo, m. a stranger, strange, happening, chancing, casual.
Advenediza cosa, f. a strange matter. A thing casual. * Advenga, Advengo, vide
Advenir. * adVenidero, m. that which is to come, or shall come. * adVenimiento,
that which chances or happens. A casual chance, a happening or falling
out. * adVenir, Praes. Advengo, advienes, adviene, 1. Praet. Advine, adviniste,
advino, Fut. Advendre, advendras, advendra, Sub. Praes. Advenga, Imperfect.
Adviniera, adviniesse, or Advendria, Fut. Adviniere, to come to, to approach, to
arrive. To happen, to chance, to fall out. Adversario, m. an aduersare, an
enemy, a cross friend. Adversidad, f. adversity, ill fortune, crosse-hap,
poverty, enemitie, contrariety. * Adverso, m. against, contrary, adverse,
unfortunate, backward. Advertencia, f. marking, heed, looking, weighing or
considering of a matter. * Advertidamente, heedfully, warily, with
consideration. * Advertido, m. Marked, taken heed unto. Advertir yo advierto,
to mark, to take heed of, to look diligently unto, to weigh or consider, to
admonish or give warning of. Adufe, a timbrell. Adufero, or Aduflero, a player
on a Taber, a player on a timbrell, or one that sells them. * Advierta,
Advierto, vide Advertir. * ad Vine, adviniera, adviniesse, vide ad Venir. *
Adulador, m. a flatterer, a clawbacke, a smoothbootes. * A duladoras palabras,
f. fawning or flattering speech. aDulcar, to sweeten, to make sweeter. *
aDulcir, to make sweet, to sweeten. Adulterar, to commit adultery, or
whordome, to counterfaite, or play false. Adulterino, m. counterfaited, false,
forged, falsified. Adulterio, adultery, whoredom. Adultero, m. an adulterer,
a whoremonger. * Advogar, Praes. yo Advogo, 1. Praet. yo Advogue, to play the
advocate or counsailor, to plead as a counsailor, to give counsel in law. *
Advogue, vide Advogar.
A E
* aEcho, the voice, Echo, which answers by resounding the last word. *
aE'llos, m. to them. aEmpuxones, by thrusts, with pushings, or thrusting,
iustling, shouing. * Aere, m. the air. * aEsconder, id est, aEsconder, to
hide, to keep secret, to keep close. aEscondidas, secretly, privily, like a
micher. * aEscuras, in the dark, blindfoldly.
A F
Afabilidad, f. affability, readiness of speech, easines to talk with, fair
language. Afable, fair spoken, gentle in speech, courteous to speak unto,
fair toonged, affable. * aFamado, m. made famous. * aFamador, m a bruter
abroad of men's reports, a carrier of news. * aFamar, to make famous. Afan, m.
labor, travel weariness, vexation. Afanado, m. wearied, vexed, having
labored. Afanar, to travel, to labor, to weary, to vex. aFe, by the faith,
verily, truly, in good sooth, in earnest. * aFeado, m. become foul, defiled,
made unhandsome, dishonested, shamed, reviled, deformed. aFeador, m. a defiler,
one that makes foul, one that shameth, a reuiler. aFeamiento, m. making
foul, defiling, dishonesting, shaming, reuiling. aFear, or aFFear, to make
foul, to shame, to defile, to dishonest, to disforme, to revile. Afectado, m
affected, minded, well liked, wished before, desired. * Afectar, to like, to
affect. Afecto, vide Afeto, affection, inclination, good liking. Aferes,
trifling business, matters of small moment. * Aferrado, m. grapled, hooked,
fastened together. * Aferrados navios, ships grapling together. * Aferrar, yo
Afierro, to grapple, gripe, or hook together, to clinch or catch hold on. *
Afeto, affection, inclination, good liking. Afeytadera, f. a barbers shop.
Afeytado, m. barbed, combed, made fair or white, painted on the face, shaven,
colored, trimmed or decked up. Afeytador, m. a barber, trimmer, dresser,
painter of faces, maker of folk fair. Afeytar, to barbe, to comb, to trim,
to dress, to paint the face, to make fair, to die with colors, to crispe or
curle the hair, to make fine and brave. Afeyte, m. painting for faces,
coloring, waters to make the face shine white, flourish, or glass to make a
thing glister: trim clothing. Affamar, vide aFamar, to make famous. * Affan,
vide aFan. * Affanar, vide Afanar. Affear, vide aFear. * Affectado, vide
Afectado. * Affecto, vide Afeto. * Afferrar, vide aFerrar. * Affeto, vide
Afeto. * A'fice, m. an officer called a searcher or ouerseer. * aFFiere, vide
aFerrar. * aFFilar, vide aFilar. * aFFirmar, vide aFirmar. * aFForrar, vide
aForrar. Aficion, f. affection, inclination, disposition. * Aficionado, m.
affected, inclined, disposed. * Aficionar, to affect, like, bend himself to. *
Afiere, vide Aferrar. Afigir yo Afijo, to fasten, to join to. Afilada, f. a
file, to sharpen sawes withal, etc. * Afilado, m. filed, sharpened. * Afilador,
m. one that does sharpen tools. Afiladura, f. the edge of atoole or weapon.
Afilar, to sharpen, whet, or file. * aFinado, made an end of, perfected,
brought to an end, dead. * aFinador, m. a refiner, finisher, or maker perfect.
aFinadura, perfecting, finishing, making fine, dying. aFinar, to make fine, to
make perfect, to finish, or bring to an end, to die. * Afine, kin, or having
alliance by marriage. Also near unto, joining near together. * Afinidad, f.
affinity, alliance or kindred by marriage. Afirmacion, f. an affirming, a
warrant, auouching or a making strong. Afirmadamente, affirmatively, by way of
warrant, auouching it to be so. * Afirmado, m. affirmed, warranted, avouched,
or made firm, fast and strong. * Afirmado, or hecho Firm, made firm, fast,
or strong. Afirmador, m. one that warranteth, affirms, or confirms, or one
that makes firm or strong. Afirmar, to affirm, to warrant, to ratify, to
confirm, to set down for certain, to establish, to avouch, to make firm,
strong, or fast. Afistolado, fistoled, or having a fistula, a disease or soar
growing to a perpetual issue through a long narrow and hard hole. Also
whistled or piped. * Afistolar, to fistolate, to grow to a fistula, a disease
growing to a perpetual issue, to whistle to pipe. * Afixar, to set up or
fasten. * Afletamiento, the paying of freight for a ship. * Afletarnaos, to pay
the freight for the goods or merchandise in a ship. Afligido, m. afflicted,
distressed, brought to a hard pass, troubled. * Afligidor, m. a troubler,
afflicter, distresser, a bringer to misery. Afligimento, m. affliction,
trouble, vexation, anguish, molestation. Afligiryo Aflijo, to afflict, to vex,
to grieve, to trouble, to molest. * Aflija, Aflijo, vide Afligir. * aFloxado,
m. mittigated, assuaged, softened, mollified, released, vnbended, weakened. *
aFloxador, m. one that slackneth, mittigateth, releaseth, asswageth, weakneth,
mollifieth. aFloxadura, f. slacknes, weakness, idleness, slouthfulnes, baseness
of mind, loosenes. aFloxar, to let loose, to slacken, to weaken, to be
discouraged, to be idle, to unbend a bow, to wax base minded, to wax feeble.
* aFloxar las agujetas, to untie points, to untruss points. * aFloxar el arco,
to vnbende a bow. * Aforado, made subject to the law. * aForrado, m. furred. *
aForrador, m. a skinner, a furrier. * aForradura, f. furring. * aForrar, to
furre. aForro, furre. * aFortunadamente, fortunately, luckely, happily. *
aFortunado, m. fortunate, luckie, happy. * aFortunar, to make fortunate,
luckie, or happy. * Afrechado, m. the bran beaten out of meal. Also all to be
done with bran. * Afrechadura, f. the bolting or beating out of bran out of
meal. Also dressing with branne. * Afrechar, to bolt or beat out the bran out
of meal. Also to beebran or dress with bran by casting bran on any thing. *
Afrecho, bran. Afrenta, f. shame, reproach, peril, danger, disgrace, opprobrie,
disdain, scorn. * Afrentado, m. reproched, disdained, scorned. * Afrentador,
one that reprocheth, disgraceth, casts in the teeth, or scorneth. Afrentar,
or Afrontar, to reproach, to disgrace, to dishonest, to bring into danger. *
Afrentosamente, reprochfully, disgraciously, dangerously. * aFrentoso, m.
reproachful, out of countenance, out of grace, dangerous. * Africano, of or
pertaining to Afric, a man of Afric. Afrontar, vide aFrentar. * aFuera,
without, aloof of. * Afuste, a company of pyoners, wheel carriage of
ordinances. * Afuziado, m. put in confidence or assured hope. * Afuziador, m.
one that puts in sure hope or confidence. Afuziar, to put in hope, to trust,
to assure, to bid.
A G
Agacapado, squatted as a hare or conie. * Agacapador, m. one that squatteth as
a hare or conie. Agacapar, or Agacaparse, vide Agachar. Agachado, m. squatted
as a bare or conie. Agachar, to squat as a hare or conie. Agalla, galha, or
Bugalla, gauls. The kernels in the neck. The gill of a fish. * Agalla de
cipres. the Cypres nut. Agallas de pesce, the gils of a fish. Agallas en la
garganta, kernels in the throat. * Agardar, vide aGuardar. * Agarrado, clasped,
buckled. Agarrar, to claspe, to buckle. * Agareno, or Moro, a black Moore, or
neager. Agarico, m. Agarike, a white and sweet smelling mushrome, which
shines very bright in the dark night: it grows on high in trees, especially
in the larix tree * aGarrocha, vide Garrocha, a kind of dart of a fadome long
with a pike of steel or iron, with which in Spain they cast, wound and strike
in a bull set loose within a rail between them. * aGarrochado, pricked or
stroke in with a dart, called in Spain a Garrocha, when they bait bulls on
horseback. * aGarrochar, to strike in or wound a bull with a Garrocha, which
is a dart of the height of a man with a steel point or pike. In Spain knights
and gentlemen use that exercise on horseback to a bull being loose and untied.
* aGarrachon, m. a great Garrocha, which noblemen, knights, and gentlemen use a
horseback, vide Garrocha. * Agatado, m. laid down, creeping or crowching on
all four. * Agatar, to go creeping on all four, as hands and feet. A
borrowed speech of Gato, which is a cat, to go creeping as a cat. aGatas,
creeping as a cat. Agazadera, vide Aguzadera, a whetstone, whereon oil being
put, the grauers and caruers do whet their instruments. It may be also taken
for a barbers whetstone. * Agenado, m. alienated, estranged. * Agenador, m. one
that alienateth or estrangeth, or withdraws away his friendship. Agenamiento,
m. casting off, alienating or estranging. Agenar, to alienate, to be
unacquainted with, to abstain from, to alter, to estrange. Agenar el hijo, to
cast off a son. Ageno, or Ajeno, m. strange, diverse, unlike, not agreeable,
estranged from us, not agreeing with. Ageno ser de alguna cosa, to be
unacquainted with a matter. To be estranged or alienated from a matter.
Agerato, m. a kind of Agrimonie: some call it Mawdline, Eupatorie. * Agi, m. a
kind of pepper which grows in India, it bears a fruit or seed long as ones
finger: it bites in the mouth like pepper, and for that use the Indians use it
in sauces and other meats. It is a kind of long pepper. The Spaniard calls
it Pimiento, id est pepper. Agijon, vide Aguijon, a prick, a sting. * A'gil,
m. nimble, active. * Agitides, veins under the tongue. * Agnado, a kinsman by
the fathers side. * Agiustar, to make just, even, straight. * aGocar, id est a
Gozar, to enjoy, take pleasure or delight in. * Agolar la vela de navio, to
hoise up sail as high as it will go. Agonia, f. Agony. * Agoniado, m.
pressed or vexed. Agonizando, giving up the ghost. Agora, id est, a ora, now of
late, or a while ago, hereafter, even now, at length. Agorar yo Aguero, to
guess at, to divine, to foretell, to tell fortunes. Agorero, m. a soothsayer, a
diuiner, a teller of fortunes, or of things to come, one that gesseth nearly
at matters, a cunning man. Agoreria, f. skill in soothsaying, telling of things
to come, etc. * aGorrachado, vide aGarrochado. * aGorrochar, vide aGarrochar.
Agostadero, m. a summer house, a banqueting house, or garden house. *
Agostador, m. one that dwells in a summer house. Agostar, to dwell in a
summer house, to summer in a place, to keep in a garden house. Also to dig
the ground for vines in August. Agosto, vide Aosto, m. the month August. *
aGotado, emptied, quite out, drawn out every drop. * aGotador, m. an emptier
of wells or pits, etc. * aGotadura, f. emptying of a well, pit, or any other
thing, drawing out of every drop. aGotar, to empty, to draw quite out.
Agovear, to submit, to humble himself. A'gra, vide Aguda. * aGraciado, m.
gracious, in favor. * Agradable, grateful, acceptable, well liked of,
pleasant. * Agradablemente, pleasantly, acceptablie. Agradado, m. accepted,
liked of. Agradamiento, gratefulnes, good acceptance, well liking, pleasing.
Agradar, to please, to like well, to delight. Agradecer yo agradesco, to
thank, to give thanks, to show gratitude. Agradecido, m. thankful,
grateful, taken in good part. Agradecimiento, m. gratefulnes, thanks giving,
gratifying, doing good. Agradescer, vide Agradecer. Agramente, sharply,
sowerly. Agramonia, vide Agrimonia. * Agravadamente, vide Agraviadamente. *
Agravado, vide Agraviado. * Agravar, vide Agraviar. Agraviadamente, grievously,
in a chafe, vexingly, molestfully. * Agraviado, m. grieved, vexed, molested,
grievous, heinous. * Agraviador, m. one that vexes, greeueth, molesteth,
troubles, sets in a chafe. Agraviar, to grieve, to vex, molest, or set in
a chafe, to trouble. Agravio, m. grief, vexation, trouble, affliction,
molestation. Agras, or Agraz, Veriuice, a sower grape, home unmade, oil
vnclarified. * A'gras palabras, sharp or sower speeches, bitter words. *
Agrelles, an herb called Sorrel. * A'gria, f. a nit in the hair. *
Agricultura, f. husbandry, tilling of the ground, plowing. * Agricultor, a
tiller of the ground, a plowman, a husbandman. Agrimonia, f. an herb called
Agrimonie. * A'grio, vide Acerbo, sharp, sower, tarte. A'grio, or Acerbo, m.
sower, tart, sharp. Also a field. A'gro, or Campo, m. a field. Agrura, f.
sharpenes, tartnes of taste. A'gua, f. water. * A'gua de angeles, a water
drawn out of white Roses, white Lillies, and Iasmins. * A'gua de Azahar, f.
water of flowers of Orenges. A'guarozada, f. water of rose. * A'gua de trebol,
water of Trefoile. A'guas vivas, the spring tides, the flowing and ebbing of
the sea. * A'guas muertas, dead, or standing waters. Also a city in Prouence.
* Aguada, as Hagamos aguada, let us take in fresh water into a ship. * Hazer
aguada, to take in fresh water into a ship. Aguadan^a, f. Guadan^a, A syeth.
Aguadero, m. a water bearer. Also the sink of a kitchen, etc. Aguador, vide
Aguadero. * Aguador del Real, a water bearer to a camp. Aguado, m. watered,
foundered as a horse. Also it signifies one that drinks nothing but water.
Aguaducho, m. a conduit, a watercourse. Aguaitado, m. watched for, lain in
wait for. Aguaitador, m. a liar in wait for, a deceiuer. Aguaitadora cosa, f.
a deceitful matter, a matter craftily compassed. Aguaitamiento, m. an ambush, a
lying in wait, crafty, packing, cunning conueyance, deceitful dealing.
Aguaitar, vide Assechar, to lay an ambush, to lie in wait for, to seek for,
to deceive or entrap. Aguamanil, m. a basin, an ewer, a lauer. Sometime a
cruse, small pot or pitcher. * Aguamanos, water to wash the hands. Aguamiel,
water with honey, meade. Aguanoso, m. full of water, waterish. Aguapie, m. the
smaller, or second wine, sharp wine. The first wine is called Yema; the
second, Aguapie: the third, Nieto. * Aguar, to water, to alay with water. *
Aguar vino, to lay the strength of wine by putting in water: or, to mingle
water with wine. * Aguardar, to wait for, to stay for, to tarry for. *
Aguardame un poco, stay, or tarry for me a little. * Aguarvar, vide Agradar.
Aguatocho, m. the cock of a conduit, a tap to draw drink at, a spoute, a
syring: a water squirt. * Agucia, vide Acucia, sharpnes, quicknes of conceit. *
Aguciadamente, vide Acuciadamente, sharply, wittily. * Aguciar, vide Acuciar,
to sharpen, to quicken the wit. * Aguda, or A'gra, vide Agramente. Agudamente,
sharply, wittily, readily. Agudeza, f. sharpnes, quicknes of conceit, readiness
of wit, nimblenes of sight, the edge of any weapon or tool. Agudo, m. sharp
in taste, quick conceited, ready witted, quick of sight, sharp in cutting. *
Aguela, or Abuela, f. a grandmother. Aguelo, or Abuelo, m. a grandfather. *
Aguere, Aguero, vide Agorar, to soothsay, to tell fortunes, or foreshew of
things to come. Aguero, m. a soothsaying, a telling of fortunes, foreshewing of
things to come. * Agugerar, vide Agujerar, to make full of holes. * Agugeta,
vide Agujeta, a point, a lace. * Agugetero, vide Agujetero, a point-maker.
Aguja, f. a needle, a stone broad and large below, and sharp and narrow above.
Also a kind of fish. * Aguja de bolsar, a stitching needle. * Aguja de marear,
a compass for mariners to sail by. * Aguja marina, a fish with a long sharp
beak like a needle. Also an herb with a kind of blade showting up sharp. *
Agujas pampillas, an herb called storkes bill. Aguja piece, a garfish, piper
fish, or horne-beake. * Agujada, vide Aguijada, f. a goade. * Agujerado, m.
full of holes, made like a lattish, cast cross, cancelled or cut off.
Agujereado, idem. * Agujerar or Agugerar, to make full of holes, to make like a
lattish, to cancel, to misuse, to cast cross. * Agujerar un nauio, to gowge
or make holes in a ship. Agujero, m. a hole, a cranie, a clift. Agujeta, f. a
point, a lace, a latchet. Agujetero, m. a point-maker, a maker of laces.
Aguija, f. a small peeble stone, shingle on the seashoare, gravel. Aguijada,
f. a goade. Aguijador, m. one that pricketh forward, he that drives on or
urges. Aguijadura, f. pricking forward, driving on, hastening, posting on.
Aguijar, to prick forward, to urge or drive on, to hasten, to make poast
haste. Aguijen^o, m. full of peeble stones, grauelly, or full of gravel.
Aguijon, m. a prick of a goad, a sting. * Aguijonazo, m. the pricking with a
goad or sting. Aguijonear, to sting, to prick, to urge or drive forward.
A'guila, f. an eagle. * A'guila pescadera, an osprey. * A'guila negra, a hawke
called a Saker. * A'guila atahorma, a hearon. * Aguilando, or Aguinaldo, m.
handsel, or the first money that one takes, a reward. * Aguilen^ado, m. hook
nosed like an eagle. Aguilen^o, of an eagle, or like an eagle. Also long
visaged. * Aguilla, or Agulia, vide Aguja, f. Aguilocho, m. an eagles chicken,
a young eagle. Aguinaldo, vide Aguilando, handsel, or reward. * Agulia, or
Aguilla, vide Aguja, f. aGusto, m. with liking, to the good liking, to his
mind, as he would have it. * Aguxerar, vide Agujerar. * Aguxerar un nauio, to
gowge a ship. Aguzadera, f. a whetstone. * Aguzamiento, m. whetting, making
sharp. Aguzanieve, a bird called a wagtaile. Aguzar, to whet, to sharpen, to
make the point sharp, to gnash with the tuskes as a boar does.
A H
* Ahagar, vide Ahogar. aHao, ho, an aduerbe of calling. * Ahechador, m. a
sifter or boulter of meal, one that winnoweth corn, etc. * aHechado, m.
sifted, winnowed, or fanned. aHechaduras, branne, chafe, dross or dust of
corn, etc. Ahechar, to sift, to boult, to fan or winnow corn, to purge, to
make clean. Ahelear, to taste of gall, to be bitter. * aHerrojado, m. tied
with yrons or chains, laden with yrons or chains. * aHerrojar, to tie with
iron or chains, to load with iron or chains. * aHi, as Quien viene ahi? who
comes here? or who is there, or who goes there? * aHidalgamente,
gentlemanlike, like one of good bringing up. * aHidalgado, brought up like a
gentleman, well nurtured, of gentleman like conditions. * aHijada, f. adopted,
or taken as his own daughter, brought up by hand from or without the dame, a
god daughter. aHijado, m. adopted, or taken as his own son, brought up by
hand without the dame, a godson. aHijamiento, m. taking as his own child,
suckling by hand and fostering without the dame. aHijar, to adopt, or take for
his own child, to suckle by hand, to foster without the dame, to beget
spiritually, or to be his ghostly father, or rather his godfather. aHilado, m.
waxed lean, become lanke, or slender, mouldie. aHilamiento, m. waxing lean,
becoming lanke, growing mouldie. aHilar, to wax lean, to become lanke, to
grow mouldie. aHincadamente, earnestly. aHincar, to be earnest, to prick on or
urge much, to hasten. aHinco, earnestness, importunity, haste. aHinojar, to
kneel. * Ahirmado, vide Afirmado. * Ahirmar, vide Afirmar. Ahitado, raw
stomacked. Ahitarse, to have a raw stomach, to want good digestion of that he
had eaten. Ahito, m. rawnes of the stomach, ill digestion. aHocinado, m. any
crooked thing made like a hook. aHocinarse, to become crooked as a hook.
Ahogado, m. choked, stopped, drowned, quenched. Ahogador, m. a choaker,
quencher, strangler, or stopper. A drowner. Ahogamiento, m. strangling,
choking, quenching, stopping, drowning. Ahogar, Praes. yo ahogo, 1. Praet. yo
ahogue, to choke, to strangle, to stop, to quench, to drown. * Ahogue, vide
Ahogar. * aHojadado pan, m. a fritter, a fine cake, or the rising of the crust
in baking as it were pimples. * aHondamiento, m. a diuing to the bottom, a
putting to the bottom. * aHondar, to put to the bottom, to go or diue to the
bottom. aHora, aora, or agora, now, of late, or a while ago, even but now, at
length, hereafter. * Ahorcadizo, m. one that is hanged, or worthy to be
hanged. Ahorcado, m. hanged. Also an ungracious gallows. * Ahorcador, vide
Verdugo, m. Ahorcadura, f. hanging, execution of malefactors. Ahorcar, Praes.
yo aHorco, 1. Praet. yo Ahorque, to hang up on the gallows, to hang by. *
Ahornado, m. put in an oven, vide Enhornado. aHornagarse la tierra, to be
blasted, burnt or scorched. * aHorque, vide aHorcar. Ahorrado, m. manumitted,
or set free where he was bond before, spared, delivered. * Ahorradura, m.
making free of one that was bond, sparing, saving of charges. Ahorramiento,
saving of charge, sparing, delivery. Ahorrar, to save charge, to spare, to
deliver, to make a bondsman free. * Ahorrar esclavo, to manumit, or set free a
bondsman. Ahotado, m. bold, stomackefull, hardy, emboldened. * Ahotar, to make
bold, stomackefull or hardy. * aHoyado, m. ditched. * aHoyador, m. a ditcher.
aHoyadura, f. digging of a ditch, or ditches. aHoyar, to dig a ditch. *
Ahuchar, to put in a hutch, chest, trough, cupboord or press. To hoord up
money. * aHueca, aHueco, vide Aocar. Ahullar, vide Aullar, to howl, to roar.
aHumadas, f. smoakings. aHumado, m. smoakie or smoaked. aHumar, to smoke, to
make a smoother. * aHurtada, slily, or by stealth. * aHurradillos, by stealth,
unawares. aHusada figura, f. a thing shaped or framed spindlewise. *
aHuyentado, m. put to flight, made to run away. * aHuyentador, m. one that
puts to flight, or makes to run away. aHuyentar, to drive away, to put to
flight. * Ahuziado, trusted. * Ahuzamiento, m. a trusting, a confidence.
A I
Ai, vide Ay, there, or at that place. Ai or Ay, there is, there are. Sometime
it is an Interiection of complaining and signifies, out alas. But then Ai or
Ay is of two syllables. A'ia, vide A'ya, f. a nurse, a schoolemistresse. A dame
or mistress. * Ajada, f. sauce made of garlike. * Aia^mado, vide Animado, m.
animated, encouraged, hartened. * Aje, vide Agi. * Ajenamiento, vide
Agenamiento. * Ajenar, vide Agenar. * Ajeno, or Ageno, strange, of another
sort. A'io, vide A'yo, a tutor, a schoolmaster. * Aiduda, or Cristel, vide
Ayuda, a glister. * Aier, vide Air, yesterday. * Aiguier, m. a sink to wash
vessel in. A'ime, vide A'yme, woe is me, alas. Aina, vide Ayna, quickly,
hastily. A'jo, m. Garlike. Ajonge, or Ajonje, m. the juice that comes from an
herb whereof they make birdlime. Ajonjoli, a kind of medicinal herb growing
in Indies. * Ajorcas, f. bracelets at the hands. * Airadamente, vide
Ayradamente, angrily, disdainefully, in a great chafe. Airado, vide Ayrado,
angry, in a great chafe. Airamiento, vide Ayramiento, anger, disdain. Airar,
vide Ayrar, to be angry, to be in a great chafe, to disdain. A'ire, vide
A'yre, m. the air, wind, breath, countenance, pleasantnes, beauty,
comelines. Airoso, m. pleasant, comely, beautiful, fair. also airie, or of
the air. * Aislado, vide Ayslado, compassed with water. Aislar, vide Ayslar,
to compass round with water. Aiuda, vide Ayuda, help, aid. Also a glister,
or purgation. * Aiudado, vide Ayudado, m. helped, aided. Aiudador, vide
Ayudador, m. a helper, an ayder, one that stands to it at a pinch. Aiudar,
vide Ayudar, to aid, to help. Aiunar, vide Ayunar, to fast, or forbear
meat. Aiuno, vide Ayuno, fasting from meat. * Aiunque, vide Ayunque. *
Aiuntado, vide Ayuntado, joined, or coupled to. * Aiuntador, vide Ayuntador,
one that coupleth or joins together. Aiuntamiento, vide Ayuntamiento, joining
or coupling together. Aiuntamiento con parienta, Incest. Aiuntar, vide Ayuntar,
to join, to couple together, to marry, to run together, to gather together.
Aiuso, vide Ayuso, below, downwardes, underneath. * Dios en Ayuso, God
excepted. * Ajustado, m. made Just, even, plain, straight.
A L
Al, or a El, to the, unto. * Al, id est algo, some, something, some beside.
Ala, f. a wing, the fins of a fish, the eaues of a house. Ala de Batalla, the
wing of a battle. * Ala de la gente de cavallo, a wing of horsemen. Ala yerva,
an herb called Enula campana. * Ala de tejado, the edge or skirt of a gutter
tile. The eaues of a house. * Alabado, praised, commended, well spoken of. *
Alabador, m. one that praises, commends or reports well. Alabanca, f.
praise, commendation, laud. Alabancioso, m. praising, commending, boasting,
bragging. * Alabanza, vide Alabanca. Alabar, to praise, to laud, to boast, to
vaunt, to commend. Alabarda, f. a halbert. * Alabardazo, m. a blow or stroke
with a halbert. * Alabardero, m. a halberdier, a yeoman of the guard. *
Alabastrino, m. made of alabaster. Alabastro, m. alabaster. * Alacan, m. vide
Alazan. * Alacer, a circle. Also a kind of herb. Alacha, f. herring, or a fish
like a mackerell. Alacor, or Cartamo, m. an herb wherewith they die carnation.
Bastard saffron. Alacran, m. a scorpion. Aladar, m. the hair of the head that
hangs down on the temples of the head. Alado, m. winged. * alLado, by the
side. * a la Fe, f. in faith, in troth. * a la he, f. idem. * a La gala, a La
gala, f. gallantly, gallantly, bravely, bravely. * Alagar, or Halagar, to
cocker, to flatter, to make much of. * Alagas, vide Halagos, cockerings, making
much of. Alaguen^o, or Halaguen^o, flattering, cherishing, making much of,
friendly entertainments, fawning blandishments. * al A'lua, at the break of
the day, at the dawning of the day. * ala Mano, f. ready at hand. * ala Mano
alas Manos, at hands, at blows, at strokes. * venir alas Manos, to come to
handie blows, or to fight. Alamares, m. lace buttons. * Alamarado, m. laced
with such buttons. Alambique, m. or Alquitara, a lymbecke or stillatorie.
Alambre, m. copper. Alameda, f. a poplar grove. * Alamin, a man of trust, a
trusty man, one on whom one may repose trust and confidence. A'lamo blanco, m.
poplar. A'lamo negro, or Negrillo, black poplar, alder. * Alamud, m. a bolt of
iron with a lock to it, a lock of a door made bolt wise. * Alamvique, vide
Alambique. * Alanbique, vide Alambique. Alancada, f. an aker of ground. *
Alancado, m. cast, hurled, thrown. Also vomited. * Alancar, to cast, throw,
hurl, to thrust forward. Also to vomit. * Alanceado, m. wounded or deadly
hurt with the stroke of a lance. * Alanceador, m, one that wounds with a
lance. * Alancear, to wound or hurt with a lance. Alano, m. a mastie dog.
* ala Par, even against, just with the like, equal, even with, hand to hand.
* Alar, vide Alarde, m. a muster. * Alarabes, m. Moors, or Arabians. *
Alaracas, f. outcries, noise, crying out, explaining, vociferation. Alarde, m.
a muster, an ouerseeing, an ouer-viewing. * ala Redondo, m. wheeling round, in
compassing about, in fetching a circle about. * Alarga, f. a loofe off, a far
off. * aLargado, m. largened, loosed, set at liberty, untied, unfolded,
prolonged, stretched. * aLargamiento, m. an enlargement, a loosing, a setting
at liberty, an untying, an unfolding, a prolonging, a delaying. aLargar,
Praes. yo aLargo, 1. Praet. yo Alargue, to enlarge, to prolong, to unfold, to
spread, to set at liberty, to stretch out. * aLargar la vela, to spread the
sail, or set sail after it is hoised up. * aLargar la brida, to slacken or
loosen the bridle, to give the horse the head. aLargas de tiempo, driving off,
or prolonging of time. * aLargue, vide Alargar. * Alarguez, f. the seed or the
thin rind of a kind of weed to color hair yellow. Alaridos, m. cries,
shoutes, exclamations, a noise, clamors. Alarifadgo, m. a surueyorship, an
ouerseership, a controllership. Alarife, m. a surueyor, a master carpenter, an
ouerseer or controller in buildings. aLaSazon, f. at that time, then. * Alasor,
m. a kind of small herb in Spain used to make painting for women's faces, and
wherewith they die cornation. Bastard saffron. * Alastrado, m. balasted with
Balaste. * Alastrador, m. one that does balast ships. Alastrar, to balast a
ship, to poise. Alastrarse el animal, to burden or load a beast. * alas Vezes,
by course, by turns, by fits. * A'las wings. * A'las de piece, fins of a fish.
* ala Tarde, f. at, or in the evening. aLaton, or Laton, latten, a kind of
metal so called. * Alatonado, m. made or done with the metal latten. *
Alatonar, to plate, work or do any work with the metal latten. * Alatron,
m. saltpeter. * Alavanca, vide Alabanca. * Alavar, vide Alabar. * Alavarda,
vide Alabarda. * Alavardazo, vide Alabardazo. * Alavardero, vide Alabardero. *
Alavastrino, vide Alabastrino. * Alavastro, vide Alabastro. * alaVista, f. to
look to to see to. In sight, in presence. * Alazan, m. a dark brown bay
color. Alazena, vide Alhazena, f. * A'lba, vide A'lva, the break of the day.
Albacea, m. an executor, or an administrator, or assign of a will or
Testament. * Albaeca, vide Albacea. Albahaca, or Albahacha, f. Basil the herb
so called. * Albahaquero, m. a earth paunch or pitcher, where the herb Basil
is set to grow. Albahaquilla salvage, f. wild Basil, or wild small Basil.
Albahaquilla, f. a kind of small Basil. * Albaida, f. white, whitenes. Also a
piece of money in Spain called, vna Blanca: that is half a Maravedi. *
Albala, f. a schedule or writing that is given when one paieth tribute, or
custom to the king. * Albanega, a kind of networke coife that women wear on
their heads. Alban^ar, vide Alvan^ar, m. a gutter or sincke. Alban^i, or
Albanil, m. a mazon, tiler, or bricklaier. * Alban^ir, m. idem. Alban^ileria,
or Alban^eria, the mazons craft. Tiling. * Albaquia, f. the remnant, the
residue, that which remains. * Albar, vide Alvar. * Albarazos, vide Alvarazos,
m. morphew. Albarada, f. a stone wall, a bulwark. * Albarchiga, Alberchiga, or
Alvarchiga, an apricocke. * Albarcoque, or Alvarcoque, m. an apricocke. *
Albarcocal, m. a place where apricocks grow. Also an apricocke tree. Albarda,
vide Alvarda, f. a packesaddle, a pannier, a dosser. * Bestias de Albarda,
sumpter horses or great mules. * Albardado, or Alvardado, m. sadled with a
packesaddle. * Albardador, or Alvardador, m. one that sadleth or sets a
packesaddle on a beast. * Albardan, m. a fool, a sot. * Albardar, or Alvardar,
to saddle with a packesaddle. Albardero, or Alvardero, m. a pannell maker, or
packesaddle maker. * Albardilla, vide Alvardilla, f. a small or little
packesaddle. * Albardin, m. small rushes, or matweede. Albardon, or Alvardon,
m. a packe-horse, an ass or mule that carries a pack. Also a great
packesaddle. * Albarino, vide Alvarino, m. a dun swart color. * Albarjon, vide
Alvarjon. Albarrada, or Alvarrada, f. a wall of stones heaped together without
mortar or lime, made in steed of a mound. a bulwark. Also a causey. Albarran,
or Alvarran, m. a batcheler. one that is unmarried, or one that has ground or
pasture in a place and has no dwelling or abiding there. Albarrana, or
Alvarrana, f. a turret on a wall. Albarrana cebolla, a kind of sea Oinions.
Albarrania, f. single life, the unmarried estate, or holding of ground in a
place, having no dwelling house or place. * Albartada, Albartado, or Monton, a
heap, a pile, a heymowe, a stacke, a mass of any thing. Albatoca, f. a kind
of boat or bark. * Albayaldado, or Alvayaldado, m. done or smeared over with
white ceruse, or painting for women's faces. * Albayalde, vide Alvayalde, m.
white ceruse, or painting for women's faces. Alberca, f. vide Estanque, a poole,
or pond. * Alberchiga, or Alverchiga, f. an apricock. * Alberchigo, or
Alverchigo, idem. * Albergado, vide Alvergado, lodged. * Albergar, Praes. yo
Albergo, 1. Praet. yo Albergue, to lodge, to inn, to harbor. * Albergo, or
Alvergo, m. a lodging, an Inn, a place of entertainment. * Albergue, or
Alvergue, idem. * Albergue, vide Albergar. * Albergueria, f. a lodging, an
Inn. * Alberja, vide Arveja, a poise. * Alberjana, vide Alverjana, f. a kind
of weed in corn. Albeytar, m. a ferriar, a horse leech. Albeyteria, f. a
ferriers forge, the ferriers Art. * Albihares, a kind of flower called
Narcissus. * Albillo, vide Alvillo. * Albin, m. the blood stone that stops
blood. * Albina, vide Alvina, f. the beating of the tide, the raging of the
sea. * alBivo, or alVivo, to the quick, lively. * A'lbo, vide Blanco, white.
Albogue, a pipe, a flute. Alboguero, a piper, or one that plaieth on the flute.
* Albondigas, f. a kind of chopped meat round like puddings. * Alborada, vide
Alvorada, f. music played to one at the break of the day. Albor, or Alvor,
the breaking or dawning of day. Alborbolas, a noise or rumor of joy. *
Alborbolear, to make a noise of joy or rejoicing. Alborea, or Alvorea, vide
Alva, the morning or break of day. Alborear, or Alvorear, vide amanecer, to
wax or grow toward day. Alborete, vide Alboroco, a tumult, hurliburly, a
sedition, a sudden fright or fear. * Alborni, vide Borni. * Albornia, f. an
earthen pan to put milk in or such like. Albornoz, a soldiers coat, a
mandillion, a iacket, a cassocke, a Moors cassocke. Alborocar, vide Alborotar,
to make a tumult. Alboroco, Alborote, or Alboroto, m. a tumult, a stir, a
hurly burley, a sedition, an amasement, a fright. * Alborotadamente,
tumultuouslie, seditiously, factiouslie. * Alboratado, m. stirred into tumult.
Alboratador, m. a maker of tumults, a seditious fellow. Alborotadora cosa, f.
a seditious or factious matter. Alborotar, or Alvorotar, to raise a tumult, to
raise sedition or rebellion. Alboroto; Alborete, Alboroco, or Bollicio, vide
Alboroco. Albricias, f. reward for news, liberality for bringing glad
tidings. Albur, m. a fish called a mullet. * Albura, or Alvura, or Blancura, f.
whitenes. * Alburejo, m. a little mullet fish. * Alburquerque, a town in
Castile in Spain. * Alcabala, or Alcauala, f. tole, custom, tallage,
imposition, subsidy. * Alcabalero, or Alcavalero, m. a collector or gatherer
of subsidies, a customer. * Alcabuco, m, a forest, or thick wood. Alcacaba,
in the moorish tongue a castle or a strong house, or tower in Granada so called.
Alcacar, m. a place, a house of strength, a tower, a fortress. * Alcacar real,
m. a royal palace, the kings house, or strong palace. * Alcazaren, a place
in Spain so called. * Alcacava, vide Alcacaba, also thick wood, a forest. *
Alcacel, m. all manner of iron works, green barley cut for horses. Alcacer, m.
green barley. * Alcada, the ending of a controversy in law. * Alcadera para
saltar, f. a weight of lead to hold in the hands for them that leap to make
them leap further. Also a pole to lift one up to leap with. * Alcado, m. lift
up, taken up, raised up, broken up as the ground, slacked. * Alcador, m. a
lifter up, a taker up, a raiser up, a breaker of the ground up, one that
slacketh a thing that is hard bound. Alcadura, f. lifting up, taking up,
raising breaking of the ground, slacking. Alcaduz, or Acaduz, m. the scoope in
a water wheel, a pipe of a conduit. * Alcahueta, f. a she baude, a woman
baude. Alcahuete, m. a baude, a ruffian, a pandor, a man baude. Alcahueteria,
f. the trade of bawdrie. * Alcaiceria, f. a row or street of shops of wares, a
place where many shops are on a row together. Alcaide, vide Alcayde, a captain
of a castle, fort or strength. * Alcayde de carcel, the keeper of a prison, a
jailer, a warden of a prison. Alcaidia, vide Alcaydia, f. a captainship of such
castle, fort or strength. * Alcala, the name of a town in Spain. Alcalde, a
justice, a sheriff, a conestable. * Alcalde mayor de justicia, the Lord chief
justice. * Alcalde de la corte, m. a chief iusticer in the kings house. *
Alcalde de Alcaldes, m. a high commissioner. * Alcalde de las Alcadas, a chief
judge or commissioner to judge causes when men appeal to him from the
inferior Alcaldes. Alcama, or Aljama, f. an assembly of Jews. * Alcana, f. a
place where a row or many shops of wares stand together. * Alcancado, reached
unto, gotten, purchased, obtained, compassed, ouertooke. * Alcancador, m. one
that reaches unto, a purchaser, a getter, an obtainer, an ouertaker. *
Alcancamiento, m. A reaching unto, an obtaining, a getting, an ouertaking.
Alcancar, to reach unto, to purchase, to get, to obtain, to conquer, to
arrive, to compass, to overtake. un Alcance, an obtaining, purchasing,
getting, pursuing, reaching, ouertaking. A leuiyng of money. * Alcancia, vide
Alcanzia, f. Alcandara, f. a perch for a hawke. * Alcandora, f. a shirt.
Alcanfor, m. Camphire. * Alcanforado, m. done or dressed with Camphire. *
Alcantara, f. a bridge. * Alcantarilla, f. a little small bridge. Alcanzia, f.
balls made of earth and filled with ashes, a pipkin or possenet made of earth.
Also a chest or box to keep money in that cannot be gotten out till you
break the box. * Alcanzia de fuego, balls filled with powder, squibs made of
powder to set a train of fire to them. * Alcanzia para tirar, balls of wild
fire to throw or cast. * Alcanziar, to throw balls of earth or ashes one at
another. A kind of sport used in Spain a horseback. * Alcanziazo, m. the
hitting or stroke given with such balls of earth or ashes. Alcaparras,
capers. * Alcaparrado, m. like unto capers. Alcaparral, m. a bed of capers. A
place where capers grow. * Alcaparilla, f. a small or little bed of capers, or
a place in Spain so called. * Alcaparronal, m. a place where great store of
capers grow. * Alcaparrones, great capers. * Alcaparro, m. the stalk or tree
whereon the capers grow. * Alcaparroso, m. full of capers. Alcar, to lift up, to
rise in rebellion, to eleuate, to exalt to pluck up. * Alcar campo or Cerco,
to raise a siege. Alcar barvecho, to plough up ground. Alcar de obra, to leave
work. * Alcar las mesas, to take away the table, to take up the cloth. *
Alcaravan, m. a foul with long legs, and beak, a Bitter. Alcarabea, or
Alcaravea, the small seed or grain within carrowaies. Alcarchofa, f. an
artichoake. Alcarchofado terciopelo, wrought velvet like an artichoake. *
Alcarchofado color, m. a dun color like a artichoake. Alcarias, f. cottages. *
Alcartas piece, a kind of fish. Alcartas, or Alcartaz para especias, a spice
bag or coffin for spices. Alcatara, vide Alquitara. Alcatifa, f. a rug for a
bed. Alcatraz, m. a kind of foul like a seamow, a great eater of fish.
Alcavala, or Alcabala, f. subsidy, common revenues, tole, custom, tallage,
imposition. Alcavalero, or Alcabalero, a customer, one that gathers the
subsidy, a collector, a tale-gatherer. Alcauci, or Alcaucil, m. a small
artichoake, a kind of thistle like an artichoake eaten in Spain. * Alcayata,
f. a crooked kind of hook or nail to hang cloakes, hates, or such other
things against a wall. Alcayde, a justice, a sheriff, a chief keeper of a
prison, a captain of a castle, a conestable. Alcaydia, iusticeship, a
sherifealtie, keeping of a castle, chief charge of keeping a prison. Alcayta,
f. a hook. * Alcayzeria, f. a place where silk is sold. * Alcazaba, vide
Alcacaba. * Alcazar, vide Alcacar. Alchimilla, f. the herb starwoort. *
Alcion, or Halcion aue, a kings fisher. Alcoba, f. a closet a close room for
a bed. * Alcohela, f. Endive water, or water of Endive. Alcohol, a drug
called Antimonium, it is a kind of white stone found in silver mines. *
Alcoholado, dawbed, smeared, painted. * Alcoholado toro, or Alcoholada vaca, a
bull or cow with black eyes. Alcoholar, to smeare, to daube, to paint, to lay
on Alcohol on the corners of the eyes. * Alcon, vide Halcon, a hawk, a
faulcon. * Alconcillo, or Alconzillo, m. a little hawk or faulcon. Alconcillo
de brasil, red ink. * Alconcilla, or afeyte, a kind of painting for women. *
Alcoran, m. a gathering together, or summarie of the laws of Mahomet, a book
wherein the laws of Mahomet are written. * Alcorca, f. a conserve. *
Alcornocal, m. a place where cork grows. Alcornoque, m. the cork tree. *
Alcorque, a cork shoo, a pantofle. * Alcoscucu, m. a kind of meat or paste
made of flower and honey. Alcotan, m. a hawk called a hobbie. * Alcova, vide
Alcoba. * Al crebite, m. brimstone. Al crivite, m. brimstome. * Alcuentro, vide
Encuentro, to the contrary, an encountering, a meeting. Alcun^a, f. a stock, a
lineage. Alcuza, or Azeytera, f. an oil pot. * Alcuzazo, a great oil pot, or a
blow therewith. * Alcuzilla, f. a little oil pot. Aldava, or Aldaba, the ring
or hammer of a bar, a bolt. * Aldavada, f. the blow or knock at the hammer
or ring at the door. * Aldavon, a great hammer or ring at a door. Aldea, f. a
village, or little town. Aldeana, f. a country less, an inhabitant in a
village, a country wench. Aldeano, a country man, a dweller in a village.
Aldeguela, f. a little village. * Aldrio, vide Alvedrio. * Aleantado, m.
breathed, relieved. * Alebe, m. a traitor. * Alecto, one of the three furies so
called, signifies a thing never resting. * Aleche, m. a herring. Aleda, f. the
dregs of honey, wine or other thing. * Aleden^o, m. vide Mojon. * Alegacion,
f. an allegation, an alleging or protesting. * Alegado, m. alleged,
protested. * Alegador, an alledger, a protester. * Alegamiento, an alleging,
protesting, or an affirming. * Alegar, Praes. yo Alego, 1. Praet. yo Alegue, to
allege, to protest, to affirm. Alegramente, vide Alegremente, merrily,
pleasantly. Alegrar, Alegrarse, to rejoice, to be glad, merry, iocond,
frollicke, or pleasant. Alegre, joyful, merry, glad, iocond, blithe,
sportfull, frollicke. Alegremente, gladly, merrily, pleasantly, iocondly. *
Alegreza, f. mirth, joy, gladness, sport. Alegria, vide Alegreza, f. mirth, joy,
gladness, pleasure, sport. * Alegron, m. a great sudden joy or mirth. * Alegue,
vide Alegar. * Alejar, or Alexar, to depart, to go far off. * Aleju, vide
Alexu. Aleluya, cuckoe meat. * Aleluya, of joy, a hymn or song of joy. *
Aleman, a German or Dutchman. * gente Alemana, f. the high Dutch people, the
high Germans. * Alemanado, m. of or pertaining to Germany. * Alemanisco, m.
lynnen of Germany. * Aleman^a, m. Germany, high Dutchlande. * Alendro, m. the
rose baytree. * Alentado, vide Alientado. Alentar yo Aliento, to breath, to
pawse, to put life into. Alerta, ready prepared, put in order. * Alerto ojo,
m. an eye ready prepared, well beholding or marking. Alerze, Ceder. Alesna, or
Alezna, f. an awle, a bodkin. Aleta, f. a little wing. * Aleta de pesce, the
finne of a fish. Aleue, m. a traitor, a treacher. * Alevosia, f. treason,
conspiracy. Alevoso, m. a traitor, a treacher. * A un traydor, dos Alevosos,
to one traitor, two traitors: that is, a couple of crafty knaves will coosen
one: the Italian says, A un fino, fino and mezo. Alexado, m. departed, set far
off, put far asunder. * Alexador, m. one that puts asunder or separateth. *
Alexamiento, m. a banishment, putting far off, a diuorsing, or parting asunder.
* Alexar, or Alejar, to depart, to go far off, to separate, to banish, to put
far off. * Alexia, f. a paaste made of flower and water, a pudding, a pan
pudding. Alexixa, f. a pudding made of wheat, a pan pudding. Alexu, or Aleju,
kind of biscuit, or simnell made of honey and spice. Alezna, vide Alesna, a
shoomakers awle. Alfabega, vide Albahaca, Basil. * Alfahar, m. a place where
earthen pots are made. * Alfaharero, m. a potter, a maker of earthen vessels. *
Alfaiata, a woman tailor. * Alfajor, vide Alexu. Alfalfa, f. three leafed
grass, clouers grass. Alfamar, a couerlet. Also a bolster. * Alfaneque, a
kind of hawke. * Alfanje or Alfange, m. a sword, a cimitar, a turkey sword. *
Alfangazo, or Alfanjazo, m. a great turkey sword. Also a blow with a turkey
sword. * Alfaqui, m. a moorish word signifieng a chief priest among the
Moors. * Alfarda, f. a tribute, subsidy, or duty to the prince. Alfarge or
Alfarje de molino, m. a mill stone, a grinding stone. * Alfargia, f. a plancke
or board sawed in two, a thin plancke or board. * Alfarobas, carobes, an herb.
Afaxor, vide Alexu. * Alfaxor vino, a wine made with honey, a kind of
meatheglin. * Alfayata, f. a woman tailor. * Alfena, or Alhena, f. priuet,
wherewith they make bowers in gardens. Alfen^ique, sugar pellets. * Alferadgo,
m. the office of an ensign in war. Alferes, m. an ancient bearer, a
standard bearer. Also the Bishop at chesse. Alful, vide Aguero, a divining or
prophesying. Alfidel, m. a pin, such as women use to pin withal. Alfiler, m.
idem. * alFin, at the end, at the last, in so much that. Alfocigo, or
Alhocigo, or Alhostigo, phisticke nuts. * Alfombra, f. a carpet in the Moors
tongue. Alforja, f. or Alforxa, a wallet, a budget, a clokebagge, a scrip. *
Alfornas, the herb Fenugreeke. * Alforxa, vide Alforja. * Alforria, f. setting
at liberty, freeing. Alforza de vestido, a plait in a garment, a tucke in a
gown or other garment. * Alfoz. m. the limits or bounds of any thing. *
Algagias, f. ornaments for soldiers a horseback. Alga marina, f. reekes, or
sea weed. * Algaida, f. a thicket, a wood or place full of trees and bushes.
Algalia, ciuet, or sweet musk. * Algarabia, or Algaravia, f. the Moors
language or tongue. Algarada, f. a sodame assault or assailing with a great
cry, noise, or stir, a tumult, a hurly burly. * Algarasita, pediers french. *
Algarbe, or Algarve, the west. Also a province in Spain between Andulazia and
Portugal. * Algarve, idem. Algaravia, f. the Algarbian or Moors language. *
Algares, m. caves, dens, hoales, pits. Algarve, a den, a hole, a pit, a ditch.
Also a place in Portugal so called. Algarrova, or Algarrobo, Carobes, or S.
John's bread. * Algayda, f. a thicket, a wood, or place full of trees and
bushes. * Algazara, vide Algarada. Algebra, f. bone setting. Algebrista, m. a
bone setter. * Algedrez, m. the chesse, or chesseplay. * Algeriza, vide
Algezira. * Algezira, f. a province in Spain. Also Islands so called. Algibe,
or Algive, m. a cesterne, a prison under ground, a dungeon. A'lgo, somewhat,
ought, any thing. Algodon, m. bombast, cotton. * Algodonado, m. cottoned. *
Algodonador, m. a cottoner, one that raises the notte upon cotton. *
Agodonadura, f. cottoning, freezing of cloth. * Algodonar, to cotton, to freeze
cloth. * Algongoli, vide Aljonjoli. Algorfa, or Soberado, a lofte, a story, a
garret. * Algoravas, vide Algarrovas. Algualizazgo, or Alguaziladgo, m. a
sherifewicke, a bailiwicke, a marshalship. Alguazil, m. a sheriff, a baily, a
marshall, or chief executioner, a provost marshall. Alguarismo, or Guarismo,
m. the science of Arithmeticke. Alguien, vide Alguno, some body. alGuirnalda,
f. a crown or garlande, a wreath. Alguna vez, sometimes, at times, now and
then. Alguno, or Alguien, some body, one or other. Algun tanto, about so much.
Algun tiempo, sometime. * Alha, vide Alla. Alhadida, burnt brass. Alhaja, or
axuar de casa, implements, appurtenances, all manner of houshoulde stuff.
Alhajeme, or Alhaxeme, m. a barbor Alhaili, or Alhayli, white violets, or the
flower deluce. Alhambra, f. a palace for a prince of strength. * Alhamel, m. a
porter that carries burdens. Alhaqueque, m. in the Moors tongue, a herald at
arms sent to entreat of peace. * Alhaqui, vide Alfaqui. * Alharacas,
exclamations, outcries, noise. Alharaquiento, m. a crier, a proclaimer, one
that makes noise. * Alhaxeme, vide Alhajeme m. Alhazena, f. a small basket, a
hole in a wall to set things in, an ambrey, a cubbord. * Alhelga, the staple of
a lock or bolt. Also the hollownes or gaping of teeth standing wide one from
another. Alheli, vide Alhaili. Alhen^a, f. priuet, or privy primtree. Alhilel,
or Alfidel, a pin. * Alholbas, fenugreeke. Alhocigo, Alhostigo, or Alfocigo,
fysticke nuts, or fisticke tree. Aholi, a place to keep salt, a barn, a corn
garret, a garner, a maund. Alholvas, fenugreeke. Alhombra, f. a carpet.
Alhondiga, f. a shop, a merchants warehouse, a barn, a garner for corn.
Alhondiguero, m. a shopkeeper, he that keeps the barn or corn, a corn
master. Alhondon, m. the bottom of any thing. * Alhori, vide Alholi. *
Alhorria, vide Alforria, f. setting at liberty. Alhostiga, the fruit of the
Pistack tree, fisticke nuts. Alhostigo, Alhocigo, or Alfocigo, the fisticke
tree, or fisticke nuts. * Alhoz, the borders, lymits, or bounds of any place. *
Alhozego, or Alhozigo, the pistacke tree, or fisticke nuts. * Aluhucema, vide
Ahuzema. * Alhucena, f. vide Alhuzema. Alhurreca de la mar, f. the salt foam
that comes out of the roots of canes. Alhuzema, f. lauander. Aliado, m.
allied, confederate, a partner, accessarie, combined. * Aljama, or Alcama, an
assembly of Jews, or their synagogue. * Aljamia, f. a barbarism, a confusion
of toongs. * Aljana, vide Aljava, a quiver. Alianca, f. alliance, confederacy,
combination, part taking, brotherhood. Aliar, to allie, confederate, combine,
or join in kindred or friendship. Aljama, or Alcama, f. a synagog, a
congregation of Jews. * Aljamia, f. the Moors call the Spanish tongue Aljamia.
* Aljamiado, made into the Spanish tongue. Aljava, f. a quiver for arrows. *
Alicates, small pincers to pull hairs from the nostrels or eiebrowes, etc. *
Aliecan, vide Alazan. Alicace, or canca, foundation. * Aljedrez; Axedrez, vide
Algedres, chesseplay. * Aliende, vide allende. * Antojos de Aliende,
spectacles, that make small things seem great. * Aliende de esso, furthermore,
over and above. * Alientado, m. breathed. * Aliente, Aliento, vide Alentar.
Aliento, m. breath, spirit. * aLigerado, m. made light, nimble, or quick. *
aLigerar, or aLijerar, to make light, nimble, swift, or quick. * Alimado, m.
filed. * aLimador, m. one that fileth. Aliman^a, f. a brute beast. * aLimar, to
file with a file: * Alimentado, m. nourished, fed, cherished, maintained,
fostered, brought up. * Alimentador, m. a nourisher, a fosterer, a feeder, a
susteiner, a bringer up. Alimentar, to nourish, to feed, to foster, to bring
up, to maintain,, to cherish. Alimento, m. nourishment, food, maintenance,
bringing up, sustenance. Alimpiadero, m. a streiner, to cleanse any thing with.
* alimpiado, m. streined, made clean, purged, brushed, wiped, made pure.
alimpiador, a clenser, a purger, a purifier, a refiner. aLimpiadura, f.
clensing, purging, refining, purity, brushing. aLimpiaduras, m. the dregs, the
scum, the parings, the clensings. aLimpiar, to cleanse, to purge, to refine, to
brush, to wipe, to purify by sacrifice, to streine, to make neat. * Alindado,
m. limited, bounded, confined, banished. Also made fine, neat, gallant.
Alindar, to limit, to confine, to bound, to exile. Also to make fine,
delicate, and fair. Alinde, f. the bounds, limits, or confines of a country,
or other place. Also a kind of spectacles. * Alin^ado, m. made fit, set in
order. * Alin^ador, m. one that makes fit, or sets in order. Alin^ar, vide
Aderecar, to make fit, to set in order. Alin^o, m. fitting, setting in order.
Aljofar, pearl, the seed of pearl, small pearl. Aljofifar, or Ladrillado, m.
pauing, tile painted. Aljonge, or Aljonge, m. the gum of a kind of thistle.
Aljonjera, or Aljongera, m. a sowthistle. Aljonjoli, or Aljonjoli, m. a white
grain whereof oil is made. * Aliox, m. Marble. * Alisado, m. smoothed.
Alisadura, f. smoothing, playning. Alisar, to make smooth or plain. Aliso, m.
a kind of willow. Alisma, f. a kind of Plantaine. * aListado, m. enrolled, ones
name taken in a roll, catalogue, or muster book. aListar, to enroll, to make a
roll of men's names, to make a catalogue. * Aljuba, f. a kind of moorish
cassocke reaching down below the knee after the manner of the Polonians.
Aljuban morisco, m. a moorish cassocke. * Aliviado, m. lightened, eased, made
merry. * Aliviador, m. one that lighteneth, eases, or makes merry. *
Alivianar, to make light headed, fantastical or foolish. Aliviar, to lighten,
to ease, to unburden, to rejoice. To be merry or light hearted. Alivio, m.
lifting up, ease, lightner of heart, mirth, joy, gladness, solace, pastime. *
Alizar, m. a kind of painted brick, vide Azulejo. Alla, there, thither, in
yonder place. * alLado, m. near by, joining unto, on the one side. Allanado,
m. made plain, made smooth, spread abroad, unfolded. * Allanador, m. a
plainer, a smoother. Allanadura, f. plain, making smooth. stretching or
spreading abroad. Allanar, to make plain, to smooth. To spread abroad, to
unfold. * Allar, vide Hallar. * aLlegadas mocas, f. good loving,
wel-willingwenches, coming with others for company. aLlegadizo, m. gathered
together, heaped together. * aLlegado, m. joined, or heaped together, commen,
hard by, approached. aLlegado en vando, led away in affection. aLlegador, m. one
that approaches, arriueth, or comes near. Also a greedy gatherer.
aLlegamiento, m. an arriving, a coming or approaching near unto, a gathering
or uniting together. aLlegar, Praes yo allego, 1. Praet. yo allegue, to arrive,
to approach, to come near, to unite, to gather together, to belong unto. *
Allegue, vide Allegar. * aLlenado, m. made full, filled. * aLlenar, to make
full, to fill. Allende, beyond, on the otherside, furthermore. Allende y
aquende, this way, and that way. Alli, there, thither, in that place. Allogar,
vide Allegar. * Allozo, m. the Almond tree. A'lma, f. the soul, the mind, the
spirit of a man. Almaciga, f. Masticke. * Almacigar, to make or do any thing
with Masticke. Almadan^a, or Marra, m. a mattocke, a spade, a shouell, a
pickaxe. Almaden, m. a mine of metal. Almadraque, m. a bolster, a pillow.
Almadrava, fishing for Tunnies. * Almadravero, m. a fisher for Tunnies.
Almagra, or Almagre, red oker, redding, red lead. Almagrado, m. marked with
oker, red leaded, redded. * Almagrador, m. one that marketh with red oker.
Almagrar, to mark with oker, or red lead, to red. Almagre, vide Almagra. *
Almaizal, or Almayzal, the women's ornament of the head among the Moors, it is
of silk. * Almaizalado, or Almayzalado, made of the fashion of a Moorish
kerchiefe, or the head covered with a moorish kerchiefe. Almaizar, vide
Almayzar, a wiping cloth of hair. also vide Almaizal. * Almalafa, f. an attire
that the Turks use. Almanach, m. an almanacke, a prognostication. * Almanaque,
m. an almanacke, a prognostication. * Almandarahe, a harbor or road for ships.
Almariete, id est, Alhazen^a, pequen^a, a little cupboord, or place to set
glasses in. Almario, m. an armorie, an ambrie. Almarraxa, an ewer of glass, a
casting bottle, to cast sweet water. Almartaga, f. a kind of headstall for a
horse, trimmed, gilt, and embrodered, the scumme of lead. Also a medicinal
herb. * Almartaxa, f. the sum, foam, froath, or spume of silver. * Almastiga,
f. masticke. * Almayzal, vide Almaizal. * Almayzalado, m. made of the fashion
of a Moorish kerchiefe. Almayzar, a wiping cloth, a hair cloth, also vide
Almaizal. Almazen, m. an armorie, a trunk, a cubboord, a conduit head, a
storchouse, a warehouse. * Almazen de Aquaducho, the conduit head from whence
the water first rises. * Almazen de suziedad, a retract where to cast out the
filth and ordure of a city. * Almezenado, m. put in a ware house to be kept. *
Almazenar, to put into a ware house or store house to be kept. * Almaziga, vide
Almaciga. Almea, vide Azumbar, red storax. Almear de feno, m. a haie-loft. *
Almeca, vide Almeza. * Almedina, a great town or city. * Almej, f. a cockle.
* Almejal, m. a place where cockles breed. * Almejero, or Almegero, m. one
that gathers or sells cockles. Almena, the pinacles of a tower, the
battlements of a wall. * Almenada muralla, f. a wall made with battlements. *
Almenado castillo, a castle made with battlements. Almenaria de fuegos, f.
fires made in the night, beacons. Almenara de acofar, a candlestick of brass
with many sockets. Almendra, Amella, or Amendroa, f. an almond. Almendrada, f.
almond milk. Almendral, m. a garden of almond trees. Almendro, an almond tree.
* Almenilla, f. a little battlement of a wall. * alMenos, at the least. Almete,
m. a helmet. * Almeza, f. a cockle fish. A'lmez arbol, a lote tree, or nettle
tree. * alMez, monthly, every month. Almiar, a hey reeke, or hey cock, a
mass, a heap, a great stacke. * Almibar, vide Almivar. Almidon, m. starch. *
Almidonado, m. starched. * Almidonar, to starch. Almilla, f. a wastcoate. *
Almina, a tower or turret. Almiralle, a king in the Arabian language. *
Almiranta, f. the viceadmiralship. Almirante, m. a Lord admiral, an admiral
at sea. Also used in Spanish for the second person at sea, the next person to
the general. Almirez, m. a brazen mortar. * Almiron, m. a dainty meat for
sick persons. * Almiscle, or Almisque, musk. * Almiscado, or Almizcado, done
with ciuet, or musk. Almivar, sugar made liquide. Almizque, m. musk.
Almizquera, f. a place where they lay up musk. * A'lmo, m. any thing it does
nourish. * A'lmo padre, m. a fostering or cherishing father. Almocafre, m. a
dib to set herbs. * Almocrebe, or Almocreve, m. a muliter, a driuer of mules.
Almodrote, m. a hotchpot of garlic and cheese. * Almofex, vide Almofres.
Almofia, f. a pan of earth to make fire in for want of a chimney. Almofres, or
Almofrex, a male made in fashion like a pillowbeare. Almogavar, m. an
aduenturer in war, a light harnessed soldier. Almohaca, f. a currie comb. *
Almohacado, m. curried with a currie comb. Almohacar, or Almohazar, to currie.
Almohada, f. a pillow. * Almohadilla, f. a little pillow, a cushinet. *
Almohaza, vide Almohaca. * Almohazar, vide Almohacar. * Almohino, m. to the ase
a play when two or three are set to coosen one. * Almojarifadgo, vide
Almoxarifadgo, the customership. * Almojarife, vide Almoxarife. Almojavana, f.
a kind of cheese cake. Almoneda, f. open sale, an outcrie. Almonedear, to set
to sale, to sell. * Almorafes, armor for the thighs. Almorranas, f. the
disease called the piles. Almorranamiento, m. full of piles. * Almoraniento,
full of piles. Almoradux, m. Marieram. Almorzar, or Almorcar, to break fast,
to eat in a morning before dinner. * Almotacania, the office of the clarke of
the market. Also of one that looks to the keeping clean of the streets.
Almotacen, m. one that has the office of a clarke of the market in Spain, as
also to set fine on their heads which keep not the streets clean.
Almotacenadgo, m. the office of a clarke of the market, and of one that has
authority to command the streets to be made clean. * Almotalefe, m. one that
has office to fee to silks: one that sets to the seals that it may be
vendable. Almoxarifadgo, or Almoxarifazgo, the customership. Almoxarife, m. a
customer. Almud, vide Celemin, a pecke. Almuedano de moros, a crier. Almuerzo,
or Almuerco, a breakefast. * alMuladar, m. a dunghill. Almun^ecar, m. the place
where they sell raisons. A'lna, a yard, an ell. * Alnado, m. children that have
a stepmother, stepchildren. * Alnafe, m. a paunch pan, or a pan of earth.
aLocado, m. frantic, become a fool, a dolt, become fool or doting. * Aloja,
f. a kind of wine called metheaglin. * Alojado, m. lodged. * Alojador, m. one
that lodges. Alojamiento, lodging. Alojar, to lodge, to inn. aloMas, for the
most part. * aloMenos, at the least. Alondra, f. a Lark. Alones, the pinions
of the wings. Alongamiento, m. prolonging, absence, a deferring, a putting off
from time to time. Alongar, Praes. yo Alongo, 1. Praet. yo Alongue, to prolong,
to defer: to put off, to lengthen, to prorogue, to adiorne. Alongue, vide
Alongar. Alosa piece, f. an Alose, or Shad fish. Aloxa, or Aloja, f. wine called
Metheagline. * Aloxado, vide Alojado. * Aloxamiento, vide Alojamiento. *
Aloxar, vide Alojar. * Aloxo, vide Aloja. * Alozna, f. Wormwood. Alpargata, a
shoe made of linen packthred. * Apargatado, m. shod with such a shoe. *
Alps, m. the Alps. * Alpechem, or Alpechin de azeyte, syrrupe in Olives, the
fruit of a tree like Olives. Alpechin, idem. * Alphabeta, f. an alphabet. *
Alphabetica tabla, or Alphabetica orden, an alphabet, the order alphabeticall.
* alPie, or alPiede, at the foot. * Alpina, pertaining to the Alps, or
amongst the Alps. Alpiste, fox tails. alPresente, at the present time. *
alPrincipio, at the beginning. * Alquemia, vide Alquimia, the Art of Alcumie.
* Alquemista, vide Alquimista, an Alcumist. Alqueria, f. a farm or hired
house. Alquerque, m. a kind of play or game, somewhat differing from table
play. * Alquetifa, f. vide Alcatifa. * Alquetiza, f. a carpet. Alquicel, or
Alquicer morisco, a Moors cassocke, or mandillion. Alquiladizo, m. to be let
out to hire, to be rented. * Alquilado, m. let out to hire, rented. Aquilador,
m. he that hireth or lets out for rent. Alquilar, to hire, to let out for
rent. Alquiler, or Arrendamiento, hiring, letting out for rent. * Alquillado,
vide Alquilado. * Alquimia, f. Alchimie. Alquimista, m. an Alcumist. Alquinal
morisco, a moorish handkercher. Alquitara, er Alcatara, f. a stillatorie, a
limbecke to distill. Alquitira, f. Dragagant. Alquitran, m. Naptha. *
Alquitranado, smeared with Alquitran, or Naptha. * Alquitranar, to smeare a
ship with Alquitran. alRededor, round about. alReves, clean contrary. *
alSastre, vide Sastre, a Tailor. * alSereno, m. put into the evening dew, or
ill blasting air. Alsine yerva, chickweed. A'lta, or Altamente, highly.
Altabaque, a basket, hamper, or pannier of osiers.. Altabaxo, m. a down right
blow. * Altaneras aves, high flying birds, soring hawks. Altanero, a faulcon.
Altar, or A'ra, an altar. * Altavajo, or Altabaxo, a down right stroke or
blow. Alterable, changeable, mutable, inconstant. * Alteracion, f. alteration,
change, inconstancy. Alterado, m. troubled, changed, removed, angry. *
Alterador, m. a remoouer, a changer, an inconstant man. Alterar, to alter, to
change, to remove, to grow angry, to prove inconstant. * Altercar, Praes.
yo Alterco, 1. Praet. yo Alterque, to contend, to chide, to brabble, to
wrangle, to debate. * Alterque, vide Altercar. Alteza, f. highness, loftiness,
greatness in estate, mightines: Altivamente, loftily, highly, proudly,
stately. * Altibaxos, or Altivaxos, uneasy ways to go in, up and down, high
and low. * Altivez, f. pride, highness of stomach, loftines. Altiveza,
loftines, pride, statelines. Altivo, m. lofty, proud, stately, mighty high
minded, hautie, disdainful. A'lto, m. high, lofty, stately, the loft or
story in a house, deep, profound. A'lto Hazer, to make a stand as soldiers
do, to stay. Altramuzes, vide Atramuzes. alTraves, or alTravers, overthwart, a
cross, oblique. Altura, f. height, altitude, the depth, the top of a hill.
A'lva, or A'lba, f. the morning day break, the morning watch. Also a white
thing. * Alvacea, or Albacea. * Alvaeca, vide Albaeca. * Alvahaca, or Albahaca.
* Alvahaquero, or Albahaquero. * Alvahaquilla, f. small Basil. Alvaialde, vide
Alvayalde. * Alvaialdado, vide Albaialdado, painted with a white color, called
Ceruse. Alvala, f. a handwriting, a bill, an acquittance, a schedule, a ticket.
Also a kind of tax or tribute to the prince. Alvanega, f. a kind of coife. *
Alvan^ar, or Alban^aar. * Alvan^i, Alvan^ir, Alvan^il, or Alban^i, a Mason,
Tyler, or Bricklayer. * Alvan^eria, Alvan^ileria, or Alban^iria, Tyling, Masons
craft, or Plaistring. Alvar, that which is soon ripe and soon sodden.
Alvarazos, morphew. * Alvarchiga, Alverchiga, vide Albarchiga, an a pricocke.
Alvarcoque, Albarcoque, or Abarcoc, fruit called an Apricocke. * Alvarda, or
Albarda, a pack saddle. * Alvardador, or Albardador, m. one that puts on
the pack-saddle. * Alvardan, or Albardan, m. a fool, a sotte. * Alvardar, or
Albardar, to saddle with a packe-saddle. * Alvardero, or Albardero, m. a maker
of pack-saddles. Alvardilla, or Albardilla, a little pack saddle. * Alvardin,
vide Albardin, Matweed, small rushes. * Alvardon, or Albardon, m. a great
pack-saddle, a sumpter saddle, or a sumpterhorse. Aluarino, a dun or swart
color. * Alvarjon, m. great peaze. * Alvarrada, or Albarrada. * Alvarran, or
Albarran. * Alvarrana, or Albarrana, f. a turret on a wall. * Alvarrania, or
Albarrania, f. the single life, the unmarried estate. * Alvatoza, or Albatoca,
f. a kind of bark or boat. * Alvayaldado, or Albayaldado, painted with white
Ceruse. * Alvayalde, or Albayalde, a white color to painte women's faces called
ceruse. * Aluchali, m. a captain among the Turks. * Aludas, f. with wings,
winged. * Aluder, to allude, to have a resemblance with. Alvedrar, to judge, to
deem, to arbitrate, to award to give sentence. Alvedrio, m. freewill, the
sentence that the arbitrator gives, judgment, an a ward, opinion, will,
pleasure, fancy. * Alverca, a poole or ponde. Alverchiga, Alverchigo,
Alberchiga, or Alberchigo, an apricocke. * Alverchiga, or Alberchigo, idem.
Alvergado, or Albergado, lodged, housed. Alvergar, or Albergar, Praes. yo
Alvergo, 1. Praet. yo Alvergue, to lodge, to inn, to nestle, to dwell, to
house, to lie, to harbor. * Alvergo, or Albergo, a lodging, an inn. *
Alvergue, or Albergue, idem. * Alvergue, vide Alvergar. Alvergueria, a lodging,
an inn, a dwelling place. Alverjana, or Alberjana, f. a kind of weed in
corn. * Alverja, vide Arveja, a pease. * Alveytar, or Albeytar, m. a farrier,
a horseleach. * Alveyteria, f. a farriars art, or a farriars forge. * alUibo,
vide alBivo, to the quick. * Alujar, vide Alojar. * Alvillo, m. a kind of hard
gray grapes. Alvin, a bloodstone, it stops blood. Alvina, f. the beating of
the tide, the raging of sea. * alVivo, vide alBivo. Alumbrado, m. lightened.
Alumbrado con Alumbre, dressed with allume. * Alumbrador, m. one that
lighteneth or one that dresseth with allume. Alumbramiento, m. a lightening or
giving of light. Alumbrar, to lighten, to give light, to illuminate. Also to
dress with allume. Alumbre, Allume. aLunado, m. lunaticke, mad, in a frenzy.
* aLunar, to run made, to be lunaticke, to be frantic, or out of his wits.
A'lvo, vide A'lbo, or Blanco, white. * Alvogue, vide Albogue. * Alvoguero, vide
Alboguero. * Alvondigas, vide Albondigas. * Alvor, vide Albor, break of day,
the dawning. Also whitishnes. * Alvorada, Alborada, music given at the break
of the day. Alvorbolear, vide Alborbolear. * Alvorear, Alborear, or Amanecer,
to wax, or grow toward day. * Alvorete, vide Alborete. * Alvorni, vide
Alborni. * Alvornoz, vide Albornoz. * Alvoroco, vide Alboroco. * Alvorotar, or
Alborotar, to make a tumult, or raise a faction or sedition. * Alvoroto, vide
Alboroto. * Alvura, vide Albura. * Alvurejo, vide Alburejo. * Alvurquerque,
vide Alburquerque * Aluziado, m. made smooth, made plain. Aluziar, to make
smooth or plain. * Alxava, vide Aljava, a quiver. * Alzado, vide Alcado. *
Alzarse, vide Alcarse, to fail, to miss, to err, to deceive, to trespass,
to defraude, to lift up, to break, to play banquerout. A'ma, f. a mistress, a
nurse. Amable, lovely, amiable, beautiful, gentle, courteous. Amablemente,
lovingly, amiably, gently. Amado, m. beloved, desired. Amador, m. a lover, a
suter, a wooer. Amadora cosa, f. a loving thing pertaining to love. aMaestrado,
taught, instructed. aMaestrar, to teach, to instruct, to warn. * Amagado, m.
offered to be beaten or stricken. * Amagador, m. one that offers to strike
or beat. Amagar, Praes. yo Amago, 1. Praet. yo Amague, to threaten, to make
offer to strike, or give a blow. * Amague, vide Amagar. * Amainado navio, vide
Amaynado, a ship striking sail. * Amainar, vide Amaynar, to strike sail. *
Amamar, or Mamar, to suck the teate or dugge as infants. Amamantamiento, m. a
giving suck, a sucking the dugge. Amamantar, to give suck, to give milk. *
aMancebada, f. a married woman committing whooredome with another man.
aMancebado, m. he that haunteth or uses women, a loose liver, a vser of
whoores or concubines. * aMancebamiento, m. a following or haunting of whoores.
* aMancebar, to entangle himself with a whore, to use the company of women, to
grow effeminate. aManderecha, f. on the right hand. aMan ysquierda, f. on the
left hand. * Amanear, vide Amanecer, to wax toward day. Amanecer, or
Amanescer, to wax toward day. Amaneciendo, or Amanesciendo, betimes, early
in the morning. aManera, in manner, in such sort, like unto. * Aman^ado, one
that is diligent in his business, one that is ready or dextrous in his
affairs. Aman^ar, vide Alin^ar. * Aman^ear, vide Amanear, to awake, to rouse,
to stir up. Amanojada, f. bundles of any thing tied up together. * aMansado,
m. made gentle, made soft, pacified, tamed. * aMansador, a peacemaker, a
pacifier, a tamer. Amansar, to make soft, to pacify, to make gentle, to tame,
to appease. Amante, m. a lover, loving. * Amantillos, m. certain coardes in a
ship called the listes. * aManzillado, m. made lamentable, pitiful, or
wretched. Also spotted. * aManzillador, m. one that makes lamentable,
miserable, or wretched, or one that spotteth. * aManzillar, to make pitiful,
wretched, miserable, or to bespot. Amapolas, f. wild Poppie. * Amapollas,
idem. Amar, to love, to like, to rejoice in, to take pleasure in. *
Amargamente, bitterly, sowerly, cruelly, severely, eagerly. Amargar, Praes. yo
Amargo, 1. Praet. yo Amargue, to make sower, or sharp, to exasperate, to wax
cruel or fierce. Amargo, m. sharp, bitter, cruel, severe, angry. * Amargue,
vide Amargar. Amargura, f. bitterness, sharpenes, sowernes, cruelty, severity,
eagernes. * Amarilla, color white, wan, or sallow colored. * Amarillear, to
wax pale, to wax faint, or wan. Amarillez, f. palenes, wanness, faintnes.
Amarillecer, to wax pale, wan, or faint, to be sallow colored. Amarillo,
pale, wan, faint, sallow colored. Amarra, f. a coarde, a cable to fasten.
Amarrado, m. fastened, tied, ancored. * Amarrador, m. one that fasteneth,
tieth, or ancoreth. Amarrar, to fasten, to tie, to ancor a ship. * Amarzillar,
vide Amanzillar. Amassadera, f. a tubbe wherein they knead dowe, or a woman
that does knead. * Amassado m. kneaded, made dowe to be baked. Amassador, m.
one that heapeth together, one that kneadeth or m^uldeth dowe. Amassadura, f.
moulding, baking. Amassar, to mould, to bake. * Amassijo, vide Amassadura. *
aMatar, to kill, to slaie. * Amaynado, m stricken sail. * Amaynar las velas,
to strike sail. A'mbar, m. amber. A'mbargris, m. ambergreece. * Amberes, vide
Anveres, the town of Anwerpe. * Ambicioso, m. ambitious, seeking or going
about honor and preferment. * A'mbito, a going about, a compassing, a trifling.
Amblador, m. an ambler. Amblar, to amble, to sift meal or lyme. A'mbos, both.
A'mbos ados, both two, both of them. Ambrosia, f. a kind of wormewoode. Also
the meat the Poets fained the gods did eat. * Ambrunesa, f. a cherrie. *
Amedrentado, m. feared, skarred. * Amedrentador, m. one that skarreth, fears,
or puts in a fright. Amendrentar, to affraie, to affright, to fear, to
amase. aMelizinar, to cure, to heal, to give medicine, or cure unto. * Amella,
vide Almendra. Amelonado, m. softened, mollified. * aMenaca, aMenace, vide
aMenaza. * aMenaza, f. threatenings. * aMenazado, m. threatened, menaced.
aMenazador, m. a threatner, a menacer. aMenazando, threatening with threats.
aMenazar, to threaten, to menace. aMenazas, with threats, or menaces. *
Amendroa, vide Almendra. Amenguado, m. diminished, prejudiced, lessened,
discredited. * Amenguamiento, m. a diminishing, a preiudicing, a making less,
a discrediting. Amenguar, Praes. yo Amengo, 1. Praet yo Amengue, to diminish,
to make less, to abate, to prejudice, to discredit. * Amenidad, f.
delightfulnes, pleasantnes, cleerenes. * Ameno, m. pleasant, delightful,
comfortable. * Amenissimo, m. most pleasant, most delightful, most clear.
Amentar yo Amiento, to sling or cast out of a sling. aMenudo, often, thick,
many times together. Ameos, the herb called Ammy, or Ameos. Ametalado, m. made
or done with metal. Also fained, double faced. * Ametalar, to feign, to bear
two faces, to gloss, or cogge. Also to make or do with metal. * Amethisto, a
stone called Amethist. * Amexca, f. vide Ciruelo, a Plum. * Amidon, vide
Almidon. * Amiente, Amiento, vide Amentar, to hurl, to fling. Amiento, m. a
string of a sling. Amiesgado, or Amiezgado, a strawberrie. Amiga, f. ash
friend, a lover, a friend, a leman, a sweet heart. Amigable, lovely, friendly,
full of courtesy, kind, dear. * Amigablemente, lovingly, kindly, courteously.
Amigar, to currie favor, to get friendship, to win friends, to reconcile and
become friends. Amigo, m. a friend, a lover, a parramour. * Ammiraglio, or
Ammirallo, vide Almirante. * Amisque, or Amizque, moss that grows on trees,
sea moss, herb coral. Amistad, f. friendship, good will, good fellowship,
amity, friendlines. * Amito, m. a rail of linen that women wear. Also a
necke-cloth called an Amite, that priests put on, when they say mass. Also
apparel, or attire. * Amizque, vide Amisque. A'mo, a master, a patron, a he
nurse. * Amo, he has loved. * Amodorriado, m. sick of the lethargy, or
possessed with a giddines in the head, troubled with the drowsy evil. *
Amodorrido, m. sick of the lethargy, or drowsy evil in the head. * Amohado
lugar, m. a mossie place, or a dampish low moist place. Amohatrar, to run in
debt, to borrow of one to pay the other. * Amohinado, m. chafed, fretted,
crossed, vexed, angered. Amohinar, to chafe, to fret, to vex, to anger, to
cross, to put in a rage. * Amojonado, m. bounded, limited. aMojonar, to set
bounds, to limit. * Amolado, m. sharpened, ground, forged. * Amolador, m. a
grinder, a forger. Amoladuras, f. the dross of iron. Amolar yo Amuelo, to
grind, to sharpen, to forge. * aMoldado, m. put into a mould, or cast in a
moulde. * aMoldador, m. one that puts into a moulde, or casts in a moulde.
* aMoldar, to put into a moulde, to cast into a moulde. * Amollar, to soften,
to slacken as the coardes or sails of a ship, etc. Amollentadura, f. a
softning, a mollifying, asswaging, a calming. aMollentar, to make soft, to
mollify, to assuage, to calm, to pacify. Amonestacion, f. warning, an
advertisement, admonition. * Amonestado, m. warned, advertised, admonished.
Amonestador, m. an admonisher, an aduertiser. * Amonestamiento, vide
Amonestacion, m. a giving of warning, an advertisement. Amonestar, to warn, to
advertise, to admonish. Amonio, an herb called Amonie. * aMontado, m. gotten
up on the mountains, running on the mountains. * aMontar, to get upon the
mountains, to fly or run away on the mountains. * aMonton, by heaps,
heapingly. aMontonado, m. heaped up. * aMontonadamente, by heaps. *
aMontonador, m. a heaper up, a gatherer together. aMontonamiento, m. a heaping
or gathering together. aMontonar, to heap up, to gather together, to raise a
stacke or mow of corn. aMontones, by heaps. Amor, love, favor, grace,
desire, lust, affection. Amor de hortelano, cleauers. Amoradux, m. Marioram. *
Amordazado, m. bitten, pinched, nipped, taunted, rebuked. aMordazador, a biter,
a pincher, a snipter, a taunter, a rebuker. aMordazamiento, m. a biting with
the teeth, a nipping, a pinching, a checking, a taunting, a rebuking, a pinch.
aMordazando, bitingly, tauntinglie. aMordazar, to bite, to pinch, to taunt, to
rebuke, to check. * aMoriscado, made after the Moors fashion or manner.
Amorosa, a she lover, a parramour, a favorite. Amorosamente, lovingly,
amorouslie, wantonly, courteously. * Amoroso, m. loving, courteous, gentle,
kind, amorous, affable. Also a favorite, a lover. * Amorra, a certain game
used of children one being blindfolde, another holding up certain fingers, the
other tells how many he holds up. * Amortajar, to draw toward death, to
quench, to extinguish. Amortecer, to swoune, to faint, to fall in a trance.
Amortecido, m. swouned, fainted, fallen in a trance or swoune. Amortecimiento,
m. a swouning, a falling into a swoune, a fainting. * Amortiguado, mortified,
extinguished, slain, killed, put out. Amortiguamiento, m. mortification, a
quenching, killing, or extinguishing. Amortiguar, to mortify, to quench, to
kill the desires, to put out, or extinguish. aMoscador, m. a thing or fan,
made to drive away flies. * aMostrar yo aMuestro, to show, to declare. *
aMotinado, m. made mutinous, factious. aMotinador, m. a factious or mutinous
fellow. * aMotinar, to make a mutiny, to raise a hurly burly, or disordered
rout. * Amparado, m. protected, defended. * Amparador, m. a protector, a
defender, a guider. Amparar, to protect, to defend, to guide, to maintain, to
uphold, to cover, to hide, to save, to shield, to countenance. Amparo, m.
defense, protection, maintenance, a guard. Ampolla, f. a swelling, a bubble, a
vial glass, a drinking glass. Ampolla de agua, a bubble of water, a water
pot. Ampolleta, a small bubble, a wheale, a little vial or glass. Ampollarse,
to rise in blisters. * Amuele, vide Amolar. * Amuestre, vide aMostrar. * Amura,
f. a coard in a ship called the great tacke. * Amydon, or Amidon, vide Almidon,
starch. * Anacales, boordes that they set the bread upon before it goes into
the oven, or after it is drawn out. * Anacephaleosis, a recapitulation or
reckoning up of names. A'nade, f. a ducke, or drake. * A'nade de call, a tame
ducke. A'nade silvestre, a wild ducke. Anadear, to wallow like a ducke.
Anadina, An^adino, a little duckling. An^adir, vide An^adir, to ad, to annexe,
to join, to put together. * Anadido, m. added, joined, put together, annexed.
Anadidura, f. a joining, adding, or putting together. An^adon, m. a great
ducke. Anagirys, Bean trefoyle, an herb very fair to see to, but having a
stinking savor. Anales, Chronicles, ancient records, yearly histories, or
chronicles of things done from year to year. Anapelo, Wolfes bane. *
Anathematizado, pronounced accursed. * Anathematizamiento, m. a pronouncing one
accursed. * Anathematizar, to pronounce accursed. * An^afil, or Trompeta, a
trumpet. * Anathomia, f. an anatomy. * Anathomista, m. one that draws out an
anatomy. * Anatomista, idem. A'nca, the hips, the horse buttocks. * A'ncar, or
A'nsar, m. a goose. * A'ncas, crown land, let out to farm. Ancaron, or
Ansaron, m. a great goose. Ancarotes, the gum of a certain tree. Anchamente,
largely. * Anchissimo, m. most large, most broad A'ncho, m. large, broad.
Anchova, hering fry. * Anchoveta, small hering fry, Anchoves. Anchura, f.
breadth, largeness. Anciania, fancientnes, antiquity. Anciano, m. ancient,
old. A'ncla, vide A'ncora, an anchor of a ship. * Anclado, m. fastened with the
anchor. * Ancon, m. the breaking in of the sea on the land into a creek.
A'ncora, or A'ncla, an anchor. * Ancorado, or Anclado, ankored, fastened. *
Ancuza, f. a kind of buglosse. * Andaca, come on this way with me. * Andada,
f. a going away, a parting. A hasty bread in Spain made as a hasty pudding
in England. Also a daughter in law. Andado, m. gone, walked, passed away. Also
a son in law, properly the son of a wife or husband that is dead. in latin
Privignus, and not Gener. * Andador, m. a wanderer, a walker. Andador
pregonero, a crier, a proclaimer. Andadora cosa, wandering, gadding. Andadura,
f. going, walking, a gate, or manner of walking. Andamio, m. a scaffold, a
gallerie. * Andanca, f. going forward, proceedings. Andancia, or Andancio, a
walking place. Andar, Praes. A'ndo, andas, anda, 1. Praet. Anduve, anduviste,
anduvo, Fut. Andre, andras, andra. Sub. Praes. A'nde, Imperfect. Anduviera,
Andria, or Anduviesse, Fut. Anduviere, to go, to walk, to march, to pace, to
proceed, to depart. * Andar en puras carnes, to go naked. * Andar en cuerpo,
to go without a cloak. * Andar a la mano, to go in readiness. * Andar a
gatas, to go groping in the dark, or to go creeping on all four. * Andar en
coro, to dance in a round, to run or go in a circle. * Andar arriba, to go
up above. * Andar a orca, to sail with a side wind, not directly forward. *
Andar en popa, to sail with a ready direct wind. Andariega, f. a gadding
gossip. A'ndas, or A'ndaz, f. a beer for the dead to carry them to church, a
horslitter, a chair to carry one in. * A'nde, Pasce, let it go, let it
pass. * A'nden mis blancas tocas, let my white kerchiefes now walk again, or
let them now be worn again, and so cast off all mourning weeds. * A'nde la
loca, f. let dishes walk, let us make good cheer. Anden, m. a walk, or a
place, as a gallerie or such like to walk in. * Andilla, f. a foot stool to
lift a woman to horse. * Andorinba, vide Golondrina, f. Andrajo, or Handrajo,
m. a ragge, a cloute. Andrajoso, m. ragged, torn, tottered. Andrinas, or
Endrinas, black plums, prunes. * Andromacha, f. the wife of Hector. Anduares,
m. villages. * Andurriales, m. a place where men pass to and fro. * Anduve,
Anduviera, Anduviesse, Anduvo, vide Andar. * Anegadizas tierras, f. grounds
that have been drowned with land fluds. * Anegado, m. drowned, ouerflowed.
Anegamiento, m. drowning, ouerflowing. Anegar, Praes. yo Anego, 1. Praet. yo
anegue, to drown, to ouerflowe, to suffer shipwreck. Anegue, vide Anegar.
Anejo, vide An^ejo, m. old, ancient. Anejo vino, old wine. * Anelar, to
breath after, to gape after, to pant. Also greedily to thirst after or covet
any thing. * Anexado, m. annexed, joined to. * Anexar, to annexe or join to.
Anexo, annexed, joined to. Anfiteatro, a theater. Angarillas, f. a hurdle to
draw any thing on. A'ngel, m. an angel. A'ngela, a proper name to very many
women in Spain. Angelico, a little angel. Angelico, angel like. Angelica,
the herb Angelica. Also a proper name. * Angelina, f. a proper name of women
in Spain. * Angostado, m. made narrow, made straight. Angostar, to make narrow
or straight. Angosto, m. narrow, straight, not broad, not wide. Angostura, f.
streightnes, narrownes, strictnes. Anguilla, f. an eele. Angular, placed in the
corner, or having many corns. * Angulo, m. the corner of any thing Angurrias,
a kind of Pompion. * Angurria, f. the strangurie, when one makes water by
drop meal, and that with great pain. Angustia, f. sorrow, grief, vexation,
anguish, heaviness of spirit. Angustiado, m. grieved, vexed, perplexed, made
sorrowful. Angustiar, to vex, to grieve, to make sorrowful, to molest, to
fret, to carke, to care, to afflict, to pain. * Angustioso, m. heavy,
sorrowful, grievous, fretfull, careful. * Anhelar, to gape after, to gasp for
wind or breath, greedily to covet or thirst for any thing. * Anichilado, vide
Aniquilado. * Anichilar, vide Aniquilar. Anidar, to nestle, to make a nest, to
lodge, to dwell. * Aniega, Aniego, Aniegue, vide Anegar, to drown. * Aniejo,
vide An^ejo. Anillo, m. a ring. Anillo de la puerta, a ringle of a door.
A'nima, the soul, the spirit or life of a man. * Animada, f. a thing that has
life or soul. * Animado, animated, encouraged, hartned. Animal, a living
creature, a beast. Animalejo, a little creature, a little beast. Animales
cen^idos, flies, worms, and such like living things. * Animalico, m. a little
living creature. Animar, to encourage, to harten, to animate, to put life into,
to make valorous. Anime, m. a kind of perfume, or die withal. * A'nimo, m. a
mind, a courage, a spirit, a boldness, a heart. Animoso, m. courageous, hardy,
bold, aduenturous, valorous, stout. Animosidad, f. courage, boldness, stoutnes,
hardines, valor, magnanimity. Animosamente, courageously, boldly, stoutly,
hardily, valiantly, aduenturouslie. aNin^adamente, childishly, foolishly,
fondly. aNin^ado, childish, become a child. * aNin^eza, f. childhood,
infancy. * A'nio, a river of Italy. * Aniquilar, or Anichilar, to disanull, to
annihilate, to make of no force or effect. Anis, or Matalahuga, annis, or annis
seed. * An^adido, m. added, joined, annexed. An^adidura, f. adding, a
conioyning, an annexing, a putting unto. An^adir, to annex, to conioine, to
add, to put together. An^afil de Moros, a Moorish trumpet. An^agaza, or
An^agaca, a stale, a call for birds. An^al, yearly. * An^ar, to begin the
year. An^azas, f. faires, marts. * An^azea, f. a matter of delight or
pleasure. An^ejar, to wax old, to grow in years, to grow ancient. An^ejo,
old, ancient, overtaken with years, stale. An^il, azure, sky color. An^ilado,
colored with azure. * An^ino, of a lamb, or a lambs fleece. A'n^o, m. a
year. * Doze an^os ha, twelve years ago. * De an^os atras, in years past. *
An^ojo, a calfe of a year old. * An^oria, vide Anoria. An^ublado, m. cloudy,
darkesome, blasted. An^ublar, to wax cloudie, to become mistie, or blasted.
An^ublarse el cielo, the heaven waxing cloudie. An^ublo de trigo, the rust of
wheat, the blasting of wheat. * An^udado, m. vide Anudado. * An^udadura, f.
vide Anudadura. * An^udar, vide Anudar. * An^ullacion, vide Anullacion. aNoche,
yester night. Anochecer, to wax night, to grow late. Anocheciendo, waxing
evening, or toward night. * Anona, f. a kind of fruit. Anoria, f. an engine
to draw water, a wheel at a well to draw water. * Anorca, or Nueza blanca, f.
a herb called white Briony. * A'nsa, vide A'nsar. A'nsar, a goose. *
Ansareria, f a place to keep geese in. * Ansaria, f. idem. * Ansarillo, a
little goose or goseling. Ansarino, a goseling. Ansaron, a great goose. *
Ansina, even so. * A'nsia, A'nsias, or Congoxa, f. sorrow, grief, torment,
vexation of mind, disdain, lothsomnes. * Ansioso, m. full of grief, full of
vexation, torment, anguish, care, trouble, anoyance. * A'nta, f. a kind of
beast in the Indies, which has the skin very thick, a kind of buffe.
Antan^o, m. the last year. Antartico, as Polo Antartico, the antarticke
circle. * A'nte, vide A'nta. A'nte, or A'ntes, before, rather. Ante-ayer, the
other day, the day before yesterday. Antecedente, going before, excelling,
antecedent. Antecessor, m. an ancestor, a foregoer. Anteceder, to go before. *
Ante muro, m. a counter-skarfe, a defense for a wall. Antena, f. a sail yard.
* Antena de caracol, f. the post standing upright about which the stairs do
wind. Antenado, m. a son in law, properly the son of a wife or husband
that is dead. * Ante-Passado, gone or passed before, an ancester, a
predecessor. AntePecho, m. a place to lean the breast one, as at a bay window,
or railes or such like. antePoner, Praes. antePongo, antepones, antepone, 1.
Praet. Antepuse, antepusiste, antepuso, Fut. Antepondre, dras, dra. Sub. Praes.
Anteponga, Imperfec. Antepusiera, antepondria, or antepusiesse. Fut.
Antepusiere, to prefer, to set, place, or put before. * antePonga, antePongo,
vide Anteponer. * antePuerta, a cloth of Tapistrie, darnicks, or such like to
hang before a door. * antePuesto, preferred, put before. antePuse,
antePusiera, or antePusiesse, vide Anteponer. Anterior, the former, or
foregoing. A'ntesque, before that, rather that. A'ntes, before, rather. *
anteVer, to foresee, to prevent, to provide for. * anteVisto, m. foreseen,
prevented. * Ante-yglesia, the churchyard. Anticipacion, f. preventing,
supplanting. * Anticipador, m. a preuenter, a supplanter. Anticipar, to
prevent, supplant, to anticipate. * Antico, or Antiquo, ancient, of old time
past. * Antidoto, m. a preservative against poison. Antier, the other day, the
day before yesterday. Antifaz, a veil, a mask, a vizard. * Antigua, vide
Antiguamente. * Antiguallas, f. antiquities, matters or relics of old time.
Antiguamente, of old, anciently. Antiguamiento, the abolishing, the abrogating.
Antiguar, to abolish, to abrogate, to leave or forsake. Antiguidad, f.
antiquity, ancientnes. Antiguo, m. old, ancient. Antiguor, ancientnes, oldnes.
* Antilla, or Antillo, vide Antillo. Antiparas, leather cawkers, or buskins
that laborers in Spain use to wear in harvest time to bind up their corn,
that the beards and ears of corn may not stick on them or prick their legs:
greaues for the legs, also a leather pealt for laborers in harvest for the
same purpose. * Antipodes, the antipodes or people which dwell directly under
us. * Antiquissimo, m. most ancient, very old. * Antojado, m. longed for,
lusted after, humorous, fantastic. Antojadizo, lustful, longing, desirous,
humorous. Antojar, to long for, to lust for, to desire, to seem to be
humorous, or fantastic. * Antoxar, idem. * Antojo, or Antoxo, m a lust, a
desire, a longing humor or conceit. Also spectacles. Antojos, spectacles,
lust, desire, longing, as a woman with child. Antorcha, f. a torche or link.
* Antorchado, m. dropped on with a link or torch. Also wreathed or wouen one
within another. * Antoxo, vide Antojo. * A'ntre, m. vide A'nta. Antruejo, m.
shrouetide, the week before lent. * Antubion, or Antuvion, as Jugar de
Antubion, is when two men falling at words, the one upon a sudden before the
other can draw his weapon, hurts, wounds, or kills him: or to come
behind one and strike him. Also to use any manner the like treachery. A
preventing. Antuviar, to prevent, to excel. Antuvio, m. preventing, excelling.
* Antyer, the otherdaie, the day before yesterday. * Anubis, m. in the
Egyptian tongue signifies a dog, in whose form they worship the God
Mercury. Anuble, or Anublo, the blasting of corn, or mil-dewing. aNudado,
knit together, tied, made in knots. * aNudador, m. one that tieth, knitteth, or
makes in knots. * Anudadura, f. a twisting or knitting together, a tying, a
fastening, a knot. * aNudar, to tie in knots, to knit, to fasten, to link
together. * Anular, or Anullar, to disanull, to cancel, to make void, to
frustrate. * Anveres, Anvers, or Anberes, f. the town of Anwarpe in the low
countries. * Anunciacion, f. the annunciacion day, the Ladies day in Lent. Also
a showing, telling, or declaration, a message. * Anunciado, m. pronounced,
declared, sent upon any message, showed. * Anunciamiento, m. an embassage, a
message, a declaring, showing, or denouncing. * Anunciar, to declare, tell,
pronounce, show, or relate, to send on an arrant, message, or embassage. *
Anuncio, m. a message, an embassage, sometimes for the popes Nuntio or
ambassador. A'nxia, vide A'nsia, grief, torment. Anzuelado, m. full of fishes
hooks, hooked, angled, caught. Anzuelo, m an angle, a fishooke. Aocar yo
Ahueco, to make hollow, to empty. * aOjado, m. bewitched with the eyes. *
aOjador, m. a bewitcher. * aOjadura, f. witchcraft, bewitching. aOjamiento, m.
a bewitching, forespeaking, a charming with the looks. aOjar, to bewitch with
the eye, to charm, to forespeake. * Aora, vide Agora, at this time, now. *
Aora poco ha, a little since, a small time since, even now. Aorca, with a
quarter wind. Aotraparte, else where, on the other side, on the contrary.
Aosadas, boldly, assuredly, audaciouslie, I warrant you, I dare say. * Aosto,
or Agosto, m. the month of August. * aPacentado, m. fed, nourished. *
aPacentador, m. a feeder, a nourisher. aPacentamiento, m. a feeding, grasing,
eating. aPacentar, yo aPaciento, to eat, to feed, to grase. * Apaciente,
Apaciento, vide Apacentar. * Apagado, m. quenched, appeased. * Apagador, m. one
that quenches, extinguisheth, or puts out. Apagamiento, m. quenching,
extinguishing, or putting out. Apagar, Praes. yo Apago, 1. Praet. yo Apague, to
quench, to extingush, or put out fire, etc. Sometimes to pacify, or to appease.
* Apague, vide Apagar. aPaleado, m. cudgelled, beaten with a cudgel, given the
bastonado. * aPaleador, m. a cudgeller, one that uses to strike with a
bastonado or cudgel. aPalear, to cudgel, to give the bastonado, to beat like
a dog. * Apan^ado, m. taken, snatched, taken up. * Apan^ador, a catcher, one
that snatcheth, or takes up. * Apanaguiado, sustained, fed, maintained. *
Apanaguar, to sustain, seed, or maintain. Apan^ar, to catch, to snatch, to
take up, to accommodate, to make fit. Apan^o, m. a taking up, a snatching up, a
putting up, a fitting. Aparador, m. a cupboord to set plate on, a dresser to
serve meat on out of the kitchen, a case to keep plate in. Aparar, or
Aparejar, to provide, to prepare, to puruey, to make provision, to dress or
make ready meat. Aparato, or Aparejo, m. preparation, provision, purueyance.
* Par, equal with, like, by, in regard, in respect, incomparison, just
against, side by side. * aPar de si, by him, just even with him, close by him,
side by side with him, just as far forth as himself. Aparcero, m. a partaker,
a partner, in rent, trade, or such like. * Aparecedor, vide aParescedor, m. one
that comes in sight or appears, one that makes a show, or a semblance. *
aParecimiento, m. an appeering, a coming in sight, a show or semblance of a
thing. * aPared y medio, a wall in the middle between the next wall to us. *
Aparejado, m. prepared, provided, furnished, dispatched, dressed. * Aparejador,
m. a purueyor, prouider, furnisher, one that makes ready. Aparejar, or
Aparar, to make ready, to prepare, to provide, to furnish, to dispatch, to
dress. Aparejo, or Aparato, m. preparation, provision, dressing, furniture for
a house, etc. * Aparencia, appeerance, outward show, semblance, or likelihood.
* Aparentado, m. having many kinsfolks. * Aparentar, to make kindred with one
by marriage. * aParescedor, m. one that makes a show or semblance. *
aParescer, to appear, to make a show or semblance, to come in sight. *
aParescido, m. appeered, seemed, made semblance. * aParescimiento, m. coming
in sight, appearing, making a show. Apartadamente, severally, distinctly, each
apart, particularly. * Apartado, m. severed a sunder, parted, divided,
divorced, put one from another, far a sunder. Apartamiento, m. seuering a
sunder, parting, dividing, diuorcement, segregating, turning another way, going
away, unloosing. Apartar, or Apartarse, to divide, to part asunder, to
separate, to sever, to divorce, or leave quite, to go away, to sequester, to
vnfasten, to draw aside, to turn another way. * aParte, f. aside, a far
off, apart. Also in the name, or on the behalf. * Apascentado, m. fed,
nourished, cherished, grased as cattle. * Apascentar, yo Apasciento, to feed,
nourish, or cherish, to grase or feed cattle. * aPassionadamente, grievously
with passions of the mind. aPassionado, m. grieved, passionate, humorous,
vexed, sick. aPassionar, to grieve, to vex, to be sick, to be subject to
fits or passions, to be humorous. aPazibilidad, f. quietness, peaceablenes,
pleasantnes. aPazible, peaceable, quiet, pleasant, delightful, full of solace
or pleasure. aPaziblemente, peaceably, quietly, pleasantly, ioyously. *
Apaziguado, m. pacified, appeased, quieted, resolved, made at one. *
Apaziguador, m. a peacemaker, an appeaser, a pacifier, an vmpier. Apaziguar, to
pacify, to appease, to set at one, to make friends, to quiet, to resolve. *
A'pe, in the Indian tongue signifies an absolute captain among the rest.
aPeamiento, m. a lighting from horse, dismounting. aPearse, to alight from
horseback, to dismount. * mas aPechos, more earnestly, more effectually.
aPedacos, m. peecemeale, by morsels, by snatches, by mammocks, by slices. *
aPedreado, m. or aPedrado, stoned to death, beaten with stones, spoiled or hurt
with hail. * aPedreador, m. a stoner to death, a thrower of stones. aPedrear,
to stone to death, to fling stones at, to hurt or spoil with hail. * aPegado,
m. fastened, sticked to, made fast, glued. * aPegamiento, m. fastening to,
sticking or cleaving to, gluing, joining. aPegar, Praes. yo aPego, 1. Praet. yo
aPegue, to cleave to, to stick unto, to join together, to glue. * aPegue,
vide Apegar. * Apelacion, f. appealing to a higher judge or court, a calling
before a judge. * Apelante, one that appealeth, etc. Apelar, to appeal. *
Apellidar, to appeal often, to appeal again and again, to call to the
watchword. To give a surname, to call by name. to call people together to do
any thing, or for succor or aid. Apellido, a surname. Apellido de guerra, a
watchword, the word given to the corporals at the setting of the watch. *
aPelo, by a hair, just, pat, iumpe, even, barely, poorly, mincingly. Apelo
ayuso, down the hair. * aPelo ariba, up the hair, aPenas, hardly, scarcely,
with much ado. * Apenino, m. a very high mountain that runs along and
divides Italy. * Apercebido, m. prepared, provided, warned or pressed for a
soldier. Apercibimiento, m. preparation, provision, forewarning, pressing for a
soldier, readiness. Apercebir yo Apercibo, to press for a soldier, to warn,
to prepare, to be ready. * Apercevido, vide Apercebido. * Apercevir, vide
Apercebir. Aperciba, Apercibo, vide Apercebir. * aPerrochado, m. well customed
in selling, having much custom or customers in selling or uttering his wares.
* aPerrochar, to be well customed in selling of wares, to have many buyers or
customers for his wares. * Aperfadamente, vide Apartadamente. * Apertar, vide
Apartar. Apesarado, m. sorrowful, grieved, heavy. * Apesarar, to make heavy,
to grieve. * Apesgado, f. vide Apesgamiento. * Apesgado, m. pressed down,
weighed down, thrust down. Apesgamiento, m. pressing down, weighing down,
greeuing, aggravating. Apesgar, Praes. yo Apesgo, 1. Praet. yo Apesgue, to
press down, to ouerbear, to ouersway, to grieve, to aggrauate * Apesgue, vide
Apesgar. * Apestado, m. infected with the plague or pestilence. * Apestar, to
infect with the plague or pestilence. Apetescer, to desire, to covet, to
request, to wish, to have an appetite unto, to long for. Apetito, m. appetite,
desire to meat, coveting for any thing. * Apiadado, made tender hearted, become
meek or pitiful. Apiadar, to pity, to have mercy and compassion on. *
Apinado, vide Apin^ado, m. Apin^ado, close together, united, joined in one. *
Apin^arse, to close together, to unite, to join in one. * Aphorisma, f. au
Aphorism, or a principle in art. * Aplazado, adiourned to a day of hearing a
matter. * Aplacar, or Aplazar, to adiourne or appointe a new day of hearing a
matter before a judge. A'pio, m. Smallage or water parsley, or marsh parsley. *
Apique, as Tan Apique, so ready, so at a point, so at hand. * Apiton, the bud
of a flower before it blossometh. Apitonado, m. fierce, hasty, furious, full
of rage. Also budded out. Apitonamiento, m. fiercenes, rage, furiousnes,
unruliness. Also a budding out. * aPlacado, m. placed, settled, stayed, or
appointed to appear or answer by a peremptory day. * Aplacado, m, pacified,
appeased, pleased, quieted, resolved, reconciled. Aplacar, Praes. yo Aplaco, 1.
Praet. yo Aplaque, to appease, to pacify, to reconcile, to quiet, to resolve.
* Aplaque, vide Aplacar. * Aplauzo, m. an applause, a clapping of hands in
sign of good liking of any thing done or said. * Aplazado, appointed by a day,
a day set down or appointed. Aplazar, to appoint or to set down a day, to
prefixe a day, to agree on a day or time, to do a thing. Aplazer, to please,
to like well, to delight also. * aPlazer, at pleasure, at ease. Aplazible,
pleasant, joyful, delectable. * Aplicacion, f. applying of a matter to the
purpose, referring to some thing. * Aplicadero, m. that may be applied or
referred. * Aplicado, m. applied, referred. * Aplicador, m. one that applies
or makes relation of matters using them to the purpose. * Aplicar, Praes. yo
Aplico, 1. Praet. yo Aplique, to apply his speeches to some end, to speak to
the purpose, to have relation to some other thing. * Aplique, vide Aplicar.
aPlomado, m. heavy, leaded, of the nature of lead, blunt, dull, lumpish,
leuelled. * aPlomar, to cover with lead, to solder with lead, to level or
measure with a plummet or ruler, to throw or fling with violence, or to make
heavy or grieve. * Apocado, made little worth, become of no value, lessened,
vilelie esteemed. aPocar, Praes. yo Apoco, 1. Praet. yo Apoque, to lessen, to
make little of, to esteem little worth, to hold in vile account, to reckon
basely of. Apocrifo, or Apochripho, that which is not of certainty and
sufficient authority. * Apodador, m. one that uses to quip, nip, or taunt in
his speeches. * Apodado, m. quipped, nipped, taunted with speeches, scoffed,
reproved. Apodamiento, m. quipping, taunting, nipping speech, scoffing
sharply. Apodar, to quip, to taunt, to use nipping words, to twit, to
reprove, to rebuke, to tax, to estimate. Apodos, m. quips, taunts, privy
nips, checks, rebukes, taxations. * Apoderado, m. seized, or possessed of,
enabled. aPoderar, or Apoderarse, to seize, or give possession of, to enable,
to deliver into his hands or power. Apoiar, vide Apoyar, to suck a dugge, to
prop up, to vndershore. aPolillado, m. motheaten, spoiled with mothes.
aPolillar, to spoil with mothes, to eat or consume with mothes. * Apolino,
of, or belonging to Apollo. Apoplexia, f. a disease called Apoplexy, which
depriueth him that it possesses of the use of all his senses. * Apoque, vide
Apocar. Aporcadura, making of ridges, or small beds in a garden. Aporcar,
Praes. yo Aporco, 1. Praet. yo Aporque, to make ridges, to make baulkes, to
cover, to bury under ground. aPorfia, f. a vie, striuingly, endeavoring who
shall do best, or who shall get most, one envying another, or, one outbidding
another. * aPorreado, m. cudgelled, given the bastinado. Also bobbed or boxed
with the fistes. aPorreadura, cudgelling, giving the bastinado. Also bobbing or
boxing with the fistes. aPorrear, to beat with a cudgel, to give the
bastinado. Also to bobbe or box with the fistes. * Aporque, vide Aporcar. *
Aportado, m. landed, or arrived on a coast. * Aportadero, a landing place. *
Aportamiento, m. landing, or arriving on a coast. * Aportar, to arrive or land
on a coast. Aportillado, m. opened, broken open, undone, unsealed. Aportillar,
to open, to break open, to undo, to unseal. aPosentado, m. lodged as a
guest, appointed where to lie. aPosentador, m. a harbinger, a furrier, one that
takes and appoints men where they shall lodge. aPosentamiento, m. a lodging
place, an Jnne, a guest-house, a harborough. aPosentar, yo Aposiento, to lodge,
to grant lodging, to appoint where to lie, to take up his lodging. Aposento, or
Aposiento, a lodging, a chamber. * Aposento de nao, the docke where a ship is
builded, or amended. Also a cabin in a ship. * Aposiente, Aposiento, vide
Aposentar. aposPelo, or Pelo ariba, against the hair, crossely, untowardly.
Aposta, of set purpose, wilfully, wittingly, perfectly. * Apostar, to lay a
wager. * Apostata, m. a miscreant, one that once being a Christian denied the
known truth. * Apostatar, to become an apostata, to wax a miscreant, to fall
from faith and true religion which he professed before. Apostema, f. an
impostume, a course of ill humors gathered to a head. Apostemacion, f. idem.
Apostemar, to grow to an impostume, to wax full of corruption. Apostol, m. an
apostle, a messenger sent, a legate or ambassador. * Apostolado, m. an
apostleship. * Apostolico, belonging to an apostle. * Apostolicas letras,
letters dimissorie. * Apostura, f. handsomnesse, propernesse, comlines,
seemelines. Apothegma, f. a quick and witty saying. Apoyar, to suck a dugge,
to underprop or vndershore. * aPreciado, m. prized, valued, estimated.
aPreciador, m. a prizer, a valuer, or estimater, what things are worth.
aPreciadura, f. prizing, rating, valuing, or estimating what things be worth.
aPreciar, or estimar, to estimate, value, or prize what a thing is worth.
Aprecio, the price, value, or rate what a thing is worth. * Apregonar, to make
proclamation. * Aprehender, to apprehend, to catch hold of, to conceive, to
get. * Aprehendedor, m. an apprehender, one that conceiueth or catches hold
of. * Aprehendido, m. apprehended, conceived, or caught hold on. * aPremiado,
m. forced, urged, compelled, surcharged, or recharged, underpropped. *
aPremiador, m. one that instantly urges, forces, compels, rechargeth.
aPremiadura, f. force, compulsion, constraint. * aPremiallos, id est,
aPremiarlos, to force them, to constrain them. Apremiar, to force, to compel,
to urge, to constrain, to recharge. * Apremio, m. compulsion, constraint,
inforcement. * Aprender, to learn, to enterprise, to undertake. * Aprendiz, an
apprentise. * Aprendizes, m. those that learn any art, apprentises.
aPresurado, m. hasty, posting, fearful. * aPresurador, m. one that makes
haste. Apresuradamente, hastily, in post haste, in a fear. * Apresuramiento,
m. posting, making great haste. Apresurar, or Apressurar, to make haste, to
hasten, to be in a fear, to be in a chafe. * aPrestado, m. made ready,
prepared. aPrestar, to make ready, to prepare, to dispatch, to rid.
Apretadamente, strictly, narrowly, violently. * Apretado, m. straightned,
pressed, urged, bound, forced, pinched. Apretamiento, griping, straining,
pressing, or pinching, joining, or gluing together, binding. Apretar, yo
Aprieto, to bind, to streighten, to strive, to gripe, to strain, to press, to
pinch, to glue, to join together. * Apretura, f. binding, streightening,
joining, gluing, pressing. aPriessa, f. hastily, quickly. Apriete, Aprieto,
vide Apretar. Aprieto, m. a straight, a narrow pinch, a difficulty. *
Apriscado, m. put in a fold, shed, or sheepecote. Aprisco, m. a sheepehouse, a
shed, a sheepecote, a fold. * aPrisionado, m. imprisoned, laid in the bolts,
inthralled, made captive. * aPrisionar, to imprison, to inthrall, to lay in the
bolts, to lead captive. * Apriso, vide Aprisco, a sheepecot, a sheepefold. *
Aprobacion, vide Aprovacion. * Aprobar, vide Aprovar. * Aproge, or Aproje, vide
Allegamiento, approaching, a drawing nigh. aPropriacion, m. an applying, a
parable, a fitting to the matter, a likening. * aPropriado, m. likened,
compared, fitted, appropriated. aPropriar, to appropriate, to liken, to
compare, to speak by parables, to fit. A'pro, a Boar. Aprovacion, f.
allowing, ratifying, approouing, consenting to, confirming. * Aprovado, m.
approved, ratified, allowed, confirmed. Aprovar, yo Apruevo, to approve, to
allow, to ratify, to yield or consent unto, to confirm. Aprovechamiento, m.
profiting, commodity, gain, profit, increase, furtherance, preferment. *
Aprovecimiento, vide Aprovechamiento. Aprovechar, to profit, to gain, to get
commodity, to have preferment, to increase, to be furthered. Apruebe, Aprueve,
Apruevo, vide Aprovar. aPrueva, f. by proof, by trial, by experience, a vie,
striuingly, endeavoring who shall do best, or win most. * A'pto, m. fit, meet,
apt. Apuesta, a wager, a gage, winning of a game at play. Apuesta cosa, a
neat, fine, or trim matter. * Apuesto, m. hansome, comely, neat, fine,
gracious, trim. aPun^ar, or aPunear, to buffet, to beat with fistes, to
fight at buffets. Also to gripe in the fist. Apun^ear, idem. * Apuntador, m.
one that points out. Also an ouerseer that looks and notes who comes,
and who is absent from an assembly, where he ought to come. * Apuntalar, to
prop up, to underset, to uphold. Also to make sharp. Apuntalado, propped up,
underset, vpholden. Also sharpened. Apuntar, to point out, to note, to assign.
Apuntillar, to spurn. * aPunto, in a readiness, ready at hand. * aPuradamente,
purely, strictly, forciblie. * Apurado. m. purified, streined, enforced. *
Apuramiento, m. purifying, straining, forcing. Apurar, to purify, to strain,
to enforce. * Aquatocho, m. a spout, a pipe that carries water to a Conduit, a
squirt or spout to spout water or such like. * Aqueda, as tan^er aqueda, to
ring a bell, to set the watch in Spain, in summer at ten of the clock, in
winter at nine, after which hours, men ought not to carry weapons, for
officers go about the street, and whom they so find, they disarme, and commit
them to prison. Aquedador, m. one that makes stay of a matter, not letting it
go forward. aQuedar, to stay, to stop, to let, to tarry or abide. * Aquejado,
vide Aquexado. * Aquejar, vide Aquexar. Aquel, he. Aquella, she. Aquello, that.
* Aquellas, those, f. g. Aquellos, they, or those. * Aquiende, on this side,
nearer, the nearest. Aquesso, this. Aquesta, this, f. g. or she. Aqueste,
this. * Aquesto, or Aquesso, this, or this thing. * Aquestos, these.
aQuexadamente, hastily, speedily, quickly, nimbly, with expedition. aQuexado,
m. hastened. Aquexamiento, m. haste, speed, prickking on, making dispatch,
hastening on. Aquexar, to hasten, to make speed, to make haste, to urge
forward. Aqui, here. * aQuietado, m. quieted, pacified. * aQuietamiento, m. a
quieting, a pacifying. * aQuietar, to pacify, to quiet. A'quila, vide A'guila,
f. an eagle. * Aqui la, there, thither, yonder. * Aquileno nariz, a hook nose.
* Aquilifer, he that carries an eagle. * Aquilon, the north. * Aquistado, m.
gotten, conquered, woonne. * Aquistar, to get, to conquer, to win. A'ra, f. an
altar or constellation so called. * A'rabe, m. a moore, an Arabian. * Arabia, a
great country so called, the Moors country. * Arabal, vide Arrabal. *
Aracadas, vide Arracadas. * Aracife, vide Arracife. * Arada, vide Arado. Arado,
a plough, a furrow. Also broken. Also plowed, furrowed. Arado camera, a crooked
plough. Arador, m. a worm in the hand. Also a ploughman. * Aradro, m. a
plough. * Aragan, vide Haragan. Arambel, m. a tottered, or torn cloth.
Arambre, f. copper. * Araian, or Arayan, the herb myrtle. * Arancar, vide
Arrancar. * Arancel, m. a proclamation in paper to tax the prises of victuals.
* Arandela, f. rebatoes, supporters for women's ruffes. * Arandes, strawberies.
* Aranha, a crabfish. Aran^a, f. a spider. * Aran^a piece, a fish called a
Quauiuer. * Aran^ado, m. scratched, clawed. * Aran^ador, m. one that scratcheth
or claweth. * Aran^adura, f. scratching, clawing. * Aran^ar, to claw, to
scratch. * Aran^eta, s. a little spider. Aran^enta casa, a house where are many
spiders. Aran^uelo, m. a snare, a gryn to catch birds with. * Aranxuez, the
name of one of the kings houses in Spain. Aranzel, or Arancel, m. a
proclamation in paper, a role of names of officers, showing the manner and
cause of their acceptance: a rate set down of the prises of victuals by
justice. Arar, to plough, to break up ground. * A'raris, a river in the
province of Lions in France called Soon. * Arasar, vide Arrasar. * Arastrar,
vide Arrastrar. * Araval, vide Arraval. * Arayar, vide Rayar. * Aratos,
otherwhile, by turns, by fits. * Aravigo, the Moorish speech, or Arabike
tongue. * Araygado, vide Arraygado. * Arayhan, vide Arrayhan, myrtle. * Arbeja,
f. a pease. * Arbitrante, m. an arbitrator, an vmpier Arbitrador, or A'rbitro,
m. an abitrator, a daiesman, an vmpier. Arbitrar, to arbitrate, to think, to
set down his opinion. Arbitrareo, that which is or may be put to arbytrement
Arbitrio, m. arbitrament, judgment, opinion or sentence what he thinks
meet to be done. A'rbitro, vide Arbitrador. A'rbol, m. a tree. A'rbol de
parayso vide Alhen^a. * Ar'bol de proa, the foremast. * Arbolado, m. set up as
a tree, or set up as a mast of a ship, or set up as pikes when they make a
stand. * Arbolar, or Arvolar, to put on tree, or to maste a ship. To make a
stand as pikemen. * Arbolar vanderas, to set banners or ensigns on end, to
hallow ensigns or banners. * Arbolar un esen^a, to bear an ensign right up.
* Arbolar vna pica, to make a stand with a pike. Arbolecer, to grow up to a
tree. * Arboleda, f. a groaue of trees, a coppis or wood lately cut. *
Arboledero, a keeper of fruit trees, a looker to an orchard. Arbolillo, or
Arvolillo, a little tree, a shrub. * Arborada huerta, f. an orchard full of
trees. * Arborar, vide Arbolar. * A'rbre, m. vide A'rbol. A'rca, f. a chest, a
deske, a binne to keep bread in. * Arcabuco, m. a great thicket or grove of
high trees. Arcabuz, m. a harquebusse. * Arcabuz de posta, a harquebusse de
crocke. * Arcabuzazo, m a blow or stroke with a harquebusse, a shot with a
harquebusse. * Arcabuzero, m. a harquebusier. * Arcabuzeria, shot, or shooting
of harquebusse. * Arcadas, f. vomiting at sea. * Arcadero, m. a chest-maker, a
coffer-maker. * Arcador, a bestower in chests. * Arcaducado, very much,
destitute of provision. * Arcaducado, m. directed or conducted by pipes, leads
or trunckes, as water. * Arcaducar, to direct or conduct by pipes, spoutes or
canes, as water. Arcaduz, m. a conduict pipe. * Arcaduzar, vide Arcaducar.
Arcangel, a chief Angel, an Archangell. A'rcas, as las A'rcas, a man's chest
or breast. * Arcas, or Arcaz, m. a great chest or coffer. Arcedianadgo, m. an
archdeaconship. Arcediano, m. an archdeacon. * Arcero, m. a halbardier, a
yeoman of the guard. An archer. Archero, m. an archer, a yeoman of the guarde. *
Archibo, the arches court, a treasury of evidences, or the chancery. *
Archibos de poeticas fabulas, a treasury of poets fables. * Archiducado, m. an
arche-dukedome. * Archipreste, m. a chief priest. * Archipielago, the maine
sea that compasses Grecia about. * Architecto, or Architeto, m. a chief
builder, a chief mazon, an architect. * Architectura, or Architetura, f. skill
to direct men in building. Also building of curious houses. Archivo, or
Archibo, the arches, a treasury of evidences, or of records. * Arcilla, vide
Arzilla. * Arcipielago, vide Archipielago, the maine sea. Arcipreste, vide
Archipreste. A'rco, m. a bow, an arch, a vault. A'rco del cielo, the rainebowe.
* A'rco, or Boveda, a vault. * Arcon, m. the pummell of a saddle. Arcopispado,
m. an archbishopricke. Arcopispo, m. an archbishop. A'rda, vide Harda, a
squirrell. Arder, to burn, to blaze, to set on fire, to flame. * Ardid, m. a
stratageme, boldness, or hardines. Ardid de guerra, a policy, or witty shift
in war. * Ardideza, f. heat, hardines, choler, fury. * Ardido, m. burnt,
scorched. Ardiente, burning, hot, on a fire, flaming. Ardientemente, hotly,
burningly, fervently. * Ardil, vide Ardid. Ardimiento, m. heat, burning,
flaming. Ardite, a piece of money worth three Marauedies. * A'rdol, vide
A'rbol. Ardor, m. heat, burning, flame, a blase. * A'rduo, m. hard to be done,
difficult, not easy to be compassed. * Arduydad, hardness, difficulty. *
Areado, vide Arreado. * Areban^ado, vide Arreban^ado. * Arebatar, vide
Arrebatar. * Arebenta buey, along legged beetle fly venomous to cattle. Also
an herb. * Areboles, vide Arreboles. * Arrebocar, or Arebozar, vide Arrebozar.
* Arebujar, vide Arrebujar. Arebuxar, vide Arrebuxar. * Arecho, vide Arrecho. *
Arecife, vide Arrecife. * Aredado, vide Arredado. * Aredrado, vide Arredrado. *
Aregostar, vide Arregostar. * Areito, m. a kind of dance among the Indians. *
Arelde, vide Arrelde. * Arellanado, vide Arrellanado. * Aremango, vide
Arremango. * Aremeter, vide Arremeter. * Aremetido, vide Arremetido. *
Aremolinar, vide Arremolinar. Arena, f. sand, gravel. Arenal, m. a place of
sand, a grauelly place. * Arencado, vide Arenque. * Arencado, vide Arrancado. *
Arendado, vide Arrendado. * Arenga, or Harenga, a long speech, an oration.
Arenisco, or Arenoso, m. sandy, grauelly, full of sand, or gravel. * Aren^a,
vide Aran^a, a spider. Arenoso, vide Arenisco, sandy, full of sand or gravel.
Arenque, m. a hering. * Arepastar, vide Arrepastar. * Arepentir, vide
Arrepentir. aRespeto, or aRespecto, in respect, in regard. Arestin, m. the
scratches in a horses pasterne, the scurffe or skall in childrens heads. *
Areziar, vide Arreziar. Arfil, m. the bishop at chesse play. Argadijo, m. the
frame of any thing. Argadillo, m. a reele to reele yarne on. Argamassa, f.
rough cast walls, etc. mixture of sand and lime. * A'rganas, a kind of hamper
made of hemp in network wise, to fetch corn out of the field upon the back
of a beast. * Argel, m. a horse with his right foot white, and no other white
about him, held in Spain for an unlucky horse. Also a city in Barbary. *
Argentadas, m. silver bals, bals done over with silver. * Argentador, m. a
gilder with silver. * Argentado, m. siluered over or done over with silver. *
Argentar, to silver over, to gilde over with silver. * Argentaria, f. gilding.
* A'rgo, the first ship that was made, wherein Jason and his company went to
steal the golden fleece. * A'rgos, a famous city in Greece, named of king
A'rgos, which reigned over it, dedicated to Venus. Also Argos with the 100.
eyes, whom Mercury lulled asleep, and cut off his head. Argolla, f. a ring of
iron. * Argollica, f. a little ring. Arguella, f. a wallet. * A'rguenas, f.
budgets, bags. Arguir, to dispute, to reason, to argue about a matter. Argullo,
m. sharpnes, subtle points, wittiness. Argulloso, m. sharp witted, quick
conceited, subtle. Argullosamente, sharply, wittily, subtly. Argumentador,,
m. a disputer, a cauiller, one that loves well to reason of matters.
Argumentar, to dispute, to argue, to reason, to cavil. Argumento, m. an
argument, a reason, a proof, the summarie contents of a matter. * Aribar, vide
Arrivar. * A'rido, vide Seco. * Arillos, m. stones in raisons. Also earinges.
Arimar, vide Arrimar. * Arinconar, vide Arrinconar. * Ariscado, m. put into
danger, placed among rocks in a dangerous place. * Ariscar, Praes. yo Arisco,
1. Praet. yo Arisque, to hazard and put in danger, to venture. * Arisco,
danger, hazard. * Arisgado, vide Ariscado. * Arisque, vide Ariscar. * Arista,
f. the beard of the ear of corn, sometime the ear. a hair. * Aristocracia,
f. an aristocracy, a common weal governed by the nobles, or better sort. *
Aristologia, f. an herb called Hartwoort or Birthwort. Aristolochia, f. an
herb called Hartwoort. Arithmetica, f. the art of reckoning with number and
casting readily of sums. * Arithmetico, m. a professor of arithmetike. *
aRito, justly. * Ariuar, vide Arriuar. * A'rma, weapon, harneis. Also an
alarm. * Arma tocar, to strike up alarm, to give the alarm, to sound the
drum. * un A'rma, an alarm. Armada, f. a fleet of ships furnished for fight.
Armadijo, a snare or grin to catch birds. Armado, f. armed, well appointed.
Armadura, f. armor, furniture. * Armanca, a snare, trap, or grin. Armandijas,
f. snares or traps for to catch birds or beasts with. Armar, to arm, to
furnish with weapon, etc. to set a snare, to bend, to level. Armar paxaros, or
Gacapos, to set gins for birds or conies. Armar cancadilla, to trip. Armar
engen^o, to bend or to level any engine. A'rmas, arms, harneis, weapons, or
any soldier like furniture. * Hombres de armas, armed men. Armario, m. an
armorie, a deske. Armatoste, m. a toy, a snare, a grin, a rack for a
crossebow. Armazon, m. the ground work of any thing as the timber work for a
house, the ioints of a ship, etc. * Armazon de navios, the grounde-worke of
ships. * Armelina, f. a little beast bearing fine fur, called an Ermine.
Armella, f. a ring of iron or of other metal. Armero, m. an armorer, one that
makes or sells armor. * Armilla, f. a cocklefish. Armin, the fur of Ermines.
Armin^os, the little beasts that carry the fur called Ermines. * Armoles, or
Armuelles, an herb called Orach, or golden flower. * Armonia, or Harmonia,
harmony, a sweet agreement in musical voices, or instruments. Armoniaque
goma, a kind of gum called gum armoniake. Armuelles, or Armoles, Orach, an
herb so called. Arnes, m. harneis to furnish soldiers with. * A'ro, m. a
circle of iron or wood, a hoop of a barrel. * A'ro de broquel, the circle of
iron about a buckler. * Aroba, vide Arroba. * Arocinado, vide Arrocinado. *
Arodillado, vide Arrodillado. * Arojar, vide Arrojar, to cast, to throw. *
Arollado, vide Arrollado. * Aromadizo, vide Arromadizo. * Aronjado, vide
Arronjado. * Aropado, vide Arropado. * Arostrar, to have a will or liking to
do a thing. To turn the face toward. * Arova, vide Arrova. * Aroxar, vide
Arroxar. * Arroyar, vide Arroyar. * Aroyuelo, vide Arroyuelo. * Aroz, vide
Arroz. * Arqueado, m. made in the manner of a bow, arch or vault. * Arquear, to
make like an arche. * Arquero, a bow-maker, or a chestmaker. * Arqueron, vide
Arcaz, m. a great chest or coffer. Arqueta, vide Arquilla, f. a little chest.
Arquilla, Arquita, or Arqueta, f. a little chest. a curlew. * Arquillo, a
little bow, a fidling stick, a racket, a spring to catch birds with.
Arquitetura, vide Architetura, f. * Arquiteto, vide Architeto. * Arquitraue, m.
a principal beam of any frame or building. Arrabal, the suburbs of a city,
the base town, an out street. Arracadas, f. eare-rings. Arracife, a rock or
shelfe in the sea, a foord. * Arraez, a master of a bark or galliote.
Arrancado, m. pulled up, rooted out, loosned, snatched away, shifted away,
grubbed, plucked out, rid from entangling, vnfastened. * Arrancador, m. one
that plucketh up by the roots, a snatcher or catcher by violence, one that
riddeth from encumbrance. Arrancadura, f. plucking up by the roots, snatching
or catching by violence, riddance from encumbrances. Arrancar, Praes. yo
arranco, 1. Praet. yo arranque, to extirpe or pluck up by the roots, to
loosen, to deliver from encumbrances, to grub up, to shift away, to snatch or
catch by violence. * Arranque, vide Arrancar. * A'rras, f. the earnest penny
or money given onward upon a bargain. * arRasado, m. mowed, reaped, shorn,
shaued, but most properly, striked as a bushel, or other measure is, smoothed,
rased. arRasadura, f. striking of a bushel or other measure. Mowing, reaping,
clipping or shauing, leuelling, rasing. Arrasar, to strike as a bushel is
striked, to mow, to reap, to clip or shave, to leuel, to smooth, to raze or
blot out. * Arrastrado, m. dragged, drawn, raked, haled, tugged, trailed along
the ground. Arrastradura, f. a dragging, a drawing, a raking, a tugging or
drailing along the ground. Arrastrar, to drag, to draw, to rake, to scrape, to
pull, to hale, to tug, to traile along the ground. * Arraval, or Arrabal, the
suburbs of a city. * Arraygado, rooted, fastened, or twined about a thing.
Arraygadura, taking root, fastening, twyning about a thing. Arraygar, Praes.
yo Arraygo, 1. Praet. yo arraygue, to take root, to fasten, to twyne about a
thing, to grow to a stem or stalk, to spring up, to settle, to take hold, to
plant, to set. * Arraygue, vide Arraygar. Arrayhan, a Myrtle tree. Arrayhanal,
m. a grove of Myrtle trees. * Arrayz, even, aneanst, level, just, full
measure. under, beaneth. * A'rraz, the earnest, that one gives or takes in
making any bargain. * Arreado, m. arraied, dressed, made ready. Arrear, to
prepare, to make ready, to dress. * Arreban^ado, m. gotten or gathered
together. * Arreban^ador, m. a gatherer together, one that lays on a heap,
or pile. Arreban^adura, f. gathering together, a heap or pile, a hoorde of
money, or of other things. Arreban^ar, to gather together, to lay up on heaps
or piles, to hoord up money or other things. Arrebantar, vide Arrebatar.
Arrebatadamente, snatchingly, by catching, by fits, suddenly. * Arrebatada
musica, sudden music quickly gone. Arrebatado, m. catched, snatched,
surprised, taken. * Arrebatados plazeres, pleasures had by fits, which quickly
or suddenly come, and are as soon gone. * Arrebatador, m. a catcher, a
snatcher, one that gets now and then, or that catches suddenly. *
Arrebatadora, f. a buZZard. Arrebatamiento, m. catching, snatching, getting by
fits, getting suddenly, scraping. Arrebatar, to catch, to snatch, to get by
fits or suddenly, to scrape together, to claw, to scratch. Arrebatina, catching
or snatching, a skirmish, a sudden fray, boot-haling. * Arrebocado, m. muffled,
masked, wimpled, hidden under the cloak. * Arrebocarse, Praes. yo Arreboco, to
muffle, to mask, to wimple or hide the face. Arreboles, red strakes in the sky
that are seen at the rising or setting of the sun. * Arrebozado, or
Arrebocado, muffled with his cloak about his eyes or face, wimpled, masked. *
Arrebozar, to throw his cloak over his face. * Arrebugiado, or Arrebujado,
vide Arrebuxado. * Arrebujarse, vide Arrebuxarse. * Arrebuxadas schismas,
heresies, factious schisms, hidden, covered or kept in hugger mugger. *
Arrebuxado, m. vide Arrebocado. * Arrebuxamiento, m. a muffling, a masking, a
wimpling, or a hiding the face. * Arrebuxarse, or Arrebujarse, vide
Arrebocarse. Arrechar, to lift up, to set upright: properly understood of the
prime member. Arrechadura, f. standing stiff, lifting up, setting on end. *
Arrecho, set up on end. * Arrecife, vide Arracife, a rock or shelfe in the
sea, a foord, a coast full of rocks. Arredado, m. vide Arrendado. * Arredrado,
m. separated, put a sunder, driven away, enforced, put away privily. Arredrar,
to drive away, to separate, to put a sunder, to remove privily, to enforce.
Arregostado, m. tasting, liking of the taste, having tasted. * Arregostar, to
taste for a liking, to like of the taste. Arrejada, f. the plough staff, or
the iron on a plough-staffe wherewith the ploughman cleanses the coulter.
Arrelde, a weight of four pounds. * Arrellanado, m. sitten down on the flat
ground. Arrellanar, to settle in his seat, to sit upon the flat ground. *
Arremangado, m. trussed up, tucked up, bound up. * Arremangamiento, m.
trussing, or tucking up, binding up. Arremangar, Praes. yo Arremango, 1. Praet.
yo Arremangue, to trusse, or to tucke up, to bind up. * Arremango, m. the lap,
a trussing up a fierce setting on, an assault. * Arremangue, vide Arremangar.
Arremeter, to invade, to set upon, to assail. Arremetida, f. an assault, a
sally, a setting upon men, an invasion. * Arremetido, m. assaulted, set upon,
invaded. Arremolinar, to whirle about like a whirlewinde. * Arrendado, m.
bridled, curbed, ridden with a snafflle, rained up, let to hire, taken by the
great. Also counterfaited. Arrendador, m. one that lets to hire, one that
hireth or takes to farm, a counterfaitor, a rent gatherer. Arrendamiento, m.
letting, farming, taking by the great, hiring of any thing, yielding to.
Arrendar, yo Arriendo, to bridle, or rain up a horse, to curb, to put on a
snaffle, to let for rent, to hire for rent, to take by the great. Also to
counterfaite, to yield to. Arreo, m. on a row, a row together, in order. *
Arreo, m. an ornament, decking, or trimming up: trappings, or a coparison for a
horse. Arrepastar, to feed, to put to pasture, to graze, to go to grass, or
to fodder as men do cattle in the winter. Arrepentir, yo Arrepiento, to repent,
to rue, or be sorry for some thing past and done, to be grieved or ashamed for
his fault, to forethinke. Arrepentido, m. repentant; penitent, sorry for
sins. Arrepentimiento, m. repentance, penitencie, ruth or sorrow for faults
escaped, or matters done and past. * Arrepiente, Arrepiento, vide Arrepentir. *
Arrepintir, vide Arrepentir. Arrepiso, penitent, repentant, etc. Arrexaque, m.
a forke with three prongs, any tool with three teeth, a forke to tend or
pitch haie with, an Eele spear, a Troutspeare, a fleshhooke, a bird without
feet called a martle, a quarrel of a crossebow. * Arreziado, fortified,
strengthened, made strong. * Arreziar, to strengthen, to make strong, to wax
strong from sickness. * Arrezio desde un rato aca el mal, the sickness a little
while since increased and waxed vehement. * Arreziar de dolencia, to recover
his health again, to grow well again. Arriar, to fall back, as a ship does
when she lets go her cable. * Arriate, a pot of flowers on a wall, a causey,
a pathway. Arriba, or Arriva, upward, above, on high, aloft. * Arribal, vide
Arrabal, m. the suburbs of a city or town. * Arribada, or Arrivada, f. an
arrival, coming to shore, or to harborough, ascending, or mounting upward.
Arribado, arrived, landed, come to harborow, ascended or mounted upward.
Arribar, or Arrivar, to arrive, to come to shore, or to harborough, to soar
up as a hawk, to lean or poise upon, to ascend, to mount upward. * Arriende,
Arriendo, vide Arrendar. * Arriero, vide Harriero. * Arrimado, m. leaned on,
relied or rested upon, stayed. * Arrimador, m. one that leans or relieth
upon. Arrimadura, f. a leaning against, relying or resting upon. Arrimar, to
lean against, to set up against, to rely or rest upon, to stick unto. Arrimo,
any thing to lean on, or to rely upon. arRinconado, m. thrust up in a corner,
driven to a narrow pinch, enchanted, made numme or senseless. * arRinconador,
m. a driuer into corners, a sorcerer, an inchanter. * arRinconamiento, m.
enchantment, a driuer into corners. * Arrinconar, to enchant, to freese, to
make numme, or senseless: to put or drive into a corner. * Arrindar, vide
Arrendar. Arriscado, endangered, in hazard or ieopardie, hardy. * No seas
Arriscado, be not fool hardy. Arriscar, Praes. yo Arisco, 1. Praet. yo
Arrisque, to endanger, to hazard, to adventure, to ieopard. * Arrisque, vide
Arriscar. * Arriva, above, aloft. * Arrivado, arrived, having taken landing,
come to a place. * Arrivar, to arrive, to come to shore. Arroba, or Arrova, a
certain measure, or a weight of twenty five pounds, of measure eight Acumbres:
six gallons English. * Arroba de vino, a vessel of wine holding six gallons.
* Arroba de canela, twenty five pounds of Synamon, a measure of wine
containing eight Acumbres, or six gallons. Arrobado, measured by that measure,
or according to that weight. Arrocinado cavallo, an ill favored jade. *
Arrodillado, m. on the knees, kneeling. Arrodilladura, f. a kneeling on the
knees. Arrodillar, to kneel on the knees. Arrogancia, f. arrogancy, pride,
hautines of stomach. Arrogante, proud, arrogant, insolent, of a hautie mind.
* Arrojadizas armas, weapons used to be thrown, as darts, etc. * Arrojadizo,
m. any thing to be cast. * Arrojado, m. thrown, flung, hurled, driven away,
rushed in, overflowed with water. * Arrojador, m. one that flingeth, casts,
hurleth. Arrojar, to throw, to cast, to fling, to thrust or press in, to
throw in, to ouerflow the banks as the spring tide, or high water. *
Arrollador, m. a rowler, a tumbler, a wrapper, a tosser to and fro. Arrollar,
to roll, to tumble, to fold, to wrap, to toss to and fro. * Arromadizado,
pained with heaviness of the head, grieved with the falling down of the rheum.
* Arromadizo, rheum, heaviness of the head. * Arronjado, m. cast, hurled, or
darted. * Arropado, heavy headed with Arrope, id est, new wine, or clothed
with Ropa, id est, a gown or garment. Arropar, to cloth, or to make the head
heavy with new wine. Arropa, or Arrope, new wine sodden to the third part,
must, wine sodden for sauce. Arrope de moros, syrrup of mulberries. Arrostrar,
to face, to come face to face. * Arrova, a measure of eight Acumbres, that is
six gallons, of weight 25. pound. * Arrovin^ar, to snatch up suddenly, to
catch up in haste. * Arroxar, to make to shine or glister like gold, to make
look red. Arroyar, to plow the ground. Arroyarse el rio, to run along in and
out as a river does. Arroyo, m. a little river, a running brook of water. *
Arroyuelo, m. a little running brook. Arroz, m. Rice. * Arrufianado, m. made
or become a baude. * Arrufianar, to make or become a baude. Arruga, f. a
wrinkle in the face or other part, a pleite, a fould. Arrugado, m. pleited,
foulded, wrinkled. Arrugar, to fould, to pleite, to wrinkle. Arruynado, m.
ruinated, ready to fall, defaced, laid waste, thrown down. Arruynar, to
throw down, to bring to ruin, to deface or pull down, to lay waste, to
destroy. * Arrullado, m. lulled a sleep. Arrullar el nin^o, to lull the child
a sleep. Arrullarse la paloma, or Tortola, to cry or mourn as stocke-doues
and turtle-doues use to do. * Arruviado, m. made to glister, of the color of
gold. * Arruviar, vide Arroxar. Arsenico, Orpment, Arsenicke, of the color of
gold. * Artafice, vide Artifice. A'rte, f. art, cunning, science. Artejo, m. a
joint of a finger. * Artemisia, an herb called Mugwoort, some say Feuerfew.
Artemisa, idem. * Artera, f. vide Artero. * Arteria, a small sinew, or artery.
Artero, cunning, crafty, deceitful. also an artificer. Artesa, f. a kneading
trough, or a tub to mould bread in. Also a boat hewed out of a tree, being all
in one piece. Artesano, m. a handicrafts man. Artesilla, f. a little bowl,
goblet, or standing cup. Artesones, Plaisterers works that they make in the
seelings of houses. also great kneading tubs, or troughs to moulde dough or
bread. * Artichoca, f. or cardo de comer, an Artichoke. Articular, to set down
articles, to condition, to covenant, to distinguish, to speak treatably, to
point out joint by joint. Articulo, m. an article, a natural composition of
ioints, or bones, a knuckle: an article of the faith, a little part. *
Artifice, m. a handie crafts man, an artificer, a workman. Artificio, m.
workmanship, cunning in the occupation. * Artificiosamente, cunningly,
workemanlike. Artificioso, m. cunning, one that is his crafts master, very
cunning. Artificialmente, vide Artificiosamente. * Artillado, furnished with
artillery. * Artillar, to furnish with artillery. Artillero, m. a master of
the ordinance, or gunner. Artilleria, f. ordinance, artillery. * Artimada, f.
a thing made by art. Artiman^a, f. deceit, slight, shifting. Artista, m. an
Artist, one that studieth an art. * Artotrogo, m. a greedy gut, a gluttonous
fellow. * A'rua, the fields. * Aruda, f. vide Ruda, an herb called Rue.
Arveja, f. pease: some say tares. * Arufianar, vide Arrufianar. * Arugar, vide
Arrugar. * Arullar, vide Arrullar. * Aruviar, vide Arruviar. * A'rvol, vide
Arbol. * Arvolar, vide Arbolar. * Arvoleda, a grove or orchard of fruit trees.
* Arvoledero, vide Arboledero. * Arvolillo, vide Arbolillo. * Aruspicina,
divination by the sacrificing of beasts. * Aruynar, vide Arruynar.
Arzaepielago, vide Arcipielago. * A'rze, vide A'zre. Arzilla, f. a kind of
claie, potters clay. * Arzen, m. the shore, or seas side, a bank to keep in
water. * Arzion, vide Arzon. Arzon, m. the pummell of a saddle, a crouper. As,
An ace at dice, or at cards. A'sa, f. the ear or handle of a pitcher, or such
like: occasion, opportunity. aSabiendas, wittingly, with consent and liking,
of set purpose. * aSaco, by spoiling, boot-halling, by robbing. * Asaderia,
vide Assaderia. * aSaetar, to shoot. * Asalariado, m. rewarded with wages,
salarie, or stipend. * Asalariar, to reward with wages, stipend, or salarie. *
Asaltado, m. set upon, assailed. * Asaltar, to set upon, to assail. * Asalto,
m. a setting upon, an assault. Asar, vide Assar, to roast. Asarabacar, a kind
of nard, or a kind of foalefoote, an herb so called. * Ascalonia Cebolla, a
scalion, or little onion. * Ascendencia, f. an auncestrie, a genealogy. A'sco,
as aver asco. loathing, to loath. Ascoroso, one whose stomach does loath much.
A'scua, f. hot coals. * Ascuras, vide aEscuras, in the dark without light. *
aSecas, Barley. * Asechanca, vide Assechanca. * Asediar, or Asidiar, to
besiege, to lay siege unto. * Asedio, or Assedio, a siege, a situation. *
Aselga, f. an herb called a Beete. * A'sele, take hold on him. * aSemejanca,
f. to the likelihood, to the likeness, in comparison of. * A'sen, they lay hold
on, they take hold on. * Asendereado, m. troaden as a pathe. Asendrado, m.
idem. * Asentar, to set down. * Asensio, Wormwood. * Aserravelas, or
Acerravelas, coards in a ship, called marklines. * Aserrar, yo Assierro, to saw
or cut with a saw. * Asessor, an assistant, one that sits on the bench, to
be assistant in justice and judgment. * Asestado, m. aimed at, leueled at. *
Asestar, to aim at, to level at. A'sga, f. opportunity, catching hold on.
Asgar, to fly or fasten upon, to catch hold on. * Asial, m. a kind of pincers
to hold a horse with by the nose while he is a shooing or letting blood. *
Asidero, m. the ear or handle of a pot, cup, or such like. * Asidiar, to
besiege, to lay siege, to beleaguer. * Asidio, vide Asedio, or Assedio, a
siege, a besieging. Asido, m. cleaving or sticking to. * Asiente, Asiento, vide
Assentar, to set down. * Asiento, m. a seat, or situation, quietness or
reposednes of mind, settling at the bottom, the dregs that settle to the
bottom. * Asierre, Asierro, vide Asserrar. * Asignar, to appoint or assign,
to seal or sign a writing, to make a cross or sign Asilla, m. opportunity,
occasion. A little handle of any thing to take hold on. Allo the throat.
Asion, vide Aciones. Asir, to take hold on, to stick to, to cleave to, to bud.
* Asistendo, ayding, helping, assisting. * Asistir, to aid, to assist or
help. A'sma, shortness of breath, swouning or a qualme in the stomach, ecstasy
or a passion of the mind, grief, annoy, vexation. Asmar, to esteem, to
imagine, to think, to estimate. Also to be short-winded. Asmatico, one that is
troubled with shortness of breath, or with an ecstasy or swouning. A'sna, Asno,
a she ass, a he ass. Asnal, m. pertaining to an ass. Asnarizo, m. a keeper
or driuer of asses. Also the place where asses stand, or are shut up. *
Asnejonazo, m. a great ass, a block-headed fellow. Asnero, m. a keeper of
asses. Asnico, vide Asnillo, a little ass. * Asnillo, vide Asnico, idem.
A'sno, an ass, a bearing beast. Asno camps, a wild ass. * Asolado, m.
brought to the ground, spoiled, subverted. * Asolar, to ruinate, bring to the
ground, to subvert, spoil or consume. * aSalas, alone, by himself, without
any company. * Asoldadar, to name and appoint one out for a soldier. * Asomar,
to appear up. * Asombrar, vide Asombrar. * Asonada, an alarm, or raising up
of people by ringing of bells. A'spa, f. a reele for thread, or for yarne. *
A'spa de molino, a winde-mill sail. Aspado, m. reeled, wound in bals. Aspar,
to reele thread or yarne, to turn about as the sails of a windmill do, to
roll or wind in bals. * Aspecto, m an aspect, a looking on, regard,
countenance, sight, prospect, physiognomie. Aspeluzar, vide Espeluzar, to have
the hair stand stiff with fear, to have the hair stand upright. *
Asperamente, sharply, eagerly, fiercely, bitterly, roughly, stearnly.
Asperear, to make sharp, to make rough, to make eager. Aspereza, f sharpnes,
roughnes, eagernes, fiercenes, straightnes, bitterness. Aspereza, or Amargura,
bitterness. A'spero, m. sharp, eager, stearne, fierce, cruel, bitter,
straight, craggie, rugged. A'spero de pelo, rough haired, shagd haired.
A'spero, or Fragoso, craggie like rockie mountains, wild, rugged. * Asperon,
m. a whetstone to make knives, or such like, sharp. Also the nose or snoute of
a ship or galley. * A'spide, a kind of little serpent in Afric very venomous,
an Aspicke. * Aspirar, to aspire, to covet, to attain unto, to seek for, to
get promotion. * Aspreza, vide Aspereza, a straight pinch, sharpnes, etc. *
A'squas, f. live coals after they have done flaming, burning coals.
Asqueroso, loathsome, horrible, irksome. * A'sre, cypres wood. * A'ssa, as dar
Assa, to give a handfast, to give or minister occasion. * Assaderia, a roasting
place, a kitchen. Assadero, m. a spit to roast meat on. Also one that turns
the spit. * Assaderillo, m. a little spit. Assado, m. roasted. * Assadon, vide
Acadon, m. * Assador, m. a spit to roast meat. Assadura, the garbage or guts.
Also a liuering pudding, or a sawsedge. assaetado, shot. * Assaetador, one that
shoots in a bow, or with a dart. * assaetar, to shoot with a bow, to dart,
to hit with a thunderbolt. * Assaltado, m. assaulted, set upon. * Assaltar, to
assault, to set upon. * Assalto, vide Asalto. Assar, to roaste. Assarabacar,
vide Asarabacar. Assaz, enough. Asseado, m. neat, fine, handsome, curious. *
Assear, to make neat, fine, handsome, curious. * Assechado, laid in wait
for, watched. Assechador, m. one that lies in wait, a skoute that goes upon
discovery. Assechadora cosa, f. a deceitful matter, a matter fetched about by
a wile. Assechanca, f. an ambush, a lying in wait, a plot to entrap folk.
Assechando tomar, to take by an ambush, to entrap by a wile. * Assechanza, vide
Assechanca. Assechar, to lie in wait, to lay an ambush, to entrap. *
Assedtiar, vide Asediar, to besiege, to late siege to. * Assedio, vide Asedio,
m. siege, a besieging. * Assegundar, to make second or next to one, to second.
* Assegurado, m. assured, put in security. * Assegurador, m. one that does
warrant, one that puts in security. * Asseguranca, f. assurance. *
Assegurar, to put in security, to save harmeles, to warrant. * Assencio, or
Assensio, wormwood. Assenderado, or Assendercado, rare, excellent. *
Assentado, m. seated, settled, stayed. Assentador de real, m. a camp-master, a
quartermaster. Assentamiento, m. placing, settling, pitching of a camp,
sitting. Assentar, yo Assiento, to place, to settle, to sit, to sit down, to
sincke to the bottom. Assentarse en cuclillas, to sit rucking or cowring down
on the tail. Assentar el real, to lodge the camp, to appoint every company
their quarter. * Asseo, m. comelines, fines, neatnes, handsomnes, gallauntnes.
* Asserado, m. sawed with a saw. * Asserdador, vide Asserrador. Asserrador, a
sawyer. Asserraduras, sawdust. Asserrar yo Assierro, to saw, to saw in sunder.
* Asservado, m. kept, preserved, watched. Asseruar, to keep, to watch, to
observe, to mark or look unto. Assessor, m. an associate on the bench, one
that sits with other. Assessorio, idem. * Assestado, m. appointed, aimed,
prefixed, underpropped, set against. * Assestador, m. one that aymeth, leueleth
or appoints, prefixeth, proppeth or sets against. Assestadura, f. aiming
at, prefixing. Assestar, yo Assiesto, to appoint, to prefixe, to aim, to
underprop, to set against, to cavil at. Assestar tiro, to aim a shoot. Assi,
so, thus. Assi como, even as, like as, so as. * Assido, m. taken hold on,
fastened, clinched, griped. * Assidero, m. a thing to be taken hold on, a stay,
a holdfast, a thing to gripe or graple on. A handle, an occasion, opportunity.
Assi mesmo, even so, in like sort. Also eke, eftsoons, moreover, over and
besides, even the very same. * Assi que, then, therefore, so that, in such sort
as. * Assiente, Assiento, vide Assentar. Assiento, m. a seat, a chair,
situation, the dregs. Assiento hazer, to sink downward, to settle about the
bottom. Assiento de edificio, the situation of a house. * Assierre, Assierro,
vide Asserrar. * Assieste, Assiesto, vide Assestar. Assignacion, f. appointing,
assignement. * Assignado, m. appointed, assigned. Assignar, to appoint, to
assign, to set down. * Assilla, a little handle to hold by. * Assir, vide
Asir. Assistente, an assistant, a helper, an ayder. Assolacion, f. setting
against the sun, making waste or desolate. Assolado, m. set against the
sun, desolate, ruinated or brought to the ground. Assoladura, f. making
waste, wasting, laying desolate. * Assolamiento, m. vide Assoladura. * Assolar
yo Assuelo, to make desolate, to spoil, to set against the sun, to lay
waste. * Assolcar, to make furrows as a plough in the ground, to lay out
ridges, to cut as a ship in the sea. Assolear, to dry against the sun, to lay
in the sun, to bleach clothes. Assoltaryo Assuelto, to loosen, to rid out of
bands, to discharge. Assolucion, f. absolution, acquiting, discharge, letting
loose, setting at liberty, remission, pardon. Assoluer, yo Assueluo, to
absolve, to acquit, to discharge, to let loose, to rid out of doubt, to
forgive. * Assolutamente, absolutely, perfectly, clearly. Assomado, m.
appeared up. Also giddieheaded, almost drunk. Assomar, to peer up, to look
up, to appear, to lift up the head. Also to be giddie headed, almost drunk.
Assombrado, m. shadowed, afraid, astonished. * Assombrador, m. one that skarreth,
frayeth, makes astonished. Assombrar, to shadow, to skarre, to make astonished or
afraid. Assombrar, or hazer sombra, to shadow, or yield shadow. * Assonadas,
f. by soundes, by noises, by tunes, by voices. Assonador, m. a tuner, one that
sets tunes. assonar, yo assueno, to tune or set a tune, to sound, to sing
with. * Assordar, to make deaf. aSsosegado, m. pacified, appeased, quieted.
aSsosegar, Praes. yo aSsossiego, 1. Praet. yo aSsossegue, to appease, to
pacify, to quiet or make calm. * asSossiega, asSossiego, vide asSossegar. *
Assuele, Assuelo, vide Assolar. * Assuelva, Assuelvo, vide Assolver. Assuelto,
absolved, pardoned, acquitted. * Assuene, Assueno, vide Assonar. Assulcado,
divided by furrows, laid out in ridges. Assulcar, Praes. yo Assulco, 1.
Praet. yo Assulque, to make furrows, to lay out in ridges. * Assulque, vide
Assulcar. * Assuncion, taking, or getting up, mounting. A'sta, the stafe of a
lance, aspeare, a lance, a pike, a staff. Astenerse, vide Abstenerse. Astil,
m. a stalk of any herb. The haft or handle of a spade, pikaxe or such like.
Astilla, f. a stub, a square piece of timber called a quarter, a stalk, a
rafter, a stake, a pile, a chippe, a lath, a stump, a stock, a wharle for a
spindle, a shiue, a splinter. Astillado, set on a staff, fastened on, patched
together, splintered. * Astillas, by chip meal, by splinters, by little
pieces. Astilejo, m. a constellation of stars, called the Orion. Astillero, m.
a docke to build ships on. * Astinencia, f. abstayning or forbearing of meat,
or any other thing. * Astinente, one that forbeareth much eating and drinking,
a temperate man, or one that forbeareth by virtue from doing violence or wrong.
* Astragar, Praes. yo Astrago, 1. Praet. yo Astrague, to spoil, to destroy, to
mar. * Astrague, vide Astragar. * A'stro, a celestial sign compact of many
stars. * Astrolabio, m. an instrument of Astronomers, called an Astrolabe, by
which the motion of the stars is gathered. Astrologal, belonging to Astronomy.
Astrologia, f. experience and reading of Astronomy. Astrologo, m. one that can
reason of the reuolutions of the heavens, the course of the Planets, the
constellations, etc. * Astronomia, f. art or skill in Astronomy. Also an
herb called Aristolochia longa. Astroso, m. unfortunate, unlucky, borne in an
ill hour. * Astrosamente, unfortunately, unluckily. Astucia, f. craft, deceit,
subtlety. * Asturia, a province in Spain so called, full of mountains.
Astuta, or Astutamente, craftily, cunningly, slily, deceitfully. Astuto, m.
crafty, deceitful, cunning, wary, sly, subtle, wily. * Asylo, m. a
sanctuary or place of refuge whence malefactors could not be fetched to be
punished.
A T
* Atabayoa, f. an Apothecary drug so called. Atabal, a drum. Also a round
instrument like a kettle without a bail, used in war in times past, and yet
among the Spaniards used at feasts. * Atabalejo, m. a little drum. Atabalera,
f. ash player on a taber. Atabelero, a drummer, a taberer. * Ataca, vide
Hataca, of a cooks great spoone. * Atacado, m. tied, bound, trussed up. *
Atacado de las cortinas de muralle, fastened to the curtains of the wall.
Atacadura, f. tying, binding, trussing up. Atacar, Praes. yo Ataco, 1. Praet.
yo Ataque, to tie, to bind, to fasten, to trusse up. To ram powder into a
piece. Atacar las calcas, to trusse up his hosen. Atacar el alcabuz, to ram
powder into a harquebusse with the skowring stick. * Atacar la poluora con la
baqueta, idem. * Atadegna, f. a kind of herb called Fleabane. * Atadillo, m.
any small matter tied or wrapped up together. Atado, m. bound, tied, wrapped
up, clasped, embraced, overcome, wound or compassed about as Iuie about a tree.
* Atador, m. one that binds or tyeth. Also the thing that binds or tyeth.
Atadura, f. a band, a tying, a clasping, a thong, a latchet. * Atafea.
Ataharre, m. a crouper for a mule or ass, to keep that the saddle or pannell
slide not forward. Atahona, f. an ass or horsemill. A bridewell. * Atahona de
mulos, a horse-mill. Atahorna paxaro, a kind of foul that lives by pray.
Some think it to be a kind of Eagle; other, a kind of Faulcon; other, a
Ringtayle. Atajado, m. cut off, shut off from his purpose. Atajador, one that
cutteth off or stops the way, askoute, a spy, a boot-haler or stealer of
cattle. Atajar, to discover, to forage or spoil, to cut off or stop of his
purpose, to make short, to make a wear in a river. Atajar camino, to stop the
way. Also to go the shortest way or cut. Atajar enemigos, to cut off enemies
by getting between them and their home. Atajar descubriendo tierra, to
discover land at sea. Atajar pleyto, to give over law quickly, to withdraw his
plea. * Atajasolazes, a cutting or cutter off of pleasure or mirth. Ataifor, m.
a cupboord. Also a tressle, or three footed stool. Atajo, a cut, a slice, in a
journey or voyage the cut or shortest way, a turnepike in a way: a wear in a
river: a style in a hedge, a gate. A flock or heard of cattle. * Atajo de
ganado, a flock of sheep or a pen for sheep or cattle. Atajo de pleyto,
ending of suit in law, letting the action fall. * Ataladrado, m. boared
thorough. Ataladrar, to boar thorough. Atalaya, f. a watchtower, a beakon, a
watch aboard a ship. Atalayamiento, m. watching at a beakon, a watching a
shipboord. Atalayar, to watch at a tower, at a beakon, etc. or a ship-boord. *
Atalayador, m. a watchman that watches at a beakon, at a tower, etc. or a
shipboord to discover. * Atalayero, m. idem. Atambor, m. a drummer, a taborer.
Also the drum it self. * Atamiento, m. a band, a thing to tie withal.
Atan^er, to belong to, attain or pertain. Atanor, m. a conduict pipe, the
cock of a conduict, any trough or pipe that carries water in the ground.
Atanquia, f. a little pair of pincers to pluck hair off withal, a plaster
to take away hair. * aTanto, until, whilst, even, so far as. * Atapado, m
stopped, covered. * Atapadura, f. a cover, a stoppell, a stopping of any thing.
Atapar, to stop, to cover. * Ataque, vide Atacar. Atar, to bind, to tie, to
wrap, to embrace, to overcome, to wind or compass about, as Iuie about a
tree. Ataracana, f. a docke where ships are made or amended. A storehouse for
munition, a place of exercise. * Ataracanal, idem. * Atarse, to be bound or
tied. * A'tarce, A'tarse, or Tamariz, the Tamariske tree. * Atarragado, m.
stuck fast as in the mire or clay, grauelled or stalled that cannot get out. *
Atarragar, Praes. yo Atarrago, 1. Praet. yo Attarrague, to stick fast as in
the mire or clay, to be grauelled, not able to get out. Atarrague, vide
Atarragar. * Atarraya, f. a fishing net, a fowling net, a hay for conies. *
A'tarse, vide A'tarce. Atascado, m. sticking in the mire. * Atascar, to stick
in the mire. * Ataval, vide Atabal, a drum. * Atavalero, v. Atabalero, a
drummer. Ataud, m. a coffin, a beer for dead men, a tomb. * Ataviatamente,
fitly, finely, trimly. Ataviado, m. fitted, trimmed, attired, made handsome.
Ataviar, to make fit, to deck, to make handsome, to apparel. * Atavio, m.
handsomnes, trimnes, comelines. Atauxia, f. damasking of a knife, dagger,
sword, or such like, or engrauing in stone or wood. * Atayfor, vide Ataifor. *
Atemorizado, m. skarred, made afraid, entangled much with business, amazed.
Atemorizar, to skar, to make afraid, to trouble much with business, to neigh as
horse, to rouse, to astonish, to daunt, to fright, to mate. aTenazadas, with
pluckes of pincers. aTenazar, to pluck with pincers. Atencion, f. heedfulnes,
marking, taking heed, accomplishment, applying. Atender, yo Atiendo, to attend,
to mark, or give heed unto, to solicit, to apply. aTenerse en voto a otro,
to give his consent with other. * Atentado, m. one that goes by trying,
feeling, assaying, or first proving. * Atentamente, attentively, harkening unto
with attention. Atentar, yo Atiento, to attempt, to assay, to touch, to feel,
to groape. * aTentar a escuras, to groape, or feel in the dark. Atento, m.
heedfull, attentive, marking, diligent, applied. Aterecerse, to wax stiff
with cold. Aterecimiento, m. stifnes with cold. Aterido, m. stiff, stark,
idle, slothful, retchles, negligent, lazy. Aterirse, vide Aterecerse. *
Aternia, I would hold with, or he would hold with. Aterrar, yo Atierro, to
suppress, to cast, or throw to the ground, to fell, to humble, to dam or fill
up with earth. * Aterrero, m. a butte to shoot at. Sometime it signifies, at
the market place, or in the court. * Atenta la causa, heeding the matter. *
Atesorado, or Atezorado, m. hoorded up, heaped up. * Atesorador, or Atezorador,
m. one that hoordeth up, or gathers store of goods. Atesorar or Atezorar, to
hoord or lay up, to gather riches apace, to heap up. Atestado, m. filled,
stuffed full, farced. Atestar, yo Atiesto, to fill, to stuff full, to farce. *
Atezorado, vide Atesorado. * Atezorador, vide Atesorador. * Atezorar, vide
Atesorar. Athanasia, f. an herb called Tansie. * Athleta Tusca, a woman
champion in Tuscany, in Italy famous for her deeds, whom Celestine exceeded in
her art. * Aticar, or Atizar, to kindle. aTiempo, in good time, in due season.
* Atiendo, Atiando, vide Atender. * Atiente, Atiento, vide Atentar. aTiento, by
feeling, by guess, by groping, by trial. * aTierre, aTierro, vide aTerrar. *
aTieste, aTiesto, vide Atestar. * Atiladura, f. the filing, refining, or
purifieng of any thing. * Atilar, to file, refine or make pure or neat any
thing. Atinar, to guess, to conjecture, to suppose. * Atincadura, f. borrace
or sodder for gold, etc. Atincar, vide Atincadura. * Atiriciado, m. quaking or
quiuering, pale, wan. * Atiriciar, to quiver, to quake. To be pale or wan.
Atizador, m. one that kindles fire, one that provoke. Atizar, or Aticar, to
kindle fire, to stir up, to provoke. Atocha, f. a kind of shrub used to make
frailes with. Atochado, m. foolish, frantike, dull, benumbed, deaf. Atolladal,
or lamedal, a mirie place, a puddle, a durtie plot. Atolladero, idem, m. *
Atollado, m. fast in the mire. Atollar, to stick in the mire, to pluck away,
to disioyne. A'tomos, m. moates or hairs in the sun. * Atonarse, to be
astonished or amazed, to be dismayed. * Atonado, or Espantado, astonished, amazed.
* Atonito, m. astonished, amazed. * Atontado, m. made foolish, frantike, or out
of his wits. Atorconada bestia, a beast that has the griping in the belly.
Atormescer, to wax heavy, dull, or vnwilsome, to be unlusty, senseless, or
astonished. Atormecido, astonished, heavy, dull, unlusty, having neither life nor
soul. Atormescimiento, m. dulnes, heaviness, astonishment. Atordido, vide
Aturdido, astonished, amazed. * Atordir, vide Aturdir. Atormentado, m. tormented,
racked grievously handled. Atormentador, m. a tormentor, an executioner of
punishment, a hangman. aTormentar, yo aTormiento, to torment, to rack, to
handle grievously. * aTormiente, aTormiento, vide aTormentar. Atossigado, m.
poisoned, having taken intoxication. * Atossigar, yo Atossigo, 1. Praet. yo
Atossigue, to poison, to give intoxication to. * Atossigue, vide Atossigar.
Atraer, Praes. yo Atraygo, atraes, atrae, 1. Praet. Atruxe, or Atraxe,
atruxiste, atruxo. Fut. Atraere, atraeras, atraera. Sub. Praes. Atrayga,
Imperfect. Atruxera, atraeria, or atruxesse, Fut. Atruxiere, to draw, to get
to, to allure. * Atrahimiento, vide Atraymiento. Atrahillar, to draw in a
slip, or in a leash. * Atraimiento, or Atraymiento, drawing to. * Atraillar, or
Atrayllar, to draw in a slip or in a leash. * Atraillado, or Atrayllado, drawn
in a slip or leash. Atramuzes, or Altramuzes, a kind of pulse called Lupines.
Atrancar, Praes. yo Atranco, 1. Praet. yo Atranque, to bar or make fast the
door. To stride a wide step, to stride or step over a ditch, or such like.
Atrancar la puerta, to bar, or make fast the door or gate. * Atrangar, vide
Atrancar. * Atranque, vide Atrancar. Atras, behind, backward. * de Atras, of
former times, behind, backward. Atras mano, out of the way, not directly in
ones course. Atrativo, m. attractiue, drawing, alluring. Atravesado, or
Atravessado, crossed. Atravesar. or Atravessar, yo Atraviesso, to cross, to
overthwart, to trauerse. * aTravisse, aTraviesso, vide Atravessar. * aTraydo,
or Atraido, drawn to. * Atrayga, Atraygo, vide Atraer. Atrayllar, to draw in
a slip or leash, to couple up. * Atrayllado, coupled up, or drawn in a slip.
Atreguado loco, a frantike fool, one that is mad by fits. Atreverse, to be
bold, to be hardy. * Atrevidamente, boldly, hardily, audaciously. Atrevido, m.
bold, hardy, audacious. Atrevimiento, m. boldness, hardines, audaciousnes.
Atriaca, f. Treacle. Atriaquero, a maker or seller of Treacle, a Quackesaluer
that runs from market to market to sell salues, waters, etc. Atribuyr, to
attribute, to impute, to lay to, to arrogate. Atribulado, m. troubled, vexed,
grieved. Atribular, to trouble, to vex, to grieve. * Atricion, f. a renting,
or tearing contrition. * Atrinchear, to make trenches for defense. *
Atrincherado, m. placed among trenches for defense. * Atrochado, m. a fool, a
noddie, a diZZard, a giddie-head. * Atroche, y much, unadvisedly, rashly,
without consideration. * Atrocissimo, most fierce, most cruel. Atronar, yo
Atrueno, to thunder, to skar or make afraid with thunder, to play the fool,
to become an idiot or diZZard, to stagger. Atronado, m. made afraid with
thunder, become an idiot or diZZard, made to stagger. Atronamiento, m. making
afraid with thunder, astonishing, thundering, becoming a fool. * Atronerado,
m. made with many loopholes to shoot out at. * Atropellado, m. trodden under
foot. * Atropellar, to tread underfoot. * A'tropos, one of the three
destinies of man's life, signifying, not to be changed: she is said to cut off
the thread of man's life, when Clotho and Lachesis have spun and drawn it to
the length. * Atroz, cruel, fierce, heinous. * aTruena, aTrueno, vide Atronar.
* aTruxe, aTruxera, aTruxesse, vide Atraer. Atruendo, vide Estruendo, a great
noise. * Attar las velas, or Hicarlas velas, to hoise sail. * Attento, vide
Atento. * Attizar, vide Atizar, to kindle. * Attonito, vide Atonito. aTuerto,
by wrong, wrongfully, unjustly. * Atufado, m. suddenly, in a rage or choler.
Atufar, to be quickly in a rage, to be suddenly in a chafe, to be choleric
by and by. * Atujado, m. fit, meet, apt, handsome. Atun, m. a fish called a
Tunny. * Atunero, m. a fishmonger, a seller of Tunneyes. Aturdido, m.
astonished, dull, giddie, diZZie, mad, foolish, frantike, rauing in the head.
Aturdir, to astonish, to become or make giddie, dull, or diZZie in the head. *
Atusado, m. cut very low or bare with sheares. * Atusar, to cut very low or
bare with sheares. To croppe or browse as cattle does. * Atutia, f. an
Apothecarie drug.
A V
Avaliado, m. valued, esteemed. * Avaliador, m. one that valueth or esteems,
deemeth or priseth. * Avaliar, to value, esteem, deem or prise. * Avallar,
vide Aballar. Avalorios, garinshings with bugles, or a pedigree of ancesters. *
Avanderado, or Abanderado. * Avandero, vide Abandero. * Avandor, m. a fan for
to fan corn. * A vanguardia, f. the vauntgard. Avanicos, m. fans for women
to carry in their hands. Avaramente, couetously, greedily. * Avaratar, vide
Abaratar, to barter, to exchange. Also to make good cheap or of low price.
Avaricia, f. couetuousnes, greedines. * Avaricioso, covetous, gripple on
worldly goods. Avariento, m. a greedy cormorant, a covetous wretch. *
Avarrisco, vide Abarrisco, wholly, altogether. * Avaro, covetous, miserable,
hard. * Avarrar, vide Abarrar. Avarraz, Havarraz, vide Abarraz, an herb
called Staues-acre, or Louse-bane. * Avasallado, m. made a subject or vassal.
* A'ucto, vide A'uto. * Auctorizado, m. warranted by authority, countenanced.
* Audado, vide Andado, m. * Audaz, Audas, or Audax, hardy, bold, audacious.
Audiencia, f. hearing, audience, a place where matters are heard, a court kept.
Audiencia de rueguo, the court of requests. * Auditivo, to be heard. Auditor, a
hearer. Auditorio, m. an auditorie, a place where folk are heard. A've, f. a
bird. * Avecica, f. a little bird. * Avecilla, idem. A'vefeniz, a bird called
a Phoenix, whereof there is never but one in Arabia. * Aveja, f. a Be. *
Avejaruco, or Avejeruco, vide Abejeruco, a Wood-wall, or Wit-wall, a bird so
called. * Avejera, vide Torongil, Balm gentle the herb. * Avejon, vide
Abejon. Avellacar, to make vile, to revile, to disgrace, to set at naught.
Avellana, f. a hazell nut. Avellana de la India, Mirobalane. * Avellanal, m. a
place where Hazell nuts grow. Avellanedo, a grove of Hazels. Avellano, m. a
Hazell tree. * Avello, id est, Aver lo, to have it. Avena, f. Oats. Avena
vana, wild Oats. * Avena montesina, idem. Avenado, sodden with oats, mad,
brain-sicke. Avenedizo, or Advenedizo, a stranger, one that comes as a
stranger. Avenencia, or Avenimiento, agreement, composition. Also a cane with
which they take out wine of the vessel to taste. Avenida, f. a flood, an
inundation, a great fall of waters. * Avenimiento, m. vide Avenencia. aVenir,
Praes. Avengo, avienes, aviene, 1. Praet. Avine, aviniste, avino. Fut.
Aviendre, aviendras, aviendra. Sub. Praes. Avenga, Imperfect. aveniesse,
avendria, aveniera. Fut. aviniere, to come together, to agree, to be friends.
Avenir el rio, to ouerflowe, as a river does. Aven^olas, the eie-lids.
aVentadeto, m. a fan. * Aventador, m. one that fanneth or makes wind, or
one that runs headlong into a matter. Aventajado, m. excellent, surpassing,
over and above. Aventajar, to excel, to get advantage, to surpass, to gain,
to have the better. Aventamiento, running on headlong, tumbling down. A making
or blowing of wind. Aventar, yo Aviento, to fan, to make wind, to run
headlong. Aventarse el ganado, to run headlong as a flock of sheep do when
they are skarred. Aventar pan, to fan or winnow corn. Aventura, f. adventure,
chance, hap, fortune. * Aventurado, m. fortunate, happy, luckie. Aventurarse,
to adventure, to hazard, to put in trial. * Aventurero, m. an aduenturer, a
venturous fellow, a hardy man, one that puts all upon haphazard. Aver,
Praes. He, as, a, 1. Praet. uve, uviste, uvo, Fut. aure, auras, aura. Sub.
Praes. aya. Imperfect. uviera, auria, or uviesse. Fut. uviere, to have. Averes,
or Haveres, goods, wealth, substance. * Averias, vide Averes. * Avergoncado, m.
ashamed. Also in Spain one that is publikly punished for some offense (as
petie Larceny) riding on an ass through the streets, and a crier manifesting
his fault. * Avergoncar, to shame, to make ashamed, to be ashamed. Averigacion,
f. verifying, ratifying, auouching of a thing to be so. * Averiguacion, idem. *
aVeriguado, m. avouched, verified, confirmed, ratified. * Averiguador, m. one
that approves, verifieth, ratifieth, or confirms. Averiguamiento, m.
verifying, ratifying approouing or confirming. Averiguar, or Aberiguar, to
verify, approve, ratify, confirm or avouch. * Averitador, vide Averiguador.
* Averno, m. a lake in Campania dedicated to the god of hell, where is thought
to be the entry into hell. * Avertura, vide Abertura, f. * Avestruz, a bird
called an Eastrich. * Aveto, vide Abeto, the Fir Tree. * Avezado, accustomed,
enured, usual. * Avezar, to use, to accustom, to enure. aVezes, sometimes,
other-whiles, by turns. Avezilla, f. a little bird. * Avezinar, to be near
neighbor unto, to dwell hard by. * Avezindado, dwelling hard by. Avezindarse,
to dwell near by, to be a near neighbor. Augmentado, vide Aumentado.
Augmentar, vide Aumentar, to increase. * Augusta, f. an Empress. * Avia, I
had, or he had, vide Aver. * A'via, f. a river in Spain. * Aviado, m. one
dispatched and ready to take his journey onward on his way. * Aviamiento, m. a
setting forward on the way or journey. * Aviar, to set forward on the way, to
be in readiness to journey. * Aviciado, m. made vicious. * Aviciarse, to become
vicious, or wicked. * avidas ondas, or aguas, covetous or insatiable waters. *
A'vido, covetous, greedy, desirous, vnsasatiable. * aVido, as He avido, I had,
I have had. * Auyentado, vide Ahuyentado, fled away, run away, gone. Aviente,
Aviento, vide Aventar. * Aviertamente, vide Abiertamente. Avierto, open,
manifest, vide Abierto. Aviesso, m. cross, contrary, froward, untoward. *
A'vila, f. a town by Toledo in Spain. Avilenteza, f. opportunity, fitnes,
convenient season. * Avilitar, vide Abilitar. * Aviltar, or Abiltar. Avilteza,
f. vileness, baseness, meandness. * Avinado, m. made or done with wine.
Avinagrado, m. made sharp, as with vinegar. * Avinar, to do or make with
wine, to mingle with wine. * Avisadamente, advisedly, warily. Avisado, m.
advised, warned, admonished. Avisar, to advise, warn, admonish, or exhort.
Aviso, m. a warning, admonition, exhortation, or advise given. Also an
intelligence. * Avitar, vide Abitar. * Avituallar, to furnish with victuals. *
aVivado, or aBivado, made alive, quickened, revived, cheered. * Avivar, or
aBivar, to quicken or make alive, to cheer, to revive. * Aulaga, f. an herb
with many pricles. * Alguaquida, a match of brimstone to kindle a candle.
Sometime Sulphur, brimstone. * Aulaquida, vide Alguaquida, f. sulphur or
brimstone. A match of brimstone to light a candle. Aullador, m. one that
howleth or yelleth. Aullar, or Ahullar, to howl, yell, or cry out. Aullido,
m. howling, yelling, or crying out. * Aumentado, or Augmentado, increased,
grown greater. * Aumentador, or Augmentador, m. one that increases,
enlarges, or makes greater. Aumentar, or Augmentar, to increase, enlarge, or
make greater. Aumento, m. increase, enlargement, that which is over and above.
Aun, yet, notwithstanding, hitherto, thus far, as yet. Aunque, although,
howbeit, notwithstanding that. * Avovado, vide Abobado. * Avogacia, f. the
office of a Counselor at law. * Avogacion, f. pleading as a counselor at law.
* Avogado, m. a counselor at law. Avogamiento, vide Avogacion. * Avogar,
Praes. yo Avogo, 1. Praet. yo Avogue, to plead as a counselor at law *
Avortar, vide Abortar, to bring forth young before due time. * Avorton, vide
Aborton. Aura, or Haura, he or it shall have, vide Aver. * Aureo, m. golden,
that which is of gold. * Auria, should have, vide Aver. * Lambas de auria, the
proper name of a duke of Genoa in Italy. * Aurora, vide A'lva. * Ausencia, f.
absence. Ausentarse, to be absent, to be away. Ausente, or Absente, absent, or
out of the way. * Ausonia, f. the name of a city. * Austero, m. severe, hard,
rigorous. * Austrial, or Austrino, southerly. * Austrino, m. idem. * A'ustro,
vide Vendaval. Autentico, m. authentike, approved by good authority. Autillo,
m. an owl. * A'uto, an act in a Comedy, a deed. Author, m. an Author, the
inventor or setter forth of some work. Autoridad, f. authority. *
Autorizado, f. allowed by authority. * Autorizante, one bearing authority.
Autorizar, to set in authority. * Avurtada, vide Avutarda. * Avuttar, vide
Avortar. * Avutarda, vide Abutarda. * Auxiliario, m. that comes to help,
aid, or reskue. * Auxillo, m. aid, reskue, relief. * Auzuba, f. a kind of
fruit in the Indies here unknown.
A X
Axaqueca, f. a kind of pain in the head. * Axaquecoso. m. one that is
troubled with such pain in the head. * Axaquera, vide Axaqueca. Axadrea,
Segurella, or Sagorida, an herb called winter sauorie. Some say it is
Marierom. * Axarave, a purgation. Axedrez, chesse to play at, chesse-play. *
Axenxio, or Assencio, Wormwood, an herb commonly known. Axenuz, an herb
called Nigella Romana, or Gith, or Saint Katherines flower. Axi, red pepper. *
Axie, vide Axi. * Aximenez, a sunnie place. Aximezes, iutties in a house.
Axorcas, f. bracelets to wear on the arms for ornament. Axorcas de pies.
fetters or gives to shackle the legs of prisoners with. Sometimes garters.
Axuar, all manner of household stuff, any furniture for a house.
A Y
Ay, there, at that place. Ay, monosillabum, there is, there are. * Ay, of
sorrowing, or pitiful complaining, as, woe, out alas. * Ay triste de mi, out
alas, what a wretch am I? A'ya, f. a nurse, a schoolemistresse. * Aya, as Que
Dios aya, whom God have mercy on. * Ayantar, a dinner, to dine. * Ayantar como
perro, to dine without drink. * Ayantar de gorrion, a short dinner, a poor
pittance. * Ayduda, or Cristel, a clister. Air, yesterday. Air tarde,
yestereuening. aim, alas. Ayna, vide Presto, quickly, readily, speedily. *
A'yo, m. a tutor, a schoolmaster. * Ay, onde estas, ho, where art thou? *
Ayradamente, angrily, in a rage, in anger. Ayrado, m, angry, vexed, in a
chafe. Ayramiento, m. anger, vexation, wrath, disdain. Ayrarse, to be angry,
to be in a chafe, to be vexed, to be in a rage. A'yre, the air. Also
pleasantnes, beauty, comelines, gratiousnes. Ayroso, m. pleasant, beautiful,
comely, gracious. * Ayslado, m. enuironned, or compassed about with waters,
made as an Jland. Ayslar, to compass all about with waters, to make like an
Island. Ayssa, the cry that mariners use when they hoise up anchor, or lift any
burden together. Ayuda, help, succor, relief, a clister, a purgation. Also
subsidies to a Prince. * Perro de ayuda, a dog that helps or takes part with
his master, a great mastiffe dog. Ayudador, m. a helper. Ayudado, helped,
relieved, succored. * Ayudante, an assistant. Ayudar, to help, relieve, or
succor. * Ayudator, vide Ayudador. * Ayuna, fasting. * en Ayunas, fasting,
before one has eat any thing. Ayunar, to fast. * Ayunque, m. an anuile, upon
which smithes work their iron. * Ayuntadamente, fitly, conveniently, to the
purpose. * Ayuntado, m. joined, coupled, tied. * Ayuntador, m. one that
coupleth, joins or tieth together. Ayuntamiento, m. coupling, joining,
buckling. A court of Aldermen. Ayuntar, to join, to couple, to buckle
together. * Ayuso, below, beneath. * Dios en Ayuso, next under God.
A Z
* Azaar, flowers of Orenges. * Azabache, m. Ieat. Azache, silk. * Azabra,
vide Hazabra. * Azadon, m. a spade, a pikeaxe, a mattocke. * Azafran, Saffron.
* Azafranado, m. done or dressed with Saffron. Azagaya, f. a iauelin, a Moors
weapon. Azahar, vide Azaar. Azaleja, f. a towell. * Azambulheyto, vide
Azebuche. Azar, an ill token, an evil sign, a prick or note in a die, a
hucklebone. Azar en el dado, a game at dice called Hazard. Azarcon, red led. *
Azarcon vaso, a kind of vessel. Azarote, Sarcocoll, a kind of gum. Azavache,
ieat, or the Agat stone. Azcona, a kind of dart. Azebo, m. the Holme or Huluer
tree. Azebuchal, m. a grove of Olive trees. Azebuche, or Azambulheyro, a wild
Olive tree. Azebuste, idem. Azeche, a kind of black mineral. * Azeda cosa,
f. an eager or sharp thing. * Azeda, vide Azedera. Azedar, or Azedarse, to
wax sharp, sower, or eager. Azedera yerva, Sorrel. Azedia, f. sharpenes,
sowrenes, hartburning. Azedia piece, a fish called a soale. Azedo, m. sower,
sharp, eager. * Azedrilla, or Romaza, a kind of sorrel. Azedura, f.
sowrenes, sharpnes, eagernes, tartnes. Azeite, or Azeyte, m. Oil. Azeitera, or
Azeytera, f. an oil cruse, a little oil bottle. Azemila. f. a great mule.
Azemilar, belonging to a mule. Azemilero, m. a muletor. * Azerado, m. steeled,
made with steel. Azerar, to make with steel, to steel. Azero, m. steel. *
Azetuni, a dark sad green of the color of an olive. * Azevar, sea housleeke,
an herb. Azeyte, or Azeite Oil. Azeytera, or Cangilon, an oil cruse, a
little oil bottle, a vessel of oil. Azeytero, m. a seller or maker of oil.
* Azeytoso, oily, full of oil. Azeytuna, an olive berrie, an olive. Azeytuna
en cortido, an olive in syrup. * Azeytunado color, olive color. Azeytuno, an
olive tree. * Azia, vide Hazia. Aziago, m. unfortunate, unlucky, unhappy. *
Azial, m. a bit of a bridle to put in a horses mouth. * Aziar, idem. * Azibar,
or Acibar, m. a juice of an herb to purge choler with, called Aloe. Azicates,
ginnet spurs, which have a long gag or prick of iron or steel, in place and
steed of a rowell. Azige, m. a kind of earth whereof they make ink. * Azir,
vide Asir, To take hold on. * Azivar, vide Azibar. * Azofeifa, a fruit called
of the Apothecaries Iuiuba. Azogado, one that is overcome by the savor of
quickesiluer: by metaphor it signifies a fearful silly wretch. Azogue, m.
Quickesiluer. A'zre, vide A'rze, a maple. * Azuar, vide Acucar. * Azucar, f.
Sugar. * Azucar de conserua, comfets. * Azucena, white lilly. * Azuela, f. a
little axe, or hatchet, a coopers ads, an axe. * Azufrado, m. done with
Brimstone. * Azufrar, vide Acufrar. * Azufre, vide Acufre, m. Brimstone. Azul,
blew, azure. * Azul claro, a bright blew. * Azulaque, a certain mortar or
Cement, with which they join canes together. Azulejo, a painted tile or pauing
brick that is of diverse colors, blew color. Azumbar, red storax, Spikenard.
* Azumbido, a buZZing or humming. * Azumbrar, to measure with the measure
AZumbre, vide Azumbre. * Azumbre, vide Acumbre.
B.
* BAaraz, a kind of root which shined in the night as fire, and they cured
therewith those that were possessed with devils, beside other virtues it has.
* Babadero, m. a bib for a child to keep that he driuell not his clothes. *
Babear, to driuell. * Babera, vide Bavera, * Babuja, a bubble, a bossed nail,
a stud, a brooch, a bullion. * Babor, vide Baborda. * Baborda, starbord side,
or the left side of a ship. * Babovini. penthouses, to keep the water from
the wall. * Baca, f. a town in Spain. * Baca, vide vaca Bacalaos, a kind of
new-land fish. * Bacan, a town in Spain. Bachara, f. an herb with the
flowers, called our Ladies gloves. Bachiller, m. a batcheler of art. *
Bachilleria, batchelership, the taking the first degree in schools. Bacia, f.
a barbers basen. Also any basen of earth, pewter, tin, silver, or any other
metal made of the fashion of a barbers basen. * Bacillar, to stagger, to
waver in thought, to be inconstant. Bacin, m. a basen. Also a trey, a boll, a
pan, pot, or vessel for a close-stoole. Bacin, or Servidor, a pot for a
closestoole. Bacinete, a basnet, or little basin. * Bacinilla, idem. Baco, m.
the spleen, the milt. Also broune colored. Baco, or negro, brown, swart
colored. * Bactros, a people bordering upon the East Indies. * Baculo, m. a
tipstaffe, such as is carried before a bishop. Also a staff that old men
lean on, and walk with. Badajada, f. a clapper of a bell: by metaphor
doltishnes, blockishnes. Badajadas de campana, iangling of bells. Badajo, m. a
clapper of a bell, by metaphor a dolt, an Asse-head. * Badana, f. sheep
leather dressed like to goats leather. * Badea, f. a kind of Melon, a galley,
an eele poute. Badeha, idem. * Badil, m. a long wooden instrument wherewith
they beat mortar. Also a fire-shouell. Badil de hogar. a fire-shouell * baeca,
f. a city in Spain. Bafo, vide Baho. Bagaje, or Vagaje, m. lumber, trash,
trumpery. Baga de laurel, the bay berrie. * Bagel, or Vagel, m. a vessel, a
boat, a skiffe. Bahari, m. a kind of hawk. Bahear, to reeke, to fume, to
smoke, to euaporate, to exhale, to vent. Baho, or Bafo, vapor, smoke, reeke
breathing. Baia, or Baiha, vide Baya, a bay, a creek. * Bajel, Bagel, or
Vagel, m. a vessel, a boat, a skiffe. Bajeles, vessels, boats, skiffes. *
Bailadera, or Dancadora, a woman dauncer. * Bailador, a dauncer. * Bailar, to
dance. * Bail, m. A dance. * Baio, vide Bayo, for bay color, or bayard,
ahorse. * Bajo, vide Baxo, low, base. Bajo de vientre, the pawnch, the lower
part of the belly. Bala, a bullet. * Bala de viento, a handball or football
blown full of wind. * Bala de lienco, a roll of linen wrapped or rolled up
together. Baladron, m. a prater, a cogging companion. Baladronear, to prate, to
cogge. Balagos, hey-cocks. Also sheaues of corn. * Balahustes, turned posts.
Balanca, f. a balance. * Balancar, to balance or weigh. * Balancario, a
weigher. Balance, the weighing down of the balance, or any other thing in the
like manner. * Balancia, f. a fruit like a melon. * Balando, bleating as sheep.
Balar, to bleate as a sheep. * Balax, a precious stone. * Balazo, m. the
stroke of a bullet, the shot of a bullet. * Balbluciente. stuttering. Balcon,
m. a bay window. Baldado, m. of free cost. * Balde, a bucket to draw water
with. * Balde, as en balde, free cost, without any paying for. * Baldia,
voidnes, vastnes. Baldio, any thing void, empty, vacant, and is not employed.
Baldon, m. a scoff, a taunt. * Baldonado, scoffed at, taunted. * Baldonador, a
scoffer, a taunter. Baldonar, to scoff, to reproach. Baldres, m. white leather,
a sheeps skin. * Baldronear, vide Baladronear. * Baldrogas, an herb called
Purslane. * Balencia, vide Valencia. * Balena, vide Valena. * Baleroso, vide
Valeroso. * Balesta, vide Ballesta. * Balestero, a shooter in a crossebow. Also
a crossebow maker. * Balia, vide A'ma. * Balia, vide Valia, the value of a
thing. Balido, bleating of sheep. * Baliente, vide Valiente. Balija, a wallet,
a male, a cloakebag or portmantew. * Balista, a crossebow, which in times past
was much used in war. Balitado, bleating. Balitar, to bleat as a fawn or a
sheep. * Baliza, vide Valiza. * Balladar, a valley, a bulwark, a rampire. *
Balle, or Valle, m. a valley. * Ballena, a whale fish. Ballesta, vide Vallesta,
a crosse-bow. Ballestar, to shoot in a crosse-bow. * Ballestazo, m. a shot or
blow with a crossebow. Ballestero, vide Vallestero, a crosse-bow maker, a
crosse-bow man that shoots in a crosse-bow. * Ballico, vide Vallico. *
Ballota, vide Bellota an Acorne * Balon, vide Valon, a Wallon or Burgonian, a
man of that country. * Balones calcones, great gascoigne, or Spanish hose. *
Balor, vide Valor. Balfa, f. a boat, a poole of water. * Balsamar, to dress
or make with Baulme. Balsamo, Baulme. * Balteo, m. a kind of cloth or garment.
Baltrueto, m. a gadding fellow, a roguing fellow. Baluarte, m. a bulwark. *
Balume, m. a volume of a book. Balumen, m. a volume. * Bamba, a diZZard or
natural fool. * Bambalear, to roll up and down, to wave up and down.
Bambaneando, staggering. Bambanear, to stagger, to waver or wag up and down.
Bancal, m. a carpet or cloth for a bench. * Bancarota, m. a banckrupt. Banco,
or Vanco, a stool, a bench, a shelfe in the sea. Also a money changer, a
banker. * Banco en la mar, a shelfe in the sea. * Banda, vide Vanda. * Bandear,
to bandie, to follow a faction, to help a side, to become factious. * Bandeo,
m. relief, help to strengthen his side or faction. * Bandera, f. an ensign,
a banner, streamer or standerd, a flag on a ships top. * Banderado, m. an
ensigns servant to carry his banner or ensign. * Banderilla, f. a little
banner, ensign or standart, or a little flag on a ships top. * Banderizo, one
that leans to a faction. * Bandero, idem. * Banderola, f. a little flag, a
little banner or ensign. * Bandido, m. banished. * Bando, m. a faction. *
Bandolero, m. a factious seditious person, one that follows a faction. *
Bandujo, a farsing of any meat, a pudding. * Bandurria, f. a bandore, a
gittarne. Banduxo, m a pudding. * Banquardia, vide Vanguardia Ban^ado, bathed.
Ban^ador, m. a bather, a bath-keeper. Ban^ar, or Van^ar, to bath. * Ban^il,
vide Van^il Ban^o, or Van^o, a bath. * Ban^o mugeril, the stews, or bath for
women. * Banostero, m. vide Bastonero, one that with a staff makes room, a
whifler. Banquero, m. a money changer, an exchanger. * Banquete, vide Vanquete,
a banquet. * Banquillo, m. a footstool. * Bao de navio, pieces or ioyces,
upon which the cradle in a ship stands. * Baporoso, vide Vaporoso, smoakie,
vaporous. * Baptismo, m. baptism. Baque, a fall, a loss. * Dar el baque, to
give one a fall. * Baquero, vide Vaquero, a cowheard. * Baqueta, a little cow,
a gunsticke. Baquilla, a little cow, a kind of beetle with horns. * Bara, vide
Vara. Baraca, f. a broyle, let, trouble. Barahunda, f. a tumult, a turmoile. *
Barahustar, to rush in among weapons and to cast them this way and that, to
cross lances, to cross one with another. * Barahustear, vide Barahustar.
Barahustes, vide Balahustes, turned posts like pillars to support galleries or
such like. Baraja, a brabble, a pack of cards, a pair of playing cards. *
Barajador, m. a packer of cards, a shufler of cards. Barajar, or Varajar, to
pack cards, to shuffle cards. * Baral, vide Varal. * Baranda, vide Varanda.
* Barar, vide Varar. Baratar, to sell cheap, to deceive. Baratija, f. pedlerie
ware. Barato, good cheap. Baraton, one that sells good cheap, a broker. *
Baratro, a deep pit in Athens whereinto condemned men were cast. It is taken
for hell. Baraza, vide Baraca, f. a let, a stop. Barba, vide Barva, f. the
chin, the bearde. * Barba cabruna, an herb called goats beard, or go to bed
at noone. * Barbacana, f. a yard about a house, a barricado made of barrels
filled with earth, etc. to defend soldiers with. Also graie bearded. Barbado,
or Barvado, m. bearded. * Barbaramente, barbarously. Barbaria, f. or
Barbariedad, barbarousnesse. Barbaro, barbarous. * Barbaroxa, a famous pyrate
among the Moors which had a red beard, therefore called Barbaruxa. Also the
figure of a great beard painted on cruses to drink in: the Spaniards call it
Barba roxa. * Barbas de gallo, cocks bearde, or the two laps of flesh hanging
down under the cocks bill. Barbechar, to break up, to ear, till, or fallow
the ground. * Barbecho, plowed ground. * Barbecilla, vide Barbezilla, f. a
little beard. Barbero, m. a barber. * Barbeta, f. a rope with which they let
down the boat. * Barbezilla, a cocks bearde, or a little beard. * Barbilla,
the chinne. * Barbiponiente, one that begins to have a beard. Barbo, or
Barvo, m. a fish called a barbel. * Barbo, or Barvo de la mar, a fish called a
Mullet. * Barbote, the armor for the chinne. * Barbudo, m. having a great
thick beard. * Barbullas, vide Barbollones. Barbullar, to deceive, to coosen,
to boil or bubble up as a pot. Barca, f. a great boat, a bark, a skiffe, a
horseboate. * Barcaje, passage money, or barcage, a kind of toll paid for
every thing that is transported over the water. * Barcelona, the chief city
and University in the province of Catalun^a in Spain. * Barco, m. a small
boat, a wherrie. * Barda de cavallo, the arming of a great horse. * Bardados
cavallos, barded horses, great horses for service. * Bardajo, m. A Ganimedes, a
boy to bugger. * Bardana, f. the great burre, or clot burre. Bardar, to lay
iouyces with straw on a mudde wall to keep it dry. * Barde sus paredes, etc.
let him lay iouyces and straw of his own wall first, etc. Bardaxo, vide
Bardajo. * Barilla, vide Varilla. Barjuleta, f. a pocket, a little wallet. *
Barloar, to board a ship, to rush and iustle one ship against another. *
Barloventear, and Barlontear, to go above the wind, to take the wind. Also to
sail up and down with a side wind. Barniz, m. vernish. Barnizado, vernished.
* Barnizar, to vernish. * Baron, m. a Baron, a Lord. Also a man. * Baronia, f.
a Baronie. * Baronil, manlike. Barquero, m. a bargeman, a pilot, a ferriman. *
Barqueta, a pinnasse, a little flie-boat, a scouting boat, a light barge. *
Barquilla, a boat, a small bark. * ducado de la Barquilla, a ducat with the
sign of the bark in it, a kind of money so stamped. Barquin^o, m. bellows,
a little bark. Also a kind of banqueting stuff. Barra, a bar of a door,
an iron bar, a shelfe in the sea. Also the gross spunne threads in cloth. *
Barraca, f. a tent made of a sail of a ship. Also a soldiers cabin or such
like in the field. * Barrachel, m. a corporal, or a provost marshall in a
camp. * Barrachel, or prevoste, a provost marshall in a camp. * Barraco, a
tame boar. Also a piece of ordinance used in war. Barragan, m. a great stout
fellow. Barragana, f. a great ramping wench, a roile. Barraganada, vide
Barragana. * Barraganete, a piece of wood on the side of ships, to fasten
coardes. * Barrajo, contention, strife, a pack of cords. * Barran, a country
clownish fellow, a rude rusticall fellow. * Barranca, vide Barranco. Barranco,
a bank of earth, a breach of earth, the earth between two hills, a dunghill, a
pit, atrench, a breach in the earth, a deep. * Barrancoso, rugged, uneven,
full of hills and valleies. * Barraquilla, a little cabin for a soldier in the
field, a little tent made of a sail of a ship. * Barraquillo, m. a piece of
ordinance used in war. Also a little boar. * Barras, bars of iron, bars
in blasoning of coate-armes, bars or sowes of silver, lead, or such like
metal. * Barras, as juego de barras, a play with two bowls and a little
round hoope of iron or silver, with two battle-dores to beat in the boules
through the ring. * Barreados, m. made with bars of iron. * Barrear, to set
bars of iron on a thing. Barredera red, a dragnet, a drawing net * Barredera
vela, f. a sail that hangs so low in a ship that as it were sweepeth the
hatches, the lowest sail in a ship. Barredero, m. a sweeper, a brusher, a
whipper, a scourger, a scauenger, a swabber in a ship. Barredero de horno, a
sweeper of an oven, a mawkin to make clean an oven with. * Barredor, m. a
sweeper, a brusher, a swabber in a ship. * Barredor de chimeneas, a chimney
sweeper. Barreduras, f. dust and filth that is swept. Barrena, f. a wimble, an
auger, a pearcer. Barrenar, to boar thorough. Barreno, m. a hoale boared. *
Barrendero, vide Barredero. Barren^a, or Bacin, a great earthen pan. Barrer, to
sweep, to brush. Barrera, f. abarrier, a clay pit, a scaffold to stand and
behold bull baiting, etc. the front of a wall. * Barrera sin salida, railes or
scaffoldes made without any place to get out, closed round about. * Barreta, f.
a little bar of iron or such like. * Barri, vide Barril. Barrial, m. a plot
of clay. Barrido, m. swept, made clean. * Barriento, m. full of claie.
Barriga, f. the paunch, the belly, the womb, the privy parts, the arsegut, a
watering trough. Barrigudo, m. gorbellied, a grand paunch. Barril, m. a
barrel. * Barrilejo, m. a small barrel or little vessel, a firkin to salt fish
in. * Barrilero, m. a maker of barels, a seller of barels. Barrio, m. a
street, a ward. Barro, m. claie, a wheale, a pimple in the face. Also mortar.
* Barros de rostro, wheales or pimples in the face. Barroso, clayish, full of
claie, he that has a face full of pimples. * Barruntado, m. suspected.
Barruntar, to wind out, to suspect. Barrunte, suspicion. * Barrunto, idem.
Barva, f. the chin, the beard. * Barvacana, or Barbacana, a yard about a house,
a Barricado made of barrels full of earth, etc. Also a hoary beard. Barva, de
aron, an herb called cockoepint. Barva de cabron, an herb called goats
beard. Barvado, vide Barbado, one that has a beard. Barvar, to have a beard
springing. * Barvaroxa, vide Barbaroxa. * Barvas, the beard, the chin. * Barvas
de gallo, two lappes of fleshie matter hanging down under the cocks bill,
called cock-beard. Barvasco yerva, an herb called Mullein, Woolblade,
Lungwoort, Torch-herb, or hig-Taper. Cowslip. Barvechar alcando, to break up
the ground. Barvechar venando, to twifallow, or plough over ground the second
time. Barvechar terciando, to thrifallow, or plough over ground the third time.
Barvecho, m. plowed ground, a fallowed field. Barvechazon, the time of
ploughing, fallowing, etc. Barveria, f. a barbersshop. Barvero, m. a barber. *
Barveta, vide Barbeta. * Barvezilla, f. a little beard. * Barvilla, the chin. *
Barviponiente, vide Barbiponiente * Barvo, vide Barbo, * Barvo de la mar vide
Barbo de la mar. Barvudo, m. he that has a long or thick beard. * Barvullas,
vide Barbullas. * Barvuta, vide Barbuta. * Baruntado, m. suspected, winded out.
* Baruntar, to wind out, to suspect. Basa de coluna, the foot of a pillar. *
Basca, or Vasca, f. annoy, grief, torment, vexation, loathsomnes, dismay,
swouning, an ecstasy or shortness of wind. Also throngs, pangs. * Bascoso, one
short winded, one annoyed, vexed, panged with pangs or throngs. * Basija, or
Vasija, any kind of pot or vessel. Basilisco, a serpent called a Basiliske or
Cocatrice. * Basillo, vide Vasillo. Basquin^a, or Vasquin^a, a woman's
peticoate, a kirtle. * Basta, it suffices, it is enough, no more words. There
needs no more. Bastage, Bastaje, or Ganapan, a porter. * Bastamente, grossly,
coursely. Bastante, sufficient. Bastantemente, sufficiently, enough. Bastar, to
suffice, to satisfy, to be enough. * Basta lo dicho, there is spoken
sufficient. Bastardia, f. bastardie. Bastardo, m. a bastard, one unlawfully
begotten. * Bastardo, or Plataforma, a platform in fortification. *
Bastecedor, a purueyor. Bastecer, or Bastescer. to furnish sufficiently. *
Bastescido, or Bastecido m. furnished sufficiently. Bastida, f. a tower, a
fort. Bastimiento, m. fortification, victual, furniture. Basto, m. thick,
course, gross. Baston, m. a club, a staff. * Bastonero, m. an officer that
carries a staff to part and make room among the people, a whifler. *
Bastonazo, m. a stroke with a staff. Also a great staff. * Batador, m. a
washing beetle. Batalla, f. a troup, a company of soldiers, a battle, an army.
Batallar, to fight in battle. Batallolas, f. the space in a galley between the
oars for soldiers to stand in. * Batallon, a petie battle or army, a great
squadron appointed to fight, so called by the Switzers and Italians, being
after the Greek Phalanges, or the Roman legions, of between six and eight
thousand soldiers. Batan de pan^os, a mill or place to full cloth in.
Batanado, m. fulled. Batanar pan^os, to full clothes, to beat clothes as
washers do. * Batanero, m. a fuller of clothes. * Batata, f. a root. Batel, or
Vatel, m. a ship boat, a skiffe. * Bateos, m. baptism. * Bateria, or Vateria,
beating, battery. * Batidor, m. a beater, a thresher. * Batido, m. beaten,
threshed, knocked. Batiente de puerta, the iawmes or cheeks of a door, the
side posts of a door. Batihoja, a gold-beater. Batir, to beat, to strike, to
thresh corn. Batir hoja, to beat gold, or to beat any metal into plates.
Batir los dientes, to gnashe the teeth. Bava, f. slauer, spittle. Bavadero, m.
a muckender, a bib. Bavaza, f. spittle, slauer, slimines. Bavear, to slauer, to
driuell. Bavera, f. a part of the headpiece or cask, called the beauer. *
Baveza, f. vide Braveza. * Baul, m. a trunk or chest to put in apparel. *
Bavosa, f. a snaile, a slug. Bavoso, slauering out of the mouth. * Baupres, m.
the bolt-sprit of a ship. Bausan, or Pausan, m. one that stands gaping to
behold any thing. Bautismo, m. baptism. * Bautizado, m. baptized, christened.
Bautizar, to baptize. Bautista, he that baptiseth. Bautisterio, m. a font used
in Churches to baptize children in. Also the baptising of children. * Bavor,
vide Babor. * Bavorda, vide Baborda. * Bavovini, vide Babovini. * Baxa, below,
a dance so called, a low dale, a vale, a valley. * Baxa, m. a Bassa or
commander among the Turks. Baxada, f. a going down. * Baxado, m. brought
down, humbled, debased, made vile. * Baxamente, lowly, humbly, basely. Baxar,
to bring down, to dismount, to debase, to make vile, to tread under foot. To
descend, to come or go down. Baxas, f. quick sands, shelues in the sea. *
Baxel, Bajel, vide Vagel, a vessel, a skiffe, a boat. * Baxero, m. that which
is below, the nether lip. Baxeza, f. lownes, baseness, vileness,
contemptiblenes. Baxilla, f. a garnish of plate. * Baxillo, vide Vaxillo, m. a
small vessel. * Baxio, m. a quick sand, a shelfe in the sea. Baxo, under,
beneath. * Baxo, a trough to water cattle at. Baxura, f. baseness, cowardice.
Baya de mar, a bay, a creek. * Baya, as dar la baya, to jest, to mock at. *
Bayas, vide Vayas, bay berries. Bayben, or Bayven, a swaying from one side to
another, shipwreck, crosse-for-fortune. * Bayetas, bays, such as they line
garments with. * Bayladera, f. a woman dauncer, which danceth and snappeth, or
makes a noise with the fingers. Also a little toy or top that children use and
set up with their fingers on a table. Baylar, to dance and make a snapping
noise with the fingers. Baylador, m. a dauncer. Bail, m. a dance. * Baylio, a
judge, a bayliffe of the order of the knights of Malta. * Bayna, vide Vayna. *
Bayo, m. bay color, a horse. * vno piensa el Bayo, otro que lo ensilla, the
bay horse thinks one thing, and he that saddleth him thinks another thing.
* Bayuen, a swaying, or rolling from one side to another as a ship, cross
fortune. * Bazo, the spleen, the milt.
B D
Bdelio, the liquor of a certain tree, called Bdellium.
B E
* Beatitud, f. blessedness. * Beatissimo, m. most blessed. * Beato, m. blessed.
* Bebida, f. drinck or a match at drinking: Also a potion to drink. Beca, f. a
miniver hood that doctors use to wear, a hawks hood, a tippet, a cloth about
the neck for warmenes. * Becar, vide Bezar. * Beceto, the hanging part of the
lip. Also jewels that the Indians hang at their lips, nostrels, and ears.
Beco, vide Labio, a lip. Becndo, m. great lipped. Bedel, a stone called
Bedellium. * Befar, vide Burlar. Befas, injury, wrong, displeasure, iestes,
and mockes. * Bege, or beje, vide Beque, the beak-head of a ship. Beguin, m. a
religious man, a convert. * Behemencia, vide Vehemencia. Behetrias, Lordships
or liberties, frank and free, at their own government, by a metaphor taken
for confused noises or tumults. * Behordo, an herb called Cats tail. * Bejes,
vide Vejez. * Bejo, vide Vejo. * Bela, a sail of a ship. Beldad, f. beauty. *
Beleta, a weather-cocke. * Belezo, small household stuff, as pots, pans,
dishes, etc. Belho, vide Bello. * Belica, f. a proper name, as we say Bessie.
* Belico, warlike. * Belicoso, m. warlike, bent to fighting. * Belida yerva, an
herb called Crow-foote. Bellamente, fairly, trimly, goodly. Belleza, f.
beauty, fayrenes. Bello, m. fair, beautiful. * Bellona, the imagined goddess
of war, sister to Mars. Bellon, as moneda de Bellon, base money, copper money.
Bellota, vide Vellota, an Acorne, the bud or knop of a flower. * cordones de
Bellota, strings with tasels or knaps at the end of them like Acornes: tassels.
Bellotero, m. he that gathers Acornes. * Belo, m. the first king of assyria:
whose image after his death was first worshipped of any image. * Beltaldar,
vide Despinsar. * Belveder, fair to see to or look on Also a place of fair
prospect in Rome so called. Benblanco y roxo, a kind of nut. * Bencedor, m. an
ouercommer, a conqueror. * Bendabal, or Bendabar, the south-winde. benDezir,
Praes. Bendigo, bendizes, biendize. 1. Praet. Biendixe, biendixiste, biendixo.
Fut. Bendire, ras, ra. Sub. Praes. Bendiga, Imperf. Biendixera, biendiria, or
biendixesse. Fut. Biendixere, to bless, to say well. Bendicion, f. blessing. *
Benditora, hallowed water. Benedicho, m. blessed. * Bendito, m. idem. *
Bienditamente, blessedly. Bendixe, Bendixera, Bendixesse, Bendixo, vide
benDezir. Beneficiado, m. beneficed, one that has a good turn done him,
grounds or fruits well tilled and well husbanded. Beneficiar, to benefit, to do
a good turn. To cherish any kind of fruit. Beneficio, m. a benefit, a good
turn, a courtesy. * Benevolencia, f. good will. * Benevolo, m. well-willing,
well minded, helping. * Benignamente, kindly, bountifully, gently. Benignidad,
f. kindness, bounty, gentleness. Benigno, m. kind, gentle, courteous, bountiful,
ready to hear one. * Benignissimo, m. most kind, most bountiful, most
courteous. * Benino, m. kind, gentle, courteous, ready to hear one. * Benito,
as San Benito, which is an apparel pictured with images of devils, worn of
such as having digressed from the Romish Religion, without recanting are lead
therein to be burnt: to those that do recant, they put on a San Benito, with
only the pictures of a red Saint Andrews cross thereon. Benjuy, an herb
called Laser. * Bentalle, vide Ventalle. * Bentosa, vide Ventosa. * Bentoso,
vide Ventoso. Beodez, f. drunkenness. Beodo, m. drunken. * Beque, m. the
beak-head of a ship. * Berangena, vide Berengena, f. * Berberio, or Berveria,
the country Barbary. Berberis, Barberies. Berca, or Verca, f. Colewoort.
Berca peruna, wild Mercury. Bercera, belonging to Colewoorts. * Bercetas,
little Coleworts. * Bereda, vide Vereda. Berengena, or Berenjena, a kind of
fruit growing on the ground like a Melon, it is fashioned like a pear, and
is about that bigness, usually sodde in Spain in the pot, and eaten with beef
or mutton. * Berengenal, m. a place where Berengenas grow. * Berenjena, or
Berengena, a herb groing on the ground like a Melon, of the form and bigness
of a pear, usually sodden in the pot and eaten with beef and mutton in
Spain. * Berga, vide Verga. * Bergantines, or Fustas, small ships,
Brigandines, pynasses, foysts. Beril, a precious stone so called. * Bermegito,
vide Bermejito. Bermejer, vide Bermejescer. * Bermejescer, to wax reddish, or
read. Bermejito, ruddie, reddish. Bermejo, or Vermejo, m. red colored
Bermejura, f. rednes. Bermellon, vermillion. Bernegal, m. a kind of earthen
vessel to drink in, painted with varnish which they use in Spain. Bernia, f.
an Irish rugge or mantle, a rugge, such as sea men wear. * Berniz, m. varnish.
* Berniz en grana, varnish before it be ground. Berraco, m. a barrow hog, a
boar pigge, a nut with a green husk. Also a piece of artillery very short
and great. Berracas, or Berrazas, water cresses. Berriondez, f. a pigges going
to brimming, a dogs going to salt, any other beast going the male to the
female to engender at the time of the year. Berro, an herb called
Groundswell. Also an herb called water Cresses. Berrocal, m. a place full of
hillocks. * Berruca, vide Berruga. Berrueco, a hillocke, a wart. Berruga, f. a
wart. Berrugoso, or Berrugozo, full of warts, full of hillockes. * Berveria,
vide Berberia, f. the country of Barbary. * Berza, vide Berca. * Besado, m.
kissed. Besar, to kiss. Beso, m. a kiss. Bestia, f. a beast. * Bestia de
aluarda, a bearing beast. Bestial, beastly. * Bestialidad, f. beastlines. *
Bestiame, m. a company of beasts. Bestion, or Reparo, a kind of fort, a
bulwark, a rampire. * Besugo, a kind of delicate fish. Beta, or Veta, f. a
beete. Betonica, f an herb called Betony. Beton de colmena, a composition
found in Beehiues like to wax. * Betumen, m. a kind of lime or clay, fast,
clammie like birdlime, used in old time in steed of mortar and in lamps to
burn in steed of oil, being of the nature of brimstone. Betumar, vide
Betuminar. Betuminar con Betun, to daube with a kind of tough slime. Betun, a
tough kind of slimie mortar. * Betunes, id est, Betun es, that is, it is a
tough kind of slime. * Beudo cuerpo, a drunken body. Bevedero, m. a trough
for beasts to drink in. Bevedor, m. a drinker, a blowster, a drunkard. *
Bevedora, f. tippling gossip. Bever, to drink. Bever al cabo, to drink all,
to carrouse whole pots. Bever a porfia, to drink a vie, who shall drink most.
* Bever mucho, to drink lustily, to quaffe, to toss the pot. Bevida, f. a
potion, a drink, a drunken match. Bexiga, or Vexiga, a bladder, a bubble. *
Beziga de perro, an herb called winter cherrie, or Alkakengie. * Bexigazo, m.
a blow or stroke with a bladder. * Bexiguilla, f. a little bladder. Bexuco, m.
kind of with. * Beynte, vide Veynte. * Bez, vide Vez, f. Bezado, m. kissed.
Bezar, to kiss, to accustom, to instruct. * Bezero, m. he that keeps a
turn. * Bezerrillo, a little calfe. * Bezerrico, idem. Bezerra, f. an herb
called calves snout. Bezerro, m. a great calfe, velym. Bezo, or Beco, custom,
fashion, use. Also the lip. * Bezugo, or Besugo, sea breame.
B I
* Biasma, f. vide Bisma. Biblia, f. the bible. * Bibliotheca, f. a library of
books, a book sellers shop, a place where books be kept. * Bicaca, a pouch or
great purse. Bicarro, or Bizarro, brave, gallant. * Bicha, f. a viper. Bieldo,
m. a fan, a scowpe to cast corn with against the wind for to winnowe it. *
Bielgo, a fan to winnow corn against the wind. Bien, well. Bienaventurado, m.
happy, fortunate, luckie. Bienaventuranca, f. good fortune, good hap, good
luck. Bien acustumbrado, well accustomed of honest and good demeanor. *
Bienaventuradamente, happily, luckily, fortunately. Biendezir, vide Bendezir,
to bless, to say well. Bienes, goods. Biengranada, f. oak of Jerusalem, oak
of paradise, oak of cappadocia. Bienhablado, well spoken, affable. *
Bienhablar, to speak well. Bien hazer, to do well. Bien hecho, well done, a
benefit. Bien hechor, f. a well dooer. Bienhechora cosa, a bountiful matter.
* Bienque, vide Aunque, albeit, although. Bienqueriencia, f. good will.
Bienquerer, to wish well, to bear good will. Bienquisto, m. well beloved.
Bienquista, y amigablemente, lovingly and friendly. * Biforme, double
fashioned, of two forms. * Bifronte, one with two foreheades, a surname given
to Ianus, because he being a great iusticer looked every way. * Biga, vide
Viga. Bigor, m. vigor, force, strength. * Bigornia, f. the iron upon which
ferriers turn or work horseshooes. * Bigota, f. a pulley of a ship. * Bigote,
the muchachoes of the beard. * Biguorda, f. a prickly bindweed. Bila, f. vide
Hila, a rank. * Bilbao, f. the principal city of Biskay so called. Billon,
as moneda de Billon, Bullion to make money of, or copper to make money of.
Bilma, f. a kind of seare-cloth. Bimbrera, f. a willow tree or osier tree. *
Bira, f. a turning, a turning about. Also a shaft, an arrow. * Birar, to turn,
to turn about. * Birlar, to play at kailes. * Birlos, m, kayles to play
with. * Birotazo, m. the stroke with a bolt, the shot of a birdbolt. * Birote,
or Virote, m. a bolt, a bird-bolt. Bisaguela, or Bisabuela, f. a great
grandmother. Bisaguelo, or Bisabuelo, a great grandfather. * Bisaguela, vide
Visabuela. * Bisaguelo, vide Visabuelo, m. * Bisarma, or Visarma, f. a kind of
weapon with two pikes. * Biscaya, vide Viscaya, f. the province Biskay in
Spain. * Biscayno, or Viscayno, a man of Biscaie. * Bisco, vide Visco, m.
squint eied, goggle eied. * Bischochado, m. hard as biscuit, made like biscuit. *
Bischochero, m. a maker of biscuit bread. * Biscocho, or Viscocho, biscuit bread.
* Bisiesto, or Visiesto, vide Bissiesto, leape-yeere. * Bislumbre, vide
Vislumbre, twylight. * Bisma, f. a sear cloth. * Bisnaga, or Visnaga, f. an
herb with which ordinarily they pick their teeth in Spain. * Bisnagra, vide
Bisnaga. * Bisnieta, f. the grandchilds child, being a female. Bisnieto, or
Visnieto, m. the grandchilds child, being a male. * Bison^o, m. a new come
soldier, a nouice. Bispera, vide Vispera, f. the eeue of a feast. Also the
eeue of every next morrow. Bisperas, or Visperas, the euenings or euensongs,
evening prayer upon the eeue of a holy day. Bisperadas, f. vide Visperas.
Bissiesto, or Vissiesto, m. leape-yeere. Bistorta yerva, an herb called
Bistort, Adderwort or Snakeweed. * Bitacula de nao, the place where the light
is kept in a ship, a place in a ship where they keep the compass. * Bitacora,
f. a place where the compass or light is kept in a ship. Bitor, m. a foul
called a Bittour. * Bitoria, f. victory. * Bitualla, victuals. * Biva^ce, vide
Vivace, quick, lively. * Bivandero, vide Vivandero, a victualler to a camp.
Bivar, m. a park, a warren for conies or dear, a place to keep hens, geese,
or ducks in, a fish-poole. Bivaro, m. a badger, gray, brocke, or beuer. *
Bivaro, or Biverio, a fish called a sea dog, or beauer. Biuda, f. a widow
woman. Biudo, m. a widower. Biudez, f. widow-head. Biveza, f. quicknes,
liuelines. Bivienda, f. liuelyhood, living. Biviente, alive, living. Bivir, to
live, to have life. Also to live a merry life. Also to lead or spend his
life. Bivo, m. alive. Bivora, f. a viper. Bivorezno, m. a young viper. *
Bivorino, m. a little viper. Also belonging to a viper. Bixa, f. a certain
herb wherewith the Indians paint themselves. * Bizarma, vide Vizarma.
Bizarria, f. bravery, gallantnes. Bizarro, m. brave, gallant. * Bizcaya, vide
Viscaya, Biskay a province of Spain. * Bizcayno, vide Vizayno, m. a man of
Biskay. * Bizcochero, vide Biscochero, or Viscochero, a bisket-baker, or a
bisket-maker. * Bizcocho, vide Biscocho, or Vizcocho, biscuit bread. * Bize, a
sea fish like a perch. * Bizera, vide Vizera, f. the beauer of a helmet or
headpiece. * Bizerro, m. vide Bezerro.
B L
Blanca, a piece of money being the sixtieth and eight part of a royal of
plate, or an English sixepence. Also the proper name of diverse women in Spain.
Also for white in the feminine gender. Blanchete, m. a little beagle of Malta.
Blanco, m. white. Also a mark or a white to shoot at. * Dexar en blanco, to
leave a blancke in paper to be filled up. To leave a man suing for an office or
such like, frustrat void, and beside it. * Salir en blanco, to miss the
cushion, to be frustrate or void of any thing. * Quedar en blanco, to remain
frustrate of ones purpose. Blancor, m. whitenes. Blancura, idem. Blandamente,
softly, gently. Blandear, to brandish or quiver a sword, to bend, to bow. Also
to make soft or gentle. * Blandir, to make soft or gentle. Blando, m. soft,
gentle, flattering. Blandon de cera, a wax torch. Blandura, f. softnes,
gentleness, smoothnes. Blanqueado, m. whited. * Blanqueador, m. one that
whiteneth or makes white. Blanqueadura, f. whiting. * Blanquecedor, m. vide
Blanqueador. Blanquear to make white, to be white. Blanquezino, m. whitish,
somewhat white. Blanquibol, Ceruse. * Blanquisco, m. whitish, somewhat white. *
Blao, of a bluish color. * Blasfemado, m. blasphemed. Blasfemar, to
blaspheme. Blasfemador, m. a blasphemer. Blasfemia, blasphemy. * Blason, or
Blazon, arms, a scutcheon, blazon. * Blasonar, or Blazonar, to set out, to
talk at large, to blason out. * Blazonador de arnez, a boaster of his arms,
or gentry. * Blebeyo, m. of or pertaining to the common people, one of the
comminaltie, poor, base, mean, simple, homely, of little value, of the common
sort, of small estimation. Bledo, an herb called a Blite, Spinnage.
B O
* Bobas, an herb called Sharewort. * Bobear, to be foolish, doltish. To be
astonished, amassed. To play the fool. Bobeda, f. a vault. * Bobedad, or
Bovedad, f. foolishnes. * Bobillo, or Bovillo, m. a little foot. * Bobo, or
Bovo, m. a fool. Boca, f. a mouth, a snowte. Boca del rio, the haven mouth. *
Boca. f. a coard in a ship. * Boca arriba, lying wide open with his face
upward. Boca abaxo, groueling. Bocaci, m. buckeram. Bocado, a morsel, a bit, a
mouthfull, the stuff that is put in a piece between the powder and the
bullet. Bocal de pozo, the mouth of a well. Bocal, a muffler, a muZZle, one
that assayeth and tries to speak a tongue, yet cannot. Bocal, vide Ignorante,
ignorant, unskillful in a tongue. * Mancebillos bocales, young youths that have
no knowledge in a tongue. Bocezar, to gape, to yawne. Bocezo, m. gaping,
yawning. * Bochornado, m. withered away with a close hot weather. Bochorno, m.
a close hot weather. Boco de la barva, the moss of the beard. * Bocudo, wide
mouthed. * Bocudo, m. having great must achoes. * Boda, f. a marriage, a
wedding, a bridal. Bodas, a wedding, a marriage. Bodega, f. a seller to keep
wine in. Bodegon, m. an alehouse, an inn. Bodegonero, m. an alehouse keeper,
an alehouse hanter. Bodeguero, m. a tapster. * Bodian, a tench, a sea fish
having red spots almost like a tench. * Bodigo, m. a small cake or bun bread,
which in diverse villages in Spain they offer to the priest, as also give their
children. Bodoques, m. pellets of clay. * Boezuelo, m. a stalking ox or horse
made of canuas or such like, to gather within foul to shoot at them with a
fowling piece. Bofes, m. the lungs or lights. Bofetada, f. a buffet, a blow
with the fist. * Bofeton, idem. * Bofones de jubon, the bombast, furre or
lining of a doublet. Boga, f. rowing with oars. * Bogador, vide Vogador, m. a
rower with oars. Bogar, vide Vogar, to row with oars. * Bogavante, m, the
foreman in rowing. * Bohemia, f. a country so called. * Bohio, m. a thatched
house. * Bohoneria, pedlarie ware. The place where such ware is sold. *
Bohonero, m. a pedlar that sells small wares. * Bohonora, a banker, a
lumbard, a money lender. Bohordar, to cast a kind of reeds one at another
called Cats tail a horseback. Vide juego de can^as. * Bohordo, an herb
called Water torch or Cats tail. Boja, compassing about. Bojar, to compass
about. Bola, a bowl, a footeball. * Bola de viento, a wind ball to toss from
one to another. * Imbocar la bola, to hit the bowl in the ring, at the play
called juego de Barras. * Boladero, m. flying. * Bolada, f. the flight of a
foul or bird. Also a cast with a bowl. * Bolado, m. fled or flowne. *
Boladora, flying. Bolapie, fluttering with the wings the feet on the ground.
Bolar, to fly, to surprise. * Bolar un grulla, to fly at the crane with a
hawk. * Bolarmenico, m. Bole-Armeniake. * Bolaso, or Bolazo, m. the stroke of
a bowl. * Bolcan, or Volcan, m. Mount Aetna that continually casts out fire.
* Bolcanes, idem. * Bolcano or Vulcano, m. Vulcan the God of Smithes, as poets
feign. * Bolcar, yo Buelco, to fall down tumbling. * Bolcado me a, el vino,
the wine overcame me. * Bolear a la tahona, to hasten to Bridewell. Bolea de
pelota, the flying of a ball or bullet. * Boleo, m. a flight. * Boleta, f. a
billet or ticket for lodging, etc. a little bullet to shoot. Boletines, little
morsels of an orange, little round stones. Vide Bolleta. * Bolla, f. the Popes
bull, letters patents. * Bollido, m. boiled, sodden. * Bollir, to boil, to
sees. * Bolilla, a little bullet, a little ball. Bolina, f. a rope in a ship
called the sheate, or the boling. * Bolliciar, to make a tumult, hurly burly or
great stir. Bollicio, vide Alboroto. Bollicioso, m. seditious, contentious.
Bollo de pan, a loaf of bread, a role of bread. Bollo de golpe, the swelling
after a stripe. Bollon de cinta, a stud or bosse of a girdle. Bollonado, m.
studded, bossed. * Bolos, the play at kailes or nine pins. Bolsa, f. a purse, a
pouch. * Bolsa de camino, a waifaring man's capcase, portmanteaw or pouch to
carry his necessaries in. * Bolsero, m. a purse maker. * Bolsica, f. a little
purse, a small pouch. * Bolsico, m. a little purse, a petty pouch. * Bolsilla,
f. idem. * Bolson, m. a great purse or pouch. Bolteador, m. a tumbler, a
vaulter. Boltear, to vault, to tumble. Boltejador, vide Bolteador. Boltejar, or
Boltear, to tumble, to vaulte. Boltezuela, f. a short turn. * Bolton, m. a
jewel like a heart to hang about the neck. * Bolton, or chaton de cinta, a
stud of a girdle. * Boltura, f. vide Emboltura. Bolver, yo bvelvo, to turn, to
return, to restore. * Bolver lo recevido, to restore again that he had taken.
* Bolver las espaldas, to turn his back or shoulders. * Bolver al reves, to
return back again. * Bolverse en algo, to become, to betide, to chance, to
befall, to happen. Bolvible, that may turn, or be turned. Bolvimiento, m.
turning. * Bolumen, m. a volume of a book. Bomba, f. a pumpe. * Bomba de
fuego, a ball of wildefire. * Bombarda, f. a piece of artillery. * Bombo, any
bumming or humming noise. Bonanca, f. fair weather, a calm. * Bonancar, to
make calm, to make fair weather. * Bonda, vide Honda. Bondad, f. goodness,
bounty. * Boneta, f. the bonet of a sail in a ship. Bonete, m. a cap, the top
sail. * Bonetero, m. a capper. * Bonico, or Bonito, pretty, good, neat,
fine. Bon^iga, f. a cowturd. * Bonissimo, most good. Bonito, vide Bonico. *
Bonito, m. a fish called a Tunnie. * Bonvaron, an herb called Groundswell. *
Bon^uelo, m. a cake, a little loaf. * Boo, vide Bueno. Boquear, vide Bocezar,
to gape, to yawn, to make mowes, to play or check with the mouth as horses
do. * Boqueron, m. a great hole in a wall or such like. * Boquiabiertos, m.
wide mouthed, open mouthed. Boquiroto, foul mouthed. * Boquirrito, vide
Boquiroto. * Boquisecos, m. dry mouthed, thirsty. Borbolear, to bubble, to
sees. Borbollones, m. bubbles with seething. * Borcegui, Buskins of leather.
Borcellar de caxa, the brim of a chest. Bordador, or Boslador, m. an
imbroderer, an edger. * Bordado, m. imbrodered, edged, fringed. Bordadura, f.
embrodering, fringing. Bordar, or Boslar, to embroder, to edge. Board, m. a
border of embroderie, a skirt, the brim or edge of a fort or any thing. Also a
bastard son. * Board tajado, fringe. Bordon, m. a staff which pilgrims walk
withal. Also the great or base string of any instrument. * Bordon de vihuela,
the great or base string of a vial. Bordonero, m. a base fellow. Also a
pilgrim that carries Bordon in his hand to walk with. * Boreas, m. the north
wind. * Borgon^a, f. the dukedom of Burgundy, a woman of Burgundy.
Borgon^on, m. a Burgonion, a Wallon. * Borla, round fringe. * Borlador, m. a
maker of fringe. Borneado, m. bent by beathing at the fire. Bornear, to bend
timber by beathing at the fire. Borne, m. the bending of a staff or timber by
beathing at the fire. Borni, m. a kind of hawk. Borona, f. a kind of grain
in China. * Borra, f. a blot, the dross of any thing, ewes mutton. * Borracha,
f. a bottle with hair. Also a drunken woman. * Borrachera, or Borracheria, f.
drunkenness, a drunken feast. Borracho, or Beodo, a drunkard. Borrachez, vide
Borrachera. * Borrado, m. blotted, cancelled, razed or blotted out. * Borrador,
m. a blotting book, a day book, a house book. * Borrador de cuentas, a
blotting book of reckonings. * Borradura, f. a blotting, a rasing out.
Borraja, f. an herb called Burrage. Borrar, to blot, to blurre. Borras, f.
dregs of wine, oil, or of ointments. Borrasca, f. a tempest. * Borrascoso,
tempestuous. Borrax, or Borraz, vide Atincar, solder for goldsmithes. *
Borraza, idem. * Borrega, f. a lamb. Borrego, m. a lamb of a year old.
Borrico, m. an ass colt. * Borro, m. a lamb giddie in the head. Borron, m. a
blot. Borujo, vide Burujo, the husks of grapes or such like fruit after the
wine or juice is pressed out. Borzegui, or Boszegui, a buskin. Borzeguineria,
f. a buskin makers shop. Borzeguinero, m. a buskin maker. * Boscage, m. a
thick wood, wooddie. Boslado, vide Bordado, embrodered. * Bosladores, m.
embroderers. Bosladura, vide Bordadura, f. embroderie. Boslar, vide Bordar, to
embroder. Bosque, m. a wood, a grove, a coppise. * Bossal de cavallo, a kind
of furniture for a horse head, used in Spain of silver, with bells and a point
in the same, right in the forehead like a unicorn. Bossar, to vomit. Bostezar,
or Bocezar, to gape, to yawne. Bostezo, m. gaping, yawning. Boszegui, vide
Borcegui, m. Bota, a boot to wear, a bottle, a buskinne. * Bota de vino, a
bottle of wine. * Bota, f. a boot to wear. * Botamente, bluntly, dully.
Botana, f. a piece of wood to stop a hole in a bottle, to be stitched fast or
tied to that the drink run not out. Also by a metaphor used for an issue in
the legs. Botar, or Votar, to put forth, to thrust forth, to vow, to dim
the color, to dull the edge. * Botar jurando, vide jurar, to vow, to swear:
as * Boto a Dios, I swear by God. Botarse el color, to dim the color.
Botas, f. boots. * Bote, m. a box, the blow or stroke with a pike or such
like, the rebound of a bal, a box of an Apothecarie, a stone or a kind of
stony mortar. They use in Spain to make a ball rise to strike him afterward
with a racket or battle-dore. * Bote de conserva, an Apothecaries box. Bote de
pelota, the rebound of a ball. * yr de bote, to go the ready way. Botecica, f.
a little box, a little bottle. * Botelleria, f. the butterie. * Botezillo, m.
a galley pot, a kind of lymbecke or stillatorie, a little measure. Botica, f.
an Apothecaries shop, a shop. Boticario, m. an Apothecarie. Botija, f. a tubbe.
* Botijuela, f. a little tub. Botilla, f a little bottle. * Botiller, m. a
butler. Botilleria, f. a butterie, a place where bottles are sold. Botillero,
m. a butler. Botin, m. a booty taken. Also pincens of leather that women wear
in Spain. * Botines, idem. Botinero, he that keeps the booty, or a pincen
maker. Boto, m. dull of edge, dull witted. * Boto a Dios, I vow to God, or I
swear by God. * Boto a tal, I swear by such a one, etc. Boton, m. a button, a
bud, a searing iron, a byle, an impostume. * Boton de fuego, a ball of wild
fire. * Botor, m. an impostume. * Bouchette, vide Mexilla, a cheek. Bovear, to
play the fool. Boveda, vide Bobeda, a vault. * Bovedar, to vault, to make
vaults underground. * Bovedilla, f. a little vault. Boveria, f. foolishnes,
doltishnes. Bovo, or Bobo, a fool, a dolt. * Bout, m. a moonefish. Box arbol,
a box tree. * Box de capateros. a shoomakers last to fashion their shoes on.
* Boxar, m. a promontorie or hilly spong of ground standing into the sea.
Boxedal, m. a grove of box trees. * Boxo, roundnes, compass, circuit. Boya,
f. a booy for an anchor, a cork for a net or angle, a push or bile. Also one
that serves in the galleys for money or pay. Boyada, f. a herd of oxen. *
Boycar, to lift up his voice, to cry out. Boyero, m. a neatheard, a haywarde.
* Boyezuelo, m. a runt, a steer. Also a stalking ox to stalk at and kill
partridges or such like. Boyuno, m. pertaining to oxen. Boz or Voz, f. a voice.
* Boza, vide Boca. * Bozeador, m. a crier out, one that makes a noise. Bozear,
to cry out, to make a noise. Dar bozes, idem. * Bozeria, or Vozeria, f. a
great noice of many voices. Bozina, f. a trumpet, a cornet, a shepherds pipe.
Also a purple fish. Bozinero, m. a trumpeter, a piper. Bozinglero, m. one that
cries out, one that makes a noise. * Bozios, m. a horn shell fish. *
Brabada, Bravata, or Bravada, a brauado, a show of challenge or of daring. *
Brabear, to give the brauado, to make a show of challenge. * Brabeza, f.
fiercenes, wildnes, bravery. * Brabo, m. wild, fierce, cruel. * Brabura,
vide Brabeza, f. * Braca, a fathom, an ell, a coard in a ship called the brace.
Bracada, f. an ell, a fathom. * Bracado, vide Abracado, m. embraced with the
arms. * Bracal, m. pouldrons or armor for the arms, or attire that women put
on their arms toward the shoulder. Bracales, pouldrons, armor for the arms.
* Bracaletes, m. bracelets. Also armor for the arms. * Braceaje, labor or
work done with the arms. Bracear, to shake the arms. Bracero, m. one that
casts out the arms. * Bracho, vide Braco. * Bracito, m. a little arm. *
Bracillo, vide Bracito. * Braco, m. an arm. * Bracoles, vide Bracales. Bracos,
the arms. * Bracos, or Tenazas de cangrejo, or Scorpion, the claws of a Crab
fish, etc. * Bracol, m. arming for the arms, pouldrons. * Bracolete, idem.
Bragado, one with breeches, an ox with a white leg. Bragas, f. breeches. *
Braguera, f. vide Braguero. Braguero, m. a trusse for a broken bellied man.
Bragueta, f. a cod piece. * Bramador, m. one that roareth. Bramar, to roar
like a lion or bull, to make a fretting noise. Bramido, m. roaring, lowing. *
Branca, f. a claw, a paw, a foot of a bear or such like beast. Also chains in
galleyes or prisons to tie the slaves or prisoners. Branca vrsina, an herb
called Bears foot. Brasa, f. a burning coal. Brasero, m. a chafing dish, or
vessel of earth, copper, or silver, which in Spain they use to put coals in,
and so make fire, and not in chimneies. Also a brewer. * Braseros de plata, a
chafingdish of silver, or vessels to make a coal fire, of silver, in steed of
chimneyes. Brasil, m. Brasill-wood, the red color made with Brasill. Also
the country Brasill. * Brava, warlike, fiercely. * Bravada, or Brabada, a
brauado, a show of challenge or daring. Bravamente, wildly, fiercely, bravely. *
Bravante, the province of Brabant. Bravear, or Brabear, to be fierce, to show
himself wild, to brave it, to give the brauado. Braveza, f. fiercenes,
wildnes, bravery. Bravo, m. fierce, wild, cruel, brave. * Bravonel, m. vide
Bravo, also the proper name of a certain Moore. * Braza, or Braca, a great
coard in a ship called the brace. Also vide Braca. * Brazada, vide Bracada. *
Brazales, vide Bracales. * Brazear, vide Bracear. * Brazito, vide Bracito. *
Brazillo, vide Bracillo. * Brazo, vide Braco. * Brazol vide Bracol. * Brea, f.
caulking of ships. * Breado, caulked. Brear navio, to caulke a ship. * Breba,
or Breva, a fig soon ripe. Breco, a twig to make coal. also furzes, a shrub
called heath, Sweete-broome or Lingwort. * Bredo, a kind of beete having no
savor, called Blite. * Brega, strife, contention in law, wrangling. * Bregar,
to strive, to contend. * Bregigam, a shelfish cleaving on the rocks, called a
Lympin. Bren^a, f. a shrubbie place, a young orchard, a nurserie for trees, a
crag of a mountain, a bushie or thornie place. * Bren^al, a bushie place, a
place full of briers. * Bretan^a, f. Britany, a kind of linen cloth brought
from Britain in France. * Brete, m. a pair of stocks or fetters of iron to
fasten the feet in. Breton, a young sproute of any thing. Also a man of
Britain in France. Bretonica, f. an herb called Betony. Breva, or Breba, f.
an early ripe fig. * Brevage, m. beurage, a kind of homely drink. Breval, a
fig tree, the figs whereof are soon ripe. Also a place where fig trees grow.
Breve, short, brief. * Breve de pontifice, a schedule, a ticket, a billet, a
bill, a note, a docket. A Popes bull. Brevidad, f. shortness, brevity.
Brevemente, shortly, briefly. * Brevesito, or Brevezito, somewhat brief or
somewhat short. Breviario, m. an epitome, an abridgement, a brief, a breuiarie
of prayers. Brezna, f. a chip. * Briagues, f. drunkenness. * Brico, m. a bank.
Brida, f. a bridle. Andar a la brida, to ride a great horse with the legs
hanging down long in the stirrops: the contrary to which is Cavalgar a la
gineta, to ride with the legs very short or high trussed up in the stirrops. *
Briento, m. forcible, violent. Brimbillada, f. Marmelade, conserve of quinces.
* Brincado, m. dandled as a child, leaping, skipping. * Brincar, Praes. yo
Brinco, 1. Prae. yo Brinque. to dandle a child, to skip, to leap. Brinco, m.
a ierke, a leap. * Brindar, or Hazer brindes, to drink to one, to salute one
with drinking to him. * Brindes, as Hazer Brindes, idem. * Brinque, vide
Brincar. * Brinquillo, m. a little ierke, a little leap. * Brinquin^o, a toie
for a child to play with. Brio, wilfulnes, headines, liuelines. * Brionia
yerva, f. an herb called Bryonie. Brioso, m. wilful, lively. * Brisa, f. the
north wind, the northeast wind. Brisar la cuna, to rock the cradle. *
Briscos, m. vide Riscos, craggy rocks. Brocado, m. cloth of gold and silver. *
Brocado raso, smooth, or plain cloth of gold or silver. * Brocado rico, m.
rich cloth of gold or of silver. Broca, f. a shoomakers tacke nail. Brocal de
pozo, the covering of a well, the brinke of a well. * Brocatel, m. counterfeit
cloth of gold or silver. Brocha, f. a claspe, or button. * Broche, m. a claspe
or button. Broma, f. a worm that eats holes in ships. Also a heavy, lumpish
thing. * Bromido, vide Bramido. * Broncha, f. a brooch, the boughs of a tree.
Bronze, m. brass. Broquel, m. a target. Broquelado, m. armed with a target.
Broslado, or Bordado, embrodered. * Brosladores, vide Bordadores, embroderers.
* Brosladura, f. embrodering. * Brotado, m. budded. Brotar, to bud, to break
out with scabs. Brozno, m. rough, rugged, sharp. Bruces, groueling, with the
face between the hands. * Bruchete, m. a kind of shellfish. * Bruja, f. a
hagge, a woman enchauntresse, a witch. * Bruma del ynvierno, f. midwinter,
frost, mist, fog, cold frosen weather. Bruneto, m. blackish, sad color. *
Brun^ido, m. burnished with a boares tooth, or other like tool. * Brun^idor,
m. a burnisher. * Brun^idura, f. burnishing. Brun^ir, to burnish. Bruno, m.
brown colored. * Bruno, m. a river of Tuskanie. * Brusca yerva, a shrubbe
called Kneeholme, Butchers broom, Petigree, or Kneehuluer. * Bruscador, m. one
that uses or sells Kneeholme. * Bruscar, Praes. yo Brusco, 1. Praet. yo
Brusque, to heat a ships side with burning reed. * Brusco, vide Brusca. *
Brusque, vide Bruscar. Brutal, or Bruto, brutish, beastly. Bruto, idem. Bruxa,
or Bruxo, a hagge, a fiende, a witch. Bruxula para tirar, f. the aim string,
or beade they shoot with, that which they take their aim by in a crosse-bowe
or such like. * Bruxula, f. a box wherein the mariners compass is set and
fastened. Also the mariners compass. * Buas, vide Bubas, f. Buaro, or Buarro,
an owl. * Bubas, f. the french pockes, a swelling in the flank rising of that
disease. * Buboso, m. full of the pocks. * Buces, as Beuer de buces, to drink
by sips, to lie down and drink at the river with the mouth after the manner
of cattle. Buche de animal, the maw of a beast. Buchete, a cheek, a pop with
the mouth. * Budian, vide Bodian. * Buelco de dado, m. the tumbling or rolling
of a die. * Buelco, m. a tumbling, a falling down, rolling or tumbling. *
Buelco, Buelque, vide Bolcar. * Buele, Buelo, vide Bolar. Buelo, m. a flight. *
Lleuar en Buelo, to take away quickly. * Buelque, vide Bolcar. Buelta, f. a
return, a turning away, a turning round. * aBueltas, together. * Ser de
buelta, to come back again. * Buelta dar, to wheel about, to give a turn. *
Buelto al revez, a turning back, turned back. Buelto, m. turned, tumbled,
tossed, changed. * Buelva, Buelvo, vide Bolver. Buenamente, well. Bueno, m.
good. * Buen^ol, a simnell or bunne made of flower, oil and raisins. Buetagos,
or Bofes, the lungs, the tripes or belly of a beast. Buey, m. an ox, Buey
novo or Novillo, a steer. Bueytre, m. a vultur. Bueytrera, a place to kill
vultures. Also a kind of fishing net. Bufalo, a buffle, a kind of wild ox.
* Bufano, vide Bufalo. Bufar, to puff, to blow as a horse. * Bufeo, m. a
great kind of fish. Bufete, m. a standing table. * Buffar, to huffe, puff, or
snort as a horse, bull, or other such beast does. Bufido, m. puffing, blowing,
or snuffing of a horse. * Bufon, m. a iester. Vide Truhan. * Bugallas, f.
galls used of diars. * Bugelladas, f. painting for women's faces. * Bugellador,
a maker or seller of painting for women's faces. Bugerias, f. trifles. *
Bugulosa, Buglosse. Buho, m. an owl, shrich-owle. Buhonero, m. a pedlar, a
seller of small wares up and down the country. * Buho solo, m. an owl alone.
Bujarronear, to commit sin against nature. Bujarron, m. a buggerer. Bula, f.
a Popes bull. Bular la frente, to burn the forehead. Bulbo, m. a wild oinion.
* Buldero, m. vide Bulero. * Bulero, a carrier of pardons or bulls. * Bulla, a
seditious or tumultuous stir. * Bullente, stirring, boiling. Bullicio, m. a
tumult, a stir, a hurly burly, a sedition. * Bulliciosamente, tumultuously. *
Bullicioso, m. contentious, bent to wrangling. Bullidura, f. springing up,
boiling. Bullir, to spring up, to boil up. Bullon, m. an Irish skeine. Bulto,
m. shape, the bulk of the body. * Bulto de voz, a great voice. * Bun^oleria,
f. the place where they sell buns, or little cobloaues, or where they make
them. * Bun^oleto, m. he that makes or sells cobloaues. Bun^uelos, m.
pancakes, cobloaues, buns. * Buratos, m. a kind of light thin stuff for
clokes used in Spain, or most used for women's mantels there, Cipres or Cipers,
such as they make hatbands of. Burbugear, to bubble. Burbuja, or Ampolla, a
bubble on the water. Burdegano, m. a mule. Burdel, or Puteria, a stews, a
brothel-house. * Burgos, a city in old Castile in Spain. * Buriel, a kind of
cloth. Buril, m. a grauing tool. * Burin, a goldsmithes instrument to grave or
carue with. Burla, f. a jest, a mock, a scoff, a deceit. Burlador, m. a
iester, a mocker, a deceiuer. * Burlando, jesting. Burlar, to jest, to mock,
to deceive. * Burlilla, a pretty jest. Burlon, m. a iester. * Burra, f. a she
ass. * Burrasca, f. a tempest or storm at sea. * Burratos, a kind of stuff
whereof they make women's mantels in Spain. * Burto, a he ass. * Burro piece,
a sea fish. * Burujo, m. the husks of grapes or such like fruit after the wine
or juice is pressed out. Busca, f. a search, seeking. * Buscado, m. sought,
searched. * Buscador, m. a seeker, a searcher. Buscar, Praes. yo Busco, 1.
Praet. yo Busque, to search, to seek. * Busque, vide Buscar. * Bustamantes, a
surname of a certain lineage in Spain. * Butrera, f. a place where they catch
vultures, a place where bait is laid for vultures. Also a fishing net. Buva,
vide Bubas, f. the pocks, a botch, a bile. * Buxahamel, a Moorish dance.
Buxeta, f. a box, a little box, a ciuet box. * Buxula, f. vide Bruxula, a place
where they keep the compass a shipboord. * Buytre, m. a vulture. * Buytrera,
a place to kill vultures in, or to catch vultures. * Buytron, m. a we will to
catch or to keep fish in the water. * Echar Buytrones, to cast weeles in the
water to catch fish. * Buyzillo, a young bullock, a steer. * Buzano, m. a
diuer, a ducker under water as Moors do in the Indies for pearls. * Buzio,
m. a certain cockle fish with a smooth shell, glistering like the mother of
pearl. Also the same as Buzano. * Buzo, vide Buzano. * By^sa, f. a cheuerell
skin to make purses with. * Bysa, vide Byze. * Byze, the north wind.
C
* CA, id est Que, for, for that. Cabal, just, right. * Cabala, f. a mystical
science of heavenly things, or revelation of things secret professed by the
Rabbis. * Cabalia, f. idem. * Cabalista, m. one professing the art of Cabala.
* Cabalistico, m. of or pertaining to the art of Cabala, mysterious,
cabalisticall. * Caballa, vide Cavalla. * Caballariza, vide Cavallariza. *
Caballero, vide Cavallero. * Caballillo, vide Cavallillo. * Caballo, vide
Cavallo, m. * Cabalmente, justly, rightly. Caban^a, f. a cabin, a cottage, a
shepherds cottage, a soldiers cabin. Caban^uela, f. a little cottage, a little
cabin. Cabe, near to, hard by. Cabe, the verb Impersonall, it is held, it is
contained, it happens, it contains or holds. Cabeca, f. a head. Cabeca de
perro, the head of a dog, or an herb called dogs-head. * Cabeca de ternero, f.
an herb called Calves snowte, or Snapdragon. * Cabeca verguencado, f. the nut
of a man's yard. * Cabecada, f. a blow with the head against the wall, the
headstall for a horse. A stickneckednes, a wilfulnes, a stubbornes, a
headstrongnes. Cabecada de cavallo, the headstall of a bridle. Cabecado, m. a
headstall for a horse. Also the vamping or putting to the instops to boots. *
Cabecaje, vide Cabecamiento. Cabecal, m. a pillow, a bolster. Cabeceamiento, m.
nodding, shaking of the head. Cabecear, to nod, to shake the head. *
Cabecelero, the executor of a testament. Cabecera, f. the upper end of a table,
bed, or other thing. Cabecera de cama, a beds head. Cabecera de meza, the upper
end of a table. Cabecon, the neck band of a shirt, a falling band, the neck
of a dublet, a man with a great head, the collar of any garment. * Cabecon, a
town of Castile not far from Valladolid. Cabeco, or Cerro, m. a hill.
Cabecudo, m. headstrong, great-headed. Cabecuela, f. a little or small head.
Cabellado, m. long haired. Cabelladura, f. the bush of hair. * Cabelladura
agena, a false hair. Cabellera, f. a periwig, a false hair. Cabellos, m. the
hair of the head. Cabelloso, m. hairie, full of hair. * Cabelludo, m. idem.
Caber, Praes. Quepo, cabes, cabe, 1. Praet. Cupe, cupiste, cupo. Fut. Cabre,
cabras, cabra, Sub. Praes. Quepa, Jmperfect. Cupiera, cabria, or cupiesse, Fut.
Cupiere, to receive, or contain, or to be contained or received in any thing.
* Caberna, f. a cave. Cabero, m. the last. Cabestrar, to halter. Cabestrage, m.
haltering. Cabestrero, m, a roape-maker. Cabestro, m. d halter. * Cabezada,
vide Cabecada. * Cabezcaydo, wri-necked, his head fallen down. * Cabezera,
vide Cabecera. * Cabezon, or Cabacon, the neck or collar of a dublet, the
neck band of a shirt, a falling band. Also one with a great head. * Cabezudo,
vide Cabecudo, headstrong or having a great head. * Cabezuela, vide Cabecuela.
* Cabida, f. an entrance. * Cabida tener, to have interest with one. Cabido,
contained, received, taken. * muy Cabido, very familiar. * Cabildadas, f.
sentences given by the senate. Cabildo, a senate, the chapter or whole society
of the Dean and Prebends in a Cathedral Church. An assembly of Aldermen. A
corporation of a city. Cabildo de yglesia, a Chapter house. * Cabillo, m. a
little end, the small end. * Cabizbaxo, the head downward. * Cable, m. a cable
roape. * Cablecadas de cavallo, headstals for horse. Cabo, or Cavo, m. an end,
a finishing or conclusion. * Cabo de esquadra, a corporal among soldiers.
Cabo de cuchillo, the hafte of a knife. * Cabo, or Pun^o, a handle or pummell.
Cabo de tierra, a cape, a headland. * caborda, f. a boarding or arriving of a
ship close to land, or close to a wharse or key. * cabordar, to approach with a
ship close to land, or close to a wharfe, landing place, or key. Cabra, f. a
she goat. * Cabra piece, a fish called a gurnard. Cabra Silvestre, or
montezina, a wild goat. * Cabra, a town of Andaluzia. * cabra, vide Zabra.
Cabrahigo, a wild fig tree or fig it self. * Cabraygo, idem. Cabrahigar,
to ripen figs, to set wild figs. Cabrero, m. a goatherd. Cabrerizo, idem. *
Cabrestante, m. a capston in a ship. Cabrial, or Cabrio, a rafter, a quarter
se^ on end, to lift some thing on high with. * Cabrilla, f. a little goat,
also vide Cabrillas. Cabrillas, f. a. constellation called the goat and kids.
Cabrio, vide Cabrial. * Cabriolas, f. capering in dancing. * Cabriolar, to
caper. * Cabritico, m. a kid or little goat. Cabrito, m. kid. * Cabrito
montes, a wild goat. Cabrituno, m. belonging to a kid. Cabron, m. a he goat,
a great goat. * Cabronzillo montes, m. a roe bucke. Also a mountain or wild
goat. * Cabruna, f. a goats skin. Cabruno, of a goat. cabullido, m. diued
vnderwater, plunged in water, laid in a deep sleep. cabullir, to diue or
ducke under water, to plunge in water, to lay a sleep, a chase. Caca, f.
birding, fowling, bunting, fishing, wild foul. Caca de aves, Birding. *
Cacado, hunted. * Cacado, as lo han cacado; they have caught him in a snare,
they have hunted him. Cacadora, f. a huntresse. Cacadora cosa, a thing
belonging to hunting, hawking, fishing, or fowling. Cacador, m. hunter. Cacar,
to hunt, to hawk, to fish, to foul. * Cacaraves, to foul, to go a birding.
Cacarear, to cackle as a hen. * Cachas de cuchillo, f. the hafte of a knife. *
Cachear, or Cachar en pedacos, to cleave in pieces. Cachete, m. a strouting out
of the cheeks with much meat or wind, a whirret on the cheek. Cacheteado,
m. whirretted on the cheek, smitten on the cheek with a hand. * Cacheton, m.
a whirret on the cheek. * Cachonda perra, a bitch that goes proud. Cachorro,
m. a whelpe. Cacho, a crust, a piece, a lump. * Cachorrico, or Cachorico, m. a
little whelpe. * Cachorrito, m. idem. Cacique, m. an Indian prince. * Caco, m.
a son of Vulcan, who was a notorious thief, wasting all Italy until
Hercules slew him. Caco de cobre, a brazen vessel to put pots in, as butlers
use by the cupboord. Caco de hierro, a fleshhooke, a pipkin, a trout spear. *
Cacoleta, f. a touchpan of a small piece. Also a little pipkin. * Cacoleta del
poluorin, f. a touchpan for powder of a piece. Cacolilla, f. a little skillet.
Cacon, a fish of whose skin water glue is made. * Cacorla, f. a city in the
kingdom of Granada in Spain. Cacorro, m. covetous, sparing, niggardly.
Cacuela, f. a pipkin. * Cacuela para pringar, a pipkin to keep hot larde to
drop upon Moors or Neagers, and on other malefactors. Also a pipkin with
dripping in it that the poorer sort eat of. Cada, every. Cada dia, every day.
Cada dos, y cada tres dias, each two and three days, every second or third
day. Cada bueno, every good man. Cada qual, every such a one. Cadan^ero, of
every year, yearly. * Cadaldia, vide Cada dia. * Cadalecho, m. a horselitter
or chair to carry one in, a cowch or little bed, a beer for dead men, the
sides of a bed. Cadahalso, m. a scaffold whereon execution is done, a pulpit, a
preaching place. * Cada hora, each hour. * Cadarco, course silk, raw silk.
Cada ruyn, every bad man. * Cada sendos, every one one, each one one. * Cada
vez, every time. Cada vno, Every one. * Cadena, f. a chain. * Cadenilla, f. a
little chain. Cadera, the hip, the huckle bone, a chair with a back. *
Cadinillas, vide Collares. * Cadis, the city of Cales in Spain. * Cadozes,
gudgeons. * Caduceo, a sign of peace, Mercuries mace. Caduco, m. weak. Caer,
Praes. yo Caygo, 1. Praet. yo Cay, to fall. Caedizo, ruinous ready to fall. *
cafari granada, the principal pomegranate, a kind of pomegranate. *
cafarihigo, a chief or principal fig. Cafila, f. a company of beasts
together, a company of base people together. * cafio, rude, rusticall. cafio
en lengua, rude in any tongue. cafir piedra, the saphir stone. * cafra, f. a
city in Spain. caga, f. the end. * Cagado, shitten. Cagajon, or Cagado, m. a
turde. * Cagador, m. a shiter, a fish called a sea hare. * cagal, vide Zagal. *
cagano, vide Zagano. Cagar, Praes. yo Cago, 1. Praet. yo Cague, to shite. *
Cagarolo de mar, a welke fish, a perwinkle. * Cagarrutas, f. goats turdes, or
sheep turdes or tirtles. caguan, vide Acaguan, m. a porch, a pond, a brook
where women wash. * Cague, vide Cagar. * caguera, f. the last, the hinder part.
Caguero, m. the last. Also a tree like an alder tree. * caharen^as razones, f.
wild, coy, disdainful reasons. caharen^o, m. wild, coie, disdainful.
caherimiento, m. vpbraiding. caherir, yo cahiero, to vpbraide. * cahiere,
cahiero, vide caherir. cahinas, sops made of bread, honey and water. * Cahiz,
m. a measure containing 12. Hanegas, that is about eighteen bushels of English
measuring. * cahondado, m. diued to the bottom. cahondar, to diue to the
bottom. cahones, m. certain hosen or breeches. cahorda, vide cahurda, f. a
hogs stie. * Cahucho, vide Cartucho. cahumerio, m. a perfume. * cahurda, or
pocilga, f. a hogs stie. Caiado, vide Cayado, m. Caida, or Cayda, f. a fall. *
Caiga, Caygo, vide Caer. Call, f. chalk, lime. Call por regar, vnsleaked lime.
Cala, Calilla, or Mecha, f. a suppositorie, a pessarie, a surgeons searching
tool, a search. Cala, or tienta, f. a tent to put in a wound. Calabaca, or
Calabaza, f. a gourd, a bottle of a gourd. * Calabaca silvestre, a wild gourd.
* Calabacada, f. a blow with the head against the wall. * Calabaza, or
Calabaca, a gourd. * Calabazada, vide Calabacada. Calaboco de hierro, m. a
kind of fetters, a certain manner of imprisoning, a clasping iron or grapple,
a hook, a drag. Calaboco, m. a dungeon for to cast down condemned folk in, a
crooked knife. * Calaboco piece, a kind of fish. * Calabozo, vide Calaboco. *
Calabriada, f. a mixing of one sort of wine with another. * Calado, m.
penetrated, persed through. Calador, m. a searching tool. Calafatear, to
caulke ships. * Calafate, or Calefate, a caulker of ships, one that fills the
chinks with Okam, etc. * calagarda, f. a deceit, a cosenage. Calamar, m. a
Cuttle fish, a Sleene or blackefish. Also a standish, a pen and inkehorne. *
Calamar, m. a standish, a pen and inkhorne. Calambre, m. stiffenesse of the
sinews, the crampe. Calamenta yerva, an herb called wild Penniroyall, or
Cats mint. * Calamidad, f. misery, calamity. Calamita piedra, f. the adamant
stone. Calamon paxaro, m. a kind of bird that in drinking makes as though he
did bite the water. * Calandra, f. a woodlarke, a bunting. Calandria, a thrush.
Calar, to search, to pearse. * Calatrava, f. the order of the knights of
Calatrava. Also the place where they live and make residence together in
Spain. * Calavaca, or Calabaca, a pumpion or kind of melon, a gourd. *
Calavera, f. the head or skull of any dead creature. Calaverna, a skull. *
Calca, f. a hose. * Calcas, hosen, breeches. * medias Calcas, stockins, knee
hosen. Calcada, f. a causey way. Calcado, m. hosed or shod. Also a horse that
is white footed about the pasterns. Calcado de guantes, m. gloued. Calcado de
capatos, m. shod. Calcado de alcorques, in pantofles. Calcado de botas, m.
booted. * Calcador, m. a shooing horn. Calcado de chinelas, he that wears
slippers. Calcan^ar, m. the heel. * Calcan^o, m, vide Calcan^ar. Calcar,
Praes. yo calco. 1. Praet. yo calque, to tread under feet, to kick, to stuf, to
press, to throng, to thrust, to stamp. * Calcar, or Calzar, to put on hosen
or shoes, to fit, to agree, or square in proportion, to trig a wheel. Calcas,
f. hosen. * Calceado, vide Calcado. * Calceamiento, m. a hosing or shooing, a
furnishing with hose or shoes. Calcetas, f. linen nether stocks. Calcetero,
m. a hosier. * Calcido, vide Calcado. * Calcinar, to calcinate, to mortar, to
lome, to lime, to glase earthen pots within. Calcones, m. breeches, hosen,
slops. * Calcuelas, vnder-stockings, small stockings. * Calcular, to calculate.
Caldera, f. a kettle, a caudron, a brewers lead or fat, a pot to sees meat
in. * Calderada, f. that which is sodden or dressed in a caldron, a caudron
full, as much of any thing that a caudron will hold. Caldereria, f. a brasiers
shop, or the place or street where brasiers work. Calderero, m. a brasier, a
tinker, a kettle maker. * Caldereta, f. a little kettle. Calderilla, f. a
possenet. Calderon, or Caldero, m. a great caldron. Caldero, idem. Calderuela,
a bowet, buffet or kind of vessel made of copper much like a caldron to
carry a great light in it. It is used in Spain to take partridges, as in
England to go with a lowbell for other birds. Also a little cauldron or
kettle. Caldo, m. broth, porrage, a caudle. * Caldo de zorra, a manner of
speech saying, that is cold and yet skaldeth, as if one should say, your
pottage is cold enough, yet it will burn your mouth. * calea, a furred mantell
to wrap children in. calemas, f. courtesy, fained kindness. Also kind of fish. *
calema piece, a kind of fish. * Calenda, the kalends. * noche de la Calenda, the
night of the kalends. Also the eeue before a feastday, as Christmas day.
Calendario, m. a calendar, a roll, a catalogue, a book of accounts, an
Almanake. Calentamiento, m. warming, heating. Calentador, m. any thing that
warmeth or heateth. Calentador de cama, a warming-pan. * Calentadura, f. a
fomentation to comfort the body, a thing that makes one warm. Calentar, yo
caliento, to warm, to heat, to skalde, to scorch, to parch, to chafe, to
incense, to inflame. Calentura, f. heat, warmth, a fever, an ague. *
Calenturiento, m. sick of an ague. Calenturoso, m. idem. Calera, f. a
lime-kill. Calero, m. a lime-maker, or burner of lime. Caleta, f. a
suppositorie, a little creek in the sea. * Calibre, m. the diameter. Calidad,
f. a quality, sort, size or matter, a condition, a state, a calling or
profession. Calido, m. hot, warm in operation. Caliente, Caliento, vide
Calentar. Caliente, warm, warming, hot, earnest, violent. * Calientura, or
Fiebre, vide Callentura. Calificar, to qualify, to allay or mittigate.
Calilla, f. a creek in the sea. * Caliz, m. a challice, a cup. Also the city
Caliz in Spain. * Calladamente, quietly, secretly, without speaking any word,
covertly, without noise, inwardly in the heart. Callado, m. keep secret,
silent, quiet, hushed, secret, that holds his peace and is still. Also
passiuely, that is not spoken of, let pass without any mention. * Callador, m.
a man of few words, a close fellow, a still quiet fellow. Callandico, m.
quiet, soft and fair, still, secret. Callar, to be silent, to hold ones peace,
to conceal, to be quiet or hvsht, to keep secret, to make no noise. Call, f.
a street, a lane, a high way. Calleja, f. a narrow street. * Calleja
estrecha, a narrow lane, or an alley. * Callijeadera, or Callejeadora, a woman
goer much in the streets. * Callejuela, f. a little lane, an alley. *
Callejon, m. a narrow lane, an alley. * Callejear, to beat the streets, to
go much up and down the streets. * Callejera, vide Callejeadera, a woman
walker of streets. * Callecer, to wax hard skinned. * Callente, vide
Caliente. * Callentura, Calientura, or Calentura, f. an ague. Callo, m. brawne,
the thick skin of the hand, a corn growing on men's hands or feet, hard
skin. Also a tripe of an ox or cow. Calloso, m. thick skinned, hard
fleshed, brawnie, knobbie with labor, full of corns. Calma, or Bonanca, f. a
calm, or fair weather, a peaceable time. * Calmar, to calm, to appease, to
quiet, to assuage. * Calofrio, m. a fit or sickness when it is upon a man, it
causes heat and cold together. * Calon, any thing that penetrateth or
descends to the bottom. * calona, a measure being half an Arroba. Calongia,
f. a canonship. * Calongias magistrales, y doctorales certain degrees of
canonship as mastership and doctorship. Calor, m. heat, warmth. * Caloroso, m.
hot, earnest, warm. Calostre, m. the first milk that comes in the teates
after a birth, in woman or beast, called beestings. * Calthra, f. a marigold.
Also a kind of violet that comes in Autumn. Calva, baldnes. * Calvario, the
head or skul of a dead body. Also the mount Caluarie. Calvez, f. baldnes.
Calumnia, a cavil, a false or crafty accusation, a forged crime, a malicious
surmise or detraction to slander or trouble one. Calumniador, m. a cauiller, a
malicious detractor, or deceitful accuser. Calumniar, to cavil, to accuse, to
lay to ones charge falsely and maliciously. Calun^a, vide Calumnia, f. *
Calun^ado, m. slandred, wrongfully accused, falsely charged. Calun^ar, vide
Calumniar. Calvo, m. bald. Calura, f. heat. Caluroso, m. heat, hot weather. *
Calzado, vide Calcado, m. * Calzar, vide Calcar. * Calzas, vide Calcas. *
Calzeado, vide Calceado. * Calzetas, vide Calcetas. * Calzetero, vide
Calcetero. * Calzinar, vide Calcinar. * Calzones, vide Calcones. * Calzuelas,
vide Calcuelas. Cama, f. a bed, a couch, a pallet, a bedsted. Also a cockle
fish, a close stool. Cama de arado, a furrow. * Camafeos, m. kind of stone to
be graven which men ordinarily make brooches to set in their hats and such
like. * Camallada, f. a company of cammels. Camara, f. a chamber, a close
stool, a purgation, the laske, the ordure. * Camara, a city in Candie.
Camara, the bloody flixe, often goings to stool. Also chambers. * Camaras de
Arcabuz, or Artilleria, the barrel of a harquebusse or piece, or ordinance
where they put in the powder. * Camarada, f. a comerade or cabin mate
soldier. Also a placing of diverse pieces of ordinance in war together. Also
placing of diverse men together. * Tirar por Cameradas, to shoot one volley of
shot after another. * Camarado, vide Camarada, a comerade, a bedfellow, a
chamberfellowe, a camerado soldier. Camaran de Lisboa, m. a small Lopster.
Cameran de villafranca, m. a kind of fish called a shrimp. Camaranchon, m. a
garret, a loft or room in the top of a house, a room or chamber with a cross
beam in it, a rude chamber undressed. Camarero, m. a chamberlain, a groom of a
chamber. * Camerera, f. a chamber maid, a waiting woman. * Camareta, f. a
little chamber, study or closet. * Camarilla, idem. * camarilla, vide
Zamarilla, f. an herb called Shepherds purse. Camaron, a shrimpe, a crauish,
a kind of small sea crab, a lopster. Also a fish somewhat like to a
grasshopper, a prane. * Camaronera, f. a crauish net. Camarote, m. a cabin in a
ship or elsewhere. camarra, f. a leather pelt, a short cloak furred with
lambes-kins used in Germany. * camarro, m. a rug, a freeze gown, a seamans
gown, a shepherds frocke or mantle. Also a kind of musical instrument with
strings. * camarron, vide camarro, m. * Cambiado, m. changed, altered, given or
taken in exchange. Cambiador, m. a changer, one that takes up money by
exchange. Cambiar, to change, to exchange one for another, to barter, to
trucke. Cambio, m. a change, an exchange, a steed or place. Also a banker or
money changer. * cambra, vide Zambra, f. * Cambra, the name of a town in
France. Also a kind of linen called Cambricke or lawne. * Cambron, m. a
hemp or flax pit, a place in water to rot or steep hemp in. Also a kind of
thornie shrub called raund, or hearts thorn. Cambronera mata, f. brambles, or
the shrub called hearts thorn. * Cambux, a mask or covering before the face.
Camedrios, germander or English treacle. * Cameleon, m. a Camelion. Also an
herb growing by the sea side upon rocks called Chamelion. * Camellero, vide
Camelero, m. * Camello, vide Camelo, m. Camelero, m he that keeps camels.
Cameleria, or Camelleria, f. the office of a camel keeper. Camelo, m. a
camel. * Camelo pardal, a gray camel. * Camelote, m. chamlet, a kind of
wild sheep in India shaped like a camel. * Camera, vide Camara. * Cameron,
vide Camaron. Camica, or Camisa, f. a shirt, a smock, a priests surplesse, a
porters frocke, a long white garment. Camicada, or Camisada, a camisado, an
assault, a sudden attempt, invasion, or surprise upon the enemy in time of
war, so called because it is performed with shirts over the soldiers armors.
* Camiceta, vide Camiseta, f. a little shirt or smock. Caminador, m. vide
Caminante. * Caminante, a traveler, a wayfaring man, a wanderer. Caminar, to
go a journey, to walk, to go, to march, to wander, to travel. * Caminillo,
m. a little narrow lane, way, path, alley or causey. Camino, m. a way, the
street, a path, a high way, a tracke, a causey. * Camino real, the kings high
way, a great high way. * Camino pisoneado, a causey, a paued street or way, a
common beaten street. Camino de sant yago en el cielo, a place in the heavens
distinguished by Astronomers by the name of Via lactea, the milk white way. *
Camisa, vide Camica. * Camisa de lana, a woollen shirt, a cassocke, a
wastcoate. * Camisada, vide Camicada. * Camiseta, or Camiceta, a little shirt.
* Camisilla, Camicilla, or Camizilla, idem. * Camison, a porters frocke, a body
coat, or great shirt. * Camissa, vide Camisa. * Camiza, vide Camica. Camodar,
to sell, to set to sale. Also to change, to exchange. * camora, a city in old
Castile in Spain. * en vna hora, no se gana camora, camora was not won in an
hour, a proverb implying that every thing must have a time: not unlike our
English proverb, Rome was not built in one day. * camorano, a man of camora. *
camotano, vide camorano. * Campal, belonging to a champaine country, as
Batalla campal, a champaine war. Campana, f. a bell. * Campana de queda, the
bell rung at nine of the clock at night, to warn folk to leave to go in the
streets. * Campanilla, f. a little bell. Also the weesill or little tongue of
the throat. Also a herb called bindweede, or ropeweede, or withie wind, or
hedge bells: it is like Iuie. * Campan^a, f. a field or a champaine country. *
Campan^a rasa, a rased plain, an open field without any hedge, ditch or other
encombrance, a bare piece of ground. * piecas de Campan^a, field pieces of
ordinance. Campanario, f. a steeple, a tower of bells, a belfrie. Also iangling
or ringing of bells. Campanero, m. a bell ringer, a sexten of a church, a bell
founder. * Campan^ear, to ring a bell. * Campan^o, m. pertaining to Campania a
province in Italy. Campear, to pitch a field. Also to destroy or waste a
country with an army. * Campear un vandero, to flourish an ensign. *
Campeche, a kind of wood growing in India very medicinable. Campesino, of or
pertaining to the field. Campero, m. he that keeps the field. Campestre, m.
rude, rusticall, belonging to the field, wild, uncivil. Campin^a, f. a higher
champian ground then the rest. * Campion, m. a champion. Campo, m. a field, a
camp, an army, an host of men, a field in armorie. Also an escape. * campon^a,
f. a bag pipe, an oten-pipe. Also a bell hanged about sheep or gotes, a
lowbell. * campon^ar, to sound or play upon any kind of reed or pipe. campuzar,
to be drowned. * Camuca, f. kids leather. Camueca, or Camueza, f. a pippin. *
Camueco, m. the pippin tree. * Camueso, idem. * Camueza, vide Camueca. *
Camuezo, vide Camueco. Can, a dog in general. An instrument to pull out teeth,
a snap-hance, the name of a fish. Can sobre que cargan vigas the post in a
house which Carpenters call the Summer. * Cana, as Barva cana, a hoare white
beard. Also a Barricado or fortification to defend the enemy. * Cana, vide
Can^a, the stalk of a pipe, a cane, a reed, a pipe, a fishing or angling rod,
a barrel, a rundlet, a ma^s throat. also a leaden pipe or gullet to carry
water. * Canaballa, f. a kind of boats in old time made of Osyers and reeds
covered with leather, and pitched with pitch and Rosin. * Can^ahoja, f. or
Ceguta, an herb called Hemlocke. canahorias, f. caret-roots. Canal, f. a
channel, a gutter, a pipe carrying water to a conduit, a watercourse. * Canal
de tejado, a gutter made of tiles. Canalado, m. chamfured, that is, wrought
hollow, or indented as a reed or pipe. * Canalla, f. the base people,
raskalitie, the skum of the earth, rascal people only fit for dogs company.
Also a company of unprofitable women gathered together. * Canaria, f. one of
the Islands of Canaria. * Canario, m. a man of these Islands. Also a Canarie
bird. Canas, f. hoarie hairs. Canasta, f. a great maund or basket, a dosser, a
pannier. Canastilla, f. a little hand-basket. * Canastillo, a little basket. *
Canastro, or Can^asto, a basket or dosser. * Canaveral, vide Can^averal, a
place where canes grow. * Canbio, vide Cambio. canca de pierna, f. a small leg,
a spindle shanke. cancadilla, f. a hopping or tripping. cancadillas armar, to
trip. cancajoso, m. croockt legged, one that has croocked legs, stump footed.
* Cancar, vide Cansar. cancarron, m. a dead horse leg, the bone of the leg. *
Cancel, or Canzel, m. a piece of wainscote to set before a chimney in summer
time, or a portall of wainscote to bar the looking into a room when the
other door stands open. * Cancellaria, f. the description of public orders
and laws in tables. * Cancellar, or Cancelar, to cancel, to abolish, to
frustrate, to disanull. * Cancellario, m. a chauncellor. Cancer, m. a sea crab,
or crab fish. Also one of the 12. signs, called by that name Cancer. also a
canker that eats, a disease in the mouth or other parts. Cancion, f. a song,
a singing, a sonnet, a canzonet, a ballet, a dittie, a lay, a rundelay, a
virelay. Cancionero, m. a song-booke, a dittie-booke. cancos, stilts, such as
they use to go with in fens, startops. Also wooden pattens or chappines. Also
crouches. cancudos, gnats with long legs. Candado, m. a hanging-locke, a
padlocke, such as men hang upon trappe-doores. Also a bolt or bar of a door.
Also a button, a buckle, a tacke or hooks and eyes of silver, etc. used of
women in times past. * Candados de los ojos, the eye lids. Candalero de
tinieblas, vide Candelero de tinieblas, a great candlestick to set on many
candles to give great light. * Candaliza, f. a great cord wherewith they pull
up or hoise up sail. Candeda, the flower of chestnuts. Candela, f. a candle, a
light. Candelero, m. a chandler. Also a candlestick. * Candelero de tinieblas,
a candle-branch that has many candlestickes in it. * Candelica, f. a little
candle. * Candia, f. Candia or Creete. * Candial, of Candiae, or red wheat.
Candial trigo, fair red wheat. * Candido, m. white, pure, sincere, clear
friendly. Candil, m. a lamp, a candle. * Candilero, a chaundeler. Also a
candlestick. Candilejos de Judios, new lamps of the Jews. Candiota, f. a
vessel of Creete, any kind of barrel or firken, a rundlet, a little tub, a
tubbe of any kind, a brewers or vintners fat, a trough or washing boule.
Also a kind of measure of liquid things. * Canecillo, vide Canezillo. Canela,
f. Cynamon. * Canelon, m. a Cynamon tree, or comfits made of sugar and Cynamon.
Canez, f. baldnes. * Canezillo, m. a bragget or corbell in building placed in a
wall to bear up the summer or principal of a house, it is a iuttie of stone
or timber on the outside of the wall to support the maine poast of the
building. * Canfora, f. Camphire. Cangilon, an earthen vessel to carry water.
* cangano, vide Zangano. * canges, vide Zanges. * cango, vide Zangano. *
Cangreja, f. a kind of crab fish called a Fryll. Cangrejo, a crab or creuish.
Also a dragging hook. Also the crampe, a foolish fellow, a noddie, a gull.
Also a disease or crampe in a horse. * Cangrejola, vide Cangreja, a little
creuish, a prawne, a shrimpe. * canjado, m. compassed about with hollow banks.
* canja, f. vide Barranco. * Caniculares, m. the dog days. Canilla de braco,
the bone of the arm, * Canilla de pierna, the shanke. * Canilla en pan^o, a
quill of yarne, wouen loose in the cloth. * Canilla de cuba, or Tinaja, the
faucet wherein they put the spigot into a barrel or other vessel. *
Canilleras, armor for the legs. Also the hole of a faucet or spigot, out of
which the drink runs. * Canincro, sabuco, or sauco, elderne. * Canino, m.
dogged, currish, of a dog, the weed called houndgrasse provoking vomit: a
worm breeding in a horse. Also a little dog. Can^a, a quill, a pen, a reed.
Can^a fistola, Cassia fistula, an apothecaries drugge. Can^ada, or Can^ado, a
cragge or cliffe, a rock, a cave: a way to drive sheep, a sheep or goats
walk. Can^aheja, or Can^ahexa, a cloven cane, or reed. Also a kind of mantle
that shepherds wear. Also a reed or sedge or bent growing by the water side.
Also a kind of shrub. Also an herb like big fennel, called Sagapene or
fennel giant. Also ferula or hemlooke. Can^aroya, pellitory of the wall.
Can^al de pescador, an angling rod, or fishing pole. Can^a de pescar, a rod
or cane to fish withal. * Can^a dulce, sweet cane. * Can^as, as juego de
can^as, a play used in Spain on horseback. * Can^avera, the true reed, or
Christ's reed. Can^averal, m. a plot of ground bearing canes or reeds.
Can^ama, subsidy men. * Can^amera, f. marsh Mallows. * Can^amazo, course
hempen canuas. Also hempen hurdes, or sackcloth. Can^amo, hemp to make a
hempen halter or a kind of linen called canuas. Can^amon, m. hemp seed.
Can^illa de braco, vide Canilla de Braco. Can^illa de pierna, vide Canilla de
pierna. Can^illa de cuba, or Tinaja, vide Canilla de cuba, or Tinaja. *
Can^illero, m. a bishops or cardinals rochet. Also a cane or bobbin to wind
silk upon. Also any kind of squib of wild fire. Also the wheel of a mill
which causes the grinding stone to turn or go: the hole where the tap or
cock is put in to draw drink. * Can^izo, a bed to lie on made of reed.
Can^o, a sink to a privy, a kennell. * Can^o de agua, a conduit or pipe of
water, a water pipe of lead under the ground, a dam of a mill, a spout. Can^on,
m. the great bones in the arms or legs, a quill, the barrel of any gunne, the
cannions of breeches. Also a cannon or great piece of ordinance. * Can^on de
batir, a cannon to batter withal, a piece of ordinance. * Can^on de cruxia,
the cannon of the Cruxia in a gallie. * Can^on pedrero, a piece of ordinance to
shoot stones with. * Can^onada, f. the shot of a Cannon or great piece of
ordinance. * Can^onazo, m. idem. * Can^onear, to batter with cannon or great
ordinance. * Can^onera, f. the place of the cannons, a spike hole, a loope hole
to shoot out at. Also the place where the cannon is placed upon a bulwark. *
Can^onero, m. a cannonier, a gunner or one that shoots in great ordinance.
Can^utillas or Can^utillos, the space between knots in a cane. * oro
Can^utillo, m. embrodering gold. Can^uto, m. a reed to make a pipe, the ioints
of a cane or reed. Cano, m. hoare headed. Canoa, f. an Indian boat hewed out
of a whole tree like a trough, a river boat made all of one piece, a canowe.
Canon, m. a rule, a canon. * Canon pedrero, vide Can^on pedrero. Canonicamente,
according to rule, or according to an ordinary course. Canonigo, m. a prebend
of a cathedral church. Canonista, m. a canonist, a student of the canon law.
Canonizacion, f. canonizing of a saint. Canonizado, m. canonized. Canonizar, to
canonize. * Canpanario, m. vide Campanario. canqueador, m. a stalking fellow.
canqueamiento, m. stalking. canquear, to go stalking, to go on stilts, to
halt or go lame. Cansado, m. weary, tired, faint, weak, feeble. Cansancio,
m. weariness, faintness, tiring. Cansar, to tire, to weary, to faint, to
ouerlabour. * Cantado, m. sung. * Cantador, m. a singer. * Cantante, a singer.
Vide Cantor. Cantar, to sing, to chaunt, to chirpe as a bird, to crow as a
cock. * Cantara or Cantharo, a tankard or iug that holds much, a pitcher. *
Cantarero, m. a tankardmaker, a iugmaker. Cantera, f. a quarrie of stones
dug for building. * Canteria, a quarrie of stones, a masons trade. Cantero,
m. he that diggeth stones. Also he that heweth stones. Also the corner of any
thing. Cantero de escoda, m. a free mason. * Cantero, a stud or a nail, or a
bosse with a great head. Also a block. * Canterudo, m. with great large
corners. * Cantheno, a certain fish. Cantidad, f. quantity. * Cantina, f. a
celler. Canto, m. a song, singing, a sonnet, the treble string of an
instrument, a hymn, a ballade. Canto, or Lado, a shore, a bank or side of any
thing as of a bedsted. Canto de ropa, a purfle, a welt, a lace, a border or
guard about a long garment. Also a hem or skirt of a garment. Canto or piedra,
a rock, a cliffe or shelfe in the sea. Also a stone. Canto, the chirping of
birds, the crowing of a cock. Also depth, thicknes. Canto accordado, a song
well sung together. Canton, m. a corner, a nooke, a canton, an angle, the
corner of a street. Cantonada dar, to give the slip at the corner of a
street, to cosen, to deceive, to beguile, to conie-catch. Also to canton.
Cantonera puta, f. a common strumpet. * Cantoneras del libro, the four corners
of a book. Cantor, m. a singer, a chanter. * Cantor tiple, a singer of the
treble or small. * Cantucar, vide Cantuzar. Cantuesse, or Cantuesso, a kind of
herb or flower called cottonweede or stechados, a certain electuarie.
Cantuzar, to deceive, to fail, to miss, to beguile, to crack his credit.
Canuto, the cane or stalk between two knots. Canzel, a portall, a porch, a
gallerie or walking place underpropped with pillars. * Canzer, vide Cancer, m.
* Capa, a cope for a priest, a Spanish cloak. * Capa de camino, a wayfaring
cloak. Capa de soldado, a soldiers cassocke. * Capa despedacada, a cloak all
in pieces. * Capa, as Gente de Capa prieta, gentlemen better then the mean,
which wear black cloakes. * gente de Capa parda, the meaner or baser sort of
people wearing russet. * Capa de agua, a fishermans cloak or gaberdine with a
hood behind in the neck. * capa, vide Zapa. Capecete, or Yelmo, m. a caske, a
headpeece, a helmet. * Capacho ave, a bird that sings in the night. Capacho
de molino, m. the hopper of the mill, the frail wherein they put olives to be
pressed. Copacho, or Esporton, a great basket, maund, or flasket. Also a trunk
or hamper. Also a fishermans great basket wherein he keeps fish alive, a
wilchin. Capacho, a frail wherein they put figs, resins, and such like. *
Capacidad, f. capacity, largeness, amplenesse, ableness to receive and
contain. * Capadella, f. penny woort. Capado, or Castrato, gelded, splaied, an
eunuch, a gelded man. * Capador, m. a gelder. Capadura, f, a gelding of any
creature. * Caparacon, a coparison for a horse. Capar, to geld, to splay any
creature, to cut off the privy members. Caparrosa, f. vitreoll or copperas. *
Caparuca, f. a capouch of a friar. * Capas, vide Capaz. * capatas, f. vide
capatos. * Capataz, m. an ouerseer or a bailie of a man's farms or lands. Also
a clown, a countrieman, a swain, a hind, a borrell, a certain instrument
used of those that melt silver or gold. * capateador, m. one that daunceth and
claps his hands on his shoes. capateria, f. the shoomakers craft or where they
sell shoes. capatero, m. a shoemaker. * capatillo, m. a childs shoo, a small
shoo, a button on a pair of foiles. capato, m. a shoo. capato sobre pilar, a
stay to lay a summer on in building. * medios capatos, a kind of pattens with
soles only, and tied over the foot with a latchet of leather. * Capaz, or
Capas, capable, ample, large, able to receive or contain. Capear, to take away
the cloak, to waiue the cloak, to shake the cloak at any thing. Capellan, m.
a chaplain, a priest. * Capellania, f. a chaplains place or office. *
Capellina, f. a little chapel. Also a lock of hair. Also a little hat. Also
a kind of armor in old time used. * Capelo, m. a bonegrace or broad brimmed
hat, or a Cardinals hat. Capelo de cardinal, a Cardinals hat. * Caperuca, vide
Caperuza, f. a cap behind the neck to pull over the head, a poor silly
cloak or such gaberdine, a cappouch. * Caperuza, vide Caperuca. * caphiro,
vide Zaphiro, m. the Sapphire stone. Capilla, f. a chapel, the chauncell of a
church, the cape of a cloak. * Capilla de ropa, a hood or cowle. Capellejo de
muger, m. a cawle or coife of a woman. Capirotada, f. a cheesecake or such
other meat made of goats milk. Capirote, m. a hawks hood, a hood such as
mourners use to wear on their heads. * Capirote de luto, m. a mourners hood. *
Capirote de ropa, a kind of miniuer hood that doctors are wont to wear in
sign of honor. Capiscol, m. a chanter in the quire. Capitan, m. a captain, a
chieftaine, a leader, a chief, a duke, a general, a ruler, a governor, a
deputy, a provost marshall, a president. * Capitan general, a captain
general. * Capitan de la manada, the chief leader of the flock. * Capitana
nao, f. the admiral ship of a fleet of ships. Capitanear, to rule and govern
as a captain. Capitania, f. a captaineship, a conduct, a charge, a leading, a
guide. Capitel, m. a little head, the head of a stillitorie, or the head of a
pillar, pinnacle, or such like. Capitel de coluna, m. the head of any pillar. *
Capitolio, m. the capitol, a place in Rome. * Capitulacion, f. a capitulation,
condition, or covenant, an ordering, digesting, or bringing in order, an
account or reckoning roll. * Capitulado, m. capitulated, digested, and brought
in order, enrolled. * Capitular, to covenant, to capitulate, to count, to
condition, to digest and bring in order, to reckon, to bring in account, to
enroll. Capitulo, m. a chapter, a chapterhouse, a meeting place for any
society to sit in disputation or in council, a convocation house. * capo, m.
a toade. Capon, m. a capon, a kind of shell fish. Also one that is gelded, a
fillip. * Caponcillo, m. a caponet. Caponera, f. a pen, cage, or coope for
capons, or other poultrie. * Caponzillo, m. a caponet. * Caporal, m. an officer
of a band of men called a corporal. Capote, m. a gabardine, a frocke, an Irish
rugge, a shepherds cloak or cassocke. * Capote de Erbaje, m. a felt, frocke or
cloak to ride withal. * Capote de marineros, a capouch, or cassocke with a
hoode to put over the head, worn by mariners and fishermen. * Capotillo. m. a
little cloak, gaberdine, frocke, or cassocke, a short dutch cloak. * Capotin,
m. idem. * Capra, as gente de capra prieta, vide Capa prieta, gentlemen. *
Capriola, f. a caper or lofty trick in dancing. * Captivar, or Cautivar, to
captiuate or take prisoner. * Captiverio, m. imprisoning, holding captive,
captivity. * Captivo, or Cativo, or Cautivo, a captive, prisoner, or bondsman.
Capulla de la seda, the ball that a silk worm makes. Capullo de miembro
viril, the foreskin or prepuce of a man's privy member. Capullo de rosa, m. the
buds of roses or flowers, the blossoms. capuzar, to diue, to ducke, to drown,
to plunge or ouerwhelme in the water, to sink in the water. Capuz, m. a hoode,
a mourning hoode. * caque, vide Zaque. caquesami, m. vide Zaquezami. *
caquicami, or caquicames, seeled work about a house. Cara, f. the face,
visage, sight, or countenance, look, or cheer of a man. Cara a cara, face to
face. * Cara an^ublada, or frente an^ublada, a grim, sour, frowning, lowering
look, or countenance. * Carabela, a small ship called a caruell. Carabo, or
Caravo, a kind of bark or boat. * Caraca, vide Carraca, a carricke. caracas,
f. crooked pins to choke one with, any thing that is full of prickles. Also
poisonous things. Caracol, m. a snaile, a cockle fish, a welke, or periwinkle,
a tortoise. Also a pair of winding stairs. Also the place where a rower sits
to row in any boat. * Caracolzillo, m. a young snaile. Also an herb called
Saint John's woort. * Caracuchillado, m. slashed, or wounded in the face. *
caragoca, f. the chief city in the kingdom of Aragon. Also a city in
Cicilia. * Caragolo, m. the black snaile with horns and without shell.
caraguelles, gascoinehose. * carahueles, great gascoine or spanish hose. *
Carajo, m. a man's yard. Carambano, m. a great flake of ice, a hoar frost,
anysicle. * Caramente, dearly, preciouslie. Caramillo, m. brabbles. * Caramio,
or Caramyo, vide Caracol, a snaile. * Carancas, vide Carlancas, nails in dogs
collers to prick those that should lay hold on them. caranda, f. a sieue to
sift with, a winnow, a searce, a vanne. carandar, to sift meal, to winnowe, to
purge, to fan, to scarce. Caranton^a, vide Caratula, f. a mask. * carapito,
a kind of sea bird. caratan, m. a canker. Also a fine bread in Madri made of
Caraton. Caracter, a figure, a character. Caratula, or Caranton^a, f. a mask,
a visard, a covert, a muffler. Caratulado, m. masked, vizarded, covered,
muffled. * Caravea, f. an herb called Caroway. Caravela, f. a kind of ship
called a caruell. Caravo, vide Carabo. Carbon, or Carvon, m. any kind of coal
* Carbonada, f. a Carbonado on the coals. * Carbonera, a coale-house, or a
place for coals. * Carbonero, or Carvonero, m. a collier. * Carbonelo, idem. *
Carbonco, or Carvonco, m. a precious stone called a carbuncle, vide also
Carboncol. Carboncol, an infirmity called a carbuncle, a blaine, a pocke, a
plague sore, a bile, a botch, a swelling in any part of the body. Also a
little coal. carca, f. a brier, a shrub, a bramble, a brake, a throne, a bush,
a blacke-berrie-bush. carca mora, a blacke-berrie. carca parilla, f. a
rough-bindweed. carca pertuna, or Perruna, f. dog-brier, Eglantine or
sweet-brier. Also the caper-bush. * Carcabon, m. a hollow way. * carcado, m.
catched or entangled among briers. carcal, a great brake or bramble bush, a
place full of briers. Carcajado de risa, extreme laughter. Carcajadas dar, to
laugh extremely, to burst forth with laughing. * Carcaje, m. a quiver for
arrows. * Carcajear, to put arrows in a quiver. * Carcan^al, m. the heel.
carca parilla, f. a root used among the Apothecaries. carcas de vergas,
hurdles of rods, grates of woood, harrowes, gridirons. Carcava de muerto, a
toombe, a pit. Carcavera puta, f. a strumpet using churchyards. Carcavo del
vientre, the panch, the bottom of the belly. Carcax, a quiver for arrows. *
Carcax de arco, or Goldre, a bowecase. carcear, to trauerse the ground. Carcel,
f. a prison. Carcelage, m. the fees of the prison. Carcellero, m. a Iailer or
keeper of a prison. * Carces, m. one of the sails of a ship. * carcillo, or
Fisereta de la vid, the tendrill or small string that windeth about the poles
or props of a vine. carcillo, m. an earing, a ring. * Carcolejo, m. the shell
or house of a snaile. Carcoma de madera, a worm that breeds in old timber. *
Carcomer, to eat or gnawe as worms do old rotten wood. * carco, a hurdle.
Carcomido, m worme-eaten. * Cardaderas, f. cards or teazels to card wool
with. Cardador, m. a carder or winder of wool. * Cardado, m. carded, picked
teazed, touzed, plucked, haled. Cardadura, f. carding, teazing, picking woull,
flax, hemp or clothes. Cardar, to teaze, to card, to pick clothes, wool,
flax, or hemp. Also to hale, to touze, to pluck, to tug, to ruffle, to pull
by the hairs, to disheuell, to tear ones hairs, to rough cloth as shearmen
do. Cardas, f. cards to card with, working cards. * Cardena cosa, f. any
thing black and blew, of a leaden and dead color. Cardenal, m. a Cardinal or
chief man. Cardenal de golpe, m. the blew or black wales of a blow or stripe.
Cardenal de ojo, the blacknes or blewnes under the eyes, by a stroke or such
like. Cardenaladgo, m. a Cardinalship. Cardencha, or Cardo penteador, a
card-teazell. Cardenillo que se haze de cobre, the rust of copper. Cardenillo,
verde rame, the rust of brass, Verdigrease or green copperas. Cardenillo, a
color somewhat black. Cardeno, m. black and blew color much like old brass
the black and blew mark of any hurt, stripe or bruise. * Cardeno lirio, a
Floure-de-lice, or Floure-de-luce. * Cardillo, m. a young thistle. * Cardinal,
vide Cardenal. Cardo, m. a thistle, a teazel, an artichoke. Also the husk of a
chest-nut. Cardo corredor, m. the weed or herb Sea-holme, Sea-holly, or
Sea-huluer. * Cardo penteador, m. Teazell. * Cardo pinto, the great whitish
thistle that is full of white spots. Cardo-huso, wild bastard Saffron, the
holy thistle called Carduus benedictus. * Cardo silvestre, wild thistle, a
thorn. * Carducar, to card wool. * Cardume, m. a shole of fish, or a
company of fish together. Cardusar, vide Carducar, to card. * Careado, m.
made or brought face to face. Also carried, fetched, brought. * Carear, to bring
face to face. Carecer, or Carescer, to lack, to want, to aile, to fail, to
miss, to err, to cease, to leave off, to be defective, to defalke, to fail,
to make less. * Carena, f. the keele or bottom of a ship. * dar Carena, f. to
renew, to rig, to trim a ship, by turning up the keele or bottom of her. *
Carera, vide Carrera. Carescer, vide Carecer. Carestia, or Careza, f. dearth,
penury, want, scarcity of things. Careza, idem. * Carga, a charge, a burden,
a weight, a freight, a load, a lading, a bundle, a sheafe, a fardle, a trusse,
either for man or beast. Carga dar al enimigo, to charge the enemy. * Carga de
len^a, a burden of wood. * Cargadamente, heavily, dully, chargeably. *
Cargadera, f. a coard in a ship called a Stay. Also a thing to be laden. *
Cargador, m. a charger, a loader, a fraighter, an imposer of burdens, taxes,
and payments upon the people. Cargado, m. charged, burdened, fraighted, loaded,
laden, taxed. * Cargago, vide Cargado. Cargar, Praes. yo Cargo, 1. Praet. yo
Cargue, to charge, to burden, to freight, to load, to lade, to impose taxes
and payments upon the people, to thrust an office of charge upon a man. *
cargatona, vide Zargatona. Cargo, a charge in office. Also a burden, a weight.
Cargo, or Carreta de len^a, a burden or load of wood. * en cargo ser, to be
beholding to one. * Cargue, vide Cargar. * Cariacuchillado, m. wounded or
slashed over the face. * Caribe, m. an Jndian, which eats man's flesh.
Caricia, f. a cherishing, a cockering, or making much of, a loving
entertainment, flattering, fawning, blandishment, enticement, allurement,
quaintnes, squemishens, dalliance, wantonness. * Caricioso, m. full of
flattering, cherishing, entertainment, cockering, blandishment. Caridad, f.
love, charity, pity, alms, agreement, compassion. Also dearth, deerenes,
scarcity, want of things. * Caril, vide Carril. Carillo, or Carrillo, a cheek
or a little face. Also a little cart or wheel barrow, but properly those
little carts or sleds that have low wooden wheels. Also the truckle, pully or
windle wherewith a thing is easily drawn up on high. Caritativo, m. charitable,
loving, pitiful, merciful, compassionate. * Carlancas, f. nails in dogs
collers. Carlina, f. a kind of thistle. Also a fullers teazell. * Carmania, f.
a province so called. Carmel, an herb whereof if scorpions eat they loose
their senses. * Carmelita, m. a friar Carmelite. * Carmen, m. a verse. Also one
of the order of Carmelites. * Carmenado, m. carded, teazed, picked, haled,
touzed, plucked, tugged, rent or pulled in pieces. Carmenador, m. a carder or
picker of wool. Carmenadura, f. picking, teazing, carding of wool. Carmenar,
to pick, to teaze, to card wool, flax, hemp or clothes, to hale, to tear,
to touze, to ruffle. Carmesi, m. crimsen, scarlet, stamell in grain. * Carmin,
a kind of red color. Carnacha, or Garnacha, f. a kind of Moorish garment.
Carnal, carnal, fleshly. Carnalidad, f. carnalitie, fleshlinesse, alliance in
blood. Carnaval, or Carnestoliendas, shroftide, shrouing time. * Carnaza, f.
devouring of flesh, great and much flesh eating. Carne, f. all manner of flesh.
* Carne humeada, f. smoked flesh, flesh dried in the smoke or chimney, such as
is our Martelmas beef. * Carne sal-presa, salted or powdered flesh when it
begins to take salt. * andar en puras Carnes, to go naked. en Carnes,
naked, stripped to the skin. Carne de membrillo, preserved quinces. Also
marmalade of quinces. * Carneceria, or Carniceria, f. the butcherie or shambles
where flesh is killed and sold, a slaughter house. Also a place of torment. *
Carne cero, or Carnicero, m. a butcher, a slaughterman, a hangman. *
Carnecilla, vide Carnezilla. Carnero, m. mutton, generally either of a ram,
weather, tup or ewe, but usually of a weather. Also a sepulcher. Also a net bag
to carry flesh in. * Carnero castrado, a weather or ewe mutton. * Carnero para
casta, or Carnero morueco, a ram for breed. * Carnero cojudo, m. a ram. *
Carnero desmochado, a ram without horns. Carnestollendas, Carnestoliendas,
vide Carnaval, shrouetide. * Carnezeria, vide Carneceria. * Carnezilla, f.
young tender flesh, small muttons. Carniceria, vide Carneceria. Carnicero, vide
Carnecero. Carnicol, m. a game with huckle bones called Cock-all. Also dice
play, the pasterne bone. Carnosidad, f. fleshinesse, carnositie. Carnoso, or
Carnudo, fleshie, brawnie, full of flesh. Carnudo, vide Carnoso. Caro, m.
dear, beloved, costly, precious, rare, grateful, acceptable, liefe, scantie,
scarcity, dearth, penury. * Carona, f. a carob tree. Also stinking carrion.
Also the complexion or constitution of a body. Carpa, f. a carpe fish. Also a
kind of worm or moth that consumes clothes. * carpada la ancora, the anchor
being waighed. * carpadura de ancora, the waighing of anchor. * carpar la
anchora, to weigh anchor. carpas, f. daggles of dirt, spots of dirt that a long
garment gathers about the skirts. Also troubles, griefs, vexations or
garboiles that a man has. Also common whoores or bawdie houses. * carpe, a
tree with a rugged black bark, the wood whereof is easy to be climed, called
of some the yoke tree. Some think it the plane tree, it is called also
horne-beame, hard beam, or yoke-elme tree. * Carpeta, f. a carpet of a table.
Carpintear, to play the carpenter. Carpinteria, f. the carpenters craft.
Carpintero, m. a carpenter. * Carpio, a carpe fish, a little town in old
Castile in Spain. * carposo, m. daggled with durte as sheep tails or long
garments dragging on the ground. Carraca, f. a great ship of Spain called a
carract. Carrancas, vide Carancas, nails in dogs collers. * Carrasca, f. a
kind of holme. Carrascal, a grove of holmes. Carrasco, a kind of holme.
Carrera, f, a carreere, a course, a race for horses to run, a place where
races are run, the tilt yard or place for tilting or tourney. Carreta, f. a
cart, a waine, a wagon. Carretada, f. a cart load, a waine load, a wagon
load. * Carreteria, f. luggage, carriage, lading. Also cartership. Carretero,
m. a carter, a wagoner, a carman, a waineman. Carreton, m. a little cart or
wagon. Also a childs standing stool to learn to go by. * Carrica, vide
Carriza. * Carrical, vide Carrizal. * Carricia, vide Caricia. * Carrico, vide
Carrizo. Carril, m. a cartwheele. Also a trace, slough, or rut that the wheel
of a cart makes in foul way. Carrillado, m. swollen checked, a man with great
cheeks. Also diverse ways made with carts. * Carrillas yerva, f. an herb.
Carrillo, vide Carillo. Also the turning iointes of the back bone or chine.
Carrillo de rostro, vide cacillo, a cheek, a iawe. Carrillo como rodoja, a
pully, or windle of a well, ship, or garret to draw up any thing on high. *
Carriza, f. sedge, or reed. Carrizal, or Can^izo, the place where sedge or
reed grows. Carrizo, m. sedge sheregrasse. Carro, m. a cart, a chariot, a
waine, a wagon, a tumbrell, a dungcart. * Carro de damas, a coach. * Carro de
flandes, a flemmish wagon. Carro con andas, a horselitter. Carroca, f. a kind
of coach. * Carrosmatos para las piecas, the block cariages whereon great
ordinance lie. Carruage, or Carruaje, m. carriage, baggage, luggage, loading. *
Carruajal, m. a proper name of a kindred or stock in Spain. * Carruaje, vide
Carruage. Carrucha, f. carroch, a coach. * carso, vide carzo, a hurdle. Carta,
f. a letter, or character, an epistle or a missiue letter, a leaf of a book,
a card, a map, a type, a playing card. Also a pasteboord, a schedule. *
Notar carras, to indite letters. Cartapacio, m. a matter penned down, a noting
book, a nothing paper, a day book, or iournall: a memorial, or book of
state stones. * Carta de espera, a writ of recovery. Carta de pago, an
acquittance. * Carta para certificar, a certificate. * Carta de marear, a sea
card. Cartabon de carpintero, m. a carpenters square, squire, or ruler. *
Cartagena, f. a city or town in India. Cartamo, m. bastard saffron, or wild
saffron. * Carta-salva-guarda, letters of safe conduct. * Cartas, as Notar
cartas, to endite. * Cartavon, vide Cartabon. * Cartecillo, vide Cartezillo.
Cartel, m. a challenge, a cartell, a defiance, a libell. Cartel de desafio, a
letter of challenge or defiance. * Cartezillo, or Cartecillo, a little paper,
schedule or letter. * Cartido, m. a little barrel or box to keep conserved
things in. Cartilla, m. an A. B. C. to teach children. * Cartucho, m. a charge
of powder to put into a piece of ordenance or lesser shot. * Cartujo, idem. *
Cartuxano, a Carthusian, one of the Carthusian order of friars. * Cartuxo, vide
Cartucho. Caruage, or Caruaje, vide Carruage. Caruaje, idem. Carvon, vide
Carbon, a coal. Carvoncol, vide Carboncol, a carbuncle. Carvonero, vide
Carbonero, m. a collier. * carzagavillo, vide Zarzagavillo. * carzahan, vide
Zarzahan. * carzir, vide Zarzir. carzo de vergas, vide carcas de vergas, a
hurdle. Casa, f. a house, a family, a name or blood, a manor or dwelling
place. * Casa de la moneda, a place or house where a minte or place of coining
is kept. * Casa de Meca, the place or temple where Mahomet was buried. *
Casaca, f. a soldiers cassocke, a frocke, a horse-mans coat. Casadera moca,
f. a maid marriageable, of years to take a husband. Casado, m. married,
espoused, wedded, a bridegroom, a married man, a husband. * Casamata, f. a
kind of fortification called in English a casamat or a slaughterhouse, and is
a place built low under the wall or bulwark, not arriving to the height of the
ditch: whereupon the great ordinance being planted, it skowreth the ditch,
annoying the enemy when he enters into the ditch to skale the wall.
Casamentero, m. a maker of marriages. Also he or she that is joined with the
bride or bridegroom to make him or her ready, an ouer-looker of a marriage
or wedding. Casamiento, m. a marriage, espousall or wedding. * Casamuro, m. a
single wall without fortification. Casar, to marry, to allie, to join house to
house, to espouse, to wed. Casar, m. a place where a house stood, a village or
country parish. * Casaria, f. housing, a country farm. Casarse, vide Casar.
Cascatruegos, a truce-breaker, treacherous, disloyal, false, untrue,
unfaithful, deceitful, crafty, false of promise, perfidous. Cascabel, or
Cascavel, m. hawks bells, a rattle or bell such as children play withal.
Cascabellillo, m. a little bell or rattle, a little hawks bell. Cascajal, m. a
gravel pit. Cascajo, gravel and stone, course sand, shingle or
peeble-stones. * Cascajoso, grauelly, full of sand, sandy. Cascar, 1. Praet.
yo Casque, to shake, to break, to crush in pieces, to fall, to let fall.
Cascara, f. a shell, a case, parings, a nutshell: the parings of fruit, a
hide, a skin, the bark of a tree, a husk, a cod. * Cascavel, vide Cascabel.
Casco, m. a caske or burganet, the sherds of an earthen pot, a tile shard.
Casco de la Cabeca, the skull. * Casco, or Capecete, a burganet, a skul, a
caske. * Casco, or Tiesto, a head, a pate, a skonce, an earthen pot, sheard or
galley cup. Also burnt tile or brick: a piece of a broken bone, a shard of a
pot or tile. * Caseria, vide Casaria, housing in the country. * Casero, as
muger Casera, a married man or woman pertaining to the house, a woman that
keeps home. Casero, m. one that keeps house much. Also a soiourner in
another man's house. * Casero a capataz, a clown, a pesant, a borrell, a
countryman, a swain, a hind, a bailiffe. Casi, as though, almost, about, as
it were, upon. Casia, f. the fruit Cassia. * Casilla, f. a little house.
Casilla pagiza, a thatched house. * Casina, f. idem. * Casique, m. a Prince
among the Indians. * Casita, f. a little house. Caso, m. chance, fortune,
luck, a case of law, fate, destiny, lot, venture, hap, account, estimation,
reckoning, a casualty, the manner how a matter is. Caso que, albeit that, if so
be that, put case, admitting that. * hazer Caso, to make account, to esteem,
to weigh, to reckon, to value, to make a matter of. * Casoleta, the touch pan
in a piece. Also a little frying pan, or little pots or pans where painters
keep their colors. Caspa, f. dandroffe or skurffe on the head or eyes.
Casposo, m. full of dandroffe. Casquete, m. a head-peece, a helmet. *
Casquillo, m. a little head-peece. * Casquillo de saeta, the head of an arrow.
Cassacion, f. cancelling, disanulling, crossing of an account or writing,
casseering. * Cassado, casseered, crossed, defaced, blotted out of a book, put
out of cheek role, cancelled, anulled, frustrated, or made void, discharged.
Cassador, a casseer, he that cancelleth, a factor, a purcer, one that keeps
merchants accounts or money. Cassar, to strike out, to cancel, to blot, to
disanull, to cross, to casseere out of a book, to put out of check role, to
discharge, to frustrate, to make void. * Cassaun, m. a dog fish. Casta, f. a
race, a lineage, a breed, issue of ones body, a progeny, a stock, an
offspring. Castamente, chastely, cleanly, honestly, shamefastly, maidenly.
Castan^a, f. a chestnut. Castan^al, m. a grove of chestnut trees. * Castan^ar,
idem. * Castan^a color, a bay chestnut color. Castan^o, m. a chestnut tree.
Castan^uelas, f. the cracking of the fingers, the snapping of the fingers. *
Castellano, m. a Castilian, a Spaniard. Also a captain of a castle, a castle
keeper, a keeper or commander over a castle or cittadell. * Castidad, f.
chastity, temperancie, continency, cleanliness of life, virginity, purity.
* Castigado, m. punished, chastised, corrected. Castigador, m. a chastiser, a
corrector. Castigar, Praes. yo Castigo, 1. Praet. yo Castigue, to correct, to
punish, to chastise, to reprove. Castigo, m. punishment, correction,
chastisement. * Castigue, vide Castigar. Castilejo, m. a rattle used by
children. * Castil de proa, the forecastell of a ship. * Castil de popa, the
poope, or hinder deck of a ship. * Castillas, little castles, or the picture
of castles in Spanish money. * Castillete, m. a little castle. Castillo, m. a
castle, a fortress, a rock, a blockhouse, a fort, a strong hold, a
cittadell. Castiza, f. of a good race, having many children, a stock. Casto,
chaste, honest, temperate, continent. Castor, m. a brocke, a badger, a beuer, a
gray. Castor and Pollux, vide Pollux. Castradera, f. a cutting or gelding
knife. Castrado, m. a gelded man, an eunuch. Castradura, f. gelding, cutting
off the priuities, spaying, libbing of cattle. Castrar, to geld, to spay, to
lib. * Castrato, geided, spaied, libbed. Castrazon, m. time to geld, time of
the year to make honey. * Castrenses bienes, goods gotten in the war. *
Castro, m. a hold, a fort, a sconce. * Casual, casual, that which happens by
chance. Casulla, f. a cope for a priest. * Cata, or Mira, behold, see, look,
lo here, at hand, here, take heed. * Cata le aqui, behold him here, see, he is
here, here he is. * Catadura fea, f. of an ill semblance, of an ill look, ill
favored, a bad countenance. * Catastates, m. men armed at al points, their
face and all in the field or camp. * Catar, to behold, to look, to see, to
respect. Catarran^a aue, a sheldrake. Catarran^a, is also taken for the herb
Smallage. Catarrata, vide Sarazinesca. Catarrata de ojos, f. the cataract in
the eye. Catarro, m. a catarrhe, a rheum. Catasol, a daisie flower. *
Catelina, the name of a citizen of Rome. Also an ordinary name in Spain, in
English Catherine. * Catedra, any kind of chair. * Catedratico, vide
Cathedratico. * Caterva, f. a company, a flock, a crew, a rout, a shole, a
troop, a herd, a company called by the Greeks Phalanx, by the Romans
Legion, by the SwitZers and Italians Batallon, by the Spaniards Esquadron,
containing between 6000. and 8000. soldiors in squadron. * Cathalago, m. a
catalogue, a roll. * Cathedratico, a doctor of the chair. Catedratico,
Catredatico, a public reader in the university. * Catholico, vide Catolico. *
catico, a shiue of bread. * Cation, or Caution, f. a caution, a surety, a
pledge, a pawn, a bail, an assurance, a shift or starting hole, an
obligation. * Catiquero, a clarke of the kitchen, a cater. Cativar, vide
Captivar. Cativerio, m. captivity, bondage. Catividad, f. idem. Cativo, m. a
captive, a wretch, a bondsman, a prisoner. Catolico, or Catholico, catholic,
universal. Catorze, fourteen. Catorze vezes, fourteen time. Catorzeno, m.
the fourteenth. Catreda, vide Catedra, a chair. Catredal, cathedral.
Catredatico, or Catedratico, or Cathedratico, a graduate, a reader in schools
in a chair. * Catapulta, a kind of instrument used in old time in war, a
warlike engine to shoot darts, or long quarrels out at. Also a sling. Cava,
the ditch or trench of a forte, a pit, a vault or place under the ground, a
lurking or starting hole. Cavadiza cosa, f. a hollow place. Cavado, m. dug,
delued, mined, trenched, undermined. Cavador, m. a digger, ditcher, deluer,
pitmaker, a miner, a pyoner. Cavadura, f. a digging, a pit, a grave, a making
hollow, a miner. * Caval, vide Cavallo, a horse. * Cavalcar, vide Cavalgar, to
ride. * Cavalgada, f. a troop of horsemen. Also a riding. Also a company of
horse, the taking of a prize or booty. * Cavalgador, m. a rider, a horseman.
Cavalgadura, f. a riding. Also a hackney. Cavalgar, Praes. yo Cavalgo, 1.
Praet. yo Cavalgue, to ride, to stride, to straddle. * Cavalgue, vide Cavalgar.
* Cavalla, f. a mackrell fish. Cavallar, pertaining to a horse. * Cavallares, a
boorde a ship. Cavallejo, m. a nagge, a poor silly lean horse. Cavalleria, f.
horsemen in war, cauallerie, knighthood, chivalry, horsemanship, gentilitie.
Cavalleriza, or Cavallerica, f. the horsemans ward, a princes quierie or
stable, where his horses of service are kept and ridden, a stable. Cavallerizo,
or Cavalcaro, m. a rider of horses, horsemanship, a horseman, a horsebreaker,
master of the horse. Cavallero, m. a knight, or gentleman serving on
horseback. Cavallero de espuelas doradas, a knight of the order. * Cavallero,
m. a certain fortification being a mount or platform of earth built or raised
on high either within or without the wall to plant great ordinance upon.
Cavallete de tejada, the ridge of a house. Cavallillo, m. the ridge between
furrows. Cavallillo enter era y era, the bank between the quarters in a
garden. Cavallo, m. a horse in general, a knight in chesse play. * Cavallo
arocinado, a jade, or poor bare horse. * Cavallo corredor, a steed or courser
of Naples, a post horse. * Cavallo garan^on, a stallion. * Cavallo que derriba,
a horse throwing his rider. Cavallo emparamentado, a horse ready sadled, with
trappings and coparison. Cavallo castrado, a gelding. * Cavallo que sajude o da
del lomo, a trotting horse. * Cavallo que tiene la bocca porfiada, a hedstrong
horse. * Cavallo Remendado, a fleabitten horse. Cavallo tropecador, a stumbling
horse. * Cavallo acezoso, a short winded horse. Cavallo de brida, a horse to
run at tilt or tourney. * Cavallo piece, vide Cavalla. * Cavan^a, f. a cabin.
Also a warehouse, a storehouse, a place covered over where they build or
keep little boats or barges in, a shed or shelter. Also a hole or den under
the ground. * Cavan^uela, a little cotage, a little cabin, a little cave, hole
or den. Cavar, to dig, to delue, to make hollow, to mine, to undermine, to
trench. Cavazon, m. digging, ditching, mining, trenching. Cavidal, vide Caudal,
m. * Cavila, f. sea Syngreene or Aloes. Caucaso, m. a hill or a mountain so
called among the north Indians. Caucion, f. a caution, a watchworde to make one
take heed. Caudal, m. a man's stock or principal, the maine, a principal
matter. * Caudaloso, or Caudalozo, full of stock, the very maine or
principal. * Caudalozo rio, a maine principal river. Caudillo, m. a captain,
a guide, a leader. * Cave, vide Cabe. * Caveca, vide Cabeca. * Cavecada, vide
Cabecada. * Cavecon, vide Cabecon. * Cavecudo, vide Cabecudo. * Cavezuelo, vide
Cabecuelo. * Cavellado, vide Cabellado. Cavellos, vide Cabellos. * Cavelludo,
vide Cabelludo. * Caver, vide Caber. Caverna, f. a cave, a pit, a den, a
cauerne, a grot, a hole. Cavernoso, m. full of caves, dens, pits, holes,
hollow. * Cavestrar, vide Cabestrar. * Cavezudo, vide Cabezudo. * Cavida, vide
Cabida. * Cavidad, f. hollownes. * Cavido, vide Cabido. * cavila, f. Aloe.
Cavilacion. f. cauilling, wrangling, dodging, contention. * Cavilla de braco,
the smaller bone in the arm. Cavilar, or Cavillar, to cavil, to wrangle, to
fall out, to use deceit, to contend, to quarrel, to take exception at, to
iangle. * Cavildadas, vide Cabildadas. * Cavildo, vide Cabildo. Cavilosamente,
dodgingly, contentiously, deceitfully, fraudulently. Caviloso, m. full of
cauils, cauilous, dodging, contentious, wrangling, deceitful, troublesome. *
Caulinho marino, a thing in the sea living in an ugly lump without any
proportion of a fish. * Cavo, m. a head, an end. * Cavo, or Cabo de esquadra,
m. a corporal. * Causa, f. a cause, a matter, a means, an occasion, a
question. * Causado, m, caused, occasioned, brought to pass, wrought,
effected. Causar, to occasion, to mean, to bring to pass, to give cause, to
excuse. Causon, a burning fever. Cautela, f. a cautele, a taking heed, a
provision, a slight, a subtlety. Cautelosamente, craftily, subtly, heedily,
prouidently, wittily. Cauteloso, m. crafty, deceitful, witty, subtle,
cautelous. Cauterio, m. a searing iron, an iron which surgeons use to cauterize
or fear withal. Cauterizado, m. seared or marked with a hot iron, or
cauterized. * Cauterizar, to cauterize, to sear, to burn with a hot iron. *
Caution, f. a caution, a watchword to take heed. * Cautioso, that is bound for
assurance. * Cautiverio, or Catividad, captivity, bondage. * Cautivo, or
Captivo, captive, bond, imprisoned, wretched. * Cauto, m. wary, wise, witty,
circumspect. Caxa, f. a chest, a deske, a cofer, a coffin, a shrine, a little
cupboord, a trunk, a hutch, a pennar, a sheath, a binne, a chase at tennise, a
beehiue, the stock of a gunne, a merchants caske. Also a drum. Caxa de
escrivinias, a case of pens or a pennar. Caxa de libros, a deske. * Caxabel,
vide Cascabel, hawks bells, morris bells. Caxcabel, vide Cascabel. Caxcar, vide
Cascar. Caxco, vide Casco, the skull, the sheards of an earthen pot, a skull or
headpeece for the head. Caxero, m. a ioiner. Also a peddler, a skreene worker, a
chest maker. * Caxita, f. a little cofer, a cabinet or little box. * Caxilla,
f. idem. * Caxo, vide Caxco, m. * Caxon, a great chest, or standerd with
drawing chestes, or boxes in it. Caxon de arca, the till of a chest. * Caxuela,
f. a little chest. * Caxquete, m. a helmet. * Caxquillo, an arrowe head, a
little caske. Cayada, or Cayado, a shepherds staff. cayada cruxia, vide cayda,
Cruxia. Cayda, f. a fall. cayda, or Cruxia, a kind of crane. * Caydo, m.
fallen. * Cayga, Caygo, vide Caer. Cayman, m. crocodill. Caymiento, m. a
falling. * Caymito, m. an herb grown in the Indians. * Cayolaque, a kind of
perfume. * Caza, vide Caca, f. Cazcarias, f. tanglings about chickens feet,
dagglings about sheeps tails and feet. * Cazique, an Indian prince. * Cazo,
vide caco. * Cazoleta, vide Cacoleta. * Cazolilla, vide Cacolilla. * Cazon,
vide Cacon. * Cazorro, vide Cacorro. *Cazuela, vide Cacuela.
C E
* Ce, as Ce Celestina, O Celestine. * Ce, Ce, Ce, o, o, o, hola, hola, hola, a
soft calling unto one that the rest about them may not hear. Ceatica, f. the
Sciatica. * Ceber, vide Cebar. * Cebil, vide Cevil, vile, base, of no rekoning.
* Cebo, or Cevo, m. meat, fat, bait, tallowe. * Cebon, m. fat, grown fat
as a hog does. Cebolla, or Cevolla, f. an onyon, a chiboll. Cebolla
albarrana, squill or sea onyon, a kind of herb with a root like an onyon
growing both on the sea and on the land. Cebollino, m. onyon seed. * Cebra,
vide Zebra. * Cebrata, vide Zebrata. Cebretana, vide Zebretana. Cecear, to
lispe, to stutter, to stammer. Ceceoso, lisping, stutting. * Cecerro, m. vide
Cencetro, a cowbell. Cecina, f. powdered flesh. * Cecinado, salted, powdered,
laid in brine. Cecinar, to salt, to powder, to lay in brine, to pickle.
Cedacillo, m. a little sieue to sift. Cedaco, a boulter, a sieue to sift meal,
a searcer, a strainer. * Cedazillo, vide Cedacillo. * Cedazo, vide Cedaco. *
Cedibones, as Hazer Cedibones, to deny all that he has spoken, to eat his
word. Cedicio, weak, filthy. Cedo, hastily, quickly, speedily, readily.
Cedro, m. a cedar tree. Cedula, f. schedule, a scrol, a bill, a note a ticket,
an obligation or handwriting, a docket, a writ or warrant. * Cedula de
alquiler, a bill upon a house showing that the same is to be let. Cedulones, m.
bills of account, or bills on poastes or walls. * Cefal^ca, f. a vein so
called coming from the head down into the arm. * Cefiro, vide Zefiro, the
west wind. * Cegado, blinded. Cegagez, f. purblindnes, dimnes of sight,
bleare-eiednes. Cegagear, to be purblinde, or bleare-eied. Cegajoso, m.
purblinde, bleare-eied, sand-blinde, dim sighted. Cegar, yo ciego, to make
blind, to inveagle, to hoodwinke. Also to fill up a ditch. Ceguda, vide
Ceguta, f. Hemlocke. Ceguedad, f. blindness. * Ceguejar, to dim the eyes, to
make blind. Ceguera, f. dimmes of sight. Ceguta, f. Hemlockes. Ceja, f. the
eie-browes, the space between the eie-browes, the eie-lids. Cejunto, he that
has bushie eie-browes, beetle browed, or the hair of the eie-browes meeting.
* Cejunzo, vide Cejunto. Celada, f. a secret hidden thing. Also a head-peece.
Also a lying in wait, an ambush, a skull, a murrion, a helmet. Celado, m.
hidden. Also a stratageme, a wile, an ambush, lurking or deceit. * Celador, m.
a hider, a concealer, a keeper of secrets. * Celaje, m. a covering or darkning
the sun with clouds. * Celamiento, m. a hiding, concealing, or keeping close.
Celar, to hide, to conceal, to cover, to keep close, to be jealous. Celda, f.
a cell, a cabin in a ship. Celebracion, f. a celebrating, a solemnity. *
Celebrado, m. celebrated, solemnized, renowned, frequented. Celebrar, to
celebrat, to make famous, to solemnize, to renown, to frequent. * Celebre,
famous, renowned. Celebre fiesta, a famous, renowned, or much frequented feast.
Celebro, m. the brain. Celedonia, f. the herb Celandine, Swallowwoort, or
Tetterwort, or silken-Sisley. * Celedrio, a proper name of a man. * Celema, f.
a fish called a Shad or sea-Rauen. Celemin, m. a kind of measure much about a
pecke. * Celeminero, m. one that measures or sells by that measure. *
Celeno, one of the harpies. * Celer, vide Ligeto, swift, speedy, nimble,
quick. Celestial, heavenly, or of heaven, as any part of the heavens.
Celestialmente, heavenly, or after a heavenly manner. * Celestre, a sky color
in cloth. Celicio, m. a shirt of hair. * Celiduenha, vide Celidonia. * celo,
m. jealousy, suspicion, suspect, mistrust. celos, vide Celo. Celoso, m.
jealous, suspicious, mistrustfull. * Celsitud, f. highness, nobility,
excellency. * Celugia, f. jealousy. Also a lattice window. Cementador, m. he
that lays a foundation. Cementar, yo Cemiento, to lay a foundation, to join
together with lime, to cement or faster together. Cementerio, a churchyard, a
burying place. * Cemijar, vide Semijar, to be like, to make like. Cena, f. a
supper. * Cenadal, or Cenedal, a durtie or mirie place. Cenadero, m. a parlor
or a supping place. Cenador, m. a dining chamber, or a supping chamber. *
Cenagal, moorish wet ground, mud, dirt, mire, earth, or claie, a puddle. *
Cenagoso, m. mirie, durtie, muddie, clayie ground. Cenar, to sup. Cencen^o,
single, unleavened, bare, lean, gant, lanke, mere, thin, fine, withered. *
Cencerrar, to ring with a low-bell or cow-bell. Cencerro, m. a bell for a cow.
Cendal, a fine rag of linen, a kind of fine thin silken stuff called Taffeta,
Sarcenet, or Sendall. Cendal, m. a fine rag of linen, a kind of fine thin
silken stuff called taffata, sarcenet, or sendall. * Cendrada plata, silver
plate that is embossed, silver that is well fined and tried. * Cendradissimo,
m. most fine, most purified. Cendrado, m. imbossed work. Also well tried and
fined, cleansed from dross. Cendrar, to imbosse, to try, to fine well, to
cleanse from dross. Cenedal, m. a mirie plot. * Cenefa, f. the vallance of a
bed. * Cenjar, vide Cenizar. * Cenijar, vide Cenizar. Ceniza, f. ashes,
sinders. * miercoles de Ceniza, ashwednesday. * Cenizar, to cover with ashes or
sinders. Also to sprinkle or strowe with ashes. Ceniziento, m. full of ashes. *
Cenizoso, m. idem. Cen^idero, m. a girdle of a ribband or lace. * Cen^ido, m.
girded. Cen^ido animal, m. a bonelesse creature, as a fly, a be, diverse
worms, etc. called in Latin Insectum. Cen^idor, m. one that girdeth.
Cen^idura, f. girding. Cen^ir, yo Cino, to girde, to put on a girdle. * Cen^o,
m. a lowering look, a frowning look, a bending the brows. * Cen^udo, m. one
that looks lowringly, frowningly or bending the brows, angrily. * Ceno, vide
Cen^o. Cenogiles, m. garters of cruel. * Censillo, vide Senzillo. Censo, m.
tax, subsidy, sessing or rating of men's goods, rent. Censor, m. a taxer, a
sesser of subsidies, a valuer of lands or goods. Also a reformer of manners, a
punisher of misdemeanor. Censura, f. taxing, sessing of subsidies, rating of
rents. Centaurea, f. the herb called Centaurie. Centauro, m. a centaure, a
monster that poets hold to have been half a man a half a horse. Centella, f.
a sparkle of fire. * Centella, f. an herb called woolfebane. Also a shell
fish, the shell like a star shining. * Centellear, to sparkle. * Centelles,
vide Centella. * Centenal, a place where rye grows, a field or plot of rye. *
Centenar, the number of a hundred. * Centenario, m. of or pertaining to a
hundred, a hundred in number. Centeno, m. rye. * Centiloquio, m. the hundredth
dialogue or the hundredth speech or talk. Centinela, f. a sentinel, one that
watches in the night or wardeth in the day, a watchman. * Centola, vide
Cangreja, f. a crabfish. Centolla, a kind of shell fish thought to be a
tortoise. * Centoria, f. the herb Centaurie. Centro, m. the center, the point
in the midst of any round thing. Centuria, f. a company of soldiers being of
a hundred men. Centurion, m. a captain that has charge over a hundred
soldiers. Centurionadgo, m. a captainship over a hundred. * Cenzillo, single,
clear, void of encombrance, simple, small, thin. Cepa, f. a vine, the
branch of a vine, the plants of a vine, a hedge, a snare, a pitfall. Cepa
cavallo, a ground thistle, common thistle. * Ceperar, vide aPartar, to separate
or part one from another. * Cephiro, vide Zephiro, m. the west wind. *
Cepilla, f. a little vine or little vine branch. Also a little hedge, snare or
pitfall. Also vide Cepillo. Cepilladuras, f. shauings, chips, tinder. Cepillar,
to plain with a plainer, to make smooth, to make plain. Cepillo, m. a
plainer, or tool wherewith ioyners do make smooth and plain. Cepo, m stocks
to put in the feet of malefactors. Also a poor man's box in the church to put
money in. * Ceppo, idem. Cera, f. wax. Cerapez, f. a kind of ointment made of
wax and pitch with gum and rosin * Cera de minera, Mummy. * Cerbal, vide
Cerval. * Cerbatillo, vide Cervatillo. * Cerbeca, or Cerbeza, f. beer or ale.
* Cerbelo, or Cervelo, vide Celebro. the brain. * Cerbeza, or Cerbeca, beer
or ale. * Cerbigudo, vide Cervigudo. Cerbiguillo, m. the nape of the neck, the
poll of the neck. * Cerbiz, or Cerviz, f. Cerca, about, near at, night to,
close by, at hand, toward, upon. Cerca, or Cercado, a compassing, a closing in
a wall, a trench, a rampire, a siege, armed with a brigantine, habergion, or
coat of defense, or armor of proof. Cerca de lo vltimo, the last saving one.
Cercado, m. enclosed, hedged in, compassed about, besiedged. * Cercador, m. one
that incloseth or compasses about, hedgeth, or fenceth, or besieges. *
Cercania, f. nearest at hand, bordering near by. * Cercanidad, f. neerenesse
of neighborhood, bordering hard by. Cercano, m. a near neighbor, a borderer,
on that dwells hard by. Cercar, Praes. yo Cerco, 1. Praet. yo Cerque, to
compassse about, to enclose, to wall about, to hedge or fence in, to entrench,
to cast a rampire or bulwark for defense, to besiege, to arm with a
brigantine, maile coat, or armor of proof. * Cercar de seto, to hedge about,
to fence. * Cercar de gente, to beset with people, to besiege. * Cercena, f. a
cutting round, a cutting off, a cutting a sunder. * Cercenado, m. cut off, cut
a sunder, cut round, circumcised. Cercenar, to cut round, to circumcise, to cut
off, to cut a sunder, to clip or cut about. Cerceta aue, f. a sea bird like a
coote: some call it a coote, other say it is a moorehen, other a teale, other
a seacob, or seamew. * Cercillo, m. an eare-ring. Cerco, m. a hoope such as
coopers use, a roundill, a winding or turning about, a circle, a siege laid
about a town or fort, a company of men. Cerco de gente, m. a siege laid
about a town or fort, a company of men. * Cercuita, vide Cercuito. * Cercuito,
or Cerquito, a circuit, a round compass. * Cerda, f. a bristle. Cerdas de
bestia, the mane of a horse, the bristles of a boar, or such like hairs of
beasts. * Cerden^a, f. a garment of bears skins and woolues skins, used in
Sardinia. Also the Island of Sardinia. * Cerdoso, m. full of bristles. * Cereca,
vide Cereza. Ceremonia, f. a ceremony, a curious custom observed in matters
of religion, or in pompous shows. * Ceremonioso, m. given to observe
ceremonies, superstitious. * Cerero, m. a wax chandler. * Ceres, m. a daughter
of Saturn, reported to be the goddess of corn, and harvest, because she was
thought to be the first that invented the use of sowing and reaping of corn.
Cereza, f. a cherrie. Cereza tiesta, f. a Spanish cherrie, a hard stoned
cherrie that has the meat cleaving to the stone. Cerezo, m. a cherrie tree. *
Cercil, a beast untamed. Cerillas, or mudas, lip salve. * Cerimonioso, vide
Ceremonioso, m. ceremonious. Cernada, f. lie ashes, bucke ashes. Cernejas, f.
the mane hairs of a horse, or such like beast. Also the foot locks.
Cernicalo, m. a bird or hawk called a kestrell or a wind-whiffer. * Cernido,
m. sifted, rauelled, boulted. Cernidura, f. sifting of meal. Cerniduras, f,
the brandust, or refuse of meal. Cernir, yo Cierno, to sift meal. * Ceron,
vide Seron, or a proper name. Cerote, m. a searcloth. * Cerque, vide Cercar. *
Cerquita, vide Cercuita. * Cerquito, vide Cercuito. m. a circuit, a compassing
about. * Cerrado, m. locked, stopped up or made fast, bolted, barred. Cerrado
el cielo, cloudie, ouercast, gloomie weather. Cerrado camino, a way stopped up
so as none may pass, a rough way closed. Cerrados an^os, m. old age, unlusty
years when men can no longer stir well. Cerradura, f. a bolt of a lock, the
bolt of a door, a bar, a hedge, stoppage, a cloister, a limiting within a
compass. Cerraja, a lock. Also the herb Sowthistle that gives white milk.
Cerragero, or Cerrajero, m. a lockesmith. Cerrar, yo Cierro, to lock, to
bar, to bolt, to hedge, to stop, to put into a cloister, to limit or appoint
his compass, to button in, to close or come in together. * Cerrar uno con
otro, one to assail or set upon the other in fight, to close in one with
another. * Cerrar con las picas, to come in and close with the enemy by
setting on them with their pikes, or at push of pike. * Cerrazon, m. close,
gloomie or ouercast weather. * Cerril, untamed, unbroken or vnbackt as horse or
mule. Cerrion, m. fresh cheese, a great flake of ise, an isicle on the eaues of
a house. Cerro, m. a little hill, a hillocke, a task of wool or flax, a
heap, a clod. Cerro enter las espaldas, the space between the shoulder
blades. * yr al agua con cavallos en Cerro, to go to the water with horses
riding on the bare ridge or back without a saddle. Cerrojo, m. a bolt of iron
or bar for a door. Certero, m. a sure shooter, a good mark-man. * Certeza,
f. certainty or certainnesse, assurance, surety. Certidumbre, f. surety,
assurance, faithfulness. * Certificado, m. certified, given to understand.
Certificar, Praes. yo Certifico, 1. Praet. yo Certifique, to certify, to give
to understand. * Certinidad, f. certainty. * Cerval, any thing like a heart or
bucke, of or pertaining to a heart or bucke. * Cervatica, f. a kind of herb.
Cervatillo, m. a fawn of a red dear, a young hind. * Cervelo, or Cerbelo,
vide Celebro, the brain. * Cerveca, f. beer or ale. Cerveza, vide Cerveca. *
Cerugia, f. surgerie. * Cerugiano, m. a surgeon or surgeon. Cerujano, vide
Cirujano, a surgeon. Cervigudo, m. great necked, thick necked, thickness of
neck. * Cerviguillo, m. the nape of the neck, the pole of the neck. Cerviz,
f. the hinder part of the neck, the pole or nape of the neck. * Ceruleo
color, bluish, seawater green or sky color. Cervuno, m. pertaining to a
heart or a stagge. * Cerzenar, vide Cercenar. * Cerzeta, vide Cerceta. *
Cerzillo, vide Cercillo. Cesarea, as Majestad Cesarea, imperial, belonging to
an emperor. Cesped, f. a turfe. Cessacion, f, ceasing, leaving off, giving
over, letting alone. Cessar, yo Ciesso, to cease, to give over, to let alone.
Cesta, f. a basket, a chest, a maund, a frail, a pannier. Cestero, m. a chest
maker, a basket maker, a maker of panniers. Also he that carries a basket.
Cestilla, f. a cofer, a little basket, a little pannier, a hand basket. *
Cestillo, m. idem. Cesto, a wicker basket. coger agua en Cesto, to take up
water in a wicker basket, to labor in vain. * Ceston, m. a gabion, a great
basket. Cetreria, f. hawking, faulconrie, skill to keep and use a hawke. *
Cetrero, m. a faulkoner. Cetrino, m. a pale yealow color. Cetro, m. a scepter,
a kings scepter or royal mace. Also kingdom, dominion. Cevada, f. barley. *
Cevada de Cavallos, prouender for horses. Cevadera, f. a wallet or bag to carry
barley in for horses to eat. Also the boltspreet sail in a ship. * Cevadero,
m. a bait to catch with. Also vide Cevadera. Cevadizo, m. made of barley, or
of barley. Also a thing baited as a hook. Cevado, m. fatted, fed, crammed,
baited with some pleasing bait, fed with fair words. Cevar, yo Cievo, to
feed, to fatten, to cram, to bait, to allure with fair words, to bring into
a fools paradise. * Cevellinas, vide Martas, marternes fur. Cevil, common,
base, vile, shameful. Cevo, or Cebo, meat to feed with, bait, fat. Cevon,
fat, grown fat. * andar tras el Cevo, to hunt after good cheer. * Cevolla, f.
an onion. * Cevollino, a little onion, a chibboll. Cexar, vide Cessar, to
cease, desist, or give over.
C H
* Chabro, vide Cangreja, or Cangrejo, a crab-fish, a punger. Chaca, f. a chase
at tenis play. Chacota, f. a merry meeting of friends, a rejoicing of
acquaintance together. Chafaldete, m. a coard, or roape in a ship, called the
maine-tacke. Chafallos, m. pieces or patches, old ragged clothes. * Chalar,
vide Charlar. * Chalupa, f. a flat bottomed boat. * Chamarro, a cassocke or
ierkin furred within after the manner of the low country. Chambrana de
puerta, the garnishing of gates or doors. Ornaments fastened on the iaumes or
doore-postes. * Chamedreos, an herb called Germander. Chamelote, m. chamlet. *
Chamepiteos, Ground Pine, an herb so called. Chamuscar, Praes. yo Chamusco, 1.
Praet. yo Chamusque, to sindge with fire. * Chamusco, m. a sindging with fire.
* Chamusque, vide Chamuscar. Chamusquina, f. sindging with fire. Chancelar, to
cancel, to deface, to make void, and of none effect, to blot out, to
determine how it shall be. Chanciller, m. a chanceller, a chief notarie, or
controller of notaries and their writings. Chancilleria, f. the chancerie, a
court so called. Also the office of a chancellor. * Chanconetta, f. a witty
saying, an apophthegme, a witty conceited speech. * Chanqueta, a pantofle. *
Chantar, vide Cantar, to sing a part. Chantre de yglesia, m. the chanter in a
church, or he that begins the tune. Chant^ia, f. the chantership. Chapa, f.
a rattle, clapper, or such trifle for children to play with. A thin plate of
some metal to mend a kettle or such like. Chapado, m. plated, spangled. *
Chapadar, m. one that plateth over, or spangleth. Chapar, to plate over, to set
with spangles Chapas, f. a cimball, a clapper, rattles, an instrument made with
two plates. Also thin plates, spangles. Chapear, to make a ringing noise, to
make a rattling. * Chapeletes, m. little hats. * Chaperia, f. the working of
plates or spangles, rattles, Cymbals, or such like. Chapido, m. the noise of
plates, tingling, rattling. Chapin de muger, a woman's shoes, such as they use
in Spain, mules, or high cork shoes. * Chapinazo, a blow or beating with
slippers. Chapineria, f. the place where such shoes, pantofles, and slippers
are sold, such a shoomakers shop. Chapinero, m. a maker of such shoes,
slippers, and pantofles. * Chapino alcorque, m. a cork slipper, or pantofle.
Chapitel, m. a pinnacle. Charco, m. a poole, a ponde, or ditch of water. *
Charidad, charity or dearth. * el pan^o de la Charidad, a beare-cloth, a cloth
that they cast over the dead corpse in carrieng him to be buried. * Charo vide
Caro, dear. * Charlar, to prate, prattle or talk overmuch, to babble. *
Charlatan, m. a pratler, a talkatiue fellow. Charlatar, to babble, to prattle,
to tattle. * Charua, f. a hoye or bark for carriage, a lighter. * Chata, f. a
thing flat and broad that should be high, as a flat nose. * Chaton, a studde
of a girdle or such like. * Cheminea, f. a chimney. * Cherriador, m. one that
chirpeth like birds, or creaketh as the hinges of a door. * Cherriadores
quicios de las puertas, the creaking of the hinges of a door. * Cherriar, to
chirpe as birds do, to creake or squeake as the hinges of a door. Cherubin, m.
a cherubin. * Chia, f. a scrap, shred, or welt of cloth hanging down, which
in old time they used on their garments. * Chiarro, a sheet of glass. *
Chibato, m. a he goat. Chibital, a heard or flock of goats, a place where
they put goats. Chibo, or Cabron, a goat. * Chibo, or Cabrito, a kid. * Chibo
castrato, m. a gelded goat. Chibo mayor, a he goat. Chicharro, vide Cigarra,
a grasshopper, a cricket. Chico, m. little, small. Chicon, m. a blister, a push,
a wheale. Chicorea, f. an herb called Succorie. Chiflar, to whistle. Chifle,
or Chiflo, m. a whistle, a piping. * Chiflete, m. a whistling as the
boateswaine aboard the ship does make with his whistle in waying anchor. *
Chilera, f. a place in a ship where they bestow their bullets. * Chilidonia, f.
an herb called Celandine. Chillar, or Rechinar, to make a shrill cry, to
creake as the hinges of a door, as the filing of a saw, to peep as a mouse.
* Chillida, f. the chirping of birds, the peeping of a mouse or such like.
Chillido, m. a shrill cry, creaking, or noise. * Chillindron, as Juego de
Chillindron, a kind of play at cards used in Spain. * Chillon, m. any thing
that makes a shrill or schriking noise. * pan^o Chillon, a kind of cloth.
Chimenea, f. a chimney. * Chimera, f. a high mountain in Lycia, casting out
fire at the top, on the highest place thereof dwell lions, on the middle wild
goats, below serpents, whereupon it is said to be a monster with a head like
a lion, a belly like a goat, and tail of a serpent. Also a fancy or
imagination. * Chimeras, or Cismeras, y necias lenguas, tale-bearing, and
foolish toongs. Chiminea, f. a chimney. China, f. a little stone, a counter,
sometimes a doubt. Also the kingdom of China. Chinche, m. a worm that in hot
countries lies about beds, and biteth venemously. * Chinchorro, m. a kind of
boat. Also a net to catch fish with. Chinela, Chinelas, f. slippers for to
wear in the house. * Chiquillo, m. pretty, little and small. * Chiquito, idem.
* Chiribias, f. parsneps, carrots, birds called wagtailes. * Chirinas, f.
skirret roots. * Chirlas burlas, imagined toies. Chirriar, to sing as a
swallow, to creake as the hinges of a door. * Chirriadoras aves, birds that
sing like swallows. * Chirribi, or Chirrivi, vide Chiribias. * Chirridos, m.
the chirping of birds, the noise of hinges of a door. * Chirrimia, f. an
instrument of music. Chirrimias, f. a kind of musical instrument. *
Chirrivi, or Chirribi, vide Chiribias. Chirrivia, f. a parsnep, a carrot, a
wag-taile. * Chirlo, m. a fillip or flicke on the cheek. Chisma, f. a schism,
a factious renting or breaking off from the true religion. Chisme, vide
Chinche, a stinking fly called a wall-louse. Chismeria, f. factiousnesse,
schism, or trifling. Chismero, m. a factious or schismatic fellow. Also a
pratler of trifles. * Chispa, f. the dross that flies from the iron when it
is beaten hot. Chistes, iestes, toies to laugh at, sportes, daliances,
pastimes, scoffings. Chivato, a he goat. * Chivital, a heard or flock of
goats. * Chivo, a he goat. Choca, f. a cottage, a cabin, a shepherds
cottage, a shed, a simple poor habitation. Sometimes a farm house. Chocallos,
m. little bells, small jewels, eare-rings. * Chocar, Praes. yo Chueco, 1. Praet.
yo Choque, to but or run at as rams do, or as men run at tilt. * al Chocar, at
butting, at the shocke. Chocarrear, to jest, to gibe, to tell fond tales, to
use fond gestures for to delight with, to scoff, to cogge, to counterfeit
other men's doings. * Chocarrerias, f. fond jests, gibings, foolish tales to
make people laugh, counterfeiting of other men's gestures, scoffings, making of
mowes, daunsing the anticke, or any ridiculous toies to move laughter or fond
delight. Chocarrero, m. a iester, a scoffing fellow, one that plaieth the fool
for advantage, a counterfeiter of other men's gestures, one that by making mowes
and using fond toys seeks to make men laugh. * Chocarrero de passa, passa,
m. a iuglar. * Chocco, m. a cuttle fish. * Chocho, vide Altramuzes. *
Chopinazo, m. vide Chapinazo. * Choque, vide Chocar. * Choque, m. a butting
together as rams, a shock or meeting together as lanciers. Choquecuela, f. the
bone in the knee. * Choquezuela, f. idem. * Chorlito, m. a kind of bird. *
Choro, vide Coro. Chorrear, to run as a brook does, to flush down with
abundance of waters. Chorrico, m. a kind of pudding. Chorro, m. a land flood,
a running brook, a flood of waters. Chotacabras, f. birds like guls that use
to suck goats. * Choza, vide Choca. Chozno, m. a nephew of the third degree.
* Christiandad, f. christianity. * Christianissimo, m. most Christian, most
like a Christian. * Christiano, m. a Christian. * Chronica, f. a chronicle, a
history. * Chuco, m. a kind of pike and weapon with a very large and long
pike of iron. Chueca, f. the hollownes of a joint where the bone plaieth in and
out, or to and fro. * Chueco, Chueque, vide Chocar. * Chupado, m. sucked. *
Chupador, m. a sucker, or a milker of goats. Chupadura, f. sucking. *
Chupamel, or yerva de bivora, an herb called Buglosse. Chupar, to suck.
Chusma, or Chuzma, a company of poor base people, the meinie.
C I
Ciar, to stop, to retire, to stir backward, to cause to go back. Ciabogar la
galera, Praes. yo Ciabogo, 1. Praet. yo Ciabogue, to make the galley to go
backward, to drive it arseward. * Ciatica, f. the gout in the hip or
buckle-bone. also the hip or huckle-bone it self. * Cibdad, or Ciudad, a
city. * Cibil, or Civil, as guerra Cibil, belonging to a city, civil war. *
Cibilmente, vide Civilmente. * Cibollete, m. a trusse, a mandilion, or a
sleeuelesse iacket. Also a little onion. * Cicaladas armas, armor well
burnished, shining armor. * Cicalla, the clipping of money or other metal. *
Cican^a, vide Cizan^a. Cicatero, m. a cutpurse. * Cicatrizar, or Cicatricar, to
heal up unto a skar, to heal so as nothing but a skar shall be seen. *
Cicatrizo, or Cicatrico, m. a skarre where a wound has been. Cicion de
callentura, a fit of an ague, a cold fit. Cicorea, f. an herb called Suckory
or Cichorie. * Cicuta, f. a venomous herb called Hemlocke. Cidra, f. a Limon.
Cidral, a place where Lymons grow. * Cidrera, vide Abejera. * Cidro, m. a Limon
tree. Cidron, m. the stink of a rotten fig. A great Limon. Ciegamente,
blindly, like one that is blind. * a Ciegas, blindfold. Ciego, m. blind. *
Ciego, Ciegue, vide Cegar. Cielo, m. the heaven, the weather, the sky, the
world. The tester of a bed. * Cielo de la cama, the hanging of a chamber, the
tester of a bed. * de Cielo presto, by Gods strange judgments. Cien, or Ciento,
a hundred. Cien n^udillos, Knot-grasse. Cien cabecas, a hundred heads, or a
kind of Thistle full of heads. * Cienaga, a marish low ground, a place of
slime, mud, and tough dirt. Cienagal, a quagmire, a bog. * Cienago, the mirie
dirt of a bog or quagmire. * Ciencia, vide Sciencia. Cieno, mud, dirt, mire. *
Cienor, vide Cieno. * Cienoso, m. full of mud, durtie, mirie. * Cienta yerva,
the herb Knot-grasse. Ciento, or Cien, a hundred, the hundredth in order.
Cientopies, a certain wormeful of feet. Cienten^al, an hundred years old.
Cien vezes, a hundred times, an hundred fold. Ciera, vide Cera, wax. * Ciera
bermeja, red wax. Cierco, or Cierzo, the North Wind. Cierne, the flower of
Grapes. * Cierne, vide Cernir. * Cierre, Cierro, vide Cerrar. Ciertamente,
surely, verily, certainly. Cierto, m. sure, certain, assured. Cierva, f. a
hind. Ciervo, m. a heart, a stag, or red dear. * Cierzo, the North Wind. *
Ciesse, Ciesso, vide Cessar. * Cieve, Cievo, vide Cevar. * Cifo, m. a cup, a
cruse, a pot to drink in. Cifra, f. a cipher. Cifrado, m. a thing done in
ciphers. * Cifrar, to cipher. Cigarra, or Chicharra, f. a grasshopper, a
cricket. Cigon^al, m. a brewers crane to draw up water with. Also a crane to
wind up other burdens with. Cigon^ino, m. a young storke. * Ciguatrega, f. a
grasshopper, or rather a cricket. Ciguen^a, f. a storke. * Ciguen^al para sacar
agua, vide Cigon^al. Cilicio, m. hairie cloth. Cilindro, m. a dial, a roller
to role ground after it is sowed with corn, for to break the clods, and to
smooth the ground. Cilla, f. a granier to keep corn in. Also a binne to keep
bread in. Cillero, m. one that keeps a cellar, or a pantrie or a garner for
corn. * Cillervedas, small splints, ribs or bones. * Cillueredas, vide
Cillervedas. * Cima, the top of any thing, upon. * cimborio, vide Zimborio. *
cimbro, vide Zimbro. * Cimentador, m. a mason, one that lays foundations. *
Cimenterio, m. a churchyard. Cimera, f. the crest of a helmet, the upper part
whereon the crest is set. * Cimera sacar, to draw out an invention. * Cimera,
f. a province of Greece so called. Cimiento, m. a foundation, mortar. *
Ciminterio, vide Cimenterio, m. a churchyard. Cimitarra, f. a faulchion, a
Turkey sword. Cincha, f. a girth, the iron that binds a wheel about.
Cinchadura, f. a girding, a compassing about. Cinchar, to girde about. *
Cinche, vide Chisme. * Cincho, m. the round compassing of a wheel with iron.
Cincho para queso, a cheese fat to make and press cheese in. Cinco, five. *
Cinco en rama, Cinquefoile or five leafed grass. * Cincuenta, vide Cinquenta.
* Cin^e, Cin^o, vide Cen^ir. * Cinpecar yo Cinpieco, vide Empecar, to begin. *
Cinpiece, Cinpieco, vide Cinpecar, to begin. Cinquenta, fifty, the fiftieth.
Cinquepul de los Judios, certain Jewish sacrifices. * Cinquesma, f.
Whitsontide, or Pentecost. Cinta, f. a girdle of silk, cruel, or riband for a
woman, and Cinto, or Pretina, a girdle of leather or such like for a man. Also
Cinta, a flat or broad point. * Cinto, m. or Pretina, a girdle of leather or
such like for a man, and Cinta, a girdle of silk or such like for a woman. *
Cintura, vide Cinta. Cipres, m. Cypres, a Cypres tree. Cipresal, a grove of
Cypres trees. * Circuir, to compass about. * Circuito, a compass, a circuit.
Circular, pertaining to a circle, round. Circularmente, in round compass like
a circle. Circulo, m. a circle, a round compass, a company of men standing
round together. * Circumagio, a proverb. Circuncidado, m. circumcised, cut
round. Circuncidar, to circumcise, to cut round. * Circuncision, f.
circumcision, cutting round. * Circundado, compassed round. * Circundar, to
compass round, to beset on all sides. * Circunferencia, f. the compass of
all round about. * Circunloquio, m. a speech fetched far about, talk by
circumstance. * Circunvezino, m. a neighbor dwelling about. * Circuro, vide
Circulo, m. Cirial, a candle stick for wax candles, a taper. Cirio, m. a wax
candle, a torch. Ciruela, f. a plum. Ciruelo, m. a plum-tree. Cirugia, f.
chirurgerie. Cirugiano, m. a surgeon or surgeon. * Cirujano, idem. *
Cirurijano, or Cirurjano, vide Cirujano. Ciscado, m. afraid. * Ciscar, to be
afraid, to fear. Cisco, m. a sparkle of fire, the dross of coals. Cisma, f.
a faction, a schism, a renting himself from common society. Cismatico, m. a
factious fellow, a schismaticke. Cisne, m. a swan. Cisterna, f. a cesterne.
Citacion, f. a summons, a citation or warning to appear. Citar, to summon, to
cite, to warn for to appear. * Citara, f. an instrument of music called a
citterne. * Cithara, f. idem. Citola, f. a citterne, the clapper of a mill.
Citolero, m. a maker of citternes. Ciudad, f. a city. Ciudadano, m. a citizen,
a burgess, a townesman. * Ciudadela, f. a cittadell or a certain fort about a
city or town. * Ciudadeta, a little city. Ciuera, f. corn, bread corn.
Civil, civil, pertaining to a city, or to administration of actions in suite
between party and party. Civilidad, f. civility. Civilmente, ciuilly. *
Civollete, vide Cibollete. * ciza, vide Ziza. * Cizalla, the clipping of money
or metal. * Cizado, vide Zizado. * Cizan^a, f. tares, cockle, darnell,
discord. * Cizan^ador, m. one that sows discord, tares, cockle or darnell. *
Cizan^ar, to sow discord, tares or cockle. * Cizerca, f. Ciche pease.
C L
* Claba, vide Clava. * Clabar, vide Clavar. * Clabe, vide Clave. * Clabo, m. a
nail, the rudder of a ship, a hard swelling or corn on the toe or foot, the
corner of the eye, a knot or knur. * Clamar, vide Llamar, to cry out, to make
exclamation. Clamor, or Grito, m. crying, outcrie, exclamation. Clamoroso, m.
clamorous, given to make exclamation or outcries. * Clandestino, secret. Clara
de huevo, the white of an egg. * Clarabaya, vide Claravaya. Claramente,
clearly, plainly, evidently. * Claravaya, vide Claravoya. * Claravoya, f. iags
or cuts in garments, such as cutters invent for gentlewomen. Clarea, f. clarie,
drink of honey and wine. Some say muscadell, others call it Nectar or kingly
drink. Clare de vinoy miel, honied wine, Robdauie, Metheglin. Clarescer, to
wax fair, clear or manifest. * Clareza, vide Claridad. Claridad, f.
cleerenesse, plainness, perspicuitie, brightness. * Clarificado, m. made
clear, plain or manifest, clarified. Clarificar, Praes. yo Clarifico, 1.
Praet. yo Clarifique, to clarify, to make bright, clear or manifest. *
Clarimentos, m. paintings, bright colors. * Clarin, m. a certain musical
instrument. Clarion, m. an instrument of music called a clarion. Claro, m.
bright, clear, light, plain, easy to be understood, perspicuous, evident,
shrill. * Clava, vide Argamassa. * Clavado, m. nailed. Clavadura, f. nailing.
Clavar, to nail, to fasten. Clavazon, f. the setting of nails, nailing, or
studding. Clave, f. the stone on the top of a vault. Clauel, vide clavellinas,
gilliflowers. Clavellinas, f. gilliflowers, carnation gilliflowers. Clavero, m.
a bearer of keys, a maker of keys, a bearer or keeper of keys for the
treasury for the orders of knighthood. * Claveta, or Clavija, f. pins of iron,
or pegs of wood to fasten any thing. Also pegs or pins to wind up the stringes
of an instrument. * Clavia, vide Clavija. * Clavillas de las camas, f. vices or
skrewes to fasten a bedsteed together. * Clavicordio, m. an instrument of
music called Claricords, or virginals. Clavija, f. the key of virginals, the
pin of a lute, any pegge or pin. * Clavis, pinke gilliflowers. Clavo, m. a
nail, the rudder of a ship, a corn on a foot or toe, a hard swelling in the
corner of the eye, a knur or knot. Clavo de governalle, the helm of a ship.
Clavos de especia, cloves, a spice so called. Clavos de gerofle, idem. *
Claustra, f. a cloister. * Claustrio, m. a cloister. * Claustro, m. idem. *
Clausura, or Clauzura, f. an enclosure, a shutting in. Clematide, m. an herb
called Perwinkle. Clemencia, f. gentleness, meekenes, courtesy. Clemente,
gentle, courteous, meek, lowly. Clementemente, meekely, gently, courteously.
Clerezia, f. the clergy, a convocation. * Clericato, a clarkeship, the office
of priest or function of a priest. Clerigo, m. a clarke, a priest. * Clerizon,
m. youth or boys that sing in the quire, singing boys, quiristers, boys bred
up to be priests. * Clima, f. a climate. * Climeterios, an^os, unfortunate
years. * Clines, f. a horse mane. * Clipeo, m. a bucklar. * Cloaca, f. a
privy. Cloque, m. a boatehooke, a grappling hook, a hook to catch hold
with. Cloquear, to clock as a hen does, to kill fish with a trout hook. *
Cloquero, m. one that goes to kill fish with a trout spear. * Clueca, f. any
bird that sits to breed young. Clueca gallina, a clock hen. Cluquillas,
cowring down.
C O
* Coadjutor, or Coajutor, m. a fellow helper, one that aideth another. *
Coadjuvar, to help his fellow, to help together. * Coagulacion, a
coagulation, a crudding together. * Coaja leche yerva, an herb called
Maidenhaire, petty Mugwet, or cheese runnet. * Coalli, id est que Alli, that
there. Cobarde, vide Covarde, a cowarde, a milkesop, a hartlesse fellow. *
Cobardia, f. cowardice, faint hartednes. * Cobdicia, f. covetousness. *
Cobdiciar, to covet. * Cobdicioso, m. covetous. * Cobdo, vide Codo, m. an
elbowe, a cubite. Coberdia, f. cowardlines. * Cobertaza, a pot lid, a cover.
Cobertera, f. a cover. Cobertor, m. a cover, any thing to lay on. Cobertor de
cama, m. a couerlet for a bed. Cobertura, f. a covering. * Cobigera, a waiting
woman. * Cobijado, m. covered, hidden. Cobijar, to cover, to hide over. *
Cobranca, or Cobranza, f. recovery, an obtaining, a getting. Cobrar, to
recover, to get or obtain, to receive. Cobre, m. copper. Cobre de cebollas, a
roape of onions. Cobre de bestias, a houell of cattle. * Cobre de ajos, a roape
of garlike. Cobrir, yo Cubro, to cover, to hide, to recover or obtain. Cobro,
m. recovery, receipt, a place of safe keeping. * Cobuijada, a kind of lark
with a crest or tuft of feathers on his crown. coca. f. a place for a fair.
Cocadriz, f. a serpent called a Basiliske, or Cocatrice. Cocar, Praes. yo
Cueco, 1. Praet. yo Coque, to gape at, to mock, to make mouths at. Coce, f. a
kick or spurn. * Tirar coces contra el agujon, to kick against the prick.
Coceador, m. a kicker, a spurner. * Coceado, m. kicked at, spurned at. Cocear,
to kick, to spurn, to trample on. * Cocedra, a quilt or mattresse bed. *
Cocedras de pluma, f. feather beds. * Cocedron, m. an under mattresse bed. *
Cocelete, m. a corslet. * Cocer, vide Cozer. Coche, m. a coach, a wagon. *
Cochero, a coachman, a wagon man. Cochinilla, f. the herb called
Cucheneale. Cochinilla, a certain infectious fly, or a young sucking pig. *
Cochinillo, m. a young sucking pig. Cochino, m. a sucking pig, a pig, a young
hog. Sometimes a slouenly fellow. * Cochio, that which may be sodden, baked, or
dressed. Cocho, m. sodden, baked, dressed. Also a cart with two wheels. *
Cocina, vide Cozina, f. * Cocinero, vide Cozinero, m. Cocle, a grapple, a hook
to catch hold with. * Coco, vide Cosso. Coco, m. a woorme that eats vines, a
weuill. Also a voice to skar chidren with, as we say, the bugbeare. Also a
fruit growing in the Indians. * cocobrado, m. ouerturned, crossed,
ouerthwarted. cocobrar, to ouerturne, to cross, to overthwart. cocobras, f.
ouerturning, crossing of fortune. cocodover, f. a market place in Toledo. *
Cocodrillo, vide Cayman, m. a serpent a Crocodill. Cocuyo, m. a glo-worme. *
Coda, f. a tail. * Coda de mula, an herb called horse-taile. * Codaco, vide
Codazo, m. Codada, f. a blow with the elbow. Codal, of, or belonging to a
cubit, a grin. Codales de carpintero, cubits in measure. * Codazo, m. a blow or
stroke with the elbow. Codear, to strike or push with the elbow. Codera, the
scab on the elbow, or a broken sleeue at the elbow. Codicia, f. covetousness,
greedines, desiring still to gain, or to have more. Codiciar, to covet, to be
greedy of gain, to seek still to have more. * Codicilo, or Codicillo, m. a
little book, a small writing. Codicillo de testamento, a codicill, or addition
of some bequeaths, or alteration that a man before his death adds to his last
will, after that it was written. * Codiciosamente, couetously, greedily.
Codicioso, m. covetous, greedy, gripple on the world, one that thinks he
shall never have enough. * Codizillo, vide Codicilo. Codo, m. an elbow, a cubit.
* Codonero, m. a quince tree. Codorniz, f. a quail, the king of quails. *
Coela, id est, Con ella, with her, or with such a thing. * Coete, m. asquib
made of gunpowder. * Cofa, vide Cofia, f. a coife or kerchiefe. Cofia, or
Coffia, a veil or covering of a woman's head that hanged down to their
shoulders. Also a woman's coife or caul. Cofin, m. a basket, a pannier, a
frail. Cofrade, m. a brother, a friar. Cofradia, f. brotherhood, a frierie, a
company of friars, a guild or corporation. Cofre, m. a cofer, a deske, a
chest, a casket. Cofrezito, a little cofer or chest. Cogedizo, m. that is
gathered together, that is brought from here and there, that is levied or
gathered up, that is exacted or gotten by force. Cogedor, m. a gatherer
together, a taker up, an exactor or leuier by force, a collector. * Cogecha,
vide Cohecha. Coger, yo Cojo, to gather, to take up, to levy, to get as he
can, to catch, to exact or make to give, to collect. * Cogido, m. gotten
together, gathered, caught up, levied, exacted. * Cogimiento, m. getting
together, leuying, catching, collecting. * Cogomelo, or Hongo, a mushrom, or
toadstoole. Cogollado, m. hooded as moonks and nuns are, budded. Cogollo, m.
a hood, such as moonks or friars wear, a bud of a tree. Cogolmado, m. heaped
up, increased, laid on. * Cogombro, or Cohombre, m. a cucumber. Cogombrillo,
or Cohombrillo, m. a little cucumber. Cogote, m. the pole of the head, the
hinder part of the head, the nape, the noddle. * Cogulla, f. a cowle or hood
such as moonks wear. Cogujada, f. a lark, a bird so called. * Cohechado, m.
bribed, complotted together, having occupied together, or gotten goods
together. Cohechar, to plow ground together, to gather goods together, to take
bribes, to complot together. Cohechazon, f. plowing or breaking up ground. *
Cohecho, m. a bribe taken, complotting, occupying together. Cohecho de juez,
bribing to pervert justice, a bribing the judge. * Cohete, m. a squib made of
gunpowder to fly in the air. Cohollitos, m. small colewoorts, or the budding
out of any herbs. Cohombral, m. a place of cucumbers. Cohombrillo, or
Cogombrillo, m. a little cucumber. Cohombro, or Cogombro, a cucumber. Cohonder,
to confound, to corrupt, to mar. Cohondimiento, m. corruption, confusion. *
Cohondir, to corrupt, to mar or confound. * cohori, vide Zohori, m. a diuer,
a ducker. * Cohortes, m. certain bands or companies of soldiers, the gards of
a king, prince or president, garrisons, the trains or gardes of noble men or
magistrates to guard them into another country. * Cohujada, f. a kind of
lark with a crest on the head. * Coja, Cojo, vide Coger. * Cojecha, f. vide
Cosecha. * Cojedizo, vide Cogedizo, m. * Cojer, vide Coger. * Cojimiento, vide
Cogimiento. * Cojo, m. lame. Cojones, m. cullions, the stones of a man or
beast. * Cojon de perro, an herb called ragwoort. * Coito, or Coyto, m. carnal
copulation. Coionda, or Coyunda, f. the yoking of horses or oxen together. *
Coiundra, or Coyundra, idem. Cojudo, m. he that has great cullions or stones,
that which is not gelded but has his stones. Col or Berca, f. a colewoort.
Also a stalk. Cola, f. a tail, the yard of a man, etc. Also glue, pitch. Cola,
vide Cacon. * Cola del arado, the plough tail or handle. Cola de cavallo, an
herb called horsetaile, or shauegrasse. * Cola piece, an herb called
fishtaile, * Cola en grudo, glue, pitch. Colacion, f. beuer, drinking together,
nunchions, breakefast, eating after supper, a portion that is due, a bestowing
of some preferment. * Colada, f. whiting, bleaching. Colada de pan^os, whiting
or bleaching of clothes, bucking of clothes. Coladero, m. a strainer, a sieue,
colender. * Colado hierro, iron as it is cast at the mine not hammered. *
Coladura, f. straining, clensing, whiting of clothes. Colambre, f. a dicker of
leather. Colar, to strain, to cleanse as they do milk, etc. to white clothes.
Colar pan^os, to whiten clothes, to bucke clothes, to bleach clothes. Also to
wring clothes being wet. Colar benificio, to bestow a good turn, to do one a
pleasure. * Colatares, vide Colateral. Colateral, collateral, not of a right
line, pedigree, or descent downewaile, but on the right or better side, as on
the fathers side. Colcedra de plumas, a featherbed. * Colcedra, f. a bed of
wool or of flocks, a mattres to lie on. Colcha, a quilt covering for a bed. *
Colchado, made like a quilt or mattresse. * Colchero, m. a quilt maker or
seller, an vpholster, a mattresse maker. * Colchon, a bed of wool or
featherbed. * Colchonchico, or Colchoncillo, m. a little mattresse, a little
quilte to lie on. * Cole yerva, vide Col. Colear, to wagge the tail. *
Colegacion, f. a gathering together, a congregation, an assembly. * Colegados,
m. gathered together, drawn to a congregation, confederate together. *
Colegar, vide Congregar, to gather together, to assemble, to bring together.
Collegial, pertaining to a college, being of a society, living together,
belonging to a fellowship, or company. Colegio, m. a college, a place where
students or other do live together observing like orders. * Colegir yo Colijo,
to gather or bring together, to gather by proof or by reason, to forecast, to
perceive, to know, to understand, to take up, to deem or judge by reason or
proof. Colera, f. choler. Colera negra, melancholy. Colerico, m. one that is
full of choler, cholerike, hasty, given to anger. Coleta, f. the hair of the
head being round: lynnen whereof they make doublets in Spain. * Coletico, m.
a little leather ierkin. Coleto, m. a leather ierkin. * Colgadero, m. that
which hangs dangling down. Colgadizo, or Colgajo, that which hangs
dangling, as grapes do in clusters. Colgado, m. hanged down, hanged by,
fastened to, tied. Colgadura, f. a hanging dangling down, hanging by, or at,
depending upon, fastening to, or tying. Colgajo, or Colgadizo, m. that which
hangs by, or dangleth down as clusters of grapes, and such like things,
that which depends. Colgajo de uvas, a bunch or cluster of grapes. Colgar,
Praes. yo Cuelgo, 1. Praet. yo Colgue, to hang down, to hang at or by a thing,
to depend upon a thing, to fasten to, to take, or to tie. * Colho, or Verca, a
colewoort. Colica, f. a disease called the collicke. Colico, m. he that has
the collicke. * Coligado, m. bound together, confederate together. * Colija,
Colijo, vide Colegir. * Colina, f. cabbage seed. Also a place in a field which
is narrow between two valleys. Colino, m. a cabbage, when he begins to
grow to a cabbage. * Coliseo, m. a theater where comedies are represented. *
Colla de viento, a gale of wind. * Colla, vide Aculla, there, or in that
place. Collacion, f. a banquet, a ward in a city. Vide Colacion. Collaco, m.
one that sucketh of the same milk, a nurst-fellow, a foster brother. Collado,
m. a little hill, a heap. Collar de vestido, the collar of a garment. * Collar
de hombros, a collar of gold, such as great nobles use to wear as an ensign
of honor, a chain of gold, a carcanet, a necklace, or a tablet. * Collarico,
id est, Collar rico, a rich necklace or chain of gold, a rich carcanet or
tablet. * Collatares, vide Colaterales, collateral, on the right side, not
direct downward. * Collazo, a nurse-fellow, a foster brother, one that sucketh
the same milk. * Collega. m. a fellow partner, one that lives in a college,
place, or office observing orders of that society. * Collera de bestia, the
collar or yoke, or such like for a beast to draw with. * Collocado, vide
Colocado, m. placed. * Colma, f. a heap, the top or height of any thing. *
Colmado, m. heaped up. Colmadura, f. a heaping up. Colmar, to heap or fill up.
* Colmear, vide Colmenar. Colmena, f a be hiue. Colmenar, m. a place for be
hiues. Colmenero, m. he that keeps bees. Colmillo, m. a tuske. Colmillos, m.
the tuskes of a bore or of any other wild beast. Also the foreteeth. Colmo, m
the top of any thing. * Colobrina, f. a culuerine piece of ordinance. *
Colocacion, f. a placing or bestowing. * Colocado, m. placed, bestowed, settled,
seated. Colocar, Praes. yo Coloco, 1. Praet. yo Coloque, to place, to settle,
to bestow. Colodra, f. a horn to drench beasts. Colodrillo, m. the pole of
the head, the noddle or hinder part of the head. * Colombino, m. of or
pertaining to a dove, like a dove, dove color. * Colomna, a pillar, a column.
* Colonia, f. a kind of silk ribband. * Colonia, a colonie of people sent to
inhabit a country gotten by conquest. It was devised by the Romans for a
recompense of old soldiers, who having spent the flower of their age in the
service of their country, were afterward rewarded with land of inheritance. *
Coloque, vide Colocar. Coloquintida, f. a kind of wild bitter gourd so
called. * Coloquio, m. conference, talk, communication, speech together with
others. Color, m. or f. color, hue. * Color falso, a counterfeit color. *
Color carden^o or de plomo, black and blew color. * Colorlleno, a deep
color, a full color. * Color muerto, a fading, pale, dead color. * Color
florecido, a bright light color. * Color en agua, a waterish color. * Color
de paja, a straw color. * Color baco, or pardo, brown or swart color. * Color
porfiado, a durable sure color that will last. Colorado, m. colored, red. *
Colorar, to color, to die red, to paint. * Colorir, idem. to set forth in
colors. * Colostro de leche, thick milk that is milked from a cow when she
has newly calued. * Columbino, vide Colombino, of or pertaining to a dove.
Columpiar, to swing with a coard with a cross stick to stretch the arms.
Columpio, m. swinging with a coard and a cross stick. Coluna, vide Colomna. *
Colun^a rolliza, a rowler to roll and make smooth and plain any ground,
grasse-plot, or corn ground. * Colun^a, vide Colomna. Colusion, f. collusion,
fraud, deceit, crafty cosenage in bargaining. * Colzedra, vide Colcedra.
Comadre, f. a she-gossip. * Comadregia, vide Comadreja, f. a weesell.
Comadreja, f. a weesell. * Comadrera, f. a woman that goes a gossipping abroad
among her companions carrying of tales and news. A conie berrie or hole.
Comarca, f. the borders or confines of a country, the division between
country and country. Comarcano, m. bordering, a borderer, one that dwells
on the borders, bounds or division between two shires or countries. Comba, f.
a round swelling coming of a fall. Also a crooked thing, a kind of scoope to
cast out water. * Comba pequen^a y dura, a swelling in the finger, called a
fellon. * Combado, or Conbado, m. crooked, bending round and crooked. * Combas,
m. a round and crooked thing. Also vide Compass. Combat, m. a combat, a
battle, an assault, a conflict, a skirmish. Combatible, assaultable, battable.
* Combatido, m. assaulted, set upon, fought withal, beaten. * Combatidor, m. a
cumbater, a fighter, an assaylant, a combatant, a champion. * Combatiente,
fighting, assayling, setting upon a champion. * Combatimiento, m. a fight, a
combat. Combatir, to fight, to assault, to set upon, to assail, to combat, to
beat. * Combidador, m. one that inuiteth or bids guests. Combidado, m. a
guest bidden, invited, moved, entreated to do any thing. Combidar, to inuit,
or bid to a feast. * Combinacion, f. combining, conioyning, setting together.
Combinar, to combine, to ioin or set together, to compact, to plot, to devise
together, to enter into association together. Combite, m. a feast, a banquet, a
guest-meale. Combleca, f. a concubine, a competitor, or rival with an other
woman for the love of a man. Combleco, a rival, a competitor, a fellow-louer,
a corriuall, one that strives or runs with another for one and the same
prize. * Comecon, the itch, tetter or ringwoorme. Comedera cosa, any thing to
be eaten. * Comedero, that which may be eaten, eatable. Also a place where
meat is eaten. * Comedia, f. a comedy, a play, an interlude. * Comediante, m.
a player, a comedian. Comedido, m. premeditated, discreet, measured, well
mannered or nurtured, civil, of a temperate behavior. * mal Comedido, m.
unmannerly, ill nurtured, uncivil, distempered in behavior, ill brought up. *
mas Comedido suplico, good words, I pray you, more quietness, etc.
Comedimiento, m. premeditation, discretion, good manners, behavior. Comedio,
in the mean while, set in the midst, put in arbitrament. Comedir, yo Comido,
to premeditate, to measure, to stint, to moderate. Comedor, or Comilon, m. a
great eater, a glutton, a greedy gut. * Comencado, m. begun, commenced.
Comencar, yo Comienco, to begin. * Comendado, m. commended. Comendador, m. a
commander, a lieftenant, one that has commandments given him in charge.
Comendar, yo Comiendo, to commend, to praise, to set forth, to extol. *
Comendero, vide Comendador, also one that commits or commends to ones
charge. Comensal, a fellow-boorder, a fellow-guest, a fellow-commoner, a
companion of the table. * Comenzar, vide Comencar. Comer, to eat, to dine. *
Comer un bocado sin assentarse, to eat a snatch and away, to eat a bit
standing. * Comer de gorra, to dine or eat at any others coast. * Comercio, m.
commerce, intercourse of merchandise together, trafique. Cometa, f. a comet, a
blazing star. * Cometedor, m. a committer of causes or affairs to any man, a
layer of wagers. Cometer, to commit, to set upon, to endeavor, to impose, to
lay a wager, to bet. * Cometer, or encomendar, to commit, to recommende or give
in charge, to leave in trust, to appoint, to assign, to depute, to deliver. *
Cometido, committed, recommended, left in trust, assigned, deputed, a
committie, an arbitrator, an vmpier. Cometidor, a committer, vide Cometedor.
Cometimiento, m. setting upon, committing. Comezon, f. the itch, a tetter,
scurfe, a ringworme. * Comfetes, m. comfets. Comida, f. meat, dinner. Also a
drinking before meals, a light beuer. * Comide, Comido, vide Comedir. *
Comience, Comienco, vide Comencar. * Comiende, Comiendo, vide Comendar.
Comienco, m. a beginning, an entrance to any work. Comigo, with me. * estas
Comigo, o no? are you with me or on my side, yea or no? Comilon, vide Comedor.
* Cominchos, the herb cumin. Comino, m. cumin seed. * Cominos, seeds of
cumin. Comissario, m. a commissarie, a commissioner, an officer chosen and
assigned to that place, an executor of a dead man's will. Commission, f. a
commission directed to any for service to be done, or otherwise to some other
purpose. Comissura, f. a joining together, a iointer, a closing together of
boords. * Comite, vide Comitre. Comitre, m. the boateswaine in a ship, he that
corrects disorders, and has charge of the book. Also the masters mate. *
Commitiva armada, f. a fleet or navy of ships committed to ones charge. Also
a fleet accompanying another fleet. Como, as, seeing, that, when as, how,
even as, why. * Comodamente, commodiously, profitably, conveniently, fitly. *
Comoda occasion, f. a convenient occasion, a fit opportunity, an easy way, a
ready means. Comodidad, f. commodity, ease, leisure, occasion, fitness,
opportunity, means, way. Comodo, m. profitable, fit, commodious, easy, at
leisure. Comoquiera, howsoever it be, howsoever, in what manner you will. *
Comoquiera que, howsoever. * Comover, yo Comuevo, to move, to stir up, to
incense, to trouble, to animate, to provoke. * Comovido, m. stirred up,
exasperated, moved, kindled, incensed, provoked, urged, enforced, egged on. *
Compadecer, yo Compadesco, or Compadescer, to suffer with others. Also to have
compassion. Compadrazgo, m. gossopship, gossopping, gossops meeting. *
Compadre, m. a he gossop, a compeere. Compan^as, f. a company, a multitude.
Compan^era, f. sociable, given to keep company. Compan^ero, m. a fellow, a
companion, a mate, a cheating companion. * Compan^ia, f. a company, a
fellowship, a meeting, a knot or crew of good fellows, society. Compan^ones,
m. the stones, testicles. Compan^ones de perro, standergrasse, dog cullions. *
Comparable, comparable, to be matched, equalled. Comparacion, f. comparison. *
Comparado, m. compared, matched, equalled, valued, prized. * Comparador, m. a
maker of comparisons. Comparar, to compare, to match. * Compartir, to impart,
to divide, to bestow, to distribute, to deal abroad. Compass, m. a pair of
compasses. Compassar, to measure with a compass, to compass about.
Compassion, f. compassion, pity, commiseration. * Compassivo, pitiful,
merciful, full of compassion and mercy. * Compeler, to urge, to force, to
compel, to constrain, to provoke, to induce. * Compelido, m. urged, forced,
compelled, constrained, provoked, egged forward. * Compendio, m. a breuiate,
compendious, brevity, a short way. Compensar, yo Compienso, to reward, to
recompense, to requite. * Competencia, f. competencie where two sue for one
office, corriualitie, sufficiency, conueniencie. Competer yo compito, to be
meet for, to agree with, to sue with another for any thing, to contend or
strive for any suite, office or dignity. Competicion, f. the suit that is
prosecuted after such manner. Competidor, m. a ryuall, a competitor, one that
contendeth with another for the same gole, a concurrent. * Competidor real, a
royal riualitie, when one is competitor or corriual with a king. Competir, yo
Compito, vide Competer. * Compiense, Compienso, vide Compensar. * Compite,
Compito, vide Competer. * Complacentia, a pleasing or delighting with. *
Complacer, vide Complazer. * Complacimiento, vide Complazimiento. Complazer, to
please, to gratify, to delight, to sooth, to content. * Complazido, m.
pleased, delighted with, content. * Complazimiento, vide Complacencia, a
pleasing, a delighting with. Complession, f. the complexion. Completas,
complines, one of the seven services that they sing in the Church. * Que os
comple, which is fit and needful for you. * Complido, m furnished,
accomplished, performed, fit, convenient, complete. Complimiento, m.
performance, complement, conuenience. Complir, to fit, to furnish, to
accomplish, to perform. * Complision, vide Complession. Componedor, m. a
maker, a composer, an atonement maker. * Componer, Praes. Indicat. Compongo,
compones, compone, 1. Praet. Compuse, compusiste, compuso. Fut. Compondre,
compondras, compondra, or Comporne, compornas, comporna. Sub. Praes. Componga,
Jmperfect. Compusiera, compondria, or Compusiesse, Fut. Compusiere, to make, to
compound, to frame, to endite, to compose, to agree, to appoint, to accord, to
dress, to set in order, to redress, to settle, to repair, to dight, to make
handsome, to order well. * Componer discordes, to compounde, controversies, to
end and take up suites, to accord men at variance. * Componga, Compongo, vide
Componer. * Comporne, Comporna, Compornia, vide Componer. * Comportable,
tolerable, comportable, indifferent, to be borne withal. Composicion, f.
agreement, composition, accord, atonement making. Compostura, f. any
compounde matter. Compra, f. a buying, a purchase, a bargain, a hansell.
Comprador, m. a buier, a purchaser, a bargainer, a chapman. Compradizo, m. that
which is bought or purchased, or bargained for. Comprar, to buie, to purchase.
* Comprehender, to comprehend, to contain, to contriue, to conceive, to
understand, to comprise. * Compression, a comprising, containing, conceiving, a
retaining, a comprehending. Comprometer, to promise with, to compromise, to
agree, to arbitrate. Compromisso, m. promised, agreed, arbitrated, compromised.
Compromissor, m. an arbitror or vmpier to compromise a matter, a surety, a
bail, a pledge, one that gives his word for a man with another. * Comprovar,
yo Compruevo, to approve, to commend, to allow, to praise, to warrant. *
Comprueve, Compruevo, v. Comprovar. * Compuerta de forteleza, a gate in a
castle before the maine or principal gate, in the day time to be taken up. *
Compuesto, m. compounded, ordered, settled, fitted, placed, framed, finished,
furnished, amended, dighted. * Compulsoria, a writ called a Subpena. *
Compuncion, f. a pricking forward, a compunction, or pricking of conscience. *
Compuse, Compusiera, Compusiesse, Compuso, vide Componer. * Compusicion, or
Composicion, f. a composition. * Computacion, f. a computation, a reckoning, a
calculation, a casting of accounts. * Computar, to reckon, to cast account, to
calculate, to compute. * Comvatir, vide Combatir, to combat, to fight. *
Comueve, vide Comover. * Comvidar, vide Combidar. Comulgar, Praes. yo Comulgo,
1. Praet. yo Comulgue, to communicate, to common, to receive the communion, to
impart, to reveal. * Comulgue, vide Comulgar. Comunal, the general good of a
country, common, mean, indifferent well, a common popular man, a man of
vulgar note. Comun, common, vulgar, public. Comunemente, commonly,
ordinarily, for the most part. * Comuneros, the factious and mutinous people
that would have all in common. * Comunicado, m. imparted, communicated,
revealed, disclosed. * Communicacion, f. a communication, a conference, talk.
* Communicador, m. he that communicates, discloseth, or imparteth any thing.
* Comunicar, Praes. yo Comunico, 1 Praet. yo Comunique, to communicate, to
reveal, to disclose, to impart, to bewray. * Comunidad, f. the communaltie,
the commons. Also a rebellion. * Comunion, f. communion, fellowship,
community. * Comunique, vide Comunicar. Con, with. * Conato, m. endeavor,
labor, travel, pains taken in the pursuit of any cause. * Conbado, vide
Combado. * Conbalescer, vide Convalescer. * Conbatir, vide Combatir. *
Conbencer, vide Convencer. * Conbeniente, vide Conveniente. * Conbento, vide
Convento. * Conbersable, vide Conversable. * Conbersar, vide Conversar. *
Conbertido, vide Convertido. * Conbezino, vide Convezino. * Conbinacion, vide
Convinacion. * Conbidar, vide Combidar. * Conbite, vide Combite. * Concavidad,
f. concauitie, hollownesse. * Concavo, m. hollow, caued, bowed, crooked. *
Concebido, m. conceived with child. Concebimiento, m. conception, a conceiving
of a thing. Concebir, yo Concibo, or Concevir, to conceive with child, to
conceive with the mind. * Conceder, to grant, to give place, to consent, to
yield unto, to resign, to afford, to condescend. Concedido, granted, yielded,
condiscended. Concegil, common, public. * Concejal, belonging to the council.
* Concejero, vide Consejero, a counselor. Concejo, or Consejo, advise,
counsel, a council holden, a guilde or corporation of men in a brotherhood. *
Concento, a consent, a consort or concordance in music. * Concepcion, a
conceiving with child. * Concepcion, fiesta de Maria virgen, the feast of the
conception of the virgin Mary. * Concepto, or Conceto, m. conceived. Also a
conceit or apprehension of the mind. * Concerner, to concern or belong unto.
* Concertado, agreed, reconciled, righted, accorded together. Concertador, m.
he that makes the agreement or atonement, a mediator. Concertar, yo
Concierto, to agree, to righten a cause, to condition, to covenant, to
bargain, to promise, to captiuate, to make a contract, to redress, to
reform, to amend. * Concertar discordes, vide Componer discordes. * Concertose
para oy, it was concluded against this day. * Conceto, or Concepto, a place
where any thing is kept or contained, the thing conceived, conception or
conceit. * Concevido, vide Concebido. * Concevir, yo Concivo, vide Concebir.
Concha, f. a cockle fish, the shell of a fish, any shell fish, but properly a
shell. It signifies also a bolle, a trey, a basin, a pan. * Conchas de la mar,
all manner of shel fish, as oisters, muscles, cockles, scallops, etc. *
Concheta, f. a snaile, a welke, a perywinkle. Conchilla, f. idem. the shell of
any small fish. * Conchuela, idem. * Conciba, Concibo, vide Concebir.
Conciencia, f. the conscience. * Concierta, Concierte, vide Concertar.
Concierto, m. a bargain, an agreement, a compact, an atonement, an accord, a
consent. * Conciliado, m. won, gotten, procured, allured, reconciled.
Conciliador, m. a winner, a procurer, a begetter, a reconciler. Conciliar, to
get, reconcile, win, make atonement, to gain. Concilio, m, council. *
Consistorio, vide Consistorio, a consistory. * Concive, Concivo, vide
Concevir. * Conclavio, the conclaue, a place where the Popes are chosen. Also a
closet. Conclusion, f. a conclusion, a shutting up of a matter. * Concluso, m.
concluded, ended, finished, resolved. Concluyr, to conclude, to finish, to make
an end of. Concordable, agreeable, suitable, concordable. * Concordancia, f. a
concordance, an agreement, an accord. Concordar, yo Concuerdo, to concord, to
agree, to accord, to join together. Concord, agreeing, assenting.
Concordamente, agreeingly, lovingly. Concordia, f. agreement, concord, peace,
unity. * Concubina, f. a concubine, a leman. * Concubinarios, m. such as lie
and keep company with concubines. Concuerda, Concuerdo, vide Concordar. *
Concurrir, to run together, to agree, to flock together, to concur. *
Concurso, m. a concurse of people, or running together, a great meeting of
people together. Condado, m. a county, an earldome, a shire. Conde, m. an
Earl, a Count. Condenacion, f. condemnation, sentence, damnation. Condenado,
m. cast, condemned, sentenced, damned. Condenar, to cast, to condemn, to
sentence, to judge, to pronounce judgment, to damn. * Condescender, to agree,
to condescend, to consent, to yield unto, to assent. Condessa, f. a Countess,
an Earls wife. Condestable, m. a conestable. Condition, f. a state, a
condition, a quality, a fashion, a covenant, an estate. * poner en Condition,
to put on condition or danger. Condicional, conditional, upon condition.
Condicionalmente, conditionally, so that. * Condigno, m. worthy, condign,
meet. * premio condigno, a condign, meet or worthy reward. * Condoler, yo
Conduelo, to grieve with another, to condole, to bewail, to be moan together.
* Condolido, m. bewailed, moaned together. Conducho, accustomed. * Conducta, or
Conduta, f. a conduct, a guide, a leading, a charge. * Conducto, as salvo
Conducto, brought, guided, lead, safe conducted. * Conduta, vide Conducta. *
Conduzgo, Conduzga, vide Conduzir. Conduzido, lead, guided, conducted.
Conduzir, yo Conduzgo, to lead, to guide, to bring, to conduct. * Conegera,
vide Conejera. * Conegero, one that sells or keeps conies, a warrener. Also
a warren for conies. * Conejera, or Madriguera, f. a conie berrie or hoale.
Conejero, m. a warrener, he that keeps a warren, or conie-grea for conies.
Conejo, a conie, a rabbet. Conejuno, of or pertaining to conies. * Con el, con
ella, con ello, con ellos, with him, with her, with the, with that, with those,
with them. * Con esse, con esso, with him, with that, with it. * Con este, con
esto, with him, with this. * Confacion, f. confection, preserving with sugar.
Confacionador, m. a confectioner, a comfet-maker. Confacionadura, f.
confection, making of sweet meats. * Confaycion, vide Confacion. *
Confaycionar, to confect, to candie, to preserve with sugar fruit or other
things. * Confederacion, f. a confederacy, a plotting, a combination.
Confederados, m. leaguers, confederated, confederates, combiners, conspirers.
Confederar, to confederate, to make a league, to enter into association, to
agree together. * Conferido, m. compared, matched, bestowed, imparted.
Conferir, yo Confiero, to compare, to match, to bestow, to impart. Confessar,
yo Confiesso, to confess, to acknowledge. Confession, f. confession. Confesso,
m. a convert to the christian religion. Confessor, m. a confessor. *
Confiadamente, confidently, boldly, trustily, assuredly, faithfully. *
Confiado, trusted, confident, emboldned, assured. Confiador, m. he that
trusts, commits to trust or credit, believes or gives credit to the
promise of another. Confianca, f. trust, confidence, credit, boldness,
assurance, belief. Confiando, boldly, confidently. Confiar, to trust, to give
credit. * Confiere, confiero, vide Conferir. * Confiesse, Confiesso, vide
Confessar. * Conficion, vide Confacion. * Confines, m. confines, bounds,
limits, borders, lists, marks, meere-stones. Confirmacion, f. a confirmation,
an assurance, an establishing. Confirmado, m. confirmed, established, made
sure, approved. Confirmar, to confirm, to make sure, to establish, to settle.
Confirmar en mal, to make obstinate, to harden and obdurate in mischief.
Confiscacion, f. confiscation, forfeiture. * Confiscado, m. forfeited,
confiscate. * Confiscar, Praes. yo Confisco, 1. Praet. yo Confisque, to
forfeit, to confiscate lands or goods either upon capital or penal crime. *
Confisque, vide Confiscar. Confitado, m. confited, confected, canded,
preserved. Confitar, to confite, to confect, to preserve, to make comfits. *
Confitear, idem. Confitero, m. a comfit maker. Confites, m. comfits, iuncats,
sweet meats. Confitura, f. making comfits, or preserving sweet meats. *
Conflicto, or Conflito, a conflict, a battle, a fight, a skirmish, an assault.
Conformacion, f. conforming, fashioning, framing. Conformar, to conform, to
fashion, to frame, to order. Conform, conformable, handsome, comely,
agreeable, like, orderly. Conformidad, f. conformity, handsomnesse, order,
agreement, consent, comeliness, obedience, likeness. * Confortado, m.
comforted, cherished, relieved, visited, persuaded, counseled, animated,
enticed, etc. * Confortar, to comfort, to cherish, to relieve, to visit, to
persuade, to counsel, to animate, to entice, to abet. * Confrade, m. a sworn
brother with one, a fellow or companion with one in a society or corporation.
* no ay Confrades de rin^ones, there are no cosen germans of the disease of
the reins. * Confradias, f. brotherhood, societies, fraternities, frieries, a
convent where men live in fraternity and society together. * Confundido, m.
confounded, disturbed, vexed, tormented in mind, perplexed, astonished.
Confundir, to confound, to vex, to trouble, to torment, to turn topsie turuie
all things. Confusamente, confusedly. Confusion, confusion, trouble, loss,
astonishment, perplexity, distraction. Confuso, m. confused, confounded,
astonished, distracted, troubled, tormented. Confutar, to confute, to confound,
to abolish, to suppress. Congelado, m, congealed, frozen. Congelar, to freeze,
to congeale. * Congetura, f. a conjecture, a supposition, a surmise, an
imagination. * Congeturar, to conjecture, to surmise, to imagine, to suppose. *
Congojar, vide Congoxar. Congoxa, f. care, anguish, grief, sorrow, vexation,
trouble of mind. Congoxar, to vex, to trouble, to grieve. Congoxosamente,
carefully, troublesomly. Congoxoso, m. full of care, trouble and vexation. *
Congregation, f. a congregation, an assembly, a meeting together. Congregar,
Praes. yo Congrego, 1. Praet. yo Congregue, to congregate, to assemble, to
gather together. * Congregue, vide Congregar. * Congrejo, vide Cangrejo.
Congrio, m, a cunger eele. * Congruo, m. fit, agreeable, meet, convenient,
proper. * Conhortar, to exhort together, to join together in a request.
Conjectura, or Conjetura, vide Congetura, f. * Conjecturado, or Conjeturado, m.
coniectured, imagined, surmised, deemed, supposed. Conjecturar, or Conjeturar,
vide Co^geturar. * Conjugacion, f. a conjugation, a declining, a conioyning
together, a coupling, a marriage. Conjugacion de verbo, the conjugation of a
verb. * Conjugal amor, the love that is between man and wife. Conjuncion, f.
a ioining, a conioyning or coupling together, a knitting together, a
combination. * Conjunto, m. joined, knitted, conjoined, coupled together. *
Conjuntura, f. a joining, knitting or coupling together. * Conjura, f. a
conspiracy. * Conjuracion, f. a conspiracy, a coniuration, a treachery. *
Conjurado, coniured, conspired, contrived. * Conjurador, m. a coniurer, a
conspirator, a contriuer. Conjurar, to conspire, to conjure, to contriue, to
plot. Con^o, m. a woman's priuitie. Conocer, yo Conosco, to know, to
acknowledge, to understand, to wit. Conoscible, that may be known. Conocido,
m. known, an acquaintance, a friend, a known man. Conocidor, m. one that
knows, an acknowledger. Conocidor de pleyto, m. an arbitrator, a judge.
Conociente, knowing, witting, acknowledging, understanding, grateful.
Conociemiento, m. knowledge, acknowledging, acquaintance. Conocimiento de paga,
a bill of debt to pay money, an obligation. Conortacion, f. a request,
exhortation, petition made jointly with others. Conortado, m. exhorted,
entreated, requested. Conortar, vide Conhortar. Conoscer, vide Conocer. *
Conoscedor, vide Conocidor. Conoscido, vide Conocido. Conoscimiento, vide
Conocimiento. * Conoscimiento de paga, a bill of debt to pay money. Conosotros,
with us. * Conporner, vide Componer. * Conpuesto, vide Compuesto. * Con que
vienes? with what come you? what news bring you? Conquista, f. a conquest, a
victory. * Conquistado, m. conquered, overcome, vanquished, subdued, brought
under. * Conquistador, m. a conqueror, a vanquisher, an ouercommer. Conquistar,
to conquer, to subdue, to vanquish, to overcome. * Consagracion, f.
consecration, a dedication to some holy use. Consagrado, m. hollied, hallowed,
consecrated, appointed to some holy use. Consagrar, to hallow, to consecrate,
to make holy. * Consalmes de mar, a kind of round black muscles. *
Consanguinidad, f. consanguinitie, kindred by blood, neerenes in blood. Con
sazon y tiempo, in season, in time, fitly. Consegero, vide Consejero, m. *
Conseguiente, following, consequent. * Conseguientemente, consequently, by
consequence, by order. Conseguimiento, m. a consequence, a following, an
attaining, atchieuing, obtaining. Conseguir, yo consigo, to follow, to
attain, to reach, to obtain, to get, to atchieue. Conseja, f. a fable, a
tale, a novel. Consejar, to advise, to counsel, to direct, to persuade, to
ask counsel. Consejero, or Concejero, a counselor, a director. * Consejo,
vide Concejo, counsel, advise. * Consentiente, consenting, agreeing,
assenting, yielding, a consenter. Consentimiento, m. consent, agreement,
assent, accord, a joining in opinion. Consentir yo Consiento, to consent, to
accord, to agree, to join in opinion. Consequencia, f. a consequence, weight,
importance. * Conserva, f. conserve. Also any kind of preserve, conserues, or
sauce kept long Conserva, a consort in shipping. Also a fellow servant. *
Conservado, m. conserved, preserved, kept, laid up. Conservador, m. he that
keeps or preserves, a Justice or keeper of the peace, an ecclesiastical
magistrate. Conservar, yo Consiervo, to conserve, to preserve, to keep, to lay
up. * Conservatoria, an upholding or mainteining, a kind of process, keeping
of the peace. Consideracion, f. consideration, advise, premeditation, forecast.
Consideradamente, consideration, advisedly, deliberately, warily, heedilie,
prouidently. Considerado, m. considered, advised wary, heedie, provident,
deliberate, considerate. Considerador, m. he that considers, forecasteth,
foreseeth, deliberateth. Considerar, to consider, to cast, forecast, foresee,
to deliberate, to weigh, to ponder, to advise, to debate, to search. *
Consienta, Consiento, vide Consentir. * Consierve, Consiervo, vide Conservar. *
Consiga, Consigo, vide Consequir. * Consignacion, f. a directing, an assigning,
consigning, appointing, setting over, a resignation, a delivery. * Consignado,
m. consigned, directed, assigned, appointed, ordained, deputed. * Consignar, to
consigne, to appoint, to direct, to assign, to ordeine, to depute, to
substitute, to resign, to deliver. Consigo, with him. Consiguente, vide
Conseguiente. Consiguientemente, vide Conseguientemente. Consiliario, m. a
counselor. * Consintir, vide Consentir. Consistorio, m. a consistory, an
assembly of the clergy in some place to determine and set order in causes
ecclesiastical. Consolacion, f. consolation, comfort, refreshing. * Consolado,
m. cherished, comforted, refreshed. Also a consulate or office of Consulship
used in Rome. Consolador, m. a comforter, a cherisher or cherer up, a
perswader. Consoladora cosa, comfortable, any thing comfortable or cordial to
a weak stomach. Consolar, yo Consuelo, to comfort, to cherish, to persuade, to
cheer up, to animate. * Consolidado, made whole and sound. Consonancia, f.
consonancie, agreement, a harmony or consent either in voices or in sounds,
conformity. Consonante, consonant, agreeable, meet, convenient, befitting,
sounding well. Also a letter called a consonant, conformable. Consonar, yo
Consueno, to sound together, to consent, to agree, to conform. * Consorte, a
companion, a fellow mate, a consort. * Conspiracion, f. conspiracy,
coniuration, a plotting. Conspirar, vide Conjurar. Constancia, f. constancy,
stedfastnes, stabilitie, staiednes. * Constancia, f. a city in Cipres, and a
chief city in Switzerland in Germany. * Constando, it being manifest. *
Constante, constant, firm, stayed, stable, resolute, determinate, assured,
steadfast. Constantamente, constantly, firmly, stoutly, resolutely, steadfastly,
boldly, courageously. * Consta la cosa, the matter appears plainly. *
Constar, to be manifest. Constellacion, f. a constellation. Constitucion, f. a
constitution, an institution, an ordinance, a decree, an appointment, a
placing, an assignement. * Constituydo, m. ordained, constituted, appointed,
placed, put, set, deputed, a deputy, a substitute. * Constituydor, a
constituter, an establisher, or ordeiner. Also any thing to be appointed or
established hereafter. Constituyr, to appoint, to ordain, to place, to set
over, to constitute, to depute, to assign, to establish. * Constren^ir, yo
Constrin^o, to force, to constrain, to compel, to urge. * Constren^ido, m.
forced, constrained, compelled, urged. * Constrin^e, constrin^o, vide
Constren^ir. * Consuegro, m. when two fathers marry their children one to the
other, they are consuegros brothers by marriage. Consuelda, f. the herb
Larks-foot. * Consuelda mayor, the herb Comfrey, knit-backe, or backe-wort. *
Consuelo, m. comfort, consolation, persuasion, help. * Consuele, Consuelo,
vide Consolar. * Consuene, Consueno, vide Consonar. Consul, m. a consul, an
officer, whereof two were yearly chosen in Rome upon the deposing of their
kings, to govern as well in time of peace, as in matters of war. Also a
Mayor or chief magistrate of a city. Consulado, m. the office of Consulship.
Consular, the consulate, pertaining to the Consul, he that was Consul. *
Consulta, f. a counsel, a consultation, a debating of causes. * Consultado, m.
consulted, debated upon. Consultar, to consult with, to debate, to deliberate,
to ponder. Consumacion, f. an ending, a consummation, a finishing, a consuming.
* Consumado, m. consumed, finished, consummate, wasted, spent. * Consumar, to
consummate, to make an end of. * Consumido, m. consumed, spent, wasted.
Consumit, to consume, to spend, or waste riotously, to fall away, to be in a
consumption. Consuno, vide juntamente. * Contable, accomptable. * Contadero, m.
a place where they cast up accounts. Contado, m. counted, reckoned, summed up,
Also told or reported. * Contador mayor, a chauncellor of the Exchequer.
Contador, m. an accounter, a teller of the exchequer. An auditor, a treasurer.
Also a counter to cast withal. * Contador de la artilleria, an auditor of the
press or artillery. Contaduria, f. the office of a teller. Auditorship or the
office of a Lord treasurer. Contagion, f. contagion, infection. * Contagioso,
m. contagious, infectious. Contal de cuentas, a set of counters. Con tal que,
so that, upon condition that. * Contaminado, m. stained, defiled, contaminate,
polluted, infected, corrupted. Contaminar, to defile, to corrupt, to pollute,
infect, contaminate. * Contante, a counter. Contar, yo Cuento, to count, to
audite, to reckon, to account, to cast account, to tell, to number, to report.
* Contar fabulas, to tell tales. * Contecer, yo Contesco, vide Acontescer. *
Contemos, let us reckon or count, or let us tell a tale. Contemplacion, f.
contemplation, speculation. Contemplado, m. contemplated, speculated, beheld. *
Contemplador, m. he that contemplateth. Contemplar, to contemplate, to behold,
to speculate. * Contemplativo, contemplative, speculatiue. Contencion, f.
contention, debate, wra^gling, strife. Contencioso, m. contentious, striving,
given to debate. * Contendedor, one that contendeth or goes to law with
another. * Contendor, idem. Contender, yo Contiendo, to contend, to debate, to
strive, to wrangle. Contenerse, yo Contengo, to contain himself, to rule, to
bridle himself, to moderate and keep himself within bounds. * Contenido,
contained, held. Also the thing contained. Contentamiento, m. contentment,
satisfaction. Contentar, to content, to please, to satisfy, to still, to
pacify, to quiet. Contento, m. content, pleased, satisfied, quiet. Also
contentment. Contento, or Plazer, content, pleasure, thanks. Contera, f. the
chape of a sword or dagger. * Conterraneo, m. a man of the same country or
shire with one. * Contezca, or Contesca, vide Contecer. * Contestacion, a
manifestation. * pleyto Contestado, a plea set down on a peremptory day. *
Contezuela, f. a little pair of beads, a little account or a little fable. *
Contias, f. sums of money. Contienda, f. a brall, a burly burly, a strife, a
contention, a conflict, a combat. * Contiende, Contiendo, vide Contender.
Contigo, with thee. Continencia, f. continency of life, chastity,
temperancie. Continente, chaste, temperate, moderate, continent. Also the
gesture, the countenance. Continentemente, chastely, temperately, moderately,
continently. * Contingibile, that happens by chance or casualtie. Contino,
continual, always, daily. * Continuacion, f. length, continuance, increase. *
Continuadamente, continually, perpetually. * Continuado, m. continued,
lengthened, prolonged. Continuamente, vide Continuadamente. Continuar, to
continue, to hold on, to lengthen, to prolong. * Continuidad, f. perpetuity.
Continuo, vide Contino. * Contioso, m. bound to keep a great horse and his
furniture to serve the prince, or a man having above 1500. ducats of revenue
yearly coming in. Contoneo, m. moving, stirring, ietting. Contorno, round
about. Contra, against, over against, opposite. * Contracifra, a countercipher,
a cipher that does answer and open another cipher. * Contracto, a bargain,
covenant, or contract. Contradezidor, m. a gainesaier, a contradictor.
Contradezidora cosa, gainsaying. Contradezir, Indic. Praes. Contradigo,
contradizes, contradize, 1. Praet. Contradixe, contradixiste, contradixo, Fut.
Contradire, diras, dira, Subiunct. Praes. Contradiga, Imperfect. Contradixera,
contrediria, or contradixesse, Fut. Contradixere, to contradict or gainsay. *
Contradicho, m. gainsaied, contradicted. Contradicion, f. contradiction,
gainsaying. * Contradiga, contradigo, vide Contradezir. * Contradixe,
contradixera, contradixesse, contradixo, vide Contradezir. * Contraditor, vide
Contradezidor. * Contraduello, m. a countermaund or a gainsaying of the law of
Duello, which is to combat and fight the listes for the reputation or honor. *
Contraer, Indicat. Praes. Contraygo, contraes, contrae, 1. Praet. Contruxe or
contraxe, iste, contruxo, Fut. Contraere, ras, ra, Sub. Praes. Contrayga,
Imperfect. Contruxesse or contraxesse, Fut. Contruxere, to contract, to
bargain, to covenant, to bring together. * Contrafuerte, a counterfort or
skonce. * Contrahaga, contrahago, vide Co^trahazer. Contrahazedor, m. a
counterfeiter, an imitater, an offender. Contrahazer, Praes. Contrahago,
co^trahazes, contrahaze, 1. Praet. Contrahize, contrahiziste, contrahizo, Fut.
Contrahare, ras, ra, Sub. Praes. Contrahaga, Imperfect. Contrahiziera,
contraharia, or contrahiziesse, Fut. Contrahiziere, to counterfeit, to imitate,
to deceive, to suborne, to do against. Contrahazimiento, m. counterfeiting,
dissembling, deceiving, imitating. Contrahecho, m. counterfeited, imitated. *
Contrahezedor, vide Contrahazedor. * Contrahize, Contrahiziera, Contrahiziesse,
Contrahizo, vide Contrahazer. * Contraido, m. contracted, brought together,
purchased. * Contraiga, Contraigo, vide Contraer. * Contralor, a controuler. *
Contramaestre, or Contremaestre, a boateswaine in a ship. Contramina, f. a
countermine. * Contraminado, m. countermined. Contraminar, to countermine.
Contramuro, m. a countermure, a counterscarfe. * Contramuros, rampires to
defend walls, counterscarfes. * Contrapelo, against the hair. * Contrapesado,
m. counterpeized. Contrapesar, to counterpeize. Contrapeso, m. a counterpoise.
* Contrapeso, the plummet of a clock. Contrapolica, f. the counterpaine of a
charter party, a counterbill. Contraponedor, m. an opposer, one that sets
against. Contraponer, Praes. Contrapongo, contrapones, contrapone, 1. Praet.
Contrapuse, pusiste, puso. Fut. Contrapondre, or Contraporne, as, a, Sub. Prae.
Contraponga, Imperfect. Contrapusiera, contrapusiesse, or Contrapornia, Fut.
Contrapusiere, to oppose, to set against, to resist, to lay against. *
Contraponga, Contrapongo, vide Contraponer. Contraposicion, f. an opposition, a
contrariety, a setting against. * Contrapuesto, m, set against, opposed. *
Contrapuntear, to counterpoint. * Contrapunto, a counterpoint, pause, or rest
in music. * Contrapuse, Contrapusiera, Contrapusiesse, Contrapuso, vide,
Contraponer. Contrariar, to oppose, to impugn, to resist, to contrary.
Contrariaridad, f. contrariety, opposition. Contrario, m. contrary, opposite,
against. * Contraronda, f. a counterround, when one round goes one way, and
another another. Also officers that go to visit the watch of the corpse diu
guard, sentinels, or round, to see if they be diligent in their watches, or no.
* Contrasen^o, a privy token, mark, or sign between two. * Contrastable,
contentious, apt to contention. Contrastar, to contend, to withstand, to
resist, to strive against, to wrangle, to iangle, to braule, to jar.
Contraste, m. contention, brauling, striving, iarring, wrangling. Contratacion,
f. contracting, bargaining. Contratar, to contract, to bargain, to treat
together. Contrato, m. a contract, a bargain. * Contravenga, Contravengo, vide
Contravenir. Contravenir, Praes. Contravengo, vienes, viene, 1. Praet.
Contravine, veniste, vino, Fut. Contraverne, nas, na. Sub. Praes. Contravenga,
Imperfect. Contraviniera, contravernia, or Contraviniesse. Fut. contraviniere,
to withstand, to come against, to oppose, to resist, to transgress. *
Contravenido, m. resisted, opposed, withstoode. * Contraverne, vide
Contravenir. Contravine, Contraviniesse, Contraviniera, vide Contravenir. *
Contraxe, Contraxera, vide Contraer. * Contrayga, Contraygo, vide Contraer. *
Contray, a kind of very fine cloth commonly of a red color. * Contrazuanete,
the top gallant mast of a ship. Contrecho, m. weak, bruised, lamed, maimed,
cripled. * Contremaestre, vide Contramaestre. Contribucion, f. a contribution,
distribution, imparting with others. Contribudor, m. a contributer. Contribuyr,
to contribute, to impart, to distribute. * Contricion, f. contrition,
penitencie, remorse, repentance. * Contrito, m. contrite, sorrowful, penitent,
repentant. * Controversia, a controversy. * Contruxe, Contruxera, Contruxo,
vide Contraer. Contumacemente, stubbornely, frowardly, obstinately, wilfully,
disdainefully. Contumacia, f. obstinacy, contumacie, stubbornnes, wilfulnes,
frowardnes, didainefulnes, contempt. Contumaz, stubborn, obstinate, wilful,
selfe-willed, disobedient, headstrong, froward, disdainful, scornful,
contemptuous. * Contumelia, f. a reproach, a contumely, a slander, a false
imputation, a wrong suggestion. * Contumelioso, m. contumelious, slanderous,
reproachful. * Conturbado, m. troubled, molested, disquieted, vexed. Conturbar,
to trouble, to molest, to disquiet, to vex. Convalecer, yo Convalesco, to
recover health, to wax strong, to be in health. * Convalecido, m. in health,
recovered from sickness, healthful. Convalecimiento, m. recovery of health
Convalescer, vide Convalecer. Convencer, yo Convienco, to convince, to convict,
to overthrow. * Convencido, m. convicted, convinced, overthrown. Convencion,
f. a bargain, an agreement, a covenant, a condition. * Convencional, belonging
to a bargain, agreement or contract. * Convenencia, f. conueniencie, fitness,
meetnesse, aptness, expediencie. Convenga, Convengo, vide Convenir. *
Convenible, conuenable, meet, fit, seemly, convenient, agreeable, expedient,
necessary. Conveniblemente, conveniently, fitly, aptly, conuenably, agreeably,
seemly. * Convenido, m. agreed upon, concluded on. Conveniencia, vide
Convenencia, agreement. Conveniente, vide Convenible. Convenientemente, vide
Conveniblemente. Convenir, Praes. Convengo, convienes, conviene, 1. Praet.
Convine, viniste, vino, Fut. Converne, nas, na, Sub. Praes. Convenga,
Imperfect. Conviniera, convernia, or conviniesse, Fut. Conviniere, to be
expedient, to behooue, to be convenient. Also to come or meet together, to
agree together or iumpe in opinion, to appear, to convent, to cite. Convento,
m. a covent or house of religion, a meeting place. Also a covenant, an
agreement, a place of assembly. Conventual, pertaining to the assembly of a
covent or religious house. * Conventualmente, after the manner of an assembly
or meeting. * Convercion, vide Conversion. * Convernia, vide Convenir. *
Conversable, sociable, conversant, conuersable. Conversacion, f. society,
conversation, company. * Conversado, m. conversant, sociable. Conversar, to
converse, to associate, to company. * Conversion, or Convercion, f.
conversion, change, alteration. * Convertido, m. converted, changed,
translated, turned. Convertir, to turn, to convert, to alter, to translate. *
Convezino, m. a near neighbor. * Convidar, vide Conbidar. * Convienca,
Convienco, vide Convencer. * Conviene, it behooves, it is requisite, it is
necessary. * Convine, conviniesse, conviniera, convino, vide Convenir. *
Convierte, vide Convertir. * Convite, or Conbite, vide Combite. * Convinacion,
a combining, a coupling, a fitting, an agreeing. * Convocar, to call together.
* Con-vosotros, with you, in your company. Conusco, with us. Convusco, with
you. * Conxetura, vide Congetura. * Co^o, id est, Como, as, how, that, seeing.
Copa, f. a cup, a goblet, a bowl. Also a heart at cards. Copa, or Redondez,
any round hollow thing, a round hollow cup. Copada, vide Cogujada. Copado, a
little craier or small boat. Also made after the manner of a cup round. Copado
arbol, a bushie tree made or cut round as a cup. * Copagorja, f. a privy,
close or pocket dagger. Also a short sword. * Copela, f. a little cup. Also a
melting pot or pan. Copero, m. a cupbearer. Copete, m. the forebush of the
hair, a lock of hair before. * Copete de los cabellos, the locks of women's
hairs tuffed out before. * gome de Copei, a kind of gum that comes from the
Indies very medicinable. Copia, f. abundance, store, leave, copy, plenty: a
copy, an example, an original, a transcript. Copiar, to copy out, to write
out, to double. Copilar, to compile, to gather out of books. * Copiosamente,
copiously, plentifully. * Copioso, m. copious, plentiful, abundant, large. *
Copla, f. a staff of verses. * Coplear, to make rimes or verses. copo, maimed,
lame, halting. Copo, m. a bale or bundle of flax, a tuffe of flax or hemp
ready for the spinner, a flake or roll of snow. * Copo, or Orcuzelo, a
pitfall, spring, or ginne to catch birds or beasts in, or a ginne or net to
catch fish. Copo para hilar, a distaffe full of flax. * Copo de nieve, a flake
or roll of snow. * Copo de lana, a lock, flock, fleece, or tuft of wool. *
Copon de cuero, m. a leather jack to drink in. * Copredera, a cover, to cover
a cup or such like, etc. Coquillo, m. a worm that eats vines. * Coquina,
vide Almeja. Coraca, a corselet, a coat of maile, a cuirace, a breast plate, a
corcelet made in the manner of a privy coat, covered with silk or velvet on
the outside. Coraca, or Cibollete, a trusse, a iacket sleeves, a mandillion.
Coracas, cuiraces, or a corselet in the manner of a privy cote plated within,
to bend with the body, covered over with silk, velvet, or such like, etc.
Coracina, vide Corazina, idem. * Coracinas, idem. Coracon, m. the heart,
courage. Coraconcillo yerva, an herb called Saint John's woort. Coradela, f.
the entralles of man or beast, the bowels. Courage, or Coraje, m. courage,
stoutnes, boldness, hardines. Coral, coral, it grows in the sea like a
shrubbed stumpe, and grows to exceeding hardness, after it is taken out of the
sea. * Coralado, m. done with coral. * Corambre, a dicker of leather. * Coraxa
enter dos muros, a skarfe between walls, a defense to keep out the enemy. *
Corazas, vide Coracas. * Corazina, or Coracina, curaces plated within after the
manner of a privy coat covered over with silk, velvet, or such like, etc.
vide Coracas. * Corbe, m. a swelling in a horse called the curb. * Corbo, or
Corvo, m. crooked, bent hooked. Corbado, vide Corvado, crooked. Corca, f. a
faune, a calfe of a hind, a young hind. * corcal, m. a Veldefare, a bird
bigger then a thrush, of the same color. * corcales de passo, Veldefares that
come and go to another country or place. * Corcesca, f. a kind of weapon
like a halbard. Corcha, f. cork. Corchete de vestidura, a claspe, a hook, a
sergeant, a catchpole. * Corchetes, or Garfios, hooks and eyes to claspe
clothes together with. Corcho, vide Corcha. Corcho de colmena, a Bee-hiue of
cork. * Corcilla, or Corzilla, a roe-bucke, a little dear. * Corcillo, m.
young venison. * Corco, m. a dear, venison, a man of Corsica. * Corco, vide
Corcha. Corcoba, f. a bunch in the back, a croope, a knob. also a shrimpe.
Corcobado, m. crook backed, bunch backed, full of knobs or kurs, crooked. *
Corcobar, to bow, to bend, to make crooke-backed. Corcobos, m. the lifting of
a horse to cast a man out of the saddle. * Corcova, vide Corcoba. * Corcovado,
vide Corcobado. * Corcovos, vide Corcobos. Cordal, the hindermost chock-tooth.
Cordel, or Cordon, m. a roape, a halter, a string, a hatband, a bow-string. *
Cordellate, a kind of course cloth with great threads in it. * Cordenada, f.
vide Cordonada, a twitch or pluck with a coard, a blow or lash with a coard.
Cordera, f. a female lamb. * Corderia, f. coarding, great store of coards.
Also a place where lambs are. * Corderico, m. a young lamb. Corderillo, m.
idem. * Cordero, m. a male lamb. * Cordero ahijado, m. a sucking lamb. *
Cordezuela, f. a little roape, a small coard. * Cordiaco morbo, a kind of
disease at the heart. * Cordial, cordial, good for the heart. * Cordillera, f.
the running along of a rock in great length. Cordojo, m. a heart grief,
sorrow, teene, trouble of mind. * Cordon, vide Cordel, m. also the ridge in a
wall made more out then the wall, running all along. Cordonada, or Cordenada,
coarded, bound with coardes. A blow with a string, or lash with a whip. *
Cordonado, m. idem. Cordoncilla, f. a little coard. * Cordoncillo, m. idem. *
Cordonero, m. a roape-maker, one that sells roapes. * Cordonzilla, f. a
little coard. * Cordonzillo, m. a small coard, a whipcoard. * Cordua, vide
Cordouan. * capatos de Cordua, Spanish leather shoes. * Cordovan, cordouan or
Spanish leather. * Cordura, f. wisdom, gravity, discretion. * Corea, vide
Correa. corita, or curita, f. a young stock dove. Also a town in Spain. Also
the name of a Historiographer of Aragon. Corma, f. a little pair of stocks.
Also a clog of wood or such like for horses, or to put on boys feet that
run from their masters. * Cornada, a push with a horn of a beast, etc. *
Cornadillo, a Diminutiue of Cornado, a little small piece of coin. Cornado, m.
a farthing, or small piece of money. * Cornamenta, the horning of any thing.
Cornamusa, f. a cornamuse, a horne-pipe, a bag pipe. * Cornarina, f. a kind of
black Onyx stone, or a thing made of horn. Corneador, m. a pusher with the
horns. Cornear, to horn, to push with the horns, to shocke or but as rams
do, to set horns upon ones head. Corneja, f. a daw, a rooke, a chough, a crow.
Cornerina, vide Cornarina, or made of horn. Corneta, f. a cornet, an
instrument of music. Also the ensign or cornet which is carried in a troop
of horse. * Cornetica, f. a little cornet, an instrument so called. *
Cornezuela, f. a little horn or bugle. Cornicabra, f. the tree from whence
Turpentine is made, a Turpentine tree. * Cornifero, that bears horns. *
Cornigero, m. that bears horns. * Corniza, f. garnishing in Masons art, or
Ioyners art. Also the cornell or long cherrie-tree, hounds-tree,
dog-berrie-tree, prick-timber-tree, or gaterisberrie tree. * Cornizolos,
haw-berries, gaterisberries. Cornudo, m. horned, a cuckold. Also a kind of
fish. * Coro, m. a quier, a company, the turning of the sail. * de Coro, by
heart, without book. * corobaro, m. an Island in the Indies. Coroca, f. a
painted hat very high of paper set on the head of a witch or bawd riding up
and down the streets therewith on an ass for a punishment. * Corolado, m.
vide Coralado, done with coral. * Coron, a city in Africa. Corona, f. a
crown, a garland, a miter, a circlet, a chaplet, a diadem, a company, a
crew. Also a sign in heaven. * Corona de rey, the herb called Melilot. Corona
de religioso, a priests or friars shaven head or crown. Coronacion, f. a
crowning, a coronation. * Coronado, m. crowned, compassed round. Coronar, to
crown, to engarland. * Coronel, m. a Collonell over a regiment. * Coronelia,
f. a collonelship. * Coronica, f. a Chronicle. * Coronicia, vide Coronica. *
Coronilla de la cabeca, f. the crown or sconce of the head. * Coronilla, f. a
coronet or little crown, a chaplet, a circlet. Also a certain herb.
Coronista, m. a Chronicler, a writer of chronicles. * Coroza, vide Coroca.
Corporal, corporal, belonging to the body. * Corporal, m. of, or pertaining
to the body. Also the box of linen cloth wherein the priests keep or
wrappe their host or sacrament. * Corporeo, m. corporal, having a body.
Corpulencia, f. corpulencie, greatness of body. * Corpulento, m. corpulent,
big, great of body. * corra, vide Zorra. Corral, a yard, a court, a
quadrangle to keep foul, poultrie, or such like for provision of a house, the
backeside of a house, an ox stall, or yard where cattle go, a piece of
ground impaled. Corral de gallinos, a henne-yarde, a court to keep poultrie
in. * Corral, or Cueva, a vault, a cellar, a cave, a den, a pit. Corrallillo,
m. a little court, yard, or backeside. * Corrambre, a dicker of leather.
Correa, f. a stripe, a scourge, a band, a girt, a cingle, a latchet of a shoe.
Correa de cuero, f. a strap, a belt, a stirrup leather, a thong of leather, a
leather girdle. Correcion, f. punishment, correction, chastisement. Corrector,
m. a corrector, a censor, a punisher. Corredera, f. a race for horses, a horse
race. Corrediza, f. a sliding knot. Corredor, m. a runner, a gallerie, a
curtain. Also one that sells old clothes, a broker, a messenger, a running
post, a forrager. Corredor, or Medianero, a herald, a messenger, an
interpreter, a pursiuant, a broker. Corredor de casa, a gallerie of a house
standing on pillars or turned poastes, the lowest gallerie, the higher the
Spaniard calls Galleria. Corredor del campo, a forrager, one that forrageth
or runs about the country for to discover. Corredor que corre, a running
post. * Correduria, f. a race or running place, brokage of a broken between
party and party, a going on bootehaling. * Salir a Corredurias, to go on
bootehaling, to go up and down robbing and spoiling the country. * Corregido,
m. corrected, amended. Corregidor, m. a corrector, an amender. Also an officer
in Spain, the chief Iusticer or governor of a town. Corregidor oficial, a
justice, a corrector or governor of a town, a clarke of the market, one that
has authority to reform waights, measures, and sundry other abuses.
Corregimiento, m. a justices office, or authority. Corregir, yo Corrijo, to
correct, to amend. Corregudo, m. knotgrasse. * Correhuela yerva, swines grass,
knotgrasse, or blood woort. Correndilla, f. a race for horses. Correo, m. a
post, a carrier, a bag for money. Correr, to run, to flow, to make
ashamed, to bait a bull, etc. Correr a las parejas, to run alike. * Correr
sortijas, to run at the ring. Correr toros, to bait bulls. * a todo Correr
huyr, to run away as fast as one can. Correria, f. running, coursing, a going
or running out of soldiers for boot. * Corresca, f. a kind of halbert. *
Correspondencia, f. answering together. Correspondiente, answering together,
that agrees with, that answers to. * Corresponder, to answer together or
alike, to be correspondent, to be answerable, to agree unto. Corretage, m.
brokage money. * Corretor, a corrector, an amender. Corrida, f. a course, a
running over. Also a shaming or putting out of countenance. * de Corrida,
hastily, runningly, with speed. Corrido, m offended, ashamed. * Corrido estoy,
J am ashamed of it. Corriente, running, a small brook, the channel, stream or
current of a river. Corrihuela, f. knotgrasse. * Corrija, Corrijo, vide
Corregir. Corillo, m. a company standing round. * Corriola, f. knotgrasse or
swines grass. Also the greater bindweede or ropeweede. * Corrimiento, m. a
running, a shaming. Also a running of the rheum. Corro de toro, a bull
baiting. * Corroborado, m. strengthened. * Corroborar, to strengthen. *
Corroca, vide Coroca. * Corrolarios, m. preambles or forespeeches. *
Corrompedor, m. a corrupter. Also a briber. Corromper, to corrupt, to putrify.
Also to bribe. * Corrompido, m. corrupted, rotten, putrified. Corrompimiento,
m. corrupting, spoiling, marring. Also a bribing. * Corrupcion, f. corruption.
Also briberie. * Corruptible, that may be corrupted. * Corrupto, m corrupted. *
Corser, m. a courser, a great horse for armed men. * Corsia, the orlop of a
ship. * Corta de razones, short witted. * Cortabolsas, a cutpurse. * Cortada
ropa, a garment cut out and not finished. * Cortadero, m. a cutting, a place
where one cutteth. Also a place where men backbite others. * Cortado, m. cut.
Cortador, m. a cutter. Cortadora cosa, f. a thing that cutteth well. Cortadura,
f. cutting the iags or outsides of leaves. Cortapisa, the furre or lining about
the skirts of a garment. Cortar, to cut, to take off the bark. * Cortarse, or
Desmayarse, to fall into a swoune. Corte, f. a princes court, a stately court
yard, a parliament, a court of aldermen. Also the edge of a weapon or knife. *
hazer Cortes, to call a parliament. * el Corte, the edge of any weapon or
knife. * Corteca, vide Corteza. * Cortecon, vide Cortezon. * Cortedad, f,
shortness, breuity, niggardliness, pinching. * Cortepiza, or Cortepisa, the
furre or lining about the skirts of a garment. Cortesana, f. a woman courtier.
* Cortesanamente, courteously, with much courtlinesse or courtesy. *
Cortesania, f. courtiership. Cortesano, m. a courtier. Cortes, courteous,
gentle, meek, affable. Cortesia, f. courtesy, kindness, mildness,
meekness, gentleness, affability. Cortesmente, courteously. Corteza, f. the
bark, the rind, the crust, the shell of a thing, a paring of any thing. *
Cortezon, m. a crust. Cortina, f. a curteine of a bed, a curteine of a wall,
running leauell from one bulwark to another. * Cortinaje, m. belonging to a
curteine of earth, or also to the curteine of a bed. Cortinal, a yard or court
of a house. Cortijo, a hamlet, a farm. Cortijos, a field of errable land, a
dairie house. * Corto, m, short, weak hearted. * Corto de razones, short
witted. Corva de la pierna, the hamme. Corvado, or Corbado, crooked. Corvadura,
f. crookednes. * Corvar, to bend, to make crooked. also to stowpe. * Corve,
vide Corbe. * Corven^a rasa, the plain ground. * Coruja ave, f. a howlet. *
Corvillo, as Miercoles de corvillo, Ash Wednesday. * Corvina, f. a kind of sea
fish. Corun^a, f. a haven town within GaliZia in Spain, called the Groyne.
Corvo, or Corbo, crooked. * Corusa, vide Corusca. Corusca, f. an owl. Corza,
f. a roe-bucke. * corzal, vide corcal. * Corzilla, vide Corcilla, f. *
Corzillo, m. idem. * Corzo, vide Corco. Cosa, f. a thing, a matter. Cosario,
vide Cossario, a pyrate at sea, a rouer at sea. * Coscogita, vide Coscojita.
Coscoja, f. a tree whereon Diersgraine grows. Coscojar, a grove of such
trees. * Coscojita, or Coscoxita, a hoppe upon one leg. * Coscoxita, idem.
Cosecha. f. profit, fruit, reuenewe, harvest, grape gathering, gathering of
fruit, getting of honey. Cosedura, f. sowing together. * Coselete, vide
Cosselete. Coser, yo Cueso, to sow, to stitch. * Coshorron, vide Coxcorron.
Cosido, m. sowed together, stitched together. * Cosidura, f. sowing, stitching.
* Cosilla, or Cosita, f. a little thing. Cosmografia, f. a description of the
world. Cosmografo, m. a describer of the world. * Coso, m. the bulbaiting
place. Cosolete, vide Cosselete, m. a corslet. * Cospanco, the paunch, the
belly. Cosquillas, f. tickling. * hazer Cosquillas, to tickle. * Cosquilloso,
m. ticklish, also skittish as beasts are. * Cossa, vide Cosa. Cossario, m. a
pyrate at sea, a rouer at sea. Cosselete, a corslet. Cosso, a place for
bulbaiting. Costa, f. cost, charge, expense. Also the sea coast. Also that
which shooemakers use to drive in upon the last to raise a shoe higher in the
instep. Costado, m. a flank, the side. Costal, m. a bag, a wallet, a budget,
a cloakebagge, a sack. * Costanilla, f. a little side of a hill. Costar, to
cost, to be at charges. * Costear, to coast along the sea. * Costezica, f. a
little side of a hill. * Costilla, f. a rib. * Costillas, the ribs. *
Costosamente, costly, chargeablie. Costoso, m. chargeable, costly. Costra, f. a
crust, a bark, a skin parched on a wound. * Costren^ido, m. compelled,
constrained. Costren^imiento, m. a constraint. Costren^ir, yo Costrin^o, to
constrain. Costribar, to stuff, to thrust up together. * Costrin^e,
costrin^esse, vide Costren^ir. Costumbre, f. custom, fashion, women's flowers.
Costura, f. a seame, a sowing, a mending. Also a chinke. Costurero, m. a
botcher, a mender. Cota, f. a coat of maile. * Cotejado, m. coated, conferred,
compared. Cotejamiento, m. coating, conferring, comparing. * Cotejar, to quote,
to compare. * Cotexar, vide Cotejar. Cotidiano, m. daily. Coto, m. a park, a
warren. * Cotonia, f. a kind of cotton. Cotral, cattle drawn from the heard.
* Coturno, m. a fashion of startup or buskin coming to the calfe of the leg.
Also a high soled slipper, moile or pantofle, likewise a lofty and high style.
Also a tragedy. * Couarde, m. a coward, a lubberly dastard. * Couardia, f.
cowardice, want of courage, pusillanimitie. * Coxar, vide Coxear, to halt, to
limpe, to go lame. * Coxcorrones, m. knocks with the knuckles of the fingers.
Also knocks of the head against the wall. Coxear, to halt. Coxedad, f. vide
Coxera. * Coxera, f. lamenesse. * Coxijo, m. the pain, grief or vexation of
any thing. Coxin, m. a cushion, a pillow. Coxixos, m. griefs. Coxo, m. lame. *
Coxo color, dark yellow color. * Coxorron, vide Coshorron, bobs with the
knuckles, or iolts of the head against the wall. Coxquear, to halt, to go lame.
Coxquillas, vide Cosquillas, tickling. * Coxquillosico, m. somewhat ticklish. *
Coxquilloso, ticklish. Also skittish as a horse or other beast. * Coyunda, f. a
yoke for oxen. * Coyuntura, f. a joining together. Cozedizo, m. sodden, to be
sodden. * Cozedor, m. a boiler. Cozedura, f. seething, boiling. Cozer, yo
Cuezo, to sees, to boil. * Coz, f. the kick of the heel or foot. Cozido,
sodden, boiled. Cozimiento, m. seething, boiling. Cozina, f. a kitchen.
Cozinar, to play the cook. * Cozinera, f. a she cook. Cozinero, m. a man
cook.
C R
* Crabrio, vide Cabrio, m. a transome of a house for building. * Crambonera,
vide Cambronera. * Craneo, m. the brain-pan. * Crea, f. a kind of linen cloth.
Creado, vide Criado. Crecer, or Crescer, to grow, to increase. Crecido, or
Crescido, m. grown, increased. * Credito, m. credit, trust, belief, affiance
* Credo, m. the belief, the creed. * en menos que un credo, in less time then
a man might say his belief or creed. * Credulo, credulous, believing quickly.
* Creedera cosa, f. a thing to be believed. Creencia, f. belief, credit.
Creer, to believe, to trust verily. * Crehencia, f. vide Creencia. * Creher,
vide Creer. Creencha, f. the partition of the hair. * Creo, I believe.
Crescer, to grow, to increase, to wax, to flow. Crescido, m. grown up. *
Cresciente, growing or rising as water. Also the cressant or half moon. *
Cresciente del rio, the rising of the river or water. * Cresciente de mar, the
flood or flowing tide. Crescimiento, m. growing, increasing, a waxing, a
flowing. * Cresciuto, m. vide Crescido, grown great. * Cresdido, vide
Crescido. Crespa, f. curling of hair or of feathers. * Crespadura, idem.
Crespa de gallo, a cocks-combe. Also an herb so called. Crespo, curle-headed.
* Crespina, or Guirnalda de seda, a silk riband, a garland of silk. *
Crespina, or uva spina, a gooseberrie. * Cresta, a crest, a comb of a cock.
Also a bunch of feathers in a helmet. * Creta, a chap in the hand, or in the
ground. Creyble, credible, worthy to believed. * Creydo, m. believed. Creyer,
vide Creer, to believe. * Creynte, as Hazer en creynte, to make to believe.
Cria, bringing up. Criacion, f. the creation. * Criadilla, f. a little wench,
or a kind of mushrom growing under ground in Spain. Criado, m. a servant, a
nurse child. Also bred up, nurtured. Criador, a creator, a nurse, a bringer up.
Crianca, f. bringing up, good manners, education, civility. * Crianza, idem.
Criar, to create, to bring up, to grow, to nourish. Criar nin^o, to bring up,
or nurse up a little child. Criar la planta, to dress and bring up a young
plant. * Criation, f. a creation. Criatura, f. a creature. Criatura mal
parrida, f. a child borne before his time. * Criazon, f. scurffe, itch, scab.
* Criba, vide Criva. * Cribar, vide Crivar. Crica de muger, f. the dew-lap in
the privy part of a maid or virgin. Crimen, a fault, a crime, * Criminal,
faulty, criminal. Criminalmente, faultily. Criminosamente, idem. Criminoso,
m. full of faults. Crin, f. the hair. Crinado, m. that has hair. Also hair
dressed or set as women do. * Crinar, to comb or dress the hair. Crines, f.
hairs, the m^ne of a horse, mule, or such like beast. Crisma, f. ointment,
holy anointing, the crisme used at the christening of children. * Crismado,
m. anointed with the crysme or holy oil. Crismar, to anoint with holy oil.
Crisol, m. a goldsmiths melting pot. * Crispadura de los cabellos, f. a
curling, frizling, crisping, or plotting the hair. Cristal, crystal.
Cristalino, m. of crystal, christalline, very clear, transparant. Cristel,
or ayuda, a glister to purge with. Cristiandad, f. christianity, christendom.
Cristiano, m. a Christian. Cristo, m. Christ. * Cristoval, m. Christopher, a
proper name. * Critical, critical, which judges by observations written. *
Critico, critic, which judges, that gives judgment. Criva, or carranca, f.
a sieue to sift with. Crivar, to sift. * Criznejas, f. high standing feathers
in a pluine of feathers. Crocodilo, vide Cocodrilo, a huge serpent called a
crocodill. * Cromgo, vide Congrio, a cungar. * Cronica, a chronicle, a setting
down of memorable acts and matters done with the time expressed. * Cronicador,
vide Cronista, m. a chronicler. * Cronista, or Cronicador, idem. * Crosificar,
vide Crucificar. * Croto, m. a foul called a Bittour. * Crucifero, or
Crucigero, a bearer of the cross. Crucificado, m. crucified. Crucificar,
Praes. yo Crucifico, 1. Praet. yo Curcifique, to crucify, to nail to a
cross. Crucifique, vide Crucificar. * Crucifixo, m. crucified, nailed on the
cross. Also the crucifixe. * Crudamente, cruelly, rawly, bloudily. * Crudeca,
vide Crudeza. Crudeza, rawnes. Crudo, m. raw, bloody, crude. Also cruel, fell,
moodie. * Crueca, vide Crueza. Cruel, cruel, fell, fierce. Crueldad, f.
cruelty. Cruelmente, cruelly. * Cruero, vide Recuero, a fodderer of cattle, a
carrier that drives great beasts with carriages. Crueza, f. cruelty. Crus,
vide Cruz. * Crustula, the cream that rises on milk, etc. * Cruxia, f. a
young crane bird. * Cruxia, the walk a board a gallerie between the
forecastle and the hinder deck. Cruxiendo, crackling, russling, or making a
crackling noise. * Cruxir, to crackle, to russle as chamlot, silks, apparel,
or such like. Cruz, f. a cross. * Cruzada, f. a kind of the Popes Bull,
granting the sign of the cross to those that took the same. Also the sign
of the cross a man carries about him. Also vide Cruzado. Cruzado, m. a piece
of money so called, in Portingall of the value of a French crown. Also a
cross way also crossed. * Cruzados los bracos, the arms crossed. Cruzar, to
cross in going. Cruzero en edeficio, a kind of quartered building. Cruzezita,
f. a little cross.
C V
* Cuadernar, to bring into four quarters or corners, to make of one four, to
bind books. * Cuaderno, that which is four fold, that which has four
corners, a sheet of paper turned into four, as stationers do in binding
their books. * Cuajado, m. curded, congealed. Cuajamiento, m. curding,
congealing. Cuajar, to curd, to congeale. Cuajo, a curd or congeling, a runnet
for cheese. * Cuando, vide Quando. * cuane, vide Zuane. * cuanete, vide
Zuanete. * Cuanto, vide Quanto. Cuarenta, vide Quarenta. Cuarto, vide Quarto.
Cuatro, vide Quatro. * Cuas, sea weeds. Cuba, f. a tub of wood to hold water
or wine. Cuba de vino, a tub of wine. Cuba en que hazen vendimia, a tub to
receive wine from the press. Cubebas, f. a kind of poisoned herb, a fruit so
called. Cubero, m. a tub maker. Cubertizo, m. any thing that covers, properly
used of the house. * Cuberta de bestia, a cloth to cover a horse or beast. *
Cubica, as Geometrica cubica, a geometrical cubicke. * Cubico pie, a foot by
the squire or rule. Cubierta, vide Cobertor, a cover. * Cubil, a cup, a tub.
Cubierto, m. covered. * Cubilete, m. a drinking cup of silver, or such a cup as
iuglers use to show diverse tricks by. Cubillo, vide Abadejo. Also a little
turret on a wall or castle. Cubo, m. a small water mill, a bucket to draw water
out of a well. Also a navy or round stock of a cart wheel where the spoakes
are fastened. Also a high turret in a castle. * Cubo geometrico, a Geometrical
square. * Cubril, any thing to cover, defend or shelter. Cubrir, to cover, to
hide. * Cucaracha, a kind of spider. Cubinos, m. young pigs. Cuchara, f. a
spoone. Cucharada, f. a spoonefull. * Cuchilla, a chopping knife, a cleauer. *
Cuchilla de montan^a, f. a ridge of a hill. Cuchillada, f. a gash with a sword
or knife, a cut. * a Cuchilladas, by cuts, by slashes. * Cuchillazo, m. a
fauchion, a great knife. * Cuchillero, a knife maker. Cuchillo, a knife. *
Cuchillon, m. a great knife. * Cuchillos de las alas, the pinnions of the
wings. Also knives with the mark of the wing in them. Cucita, a voice used in
calling a little dog, as in English pusse, pusse. * Cuclilla, as sentarse en
Cuclilla, to sit on his buttocks, to sit rucking or cowring down. Cuclillo
ave, m. a cuckoo. * Cudicia, vide Codicia, f. covetousness. * Cudiciar, to
covet. * Cueba, a cave or den in the ground, a cellar, a vault, a great tub
wherein new wine runs when it is pressed. * Cuebano, vide Cuevano. * Cueca
del ojo, vide Cuenca del ojo. * cueco, wooden pattens to wear on the feet, or
high cork shoes to raise one from the dirt. * Cuelga, Cuelgo, vide Colgar. *
Cuellar, a city in Spain in the province of Estremadura. Cuello, m. a neck,
the collar of a garment or cape of a cloak. Cuellos, m. ruffes. Cuenca, a round
dish of wood or such like. Cuenca del ojo, the round hollownesse wherein the
eye is placed. Cuenta, f. an account, a beade. * dar en la Cuenta, to
understand, to perceive, to hit just on the matter. * tener Cuenta con muger,
to have to do with a woman. * a Cuenta mia, id est, a cargo mio, on my credit,
on my word. Cuente, Cuento, vide Contar. * Cuentas, a pair of beads, accounts.
Cuento, m. a number, a poale, ten hundred thousand, a post to bear up a wall,
a tale, a history. The blunt end of a staff or pike. * Tener cuento con
alguno, to watch any one what he does. Cuento, or Razonamiento, a reasoning.
Cuento, or Millon, ten hundred thousand. * Cuera, f. a Spanish leather ierkin.
* Cuerbo, vide Cuervo. Cuerda, f. a string of an instrument of music, a
fishing line, a coard, a roape, the reine of a bridle, a soldiers match. Also
a wise and discreet woman. * Cuerda encendida, a lighted match. Cuerda, de
vihuela, the string of a violl. * Dar la Cuerda, to rack. Also to give al and
keep nothing for himself. Cuerdamente, wisely discreetly. Cuerdo, m. wise,
discreet. * Cuerezico, m. a small bottle. * Cuernero, m. one that sounds a
horn, one that sells or makes horns. Cuerno, m. a horn. Cuero, m. a hide
or skin of leather, a bottle made of a goats skin the hair inward dressed
with rozen and pitch to carry or hold wine in. Also a drunken man. * Cuero
adobado, m. leather dressed. Cuero, or odre, a bottle to carry wine. Cuerpo, m.
a body, a corpse, a volum of a book. Also a corporation. * Cuerpo de guardia, a
court of guard, the body of the watch. Cuervo, m. a raven, a crow. * Cuervo
marino, m. a cormorant, a sea drake. * Cuese, Cueso, vide Coser. Cuesco, vide
Cuexco, crafty. Also the stone or core of any fruit. Also a fart. Cuesta, f. a
rib, a side of a hill. Cuesta arriba, up the hill. Cuesta abaxo, down a hill.
* a Cuestas, f. on the shoulders or back. * a Cuestas, as Sesenta an^os a
cuestas, threescore years old. * Cueva, f. a celler, a vault, a cave in the
ground, a great tub whereinto new wine runs when it is pressed, a cave or
den in the ground. Cuevano de vimbres, a wicker basket. Cuexco de fruta, a
stone or coare of any fruit, Also crafty. mugeres Cuexcas, subtle crafty
women. * Cueze, Cuezo, vide Cozer. * no se le cueze el pan, he will not tarry,
he is in haste, he will not have patience, and tarry till the bread be baked.
cufre, m. sulphur, brimstone. Cugujada, vide Cogujada, or copada, a lark.
Cugulla, or Cogolla, f. a coule or hood such as Monks and Friars use to wear.
* cuico, or Suico, a Switzer. Cuidado, vide Cuydado, m. care. * Cuidadoso, vide
Cuydadoso, careful. * Cuidar, vide Cuedar. Cuidosamente, vide Cuydosamente. *
cuin, vide Zuin. Cuita, f. carefulnes, anguish, misery. * Cuitadillas, f.
little careful souls. Cuitado, careful, miserable or full of anguish.
Culantrillo, and Culantro de pozo, an herb called Maiden hair. Culantro,
Coriander. Cular, the gut of the fundament. Culebra, f. a snake, a serpent, an
adder. Culebrilla, the itch, a tetter, a little snake. * Culebrina, f. a piece
of ordinance called a culuerin. * Culibre, m. the roundnes or bigness of
bullets. Culo, m. the arse, fundament, or tail. Culpa, f. a fault, blame. *
Culpable, blame worthy, guilty, culpable. Culpadamente, faultily. * Culpado,
m. blamed, found fault with. Culpar, to blame, to find fault with. *
Cultivado, tilled, dressed, manured or eared. Cultivar, to till, to dress, to
manure, plow or to ear the ground. * Culto, as Culto devino, m. godly worship,
worshipping of God. cumaque, m. an herb used in steed of bark for to tan
leather with. cumaya, f. a night crow. * cumbar, vide Zumbar. * Cumbleca, vide
Combleca. * cumbre, vide Zumbre. Cumbre, f. the top. cumillo, or jarrillo, an
herb called Dragon. cumo, m. juice, sap, inward moisture. cumoso, m. full of
juice. Cumple, it must be, it is convenient. * me Cumple yr, it is convenient
that I go, it is requisite that I depart. Cumpledero, m. that which is to be
fulfilled. * Cumpletas, f. a prayer used to be said after euensong so called.
* Cumplidamente, fully, completely. * Cumplidero, that which is to be
completed and ended. * Cumplidissimo, m. most accomplished or perfect. *
Cumplido, m. complete, accomplished; or made perfect. Cumplimiento, m.
accomplishing. Cumplir, to accomplish, to be convenient. * Cun de amor, a
sweet herb so called. Cuna, f. a cradle. Cundir, to creep, to spread by
little and little. Cun^a, f. a wedge to cleave wood. * Cun^ada, f. a sister in
law, a brothers wife, or sister to my wife. Cun^ado, m. a brother in law, a
sisters husband, or brother to my wife. * Cun^ar moneda, to coin money.
cun^iga, a stock or kindred in Spain so called. * cun^o, vide Zun^o. Cun^o, a
copper smith, or brasiers hammer, a hammer to stamp or print money. * Cupe,
Cupiera, Cupiesse, Cupo, vide Caber. * el no tuvo blanca, en que al otro no
cupiesse su part, he had not a penny in his purse, whereof the other had not
his share. Cura, care, a cure of physic. Also a curate of a parish.
Curaderia, f. a tutorship, a gardianship. * Curado, m. cured or healed. A
curatship of a parish. Curador, m. a governor, a tutor, a guardian. * Curadura
de liencos, a whiting of linen cloth. curana paloma, a stocke-doue. *
Curandero, m. a bleaching place or whiting place for linen clothes. Curar, to
cure; to dress, to care for. * Curar liencos, to whiten linen clothes. *
curdo, better with the left hand then with the right, left handed. * Curen^a
rasa, a plain stock or carriage for ordinance. Ponerse a Curen^a rasa, to
put himself or themselves out of covert or hold that they may be shot at by
the ordinance. * Curia, f. a court for justice. * curiaga, f. a strap of
leather to cast a dart with, or a whip to whip with as coach men use. * Curial,
of or belonging to a court of justice, an assistant in a court of justice.
Curiosidad, f. curiosity, nicenes. Curioso, m. curious, nice, scrupulous,
careful, diligent. curita, vide corita. currador, m. a tanner, a currier.
currana, f. a wild pigeon. currar cueros, to currie leather. currear, to hum
as a be or fly does. curriaga, f. a strap of leather to cast a dart with, a
whip or lash of leather to whiphorses. * curriagon, m. the stock of a whip
that coachmen or carters use. curron, m. a leather budget, a scrip, a shepherds
pouch. curroncillo, or curronzillo, a little budget or small pouch. *
Currucion, f. corruption, putrefaction. Cursado, m. commonly used. * Cursar, to
use commonly. * Curso, m. a course, a race. * Curtido, m. tanned. Curtidor, m.
a tanner. Curtidura, f. tanning, steeping. Curtir, to steep, to tan. Curtir
cueros, to tan hides. * curujano, m. a surgeon. Curuxa, f. a nightcrow. *
curzir, vide Zurzir. * Custodia, custody, keeping, charge. * cutano, or
Fulano, m. such a one. Cutir, to shake. * Cuxa, f. the rest for the lance. *
Cuxote, m. armor for the thigh. Cuydado, m. thought, care, regard, reverence.
Cuydadoso, m. careful. * Cuydar, to think, to take care. * Cuydosamente,
heedfully. Cuydoso, vide Cuydadoso. Cuyo, whose. Cuyta, f. carfulness,
anguish, misery. * Cuytadillas, little careful souls. Cuytado, m. careful,
vexed, perplexed, miserable. * Cuzina, vide Cozina, f. a kitchen. * Cuzinero,
or Cozinero, m. a cook. cuzon, m. a stinking herb so called. Cysne, m. a
swan.
D
* DAca, give hither. * Daca yerva, a kind of herb. * no se me Da nada, I
care not. * no se le Da nada, he cares not. * Dacio, tax, custom, toll.
Dadiva, f. a gift, a bribe, a reward. Dadivas, f. gifts. Dadivosamente,
liberally, bountifully. Dadivosidad, f. bounty, liberality. Dadivoso, m.
liberal, bountiful. Dado, m. given. Also a die. Dado, m. a die to play
withal. * Dador, m. a giver. Dados, m. dice to play withal. Daga, f a dagger.
* Dale, give him, or strike him, or set on him. * Dalgo, as hijo Dalgo, a
gentleman. * Dalle, a staff having in it a dagger or sword blade, Also a kind
of syeth. Also Dalle for Dad le, strike him. Dalphin, m. a dolphin. *
Daltibaxo, id est, de Altibaxo, from high and low, up and down. Dama, f. a
dame, a lady. Also the queen at chesse play. * Damascado, m. apparelled with
damask or made damask wise. * Damasco, m. damask silk. * Damasquillo, m. a
little damask prune, damask of China. * Dameria, f. belonging to ladies.
Danca, f. a dance. * Dancado, m. daunced. Dancador, m. a dauncer. * Dancante,
one dancing. Dancar, to dance. * Dan^ado, m. damnified, hurt. * Dan^ador, m.
one that does damnifie. * Dan^ar, to hurt, to damnifie. * Dan^ino, m. vide
Dan^oso. Dan^o, m. loss, hurt, damage. * Dan^osamente, with hurt, loss or
damage. Dan^oso, m. hurtful. * Danubio, the greatest river in Europe, rising
out of the hill Arnoba in Germany, and passing by many countries keeps his
name. Dar, Praes. Indicat, Doy, das, da. 1. Praet. Di, diste, dio. Fut. Dare,
ras, ra, Sub. Praes. De, Imperfect. Diesse, daria, or Diera, Fut. Diere, to
give, to strike, to hit, to yield, to rest or stay in a place, to hit upon or
light upon. * Dar puerta segura, to shut the door fast, to make all safe. *
Dar carena, to turn up the keele or that part of a ship or vessel that goes
under water to canke and dress it for a new voyage. * Dar garrote, to
strangle. * sin Darme part, unwitting to me, I not knowing of it. * Dar con
ellos, to light or hit on them, to find them out. * Dar boxes, to cry out, to
exclaim. * Dar en cara, to vpbraid, to cast in the teeth. * Dar en los
enimigos, to shoot among the enemies, to light or hit on his enemies. * Dar de
mano, to becken or make a sign with the hand, or to put aside with the hand.
Also to take leave. * Dar del pie, to tread on the foot for a sign to beware.
Also to spurn aside with the foot. Daragoncia, f. an herb called dragons. *
Dardaso, or Dardazo, the blow or stroke with a dart. * Dardillo, m. a little
dart. Dardo, m. a dart. * Darga, vide A darga, a buckler. * Darico de oro, id
est, de Arico de oro, an earing of gold. * Darmas, id est, de armas, as Hombres
darmas, armed men. * Daseme poco, I little esteem it. * Dasermar, vide
Desarmar. * Data, f. as Dia de la data, the dating of a writing. * Datil, m. a
date, the fruit of the palm tree. * Datilado color, date color. Dativo caso,
the dative case.
D E
De, of, from, out of. * De abaxo, de arriba, from beneath, from above. * De
aca, from hence. De aculla, from thence. De alla, from thence. De ally, from
that place. De ally aca, from that place, hither. De aqui, from hence. * De
aqui y de alla, from hence and from thence. De aqui adelante, henceforth. De
aqui a poco, within short space. * De arriba, from upward. De ay, from to day,
from this present. * De ay adelante, from this day foreward. * De corrida, f.
in haste, runningly. Also shamefully. De lleno, fully. De part de fuera,
outwardly. Dean, m. a Deane. Deanadgo, m. a deanery. * Debajo, below,
underneath. Debalde, vile, nothing worth, freely, without giving any thing
therefore. Debastia, a generation of kings. Debate, m. contention, debate,
strife. Debatir, to strive. Debaxo, under, below. * Deber, vide Dever. Debil,
weak, feeble, faint. * Debelidad, or Debilitad, feebleness, weakness.
Debilitadamente, weakly, feebly. Debilitado, m. weakened, made feeble.
Debilitar, to enfeeble, to weaken. * Debodo, a manner of swearing. * Debolver,
to return, or restore back, to chop and change. De buena gana, with a good
will. * Debujado, painted, pourtraied, drawn. Debujar, to paint, to pourtray,
to draw. * Debujo, m. a pourtraiture, Art of pourtraying. Debuxador, m. a
drawer of pictures, a pourtraytor. Debuxado, m. pourtraied, drawn out.
Debuxar, to draw out a picture, to pourtray. Debuxo, art of drawing or
pourtraiture. De cada part, from every side. * Decada, f. a decade or
consisting of ten, as Titus Liuius divided his work into ten, or Decades. *
Decado, vide Dechado, an example to write by, a pattern, a copy. * Decalogo,
a decalogue containing the ten commandments of God given to Moses. * Decano,
or Provisor, m. a Deane. * Decendencia, f. posterity, issue, success. *
Decendido, m. succeeded. * Decendiente, one of that race. Decendientes,
posterity, childrens children, etc. Decendimiento, m. a descent, a pedigree,
coming down, bringing down. Decendir, yo diciendo, to come down. *
Decentado, m. an eating or repast begun. * Decentar, to begin a repast, or
eating of any thing. * Decente, comely, decent, orderly. * De cerca, near,
hard by. Decession, f. a predecessorship, a departing, a giving place to.
Decessor, m. a predecessor in an office, one that goes away and gives over
his office or place to another. Dechado, m. a pattern; example, or copy. *
Decidir, to decide a matter. * Decienda, Deciendo, vide Decendir. * Decifrar,
to decipher. Decimo, m. the tenth. * Decimo quarto, the fourteenth. * Decimo
quinto, the fifteenth. * Decimo sesto, or sexto, the sixteenth. * Decimo
septimo, the seventeenth. * Decimo octavo, the eighteenth. * Decimo nono, the
nineteenth. Decision, f. a deciding, or determining. * Deciso, determined,
decided. * Decisorio, that is upon agreement, a matter of controversy that is
in question. Declamacion, f. a declaiming, a speech for to prove or disprooue
a matter. * Declamado, declaimed. Declamar, to declaime or utter such a speech.
Declaracion, f. a declaring. * Declarado, m. declared, uttered forth.
Declarador, m. a declarer, a manifester. Declarar, to declare, to manifest. *
Declinado, m. declined, bowed. * Declinador, a bower, a decliner. Declinar, to
decline, to bow. * De consuno, altogether. De coracon, m. from the heart.
Decorar, to make comely. De corrillo, en corrillo, from one company of men to
another. De coro, without book, by heart. Decoro, comely, seemly. * Decrepito,
m. decrepite with old age, one foot in the grave. * deDresciente de mar, the
ebbing of the sea. * Decreto, m. a decree or statute, an order. * Decurion, a
captain of ten, a corporal. Dedal, or Dedil, m. a thimble. * Dedalo, Dedalus,
a proper name signifying ingenious. Of that name was a most cuning builder of
Athens. De dentro, from within. Dedicacion, f. a dedication, a consecration. *
Dedicado, m. dedicated. Dedicar, 1. Praes. yo dedico, 1. Praet. yo dedique, to
dedicate, to present with, to consecrate or publish under his name. *
Dedicatoria, a dedicatorie epistle. Dedil, or Dedal, m. a thimble. * Dedique,
vide Dedicar. Dedo, m. a finger. Dedo pulgar, a thumb. * Dedo indice, the
forefinger. * Dedo de en medio, the middle finger. * Dedo del coracon, the
ring finger. Dedo men^ique, the little finger. De donde, from whence. * Dedos
de los pies, the toes of the foot. * Deduzir, yo Deduzgo, to draw out at
large. * Dedusga, Dedusgo, or Deduzgo, vide Deduzir. * De espacio, at leisure,
leisurely. Deesa, f. a goddess. * deFaltar, to fail. Defecto, vide Defeto, m.
want, defect, failing. * Defectuo, wanting, defective. Defencion, f. a defense.
Defendedor, m. a defender. Defender, yo defiendo, to defend, to forbid.
Defendido, m. defended, forbidden. * Defensa, f. a defense. * Defensor, m. a
defender. * Defensora, f. a defendresse. * Deferir, yo defiero, to drive off,
to put off. * Defeto, m. a defect, a sailing, a fault. Defetuoso, m. faulty,
failing, defective. * Defienda, Defiendo, vide Defender. * Defiere, Defiero,
vide Deferir. * Deffrutar, to gather or pluck the fruit. * Defraudar, to
defraude, to deceive. * Defrente, over against, just against. de Fuera,
without. Defunto, m. dead, deceased, departed this life. * Degaldamente, vide
Delgadamente, slenderly, thinly. * Deganado, one that gathers up the rents
for herdes and flocks of cattle. * Degenerado, m. grown out of kind, become
unnatural. * Degenerar, to grow out of kind, to degenerate, to become
unnatural. * Degolladero, m. a place where they use to behead. * Degollado, m
beheaded, killed. * Degollador, m. a beheader, a headsman, a hangman.
Degolladura, the beheading, the wound that one makes in striking off the head.
Degollamiento, m. beheading, killing. Degollar, yo deguello, to behead, to
kill, to cut the throat. * de Golpe, with a blow or stroke. Degradado, m.
disgraded, put from his degree. * Degradamiento, disgrading. Degradar, to
disgrade, to disgrace, to put from his dignity. * Degression, vide Digression.
Deguelle, Deguello, vide Degollar. de Hecho, indeed. deHender, yo deHiendo, to
cleave insunder. * deHendido, m. cloven insunder. deHendimiento, m. cleaving
insunder. Dehesa, or Deheza, f. a pasture. Dehesa concegil, f. a common of
pasture. Dehesa privada, f. a pasture for one man's use. * Dehiende, Dehiendo,
vide Dehender. * Dehoadamente, vide desHogadamente. * Dejar, vide Dexar, to
leave, to forsake, to leave of, to let alone. Dejarretar, to hough a beast.
Deidad, vide Deydad, figodhead. Dejenerar, to grow out of kind, to become
unnatural, to degenerate. * Dejito, id est, de Ejipto, of the country of
Egypt. deImproviso, unawares, on a sudden. Del, id est, de el, of him, of it. *
Del todo, wholly. Dela, id est, de la, of her. * Dela otra part, on the other
side. Delantal, m. an apron. Delante, before. Delantera, f. a settle, a
curtain, a cloth, the foreward, the forepart of any thing. * ponerse en la
Delantera, to exalt himself above the residue, or to think himself a good as
the best. Delantera de casa, the forepart or forefront of a house next to the
street. * Delantera de cama, a kind of hangings for to hang down from the
bedsteede to the ground to keep from seeing under the bed. * Delantero, m. one
going before others. * Delator, a promoter, a solicitor, an informer, an
accuser, a complainer of faults. * Delaunas, vide Laminas. * Delecho, m. vide
Helecho, fern, a brake. Delegacion, f. appointing. Delegado, m. appointed,
sent on an embassage, substituted to an office in another room for a time.
Delegar, Praes. yo Delego, 1. Praet. yo Delegue, to send to any place, to
appoint, to substitute one to execute another office for a time. * Delegue,
vide Delegar. Deletrear, to spell. Deletar, vide Deleytar, to delight. De
Lexos, from far. * Deleytado, m. delighted. Deleytar, to delight. * Deleyte,
m. delight, pleasure. * Deleytoso, m. pleasant, delectable, delightful.
Deleznable, slipperie, frail, weak, that which is not stable, easy to be
subverted and overthrown. Deleznadero, m. a slipperie, weak, and unsure
place, a place that soon falls. Deleznamiento, m. slipperinesse,
unstableness, weakness, frailenesse, subject to continual falling. Deleznar,
to make slipperie, frail, weak, ready to fall. * Delezarse, to slide, to
slip, vide Deslizar. Delfin, or Golfin, m. a dolphin. * Delgadamente,
slenderly, finely. Delgadez, f. slenderness, finenesse. * Delgadeza, f.
finenesse, slenderness. Delgado, m. slender, fine. Delgazer, or Delgacar, to
make fine, to make small. Deliberacion, f. deliberation, advise, purpose. *
Deliberadamente, deliberately, advisedly. * Deliberado, m. advised of,
deliberated of. * Deliberador, m. a man that pauseth or takes advise in his
doing. Deliberar, to deliberate, to take advise, to purpose. Delibrado, m.
delivered, set at liberty, made free. Delibramiento, m. delivering, setting
free. Delibrar, to deliver, to set free, to set at liberty. * Delicadamente,
daintily, delicately. * Delicadeza, f. daintiness, delicacie. * Delicado, m.
delicate. * Delicadura, f. vide Delicadez, daintiness, delicacie. * Delicto, a
trespass, fault or offense. deLigero, lightly. * de Ligneacion, f. a
deligneation, a descent. * Delinquente, an offender. * Delinquido, one that
has offended. * Delirante, one that doteth. * Delirar, to dote, to rave, to
fable, to become a fool. * Delirio, doting, rauing, foolishnes. Delito, m. a
fault, an offense. * de Lleno. fully. dE'llas, id est, de ellas, of them, of
those women. * dE'llo, id est, de ello, of him, of it. deLustrar, to make
foul. * De madrugada, at break of the day. * de Man^ana, in the morning. * de
Man comun, together with much help. Demanda, f. a demand, a suit, an asking, a
receiving. * morir en la demanda, to die in the demand or suite of the matter.
demandado en Juizio, the defendant. Demandador, m. a demander, a suitor, a
plaintiff, a beggar. Demandadora cosa, f. a matter demanded or sued for.
Demandar, to demand, to require, to ask, to beg. De manera, so as.
deMarcado, m. marked out. * de Marcar, Praes. yo deMarco, 1. Praet. yo
demarque, to mark out. * Demarque, vide Demcarcar. deMas, more, besides this,
moreuer, over and above, that which remains. * deMas desto, moreover than
this. Demasia, f. superfluity, overmuch. * Demasiadamente, excessiuely.
Demasiado, m. unmeasurable, excessive. deMediado, m. divided in two. de Mediar,
to divide in two. * Demencia, f. madness, foolerie. * Demeracrio piedra, a stone
whose property is to cause great liberty of speech and eloquence. * Demerito,
a desert or demerit. deMientras, in the mean time. * deMide, deMido, vide
deMedir. * Democracia, f. a popular state of governing a common weal, or a
form of common weal, where the people have the whole authority without
having any other superiors or governors except those officers they themselves
have made, or by them are established. Demoniado, m. possessed with the devil.
Demonio, m. a devil. * Demenos, id est Demos nos, let us give. *
Demonstracion, f. showing forth, setting out. * deMonstrado, showed, set out.
* deMonstrar, to show, to set out. deMonton, heapingly together. *
Demostracion, f. a showing forth. * Demostrado, m. set forth, showed.
Demostrar, yo Demuestro, to show forth, to demonstrate. * deMudado, m.
changed. deMudar, to change. deMuestra, showing, pointing out. * deMuestre,
demuestro, vide deMostrar. * denCubrir, vide enCubrir, to hide, to cover.
Dende, from, since, sithence. * Dende en adelante, from hence forward. * Dende
la call, from out of the street. Dende entonces, since that time. * Dende
hasta, even from thence hitherto. * Dende aqui, from hence. * deNegado, m.
denied. * deNegamiento, m. a denial. deNegar, Praes. yo deniego, 1. Praet.
deniegue, to deny, to refuse. * Denegrido, m. made black. * Deniegue,
Deniego, vide deNegar. * Den^antes, id est, De antes, a while agone. *
Denodadamente, boldly, hardily. * Denodado, m. bold, hardy. * De no nada, a
thing of nothing, of no worth or price. * Denostado, m. reviled. Denostar, or
Afeantar, yo Denuesto, to revile. Dentado, m. toothed. Dentadura, f. tuskes.
Dental de arado, the plough share. Dentar, yo Diento, to file a sickle, to make
the teeth of a saw. Dentecer, yo Dentesco, to grow as teeth. Dentellada, f. a
biting, a bit. Dentera, the teeth being on edge. Denton, that has sharp
teeth, a sharp toothed fish. Dentro, within. Dentro de si, between
themselves. Dentudo, m. that has great teeth. Denuedo, boldness, hardiness.
* Denueste, Denuesto, vide Denostar. Denuesto, m. reuiling, railing, despising.
* de Nuevo, a fresh, a new. Denunciacion, f. denouncing, showing. Denunciado,
m. denounced, showed, taken witness. * Denunciador, m. a denouncer, a shewer.
Denunciar, to show, to denounce, to take witness. * De otra manera, of another
sort. * De otra part, of the other side. * De part, de fuera, on the outside.
* Departir, to distribute, to appoint here and there. * Deplorar, to bewail,
to lament, to complain, to make an end of weeping. * dePoner, Praes. dePongo,
depones, depone, 1. Praet. dePuse, depusiste, depuso, Fut. dePorne, or
dePondre, ras, ra, Sub. Praes. dePonga, Imperf. depusiera, depornia or
Depusiesse, Fut. dePusiere, to lay down, to leave in trust, to lay a wager. *
dePonga, depongo, vide dePoner. * dePorte, contentfull, enjoying, joyful.
Deposicion, f. a deposing, a putting down, a depriving from ones dignity,
sometime used for a thing left in confidence or trust, with another.
Depositado, m. left in trust. Depositar, to leave in trust. Depositario, left
in trust. Deposito, a thing left in trust. Depravado, m. depraved, made worse.
* Depravar, to deprave, to make worse, to mar, to spoil. * Depravo, m. a
deprauing or making worse. Deprender, to learn. * Depresso, depressed, beaten
down. * de Presto, quickly, readily. * de Puesto, put down from any office or
place. Also de puesto en puesto, from one settling place to another. dePunta,
with the point. * de Punto, by stitching or sowing with a needle. * Depurado,
m. vide Apurado. * Depuse, depusiera, depusiesse, depuso, vide Deponer. *
Deputado, one appointed to a charge, an assign. * Deputar, to assign, to
appoint. * De rayz. from the root. Derecha mano, the right hand. * Derecha, or
Derechamente, thoroughly, rightly. Derecho, right, straight, just, even, a
lawyers fees, customarie right, law. Also right handed. Derecho de entrambas
manos, a plaier on both hands. Derechura, f. rightnesse, straightness. De
repent, on a sudden. * Derivar, to derive. * Derivacion, f. deriuing. *
Derogacion, taking from, derogating. * Derogar, to take from, to derogate.
Derrabado, m. curtalled, the tail cut off. Derrabadura, f. curtalling, cutting
off the tail. Derrabar, to curtall. Derramadamente, scatteringly. *
Derramadero, a spilling place, a scattering place. * Derramado, m. spilled,
scattered, shed. Derramamiento, m. spilling, shedding, scattering. Derramar, to
spill, to shed, to scatter. Derredor, about. andar al Derredor, to go about.
Derrengado, m. broken backed. Derrengadura, f. breaking of the back.
Derrengar, Praes. yo derriengo, 1. Praes. yo derriengue, to break the reins
of the back. * Derrengue, vide Derrengar. Derretido, m. melted, thawed.
Derretimiento, m. melting, thawing. Derretir, yo Derrito, to thaw, to melt as
wax or such like. Derribado, m. thrown down. Derribar, to pluck down, to
throw down. * Derriengue, vide Derrengar. * Derrite, derrito, vide Derretir,
to melt, to thaw. * Derrite, liquor. Derritido, m. melted, thawed. *
Derritimiento, m. melting. * Derrivar, vide Derribar. * Derrocado, m. thrown
down. * Derrocamiento, m. throwing down. Derrotar, Praes. yo Derrueco, 1.
Praet. yo Deroque, to throw down. * Derroque, vide Derrocar. * Derrostrado, m.
taken from the face, disfigured. Derrostrar, to take away from the face, to
disfigure the face. Derrota, f. a course, a way. * Derrotero, m. a book or
map showing the course or way in the sea. * Derrueca, Derrueco, vide
Derrocar, to throw or hurl down. Derrumbadero, a downfall, a steep hill. *
Derrumbado, m. thrown down. * Derrumbar, to throw or hurl down. *
desAbahado, or desAvahado, cleared from fuming or smoking, letting the fume or
smoke quite get out. desAbahar, or desAvahar, to let the fuming or smoking of
any place to get out, to clear or free a place from suming or smoke. *
Desabalido, vide Desbalido. Desabezar, to vnteach, to grow out of custom, to
forget. desAbituacion, f. growing out of fashion or custom, taking out of his
house. * desAbituado, m. out of fashion or custom, taken out of his house.
desAbituar, to grow out of custom, to take out of his house. * desAbollado, m.
the batterings, or brusings of armor, plate, or such like taken out or made
even, or vndented in. desAbollar, to take the batterings out of armor, or
plate. * desAbotonado, m. vnbuttoned, unclasped. desAbotonadura, f. an
vnbuttoning. desAbotonar, to vnbutton. desAbrido, m. unsavory, of an evil
taste. * desAbrigado, m. set in the cold. desAbrigar, Praes. yo desAbrigo, 1.
Praet. yo desabrigue, to set in the cold. desAbrigue, vide desAbrigar.
desAbrimiento, m. vnsauorines. desAbrochado, m. unlaced, unclasped. *
desAbrochar, to unlace, to unclasp, * desAcatado, m. unmannerly, without
reverence. * desAcatamiento, m. vide desAcato. * desAcato, m. an vnmannerlines,
a want of due reverence or good bringing up. * desAcomodado, m. disprofited,
hindered. * desAcomodamiento, m. discommoditie. * desAcomodatamente,
discommodiously. * desAcomodar, to hinder, to take away the profit.
desAcompan^ado, m. alone, without company. desAcompan^amiento, m. being alone,
being without company. desAcompan^ar, to leave company, to keep alone. *
desaConfiado, m. distrusted. * desaConfiar, to distrust. * desAconsejado, m.
dissuaded. * desAconsejar, to dissuade. * desAconchado, m. taken of the shell
of fish or such like, or put out of order or place. * desAconchar, to take of
the shell of fish or such like. Also to put out of order or place. desAcordado,
m. forgetful, disagreeing. desAcordamente, forgetfully, disagreeingly.
desAcordar, yo desacuerdo, to forget, to disagree, to dissent. desAcorde, m.
disagreeing. desAcostumbrado, m. out of custone. desAcostumbrar, to bring out
of custom. desAcreditada persona, one out of credit. * desAcreditador, m. one
that discrediteth an other: * desAcreditar, to discredit, to take away the
credit from another. * desAcuerde, desAcuerdo, vide desAcordar. desAcuerdo, m.
forgetfulness, discord, dissension. * desAdar, vide desAtar. * desAdornado, m.
ungarnished, vndecked. * desAdornar, to vndecke, to pull off his clothes. *
Desafiado, m. challenged, defied. Desafiador, m. a chalenger, one that defieth.
Desafiar, to defy, to challenge. * Desafio, m. a defiance, a challenge. *
Desaforado, m. wronged, injured, dealt withal without all right and equity.
desAforrado, or dez Aforrado, ill clad, ill apparelled. desaFueros, wrongs,
injuries. desAfuziado, or desAfuzado, m. despairing. desAfuziar, to despair,
to distrust. * desAgotar, to draine all the water or other liquor from a place.
* desAgradable, worthy of displeasure, like to displease. * desAgradablemente,
displeasantly. * desAgradar, to displease. desAgradecer, yo desagradesco, to be
unthankful. desAgradecido, unthankful. desAgradecimiento, m.
unthankfulness. * desAgraviador, m. an ender of controversies, a righter of
wrongs. * desAgraviar, to end controversies, to reform wrongs. * desAgravio,
m. the righting of wrongs. desAguadero, m. a conduict, a pipe of lead. *
desAguisado, m. vide Agravio. Desagunadamente, grievously, with molestation and
vexing. * desAhogadamente, clearly, freely, not mutteringly in the throat as
though one were in strangling or drowning. desAhogado, m. free, clear, not
strangled or choked. * desAhogar, to rid or clear, to power out. desAhuziado,
m. distrustful, despairefull. * desAhuziar, to distrust, to despair. *
desAhuzido, vide Desafusiado. * desAiudar, vide desAyudar, to let, to hinder.
desAlabado, m. dispraised. desAlabar, to dispraise. * desAlbardado, m.
vnsadled. desAlbardar, to vnsaddle an ass. desAlavar, vide desAlabar. *
desAlvardado, vide desAlbardado. desAlentado, m. breathless. desAlentarse, yo
desaliento, to be out of breath. Desalfojrar, to put out of a wallet. *
desAliente, vide Desalientarse. * desAlin^ada muger, a woman without rule or
government, a sluttish woman, a slatter-bag. Also unhandsome, ill attired.
desAlin^ado, m. ouerturned, foolish, unfit, put out of order, unhandsome,
slouenlike attired. desAlin^ar, to ouerturne, to ouerwhelme, to put out of
order. desAlin^o, m. giddines of the head, foolishnes, unfitness, vnhandsomnes,
slouenlines, sluttishnes. desAlmado, m. without soul, without life, or one
caring little for his soul, a wicked man without conscience, a lewd liver, one
given over to all wickedness and villainy. * desAlmaldo, id est desAlmad-lo,
take away his soul from his body, or kill him. * desAlojado, m. dislodged,
raised, rowZed. * desAlojar, to dislodge, to raise, to rowze. * desAloxar,
idem. desAmado, m. hated. desAmar, to hate. * desAmodorriar, to free from
giddines, or lethargy in the head. * desAmorado, m. hating amorousnes, or
utterly misliking of love. desAmor, m. a hatred of amorousnes, an utter
misliking of love. desAmparado, m. forsaken, left, cast off. desAmparador, m.
a forsaker, a leauer, a caster off. desAmparar, to forsake, to cast off, to
leave. desAmparo, m. leaving, forsaking, casting off. * deSangrado, m. without
blood. * desAnimado, m. without life, discouraged. * desAnimar, to discourage,
to put out of heart. * desAn^udado, m. unknit, untied. desAn^udadura, f.
vnknitting, untying. desAn^udar, to unknit, lively, strong. * desAn^ublado, m.
without clouds. * desAn^ublar, to be clear weather, to be free from clouds. *
desAparecer, to vanish away, to hide ones self, not to appear. *
desAparejado, m. unprepared. * desApessionadamente, without passion,
resolutely. * desApassionado, m. resolute, quiet. * desApazible, unpeaceable. *
desApegado, vnfastened, unloosed, vnstucke, not cleaving to. Also not entangled
with love. desApegar, to unloose, to untie, to vnfasten. desApercebidamente,
unadvisedly. desApercebido, m. unadvised, unprepared. * desApercevido, idem. *
desAperrochar, to go or depart out of the parish he dwells in. desApiedado, m.
without pity. * Desapiedar, to be without pity. desAplazible, unpleasant. *
desApoderado, m. without power, dispossessed, deprived, unable. *
desApollillado, m. vnmotheaten, not eaten with moths. * desApretar, yo
desAprieto, to loose, to slacken that which is streighte or hard bound. *
desApriete, vide desApretar. * desAprisionar, to take out of prison.
desAprovechadamente, unprofitably. desAprovechado, m. hindered, disprofited,
let. desAprovechar, to disprofite, to hinder, to let. * desApuntado, m.
disappointed. Also the point of anything taken away. desApuntar, to disappoint,
to take away the point or prick of any thing. desArmado, unarmed.
desArmadura, f. vnarming. desArmar, to unarm. * desArraigado, m. plucked up by
the roots. desArraigamiento, m. plucking up by the root. desArraigar, Praes.
yo desArraigo, 1. Praet. yo desArraygue, to pluck up by the root.
desArraygue, vide desArraygar. * desArrebolver yo desarbuelvo, to undo, or
unwind that which is wound up or entangled together. Also to wind one out of an
intricate law matter, or such like. * desArrebuelva, vide desArrebolver. *
desArrugado, m. smoothed, wrinkles made plain. desArrugadura, f. smoothing,
making plain of wrinkles. desArrugar, Praes. yo desArrugo, 1. Praet. yo
desarrugue, to smooth, to make smooth, to take out wrinkles. * desArrugue, vide
desArrugar. desAsido, m. vnfastened, hold let gone, let slip that which one had
fast hold on. * desAsir, to let go ones hold, to let slip that which one had
hold on. desAsnarse, to speak more wisely than of custom. * Desasossegado, m.
unquiet, without rest, rough, not calm. * desAsossegar, Praes. yo
Desasossiego. 1. Praet. yo Desasossegue, to disquiet, to trouble, to make
rough, to distemper. * Desasossiego, m. unquietness, troubling, roughnes,
distempering. Desasossiego, Desasossegue, vide desAsossegar. Desastrado, m.
unfortunate, unlucky. Desastre, m. misfortune. desAtacado, m. untied, unbound,
untrussed. desAtacar, Praes. yo desataco, 1. Praet. yo desataque, to untie, to
unbind, to loosen, to untruss the points. * desAtado, m. loosed, dissolved,
untied. desAtadura, f. loosing, untying, dissoluing. desAtapado, m. opened,
unstopped. desAtapadura, f. opening, vnstopping. desAtapar, to unstop, to open.
* desAtaque, vide desAtacar. desAtar, to loose, to untie, to dissolve. *
desAtaviadamente, vnhandsomly. desAtaviado, m. unfit, unhandsome. desAtavio, m.
vnhandsomnes, unfitness. * desAtentadamente, unadvisedly, rashly. * desAtentar,
yo desAtiento, to do a thing unadvisedly, at haphazarde without consideration.
* desatiente, desatiento, vide desAtentar. * desAtiento, m. rashness,
unadvisedness. desAtinadamente, rashly, vnconsiderately, rauingly, foolishly.
desAtinado, m. stammering, stumbling, rash, inconsiderate, rauing. desAtinar,
to stammer, to stumble, to miss, to fail. desAtino, m. stumbling, rashness,
inconsideratenes, folly. desAtravessar, yo desAtraviesso, to take away any
thing that lies cross the way. * desAtraviesse, vide desAtravessar. *
desAvahado, or desAbahado. desAvahar, vide desAbahar. * Desavalido, vide
Desabalido. * desAvenga, desAvengo, vide desAvenir. desAvenir, Praes. yo
desavengo, desavienes, desaviente, 1. Praet. Desavine, viniste, vino, Fut.
Desaverne, or Desavendre, ras, ra. Sub. Praes. Desavenga. Jmperfec.
Desaviniera, Desavrernia, or Desaviniesse. Fut. Desaviniere, to disagree. *
desAverne, vide desAvenir. * desAvezindar, to go away or leave a neighborhood
or parish to dwell elsewhere. desAvine, desAviniesse, desAvino, vide desAvenir.
* desAutorizado, m. out of authority. * desAutorizar, to put out of
authority. * desAvezar, vide desAbezar. * desAvituar, vide desAbituar.
desAyudar, to leave without help. * desAyunar, to break the fast. desAzerse,
vide desHazerse, to be undone, to undo himself. desAzido, vnfastened, let
go. * desAzir, to vnfasten, to let go hold. deSazonado, m. out of season.
Desbalidas ovejas, straying sheep, bleating sheep. desBalido, m. straying. *
desBalijar, vide des Valijar. desBallestar, to shoot out of a crosse-bow. *
desBanes, vide desVanes, garrets or cocklofts of a house. desBanecido, vide
desVanecido, in a swoune, vanished. * desBarahustar, to rush into a throng
among weapons, and to strike them down, one while on one side, another while
on another. * desBarar, vide desVarar. desBaratado, m. put to flight.
desBaratado, m. put to flight. desBaratar, to put to flight. desBarato, m.
putting to flight. desBarbado, m. beardlesse. * desBarrigar, 1. Praet. yo
desBarrigue, to paunch, to pull out the guts or garbage. * desBarrigue, vide
desBarrigar. * desBastado, m. pared, shaven down. desBastadura, f. paring,
shauing down. desBastar, to pare, to shave down. * desBavado, m. standing
gaping, and driueling with the mouth, letting the slauerfall from him. *
desBentura, vide desventura, f. * desBergoncado, vide desVergoncado, m.
shameless. * desBivar, to burle cloth, to pick out small knots in cloth. *
desBiznar, to lighten, to ease one of a great weight or burden. * desBoblar,
vide Despoblar, to dispeople, to leave without people. Desbocado, m.
headstrong, lavish of speech. * desBordado, m. presumptuous. Also the gilt or
gold of a thing gilded taken of. Also the edge or outside of any thing taken
away. * desBravar, to make gentle, tame or mild. desCabecado, m. beheaded.
desCabecamiento, m. beheading. desCabecar, to behead. Descabellado, m. bald,
having no hair left on his head. Descabestrar, to vnhalter. descabullirse, to
slip away. Descaecer, yo Descaesco, to fall away, to slide away. Descaecer de
la memoria, to slip out of remembrance. Descaecemiento, m. a falling away, a
slipping out of remembrance. * Descajamiento, vide Descaxamiento. *
Descalabacado, m. a hasty frantike fool. Descalabrado. m. he that has a
broken head. Descalabradura, f. breaking of the head. Descalabrar, to break
ones head. desCalcado, m. unshod, vnhosed. desCalcar, to vnshoo, to put off the
shoes or hose. * Descalco, unshod, bare footed, without shoes. * Descalcos,
without hosen or shoes. * Descalzado, vide desCalcado. * Descalzo, vide
desCalco. * Descalzos, vide desCalzos. desCaminado, m. out of the way, not
right, counterfeit, not allowed. desCaminar, to go out of the way. desCampar
Iluvia, to be fair weather. * Descan, vide Descanso. desCansadamente, quietly.
desCansado, m. resting, quiet. desCansar, to rest. desCanso, m. rest, quietness.
desCaperuzado, m. bareheaded, the cap off. * desCapillado, m. without a Spanish
cloak, hood, or without a friars coule or hood. desCapillar, to take away the
hood of a Spanish cloak or a friars hood or coule. desCaradamente, shamelesly.
desCarado, m. shameless, impudent. * desCargado, m. discharged, unburdened.
desCargar, 1. Praet. yo desCargue, to discharge, to unburden. desCargo, m.
discharge, vnburthening. desCargue, vide desCargar. * desCarriado, m. astray,
without aid or help. * Descariamente, m. a wandering, a straying. *
Descariar, to go astray, to wander. * Descarillado, m. the cheeks torn
asunder. Descarilladura, f. tearing of the cheeks in sunder. desCarillar, to
tear the cheeks in sunder. * Descainado, the flesh plucked from the bone, the
flesh plucked off. * desCarnar, to take or pluck the flesh from the bone. *
desCarnido, m. vide desCarnado. * Descarriar, to go astray, to wander. *
desCartar, to discarde. * desCasado, m. divorced. desCasamiento, m.
diuorcement, procuring of a divorce. Descasarse, to divorce, to break off a
marriage. * Descascarado, the rind, pill, or skin of fruit pulled off. *
Descascarar, to pull or take off the husk, rind, pill, paring or outward shell
or part of any fruit. * Descato, vide Desacato. * desCavalgado, m. alighted
from horseback. desCavalgadura, f. alighting from horse. desCavalgar, 1.
Praet. yo Descavalgue, to alight from horse. * Descavalgue, vide desCavalgar. *
Descavecar, vide Descabecar. * Descavellado, vide Descabellado. Descavestrar,
vide Descabestrar. desCaxar, to take out of the shell. desCaxamiento, m. taking
out of the shell, folly. * Descendido, descended, come down. * Descendir, to
descend or come down. * desCen^ido, m. vngirded. desCen^ir, yo desCin^o, to
vngirde. * descepar, to cut off, to pull out by the roots. * Descerbigar, vide
desCervigar. * desCercado, m. the siege raised. desCercador, m. one that
raises a siege. desCercar, 1. Praet, yo desCerque, to raise a siege. desCerco,
m. the raising of a siege. desCerque, vide desCercar. desCerrajar, to vnbolt,
to unlocked. desCervigado, m. the neck being stricken off. * desCervigar, 1.
Praet. yo desCervigue, to strike off the neck. * Desvervigue, vide
desCervigar. Descimentado, m. undermined, dug up. * desCimentar, to
undermine, to dig up a foundation. * desCin^e, vide desCen^ir. * Descirvir,
vide Deservir. desClavado, m. vnnailed. desClavar, to vnnaile. * desCobijar, to
uncover. desCocar, 1. Praet. yo desCoque, to make clean, to take out worms. *
Descoque, vide desCocar. desCocotar, to kill with a blow in the neck: to
cleanse wheat from cockle. desCoger,, yo desCojo, to unfold. * Descogido,
unfolded. * desCoja, desCojo, vide desCoger. * desColar, to curtall, to take
away or cut off the tail. desColgado, m. vnhanged, taken down. * desColgador,
m. one that takes down that which hangs. desColgar, Praes. yo desCuelgo, 1.
Praet. yo desColgue, to take down that which hangs. * desColgue, vide
desColgar. desColorado, m. without color. desColoramiento, m. vncolouring,
without color. desColorar, to vncolour, to make without color. * desColorido,
m. without color. * desColorir, to take away the color, to vncolour. *
desComedidas palabras, unmannerly speeches. * desComedidamente, discourteously.
desComedido, m. discourteous, unmannerly, wicked, lewd. desComedimiento, m.
discourtesie, vnmannerlines. * desComedir, yo desComido, to be unmannerly. *
Descomide, vide Descomedir. desCompadrar, to break off kindred and friendship.
* desComponer, Praes. desCompongo, desCompones, desCompone, 1. Praet.
Descompuse, descompusiste, descompuso, Fut. Descompondre or descomporne, as, a,
Subiunct. Praes. Descomponga, Imperf. Descompusiera, descompornia, or
descompusiesse, Fut. descompusiere, to disorder, to set out of order. *
Descomponga, descompongo, vide Descomponer. * Descomporne, descompornia, vide
Descomponer. * Descompostura, f. a disorder. * Descompuesto, m. disordered. *
Descompuse, descompusiesse, descompuso, vide Descomponer. * desComulgado, m.
excommunicated. Descomulgar, 1. Praet. Descomulgue, to excommunicate. *
Descomulgue, vide Descomulgar. Descomunal, unmeasurable. desComunion, f.
excommunication. desConcertadamente, disagreeingly. * desConcertado, m. unfit,
not agreeing. desConcertar, yo DesConcierto, to disagree, to break a match, to
set at variance. * desConchar, to take fish out of the shell, to vnshell. Also
to put out of order. * desConcierte, vide desConcertar. desConcierto, m.
disagreement, trouble, confusion. * desConfiado, m. distrusting. desConfianca,
f. distrust. desConfiar, to distrust. * desConfidado, vide desConfiado.
desConformar, to disagree. desConfortar, to discomfort, to make out of heart. *
desconocer, yo desConosco, to forget, to be unthankful. desconocidamente,
unthankfully. desConocido, m. forgetful, unthankful. * desconoscer, vide
desConocer, to forget, to be unthankful. * desConoscidamente, vide
desConocidamente, unthankfully. * desConoscido, vide desConocido,
unthankful, forgetful. desConocimiento, vide desConocimiento,
unthankfulness, forgetfulness. desConsolado, m. without comfort,
discomforted. desConsolar, yo desConsuelo, to discomfort. * desConsuele, vide
desConsolar. desConsuelo, m. discomfort. * desContado, m. abated, acknowledged
to be paid, the reckoning or bill cancelled or put out. desContar, yo
desCuento, to abate in reckoning, to satisfy, to cancel or acknowledge so
much of the debt as is paid. * desconvenga, vide desConvenir. * desConvenible,
unfit, that cannot be convenient. * desConveniblemente, unfitly.
desConveniencia, f. an inconvenience. * desConveniente, disconuenient.
desConvenir, Praes. desConvengo, desConvienes, desConviene, 1. Praet.
desConvine, viniste, vino, Fut. Desconvendre or Desconverne, ras, ra, Sub.
Praes. Desconvenga, Imperfect. desConviniera, desconvernia or Desconviniesse,
Fut. Desconviniere, to disagree, to break off a match, to be at variance. *
desConverne, desConvernia, vide desConvenir. * desConvine, desconviniera,
desconvino, vide desConvenir. desConversar, to leave company. * desCoracinar,
vide desCorazinar. * desCorazonado, hartlesse, dull, sluggish, slow. *
desCorazonamiento, faintness of heart, dullness, sluggishnesse. * desCorazonar,
to be hartlesse, to be dull or sluggish. desCorchar, or desCortezar, to pluck
off the bark or skin. desCortes, discurteous, churlish, unmannerly,
ungrateful. * desCortesamente, discourteously. desCortesia, f. discurtesie.
desCortez, vide desCortes, discurteous. * desCortezadura, f. a pulling off the
bark. desCortezar, vide desCorchar, to pluck off the bark or skin, to pill
or pluck off the rind of a tree, to chip bread. desCortezaa, f. discurtesie.
desCortezmente, discourteously, churlishly. * desCosedura, f. ripping, vnsowing.
desCoser, yo desCueso, to rippe, to vnsowe. desCosido, ripped, unsown.
desCostumbre, or Desuso, want of use, want of custom. desCrecer, yo Descresco,
to decrease, to grow less and less. desCrecimiento, m. decreasing, growing
less. * desCredito, m. discredit. desCreer, not to believe. desCrevir, yo
desCrivo, to describe, to write out. desCrinar, to take off the hair.
desCripcion, or traca, a description, or setting down. * descrive, descrivo,
vide descrevir. desCubierto, m. discovered. desCubridor, m. a discouerer. *
desCubridura, f. a discovery. desCubrimiento, m. discovering. desCubrir, to
discover. * desCuelgamiento, m. a taking down of that which hangs, an
vnhanging. * desCuelga, desCuelgo, vide desColgar. * desCuente, desCuento, vide
desContar. desCuento, satisfaction, rebatement of the allowance, a cancelling
of so much as is paid of a sum. desCuesa, desCueso, vide desCoser. desCuidar,
vide desCuydar. desCulpa, f. an excuse, a freeing from blame. desCulpar, to
excuse, to free from blame. * desCurrir, to discourse, to run over. *
desCuvierto, vide desCubierto. desCuydado, m. negligent, retchlesse.
desCuydadamente, negligently, carelessly, retchlesly. * desCuydar, to be
careless, rechlesse, or negligent. desCuydo, m. negligence, carlessenes,
retchlessenes. Desde a qui a pocos dias, a few days hence, shortly. Desde
Comienco, from the beginning. Desde nin^o, from a little child. Desden, m.
disdain. desDen^ar, to disdain. desDen^oso, m. disdainful. desDentado, m.
without teeth, toothlesse. * desDentar, yo desDiento, to make without teeth.
desDezir, Praes. Desdigo, desdizes, desdize, 1. Praet. desdixe, desdixiste,
desdixo, Fut. Desdire, ras, ra, Sub. Praes. Desdiga, Imperfect. desdixera,
desdiria, or desdixesse, Fut. desdixiere, to unsay, to gainsay. desDicha, f.
misfortune. desDichadamente, unhappily, unfortunately. desDichado, m.
unfortunate, unhappy. * desDichado demi, ah unhappy that I am. * desDiente,
desDiento, vide desDentar. * desDiga, desDigo, vide, desDezir. * desDire,
desDiria, vide desDezir. * desDixera, desDixesse, desDixo, vide, desDezir.
desDon, m. vncomelines, vnpleasantnes. desDonadamente, uncomely, unpleasantly.
desDonado, m. unpleasant in talk. * desDorado, m. vngilded. * desDorar, to
vngild, to spoil the gilding. Desear, vide Dessear, to desire. * desEchada
criatura, a creature rejected, an abject among men, a folorne wretch.
desEchado, m. cast off, rejected, put away. desEchar, to cast off, to put away
or from, to thrust away, to reject. desE'cho, m. casting off, rejecting,
putting away. desElar, yo desYelo, to thaw that was frozen. desEmbaracar, to
rid out of trouble, to free from encumbrance, to dispatch out of hand. *
desEmbaracado, m. freed from encumbrance, rid from trouble. * desEmbaracar la
bolsa, to let the purse strings at liberty, to rid or empty the purse from all
trouble of money. desEmbaraco, m. expedition, or quick dispatch, freeing from
trouble. * desEmbarazado, vide desEmbaracado. * desEmbarazar, vide
desEmbaracar. desEmbarazo, vide desEmbaraco. desEmbarrar, to open, to vnbar. *
desEmbarcado, m. unshipped, arrived on land. desEmbarcar, 1. Praet.
desEmbarque, to vnship, to set on shore. * DesEmbargadamente, freely. *
desEmbargado, m. freed or set at liberty from arrest, ataching, stopping, or
seizing on. desEmbargar, Praes. yo desEmbargo. 1. Praet. yo desEmbargue, to set
at liberty, or free that which was arrested, stopped, atached, stayed or
seized on. * desEmbargue, vide desEmbargar. desEmbarque, vide desEmbarcar. *
desEmbaynar, to draw out of the scabbard or sheath. desEmbocar, Praes. yo
desemboco, 1. Praet. yo desemboque, to come out of the mouth of a river or
haven. * desEmboltissimo, m. most lusty, most ready, most quick, most
lavish. desEmboltura, f. dexterity, readiness, lauishnes, too much liberty.
desEmbolver, yo desembuelvo, to vnroll, to let loose. * deSemboque, vide
deSembocar. desEmboscar, Praes. yo desembosco, 1. Praet. yo desembosque, to go
out of the wood. * desEmbosque, vide desEmboscar. * desEmbotar, to make sharp.
desEmbravecer, to make tame. desEmbravecimiento, m. making tame, quietness.
desEmbravescer, vide desEmbravecer. desEmbriagar, to make one that is drunk to
become sober. desEmbuchar, to keep nothing in his mouth, to speak all
whatsoever. desEmbuelto, m. lusty, ready, quick, lavish, too full of
liberty. desEmbuelva, desEmbuelvo, vide desEmbolver. desEmmudecer, to break
off silence, to speak. desEmpachar, vide desEmbaracar, to make expedition.
desEmpacho, vide desEmbaraco, m. expedition. desEmpalagar, Praes. yo
desEmpalago, 1. Praet, yo desEmpalague, to take away loathsomnes, to rid the
stomach. * desEmpalague, vide desEmpalagar. desEmparejar, to separate, to make
uneven. * desEmpedrar, to take away the stones. desEmpegar, Praes. yo
desEmpego, 1. Praet. yo desEmpegue, to separate or disioyne that which cleaves
to. * desEmpegue, vide desEmpegar. * desEmpen^ado, m. redeemed from pledge, had
from gage, gotten from pawn. desEmpen^ar, to redeem a gage, or pledge. *
desEmpereza, shaking off of sloth. desEmperezar, to make lusty, to shake off
sloth. desEmpolvar, to beat out dust. desEmpren^ar, to be delivered of child.
desEmpulgadura, f. vnbending of a bow. desEmpulgar arco, to unbend a bow. *
desEmvaracar, vide desEmbaracar. * desEmvarcar, vide desEmbarcar. *
desEmvargar, vide desEmbargar. * desEmvaynar, vide desEmbaynar. * desEmbolver,
to unfold, to wind out. * desEnbaynar, vide desEnvaynar. * desEnbolver, vide
desEmbolver. desEncabestrar, to vnhalter. desEncadenar, to vnchaine. *
desEncallado, m. a ship removed that was run on ground. desEncalladura,
remoouing of a ship that was run on ground. desEncallar, to remove a ship
that was run on ground. desEncantar, to vnwitch. desEncapotadura de orejas,
f. setting up of the ears, taking the capouch from the ears. desEncapotar los
ojos, to behold steadfastly, to look wide open, to look cheerfully, to look
without lowering. desEncapotar la bavera, to put up his beuer. desEncasado, m.
put out of joint, one that has a bone out of joint. Also put or taken out of
the house. desEncasadura, or desEncasamiento, putting out of joint. Also a
putting or taking out of the house. desEncasar huossos, to put bones out of
joint. * desEncastillar, to take out of a castle. * desEncavalgar, Praes. yo
desEncavalgo, 1. Praet. yo desEncavlgue, to dismount or alight from horseback,
to take a piece of ordinance from his carriage. desEncavalgue, vide
desEncavalgar. * desEncavestrar, vide desEncabestrar. * desEncaxado, m.
vnioyned, vnfastened, pulled a sunder or in pieces. desEncaxador, m. a taker
out of the ioints of any workmanship, a puller in pieces of that is iointed or
fastened together. * desEncaxadura, f. a taking a sunder that which was ioynted
or fastened together. * desEncaxar, to take a sunder or in pieces that which
was fastened or joined together. * desEnclavado, m. vnpinned, vnnailed. *
desEnclavar, to vnpinne, or vnnaile. * Desenconar, to take away poison, to
purge poison. * desEndemoniado, m. one that has had a devil cast out of him.
* desEndemoniar, to cast out devils. * desEnfadado, m. freed from wearines,
loathsomnes, irkesomnes, from offense, trouble, or tediousnes. * desEnfadar, to
rid from loathsomnes, to free from weariness, irkesomnesse, grief, offense or
trouble. * desEnfado, m. freeing from loathsomnes, wearines, irkesomnes,
grief, offense, trouble, or tediousnes. desEnfamado, m. infamous, one having
an evil report. desEnfamar, to defame, to report ill of. * desEnfrenadamente,
vnbridledlie, without rule or order. desEnfrenado, unbridled, unruled,
unordered. desEnfrenamiento, m. vnbridlednesse, unruliness. desEnfrenar, to
unbridle. * desEngan^ado, m. not deceived, freed from deceit, leaving to be
deceived, finding the error. desEngan^ar, to open or perceive a deceit, to
leave to be deceived. * desEngan^o, m. discovery of a deceit. * desEngrudado,
vnglued. desEngrudamiento, vngluing. desEngrudar, to vnglue. desEnhadar, vide
desEnfadar. desEnhado, vide desEnfado. desEnhetrar, to deliver out of a snare,
to vnsnarle silk or thread that is entangled together. desEnlazar, to loosen,
to untie, to rid from a snare. * desEnmudecer, to leave to be dumb, to
speak and talk. desEnquadernar, to take away the corners of any thing.
desEnquadernar libros, to unbind books. desEnredar, to take out of a net.
desEnsan^ar, to appease wrath. desEnsayar, to put off a cassocke, to leave for
to assay. desEnsen^ar, to takeout of the bosom. desEnsen^ar, to vnteach.
desEnsillar, to vnsaddle. * desEnterrado, m. dug out of the earth.
desEnterramiento, digging out of the earth. desEnterrar, yo desEntierro, to dig
out of the earth. * Desenteria, f. the bloody flix. desEntonado, m. discord in
music. * desEntonamiento, m. a being out of tune. desEntonar, to sound out of
tune. desEntran^ar, to pluck out the bowels, to be in choler. desEnvaynar, to
pluck out of the sheath or scabberd. * Deseo, vide Desseo, desire. desEredado,
m. disherited. desEredar, to disherit, to put by his inheritance. desErencia,
f. disinheriting. * Deservicio, displeasure, ill liking. * deServido, or
desServido, m. not well served, not well pleased. desEsperacion, f. despair. *
desEsperadamente, desperately. desEsperado, m. desperate. desEsperar, to
despair. * desEstimar, not to esteem, to contemn. * desSeximiento, m. a
taking away the sex, a making no difference of sex. desFallecer, yo
desFallesco, to faint, to swoune. * desFallecido, m. fainting, in a swoune.
desFallecimiento, m. fainting, being in a swoune. desFallescer, vide
desFallecer, to swoune. Desfamado, m. desamed, infamous, of an evil name.
Desfamar, to defame, to report evil of. desFavor, m. disfauor, disgrace.
desFavorecido, m. disgraced, out of favor. desFavorecedor, m. he that
disliketh, he that disgraceth. desFavorecer, yo desFavoresco, to dislike, to
disgrace. * desFaxar un nin^o, to vnswaddle, to take out of the swaddle
cloutes. * desFigurado, m. deformed, disfigured. desFigurar, to disfigure, to
deforme, to mishape, to make ill favored. * desFiuzado, m. vide desAfiuziado.
* desFiuzar, vide desAfiuziar. * desFlaquecido, m. made lean or weak.
desFlemar, to purge fleame, to scum a pot, to break or utter ones choler.
desFlorar, to deflower. desFogar, Praes. desFuego, 1. Praet. yo desFogue, to
take out the heat or burning, to cool. * desFogue, vide desFogar. desFormar,
vide desFigurar. desForme, ill favored, deformed, out of fashion. desFormidad,
f. ill fauourednesse, deformity, of an ugly fashion. desFrutar, to gather
fruit. * desFuega, desFuego, vide desFogar. * desFuerco, id est, de esfuerco.
desFundar, to beat out the head of a but or other vessel. * desGajando,
cleaving asunder, splitting. desGajar, to cleave asunder, to slit, to splent. *
desGalanear, to take away the gallantrie. * desGan^ar, to grin or gnash the
teeth. * desGarrado, m. rent, torn. * desGarrar, to brag, to brave it, to
break, renting, tearing. desGarro, m. brauing, bragging, breaking, renting,
tearing. desGarron, m. a bragging fellow, a great renting or tearing. *
desGosnar, vide desGoznar, to take off hinges. * desGovernado, m. misgouerned,
disordered. desGovernar, to misgouerne, to misorder. desGoznar, to take off
hinges. desGracia, f. disgrace, vnpleasantnes, vncomlines. desGraciadamente,
vnpleasauntly, without grace. desGraciado, m. disgraced, unpleasant. desGradar,
to take away a degree from one, to disgrade. * desGradescido, m. vide
desAgradescido. * desGradescer, vide desAgradescer. * desGradescimiento, vide
desAgradescimiento. * desgrado, vide desAgrado. * desGraduar, to take away a
graduateship, to degrade, to take away one degree. * desGranado, m. the
kernel being taken out, threshed. desGranar, to get out the grain, to thresh.
* desGren^ado, m. the hair plucked away, without hair. * desGren^ador, m. one
that plucketh away hair, a pillar or maker balde. * desGren^ar, to pill or
make balde, to pluck away hair. desGuarnescer, to vngarnish, to unfurnish.
desGustar, to dislike. desGusto, m. distaste, disliking. * desHacer, vide
desHazer, to undo. * desHaga, desHago, vide desHazer. desHazer, Praes.
desHago, Hazes, Haze, 1. Praet. desHize, Hiziste, Hizo, Fut. desHare, ras, ra,
Sub. Praes. desHaga, Imperfect. desHiziera, desHiziesse, or desHaria, Fut.
desHiziere, to undo, to unmake. desHazimiento, undoing, vnmaking.
desHebillar, vide desHevillar, to take off the claspes. * desHechar, to undo,
to cast away. desHecho, undone, cast away. * desHeredado, disinherited.
desHeredar, to disinherit, to put from his inheritance. desHerrado, m. unshod,
as horses or beasts. desHerrar, yo desHierro, to vnshooe a horse, etc. *
desHevillar, to vnbutton, or to unbuckle. * desHierre, vide desHerrar. *
desHilada, f. a going out of rank, a going out of order. * a'la desHilada, out
of rank, out of order. desHilado, m. untwisted, the threedes pulled out.
desHiladura, f. vntwisting, a pulling out the threedes. desHilar, to untwist,
to pull out the threedes. desHincado, m. plucked out, vnnailed. desHincadura,
f. plucking out, vnfastening. desHincar, Praes. yo desHinco, 1. Praet. yo des
Hinque, to pluck up, to pull out a nail, to vnfasten. desHinchado, assuaged
where it was swollen. desHinchar, to assuage the swelling. * desHinque, vide
desHincar. * desHize, desHiziera, desHiziesse, vide desHazer. desHogadamente,
clearly, plainly, not cackingly, as though one were almost strangled or
choked. * desHojado, m. made bare of leaves, the leaves being taken off.
desHojador, m. one that takes away the leaves. desHojadura, f. plucking off
the leaves. * desHojamiento, a plucking off leaves. desHojar, to pluck of the
leaves. desHollejar, to pare, to flea, to vnbarke. desHollinar, to wipe away
foot. * desHonestamente, unhonestly. * desHonestar, to make dishonest.
desHonesto, m. dishonest. desHonor, vide desHonra, dishonor. Deshonra, f.
dishonor. * desHonrado, m. dishonored. desHonrar, to dishonor. * desHonta, vide
Deshonra. * desHora, or Des ora, out of time, out of season. * desHoxar, vide
desHojar. desHuziar, or desFusiar, to distrust, to despair. desjarretar, vide
dejarretar. * Deside, slothful. Desierto, m. forsaken, a desert or
wilderness. * deSignal, of mark, of sign. * Designar, to design, appoint, a
lot or intend. * Designios, or Desin^os, m. designs, endeavors, enterprises,
appointments, intents. * Desigual, unequal. Desigualar, to make unequal.
Desigualdad, f. inequality. * Desigualmente, unequally. * Desildes, or
Dezildes, id est, Dezid les, tell them, or say to them. * Desinio, vide
Designo, designs, endeavors. * desInteressable, not having any interest.
Desin^o, a design, a purpose. Desir, vide Dezir, to say, to speak. * deSirve,
vide deServir. * Desistir, to desist, to leave of, cease or give over. *
desLadrillar, to until, to take away the tiles, bricks or pauement. Deslatar,
or Desparrar, to shoot off. Deslate, shooting off, a jest, a fond speech. *
desLavado, m. washed off. desLavar, to wash off. desLavadura, f. washing off.
desLeal, unfaithful, disloyal. desLealdad, f. disloyalty, unfaithfulness.
desLechucador, m. a pruner of vines. desLechucar vides, to lop or prune vines
to cut off the superfluous branches. * desLeydo, m. dissolved, crummed as
bread, digested. desLeydura, f. dissoluing, crumming of bread, digestion.
desLey^se, to be dissolved, to crum bread, to be digested. * desLendar la
cabeca, vide desLendrar. desLendrar, to take out nits. desLenguado, m. one
without a tongue, one that cannot rule his tongue, a prater. * des Lenguamiento,
m. without tongue, prattling, tattling, babbling without rule or government of
tongue. * Desliado, untied, unfolded. * desliadar, vide desLiar, to unbind, to
untie. desLigar, Praes. yo desLigo, 1. Praet. yo desLigue, to unbind, to
untie. * desLigue, vide desLigar. * desLindado, m. bounded out, marked out.
desLindador, m. that marketh or boundeth. desLindadura, f. marking, laying out
of bounds. desLindar heredades, to lay out the bounds, to mark how far the
inheritance reaches every way. desLizadero, m. a slipperie place. * desLizado,
m. slipperie. * desLizamiento, m slipperinesse. desLizar, to slip, to slide.
desLoar, to dispraise. desLoma, f. a broken back. desLomado, m. broken backed.
desLomadura, f. breaking of the back. desLomar, to break the back. *
desLumbrado, m. shadowed, darkened, the sight taken away. desLumbrar, to dazzle,
to darken, to shadow, to take away the clear sight of a thing. desLuzido, m.
darkened. desLuzir, to take away the glass of any color, to darken. *
Desmado, m. tithed. desMajados, or desMajolados capatos, shoes unbuckled,
shoes down at the heels. * desMallado, m. vnmayled. desMalladura, f.
vnmayling. desMallar, to vnmayle. * Desman, m. a misdemeanor, an ill behavior.
desManar, to go a stray, to stray. desMandado, m. disordered. desMandarse, to
be disordered, to go astray, to misgouerne himself. * Desmanes, misbehauiour,
misdemeanor. * desMantelar, to dismantle, to beat down the garnishing of a
wall or fort. desMaran^ar, to untwine, to unfold, to rid from intangling.
desMarrojar, to prune a vine. * desMayado, dismayed, discouraged, made out of
heart. desMayr, to dismay, to discourage, to put out of heart, to swoune.
desMayo, m. dismay, swouning, discouraging. * desMedido, m. unmannerly,
vnmeasurably. desMedrar, to fail, to faint, to empaire, to go backward in
thriuing. * desMedro, m. a going backewarde in thriuing, an empayring.
desMejorado, m. made worse. desMejorar, to make worse. desMelenado, m.
untrimmed, the hair all about the ears untied. desMembrado, m. dismembered,
lame of some lim. desMembradura, f. dismembring. * desMembrar, yo desmiembro,
to dismember, to make lame of the lims. desMemoriado, m. out of remembrance,
forgetful. * desMenguar, Praes. yo desmengo, 1. Praet. yo desMengue, to
diminish, to lessen. * desMentido, m. the lie cast on him, reproched with the
lie, one thing compared with another being unequal. * desMentidor, m. one that
gives the lie. desMentir, y desMiento, to confute, to give the lie, to compare
an unequal thing with another. desMenuzado, m. broken in pieces, brayed,
powned, minced small. desMenuzando, breaking in pieces, braying, powning. *
desMenuzamiento, m. breaking in pieces, braying, powning, mincing small.
desMenuzar, to diminish, to break, to bray or powne in a mortar, to mince
small, to set down in particulars. desMeollamiento, m. taking out of the
kernel, taking out of the brain. desMeollar, to take out the kernel, to take
out the brain or the marrow. desMerecer, to deserve ill. desMerecimiento, m.
deserving ill. * Desmerojon, vide Esmerojon, an Eagle, a sparrowhawke.
desMesura, f. want of measure. desMesuradamente, or desMezuradamente,
vnmeasurably. desMesurado, m. unmeasurable. desMesurar, or desMezurar, to be
unmeasurable, to be unruly. * desMiembre, desMiembro, vide desMembrar. *
desMiente, vide desMentir. * desMigajar, to crum, to crimble. * desMigear, to
crum. * desMinuir, to diminish. * desMiramiento, m. vnmannerlines. desMochado,
m. notted as a sheep or beast having lost the horns. Also maiming.
desMochadura, f. a notting or cutting off the horns. Also mayming. desMochar,
to notte or cut off. Also to maime. desMoler, yo desmuelo, to digest meat.
desMontado, m. grubbed up. desMontadura, f. grubbing up by the roots.
desMontar, to grub up by the roots, to make the ground bearing corn, or
passable. desMoronar, to pull down a wall or hill, to dismure, or lay without
walls. * desmuele, vide desMoler. * desNarigado, m. one that has his nosthrils
cut off, cut nosed. desNarigar, Praes. yo desNarigo, 1. Praet. yo desNarigue,
to cut off the nosthrils. * desNarigue, vide desNarigar. desNatar, to skim with
a cream boll, or milkeboll, to take off the cream. desNaturalizado, m.
banished, outlawed. desNaturalizar, to banish, to outlaw. desNegamiento, m.
recanting, denying again, a recanting of that which was denied. desNegar, yo
desNiego, to recant, to deny again, to recant that which was before denied.
desNegrado, vide Desgren^ado. * Desnerbar, vide desNervar, to cut out sinews.
desNervar, yo desNiervo, to cut off sinews. * Desnierve, vide desNervar.
desNudado, m. unclothed, made naked. desNudar, to unclothe, to make naked.
desNudez, f. nakedness, want of clothing. desNudo, m. all naked, without
clothes. desObedecer, yo desObedesco, to disobey. * desObedecido, m. disobeyed.
* desObediencia, f. disobedience. desObediente, disobedient. desObedientemente,
disobediently. desObligar, to unbind. desOcupado, m. vnbusied, at leisure,
unoccupied. desOcupar, to forsake, to leave unoccupied or unused. desollar, yo
desuello, to flea, to pluck off the skin. desOnestidad, f. dishonestie,
filthiness. desOnesto, m, dishonest, filthy. desO'nra, vide desHonra, dishonor.
desOnrar, vide desHonrar, to dishonor. desO'ra, vide desHora, out of time or
season. desOpilar, to unstop the oppilation. desO'rden, f. misorder.
desOrdenadamente, disorderly. desOrdenado, m. disordered. desOrdenamente,
disorderly. desOrdenar, to misorder. * desOrejado, m. the ears cut off.
desOrejar, to cut off the ears. desOspedado, m. one that keeps no
hospitality. desOspedamiento, m. want of keeping hospitality. desOssado, m.
without bones. desOssar, yo desuesso, to take out the bones. desOvada gallina,
a hen that has laid all her eggs. * desOvar, to lay eggs as hens do, to
cast spawne as fishes do. desOvillar, to unwind a bottom or clue of thread or
yarne, or such like. * desPabesar, vide desPavesar. * desPabilar, vide
desPavilar. Despacio, id est, de espacio, of space, leisurely. desPachado, m.
dispatched. Despachar, to dispatch, to rid out of the way. * desPacho, m.
expedition, dispatch. desPagado, m. displeased. desPagamiento, m displeasure.
desPagar, to displease. desPajadura, f. winnowing of corn. desPajar, to winnow
corn. * Despaldas, id est, de espaldas, on the shoulders or back. *
desPalmadas galeras, galleys trimmed up or rigged to be floted. desPalmar, to
trim up a gallie, to take or break boughs from a palm tree, to pare the
hoof of a beast to cure his foot. desPampanador, m. a cutter of leaves from
vines. desPampanadura, f. cutting of leaves from vines. desPampanar, to cut
leaves from vines. * Desparamado, scattered abroad. * Desparamadura, a
scattering abroad. * Desparamar, to scatter abroad. Desparar, to shoot off.
Desparate, m. foolishnes. Desparejar, to separate. desParecer, yo desParesco,
vide desParoscer, to vanish, to hide himself. * desParecido, vanished, hidden.
* desParpajar, to put out of joint, to set out of place. * Desparramado,
scattered abroad. * Desparramadura, a scattering abroad. * Desparramar, to
scatter abroad. * Desparrencado, stradling, going stradling. * desPartido, m.
parted. desPartidor de ruydo, m. a parter of a fray, a stickler. desPartir, to
part a fray, to appease a tumult. desParzir, vide Esparzir. * dEsparto, id est,
de Esparto, of a kind of hemp in Spain whereof they make packthreed shoes
to go in. * desPavesaderas, vide Despaviladeras. desPavesadura, f. vide
Despaviladura. desPavesar, or desPavilar, to snuff a candle. * Despaviladeras,
f. snuffers for a candle. desPavilador, m. one that snuffeth a candle.
desPavilar, vide desPavesar, to snuff a candle. * desPaviladura, f. the
snuffing of a candle. * desPavorido, m. fearful. * desPavorir, to be afraid.
desPeado, m. surbated. desPeadura, f. surbating. desPear, to surbate on the
feet with going. * desPecar, vide desPedacar, to tear in pieces. desPechado,
m. despited. desPechar, to despite. * desPecho, m. despite. desPechugadura, f.
taking the flesh from the breast of a bird, opening of the bosom.
desPechugar, Praes. yo des Pechugo, 1. Praet. yo desPechugue, to take the flesh
off the breast of a bird, to open the breast. desPechugue, vide desPechugar.
desPeconar, to take away the stalk or stem of fruit. desPedacado, m. torn in
pieces. desPedacadura, f. a tearing in pieces. desPedecar, yo desPadieco, to
tear in pieces, to shut out. desPedida, f. a dispatch, a departure. desPedido,
m. dispatched, departed, sent away. * desPediece, desPedieco, vide desPedecar.
desPedir, yo desPido, to dispatch, to send away, to depart, to take his leave.
desPedrar, or desPedregar, yo desPiedro, to pluck out stones. desPegado, m.
severed, vnglued, disioyned. desPegadura, f. seuering, vngluing, disioyning.
desPegar, Praes. yo desPiego, 1. Praet. yo desPegue, to sever that which
cleaves or sticks, to disioyne, to vnglue. * desPegue, vide desPegar.
desPeluzar, to have the hair standing on end, to take hair or motes from a
garment, etc. * desPenado, m. freed from pain. * desPenar, to free from pain.
Despendedor, m. a spender. Despender, yo desPiendo, to spend. * Despendido, m.
spent. desPen^adero, m. a downfall, a steep rock. desPen^ado, m. throne
down headlong. desPen^ar, m. to throw down headlong. Despensa, f. expense,
charges in money. A celler, a buttrie. Despensero, a butler, a steward, a
purser in a ship. desPepitar, vide desPon^ar. * d'Espera, of demur, of delaying
or prolonging a suite or such like. dEsperacion, f. despair, distrust.
dEsperar, to despair, to distrust, to be out of hope. desPerdiciado, m. spent,
unthriftily. desPerdiciadura, f. spending, unthriftily. desPerdiciar, to
scatter, to spend unthriftily. * desPerezar, to rowse from sluggishnes, roame,
to reach his body gaping for sleep. * desPerezo, a roaming, a reaching of the
body when one is sluggish. * desPernar, y desPierno, vide desjarretar. *
Despertado, m. awaked, raised. * Despertador, m. a waker, a raiser up.
Despertar, yo desPierto, to waken, to raise up. desPesar, to grieve. *
desPezonar, vide desPeconar. * desPiadado, m. without pity. * desPiadar, to be
without pity. * desPida, desPide, desPido, vide Despedir. * Despidiente, a
dispatcher. * desPiedro, vide desPedrar. * desPiego, vide desPegar. *
Despiendo, vide despender. * Despierte, desPierto, vide desPertar. Despierto,
m. awakened, raised. * Despinsado, the knaps of cloth taken out with pinsers.
* Despinsar, to take out the knaps of cloth with pinsers. Despince, the taking
away the knaps of cloth with pincers. * desPiojador, m. a lowser. desPiojar,
to take away lice. * desPlacer, or desPlazer, to displease. * desPlacible, vide
desPlazible. desPlazer, to displease or displeasure. The substantive.
desPlazible, displeasing. * desPlegado, m. unfolded, without pleits or folds.
desPlegadura, f. taking away pleits or folds, making smooth. desPlegar, Praes.
yo desPliego, 1. Praet. yo desPlegue, to unfold, to make plain, to take away
pleits. * desPlegue, vide desPlegar. * desPliega, desPliego, vide desPlegar.
desPlomado, m. lively, without lead. * desPlomar, to make without lead.
desPlumado, m. without feathers, plucked. desPlumadura, f. plucking off
feathers. desPlumar, to pluck off feathers. desPoblacion, f. dispeopling,
leaving without people. desPoblado, m. unpeopled. * desPoblados asperos romper,
to break the rough and craggie deserts. desPoblar, to unpeople, to make
desolate. desPojado, m. spoiled, unarmed. desPojador, m. a spoyler, he that
vnarmeth. desPojar, to spoil, to unarm. * desPojo, or desPojos, m. spoils. *
desPolvorear, to beat or take out the dust of any thing. * desPolvorizado, or
desPolvorisado, m. beaten to powder. desPolvorizar, or desPolvorisar, to beat
to dust or to powder. * desPortado, m. the door taken away. * desPortar, to
take away the door. * dEsposada, f. a woman betrothed to a husband. *
dEsposado, m. a man betrothed in marriage. dEsposados, the betrothed. dEsposar,
to betroth. dEsposorios, m. the time of betrothing, betrothings. * desPosseer,
to dispossess. * desPosseydo, m. dispossessed. * Despoxar, vide desPojar.
desPreciadamente, dispitefully. desPreciado, m. despised. desPreciador, m. a
despiser. desPreciar, to despise. desPrecio, m. despising, contempt. *
desPrender, to vntacke, to vnpin, to vnstitch, to vnhitch. * desPrendido, m.
vnpinned, vnstitched, vnhitched, vntacked, loosed. * Despresces, citations,
summons. * Despres, contempt. * desProporcionado, m. vnproportioned *
desProporcionamiento, m. ill proportion or fashion. * Desprobeydo, vide
desProveydo. * Desprobeer, vide desProveer. * desProporcionar, to bring out of
fashion. desProveido, or desProveydo, m. unprovided, unfurnished. * desProveer,
to unfurnish, to disprouide. desPuchar, to draw out. * Despuelas, id est, de
espuelas, of spurs, as moco despuelas, a footeman, a lackie. desPues,
afterward. * desPues que, after that. desPuntado, m. made blunt. * desPuntador,
m. a maker blunt. desPuntar, to make blunt. * Desquajado, or Desquaxado,
vncrudded, scattered abroad. * Desquajamiento, or des Quaxamiento, an
vncrudding, a scattering abroad. * desQuajar, vide desQuaxar. * desQuartizado,
m. quartered. desQuartizar, to quarter. * desQuaxado, or desQuajado, m.
vncrudded, scattered. * desQuaxamiento, or desQuajamiento, m. an vncrudding, a
scattering abroad. * desQuaxar, or desQuajar, to vncrud, to scatter abroad. *
desQue, from that. * Desquenten, vide Descontar. * desQuiciado, m. taken off
the hooks or hinges. desQuiciar, to take a door off the hooks. * desQuido,
vide desCuido. * Desquixarar, to take out the jaws of any thing. * desRaygado,
m. plucked up by the roots. * desRaygador, m. a plucker up by the roots. *
desRaygamiento, m. plucking up by the roots. * desRaygar, Praes. yo desRaygo,
1. Praet. yo desRaygue, to pluck up by the roots. * desRaygue, vide
desRaygar. * desReglado, m. out of rule, a sick man that will keep no diet. *
desRegolado, m. idem. * desRonchado, scabs plucked off, a bough pulled from the
tree. desRonchar, to pull off scabs, to pluck a bough from a tree. desSabrido,
or deSabrido, m. unsavory, of an ill taste. * desSabrimiento, m. evil
savoring. * dessAfiado, or desAfiado, challenged, defied. * dessAfiar, or
desAfiar, to challenge, to defy. * dessAraygado, vide desRaygado, pulled up by
the roots. * dessAraygamiento, vide desRaygamiento, m. a pulling up by the
roots. * dessAraygar, vide desRaygar, to pluck up by the roots. * Dessa
cosa, id est, De essa cosa, of this this thing. * Dessas es? id est, de Essas
es? Is she one of those? Dessaynar, to take out the fat. * Desse, id est, de
esse, of this, of him. Desseable, that is to be desired. Desseablemente,
desirously. * Desseado, m. desired. Dessear, to desire, to wish, to fail. *
desSemejado, m. made unlike. desSemejante, unlike. desSemejantemente, unlikely.
desSemejar, to be unlike. Desseo, m. desire. Desseosamente, desirously.
desseoso, m. desirous. * desServicio, m. ill service, ill pleasing, an offense.
* desServido, m. ill served, ill pleased. * desServidor, m. one that serves
ill, one that pleases ill. * des Servir, yo des Sirvo, to mislike, to serve
ill, to please ill. * desSirve, desirvo, vide desServir. * Desso, id est, de
esso. * Dessos es, id est, de essos es? is he one of those? * Dessolacion,
waste, desolation, ruin. Dessolar, to make waste, to ruinate, to make
desolate. desSollado, m. the paunch taken out, the skin fleaed off.
desSolladura, f. taking out of the paunch, a fleaing off the skin. desSollar,
yo desSuello, to take out the paunch, to flea off the skin. * dessOllejado,
vide desHollejado, the paring or skin taken off. dessOllejar, vide desHollejar,
to take off the paring or skin of fruit or such like. * dessOllinador, a
chimney sweeper. * dessOllinadura, chimney sweeping, or wiping away soote.
dessOllinar, vide desHollinar, to wipe away soote, to sweep a chimney. *
Dessotro, id est, de esso otro, of this other. * desSuello, vide desSollar. *
dEsta manera, of this sort or fashion. * Destajado, tasked, appointed his
task. Destajo, m. task work, work by the great. * a Destajo, by the great.
aDestajo tener la tela de Penelope, to have Penelopes task in hand. *
desTapado, m. vnstopt. * desTapador, m. an vnstopper of any thing. *
desTapamiento, m. an vnstopping or opening that is stopped close. * desTapar,
to unstop. * Destaxo, vide Destajo. * Deste, id est, de este, of this man, or
of this. desTechadura, f. vntiling, uncovering a house. desTechar, to until,
to uncover a house. * desTejado, m. vntiled, vnslated, uncovered. *
desTejadura, f. vntiling, vnslating of a house. desTejamiento, m. vntiling,
uncovering. * desTejar, to until, to vnslate, to uncover. Destelladura,
dropping, distilling. Destellar, to drop, to distill. desTempladamente,
intemperately. desTemplado, m. intemperate, distempered. desTemplanca, f.
distemperature. desTemplar, yo desTemplo, to distemper. desTerrado, m.
banished. desTerrar, yo destierro, to banish out of his country. Desterronada
tierra, ground that is rolled, or balled, where the clods are broken small.
desTetar, to weane from the teate. * Destexadura, vide desTechadura. *
desTexar, vide desTechar. * desTexer, to undo that which is wouen, to unweave.
* desTexido, m. vnwouen. * desTeximiento, m. undoing that which was wouen. *
desTexidura, f. idem. * desTiemple, desTiemplo, vide desTemplar. * desTierre,
desTierro, vide desTerrar. desTierro, m. banishment. * Destilado, m. distilled.
* Destilador, m. a distiller. * Destilamiento, m. distilling. * Destilar, to
distill. Destinar, to purpose, to determine. Destin^ar las colmenas, to make
clean hiues. Destino, m. destiny, fate, luck. * Destituyr, to make desolate.
* Destituto, void, destitute, wanting. * Destizado, m. vide Deslizado. *
Destizar, vide Deslizar. * Desto, id est, de esto, of this. * desTocado, m. the
kerchief or veil of a woman pulled off. desTocar, Praes. yo desToco, 1. Praet.
yo Destoque, to pull off the kerchief or veil of a woman's head. * Destoque,
vide desTocar. desTorcer, yo desTuerco, to vnwreath. * desTrabar, vide
desTravar. Destral, m. an axe. Also a halter. Destraleja, f. a hatchet. Also a
little halter. desTravado, m. vnplatted, undone, vncrossed. desTravar, to
vnplat, to undo, to vncrosse. Destreza, f. dexterity. * Destripado, paunched,
the guts pulled out. * Destripadura, a paunching or pulling out the guts. *
Destripar, to pull out the guts or tripes of any beast, to paunch. * Destroca,
vide Destroco. * Destrocado, scattered, dispersed, put to flight, broken in
pieces. Destrocar, to scatter, to disperse, to put to flight, to make
slaughter, to spoil, to break in pieces. * Destrocar vestidos, to break in
pieces, spoil, wear out, and mar apparel. Destroco, m. a scattering, a
dispersing, a putting to flight, putting to the worst, making slaughter,
spoiling, a tearing in pieces. * desTroncado, m. broken off from the trunk or
body. desTroncar, Praes. yo desTronco, 1. Praet. yo desTronque, to break off
from the body, trunk or stock. * desTronque, vide desTroncar. * Destrozado,
vide Destrocado. * Destrozo, destruction, putting to flight or to the worst,
spoiling or marring. Destrucion, or Destruicion, destruction. * Destruido, or
Destruydo, m. destroyed. Destruidor, or Destruydor, m. a destroyer. Destruir,
or Destruyr, to destroy. * desTuerco, vide desTorcer. * desValido, vide
Desbalido. * desValijado, m. taken out of a clokebag, maile or portmanteaw,
robbed, spoiled. * desValijamiento, a taking out of a clokebag, maile or
portmanteaw, a robbing, a spoiling. * desValijar, to take out of a maile or
clokebag, to spoil, to rob. desVan de casa, m. a garret or cockloft.
desVanecer, yo desVanesco, to vanish away, to be in a swoune. desVanecido, m.
vanished away, come to naught, in a swouning. desVanescer, vide desVanecer.
desVanecimiento, or desVanescimiento, m. vanishing, swouning. * desVarahustar,
vide desBarahustar. * desVarado, slipped, slidden, fallen to a dissolute life.
* desVarar, to slip, to slide, to fall to a loose or dissolute life. *
desVaratar, vide desBaratar. * Desvarato, vide Desbarato. desVariadamente,
dotingly, triflingly, without sense. desVariado, a doter, a talker without
sense. desVariar, to dote, to rave, to tell trifling tales. desVario, m.
dotage. * desVayado, m. vide desVaydo, feeble, hartlesse, scarce able to go on
his legs. * desVaydo, m. faint, hartlesse. desVaynado, m. drawn out of the
scabbard or sheath. desVaynadura, f. plucking out of the scabbard or sheath.
desVaynar, to pluck out of the scabbard or sheath. * deSubito, on a sudden.
desVelado, m. watched, without sleep. desVelar, or desVelarse, to be without
sleep, to watch diligently. * deSuellacaras, a hangman, a villainous fellow,
that fleaeth off the skin of a dead man's face, that he may not be known. *
deSuelle, deSuello, vide deSollar. * desVellado, m. without down or moss. *
desVelladura, a taking of the down or moss. * desVellar, to pluck off the
down or moss. * desVentaja, f. disadvantage. desVentura, f. misfortune,
mishap. desVenturadamente, unfortunately, unhappily. desVenturado, m.
unfortunate, unhappy. desVergoncadamente, unshamefastly, shamelesly.
desVergoncado, m. shameless. desVergoncarse, yo desVerguenco, to be without
shame, to be impudent or shameless. desVerguenca, f. shamelesnes. *
desVerguence, desVerguenco, vide desVergoncarse. * desuesse, vide desOssar. *
desViado, m. missing the right way. desViar, or desViarse, to go wrong, to
miss the right way. desVio, m. missing the right way. * desVios, by-waies,
wrong ways. * desVirgado, m. defloured, having lost her honesty.
desVirgamiento, a deflouring, a dishonesting. desVirgar, Praes. yo desVirgo. 1.
Praet. yo desVirgue, to deflower, or dishonest. * desVirgue, vide desVirgar. *
desViznar, vide desBiznar. desVn^ido, m. vnunited, vnyoked, uncoupled, severed,
separated. * desVn^idor, m. one that vnyoketh, vncoupleth or disuniteth, one
that parts, seuereth, or separateth. * desVn^imiento, an vncoupling, a
disuniting, an vnyoking, a seuering asunder. desVn^ir, to vnunite, to unyoke,
to uncouple, to sever, to separate. * desVnzido, uncoupled, vnyoked. *
desVnzir, to uncouple, to unyoke. * desVsado, m. unaccustomed, grown out of
use. desVsar, or desVsarse, to grow out of use, to be unaccustomed, to leave an
use or custom. desV'so, m. want of use or custom. * desYelo, vide desElar. *
detal manera, in such sort as. * deTan, of so great. deTener, Praes. deTengo,
deTienes, deTiene, 1. Praet. deTuve, de Tuviste, deTuvo, Fut. deTendre, or
deTerne, ras, ra. Sub. Praes. deTenga. Imperfect. deTuviera, de Ternia, or
deTuviesse. Fut. deTuviere, to hold, to stay, to withhold, to keep back.
deTenga, deTengo, vide deTener. * deTenido, m. withholden, kept back.
deTenimiento, m. withholding, keeping back. deTerminacion, f. purpose,
determination. * deTerminado, m. purposed, resolved. * cavallero determinado, a
resolved gentleman. deTerminar, to purpose, to determine, to resolve, to
appoint with himself. deTerne, deTernia, vide deTener. * deTiene, vide
deTener. deTiene buey, Cammocke, rest-harrow, whin. de todo punto, altogether.
* detractado, or detratado, backbited, ill spoken off, abused behind his back.
* detractamiento, or detratamiento, backbiting, speaking ill of. * detractar,
or detratar, to backbite, to speak evil of. * detractor, or detrator, a
backbiter, an evil toonged body, a taker away of another good name. deTras,
after, behind. deTraves, a cross. * Detuve, vide deTener. * deTuviera,
deTuviesse, vide deTener. deTuvo, vide deTener. * deValer, id est, de Valor, to
be of avail, to be able. Devanadera, f. a thing upon which they put the skaine
of yarne or thread, etc. after it is spun and reeled, from which thing they
wind it up into bottomes or weauers wind their quils from it. deVanar, to
wind up, to roll up, to reele yarne, etc. deVanear, to rave, to talk
foolishlie, to reele or stagger. * deVaniamiento, m. rauing, foolish talking. *
deVaneo, m. rauing, foolish talking. Deuda, f. debt. * Deuda, f. a kinswoman. *
Deudo, m a kinsman. Deudor, m. a debtor. * Devedado, forbidden. deVedar, yo de
Viedo, to forbid. deVengar, Praes. yo deVengo, 1. Praet. yo de Vengue, to
revenge. * deVengue, vide deVengar. Dever, Praes. Devo, deves, deve, 1. Praet.
devi, deviste, devio, Fut. deure, deuras, deura, Sub. Praet. deva, Imperfect.
Deviera, deviesse, or deuria, Fut. Deviere, to owe. deVeras, indeed, verily, in
good sooth. deVidamente, duly. deVido, m. due. * deViede, deViedo, vide
deVedar. deViedo, forbidding. Deviesso, a kind of swelling or soar. Devisa,
f. a devise. Devisar, to perceive, to epsy. Devocion, f. devotion, care of
worshipping God, a religious purpose of the mind. Devotamente, devoutly,
religiously. Devoto, m. devout, religious, greatly addicted to serve God. *
deViera, deViesse, vide Dever. * Deuria, vide Dever. Dexado, m. left, forsaken.
* Dexamiento, a leaving, forsaking. Dexar, to leave, to forsake, to leave off,
to let alone. Dexo, vide Cabo. * Deydad, f. the Godhead. * Deyuso, id est, de
Yuso, below. Dezidor, m. a speaker, an enditer. Deziembre, m. the month called
December. Dezir, Praes. Digo, dizes, dize, 1. Praet. Dixe, dixiste, dixo, Fut.
Dire, diras, dira, Sub. Praes. Diga, Imperfect. dixesse, dixiera, or Diria,
Fut. Dixiere, to say, to speak. * Deziseys, vide Diez y seys. * Dezisiete,
vide Diez y seite. * Deziocho, vide Deiz y ocho. * Dezinueve, vide Diez y
nueve. * Dezma, vide Diezma. * Dezmado, vide Diezmado. Dezmar, yo Diezmo, to
tithe, to give the tenth. * Dezmero, a tither.
D I
* Di, vide Dar. Dia, m. a day. Dia fecial, a holy day. * Dia y victo,
sustenance, feeding, living, or victuals, things necessary and no more. *
muchos dias ha, many days past. Diasha, some days past. Diablo, or Diabolo,
the devil. Diabolico, m. devilish. * diaCatolicon, an apothecarie drug. *
Diacene, a kind of thorn. * diaCitron, m. conserues made of Citrones or
Lymons, provoking to the lust of the flesh. * Diacodion, a sirrupe made of
water and poppie. * Diacodo, a kind of stone that coniurers use in their
coniurations. Diaconadgo, a deaconship. Diacono, m. a deacon. * Diacorion, a
medicine made of Onions. Diadema, f. a diadem, a kingly crown. * Diafano, or
Diaphano, transparent, that may be seen through as glass, water, the air. *
Diafragma, f. the midriffe, or a muscle lying overthwart the lower part of the
breast, separating the lights and the heart from the stomach and other nether
bowels. * Dialectica, f. logic, the art of reasoning schollerlike by probable
arguments. * Dialectico, m. a logician. * Dialogo, m. a conference or talking
together. Diamante, a diamond. Diametro, m. a diameter, a line dividing any
figure into equal parts, a line going through the middle point of any figure.
* Diapanton, a note or rule in music. * Diapason, a concord in music of all
parts, a diapason. * Diaphano, or Diafano, transparent, that may be seen into,
as glass, water, and air. Diaquilon, m. a kind of Apothecarie drug so
called. * Diarodon, a sirupe made to mitigate pain of the belly. Diaspero, m.
a Iaspar stone. * Diatono, a plain song of two parts. * Dibujar, vide Dibuxar.
Dibujo, vide Dibuxo. * Dibuxado, vide Debuxado, m. painted out, drawn out. *
Dibuxador, vide Debuxador, m. a painter, a drawer of pictures, etc. *
Dibuxamiento, m. painting, drawing. * Dibuxar, vide Debuxar, to paint. *
Dibuxo, vide Debuxo, painting. * Dicernir, to discern. Dicha, f. luck,
fortune, hap, chance. Dicho, a saying. Also the participle said. Dichosamente,
happily, fortunately. Dichoso, m. happy, fortunate. * Diccion, or Dicion, f. a
speech, a saying. * Diciplina, or Disciplina, f. discipline, learning,
correction, penance. Diciplinar, or Disciplinar, to teach, to correct. *
Diciso, vide Deciso. * Dictado, or Ditado, given as a sentence to be made into
latin pronounced to another, any thing to be written. Dictador, or Ditador, m.
a head officer in Rome so called, who had for half a year kingly authority.
* Dictadura, or Ditadura, the office and authority of a Dictator. Also a
pronouncing of a thing to be written. * Dictamen, or Ditamen, m. any thing
written by another man's instruction. * Dictar, or Ditar, to give a sentence in
English for to be turned into Latin, to appoint, to tell or rehearse to one
what or how he shall write. * Diego, m. James. * Diente, Diento, vide Dentar.
Diente, m. a tooth. * Diente de ajo, a head of garlic. Dientes delanteros,
the foreteeth. * Dientillos de ajo, little cloves of garlic. * Diera, Diesse,
vide Dar. * Dieron, they gave. * Dimos, we gave or have given. * Diestramente,
towardly, handsomely, cunningly. Diestra mano, the right hand. * Diestreza, f.
readiness, handsomnesse, cunning, perfection. Diestro, ready, handsome,
cunning, perfect, skillful. * Diestro de entrambas manos, one that can play on
both hands. Dieta, a days journey, a diet, a parliament, a solemn assembly.
Diez, ten in number. * Diez y seys, sixteen. * Diez y siete, seventeen. *
Diez y ocho, eighteen. * Diez y nueve, nineteen. * Diezma, f. tithe. *
Diezmado, or Dezmado, tithed. * Diezme, Diesmo, vide Dezmar. * Diezmero, m. a
tither. * Diez millares, ten thousands. Diezmo, the tenth, the tithing. *
Difamado, m. diffamed. * Difamador, m. a diffamer. Difamar, to diffame.
Diferencia, f. a difference. Diferente, different, discrepant. Diferentemente,
differingly. * Diferido, m. deferred, put off. Diferir, yo Difiero, to defer,
to put off. * Difeto, vide Defeto. Dificil, hard, difficult. Dificilmente,
hardly, difficultly. Dificultad, f. difficulty, hardness. Dificultar, to make
hard, to make difficult. Dificultosamente, difficultly, hardly. Dificultoso, m.
hard, difficult. * Difiere, difiero, vide Diferir. Difinicion, f. a definition.
Difinido, m. defined. Difinir, to define what it is. * Difinitiva sentencia, a
final judgment. * Diforme, vide Deforme. * Difriges, a kind of ore or
mineral earth that finers and founders use. * Difuncion, Difunsion, or
Diffuncion, f. dying, departing out of this life, a burial. Difunto, m.
deceased, departed out of this life. Difusamente, diffusedly, unorderly. *
Difuso, m. diffused, out of order. * Diga, vide Dezir. * Digerido, m. digested.
Digerir, to digest, to brook. * Diges, or jueguitos, rattles and toies for
children to play with. Digestion, f. digesting, concocting of meat in the
stomach. * Digestir, vide Digerir. * Digesto, digested, brooked, ordered.
Digestos, m. books of the civil law, called the Digestes. Dignamente,
woorthily. Dignidad, f. woorthines. Digno, or Dino, m. worthy. * Digo, vide
Dezir, I say. * Digression, f. a digression or going out of the way. Dilacion,
f. deferring, prolonging. * Dilatable, that may be deferred or put off.
Dilatado, deferred, put off, prolonged. Dilatar, to prolong, to put off, to
defer. Diligencia, f. diligence. * Diligenciero de fiscal, a promoter.
Diligente, diligent. Diligentemente, diligently. Diluvio, m. a deluge, a great
flood. * Dime, or Dimi, tell me. * Dimelo, tell me it, or tell it me.
Diminucion, diminishing, lessening. Diminuido, m. diminished, made less.
Diminuyr, vide Deminuyr, to lessen, to diminish. * Dineral, one that paieth
laborers and workmen their money for their work. Dinero. m. money. * Dinero
cercenado, clipped money. * Dinero cortado, m. vide Dinero cercenado. * Dinero
contado, m. ready money. Dineroso, m. full of money, rich in money. * Dino, or
Digno, worthy. * Dio, vide Dar, he gave. * no se dio nada, he cared not. *
Diocesano. one dwelling within the diocese. Diocesis, f. a bishops diocese.
Dios, m. God. Diosa, f. a goddess. * Dioses, m. Gods. * Dipositar, vide
Depositar. * Diptoto, a nowne having but two cases. * Dipthongo, a dipthong,
two vowels pronounced as one. * Diputado, m. appointed for a deputy, in
another man's room. * Diputados, m. deputies. Diputar, to depute, to set in his
place another. * Dique, m. a kind of causey-way, a bank of a ditch, a bulwark
or rampire against shot of artillery. * Dira, diras, dire, vide Dezir. *
Direct, according to order. * Directo, direct, straight, orderly. * Diria,
vide Dezir. Dirigicion, f. direction. * Dirigido, f. directed. * Dirigir, yo
derijo, to direct. * Dirija, dirijo, vide Dirigir. * Disanto, id est, Dia
Santo, holy day. * disApropriar, to alienate, to turn to another use. *
disCantado, m. discoursed of, made much ado or many words of. *
disCantamiento, m. a discoursing, a making many words or much ado of a matter.
* disCantar, to discourse, to make many words or much ado of. * Discifrar, to
open a cipher. Disciplina, or Diciplina, f. discipline, learning, instruction.
* Disciplinable, that may be taught or brought under correction. Disciplinado,
well nurtured or brought up, learned, corrected. * Disciplinantes, such as
teach, instruct or correct. Disciplinar, to teach, to correct, to instruct.
Discipulo, m. a scholar, a disciple, a learner. Discordar, yo Discuerdo, to
disagree, to be at ods or at discord. Discord, disagreeing. Discordia, f.
discord, controversy. Discrecion, discretion, wisdom, consideration. *
Discrepancia, f. disagreeing, iarring. * Discrepar, to disagree, to jar.
Discretamente, discreetly. Discrescion, f. discretion, judgment to discern.
Discreto, m. discreet, wise to perceive. * Discuerda, Discuerdo, vide
Discordar. * disCulpa, f. discharge, freeing from blame, without fault, an
excuse most properly. * disCulpable, unblameable, one with whom no fault could
be found. * disCulpado, discharged, freed from fault. * disCulpar, to free from
blame, to clear from fault. disCurrir, to discourse. * Discursivo, m.
discoursiue. * Discurso, discourse, reason. * disDicha, vide desDicha, f.
mishap, evil luck. * disFamado, m. defamed, ill reported of. disFamar, vide
Difamar, to diffame, to report evil of. disFavor, vide desFavor, m. disfavor,
disgrace. disFavorecido, vide desFavorecido, m. disgraced. Disferme, deformed,
disagreeing in shape. disFormidad, f. deformity. disFracadamente, closely,
secretly, with a mask. disFracado, m. masked, muffled. Disfraz, m. the
masking, the muffling. * Disfrazadamente, vide Disfracadamente. * Disfrazado,
vide Disfracado. * disGustar, to distaste, to mislike. * disGusto, m. a
distaste, a disliking, a misliking in taste. * Disiniar, to purpose or plot a
thing before. * Disinio, or Disignio, m. a purpose, a matter plotted and
appointed, a design. Dislate, or Deslate, shooting off, a jest, a foolish
speech. * disMinuydo, m. diminished, lessened. * disMinuy^, to diminish, to
lessen. * Disobligar, to free one from that duty and obligation he stands
in. * Disobligo, no bond nor duty. Disparar, to shoot off ordinance.
Disparate, m. a shooting off, a jest, foolish speech. * disParidad, f.
inequality. * Dispensa, f. vide Dispensacion. Dispensacion, f. dispensation,
pardoning, discharging from laws. * Dispensado, m. dispensed with. Dispensar,
to dispense, to mitigate the rigor of laws. * Dispojado, vide despojado,
spoiled, unarmed. Dispojar, vide despojar, to spoil, to unarm. Dispojos, vide
Despojos, m. spoils. disPoner, Praes. disPongo, disPones, disPone, 1. Praet.
disPuse, disPusiste, disPuso, Fut. disPondre, or disPorne, ras, ra, Sub. Praes.
disPonga, Imperfect. disPusiera, disPornia or disPusiesse, Fut. disPusiere, to
dispose, to order. * disPonga, disPongo, vide disPoner. * disPorna, disPorne,
disPornia, vide disPoner. Disposicion, f. disposition, order, health.
disPuesto, m. disposed. bien disPuesto, well in health. * varon disPuesto, m. a
tall lusty man. * disPuntado, m. without a point, blunt. * disPuntamiento, m.
a blunting. * disPuntar, to make blunt, to take away the point or edge.
disPunta la man^ana, the day begins to break. * disPuse, disPusiera,
disPusiesse, disPuso, vide disPoner. disPusicion, f. disposition, order,
health. Disputa, f. disputing. Disputacion, f. a disputation. Disputador, m. a
disputer. Disputar, to dispute. * Disque, i. dize que, he says that, etc. *
Dissanto, vide Disanto, m. a holiday. Dissencion, f. disagreeing.
Dissimulacion, f. dissembing. Dissimuladamente, dissemblingly, counterfaitly.
Dissimulado, m. dissembled, counterfayted. Dissimulador, m. a dissembler, a
counterfayter. Dissimulando, dissembling, counterfayting. Dissimular, to
dissemble, to counterfaite. * Dissignio, vide Disinio, m. * Dissinio, vide
Disinio, a design, a purpose. Dissipacion, f. scattering, dispersing.
Dissipador, m. a scatterer, a disperser. Dissipar, to scatter, to disperse.
Dissolucion, f. dissoluing, loosening. Dissoluto, m. dissolved, loosened,
discharged, dissolute, careless. Dissonancia, f. a disagreeing, a iarring.
Dissonante, disagreeing, iarring. disSonar, yo disSueno, to disagree. *
disSuene, vide disSonar. Distancia, f. distance, space between place and
place. Distante, distant, asunder one from another. Distillacion, f.
distilling, dropping down. Distillado, m. distilled. Distillar, to distill, to
drop down. Distincion, f. distinguishing between one and another. Distinguir,
to distinguish. Distincta, or Distinctamente, distinctly, severally. Distincto,
or Destinto, m. distinct, several. * disTraer, Praes. disTraygo, disTraes,
disTrae. 1. Praet. disTruxe, or disTraxe, disTruxiste, disTruxo. Fut.
disTraere, ras, ra. Sub. desTrayga. Imperfect. disTruxesse, disTraxesse,
disTruxera, or disTraeria. Fut. disTruxiere, to draw aside. * disTraydo, m.
drawn aside. * DisTrayga, disTraygo, vide disTraer. * disTraymiento, m.
drawing aside. * disTraeria, vide disTraer. * disTraxe, disTraxera,
disTraxesse, vide disTraer. Distribucion, f. distributing, seuering, or
dividing severally. Distribuir, or Distribuyr, to distribute, to divide among
people their several parts. * Districto, or Distritto, m. a straight or
prefixed compass. * disTruxe, disTruxera, disTruxesse, vide Distraer. Disturbar,
to disturb, to trouble. Ditado, m. a title. Ditador, or Dictador, m. a chief
officer in Rome so called, which for half a year had a kings power, never
chosen but when the common wealth was in some great danger or trouble, and at
half years end under pain of treason yielded up his office again. Also one
that pronounces to another a thing to be written. * Ditadura, or Dictadura, f.
a dictatorship. * Ditamen, or Dictamen, any thing written or set down as
another pronounces it or gives instruction. Ditamo, m. Dittanie or garden
ginger. * Ditar, or Dictar, to appoint scholars exercises, to give vulgars to
be made into Latin. To tell, pronounce, or appoint to one what or how he shall
write. * Ditirambo, a song made in honor of Bacchus. * Ditono, having two
sounds or parts in music. * Diva, f. a goddess, a she saint. Diversamente,
diversely. Diversidad, f. diversity. * Diversion, f. a turning aside. Diverso,
m. diverse, different. * Divertido, m. turned aside, turned away. Divertir, yo
Diverto, to turn aside. Dividido, m. divided. Dividir, to divide. * Divierte,
Divierto, vide Divertir. * Diviesso, m. a hot swelling of a wound. Divinacion,
f. divining, prophesying, soothsaying. Divinamente, divinely, godly. Divinar,
to divine, to prophecy, to soothsaie. * Divinatoria art, the art of
soothsaying or divination. Divinidad, f. divinity. Divino, m. divine, holy, a
soothsayer. * Divisa, f. a devise, a purpose, a toy. * Divisado, m. devised,
purposed, bethought. * Divisar, to devise, to ordain, to bethink, to purpose.
Divisible, that may be divided. Division, f. a dividing. Divo, or Santo, a
saint, holy, divine, a God. Divorcio, m. a divorce, separating of man and wife.
* Diurno, m. daily, of the day, continual, lasting. * Divulgado, published,
made known, diuulgated. Divulgar, Praes. yo divulgo, 1. Praet. yo Divulgue, to
publish, to make known, to spread abroad. * Divulgue, vide Divulgar. Dixe,
Dixera, Dixesse, Dixo, vide Dezir. * Dizque, id est, Dize que, he says that,
etc. * Dizeno, m. vide Decimo. Deziembre, m. the month called December. *
Diziendo, saying.
D O
* Do, where. * de Do, whence. * aDo, where. Dobla, f. a piece of money called
a double, containing 23. rials and a half, of English money ten shillings ten
pence halfepenie. Dobladamente, doubly. Doblado, m. doubled, lined. * vest
Doblada, f. a lined garment. Dobladura, f. lyning. Doblar, to double, to line.
Doble, double. * Doble de campanas, the ringing of bells. Doblegable, that may
be doubled, that may be bent twifold. Doblegado, m. doubled, bent twofold.
Doblegadura, f. bending double. Doblegar, Praes. yo Doblego, 1. Praet. yo
Doblegue, to double, to bend twofold. * Doblegue, vide Dobeglar. Doblez, f. the
lining of a garment. * Doblo, m. a doubling, a folding double. * Doblon, m.
vide Dobla. * Doblon de a quatro, a piece of money of 47. rials, id est, of
twenty and three shillings and six pence. * Doblon de oro, a piece of 23.
rials and a half, in English coin, of ten shillings and ten pence half
penie. Docil, fit to be taught. Doctor, or Dotor, m. a doctor, a teacher. *
Documento, m. a document, an instruction, a lesson, a proof, an experiment.
Dogal, or Cordel, a coard, a rope, an instrument to hold horses by the nose
with, such as smithes use. * Dogana, or Fondaco, a custom house, a tole house,
a store house. * Doge, a title that only the Dukes of Venice and Genoa have.
Dolado, m. hewed, squared, smoothed. * Dolador, one that planeth boords. Also a
plain to plain withal. * Dola, a carpenters plain. Dolar, to plain timber
or boordes. Also to smooth or polish. Dolencia, f. grief, sickness, disease,
ache. Doler, yo duelo, to grieve, to be sorry. Doliente, sick, sorry,
grieved. * Dolo, m. deceit. Dolor, m. grief, sorrow, pain. Dolor de ilion,
the colicke. * Dolorcillo, or Dolorzillo, a little grief. Dolorosamente,
grievously, painfully, sorrowfully. Doloroso, sorrowful, payned, full of
grief. * Dolorzillo, vide Dolorcillo, a little grief. * Domado, m. tamed,
made gentle. Domador, m. a tamer, a maker gentle. * Domador de cavallos, m. a
horsebreaker. Domadura, f. taming, making gentle. Domar, to tame, to make
gentle, to overcome, to vanquish. * Domen^ar, to bear rule over. *
Domesticado, m. made familiar, or as one of the house. Domesticamente, tamely,
gently. Domesticar, Praes. yo Domestico, 1. Praet. Domestique, to make gentle,
to make tame, to make as one of the house. Domestico, m. gentle, tame, one of
the house. * Domestique, vide Domesticar. Domestiqueza, f. tamenes, gentleness,
being as one of the house. * Domicilio, a dwelling or habitation, a mansion
place. Domingo, m sunday. * Domingueros, m. sundaies things, holiday things. *
Dominio, m. rule, dominion, power. Also Lordship. Don, m sir, a gift, a reward.
Donacion, f. a gift, a giving. * Donadios, a Gods penie, a free gift. * Donado,
a Friar which serves the rest of the Friars, and is not of their order. Also
given. Donador, m. a giver. Donar. to give. Donayre, m. a jest, a witty
saying. Donde, whether, where. Donde quiera, wheresoever. * Dones, m. gifts.
Don^a, f. mistress, madame. * Donosamente, pleasantly, wittily. Donoso, m.
merry conceited, pleasant, witty. * Donzel, m. a young man or child and a
virgin. * Donzella, f. a maid, a virgin. * Donzella casadera, a maid that is
marriageable. Dorada, f. a kind of fish. * Dorade, a fish called a gilt head.
* Doradera, f. gilt, leaf gold. * Doradilla, f. a fish called a breame. Also
an herb called Walwort, Miltwort, or Ceterach. Dorado, m. gilded, gilt.
Dorador, m. a gilder. Doradura, f. gilding. Dorar, to gild. * Dorica, one of
the four toongs spoken in Greece, called Dialects, as the Doricke dialect. *
Dorico, a grave solemn musition representing gravity. * Dorio, a musition
playing grave music. * Dormidera, f. garden Poppie. * Dormidera marina, sea
Poppie. * Dormido, m. slept. Dormidor, m. a sleeper. Dormilon. m, a sluggard, a
great sleeper. Dormir, yo Duermo, to sleep. * Dormitar, to nod a sleep, to
take sleep by naps, to sleep by fits or often, to slumber. Dormitorio, m. a
plate to sleep in, a dortoir in religious houses. Dornajo, m. a hogs trough, a
trough to water cattle at. Dos, two. Dos tanto, twice as much. Dos vezes,
twice, two times. Dos an^al, of two years. * Dosel de seda, m. a hanging of
silk, under which the kings or great personages sit. * D'osso, of a bear. *
Dotacion, a gift bestowed. Dotado, m. endowed, enriched. Dotal, belonging to a
dowry. Dotar, to endow, to give a dowry. Dote, f. a dowry, an endowment. *
Doto, learned, wise, clarkelike. Dotor, m. a doctor, a teacher. Dotrina, f.
learning, doctrine, instruction. Dotrinado, m. taught, instructed. *
Dotrinallos, id est, Dotrinarlos, to teach them. Dotrinar, to teach, to
instruct. * Doy, I give, vide Dar. Doze, twelve. Dozena, a dozen, the number of
twelve. Dozen^al, of twelve years old. Dozeno, m. the twelfth. Dozientos, two
hundreds.
D R
* Dragante, a kind of gum that burns. Drago, or Dragon, m. a dragon.
Draguncia, an herb called Dragons. Drama, or Ochava, f. a dram in weight.
Drasgo de casa, Robin good fellow, an imagined spirit. * Droga, f. an
apothecarie drugge. * Droguero, one that sells drugs. Dromedario, m. a
dromedarie, a kind of camel with two bunches on the back, marvelous swift,
and will abide three days journey without drink. Also a caruell or swift
bark. Also a kind of fish very swift.
D V
* Duana, f. vide Aduana, a custom house. * Dubda, vide Duda, f. a doubt.
Ducado, m. a piece of gold called a Ducket. Also a Dukedom. * Ducayna, vide
Duzayna. Ducho, m. accustomed, acquainted. Duda, f. doubt. * Duda de ambas
parts, a doubtfulnes on both sides. Dudar, to doubt. Dudosamente, doubtfully.
Dudoso, m. doubtful, uncertain. * Duele, vide Doler. * Duello, m. a single
combat. Duelo, or llanto, sorrow, wailing, lamentation. * marcio Duelo, pain
of a wound. Duende de casa, Robin good fellow. Duendo, m. tame. Also a fool.
Duen^a, f. a mistres. * Duen^as, a town of Castile in Spain so called.
Duen^o, m. a master over servants. * Duerme, Duermo, vide Dormir. * Dueya, vide
Duen^a. * Dulcayna, f. a kind of trumpet. Dulce, sweet. Dulcemente, sweetly.
Dulcor, m. sweetenes. Dulcura, f. sweetenes. * Dulzayna, vide Dulcayna. *
Dulcememente, vide Dulcemente. * Dun, id est, de un, of one. * Duplicado, m.
doubled. * Duplicar, Praes. yo Duplico, 1. Praet. yo Duplique, to double. *
Duplique, vide Duplicar. Duque, m. a Duke. Duquesa, f. a Duchess. Durable,
durable, that will continue. Duracion, f. continuance, lasting, endurance.
Dura, or Duramente, hardly. Durante, enduring. Durar, to endure, to last, to
continue. Durazno, m. a kind of peach, or peach tree. Dureza, f. hardness. *
Durmiendo, sleeping. * Durmiente, one that sleeps. Duro, m. hard, cruel,
niggardly. * Duzayna, vide Dulcayna.
E
* E', or He, I have. Ea, go to, oh, holla. Ea pues, go to then.
E B
* E'bano, vide E'beno. E'beno, m. a black kind of wood called Ebanie, or
Ebene. * Ebilla, vide Hevilla, a buckle a claspe. * E'bro, m. a principal
river in Spain called in Latin Iberus, whereof Spain was called Iberia, or
Hesperia. * Eburneo, m. that is of Iuorie, fair and white like Iuorie.
E C
* Eceder, vide Exceder. Ecelente, excellent, notable, surpassing. Ecelentia,
m. excellency. * Ecelentissimo, most excellent. * Ecelsitud, f. highness,
excellency, loftines, excelsitude. * Ecelso, high, lofty, noble, excellent. *
Ecento, m. vide Acento. Ecepcion, f. an exception, setting a side, outsetting,
exempting. * Eceptar, to except. Ecepto, except. Eceptuar, to except, to out
set. * Ecessivo, excessive, immeasurable. Ecesso, m. excess, too much. *
Eceto, except, excepted, save, saving. Echacuervo, m. a deceiuer, a coosener,
one that goes from place to place and lives by coosening and deceit.
Echadizo, cast out. * Echado, m. cast, lien down. * Echamiento, m. a casting
or a lying down. Echar, to cast, to throw, to power out, to lay, to lie. *
Echar al palacio, to take all in good part. * Echar pasas, to set grapes. Echar
el cuervo, to deceive or coosen, to go up and down from one place to an other
to coosen and deceive. * Echar suertes, to cast lots. * Echar a cuestas, to
take up or cast upon the shoulders. * Echarle mano, to lay hand on him. *
Echar renuevos, to bud out, to sprout. * Echar suelas a los capatos, to sole
shoes. Echar plumas, to put out feathers. * Echarse a dormir, to betake him to
sleep. * Echar fuera, to cast out. * Echeneis, or Echineis, a little fish that
staiethships from sailing. * Echisos, amorous potions, witchcrafts. * Echizero,
a witch, a sorcerer. * Echoles, id est, Echoles, he cast on them. E'cho, a
nymph that for the love of Narcissus withered away, and so came the hollow
voice echo, or the resounding of the voice back again. * Eclesiastico,
ecclesiastical of or pertaining to the church. * Eclipsada luna, the moon
eclipsed. * Eclipsado sol, m. the sun eclipsed. Eclipsar, to eclipse.
Eclipse, m. an eclipse. * Ecliptico, pertaining to the eclipse. * Ecliptica
linea, the eclipticke, the circumference of the circle wherein the sun
finisheth his yearly motion, so called because the eclipses both of the sun
and moon happen, when as the moon (either in conjunction or opposition) is
under this line, this line is in the middle of the Zodiac. * Eco, a resounding
or giving back again of the voice, an echo. * Economia, the government of a
private house or family. * Econimico, pertaining to the governing of a private
house. Economo, one that has the handling or governing of a house, a
housekeeper, the master or steward of a house.
E D
Edad, age. Edificacion, f. building, edifying. Edificado, m. builded, edified.
Edificador, m. a builder, one that edifieth. Edificar, Praes. yo Edifico,
Praet. yo Edifique, to build, to edify. Edificio, m. a building, an edifice.
* Edifique, vide Edificar. * Ediles, officers in Rome that had charge of
looking to the public buildings, as churchwardens, or overseers of high ways.
* Editar, or Edictar, to set forth a proclamation, an act, or statute. Edito,
or Edicto, m. an edict, a proclamation, an act, a statute. Edito publicar, to
proclaim a thing. * Educacion, f. bringing up, nurture, manners education. *
Educado, brought up, nurtured, instructed, taught. * Educar, to nurture, to
bring up, to instruct or teach.
E F
Efecto, or Efeto, m. an effect or purpose. Efectuar, to bring to effect or
purpose. * Efectuosamente, effectually to the purpose. * Efectuoso, m.
effectual, working effect. * Efeminado, m. womanlike, effeminate. Efeminar, to
effeminate, to make like a woman, to grow womanish. * Efeto, m. effect or
purpose. * Efetuar, to bring to effect or purpose. Eficacia, efficacy,
substantial purpose. Eficaz, or Eficas, effectual. Eficazmente, effectually.
* Eficiente, causing, making, efficient. * Efigie, a figure, a shape, a
picture. * Efucion, or Efusion, a pouring out, a shedding or spilling. E'gloga,
f. an eglog, a pastoral dittie.
E L
El, he, the. * El mesmo, or El mismo, the same. El qual, el que, the which, he
which, he that. * Elacote, masticke. Elada, f. a frost, ise. Elado, m. frozen.
* Eladura, f. gellie or iulep, a congealing or freezing. Elar, yo Yelo, to
freeze. * Elato, m. proud, hautie. * E'lche, m. the Moorish word used by them
for a Christian. * Elcumato, an aunts child. * Eleboro, an herb good to purge
melancholy or madness. * Eleboro blanco, the herb neesewoort or lingwoort.
Eleboro negro, an herb called Bearefoote bearing reddish leaves. Also
tetterwoort or tettergrasse. Elecion, or Eleccion, choice, choosing. *
Electivo, m. elective, to be chosen. * Electo, vide Eligido, chosen, taken out.
Elefancia, f. a kind of leprosy. Elefante, a great beast called an elephant.
Elefantino, m. a little elephant. Elegancia, f. finenesse, neatness,
elegancie. Elegante, fine, neat, fair spoken, elegant, gracious.
Elegantemente, neatly, finely, choisly. * Elegantissimo, m. most fine, most
eloquent in speech. Elegia, f. a mournful song. * Elegiaco, of or pertaining
to a mournful song. Elegido, m. chosen, picked out. Elegir, yo Elijo, to
choose. Elemental, pertaining to the elements. Elemento, m. an element, one of
the four elements, as water, earth, air, fire. * Elevacion, f. lifting up,
pride, swelling, preferment, aduauncing. Elevado, m. puffed up, proud, lifted
up. * Elevamiento, m. a lifting up. Elevar, to lift up, to raise, to eleuate,
to advance, to heave or rear up. * Elha, vide Ella. * Elho, vide Ello. *
Elija, Elijo, vide Elegir. * Elisio, m. a place where the heathen feigned the
souls of the blessed to be in at rest and joy, or of pleasure as poets feign,
where the souls of good men do dwell. Elitropia, f. marigold ruds, wartwoort,
turnesol or sun-flower, which opens at the sun rising, and shuts at the
sunset. * Elitropio, a precious stone called Elitropie, which receives the
sun as a burning glass. * E'lla, f she. * E'llas, they, them. * E'llo, it.
* E'llos, m. they. * E'lmo, m. vide Yelmo, a helmet, a cask, a burgandine. *
Eloendro, m. the rose bay tree. Eloquencia, f. eloquence, grace in speaking.
Eloquente, eloquent, graceful in speech. Eloquentemente, eloquently. *
Eloquentissimo, m. most eloquent. * Elsine yerva, a kind of herb. * Eluzero,
m. bright, shining.
E M
* Emanado, running or descending from as water. * Emanar, to come out from, or
to run from as water. Emancipacion, f. making him free that was bond. *
Emancipado, m. made free, freed from bondage. Emancipar, to make free one that
was bond. * Embabucado, m. made to believe any thing, made a simple fool. *
Embabucador, one that makes another believe a thing which is not, one that
makes a fool of another. * Embabucar, Praes. yo Embabuco, 1. Praet. yo
Embabuque, to make a simple fellow to believe any thing, to make one a fool. *
Embabuque, vide Embabucar. Embacador, m. he that makes brown. Embacadura, f.
making brown, astonishment. Embacar, to make brown, to astonie, to marvel. *
Embajado, vide Embaxado. * Embajador, vide Embaxador. * Embalde, vide En balde,
In vain, without any thing for ones labor. * Embalsamar, to imbalme dead
bodies with spice, and sweet ointments. * Embarado, stiff stretched out.
Embaracado, m. let, stopped, entangled. Embaracar, to let, to stop, to
entangle. Embaraco, m. let, stoppage, intangling. * Embaracoso, m. full of
lets, stops, or intangling, troublesome. * Embarazar, vide Embaracar. *
Embarazo, vide Embaraco. * Embarazoso, vide Embaracoso. Embarbascar, Praes. yo
Embarbasco, 1. Praet. yo Embarbasque, to make fish drunk, to make a man giddie
in the head, to intoxicate. * Embarbasque, vide Embarbascar. Embarcadura, f.
imbarking, shipping, laying aboard. * Embarcar, Praes. yo Embarco. 1. Praet. yo
Embarque, to imbarke, to ship in, to lay aboard. * Embargacion, f. arresting,
stopping, attaching. * Embargado, m. arrested, stopped, stayed, attached. *
Embargante, letting, stopping, arresting, staying. No embargante,
notwithstanding, not staying, not letting. Embargar, Praes. yo Embargo. 1.
Praet. yo Embargue, to arrest, to stop, to stay. Embargo, m. arresting,
stopping, staying. * Embargue, vide Embargar. Embarnizadura, f. a varnishing.
Embarnizar, to varnish. Embarque, vide Embarcar. * Embarrado, m. dawbed with
clay. Embarrador, m. a dawber with clay. Embarradura, f. dawbing with clay.
Embarrar, to dawbe with clay. * Embarrazar, vide Embaracar. * Embasador, a
tunnell or funnell, such wherewith they fill drink into bottles. * Embate de
la mar, the beating of the waves of the sea. * emBatido, m. beaten on the
shore or rocks as waves do. * Embatimiento, m. a beating of the waves of the
sea. * Embatir, to beat upon as waves of the sea Embaucador, m. a coosener, a
iugler, one that plays leger-demaine. Embaucamiento, m. leger-demaine,
deceits, delusions. Things seeming to be that are not. Embaucar, Praes. yo
Embauco. 1. Praet. yo Embauque, to coosen, to play legerdemaine, to use iuglers
craft. * Embauque, vide Embaucar. Embaxada, f. an embassage. Embaxador, m. an
ambassador. * Embaxo, vide Abaxo, below, beneath. Embaydor, m. a deceiuer, a
coosener. Embaymiento, m. deceit, coosenage. Embayr, to deceive, to coosen, to
make a man believe an untruth. * Embazadura, vide Embacadura. * Embazar, vide
Embacar. Embazar, to let, to stop, to hinder, to trouble. * emBeber, vide
Embever. * emBegecido, m. made old. * emBegescer, or Embegecer, to wax old.
Embelesado, vide Envelesado. * Embeodar, to make drunk. * Embeodez, f.
drunkenness. Embermejar, to make red. Embermejecer, Embermegescer, or
Embermejescer, to wax red. Emberrado, vide Embarrado. Embevecer, or
Embevescerse, to be astonished, to be amazed. Embevecido, m. astonished, amazed.
emBever, to drink in, to suppe up, to draw in. * emBever el tiempo, to consume
time. * Embevescer, to astonish, to amaze. emBevido, m. drunk, supped up.
Embiadizo, sent in messages still. Embiado, m. sent. Embiar, to send. Embidar,
to vie at cards or other game. Embidia, f. envy, emulation. * Embidiar, to
envy, to have emulation. Embidioso, m. envious, full of emulation. Embite, m.
vying at any game. Embiudarse, to become a widow. emBlanquecer, or
emBlanquescer, to whiten, to make pale or white. emBlanquecimiento, m.
whitening, making pale. * Emblema, an emblem, which is small images, flowers
or such like ornaments set on a plate or other matter. Also pictureworke of
wood, stone or metal finely set and painted in diverse colors, as in
Chesse-boords, tiles and tablets, embossed work. * Embobecer, to become a
fool. * Embobecido, m. made a fool. * Embobecimiento, m. a becoming to be a
fool. * Embocadero, m. a narrow place where any thing falls into the mouth
of it, as the sea into a creek or river, etc. Embocar, to cast in the mouth,
to cast a boule into the hole of an iron ring, to run as the sea into a creek
or narrow river. * Embocar la bola, to cast a boule into an iron ring.
Embolsar, to purse up. Emboltorio, m. a pack, a fardel of clothes or such like.
* Emboltorio de especias, a wrapping for spices. * Emboltorio de flores, a
bundle of flowers. * Emboltorio de letras, a packet of letters. emBolvedor, m.
a roller, a wrapper. emBolver, yo emBuelvo, to roll up, to wrap up. * emBolver
de vando, to follow a faction. emBolvimiento, m. rolling, wrapping up *
Emborlado, m. done or dressed with tassels or fringe. * Emborlador, m. a maker
of tassels and fringe. * Emborlar, to dress or hang anything with tassels or
fringe. Emborrachar, vide Embriagar, to make drunk. * Emborricar, to put floxe
into cloth to make it show well by deceit. Emboscada, or Assechanca, f. an
ambush, a lying in wait for. Emboscar, Praes. yo Embosco, 1. Praet. yo
Embosque, to lay an ambush, to lie in wait for. * Embosque, vide Emboscar.
embotado, m. dulled, made blunt. emBotador, m. a duller, a maker blunt.
Embotamiento, m. a making dull or blunt. Embotar, to make dull, to make blunt.
Embovecer, or Embovescer, to become a fool. emBovecido, m. become a fool.
Embovecimiento, m. folly, foolishness. Embracadura, f. fitting to, or for the
arm. Embracar, to make fit for the arm. Embravecer, or Embravescer, to rage,
to be fierce. Embravecido, m. fierce, furious. Embravecimiento, m. fierceness,
rage, furiousness. Embriagado, m. drunken. Embriagar, Praes. yo Embriago, 1.
Praet. yo Embriague, to become drunk. Embriago, m. drunken, tipsie. *
Embriague, vide Embriagar. Embriaguez, f. drunkenness. * Embrion, the seed
received in the womb, or the child in the womb before it receives any
shape. Embrocadura, f. pouring on, a slipping, or sliding in. Also a sticking
or setting of shooemakers nails or tackes in the shoes, or such like.
Embrocar, Praes. yo Embroco, 1. Praet. yo Embroque, to power on, to slip or
slide in, to incline, to set or stick shooemakers tackes or nails in shoes.
* Embroque, vide Embrocar. Embrutecer, or Embrutescer, to wax rude, to wax
brutish. Embudo, m. a tunnel, the hopper of a mil. emBuelto, m. wrapped up,
rolled up, entangled. * emBuelve, embuelvo, vide emBolver. Embuste, m.
coosenage, deceit. Embutido, m. stuffed. Embutir, to stuff. Emelga, a ridge.
Also a kind of fish. * Emelgar lo arado, to lay plowed land in ridges, to sow
plowed land, and let it lie. Emendadamente, perfectly, well looked unto. *
Emendable, that may be amended. Emendado, amended, redressed, reformed.
Emendador, m. an amender, a redresser, a reformer. Emendadura, amending, a
redress, a reformation, a correcting. Emendar, yo Emiendo, to amend, to
redress, to reform. * Emfasi, or Emphasis, an emphasie or earnestnes, an
express signification of that which is intended. Emienda, or Eminienda, f.
amendment, redress, amends. * Emiende, Emiendo. vide Emendar. Emina, f. a kind
of measure. * Eminente, imminent, apparent, high in sight, aloft, in view.
Emispherio, m. the hemisphere, half the compass of the heavens which are in
sight. * Emissole, a kind of dog fish or sea hound. Emmaderadimiento, m.
timber work. emMaderar, to timber. Emmagrecer, or Emmagrescer, to wax lean.
Emmaran^ado, m. wound up, rolled. Emmaran^ar, to wind up, to roll.
Emmarchitarse, to wither, to pine. Emmascarado, m. masked, wearing a mask.
Emmascarar, to cover with a mask, to put on a mask. * Emmelado, m. done with
honey. Emmelgado, m. one that has his teeth thin, one standing wide from the
other. Also thin ridges made in the field to sow corn in. * Emmerdar, yo
Emmierdo, to beray with turds or filth. * Emmienda, an amends. * Emmiende, vide
Emendar. Emmocecerse, to wax a boie. Emmohecher, or Emmohescer, to wax
mouldie, to wax mustie. * Emoroides, a disease called the Hemorrhoides. Also a
kind of venomous serpent. * E'mos, hemos, or avemos, we have. Emmontada, f.
steep up. * Emmontada sal, salt lying in great heaps. Emmontadura, f
steepenes, upright. Emmude cer, or Emmudescer, to be dumb. Emmudecido, m.
dumb. Empachadamente, troublesomely. Empachado, m. troubled, let, rude,
shameful. Empachar, to let, to hinder, to trouble. Empacho, trouble, let,
hinderance, rudenes, bashfulnes, shamefastnes. * Empadronador, a gatherer of
subsidy, a sessor of tax, a register. Empadronado, m. registered, set in a
book, taxed for a subsidy man. Empadronar, to register, to set in a book. to
sesse for the princes subsidies. Empalagado, m. loathing. Empalagamiento, m.
loathsomnes. Empalagar, Praes. yo Empalago, 1. Praet. yo Empalague, to loath,
to make the mouth out of taste. * Empalague, vide Empalagar. emPalar, to set on
a pole or stake. Empanada, f. a pastie. Empandar, or Encorvar, to bend, to
bow. * empantanado, m. compassed with quagmires or bogges. * emPantanar, to
put into quagmires or bogges. emPapar, to imbrew. * Empar, vide Apar. *
Emparchar, to lay on plasters. emParedar, to shut within a wall. *
emParejado, m. compared. emParejadura, comparing. emParejar, to compare. *
emParentado, m. of parentage or kindred. * emParentar, to make parentage or
kindred. * Empavesada, f. a galley ready at all points to fight. * Empecado,
m. begun. Empecar, yo Empieco, to begin. Empecer, or Empescer, vide Dan^ar, to
hurt, to damnifie. * Empecible, a thing that may do hurt, hurtful.
Empeciente, harmefull. Empecimiento, m. harm, hinderance. Empedernecer, or
Empedernescer, to wax stony. Empedernido, m. stony. Empedrado, m. paued,
stoned. emPedrador, m. a pauer, a laier of stones emPedrar, yo emPiedro, to
paue. emPegado, m. pitched with pitch. emPegadura, f. pitching with pitch.
emPegar, Praes. yo emPiego, 1. Praet. yo emPegue, to pitch with pitch. *
emPegue, vide Empegar. Empellar, or Empuxar, to thrust. * empellechar, vide
Empellejar. emPellejado, m. covered with a skin. emPellejar, to cover with a
skin. * Empellexar, vide Empellejar. * Empellicar, Praes. yo emPellico, 1.
Praet. emPellique, to play the skinner, to furre with skins. * Empelliquer,
vide Empellicar, to furre with skins, to play the skinner. Empellon, or
Empuxon, m. a thrust. * Empen^a de capato, the upper leather of a shoe.
Empen^ado, m. gaged, pledged, pawned. Empen^ar, to lay to gage, to pawn, to
lay to pledge. Empen^o, m. a gage, a pledge. emPeorado, m. impaired, made
worse and worse. emPeoramiento, m. impaired, made worse and worse.
emPeorar, to impair, to make worse and worse. Emperadar, m. an Emperor. *
Emperante, vide Emperador. Emperatriz, f. an emperesse, an emperors wife.
Emperchar, to set on a perch. Emperezar, to be slothful. Emperial, belonging
to the empire. Empero, yet notwithstanding. emPerradamente, doggedly.
emPerrado, m. become like a dog, dogged. * Emperzar, vide Emperezar, to become
slothful. Empeyne, the tetter or ringworme, the itch, the instep of a foot.
Empeynes, the horn in a horse leg on the inside near the knees. Empeynoso, m.
full of tetters. * Empezear, vide Empecar. Also to piece with pieces, to mend.
* Empezible, vide Empecible. * Empezimiento, vide Empecimiento. * Empicar,
Praes. yo Empico, 1. Praet. yo Empique, to put one to death on pikes.
Empicotado, m. set on the pillorie. Empitocadura, f. setting on the pillorie.
Empicotar, to set on the pillorie. * Empiece, Empieco, vide Empecar. *
Empiedre, Empiedro, vide Empedrar. * Empiegue, Empiego, vide Empegar. *
Empilado, m. piled up, heaped up. * Empilar, to pile up, to heap up. Empinado,
m. lifted up. Empinadura, f. lifting up. Empinar, to lift up. * Empirico, m. an
empericke or physician by practice, which has gotten all his skill by
practice. * Emplacamiento, m. a summons, a warning to appear by a day. *
Emplacar, vide Emplazar, to summon, to warn to appear by a day prefixed. *
Emplastado, m. plaistered with a plaster. Emplastar, to lay a plaster or
searecloth on a sore or swelling. * Emplaste, m. vide Emplasto. * Emplasto, m.
a pilaster or searcloth. Emplastradura, f. a fomentation, plaistering.
Emplastrar, vide Emplastar. Emplastro, vide Emplasto. Emplazador, m. a
summoner, a citer, a bailife that warns to sessions, etc. Emplazamiento, m. a
citation, a summons. emPlazar, to summon, to cite by an appointed time.
Empleado, m. employed. Emplear, to employ. Empleyta, or Emplenta, a mat, a
hurdle. emPlumado, m. feathered. emPlumar, to feather. emPlumecer, to begin to
have feathers. EmPobrecer, to begin to be poor. * Empocar, vide Empozar.
emPoderar, to obtain, to win, ^o get into his power. * emPodrecer, to wax
rotten. * emPodrecido, waxed rotten. Empolla, f. a blister. emPollado, m. an
egg that has a chick. Also one that is full of blisters. * Empollamiento, a
hatching or bringing forth chickens. emPollar, to breed chickens. emPolvar, yo
emPolvo, to cast dust on. emPolvorado, m. full of dust, all dustie.
emPolvoramiento, m. a bedusting, a covering over with dust. emPolvorar, to
cover over with dust. emPoncon^ado, m. poisoned. emPoncon^ar, to poison. *
emPoncon^oso, venomous. * emPoner, Praes. emPongo, emPones, emPone, 1. Praet.
emPuse, emPusiste, emPuso, Fut. emPondre, or emPorne, as, a, Sub. Praes.
enPonga, Imperfect. emPusiera, emPondria, or emPusiesse, Fut. emPusiere, to
teach, to instruct, to put upon. * Emponga, emPongo, vide emPoner. * emPorna,
emPorne, vide emPoner. Empos, after. emPozar, to put into a ditch. emPrehender,
vide emPrender. emPren^ar, to get with child. * emPren^arse, to be gotten
with child. emPrendedor, m. an enterpriser. emPrender, to enterprise, to take
in hand. Emprendido, enterprised, taken in hand. Emprensado, m. pressed.
Emprensar, m. to press cloth or such like. Emprenta, f. a print. Emprentar, to
print. Empresa, or Empressa, an enterprise. emPrestado, m. lent, borrowed.
emPrestar, to borrow, to lend. emPrestido, m. borrowed, lent. * Empreza, an
enterprise. emPringar, Praes. yo emPringo, 1. Praet. yo emPringue, to baste, to
drop with hot bacon grease. * Empringue, vide emPringar. * emPudrecer, vide
emPodrecer. Empujamiento, vide Empuxamiento. * Empujar, vide Empuxar. *
Empujon, vide Empuxon. emPulgadura, f. bending of a bow. emPulgar arco, to bend
a bow. emPulgueras, f. the nockes of a bow. emPun^adura, f. a hafte or handle
of a sword, rapier, etc. emPun^ar, to gripe in the fiste. * emPuse, emPuso,
vide emPoner. * emPusiera, emPusiesse, vide emPoner. emPutecer, yo emPutesco,
to become a harlot. emPuxado, m. thrust, pushed. emPuxar, to push, to thrust. *
emPuxamiento, m. pushing, thrusting. Empuxon, m. a thrust. * Emvasador, a
tunnell, or funnell, wherewith they fill drink into bottles of such like. *
Emvasar, to put liquor into vessels. * Emulacion, emulation, envy in seeking
to exceed or outpasse another, a laudable grudging. E'mulo, he that enuieth, or
strives to exceed another. * Emvotar, vide Embotar. * Emvuelto, vide Embuelto.
* Emvuste, vide Embuste. * emXarraco, or Xarraco, a certain sea fish with
horns called of some a sea toade, of some the sea devil.
E N
En, in, by, of. * Ena, gaping and reaching for sleep. enAgenado, m.
estranged, alienated. * enAgenador, an estranger, one that makes away his
possessions, etc. enAgenamiento, m. alienation, estranging, making away.
enAgenar, to alienate, to estrange, to make away. * enAgrir, to make sharp.
enAguacar, to water. * enAguazar, idem. * EnAjenado, m. estranged, alienated. *
enAjenamiento, m. alienation, an estranging. * enAjenar, to alienate, to
estrange. * enAlbardada bestia, a beast saddled wiih a pack-saddle. *
enAlbardado, m. saddled with a pack-saddle. enAlbardar, to set on a
pack-saddle. * enAlbayaldado, vide enAlvayaldado. * enAlmagrado, done with
oaker. * enAlmagrar, to mark or do with oaker. * enAvardada bestia, a beast
saddled with a packesaddle. * enAlvardado, m. saddled with a pack-saddle. *
enAlvardar, to saddle with a packe-saddle. * enAlvayaldado, whited, painted
with ceruse. * Enamentar, to aim at. * Enamorada, f. a paramour, a sweet
heart. Enamoradamente, amorously. Enamorado, one that is in love. Enamoramiento,
m. love, inamouring. Enamorar, to be in love. * Enamoriscado, vide Enamorado.
Enamoriscar, vide Enamorar. * Enana, f. a she dwarffe. * Enano, a he dwarffe.
enArbolar, to set up an end a pike, or an ensign right upward as a tree. Also
to set up or raise a maste of a ship. enArcado, m. put in a chest, or made
crooked like a bow. enArcador, m. a putter into chests. enArcar, Praes. yo
enA'rco. 1. Praes. yo enArque, to put into a chest, to make crooked like a bow.
enArque, vide Enarcar. * enArvolar, vide enArbolar. Enaspar el cuerpo, to reach
with lazines. enAstado, or enHastado, m. headed with iron. enAstadura, f.
heading with iron. enAstar lanca, to point a lance. * enAyunas, fasting.
Enaziado, m. a cloudie day, a runnagate. * Enbacar, to make brown, to
astonish. * Enbalde, vide emBalde, in vain, for no purpose, without reward. *
enBaracar, vide Embaracar. * enBarazar, idem. * Enbarcar, vide Embarcar. *
Enbargante, vide Embargante. * Enbargo, vide Embargo. * Enbasador, a tunnell. *
Enbasar, to put liquor into vessels. * Enbavucar, to deceive. * Enbazar, vide
Embacar. * Enbidar, vide Embidar, to vie at any game. * Enbidia, vide Embidia,
envy. * Enbite, m. a vying at a game. * enBiudar, vide Embiudar. * enBolver,
vide emBolver, yo Embuelvo. * enBravecer, or enBravescer, to rage, to be
fierce, hot or hasty, to wax rough or furious. Enbutir, to stuff. enBuelve,
enbuelvo, vide enbolver. * Encabecamiento, a tax paid by a whole town or
corporation to the king. enCabellado, m. long haired. enCabellecerse, to have
long hair. enCabestrado, m. haltered. enCabestrar, to halter. * enCabezar, to
tax the people for subsidy to the Prince, or to put on the headstraine of a
horse. enCadenado, m. chained, linked in. enCadenadura, f. chayning. *
enCadenamiento, m. idem. enCadenar, to chain. * enCajar, vide enCaxar. *
enCalabriado, m. pierced into the brains, as drunkenness. enCalabriar, to
pearce into the brains, as drunkenness. * enCalado, m. plaistered, pargetted.
enCalador, m. a plaisterer, a pargetter. enCaladura, f. plaistering,
pargetting, curious seeling. enCalar, to plaster or parget a house, to wash
with white lime. * enCallado, m. run or stricken on ground. * enCallando,
striking on ground. enCalladura, f. idem. enCallar la nave, to run a ship on
ground. enCallecer, to wax hard as brawne. enCallecido, m. grown hard.
enCalmado, m. calmed. enCalvar, to make balde. enCalvecer, or enCalvescer, to
wax balde. enCambio, change. * enCaminado, m. directed, or set on the way.
Encaminadura, f. a direction on the way. enCaminar, to direct on his way. *
enCamino, m. a direction on the way. * enCamisada, f. a Camisada in war in
the night when soldiers put on shirts on their armor in doing an exploite, that
they may know one another of their own company, least in the dark they
might kill one another in steed of the enemy. * enCamisado, m. one that has
put on a shirt on his armor. * enCanastado, m. put or hanged in a basket. *
enCanastado soldado, or Centinela, a soldier that stood sentinel hanged in a
basket, because he stepped when he should have kept due watch, to shame him or
disgrace them. * enCanastar, to hang out in a basket. * enCandila, f. a light
to dazzle the eyes with. Encandilado, m. dazeled with sudden light. *
Encandilador. m. one that dazeleth the eyes of birds with light. * enCandilar,
to dazzle birds eyes with light. enCanecer, or Canescer, to wax hoarie or gray
headed. enCanecido, m. hoarie or gray headed. enCan^onarse las aves, birds
beginning to be pen feathered. * Encantacion, f. enchantment. enCantado, m.
enchanted. enCantador, m. an enchanter. * enCantadora, f. an enchantresse,
witch, or sorceresse. enCantamiento, m. an enchantment, a charm. enCantar, to
enchant, to charm. * enCantidad, in heaps, in great quantity. enCantir, vide
Encantar, to enchant. enCapacetado, m. armed with a helmet. enCapachar, to put
in a maund. enCapado, m. cloaked, covered with a cloak. * enCaperucado, m. the
head covered with a hood or capouch. enCapotado de ojos, one that has great
eiebrowes, lowering looks. enCapotado de orejas, one that is bangle eared.
enCapotadura, f. a lowering countenance. enCapotar los ojos, to lowre with the
eyes. Encaramado, m. raised. Encaramadura, f. raising up to a top. Encaramar,
to raise up to a top. * enCarar, to set face to face. * Encarcamiento, m. a
putting among briers. * Encarcar, to put among briers. enCarcaxado, m. put up
in a quiver. Encarcelado, m. imprisoned. enCarcelar, to imprison. * enCarcerar,
idem. enCarecer, yo enCaresco, or enCarescer, to make dear, to extol, to
amplify, to augment. * Encarecido, made dear. Also amplified, extolled,
augmented. * enCarecimiento, a making of things dear, an augmenting, an
amplifying. enCargar, Praes. yo enCargo, 1. Praet. yo enCargue, to give in
charge, to charge, to give commandment. * enCargue, vide enCargar.
Encarnacion, f. incarnation, growing to flesh. enCarnada, a carnation color.
enCarnado, as raso enCarnado, carnation colored satin. Encarnar, to become
flesh. * enCarnicado, m. fleshed, hartened, bloody minded, a hangman.
enCarnicamiento, m. a fleshing, a hartening in blood. enCarnicar, to flesh or
harten in blood. * enCarnizar, idem. enCartacion, f. banishing, outlawing,
proscription. enCartado, m. banished, proclaimed as an outlaw. enCartar, to
banish, to proclaim an outlaw. * encarzar, vide encarcar. enCastellado, m.
shut in a castle. enCastellar, to shut in a castle. enCavalgar, Praes. yo en
Cavalgo. 1. Praet. yo enCavalgue, to mount artillery, to put a musket or
harquebusse in the stock. * enCavalgar la artilleria, to lay the ordinance on
carriages. * enCavalgue, vide enCavalgar. * enCaxado, m. put into a box or
casket. * enCaxadura, f. putting into a box or casket. enCaxar, to put into a
box. enCaxe, or enCaxadura, putting into a box. Encella, or Cesta, a chest, a
satchell. enCenagado, durtie, mirie, muddie. enCenegamiento, m. durtines,
mirines, muddines. enCenagar, Praes. enCenago. 1. Praet. yo enCenague, to
beray, to make foul, to make durtie. * enCenague, vide enCenagar. *
EnCencerado, that carries a bell, as a cow or sheep. Encender, yo Enciendo,
to kindle, to set on fire. Encendidamente, hotly. Encendido, m. kindled, set on
fire. Encendimiento, m. kindling, setting on fire. enCenizar, to strew with
ashes. Encensar, to tax. Encensar tierra para plantar, to set graffing
stocks. enCensario, a censar. enCensiar, to perfume with Frankensence.
enCensios, m. Wormwood. enCenso, m. vide Censo, taxing, subsidy. Encentado,
assayed, tasted on, begun to be eaten or drunken. Encentadura, setting abroach,
assaying or beginning to eat or drink any thing. enCentar, yo Enciento, to
set abroach, to assay or begin any meat or drink. * enCerado, m. bewaxed or
besmeared with wax. Also a searecloath. * enCerrado, shut up, locked or bolted
in. enCerar, to wax, to do with wax. enCerrar, yo enCierro, to shut in, to
lock in. * enCerramiento, m. shutting or locking in. * enChamarrado, m.
clothed with a furred cassocke or ierkin, after the manner of the low
countries. Enchamarrar, to cloth with a furred cassocke or ierkin after the
manner of the low countries. Enchaque, vide Achaque. * Enchiridion, f. a
manuell or little portable book that may be carried in ones hand. * Enchudas,
or Enchugas, anchoues. Encias, f. gums. * Enciende, enCiendo, vide enCender. *
Enciensar, vide Encensiar, to perfume with Frankensence. * Enciensario, m. that
wherein the incense is burned. Encienso, m. incense, Frankencense. * Encillar,
vide Ensillar, to saddle. * Enciente, vide enCentar. * Encierre, Encierro, vide
Encerrar. Encima, upon, on the top. Encimar, to set on a top. * Encina, f. a
holme oak or French oak. Enclavado, m. fastened, nailed fast. enClavado
cavallo, a horse pricked with a nail. enClavadura, f. nailing, pricking with a
nail. enClavar, to nail, to prick with a nail, to fasten with a nail, etc.
* enClavellinado, m. full of gilliflowers. * enClavijado, m. clinched as
fingers one within another, wound up or wrested as pegs or pins of an
instrument, any thing pinned or fastened with great pins of wood or iron. *
enClavijar, to pin or fasten any thing with great pins or pegs of wood or iron,
to wind up or wrest the pegs of an instrument. enClavijar los dedos, or las
manos, to clinch the hands together by putting the fingers one within another,
to cross, wring, or wind up a peg or pin of an instrument. * enCobado, or
enCovado, m. put in a cave, made crooked. enCobadura, or enCorvadura, a making
crooked, or a putting in a cave. enCobar, or enCovar, to put in a cave, to make
crooked. * enCobrir, to cover. enCoger, yo enCojo, to withdraw, to draw
together, to shrink, to shrink up as cloth. enCogido, m. drawn together,
withdrawn, shrunk up as cloth. enCogimiento, m. withdrawing, drawing
together, a shrinking, a shrinking up as of cloth. * enCoja, en Cojo, vide
enCoger. enCojar, or enCoxar, to give a blow on the leg, to lame one, to make
one lame. Encolado, m. glued. Encoladura, f. a gluing. enColar, to glue. *
enCombrado, m. set on the top. * enCombrar, to set on the top. * enComencado,
m. begun. * enComencar, yo enComienco, to begin. enComendado, m. recommended,
committed to his charge. enComendar, yo enComendo, to recommend, to commit. *
enComience, enComienco, vide enComencar. enComienda, f. a recommendation,
commendations, a dignity so called, a presentation to a bishoprike, abbie, or
such promotion. * enComiendas, commendations, recommendations. * enComiende,
enComiendo, vide enComendar. * Encomio, a song incommendation of a man's virtue.
* Enconado, m. putrified, festered, infected. Enconamiento, m festering,
putrefying, infecting. Enconar, to putrify, to fester, to infect.
Encontinente, presently. enContradizo, meeting. * enContrado, m. met with,
encountered. enContrar, yo enCuentro, to encounter, to meet with. * Encontron,
m. an encountering, a meeting with. enCoracado, m. armed with Coracas, id est,
curets or privy coats plated within. * enCorado, m. covered with skin or
leather. enCorar, to cover with skin, to cover with leather. * enCorbado, m.
made crooked. * enCorbadura, f. crookedness. enCorbar, to make crooked. *
enCordio, m. aswelling in the head or flank, a botch. * enCordonado, m. made
or done with strings or cords. * enCordonar el cabello, to plat or twist the
hair. enCorocado, m. one that wears a paper on his head for an offense. *
enCorocar, to wear a paper on the head for some offense. * enCorozar, idem.
enCorporado, m. incorporated, made a member of a town, enfranchised.
enCorporar, to incorporate, to make a member of the body, to infranchise.
enCorvada, f. axwoort. enCorvado, m. made crooked. enCorvadura, f.
crookedness. enCorvar, to make crooked. enCostradura, f. making crustie, or
hard as on a wound. enCostrar, to make crustie or hard as on a wound.
enCrespado, m. curled. enCrespadura, curling. enCrespar, to curle. enCrestado,
m. crested. enCrudecer, or enCrudescer, to wax raw, to wax cruel.
enCruelecer, yo encruelesco, or enCruelescer, to wax cruel. * enCruelecido,
or enCrueliciado, m made or waxen cruel. enCruzado, m. crossed. enCruzijada,
f. a cross way. enCuadernacion, or enquadernacion, f. binding of books.
enCuadernador, or enquadernador, a book binder. enCuadernar, or enQuadernar
libros, to bind books. enCuberta, f. a covering, the utter sheet of a
letter. enCubertado, m. covered. enCubertamente, covertly. * enCubierto, m.
covered. enCubredizo, secret. enCubridor, m. a couerer, a hider. enCubrimiento,
m. covering, hiding. enCubrir, to cover, to hide. * enCuencion, vide encuentro,
a meeting, an encountering. * enCuentre, enCuentro, vide enContrar. enCuentro,
m. an encounter, a meeting with. enCumbrado, m lifted up on high. enCumbrar, to
lift up on high. * End, there, on that side. * Endeble, weak feeble. *
Endecasillabon, a verse consisting of eleven syllables. Endechaderas, women
mourners at burials for the dead. Endechas, f. mournings. * Endechar, to mourn
at funerals. * enDedura, vide Hendadura, f. a clift, a cleaving asunder. *
Endejas, vide Endechas, mournings. * enDamasiada, too much. enDemoniado, m.
possessed with a devil enDentecer los nin^os, to have teeth. enDerecar, to
direct, to make straight. enDeredor, round about. * enDiablado, m. possessed
with a devil, devilish. Endibia, or Endivia, Endive, an herb. enDolencias, in
sickness, in anguish and grief. * enDressar, vide enderecar. * Endrina, a
damson. * Endrino, a damson tree. * Endrino montesino, vide Andrinas. * enDuda,
f. in doubt. enDulcadura, f. a sweetening, or making sweet. enDulcar, to
sweeten, to make sweet. Endulgencias, f. pardons. * enDulzar, vide enDulcar. *
enDurar, to suffer. Also to make hard and niggardly. enDurecer, or enDurescer,
yo enDuresco, or enDurezco, to wax hard. enDurecimiento, m, hardening, waxing
hard. enDure cido, m. hardened. * enDuresca, enDurezca, vide endurecer. *
enDuzar, vide enDucar, to sweeten. Enea, f. an herb wherewith they make
mattes, a kind of rush, or flagge. Enebro, ginebro, or Zimbro, Juniper. *
Enechada criatura, a forlorn creature. Enechado, m. a child laid out, an
orphan. Enechar, to lay abroad a young child, to set out, to cleanse wheat. *
enEfeto, or enEfecto, m. in effect. * Enel, id est, en El, in it. Eneldo, an
herb called dill. * Enemicicia, f. enimitie. Enemigable, hateful.
Enemigablemente, like an enemy, hatefully. Enemigar, to make enemies. Enemigo,
m. an enemy. Enemistad, f. enimitie, hatred. Enemistar, to bear enimitie. *
Enerbolada saeta, or Xara, f. a shaft or arrow poisoned. * Enerbolado, m.
poisoned with poisonous herbs. enErizado, m. stiff, rough, bristled, or
standing up as bristles. enErizamiento, m. standing up of the hair, bristling
of the hair. enErizar, to wax stiff, to wax rough, to stand or bristle up
as hair. Enero, m. the month January. enErtarse, to wax rough. *
enErvolado, vide enErbolado. Enessar, to cover with mortar. * Eneste, Enesto,
id est, En este, en esto, in this, in that. Enfadado, m. wearied, tired,
offended. Enfadar, to grieve, to offend, to tire, to be loathsome. * Enfado, m.
irkesomnesse, tediousness, weariness. Enfadoso, m. tedious, wearisome,
loathsome. enFamado, m. famous, infamous. * Enfante, m. vide Infant. *
Enfardelar, to make up a pack or bundle. * Enfasi, vide Emfasi. *
Enfastidiado, m. wearied, troubled, molested, disdained. * Enfastidiar, to
loath, to abhor, to contemn with disdain. * Enfengidos ojos, bleared eyes.
Enfermar, to be sick, to be weak, to be ill at ease. Enfermedad, f.
sickness, infirmity. Enfermo, m. sick, weak, ill at ease. Enfermeria, f. an
hospital, a spittle for the diseased. * Enfermero, m. one that heals
diseases in hospitals. Enfin, id est, En fin, in the end. Enflaquecer, or
Enflaquescer, to be weak or feeble, to be lean. Enflaquecido, m. weakened,
made lean. * Enfonsado, freed from ordinary tax and duty. Enforrado, m.
furred, lined. Enforrar, to furre, to line. * Enforro, m. a furring or lining.
Enfotado, m. encouraged, set on. Enfotar, to encourage, to set on. Enfrascar,
to stick fast, to be entangled, to intermeddle himself. Enfrenado, m.
bridled, restrained. Enfrenar, to bridle, to restrain. enFrente, over against,
afront. Enfriadera, f. a cooling place, a vessel to cool wine with snow
water used in Spain. Enfriado, m. cooled. Enfriar, to cool, to make cold. *
Enfundadura, f. a putting up in a case. Also an arming of pikes with cloth,
velvet, etc. Enfundar, to put up in a case, to arm pikes with cloth, velvet,
etc. Enfurecer, or Enfurescer, to be mad, to be furious. Enfurecido, m.
furious, raging. * Enfurtir, to thicken cloth at the fulling mill. Engaco, m. a
rake. Engan^ado, m. deceived, beguiled. Engan^ador, m. a deceiuer, a beguiler.
Engan^ar, to deceive, to beguile, to undermine, to abuse by deceit, to deal
fraudulently, to coosen, to shift cunningly with, to play on both hands.
Engan^o, m. deceit, fraud, beguiling, coosenage, cunning, shifting.
Engan^osamente, deceitfully, fraudulently, like a shifting or coosening
companion. Engan^oso, m. deceitful, fraudulent, one that plaieth false or with
both hands, given to coosenage. * Engarrafado, m. caught with a grapple, or
with a hook. Engarrafar, to grapple, to catch with a hook. * Engasgar, vide
Asir, or Engarrafar. Engastado, m. set in, as a stone in a ring, inlaied,
chipped work. Engastador, m. one that sets stones in rings, one that
inlaieth bone or timber, a maker of chipped work. Engastar, to set a stone in
a ring, to make inlaied work, as chipped work or checker work with bone, or
timber. Engaste, chipt work, checker work, inlaying of stones in rings, etc.
* Engastonado, m. set in as a stone in a ring, inlaied, chipped work. *
Engastonar, to set a stone in a ring, to make chipped work or checker work
with bone or timber, to make inlaide work. * Engavelado, m. enrolled or
appointed to pay a tribute or custom to the king. * enGavillado, m. bound up
in fagots or bundles. * enGavillar, to bind up in fagots or bundles.
Engendrado, m. begotten, engendered, bred, having had his original. *
Engendrador, m. a begetter, an engendrer, one from whence came the offspring or
first original. Engendrar, to beget, to breed, to engender, to procreate.
Engen^ero, an enginer, one that plotteth or makes instruments with strange
devises, to effect rare and difficult matters withal, a cunning workman.
Engen^o, or Engenio, an engine or cunning instrument, a crafty or politic
invention, a scaffold in building, a framing or workmanship, a place over the
scaffolde whence some angel appeered. * Engerido, m. grafted in. * Engerir, to
graft into. * Engie, a fish called a Lamprey. * enGolfado, m. launched out into
the deep, put to sea. enGolfar, to launch into the deep, to put to sea, to
insinuate, to venture on. EnGordado, m. fatted, become or made gross, waxed
foggie and greasy. enGordar, to fatten, to make fat, to make gross, to grow
foggie or vnwilsome. Engorra, f. stay, delaie, tarriance, prolonging of time,
deferring from time to time. Engorrando, by delays, demurring, driving off
from time to time, prolonging. Engorrar, to stay, to delay, to demurre, to
drive off time, to prolong from time to time. Engorroso, m. full of delays or
demurs, one that loves to prolong or drive off from day to day. *
enGrandecedor, m. one that makes great, one that extolleth or magnifieth, an
aggrauater of matters. enGrandecer, or enGrandescer, to make great, to
magnify, to extol, to aggrauate. enGrandecido, m. made great, aggrauated,
extolled, magnified. enGrandecimiento, m. making great, magnifying, extolling,
aggravating. * Engrasado pan^o, gummed cloth, to make it deceitfully thick. *
enGrossado, m. made fat, waxed gross. engrossar, yo enGruesso, to wax
gross, to make fat. enGrudamiento, m. a pasting or gluing any thing with
paste. enGrudar, to paste, to glue, to sodder, to join, to close up with
paste. enGrudo, m. paste of flower and water, to paste or stick things
together. * Engrudo de cola, glue, such as cutlers and fletchers use.
Engrudoso, m. gluie, full of paste. * enGruesse, enGruesso, vide enGrossar.
Engrumecer, to clot, to quarre like cold blood, to grow to a ielly, to become
clotted. * Enguila, vide Anguilla, f. a fish called an Eele. Engullir, to
swallow up, to glut up, to devour. Engurria, a wrinkle in a garment. Also
the strangurie. Engurriado, m. pleited, wrinkled, folded. Also having the
strangurie. Engurriamiento, m. folding, wrinkling, pleiting. * Enhadado, vide
Enfadado, wearied, tired, offended. Enhadar, vide Enfadar, to weary, to
offend, to tire. * enHambrentamiento, a making hungry. * enHambrentar, to make
hungry. * enHastadas Puntas, spear points headed with iron. * enHastado, m.
the pike of iron or steel set to the spear. * enHastar, to head pikes or
lances with heads of iron or steel. * enHastiado, m. loathed, misliked,
abhorred. enHastiar, to loath, to abhor, to mislike, to be full, to have
enough. enHastio, m. loathing, mislike, abhorring, satietie, fulness, enough.
enHechizado, m. to bewitch, to forespeake, to inchant. * enHechizador, m. a
witch, an inchauter, a sorcerer. enHechizar, to bewitch, to forespeake, to
inchant. * Enhestado, m. to lift up, to raise, or set up. Enhestamiento, m.
lifting up, setting on end, raising up. Enhestar, yo Enhiesto, to lift up, to
set on end, to raise up. Enhetrado, m. entangled, insnarled, troubled,
perplexed. * Enhetradura, f. entangling, insnarling, interturbing.
Enhetramiento, m. vide Enhetradura. Enhetrar, to entangle, to snarle in, to
trouble by the way, to make in a perplexity, or at his wits end. Enhieste,
Enhiesto, vide Enhestar. * Enhiestador, one that carries a thing upright. *
Enhiesto, lifted up, set up, lying wide open with his face upward. enHilar, to
thread as one threadeth a needle, to guide by a thread, to cut by a thread.
enHorcado, m. hanged up, crucified, hanged by the neck. Also a waggish boy, or
a gallow-clapper. Also a roape of onions or garlic. enHorcar, Praes. yo
enHorco, 1. Praet. yo enHorque, to hang by the neck, to crucify upon the
cross. * enHorque, vide enHorcar. * enHornado, m. put into an oven. *
enHornadura, f. a putting into an oven. * enHornar, to set in an oven, to set
in bread to bake. * Enjaezado, trapped or furnished as a horse. * Enjaezar, to
trap or furnish a horse. * Enjezar, vide Enjaezar. * Enivelado, m. ruled out,
directed by a line. * Eniveladura, f. a ruling out, or directing by a line. *
Enivelar, to rule, as scholars writing books are ruled, or as carpenters use
to rule timber, to direct by a line. * Enlacado, m. entangled, intrapped,
snared, tied, fast knit. * Enlacadura, f. an intangling, tying, snaring,
intrapping. * Enlacamiento, m. idem. * Enlacar, to entangle, to snare, to
entrap, to knit, to tie fast. * Enlardado, m. larded with bakon. * Enlardar, to
lard, as cooks use to draw with lard or bakon. * Enlatado, m. done with plates
or metal stuffes. Also plated or ribbed as ships sides when they are first
made. * Enlaviar, to deceive with fair words. * Enlazado, or Enlacado, m.
intrapped, entangled, snared, fast tied, knit. Enlazadura, f. tying,
intangling, snaring, intrapping, betraying. Enlazamiento, idem. Enlazar, vide
Enlacar, to snare or entrap. * Enlevado, vide Elevado, m. lifted up, set up,
exalted. Enlevamiento, m. amazednes, giddines of the head. Enlevar, to lift up,
to raise up, to set up, to erect. * Enliriar, to beset with Lillies. * Enlisar
la tela, to make linen smooth, to smooth linen. Enlizar la tela, to set the
threads or yarne (which is to be wouen up and down with the slay) upon the
loome. * Enllenar, to fill full. Enlodado, m. berayed, mirie, durtie.
Enlodadura, f. beraying or fouling with dirt, durting. Enlodar, to make durtie,
to beray with dirt. Enloquecer, or Enloquescer, to make foolish, to make
frantike. Enloquecerse, to become foolish, to play the fool for want of wit,
to be frantike. * En los, in them, in those. Enlosar, to paue. * Enlozado, m.
paued with pauing tile. * Enlozar, to paue with pauing tile. * en Lugar, or en
vez, in place, in steed. Enlutado, m. clad in mourning apparel, dressed like a
mourner. * Enlutar, to apparel like a mourner, to go as a mourner. Enluto,
mourning. Enluzar, vide Enluzir. * Enluzir, to wash a wall with lime, to whiten
a wall. Enmagrecer, vide Emmagrescer, to make lean, to cause to pine.
Enmagrecerse, to wax lean, to pine. Enmagrecido, grown or waxed lean. *
Enmienda, f. an amendment. * Enmobescerse, to be mouldie, to be hoarie, to be
filthy, to be pale, or dead colored. * Enmordazar, vide Amordazar, to bite. *
Enmudecer, to be mute, to hold his peace. * Enmudecido, mute, dumb, one that
says nothing. Ennegrecer, or Ennegrescer, to make black. Ennivelado, vide
Enivelado. Ennoblecer, or Ennoblescer, to make noble, to advance to honor, to
exalt unto nobility. * Ennoblecido, made noble, advanced to honor. En^udecer
la yerva, to grow in knots as reeds, corn, grass, and the stalks of many
herbs do. Enodio, m. the fawn of a stag. Enojadamente, angrily, like one
offended or in a rage. Enojadizo, angry, waiward, waspish, bent to much anger,
froward, Enojado, m. angry, offended, annoyed, vexed, in a chafe. Enojar, to
anger, to annoy, to offend, to vex, to set in a chafe, to displease. Enojo, m.
anger, displeasure, vexation, offense, annoyance. * Tener Enojos, to be at
variance or discord with. Enojosamente, angrily, discontentedly, hatefully.
Enojoso, m. angry, hateful, troublesome, offensive. * Enora, id est, En ora,
at an hour, at a time. * Enora buena, or mala, at a good time, or at a bad. *
Enorden, id est, En orden, in order, orderly. * Enorme, out of rule, out of
square, unmeasurable, exceeding great, enormous, foul. * Enosar, vide Enojar.
* enPantanar, to put into bogs, to betake them to the bogs or quagmires. *
Emparado, f. vide Parrado, made like the prop of a vine. * Emparedado, a
religious person of a strict life, always penned and shut up within two walls.
* Emparejar, to go just equal with one, to go cheek by cheek, or side by
side. * Enpatronizar, to patronize, to take into protection. * enPedernido,
vide emPedernido, stony. * enPen^ar, vide emPen^ar, to pawn, to lay to gage.
* Enpezar, to begin. * Enpicar, to put one to death on pikes. * enPrestar, to
borrow, to lend * Enpuxar, to thrust, to put back, to grind as a mill. *
Enquadernado, m. bound up as a book. Also the ribs or sides of a ship set or
laid when she is first a making. * Enquadernador, a bookebinder. * Enquadernar,
to bind books, to set the ribs or sides of a ship at her first making up. *
Enqualquier manera, howsoever it be. * Enquentro, m. an incountring or meeting
with. * Enquisicion, f. a diligent search. * enRalecer, or enRalescer, to make
thin. * Enrarecer, to make rare. * Enroscado, vide Enrroscado. * Enrramado.
m. covered with boughs. Enrramar, to cover with boughs. Enrranciarse, to be
rustie, to be cankerfretted, to be mouldie. * Erredado, m. taken in a net, made
like a net. * Enrredador, m. one that catches with nets. * Enrredamiento, m.
catching with nets. * Enrredar, to catch in a net, to take with nets. *
Enrredo, m. a netting, taking in a net. * Enrrejar, vide Enrexar. Enrrexado,
lattised, made with lattises, grated. Enrrexar, to lattise, to set or make
lattises, to set grates. * Enrrique, m. a proper name called Henry.
Enrriquecer, or Enrriquescer, to enrich, to make rich. Enrriquecido, m.
enriched, made rich, grown wealthy. Enrriscado, m. steep up, on the side of
a rock, dangerous, hard to pass. Enrriscamiento, m. steepness, the craggie
side of a rock, danger, peril, hardness. Enrriscar, to get up to a mountain
or steep rock, to endanger himself, to venture perilously. Enrristrar, to
put a lance to the rest. * Enrristre, m. a rest for a lance. Enrrizar, to
ruffle the hair, to shag his hair. * Enrrodelado, m. armed with a target. *
Enrrodelar, to arm with a target. Enrronquecer, or Enrronquescer, to be
hoarse. Enrronquecimianto, hoarsenes. * Enrroscado, laid in a round circle
like an adder. Enrroscadura, f. lying round, winding round about like an
adder. Enrroscar, Praes. yo Enrrosco, 1. Praet. yo Enrrosque, to lie trent and
round like an adder: to wind round about. * Enrrosque, vide Enrroscar. *
Enrrossada cosa, a thing very read. Enrroxar, to make red, to die in a red
color. Enrruviar, to make yellow, sometimes to make reddish. * enRuviascer, to
wax reddish. Ensalada, f. a sallet of herbs. * ensAlcado, m. extolled,
exalted, set up aloft, promoted, lifted up. ensAlcamiento, m. exaltation,
extolling, lifting up, setting aloft. ensAlcar, to extol, to exalt, to set up
aloft, to promote. Ensalmador, m. an enchanter, a charmer, one that by spells
and words takes in hand to help the diseases, an exorcist. Ensalmar, to
charm, to inchant, to use charms or inchantitg words, or emplaisters.
Ensalmo, m. a charm, an enchantment. Also a pannell. Ensalmo de bestia, a
pannell for a beast. * Ensamblador, m. a ioyner. * Ensamblar, to join as
Ioyners use in their trades. Ensanchamiento, m. enlarging, amplifying, setting
out at large. Ensanchar, to amplify, to enlarge, to set out to the full, to
express at length. * ensAngostado, made straight or narrow, lessened. *
ensAngostar, to streighten, to bring to a narrow plot, to lessen. *
ensAngostamiento, m. streightening, bringing to a narrower room.
enSangrentado, m. embrued with blood, all on a goare blood. * enSangrentador,
m. one that embrueth with blood, a bloudshedder. enSangrentamiento, m. imbruing
or defiling with blood. Ensangrentar, to imbrue or defile with blood, to make
all on a goare blood. enSan^ado, m. angered, offended, grievously vexed. *
enSan^amiento, m. anger, vexation, offense, molestation. enSan^arse, to be
angry, to be offended, to take in ill part. enSartar, to put on a string, as
men use to put beads or pearls. To file up writings or records. Ensayado, m.
assaied, tried, made proof of. * Ensayador, a taster, an assayer, a proouer.
Ensayar, to try, to assaie, to make proof of, to put on a cassocke. Ensayo,
m. an assaying, a trial. * Ensebado, m. tallowed, greased. * Ensebadura, f. a
tallowing, a greasing. * Ensebar, to tallow, to anoint with tallow, or grease.
* Ensenada, f. a putting into the bosom, an entrance of the sea into a creek.
Ensenado, f. put into the bosom. Ensenar, to put into the bosom, or the sea
to come into a creek. * Ensen^a, f. a sign to a house, an ensign in war,
called also in Spanish Vandera, or Bandera. Ensen^ado, m. taught, instructed,
learned. Ensen^amiento, m. an instruction, a teaching, a bringing up,
nurturing. Ensen^anca, f. teaching, instruction, erudition. Ensen^ar, to
instruct, to teach, to bring up, to nurture. * Ensen^ar, or Sen^alar, to mark,
to give a token. enSen^orear, to bear lordship, to have rule or authority. *
Ensensio, vide Encensios, the herb Wormewoode. * Ensilado, m. put in a garner.
Ensilar, to put in a garner. Ensillado, m. saddled, furnished with a saddle,
and other furniture fit for a horse. enSillar, to saddle, to furnish a horse
for to be ridden. * Ensoalcado, m. lifted up, exalted, extolled. * Ensoalcar,
to lift up, to extol, to exalt. enSobervecer, or enSobervescerse, to wax
proud, to grow arrogant, or high minded. * enSolver, yo ensuelvo, to dissolve,
or to consume. * Ensolvido, m. dissolved, brought from the former state,
consumed. Ensordamiento, m. making or becoming deaf, thicknes of hearing.
Ensordar, to make deaf, to wax deaf. * Ensordecer, or Ensordescer, to begin
to wax deaf. Ensordedera, f. red-plum or cats-taile, a kind of palm growing
on nut trees at the spring, an herb that makes deaf. * Ensperanca, id est,
en Esperanca, f. in hope. * Enspiritado, m. possessed with an evil spirit. *
enSuen^o, m. in sleep, in dreams. * enSuma, f. in sum, in brief.
enSuziamiento, m. making foul, beraying, defiling, sluttishnes. enSuziar, to
beray, to make foul, to defile, to use sluttishly. * Entabiado, m. vide
Entibiado. * Entabiar, vide Entibiar. * Entablado, m. boorded, planked. *
Entabladura, f. a board or planke, a boording or planking. Entablamiento, m.
boording, planchering, laying of planks or boords. Entablar, to board, to
planke, to plancher, to pant as the flesh of beasts new killed, to place in a
board, to set tablemen in the tables. Entallable, that which may be carved or
graued. * enTallado, m. carved, graued, cut. enTallador, m. a cutter, a grauer,
a caruer. enTalladura, f. grauing, caruing, cutting. enTallar, to grave, to
carue, to cut curiously in wood or in metal. enTallecer la yerva, to grow to
a stalk, to grow to some stature or perfection. * enTanto, in so much, so far.
Entanto grado, so far forth, to such a pass. enTapiar, to stop up, to close
up. * enTapicar, to hang with hangings of arras, tapestrie, darnets or such
like. * Entassajos, m. by or in pieces of flesh salted and hanged, or smoked. *
Entejer, vide enTexer. Entena de nao, the foreyard in a ship, or rather the
maine yard. * Entenada, f. a daughter in law, the wives daughter or the
husbands daughter. Entenado, m. a son in law, the wives son or husbands
son. Entender, yo Entiendo, to understand, to perceive, to wit, to be
informed. * Entendido, m. understood. Entendimiento, m. understanding.
enTenebrecer, or enTenebrescer, to darken, to make dark, to obscure.
Enteramente, wholly, thoroughly, afresh, entirely. Enteramiento, m. renewing,
taking afresh. Enterar, to renew, to make whole, to do afresh. Entereza, f.
soundness, wholenesse, integrity. Enterizo, whole, sound. Enternecer, or
Enternescer, to be tender, to wax delicate or tender. Entero, m. whole, sound,
entire. Enterrado, m. buried, laid in grave, interred. Enterrador, m. he that
burieth, one that lays in grave. Enterramiento, m. burying, laying in grave,
interring, a funeral. Enterrar, yo Entierro, to lay in grave, to bury, to
interre. * Entervenga, Entervengo, vide Entervenir. * Entervenido, m. happened
by the way, chanced in the mean time. * Entervenir, Praes. Entervengo,
entervienes, enterviene, 1. Praet. Entervine, viniste, vino, Fut. Entervendre,
or Enterverne, as, a, Subiun. Praes. Entervenga, Imperfect. Enterviniera,
entervernia, or enterviniesse, Fut. Enterviniere, to happen by the way, to
chance in the mean while. * Enterverne, Entervernia, vide Entervenir. *
Entervine, Enterviniera, Enterviniesse, Entervino, vide Entervenir.
Entesamiento, m. bending, stretching out, laying abroad. Entesar, yo Entieso,
to bend as a bow, to stretch, to lay out. * enTexer, to weaue in, to plat. *
Enthimema, or Entimema, an imperfect syllogism, wanting the Mayor or Minor.
enTibiadera, m. a warming pan, or a pot to put any thing in for to keep it
lukewarm. * enTibiado, m. made lukewarm, warmed. enTibiar, to make
lukewarm. * Entienda, Entiendo, vide Entender. * Entierre, Entierro, vide
Enterrar. Entierros, m. burials, funerals. * Entiese, Entieso, vide Entesar. *
Entimema, vide Enthimema. * Entiscar, vide Enriscar. * Entiviar, vide Entibiar,
to be lukewarm. * Entollar, vide Hentollar. Entomecer, or Entomescer, vide
Atormecer, to wax drowsy, unlusty, or unfit to any thing. * Entonacion, a
tuning, a setting of tune. Entonado, m. tuned, brought into tune, set in tune.
Also a bragging fellow, a ietting companion. Entonar, to tune, to set in tune,
to bring into tune, to set descant. To brag, to boast. Entonces, then, at
that time. Entontecer, or Entontescer, to wax foolish, to become a fool. *
Entorcer, yo Entuerco, to turn or wind as a snake, to bend or bow, to fasten
or wind about. To wreath or wrench. Entormecer, vide Atormecer. *
Entormecimiento, m. or Tremiesga, heaviness, drowsines, vnlustines, unaptness to
any goodness. * Entorneado, m. vide Entornado, wrapped round about, turned or
wound round about. * Entornear, to wrappe round about, to turn or wind round
about. Entorno, round about. enTorpecer, or enTorpescer, to be astonished, to be
dull, to be even senceles, to be given to no goodness. enTorpecido, m. foul,
unlusty, astonished. enTorpecimiento, m. dulnes, astonishment, heavy
sencelesnes. Entortadura, f. the putting out of an eye, squinteiednes,
crookednes. Entortar, yo Entuerto, to be squinteied, to put out one eye, to
make crooked. * Entosicar, Entossicar, or Entoxicar, Praes. yo Entosico,
Entossico, Entoxico, 1. Praet. Entosique, Entossique, Entoxique, to poison, to
make intoxicate. * Entosique, Entossique, Entoxique, vide Entosicar. *
Entracar, to mark out, to trace out. Entrada, f. an entry, a going into a
place. An entrance into a matter, a winning in. Entrambos, both two. *
Entramocos, an herb called garden Lupine or Figbeane. Entrampar, to entangle,
to snarle, to fold in, to catch in a snare or pitfall. Entran^able, hearty,
entire, inward, from the heart. Entran^ablemente, heartily, entirely, from the
very inward parts. Entran^as, f the entrails, the inward parts the heart
strings. Entrapado pan^o, m. cloth dyed in grain. Entrapajado, m. bound about
the head, muffled. Entrapajar, vide Entrapar. Entrapar, to bind about the head
with a cloth. Entrar, to enter, to come in, to make an entrance. * Entrecejo,
m. the place between the eiebrowes. E'ntre, between, betwixt, among. * Enter
ellos, among them. Enter tanto, in the mean while, whilst that. Entrecoger,
to take up by the way, to take before it comes to the ground. Entrecortar, to
cut off, to make short, to cut off by the way. * Entre-cuero y carne, the
dropsy, or between the skin and the flesh. * entreCuesta, f. a baldrib of a
hog, the forepart of the ribs of a hog taken out from the side to be salted.
entreDezir, Praes. Entredigo, Entredizes, Entredize. 1. Praet. Entredixe,
Entredixiste, Entredixo. Fut. Entredire, ras, ra. Sub. Praes. Entrediga.
Imperfect. Entredixera, Entrediria, or Entredixesse. Fut. Entredixiere, to
forbid. entreDia, by day, in the day time. entreDicho, m. forbidding, charge to
the contrary, an excommunication. * entreDientes, betwixt the teeth. *
Entrediga, Entredigo, vide Entredezir. * Entredixe, Entredixesse, Entrediria,
Entredixo, vide entreDezir. Entrega, f. a delivery, a yielding, a restoring to
the full, a making good again. * Entregado, m. delivered, yielded up, restored
to the full, given to keep. * Entregador, m. he that yields, delivers up
or restores to the full, one that makes good again. Entregar, yo Entriego,
to deliver or commit upon trust, to yield up, to restore, to make good again,
to give over quite. Entrehuelgo, m. intermission, pawsing upon a matter, taking
deliberation. * Entrellover, to rain by the way, all to bewet with rain. *
Entrelubricano, m. the twylight, the light between the dawning and sun
rising, or betwixt the sun set and the shutting of the evening. * Enter luna
y luna, the change of the moon, the space between the change and the prime. *
Entremedias, ways or means between. Entremes de la tarasca, a hobbyhorse or
such like giant or gawde in a May game. Entremeter, to intermeddle, to put
between, to interpose, to set in the way. * Entremetido, m. interposed,
intermedled, put between, set by the way, an intermeddler, a saucy fellow.
Entremetimiento, m. intermeddling, interposing, setting by the way, putting
between. * Entremixtura, f. mingling together, with intermixing, a medley. *
Entremixtura de colores, a medley color. Entreoyr, to ouerheare, to hear
unawares, or by the way. * Entrepapado, the time while there is no pope,
betwixt one pope and another. entrePoner, Praes. entrePongo, entrePones,
entrepone, 1. Praet. entrePuse, Pusiste, Puso, Fut. entrePorne, as, a, Sub.
Praes. entrePonga, Imperfect. Entrepusiera, entrepusiesse, or Entrepornia, Fut.
Entrepusiere, to put between, to set by the way, to set between, to
interpose. * Entreponga, Entrepongo, vide entrePoner. * entrePorne,
entrePornia, vide entrePoner. Entrepostura, f. putting between, setting
betwixt. entrePuesto, interposed, set between, put betwixt. entrePuncadura,
pouncing, pricking, pricking out of samplers, etc. entrePuncar, to pounce out,
to prick out as they prick out samplers, etc. * entrePuse, entrePusiera,
entrePusiesse, entrePuso, vide entrePoner. Entresacadura, f. catching by the
way, getting at unawares before he thought. Entresacar, Praes. yo Entresaco, 1.
Praet. yo Entresaque, to catch by the way or unawares. * Entresaque, vide
Entresacar. Entre-se, betwixt themselves, among themselves. * Enter semana,
between the weeks beginning and end, in the week time, while the week
lasts. * Enter si, within himself. Entresijo de animal, the midriffe which
parts the bowels from the heart, lungs, liver, etc. Entresuelo, m. a loft, a
sollar, an upper room, the chief beam in a house. * entreTallado, m. graven,
cut or carved in stone or wood. * entreTalladura, f. a picture or image cut,
graven or carved. * entreTallar, to grave, cut or carue imagerie. *
Entretenido, m. entertained, accepted, welcomed. Entretenimiento, m.
entertainment, welcoming, bidding welcome, accepting in good part. *
entreTener, Praes. entreTengo, entretienes, entretiene, 1. Praet. entreTuve,
entreTuviste, entreTuvo, Fut. entreTendre, or entreTerne, as, a, Sub. Praes.
Entretenga, Imperf. entreTuviera, entreTuviesse, or entreTernia, Fut.
entreTuviere, to entertain, to bid welcome, to accept of. * entretenga,
entretengo, vide entreTener. * entreTerne, entreTernia, vide entreTener.
entreTexedura, f. weauing of cloth or other like things, wreathing or winding
one within another, as in making of baskets, hurdles, or such like. entreTexer,
to weaue, to wreathe together, one within another. * entreTexido, m. wouen,
wreathed together, or one within another. * entreTuve, entreTuviera,
entreTuviesse, vide entreTener. entreValo, m. the mean space, the distance
between. entreVenimiento, m. chance by the way, hap hazard. entreVenga,
entreVengo, vide entreVenir. entreVenir, Praes. entreVengo, entreVienes,
entreViene, 1. Praet. entreVine, entreViniste, entreVino, Fut. entreVendre, or
entreVerne, as, a, Sub. Praes. entreVenga, Imperf. entreViniera, entreVernia,
or entreViniesse, Fut. entreViniere, to come between, to chance by the way.
Entreverado, m. wrought with rods as baskets and hurdles of diverse colors, as
black and white. * Entreverne, Entrevernia, vide entreVenir. * Entrevine,
Entreviniesse, Entreviniera, Entrevino, vide entreVenir. Entreuntar, to anoint
between. Entricadamente, intricately, perplexedly. Entricado, m. entangled,
intricate, perplexed. Entricamiento, m. intangling. Entricar, Praes. yo
Entrico, 1. Praet. yo Entrique, to entangle, to bring into a labyrinth, to make
intricate. * Entriega, Entriego, vide Entregar. * Entrique, vide Entricar. *
Entristecido, m. made heavy, made sorrowful. Entristecer, or Entristescer, to
be sad, to be heavy. Entristecimiento, m. sadness, heaviness, sorrow. *
Entroduxe, Entroduxera Entroduxesse, Entroduxo, vide Entroduzir. * Entrodusga,
or Entroduzga vide Entroduzir. * Entroduzir, Praes Entroduzgo, Entroduzes,
entroduze. 1. Praet. Entroduxe, iste, Entroduxo, Fut. Entrodure, ras, ra, Sub.
Praes. Entroduzga, Imperfect, Entroduxera, Entrodurria, or Entroduxesse, Fut,
Entroduxiere, to bring in, to draw on, to cause to enter, to prepare a way, to
make way. * Entronizar, to put in a throne, to enstall. * Entuerce, Entuerco,
vide Entorcer, to turn or wind as a snake. * Entuerte, Entuerto, vide
Entortar. Entupecer, to stuff, to fill again, to fill full. * Enturbiar, to
trouble, to make thick or muddie as water. Enturviar, idem. * Enturviador, m. a
troubler, a disturber. En vano, in vain. Envarado, m. stiff, stark.
Envaramiento, stiffnes of the body, starknes. Envarar, to be stiff, to grow
stark and unable to stir. * Envasar, to put into a vessel. * Envedijado, m.
having long locks, or shagge hair. * Envegescer, or Envegecer, to grow in
age, to wax old, to be of good years. Envegecido, or Envegescido, m. ancient,
old, well stricken in years. Envegerse, vide Envegescer, to grow old, to
become aged. * Envejecer, or Envejescer, vide Envegescer. * Envejecido, or
Envejescido, vide Envegecido, ancient, old, stricken in years. * Envelesado,
m. slumbering, at his wits end, not knowing what to do. Envergoncado, m. made
to blush, ashamed, shamefaste. Envergoncamiento, m. shamefastnes, blushing,
bashfulnes. * Envergoncante, bashful, shamefaste. Envergoncarse, to be
ashamed, to blush, to be bashful, or shamefaste. Envernero, m. a wintering
place, a winter house. Envernar, yo Envierno, to winter, to lodge or dwell in
the winter. Enverniego, m. pertaining to winter, fit for winter. * Envers, vide
Anvers, or Anveres, the city Antwerpe. Enves, the inside, the lining. En vez,
sometimes. Envessar, yo Enviesso, to turn in and out, to turn the inside out.
Envestido, m. broken in among the enemies, assailed, invested into another
country. Envestir, yo Envisto, to inuest into another country or order, to
assail, to break in among enemies. En vez, sometimes. Enviciar, to grow
rank, to grow out of order, to surpass his bounds, to become vicious. *
Envierne, Envierno, vide Envernar. * Envierno, vide Invierno. Envilecer, or
Envilescer, to wax vile, to become little worth, to become cheap. *
Envilecido, m. made vile, base, or of none account. * Enviste, Envisto, vide
Envestir. * Enuno, vide Juntos, together, all in one. * Enxabonado, m. done
with soap, soped. Enxabonar, to soap, to do with soap. Enxaguar, to water, to
wash, to sprinkle with water. * Enxalma, f. a charm, an enchantment. Also a
panmell for a horse or beast. Enxalmar, vide Ensalmar, to charm, to inchant. *
Enxalmo, vide Enxalma. Enxalvegar, to white wash a house, to wash with lime.
Enxambrar, as swarm as bees do. Enxambre, m. a swarm of bees. * Enxebado,
cloth dressed with Xebe, which is a kind of chalk to make it work well.
Enxergado, m. he that wears sacke-cloth. Euxerido, m. graffed. Enxeridor, m.
a graffer. Enxerir, yo Enxiro, to graffe as men graffe trees. * Enxerir
d'escudete, to graffe and cut the stock in the fashion of a little shield, to
graft on. Enxertar, vide Enxerir. Enxerto, or Enxerido, m. graffed. * Enxira,
Enxiro, vide Enxerir. Enxugar, Praes. yo Enxugo. 1. Praet. yo Enxugue, to dry,
to wipe the hands after washing. * Enxugue, vide Enxugar. Enxullo de telar, a
weauers beam. Enxundia, f. fat, sewet, grease, ointment for cart wheels.
Enxuto, m. dry. * Enyessado, m. seeled, plaistered. * Enyessadura, seeling or
plaistering. * Enyessar, to seele or plaster houses. Enzias, f. the gums. *
Enzima, vide Encima. * Enzimar, vide Encimar. Enzina, f. the skarlet oak, a
holme oak, or french oak. Enzinal, a grove of such oaks.
E P
* Epenthesi, or Epenthesis, the putting in of a letter or syllable in the
midst of a word. * Ephemeri, day-bookes, or registers of every several day.
Epicureos, m. Epicures, men delighted in belly cheer, voluptuous, given to
nothing but pleasure. * Epifania, an appearing or manifestation. The day or
feast of Epiphanie, or twelfe day. Epigrama, f. an Epigram or superscription.
Epilepsia, f. the falling sickness. * Epilogo, a conclusion, a final end, a
knitting up of a matter. Epiphania, vide Epifania. Epitafio, m. or Epitaphio,
an Epitath, or an inscription upon a grave in praise of the man there buried.
Epistola, f. an epistle, a letter sent from friend to friend. * Epitaphio, vide
Epitafio. * Epitheto, an addition to a noune for some quality. * Epitome, an
abridgement, a breuiarie, an epitome. * Eponamon, m. a name that the Indians
gave to the devil.
E Q
* Equibalencia, vide Equivalencia, f. * Equidad, f. righteousness, just
dealing, equity, vprightnes. Equinocial, f. the equinoctial, when day and
night be of a like length. * Equinocio, idem. * Equiparacion, comparison, or
equalling. * Equiparar, to equal, to even, to match, to compare, to
counteruaile. * Equivalencia, f. like value, like worth, like in substance. *
Equivoca, words of diverse significations, doubtful which to take, equivocal.
* Equivocacion, f. diversity of signification. * Equivoco, equivocal, words
of diverse signification.
E R
E'ra, f. a yard, a floor, a garden bed, an account of years by the Empire.
Eral, a steer of a year old. * Erar con cordeles, to level out ground or
garden beds with lines. * Erario, m. the treasury, a princes exchequer, the
common treasury of a city. * Erbacal, or Ervacal, a place for herbs, an
herb garden. * Erbage, or Ervage, herbage, green fodder for horse or other
cattle. * Erbaje, idem. * Erbato, vide Ervato. * Erbazal, vide Erbacal. *
Erbero, vide Erveto. Erbolario, an herbarist, one that has skill in herbs.
Erbolecer, or Erbolescer, to grow up as an herb, to grow green, to bear
leaves. Eredad, f. heritage, inheritance. * Eredado, inherited, possessed.
Eredar, to inherit, to get by inheritance. Eredero, m. an heir, an inheritor.
Erege, m. an Heretic, one that holds erroneous and false points touching
faith and matters of salvation. Eregia, or Erejia, f. heresy, false doctrine,
false opinions. * Ereje, vide Erege. * Eremita, vide Ermita, a hermitage. *
Eremitano, or Ermitano, a hermit, one that has forsaken the world and betaken
himself to contemplation and godly life. Erencia, f. inheritance, heritage,
all the whole. Ereticar, Praes. yo Eretico. 1. Praet. yo Eretique, to become an
heretic, to follow false and erroneous opinions. Eretico, f. an heretic, vide
Erege. * Eretique, vide Ereticar. Erguido, m raised up. Erguir, to raise, to
call up in the morning, to arise. * Eridado, f. vide Eredado. * Eringio, an
herb called Rocket. Also Eringos roots. Erizado, m. rough, bristly. * Erizar,
to set up the hair upright. Erizo, m. a hedghog. * Erizo de mar, a deformed
shelfish called a ruff. * Erizo de castan^a, the husk of a chestnut. Ermador,
m. a waster, a spoyler. Ermadura, f. waste, spoiling, depopulation. Ermana, or
Hermana, f. a sister by father and mother, a sister. * Ermanable, brotherlike,
sisterlike. Ermanablemente, brotherly, sisterly. Ermandad, f. brotherhood,
sisterhood. * Ermandablemente, brotherly. * Ermandable, like brothers. Ermano,
or Hermano, m. a brother, most properly a brother by father and mother. Ermar,
yo yermo, to make waste, to spoil. Ermita, an Hermitage. Ermitan^o, vide
Ermitano. * Ermoso, or Hermoso, m. fair, beautiful. Eroyco, or Heroyco,
valorous, of great courage, of great exploits. Errada, f. an error, a false
opinion, a mistaking. Erradizo, a stragler, a wanderer. Errado, m. lost,
wandering. Erredor, m. one that goes astray, a wanderer. * Erradura, f.
wandering going astray. * Erramiento, m. going astraie, wandering. * Errante,
wandering, rouing, erring, gadding up and down. Errar, yo yerro, to wander, to
go astraie, to err, to do, or think amiss, to fail, to transgress, to
mistake, to wander, to straie. * Erratas, f. the faults of a book escaped. *
Erratico, m. erroneous, wandering, rouing, gadding, erring. * Erroneo,
erroneous, false, erring, mistaking in another sense. * Error, m. error, a
wrong opinion, false doctrine, going out of the way, mistaking, a fault.
Ervacal, a place for herbs, an herb garden. Ervage, herbage, green fodder
for horse or other cattle. * Ervaje, idem. Ervato, m. an herb called
Hogge-fennell, or Maidenweede. * Ervazal, vide Ervacal. * Erudicion, f.
instruction, learning, bringing up, education, nurture, teaching. Ervecer, or
Ervescer, to grow to an herb. Ervera, or Hervera, the throateboll, the
gullet, the paunch. Also a place for herbs. Ervero, m. he that gathers
herbage or green fodder for horse. etc. Also the throateboll. * Eruga, f. a
moath that eats clothes. Also an apothecarie drugge. * Erviente, vide
Herviente. * Ervilla, vide Hervilla. * Ervolario, vide Erbolario. * Ervor, vide
Hervor. * Eruzando, vide Cruzando. * Erymantho, m. a high hill of Arcadia, in
which Hercules took a wild boar which destroyed all the country thereabout.
* Erynnis, the name of one of the furies of hell, as the Poets did imagine.
E S
* Esalacion, f. an exhaling, or drawing up of vapors from the earth, and
waters by force of the sun, and of the conjunction of other fiery planets. *
EsAlcar, to lift up, to raise up. * Esaltor, to exalt, to lift up, to
advance. E'sca, f. tinder to catch fire with when it is stricken. Escabeche, or
Escaveche, m. pickle for fish, the brine that salt herings, and other saltfish
is kept in. * Escabel, or Escavel, a stool to sit on, a form to sit on.
Escabelo, or Escavelo, a form to sit on. Escabiosa, f. the herb called
Scabious. Escabroso, rough, rugged, craggie and sharp, froward, wilful,
perverse, untoward. Escabullimiento, m. slipping or sliding away, escaping or
stealing away. Escabullirse, to slip or slide away, to escape away, or
steal away privily. * Escacedad, f. holding fast, sparing, niggardlines.
Escala, f. a ladder, a pair of stairs or of greeses. * Escalada, f. a
scaling, a getting up by ladder, etc. Escalador, m. a scaler, a climer by
ladders or otherwise, a pilferer, a michar that creeps in at windows, etc. *
Escalamos, wooden pinnes in a ship, etc. wooden pegs. Escalar, to scale by
ladders, to climb, to scale fishes, or to scrape off their scales. *
Escaldado, scalded with hot water. * Escaldar, to scald with hot water.
esCalentador, m. a warming pan. esCalentamiento, warming. esCalentar, yo
esCaliento, to warm, to wax warm, to make warm. Escalera, a pair of
stairs or greeses. * esCaliente, esCaliento, vide esCalentar. Escalon, m. a
step or greese of a pair of stairs. Escalona, f. a scallion, a kind of
onion. Escama, f. a scale of fish or of such like. * Escamado, m. scaled, the
scales being scraped off. Escamadura, f. scaling or scraping off the scales.
Escamar, to scale or get off the scales of fish, andt. * Escambronas, vide
Escambrones. * Escambronera, f. a kind of bramble. Escambrones, a kind of
white bramble. Escambroso, vide Escabroso, rugged, rough, froward, etc.
Escamochos, m. fragments, broken meat, leauings, orts. Escamondar, to shave, to
make clean. Escamonea, f. scammonie, the juice of an herb used to purge
choler with. Escamoso, m. scaly, full of scales, that bears scales.
Escampar, to escape, to get away. * Escancia, f. skinking, filling of pots,
glasses or cups to drink out of. Escanciano, m. a skinker, a filler of pots,
cups or glasses to drink out of, a keeper of the cupboord. Escanciar, to
skinke, to fill out of flagons or great pots, glasses, cups or cruses to drink
in, to keep the cupboord of plate. * Escandelar, a cabin in the midst of a
galley so called. Escandalizar, to offend, to give cause of offense. Escandalo,
m. an offense, a scandal, a cause of offense given. Escandia, f. a kind of
fine wheat. Escanlizar, vide Escandalizar. Escan^o, or banco, a bench.
Escantar, vide enCantir. Escapar, to escape, to get away. * Escapulario de
frail, a friars upper attire which hangs down loose half behind and half
before to the feet. In Oxford they call it a habit, which is an upper attire
in that fashion worn on scholars gowns. Escaques, m. checker work of diverse
colors as the chesse board or such like. * Escaquear, to play at chesse. *
Escarabajo, vide Escaravajo. Escaramuca, f. a skirmish. Escaramucar, to
skirmish. Escaramugos, a kind of shell woorme breeding on rocks, and on the
sides of ships, being sharp toward the top, lympins. Escaramujo, wild
eglantine, dogbramble. * Escaravegear, to scribble in writing. * Escaravajo, m.
a beetle fly, a door fly that delights in dung. * Escarbado, vide
Escarvado, scraped, scratched. * Escarbar, vide Escarvar, to scrape, to
scratch. * Escarcela, f. a satchell, a powch, a bag. * Escarcelar, to put in a
satchel or powch. * Escarcelon, m. a pouch. a scrip, a purse. * Escarcha, f.
driven small snow. * Escarchado, m. driven as beaten snow. * Escardador, m. a
raker, a weeder, a harrower. * Escardadura, f. a raking, a weeding, a
harrowing. * Escardar, to rake, to weed corn, to weed a garden, to harrow. *
Escardas, f. weeds that they take out of the corn or wheat. * Escardilla, a
little rake, a little weede-hooke. Escardillo, a rake, a weede-hooke.
Escarlatin, m. scarlet die, grain wherewith cloth is died in grain, scarlet
in grain. Escarmentado, m. afraid, warned, scarred. Escarmentar, yo
Escarmiento, to affraie, to admonish, to warn, to skarre. * Escarmiento, m. a
warning, a scarring, affraying. * Escarmiento, Escarmiente, vide Escarmentar.
Escarnecedor, m. a mocker, a scoffer, a scorner. Escarnecer, or Escarnescer, to
scoff, to scorn, to abuse, to deride. Escarnecido, m. scorned, derided,
mocked, abused, flouted at. Escarnecimiento, m. mocking, ieering, or flouting,
deriding, skorning. * Escarnidor, m. a mocker, a scoffer. Escarnidor de agua,
an hower-glasse that runs with water. * Escarnido, vide Escarnecido.
Escarnio, or Escarnescimiento, skorning, flouting, mocking, gibing, jesting at
Imagerie work. * Escarpia, f. a hook, a tenter hook. Escarpin, m. a socke to
wear on the foot, or pumpes. * Escarpines, pumpes or sockes. Escarvadientes,
a tooth picker, a tooth scraper. Escarvador, Rasador, or Raspador, a shoomakers
cutting knife. Escarvadura, f. scraping, scratching. Escarvagear, to scribble,
to write raggedlie. Escarva-orejas, an eare-picker. Escarvar, to scrape, to
scratch. * Escarvidor, or Hurta-agua, a watering pot full of holes used to
water gardens. * Escaseza, vide Escasseza, niggardlines, etc. Escassamente,
sparingly, nearly, couetously, niggardly. Escasseza, f. sparingnes, neernes,
covetousness, niggardlines. Escasso, or Escaso, near, sparing, covetous.
Escatinar, vide caherir, to ieere or floute at. Escava de arboles, laying open
of trees about the root. Escavado arbol, a tree dug about the root and
laid open, to make it more fruitful. Escavar arboles, to lay trees open about
the roots. * Escaveche, pickle or brine for fish. * Escavel, vide Escabel. *
Escedir, to exceed, to surpass, to surmount, to excel. * Eschalmo, m. a
round piece of timber whereto the oars are tied. * Eschar, vide Echar en
galera, to condemn to the galleies. * Eschiuma de plata, skum or dross of
silver. Esclarecer, to be famous, to be clear, to be manifest. Esclarecido, m.
famous, clear, renowned. Esclarecimiento, m. fame, renown, cleerenes,
excellency, nobility, estimation, perspicuitie. * Esclarimiento, m. Amber.
Esclavina, f. a satchell, a pouch, or a kind of garment, which Pilgrims use
to wander with and put their provision in. * Esclavitud, f. bondage, servitude.
Esclavo, m. a slave, a bondsman. * Esclavonia, f. the country called Slauonia.
* Esclusa, a flood-gate. Escluydo, m. shut out, excluded, debarred. *
Escluymiento, m. shutting out, excluding. Escluyr, to shut out, to exclude, to
reject, to debar. Escoba, f. a beesome, a brush, a rubber. * Escobado, m.
brushed, rubbed, swept. Escobajo de uvas, the stalk of grapes or that stalk
from which the grapes are plucked. Escobar, to brush, to rub, to sweep.
Escobilla, f. dross, filings or parings of metal, a little beesome, a brush.
* Escobrero, vide Escobero, m. a broom-man. * Escocer, to vex, to grieve, to
smart as a lash or ierke does. * Escoces, m. a Scottish man. Escoda, f. a
masons tool to square stones with. Escodar, or dolar piedras, to square or
plane stones, to cut stones. * Escodilla, f. a porrenger. * Escodrin^ado, m.
discussed, searched out. * Escodrin^adura, f. a searching out, a discussing. *
Escodrin^amiento, m. idem. * Escodrin^ar, to discuss, to search out. Escofia,
f. a coife for to wear on the head. Escofieta, f. a little coife. Escofina, f.
a shauing knife, a filing tool. * Escofina de Queso, a scraping knife to
scrape cheese. Escofion, m. a coife for the head. * Escoga, or Escoja, vide
Escoger. Escoger, yo Escojo, to choose out, to take choice. * Escoger, choice,
election. Escogido, m. chosen, the choice. Escogimiento, m. choosing, electing,
taking choice. * Escoja, or Escoga, vide Escoger. * Escojer, to take choice, to
choose out. Escolar, m. a scholar, a student, one that learneth. * Escolarse,
to slide or slip away. Escolastico, m. of or pertaining to a scholar or
school, a student or scholar, a schoolmaster. * Escollo, m. a rock in the
sea. Escolta, a convoye. * Escoltar, to serve as convoye, to conduct or convoye
any thing in war. * Escombrado, m. cleansed, purged. Escombrar, to make
clean, to purge, to cleanse. Escomearse, to let the vryne pass without being
able to stay it. * Escondedijo, m. a lurking corner. Esconder, to hide, to
cover, to keep close. Escondidamente, secretly, privily, without being seen. *
a Escondidas, privily, secretly. Escondidijo, a lurking corner, a place to lie
hid in. Escondido, m. hidden, kept close, out of sight. Escondimiento, m.
hyding, keeping close, lurking in a corner. * Escondizo, a corner to lurk or
to hide himself in. * Escondrija, f. vide Escondrijo. * Escondrijon, m. a
lurking place, a hyding hoale. Escondrijo, m. a lurking place, a corner to
keep himself in secret from being seen. * Escopeta, f. a piece with a
snap-hans or firelock, a gunshot, a fowling piece. * Escopetazo, m. a shot or
blow with a gun, or fowling piece. * Escopetero, m. a gunner, one that shoots
in a piece. Escopetina, f. spittle. * Escopidura, f. spittle. Also Dandraffe in
the head. Escopir, to spit, to sweat. Escoplear, to scratch, to claw, to
plain with a playning tool. Escoplo, m. a scraping tool, a plain for a
carpenter. Escorche en la pintura, the first draught or line that painters
draw. Escoria, f. dross of any metal, trash or trumperie. * Escorial, a
place where dross of metal is put. Escorpion, m. a scorpion, or an
instrument in war used among the Romans, a scorpion. * Escosion, vide,
Escosion. * Escota, f. a coard in a ship called the sheate wherewith they
hoyse or let down the sail. Escotadura, f. paying a shot or reckoning.
Escotar, to pay the shot, to discharge a reckoning. Escote, m. a shot or
reckoning. * Escotilla, vide Escotillon. * Escotillon, m. a hoale in a hatch of
a ship, to go down into the ship. Also the hatch it self. * Escova vide
Escoba. * Escovar, vide Escobar. * Escoveta, f. vide Escobilla. * Escovilla,
vide Escobilla. * Escozer, or Escocer, to grieve, to smart, or very much to
pain, as a wound smarting with sharp corosiues or medicines, or as the blow
or lash of a whip. * Escozido, m. gauled, grieved with smarting of a wound or
lash of a whip. * Escoziote, it has gauled thee, it touched thee, it made thee
smart. Escozimiento, m. a smarting as a wound or lash with a whippe. Also a
disease when one cannot make water but his urine smarteth and tormenteth him. *
Escozon. idem. * Escrementos, or Excrementos, m. excrements, as urine, ordure,
sweat, spittle, etc. Escrevir, yo Escrivo, to write. * Escriba, m. a writer, a
scriuener, a notarie, a clerk. Also a scribe among the Jews. * Escribano,
vide Escrivano, m. a notarie, a clerk, a purser of a ship. * Escribir, vide
Escrevir, to write. Escrin^o, m. a deske, a casket. Escripto, vide Escrito, m.
a writing. Escriptor, or Escritor, m. a writer. * Escriptorio, vide Escritorio,
m. * Escrito, m. written. * Escrito atras, written backward. Escritor, vide
Escriptor, m. a writer. Escritorio, or Escriptorio, m. a deske to write on.
Also a scriueners shop. Escritura, or Escriptura, f. writing, scripture.
Escrivania, f. a writers trade, a pen and inkhorne, carrying of letters.
Escrivano, m. a scriuener, a notarie, a clerk, a carrier of letters, a
stationer. * Escrivano de camara, a secretary. * Escrive, Escrivo, vide
Escrevir. * Escrupulo, m. a doubtful point, a scruple, a matter of doubt.
Escuchador, m. a watchman, a Sentinel in war. * Escucha, or Centinela, f. a
Sentinel or watchman that keeps due watch in the night, a skoute. Escuchar,
to harken, to keep watch by night. * Escuchado, m. harkened unto. Escudado, m.
a targettier, one armed with a shield. Escudar. to arm with a target, to
defend with a shield. Escudero, m. an esquire, a scruingman that waits on a
lady or gentlewoman, in Spain never but old men and gray beards. * Escudete,
m. a little shield. Also they say, Enxerir de escudete, to graft and cut the
stock after the fashion of a little shield. Escudete, a water lilly.
Escudilla, a dish for meat, the scale of a balance, a porrenger. * Escudillar
la olla, to take out all the pottage and meat in the pot. Escudo, m. a target,
a shield, a french crown, a piece of 12. rials wanting one quartillo, being in
value English, five shillings ten pence hapenie. Also a scutchion of arms.
Escudrin^ador, m. a searcher, an inquisitor, a discusser of matters.
Escudrin^ar, to search, to enquire diligently, to discuss out matters, to
seek to the uttermost. Escuela, f. a school. Escuerco, m. a toade. Esculpido,
m. graued, carved. Esculpidor, m. a grauer, a caruer. Esculpidura, f. grauing,
caruing. Esculpir, to carue, to grave. * Escuma, f. vide. Espuma, skum, froath,
foame. * Escupido, m. spitten out. Escupidor, m. a spitter, one that uses
spitting. Escupir, or Escopir, to spit. Escura, or Escuramente, darkly,
obscurely, so as it cannot be understood. Escuramente, vide Escura. * Escuras,
as a Escuras, darkling, by dark. Escurecer, or Escurescer, to darken, to make
obscure. Escurecido, or Escurescido, m. darkened, obscured. Escurecimiento, m.
darkning, obscuring. * Escurial, m. a village in new Castile in Spain, where
king Philip the second built a monastery or abbey for friars of the order of
S. Jerome, the most famous for building and greatness in Christendom. *
Escuribanda, vide Escurribanda. Escuridad, or Escuredad, f. darkness,
obscurity, hardness to be understood. Escuro, or Obscuro, obscure, dark, not
easy to be understood, hard to be perceived. Escurribanda, f, a sudden
assault, a running thoroughout all. Escurriduras, f. broken drink, the
droppings of the tap, the leauings of cups. Escurrir, to run out. Escusa, f. an
excuse, a cause alleged why. Escusable, excusable, that may be excused.
Escusacion, f. an excuse, a reason alleged why, a privilege to the contrary,
a defense of a matter. Escusado, m. excused, set free, defended. Also in vain,
to no purpose. * Escusador, m. one that excuses, one that defends or shows
a reason why. Escusadora cosa, a matter that may be excused. Escusar, to
excuse, to answer for, to show a reason why, to defend, to discharge from.
Escuzado, vide Escusado. Esecucion, or Esecusion, f. execution, putting of a
thing in practice. Esecutar, to execute, to do, to accomplish, to bring to
pass, to revenge, to prosecute, to punish. Esecutor, m. he that does execute
or put in practice, he that accomplisheth or punishes. Esencion, f. exemption,
freedom, outsetting. * Esentar, to excuse, to free, to exempt, to quit, to
exclude, to outset. Esento, m. exempt, free, outset. Esequias, f. a funeral,
rites or customs usual to a burial. * Esfera, or Esphera, f. the sphere or
round circumference. * Esfilata, as Correr a la esfilata, to run out of order,
to run at ones own liberty without rule or government. Esforcadamente,
valiantly, strongly, by might and maine. Esforcado, m. valiant, stout, strong.
Esforcar, yo Esfuerco, to enforce, to encourage, to set on, to take courage, to
adventure boldly, to do his best. * esFuerce, esFuerco, vide Esforcar.
esFuerco, m. courage, valor, stoutnesse of mind, strength. * esGotado, m.
emptied, drawn out drop by drop. * esGotamiento, m. emptying, drawing out
every drop, pumping out of water. * esGotar, to empty, to draw out water, to
draw out every drop, to pumpe out water. Esgremir, yo Esgrimo, to fence, to
flourish a weapon, to play at cudgels or bucklers. Esgrima, f. fence-play,
flourishing or brandishing of a weapon. * maestro de Esgrima, a master offense.
Esgrime, Esgremo, vide Esgremir. Esgrimidor, m. a fencer, one that can handle a
weapon skilfully. Esgrimadura, skill in fence, flourishing of a weapon, playing
at cudgels. * Esguazar, to draine or draw water from any boggie or marrish
place. * Esguazo, m. the draining or drawing of water from a boggie or marrish
ground. * Esguizaro, m. a people in Germany called Switzers. * Esipula, a
disease called the mumps. * Esipulado, mumpsicke. Eslabon, or Eslavon, m. a
steel to strike fire with also the swiuell or link of a chain. Eslabon de
cadena, the link or swiuell of a chain. Eslabon de pedernal, a steel to
strike fire with. * Eslavon vide Eslabon. Esmaltado, m. enameled. Esmaltar, to
enamell. Esmalte, m. enamell. Esmerado, m. neat, fine, trick and trim.
Esmeralda, f. a precious stone called an emerald. Esmerarse, to be neat, to be
fine, or handsome, to bear themselves worthily or valiantly. Esmerejon, m. a
small hawke called a merlin. Esmeril, a gun or piece called a base. Esmerilaca,
vide Esmerilaco. * Esmerilaco, m. the stroke or blow of artillery called
bases. * Esmerilazo, m. the blow or stroke of a piece called a base. *
Esmeralizo, vide Esmerilazo. * Esmirel, a kind of artillery, to the bygnes of
an harquebus de croc called a base. * Esortacion, vide Exortacion. * Esortar,
vide Exortar to exhort. Espaciarse, to walk, to take the air. Espacio, m.
space, time, leisure. * tan de Espacio, so leysurely. Espacioso, m. large, at
length, broad, slow Espada, f. a sword, a rapier. Espada negra, a foil, such
as in fence schools they use. Espadado, m. girt with a sword. Espadan^a, f. an
herb called cats tail, flags. Espadar lino, to card flax, to hackle flax.
Espadarte, a swordfish. Espadero, m. a cutler, one that makes swords. Espalda,
f. a shoulder. * Espalda de monton, a shoulder of mutton. Espalda de balvarte,
the back part of a bulwark. * Espaldarazos, m. beating about the shoulders
with a sword being in the scabberd. Espaldar, to shoulder, to thrust, to
iustle. Also the back of a chair, the back of a corslet. * Espaldares, m.
the back or hinder part of a corslet. Also the back of a chair. Espaldas,
the shoulders. Also the back part of a house. * Espaldercetes, pouldrons of a
corslet. * Espalderes, the hindemost rowers in a galley. Espaldudo, m. broad
shouldered. Espamar, vide Espasmar. * Espan^a, or Hespan^a, f. the country
called Spain. * Espan^ol, m. a Spanyard. * Espan^olado, m. made spanish, become
as a spaniard. Espantable, fearful, terrible, horrible. Espantadizo, m. one
that is fearful or timorous. Espantado, afraid, terryfied, wondering.
Espantajo, m. fright, fear, skarring, a wonder, a bugbeare, a thing set up in
corn to fear away the crows. * Espantalobo, an herb called skarre woolfe.
* Espantado, admired, astonished, wondered, skarred, afrighted. Espantar, to
affray, astonish, skarre, to wonder. Espanto, m. fear, terror, wondering at,
admiration. Espantosamente, fearfully, dreadfully terribly, wonderfully.
Espantoso, m. terrible, dreadful, fearful. Espanzimiento, m. sprinkling, or
spotting. Espanzir, to sprinkle, to spot. * Esparcido, m. scattered or spread
abroad, sprinckeled. * Esparcir, to scatter, or spread abroad, to sprinckle.
Esparrago, m sperage, an herb. Esparraguera, f. the stalk of sperage.
Esparten^a, f. a shoe made of a kind of small wickers or of bent. Espartero,
a basket maker, a maker of frailes. Esparto, a small kind of broom or wicker
whereof they use to make frailes, Bentgrasse, Spanish broom. Esparzidamente,
scatteringly, here and there, all abroad. Esparzido, m. sprinkled, scattered,
spread abroad. Esparzidor, m. one that scatters abroad or sprinckleth.
Esparzimiento, m. sprinckling, scattering, spreading abroad. Esparzir, to
sprinckle, to scatter, to spread broad. * Espasmar, to be astonished, to be
amaZed. * Espasmo, m. amazednes, astonishment. * Espatula, f. the shoulder
blade, a voiding knife, or slice to take crumbs and other things from the table.
an Apothecaries slice. * Espaventoso, Espaventozo, vide Espantoso, fearful,
terrible, dreadful, hideous, monstrous. * Espavillar, to snuff the candle. *
Espavorecer, or Espavorescer, to begin to fear. * Espavorecido, m. skarred,
feared. * Especeria, f. spicerie. Especia, f. spice, or spicerie. Especial,
special, chief, principal. Especialmente, chiefly, principally, especially.
* Especias, spices. Especie, f. a kind, a sort, a manner. Especieria, a place
where spices are sold or kept. Especiero, m. a Grocer, a seller of spice, a
keeper of the spicerie. Espectaculo, m. a spectacle, a thing to be seen or
looked upon. Especulacion, f. beholding of some thing, contemplation,
speculation, espying. Especular, to epsy, to contemplate, to behold.
Especulativo, m. contemplative, given to meditation. Espedimiento, m.
delivery, expedition, dispatch, quick riddance. Espedir, yo Espido, to
deliver, to dispatch, to make expedition or quick riddance. * Espejado, m. a
thing as clear as a looking glass. Espejar, to look in a glass, to use for
to behold himself in a glass, to be as clear as a looking glass. Espejo, m.
a looking glass. Espejuelos, vide Antojos, spectacles. * Espelar, vide
Espelir, to expel, put or thrust out. * Espelir, vide Expelir, to expel. *
Espelon, the nose or snoute of a ship or galley. Espelta, f. beer corn.
Espelunca, f. a cave, a den. Espeluzado, m. full of bristles, frighted so as
his hair stands upright. esPeluzamiento, m. standing of the hair staring
upright, taking away of hair. esPeluzarse, to be frighted that the hair
stands, upright, to set up the bristles. esPeluzos, m. the hair standing
upright, shaking fits. * Espender, to spend, to waste. * Espendido, m. spent,
wasted. * Espeques, m. wooden leauers to lift great burdens withal. *
Espera, a demur. Espera, Esfera, or Esphera, f. a sphere, a circle, a bowl, a
roundell, a figure in all parts round. Esperanca, f. hope, trust, expectation,
waiting for a good turn. Esperar, to hope, to look for, to stay, to expect,
to wait for. esPerezarse, to stretch out the body, to strain or retch out
himself at lenght with lazines. esPerezo, m. the retching or stretching out of
all the parts of the body with laZines. Esperico, m. round as a sphere.
Esperiencia, f. experience, trial. Esperimentado, m. tried, found by
experience. Esperimentar, to prove by experience, to find by trial that it
is so. Esperimento, m. an experiment, a trial made. * Esperon, m. the nose or
snowte of a ship or gallie. * Esperonte, a kind of bulwark in fortification.
* Esperto, vide Experto. Espessado, m. thickened, close together. Espessamente,
thickly, oftentimes. Espessar, to make thick, to set close together. Espesso,
m. thick, often, close together. Espessura, f. thicknes. Espetar, to put meat
on the spit. * Esphera, or Esfera, a sphere. Espia, f. a spy, a scoute.
Espiar, to spy out, to watch who comes. Espica nardi, spikenard, a plant so
called. * Espide, Espido, vide Espedir. Espiga, f. an ear of corn. * Espiga
para enxerir, a sion or graffe. * Espigadera, a gleaner after harvest. *
Espigado, m. grown to an ear of corn, bearded like corn. * Espigasil, vide
Espica nardi. Espigar, to grow to an ear, to gather ears of corn, to
gleane, to leaze and gleane corn after the harvest is done. Espigon, m. an
ear of corn. * Espigon de ajo, a head of garlic. Espigon de cabeca de ajos,
a cloue of garlic. Espina, f. a thorn, a fish bone. * Espina de Majuelas, a
barberrie bush. Espina blanca, a white thorn. Espinaca, spinach an usual
herb. * Espinado, m. done or hurt with pricks or thorns. Espinal, a thorn
bush, or a place where thorns grow. Espinar, to prick like a thorn.
Espinazo de animal, the ridge bone of the back of any living creature. *
Espingarde, a harquebusse in the Portingale tongue. Espingardero, vide
Arcabuzero. Espinilla, the shinbone or small bone of the shin. Espino, m. a
bullasse tree, a sloe tree. Espino majuelo, a hawthorne tree. Espinoso,
thornie, prickly. * Espion, m. a spy. Espiradero, m. a breathing place, a
place to fetch wind at. Espirar, to breath, to fetch his wind. Espiritu, m.
the breath, the spirit, the ghost. Espiritual, spiritual, ghostly.
Espiritualmente, spiritually. * Espital, vide Ospital, an hospital, a spittle.
* Esplanada, as hazer esplanada, to explain, to make plain to be understood.
* Esplanar, to make plain, to set out at large or plainly. * Esplendidamente,
sumptuously, richly, stately, magnificently. * Esplendideza, f. stateliness,
magnificence, pomp, sumptuousness, riches. * Esplendido, m. pompous, stately,
sumptuous, magnificent, rich, costly. * Esplendor, m. a goodly show, bright
shining, glistering. Espliega, f. a kind of sweet herb called spikenard. *
Espliego, idem. Espolada, f. a stroke with a spur, a spurgaule. * Espoleado, m.
stricken with a spur, spurgauled. * Espoleando, striking with the spur,
spur-gauling. Espolear, to spurgaule, to strike with the spur. Espolon, m. a
cocks spur. Also a certain fort called a spur. * Espondil, a wherle of a
spindle, the white hard thing that sticks to the shell of an oister, a great
round oister. * Esponer, vide Exponer, to lay or put out to hazard, to expound.
Esponja, f. a sponge. Esponja piedra, a pumice stone. Esponjadura, f. rubbing
with a pumice, pumysing. Esponjar, to sponge, to do with a pumice stone.
Esponjoso, m. spungie, full of holes, hollow. * Espontaniamente, voluntarily,
of ones own accord. Esportica, f. a little basket, a small pannier.
Esportilla, idem. * Esportillero, m. a basket maker, a porter that carries
baskets or burdens. * Esposa, f. a bride. Esposas, f. fetters, manicles,
shackles or gieues for prisoners. Esposo, m. a bridegroom, a spouse. Espremir,
yo Esprimo, to express, to press or wring out, to set out at large, to get
out by force. * Esprime, esprimo, vide Espremir. Espuela, f. a spur. * Espuela
para el yelo, an iron stirrup or shoo to slide on the ice with, used of the
Dutchmen. * moco de Espuelas, a lackey, a footeman. Espuerta, f. a basket, a
maund, a pannier, a flasket. * Espuesto, m. set out or abroad, in danger, open
to all chances. Also expounded, declared. * Espugnado, m. won by assault,
conquered, ouercomed by force. * Espugnar, to win by assault or by force, to
conquer, to overcome. * Espulgado, m. rid from fleas, fleaed, lowsed. Espulgar,
Praes. yo Espulgo, 1. Praet. yo Espulgue, to rid clear from fleas. * Espulgue,
vide Espulgar. Espuma, f. foam, froth, scum. * Espumado, m. scummed, the foam
or froth being taken away. * Espumajo, m. vide Espuma. * Espumajoso, m. full of
scum, frothie, full of foam. Espumar, to scum, to foam, to take off the froth. *
Espumilla, f. a kind of fine white cipers or linen that women in Spain wear
on their heads. Espumoso, frothie, scummie, full of foam. Espura, f. water or
other liquor that is clear. Esquadra, f. a carpenters squire. a squadron of
25. soldiers. Esquadron, m. a squadron of soldiers of the whole army, a great
squadron. * Esquamas, f. scales of fish or any other thing. Esquero, m. a bag
to carry bait for fish. * Esquesito, m. exquisite, notable. * Esquifado, m.
made ready as a boat or skiffe to row or to bunch. Esquife, m. a cockboate, a
skiffe or small boat to go in fresh rivers. * Esquila, f. a little bell, a
sacring bell. Esquilencia, f. a disease in the throat called the quincie.
Esquileta, f. a small bell, a saunce bell. * Esquilla, f. a sacring bell. *
Esquilmado, having taken or gathered the fruit of his vineyard, corn or
cattle. Esquilmar, to take or gather the fruit of his vineyard, corn or
cattle. Esquilmo, m. the fruit or profit of any cattle, or of land or
vineyard. Esquilo, m. a squirrell. * Esquilon, m. a great sacring bell.
Esquina, f. a corner. Esquinado, m. cornered, made with corners. Also cleansed.
Esquinar paja, to cleanse corn from chafe by casting it against the wind, to
winnow corn. Also to make corners. Esquinancia, or esquilencia, f. a disease
called the squinancie or the Queens evil. * Esquitar, to quit ones self, to
be quit or even with one. Esquivamente, squeamishly, disdainfully, scornefully,
proudly, stately. Esquivar, to shun, to avoid, to eschew, to be stately or
coy. Esquiveza, f. squeamishnes, stateliness, coyishnes, shunning, avoiding.
Esquividad, idem. Esquivo, m. squeamish, coy, stately, disdainful. Essa, she.
Esse, he. Essencia, f. being. Essento. m free, exempt. Esso, that, it. *
Essotro, idest, esso otro, this other. * E'sta, this. * Esta, it is, it
stands, he is, he stands. * E'sta cosa, this thing. Estable, stable, firm,
steadfast, certain. Establecer, or Establescer, to establish, to confirm.
Establecido, m. established, confirmed. Establecimiento, m. establishing,
confirmation. establemente, firmly, steadfastly, constantly. Establerizo, m. a
horse keeper, a keeper of an ox stalle, also a horse stabled or standing at
stable. Establo, m. a stable, a stall, a house to keep cattle in. Estaca, f.
a stake, a stock to graffe on, a pale, a rack whereat horses eat hay.
Estaca, para plantar, a stock to graffe on. Estacada, f. a place full of stocks
to graffe on, or listes to fight in. Estacado, m. set on a stake, tied to
astake, put into the listes to fight. * Estacion, f. the being in a place. Also
the going from one church to another, in remembrance of Christ's being or
remaning so long on mount Caluary, so long in the garden, so long on the
cross, so long in the sepulcher. * Estada, f. a tarrying, a staying. Estadal,
a measure of eleven foot long. * Estadio, m. a certain measure of ground a
race to run. Estado, m. estate, condition, degree, stature. * estado de agua,
m. water of the depth of a man. * Estafa, a sturdines, a begging with a
command as sturdie rogues use. Also sometimes used for Estribo, a stirrup.
Estafar, to beg in the imperative mood, to beg with a command, as sturdie
beggars, and rogues do, to rob. Estai, or Estay, a coard in a ship, called
the stay. Establar, to crack, to burst, or break in sunder. Estallido, m. the
crack or noise of a gunshot or noise of breaking any thing. * Estambrado, made
of yarn. * Estambrar. to make with yarne or woosted. Estambre, m. a web of
yarne, woosted yarne. * Estamen^a, f. a kind of kersey cloth. Estamenea.
lynsey woolsey. * Estampa, f. a print, a stamp. Estampado, m. stamped,
printed. * Estampador, m. a printer, one that stampeth with puncheons, etc.
Estampar, to print, to stamp. * Estampida, f. a noise of any thing, a great
crack. Estanca, f. a standing place, a meeting place. Estancar, Praes. yo,
Estanco, 1. Praet. yo Estanque, to stop, to stay, to stand still as water, to
stop blood. Estancarse el agua, to stand as a poole of water does. * Estancia,
f. a dwelling place, an abiding place. * Estanco, m. a command from the higher
powers or authority, to sell any thing in a set place appointed, a restraint
from selling any thing elsewhere then in the appointed place. Estandarte, m. a
standart. * Estan^ado, tinned within. Estan^ar, to solder with tin. *
Estan^ero, m. a pewterer, a worker in tin. Estan^o, m. tin. * Estanque,
vide Estancar. Estanque, m. a poole, a pond. Estanque de pieces, a fish pond.
Estantales, props, vndershoarers, supporters. Estante, standing. * Estantigua,
f. a hag, a hobgoblin. Estar, Praes. Estoy, estas, esta. 1. Praet. Estuve,
viste, estuvo, Fut. Estare, ras, ra. Sub. Praes. Este. Imperfect. Estuviera,
estaria, or estuviesse. Fut. Estuviere, to be, to stand. * Estar sobre si, to
be wary, to look to himself. * Estaria, vide Estar. * Estatua, f. a statue,
an image, the picture or counterfeit of any thing. * Estatuado, m. pourtrayed,
pictured, made into images. Estatuario, m. an image maker, a maker of
counterfaites and pictures. Estatura, f. a stature. Estatuto, m. a statute, an
act of parliament, an edict, a decree. * Estatuyr, to appoint, to ordain.
Estavon, vide Eslavon. E'ste, he, this. * Este, the Jmperatiue mood of Estar,
let it stand, let it alone, let it be. Estencion, f. an extension or stretching
out. Estender, yo Estiendo, to stretch out, to bend out, to enlarge. * Estender
el arco, to bend a bow. * Estendidamente, at length, largely, all abroad.
Estendido, m. enlarged, stretched out. Estendimiento, m. stretching out,
enlarging. * Estensivo, extending, or far stretching. Estenso, or Extenso, m.
enlarged, stretched out. Estentino, m. vide Intestino, the guts. * Estepa, f.
the holy rose, a flower so called. Also a town in Andulazia. Estera, f. a
matte. Estercolado, m. dunged. Estercolamiento, m. dunging. Estercolar, yo
Estiercolo, to dung. * Estercolero, m. a dunger, one that carries or spreads
dung. * Estercolino, m. a dunghill. Esteril, barren, unfruitful. Esterilidad,
f. barrennes, unfruitfulness. Esterlin colorado, scarlet. Esterior, or Exterior,
exterior, outward. Estero, a salt marsh, a place where the tide does ebb and
flow, a lake, a poole. Esterquero, m. a dunghill. Esteva, m. the plough
handle, the plough beam that the culter is in. Estevado, m. crooke-legged. *
Estevan, m. a proper name Stephen. * Estibrar, vide Estribar. * Estiende,
Estiendo, vide Estender. Estiercol, m. a dunghill. * Estiercole, vide
Estercolar. * Estigias infernales, the lake called Styx, which the Poets feigned
to be near hell, and that there the passage was over to hell. Estilar, to still
water. Estilo, a style in enditing. * tener por estilo, to be accustomed. *
buen estilo, a good custom, a good style of writing. * Perder el estilo, to
grow out of use or custom. Estima, f. estimation, value, price. * Estimable,
worthy the estimation or thinking on. Estimacion, vide Estima. Estimado, m.
esteemed, made account of, prised. Estimador, m. one that esteems, priseth or
valueth. Estimar, to esteem, to value, to price or rate, to make account of. *
Estimulo, m. a prick. Estinco, m. a small kind of fish called a Smelt. *
Estinguir, vide Extinguir, to extinguish, to quench, to put out. * Estinto,
vide Extinto. Estio, m. summer. * Estipulacion, a solemn covenant. Estirado,
m. upright, drawn hard, stroaked up as a boot or hose. Estiradas calcas,
hosen drawn and striked up smooth. Estirar, to set upright, to draw on close
and smooth. Estirarse, to stroke or smooth up himself, to hang himself. *
Estirpar, vide Extirpar. * Estirpe, f. a stock from whence one sprung and had
his original. * Estiva, f. straw to stuff a thing withal. Estival,
pertaining to summer, or stuffed with straw. * Estivales, m. buskins or boots.
* Estivar, to stuff with straw. * E'sto, this thing. Estocada, f. a stocada or
thrust with a weapon. Estocadas dar, to stab, to thrust, to run in with a
weapon. * Estofa, f. any stuff for apparel. Estola, f. a stole, a roabe of
honor, a woman's gown, a long vestment down to the heels, any garment to
cover the body with. * Estolido, m. foolish, dull witted. Estomagado, m. angry,
full of rage or indignation. Estomagarse, to stomach a matter, to be angry, to
rage at. Estomago, the stomach, rage, wrath. * Estonces, then, at that time.
Estopa, f. okam, or the hurdes of towe, such as they use in caulking of ships.
Sometimes tow. Estopen^o, m. belonging to tow. * Estoperal, a skowper. *
Estoperoles, m. nails of iron to stop or fasten the tow in caulking of ships.
* Estoque, m. a sword or rapier, a tucke long and narrow. Estoque yerva, an
herb called corn gladen, or corn flag. * Estora, vide Estera. Estoraque, m a
sweet gum called Storax used in incense. * esTorcer, yo esTuerco, to wrest, to
wreath. * Estorcimiento, m. wresting, wreathing. Estornija de carro, the
triggar of a cart. Estornino, m. a bird called a Stare or starling.
Estornudar, to neese. Esternudo, m. neesing. Estorvar, to stop, to let, to
trouble. Estorvo, a stop, a let, hinderance, impediment. * Estotro, this other.
* Estoy, I am, or I stand, vide Estar. Estracar, to tear, to rent. Estraco, m.
tearing, renting. * Estrada, f. a way, a street. * Estradioto, m. one that
rides long, with his legs at large down in the stirruppe. Estrado, a cloth
of estate with cushions used of Princes and great nobles. Also the cloth of
the judgment seat for the judges to sit on: this manner of Estrado, almost
every gentleman's wife in Spain has, and uses without sitting on a stool.
Estragado, marred, wasted, spoiled. * Estragador, m. a killer, a murderer, a
destroyer. Estragamiento, m. or Estrago, spoil, slaughter, murdering.
Estragar, Praes. yo Estrago, 1. Praet. yo Estrague, to spoil, to mar, to lay
waste. Estrago, m. a slaughter, a cruel murder, a massacre. * Estrague, vide
Estragar. Estrangero, m. a stranger, one of another country, one but newly
entertained. * Estran^amente, strangely, like a stranger. Estran^ar, to
estrange, to alienate. Estran^eza, f. strangenes, being a stranger.
Estranguria, f. the strangurie, a disease when one cannot avoid out his urine.
* Estranjero, m. or Estrangero, a stranger. Estran^o, m. strange, of another
country or place, rare. * Estraslado, m. bred, borne, transformed. *
Estratagema, f. a stratagem, a witty shift or politic practice in war. *
Estrava, f. a woodcocke. * Estravagante, an extrauagant, by-matter. A decree of
the Pope so called. Estrecha, or Estrechamente, straightly, narrowly, nearly.
Estrechar, to streighten, to make narrow, to make straight, to bring to a near
pinch. * Estrecheza, f. streightnes, neerenes, narrownes. Estrecho, m.
straight, near, narrow. A straight at sea. * Estrecho de mar, a straight or
narrow passage over sea. Estrechura, f. streightnes, narrownes. Estregadera, f.
a currie-combe, a horse-combe. Estregar, yo Estriego, to currie or comb a
horse. Estrella, f. a star. Estrellada, f. starwoort or sharwoort. Estrellado,
m. beset with stars. * Estrellados huevos, eggs fried (without beating together)
as when they are fried with collops or bacon. Estrellar, to set with stars, to
dash against the wall in many pieces, to fry eggs. Estrellero, m. an
astronomer, one that knows the several constellations of the stars, or one
that looks much aloft. * Estremadamente, extremely, to the uttermost. *
Estremadissimo, m. most extreme. Estremado, m. extreme, passing, exceeding. *
Estremaduras, the borders. * Estremarse, to be extreme, to exceed. Estremecer,
or Estremescer, to tremble, to quake. * Estremecido, vide Temblado, trembling.
Estremo, m. extremity, the last of the beads, the latter time pasture toward
winter. * Estremo de cuentas, the uttermost of the reckoning, the last of the
beads. * Estremo de deheza, the latter time of pasture feeding or comen
toward winter. * Estremo de plata, the last of the beads commonly made of
silver. Estrena, f. a new years gift, handsell, or the first money taken.
Estrenar, to take handsell, to receive a new years gift. Estren^ido, m.
restrained, tied, bound in his body, that cannot go to stool. Estren^ir, yo
Estrin^o, to restrain, to tie. * Estrepito, m. a noise. * Estribadero, m. one
that endeuoreth or does his best, one that thrusts with his feet.
Estribadora cosa, a matter to be labored in. Estribadura, f. endeavoring, doing
his best, a thrusting or pushing hard with the feet. Estribar, or Estrivar, to
endeavor, to strain, to do his best, to thrust or push hard with the feet.
Estribo, a prop to underset a house, a stirrup. Estribo, vide Estrivo.
Estriborda, the right side of a ship called the larboord. * Estriego,
Estriegue, vide Estregar. * Estrin^e, Estrin^o, vide Estren^ir, to restrain. *
Estrinseco, m. outward, external, extrinsecall. * Estrivar, or Estribar, to
endeavor, to do his best. * Estriverage, or Estriveraje, the iutties of a wall
to strengthen or hold up a house. * Estriverange, a place where many stirrups
are. * Estrivo, or Estribo, a stirrup. * Estropajoso, m. stumbling, full of
stumbling. * Estropecado, m. stumbled, offended, troubled. Estropecar, yo
Estropieco, to stumble, to offend or take cause of offense. Estropear, to rack
with cords, stretched. Estropiado, m. racked with cords, stretched. *
Estropiece, Estropieco, vide Estropecar, to stumble. Estropieco, m. stumbling.
Estruendo, m. an unquiet troublesome noise. * Estrugudor, vide Estragador.
Estrujar, or Apretar, to strain, to thrust. * Estrupar vna vergen, to deflowre
a maid. * Estrupo, m. whooredome, violating of maids. Estuche, m. a case or
box of tools for surgeons, etc. Estudiante, a student, one that follows
study. Estudiar, to study, to setle his mind to some thing. Estudio, m.
study, settling of his mind. Estudiosamente, studiously. Estudioso, m.
studious, industrious. * Estuerce, Estuerco, vide Estorcer. Estufa, f. a stoue,
a hoatehouse. * Estulcia, f. folly, foolerie. * Estupendo, horrible, monstrous,
wondrous. * Estupro, whoredom, rauishing of women. * Estuvando, vide
Estrivando, or Estrivar. * Estuve, estuviera, Estuviesse, Estuvo, vide Estar.
E T
* Etereogenas parts, parts of an other kind, contrary to omogenas parts,
which are of one kind. * Etereo, m. of the air, ayrie, fiery, bright. *
Eternal, everlasting, eternal. Eternamente, everlastingly, eternally.
Eternidad, f. eternity, euerlastingnes. * Eternizado, m. made eternal, or
everlasting. Eternizar, to make everlasting, to eternise. Eterno, everlasting,
eternal. * Ethereo, vide Etereo. E'thico, or E'tico, m. one that is sick of a
consumption. Also belonging to moral philosophy or manners. * Ethimilogia, f.
the etymology or true exposition or reason of words. * Etrusco, one of
Tuscanie in Italy.
E V
* Evacuacion, f. emptying, euacuation. Evacuar, to empty, to make void.
Evangelio, m. the gospel, glad tidings. Evangelico, m. belonging to the
gospel, or good tidings. * Evangelizar, to preach the gospel, to declare
joyful tidings. Evangelista, m. a preacher of the gospel, a messenger of glad
tidings. E'vano, m. Eben wood, sugar chest. * Evaporacion, f. an euaporating, a
steaming out. * Evaporar, to euaporate, to steame out. * Eucharistia, f. the
sacrament of the Lords supper. Euforbio, m. a certain gum called Euphorbe,
found first by king Iuba, and called by the name of his physician Euphorbius.
Eufrasia, f. an herb called eye bright. Also a proper name of women in Spain.
* Evidente, evident, clear, out of question. * Evitable, that which may be
avoided. * Evitado, m. shunned, eschewed. * Evitar, to avoid, shun or eschew. *
Evohe, a voice that they used which sacrificed to god Bacchus. * Eunuco, m. an
eunuch or gelded man. * Euphrates, one of the four rivers that come out of
paradise. * Euro, m. the east wind.
E X
* Exaltacion, f. an exaltation, a lifting up. * Exaltar, to exalt, extol,
magnify or lift up. * Exasperar, to exasperate, to provoke, to egg on or to
aggrauate. Exambre, m. vide Enxambre, a swarm of bees, a hiue of bees. Examen,
m. an examination. Examinacion, idem. Examinador, m. an examiner. Examinar, to
examine, to inquire, to try. Exceder, to exceed, to surpass, to go beyond.
Excelencia. f. excellency, surpassing, surmounting, pre-eminence. Excelente,
excellent, passing great or good. Also a piece of Spanish money. * Excessivo,
m. exceeding, surpassing, unmeasurable. * Excesso, m. excess, too much. *
Exclamacion, f. crying out, exclaiming. * Exclamado, m. cried out on. *
Excluyr, to exclude, to shut out, to debar. * Excluso, m. excluded, debarred,
shut out. * Excommunion, an excommunication. * Excrementos, m. excrements, the
offal coming superfluously from the body, as the siege, urine, sweat, choler,
melancholy, phlegm, sniuell, etc. Also the refuse of any thing. E'xe, or Hexe,
the axletree of a cart, wagon, etc. Exea, a spy, a scoute. * Exear, to play
the scout or spy. Also to drive away. * Execrable, execrable, abominable,
detestable, blasphemous. * Execrar, to execrate, to detest, to blaspheme, to
curse. * Execracion, banning, cursing, execration. * Executar, to put in
execution. * Executivo, executiue or to be put in execution. * Executor, a
performer, an executor. * Executorial, a writ of execution. * Executoria carta,
a patent to give notice from the prince of the gentry of any one. * Exegidero,
m. that which is to be exacted, or required. * Exegir, to exact, to drive unto,
to demand importunately, to require. * Exempcion, f. discharge, riddance from.
Exemplar, m. a pattern, an example, a coppie of some thing to follow. *
Exemplar castigo, m. chastisement for example of others. * Exemplarmente, by
way of example, by show. * Exemplificacion, f. exemplification. Exemplificar,
1. Praes. yo Exemplifico. 1. Praet. yo Exmplifique, to exemplify, or to set
out at large, to discourse upon. * Exemplifique, vide Exemplificar. Exemplo, m.
an example, a show, a pattern, a coppie, a counterpane, an open execution or
punishment to fear other. * Exemto, vide Essento, exempted, privileged, chosen
out, or taken away. * Exento, or Esento, idem. * Exequias, or Esequias,
funerals. Exercicio, m. exercise, occupation, trade. * Exercitado, m.
exercised, busied, employed, occupied. Exercitador, one that uses exercise,
trade, or business. Exercitadora cosa, a matter that requires business,
employment or industry. Exercitar, to exercise, to be busy, to stir.
Exercito, an army or host of soldiers, a camp. * Exhalado, drawn out,
drawn up, exhaled. * Exhalar, to exhale, to draw out, to draw up. *
Exhortado, m. exhorted, counseled, admonished, encouraged. * Exhortar, to
exhort, to warn, to admonish, to advise, to counsel. * Exido, m. a leasue for
cattle to feed on, pasture, a medowe. * Exigidero, m. that is to be exacted,
or earnestly demanded. * Exigir, to exact, to get with much ado, to ask with
great importunity or earnestnes. * Exilio, m. banishment, exile, driving from
his native soil. * Eximido, exempted. * Eximir, to exempt, to discharge, to
release from, to rid out, to outset. * Existencia, being, presence. *
Exicrable, execrable, horrible, detestable. * Exorar, to request earnestly. *
Exorbitante, strange, wonderful, extraordinary. * Exorbitancia, strangenes,
extraordinarines. * Exorcista, m. a kind of enchanter, or coniurer. * Exordio,
m. a preamble, a preface, or introduction to a matter. Exortacion, f. an
admonition, exhortation, encouragement, advise, or wishing to a matter.
Exortador, one that exhorts, encourages, advises, or wishes to a matter.
Exortar, to admonish, exhort, encourage, advise, or wish to a thing. *
Exorrupto, m. abrupt, preposterous. * Expecer, to fish out. * Expelido, m.
expelled, driven out, banished. * Expelir, to expel, to banish, to drive away.
* Experto, or Esperto, m. tried, approved, experienced. * Exponedor, or
Esponedor, m. an expounder, an interpretor, a setter out, a layer out. Exponer,
or Esponer. Praes. Expongo, Expones, Expone. 1. Praet. Expuse, Expusiste,
Expuso. Fut. Expondre, or Exporne, as, a. Sub. Praes. Exponga. Imperfect.
Expusiera, Expornia, or Expusiesse. Fut. Expusiere, to expound, to interpret,
to unfold, to discuss, to set forth, to set or lay out. * exPonga, or
esPonga, Expongo vide exPoner. * Exporne, or EsPorne, ExPornia, vide exPoner. *
exPuesto, or esPuesto, m. expounded, interpreted, unfolded, set out, laid out.
* Expugnado, or Espugnado, m. won by force or assault. * Expugnar, or
Espugnar, to win by force, or assault, to overcome, to vanquish. * exPuse,
exPusiera, exPusiesse, exPuso, vide exPoner. * Exquisito, or Esquisito,
exquisite, neat, fine, excellently done. * Extasis, an amazement, an
astonishment, an ecstasy, a quandarie, a trance. * Extender, vide Estender. *
Extensamente, or Estensamente, abroad at large. * Extenso, vide Estenso,
stretched out, laid out at large. * Exterminar, to drive or cast out, to
banish, to destroy, to overthrow utterly, to undo. * Exterior, vide Esterior,
outward, on the outside. * Externo, outward, external. * Extinguir, to
extinguish, to quench to put out. * Extinto, extinguished, put out. *
Extirpacion, f. rooting out, plucking up by the roots. * Extirpar, to root
out, to pluck up by the roots. * Extorcion, or Estorcion, extorcion, wrong,
oppression. Extrinsico, external, extrinsecall, outward. * Extravagantes, or
Estravagantes, such as follow not common order. * Extremadamente, extremely. *
Extremadissimo, or Estremadissimo, m. most extreme, in the highest degree.
Extremado, or Estremado, m. extreme, the uttermost that may be. * Extremo, or
Estremo, extreme, the uttermost, as much as may be. * Exultar, to rejoice, to
leap, to triumph. * Eyes, id est, aueys, ye have. Ezquerdear de camina, to go
out of the way, to go amiss.
F
* FA'bla, vide fabula, a tale, a fable. * Fablar, vide Hablar, to speak, to
talk. * Fabor, m. favor, good liking. * Fabrica, a frame, a building.
Fabricacion, f. working or framing of a thing, a building. Fabricadamente,
cunningly, by due form, in frame. Fabricado, m. framed, wrought, forged.
Fabricador, m. a framer, a workman, one that plotteth things, or forgeth, or
fashioneth. Fabricar, Praes. yo. Fabrico, 1. Praet. yo Fabrique, to frame, to
forge, to work, to fashion, to invent, to make, to build. * Fabrificado, m.
framed, etc. vide fabricado,. Fabrificar, vide Fabricar. * Fabrique, vide
Fabricar. Fabula, f. a tale, a fable. Fabulosamente, like a fable, falsely,
feynedly, counterfaytly. Fabuloso, fabulous, full of trifling tales, tittle
tattle, fainedly. * Faccion, f. a skirmish, an action. Facil, easy, light,
gentle, easy to be pleased, ready to be entreated, tractable, soft, pleasant.
Facilidad, f. easines, gentleness, tractablenes, softnes, pleasantnes,
facility. * Facilissimo, most easy, most light most tractable. Facilitar, to
make easy, to make gentle, to appease, to make tractable, to make smooth, to
expound. Facilmente, easily, softly, gently, plainly. * Facinoroso, m. wicked,
ungracious, very naught, full of vices, lewd, full of mischief. Facion, a
manner, a custom, a fashion, action. Faciones, conditions, manners, customs,
fashions. * Facto, m. a deed. Facultad, f. faculty, ability, power, license,
a quality, profession, etc. * Facundia, f. eloquence, sweet flowing speech,
rolling smooth talk, grace in speaking. * Facundo, well spoken, eloquent
flowing in speech, having words at will. * Faena, business, any thing that a man
has to do, properly mariners work at sea. * Fafarron, vide Fanfarron, a
bragger, a boaster. * Fajas de calcas, vide Faxas de calcas. Faisa, f. a
kerchiefe, a wasteband, a swathing band. Faisan, vide Faysan, m. a phesant.
Faisar, or Faysar, to wrap or tie with a swathing band or such like. * Falacia,
falsehood, deceit, fraud, guile. * Falace, deceitful, deceauing, false,
fraudulent, guilefull. * Falagio, a kind of spidar. * Falange, or Falanje, a
Greek word, called by the Romans a legion, the Switzers and Italians
Batallon, the French Caterua, Spanish Esquadron, a company of soldiers
between six and eight thousand, vide Esquadron. * Falangia, or Falange, a
battle like a half moon. * Falcado, m. beset, or done with great iron nails
or hooks. * Falcante, a falsifier, one that plays a part in a comedy. *
Falcificado, m. falsified, counterfaited, corrupted. * Falcificar, Praes. yo
Falcifico, 1. Praet. yo Falcifique, to falsify, to counterfaite, to corrupt. *
Falcidad, f. falsehood, untrue dealing. * Falcifique, vide Falsificar. *
Falconero, m. a faulkoner, one that keeps a hawke, or hawks. Falcon, vide
Halcon, a hawk, a faulkon * Falconete, m. a piece of artillery called a
faulkonet, or fawkenet. Falda, f. the lap of a coat, the skirts or quarters of
a coat. Also the pleits or foldes in a garment that is gathered. The nether
part or skirts of a mountain or hill. Faldamentos, m. the skirts of a ierkin,
etc. Faldetes, skirts or quarters of a coat, skirts such as those that run at
tilt use below their armor. Also a pair of riding bases. * Faldiquiera, vide
Faldriquera. Falla, vide Falta, f. a want, a fault. * Fallar, vide Hallar, to
find. * Fallar, vide Faltar, to want, to fault or do amiss. * Fallecer, to
fail. * Fallecido, failed, missed. * Fallecimiento, a failing, a missing. *
Falido, m. failed, missed. Falsado, m. counterfaited, falsified. Falsamente,
falsely, counterfaitly, corruptly. Falsar, to falsify, to counterfaite, to
corrupt. Falsario, m. a counterfaiter, one that falsifieth or corrupts, a
forger. Falsias, f. falsehoods, deceits, counterfaite dealing. * Falsidad, f.
counterfeit dealing, false play, deceit. * Falsificar, to falsify, counterfeit
or forge. * Falsifico, a falsifier, a forger, a counterfaiter. Falso, m. false,
untrue, counterfaite, corrupt. * Falsopeto, m. a pocket in the bosom, such as
priests use in their cassockes or frocks to carry their handkerchiefe or
book in. Falta, f. want, an error, a fault. Faltar, to want, to err, to do
amiss. * Faltriquera, f. a pocket. Fama, f. report, fame, renown. * Famelico,
m. hungerbitten, hungry, pined with hunger. Familia, f. a household, a family.
Familiar, familiar, friendly, fellowly, gentle, well acquainted with.
Famaliaridad, f. familiarity, friendlines, fellowship, keeping company with.
Familiarmente, familiarly, fellowly, friendly, lovingly, like companions and
friends. Famosamente, famouslie, renowmedly, notably. Famoso, m. famous,
renowned, of great name, much spoken of, of great account. Fanal, m. the
lantern in the Admiral ship, Sometimes taken generally for any lant-horne.
Fanega, vide Hanega, a measure containing a bushel and a half. * Fanfa, a
play, an interlude, vide Farca. Fanfarron, or Fafarron, a lusty braggard, a
boasting ruffianlike fellow. Fanfarroneria, f. bragging, boasting, great
craking. Fantasear, to imagine, to conceive in the fantasy, to think fondly.
Fantasia, f. fantasy, light imagination, fond conceit. Fantasma, f. a walking
spirit, hobgobblin, robin good fellow. Fantastico, m. fantastical, fond
conceited, full of light imaginations. * Fantastigo, vide Fantastico. *
Fantazioso, m. full of fancies, fantastical. * Farage, vide Fardage. *
Farandulero, a comedian, a plaier. Faraute, an interpretor. * Farcante, a
player of enterludes, or plays. Farcas, f. plays, enterludes, comedies or
tragedies acted. * Fardaje, or Fardage, the packing together of diverse fardels,
bundels or packes. Fardel, or Fardo, a fardell, a pack. Farina, vide Harina,
meal, flower. * Farol, a lantern standing on the poope of the ship to give
light. Also a tower or high place by the sea coast, wherein were continually
lights and fires, which served for seamen to see the haven and the safest
entrance, of which the tower Farol (about half a mile from the Groine in
Galizia in Spain) was named. Faron, or Farron, a beacon, a watchtower. *
Farrage, vide Fardage. Farro, or Escandia, bran, the cribble of meal that is
boulted or sifted out: some say it signifies any hard corn, or bread corn. *
Farsa, or Farca, an interlude, a play. * Farsante, m. a plaier or actor of
comedies. * Farzante, an actor of plays, a plaier. Fasol, an herb called
Fenugreeke. * Fasta, vide Hasta. Fastidiado, m. loathed, despised much, set at
naught. Fastidiar, to be tedious or loathsome, to trouble, to molest, to
importune, to cloy. Also to loath or abhor. Fastidio, m. loathing or
lothsomnesse, disdain, abhorring, setting at naught. Also molestation,
trouble, vexation, wearisomnesse, tediousness. Fastidioso, one given to
loathing, disdainful, scornful, abhorring much. Also troublesome,
importuning, tedious, irksome. * Fastio, vide Hastio, m. loathing, disdain.
Fasto, or Fausto, m. pride, arrogancy, insolency, haughtiness of heart. Fatal,
fatal, that the destinies have appointed, such as his fortune is. Fatiga, f.
wearines, grief of mind, vexation, discouragement. Fatigado, m. wearied,
vexed, grieved, outof comfort. Fatigar, Praes. yo Fatigo, 1. Praet. yo Fatigue,
to weary, to vex, to grieve, to drive out of heart. Fatigoso, wearisome,
vexed, sore grieved, in an irksome case. * Fatigue, vide Fatigar. * Fato, vide
Hecho. Fator, m. a factor, a dealer for others, an agent. Fatoria, f.
factorship, dealing as an agent for other. * Favaraz, Avarraz, Havarraz, or
Paparraz, an herb called stauesaker or lowsebane. * Faunos, m. gods of the
fields and woods. Favor, m. favor, good liking, good acceptance. Favorable,
favorable, friendly, acceptable. Favorablemente, favorably, friendly,
lovingly, with good liking and acceptance, kindly. Favorecedor, or
Favorescedor, a favorer, a friend, one that shows loving kindness.
Favorecer, or Favorescer, yo Favoresco, to favor, to show friendship, to deal
kindly and lovingly. Favorecido, or Favorescido, m. one favored, one well
thought of, one that finds friendship. * Favoresca, or Favorezca, vide
Favorecer. Fausto, or Fasto, pride, hautinesse, stomach, insolency, etc.
Faxa, f. a wastband, a swathing band, any rolling band to swathe with, sometime
a fetter or gieue. Faxa de nin^os, a swathing band for little children. Faxas
de piernas, garters to garter the legs with, or swaddle bands for the legs. *
Faxas de calcas, panes of hose. * Faxado, m. swathed, gartered, bound about.
Faxar, to swathe, to garter, to bind about. * Faxina, f. boughs, stakes, and
such like stuff to make a rampire with. * Faxinado, m. rampired. Faysa, or
Faysan, m. a pheasant. * Faycion, a fashion, manner or custom. * Faz, f. a
countenance, face or gesture. * Fazer, vide Hazar.
F E
Fe, ar Fee, f. faithfulness, credit, honest dealing, sometimes a wedding
ring. * que es de la Fe? where is there any faithful dealing? * Fe mentida, f.
a false counterfeite faith. * Fea cosa, a foul matter, a shameful case.
Fealdad, f. fowlenesse, filthiness, shameful dealing, dishonest doing. *
Feamente, fowly, shamefully, filthily. Febrero, m. the month February. Feeble,
feeble, weak, frail, impotent. Febledad, f. weakness, feebleness,
infirmity. Feblemente, feebly, weakly. * Febrido, m. vide Fabricado. * Fecha,
vide Hecha, f. a deed, a doing, an action. * a la Fecha del present, at the
doing or making hereof. * Fecho, vide Hecho, m. made or done. Fecundo, f.
fruitful, plentiful, rank, full, abundant, fertile. * Fee, or Fe,
faithfulness, credit, honest dealing, a wedding ring, a fee. * Feeza, f. vide
Fealdad. * Fegado, vide Higado, the liver of any thing. * Felice, or Felix,
happy, fortunate, prosperous, blessed. Felicidad, f. happiness, felicity, good
fortune, good luck. Feligrez, m. a parishioner, one of the parish. *
Feligrezia, a parishionership. * Felix, vide Felice, happy, fortunate. Felpa,
f. unshorn velvet, flushe, shag. * Feltre, vide Fieltro. * Fementido, m. a
breaker of his faith, a falsifier of his faith. * Femina, vide Muger. *
Femineo, m. womanlike, soft and tender, female like, pertaining to a woman.
Also of the feminine kind or gender. * Feminil, womanlike. Fenecer, or
Fenescer, yo Fenesco, to finish, to make an end, to bring to a conclusion.
Fenecido, m. finished, ended, brought to a good pass. Fenecimiento, m.
finishing, concluding, making an end, bringing to pass. * Fenestra, vide
Ventana. * Fenicia, vide Phenicia, a country called Phenicia. * Fenix, f. a
bird in Arabia so called, whereof writers say, there is never but one in the
world at once, and when she waxes old, she gathers into her nest many
strong spices, and firing then the nest and all, she burns herself, of whose
ashes breed another Phoenix. * Feno, vide Heno, m. haie for cattle. Feo, m.
foul, filthy, ugly, uncomely to see to, dishonest. * Fereria, vide Ferreria.
Feria, a holiday, a fair, a market. Feriar, to buy and to sell, as chapmen do
in faires or markets, to keep holiday, to make a play day. * Ferir, vide
Herir, to wound. * Fermentar, to leaven, to season, to give a taste or savor.
Ferocidad, f. fiercenes, cruelty, wildenes, rigor. Feroz, fierce, cruel,
hasty, wild. * Ferrado, m. done with iron. * Ferrador, m. a worker in iron
work. * Ferreria, an iron work, as the mine where it is melted into sowes,
the forge where it is ha^mered first into bars, etc. * Ferreateado, sealed as
cloth is. * Ferrete, a seal for cloth, etc. Also a thing to die cloth black.
Fertile, fruitful, plentiful. Fertilidad, fruitfulnes, plenty, abundance,
store of increase. * Fervorosamente, hotly, ardently, hastily, eagerly. *
Fervoroso, vide Herveroso, hot, in a chafe, hasty, eager, earnest. Festijado,
feasted, made merry, well entertained. Festijar, to make good cheer, to feast,
to entertain. Festival, of a feast, or belonging to a feast, or to good
cheer. * Festividad, f. the festival day. Feudatario, m. a feodarie, one that
holds of his lord in fee. Feudo, m. fee, feud or tribute. * Feyones, a kind
of pulse called French beans, or beans of Rome. * Fiacaso, vide Fracaso.
Fiada, f. betrothed, faithfully promised, assurance. * Fiado, as dar en fiado,
to deliver upon trust, to credit with. Fiador, m. a surety that undertakes to
see another man's debt answered, or that baileth one out of prison. * Fiambre,
f. cold meat. Fianca, f. credit, putting in suerties for debt, bailing of
prisoners, any assurance. Fiar, to trust another, to become surety for another,
to put in bail for other. Ficion, f. a fained matter, a made tale, a forged
fable, a fiction. * Fidalgo, vide Hidalgo, a gentleman. * Fide dignos, men
worthy credit, able men, men whose words are worth the taking. * Fide
comisso, committed to his charge, put in trust, a feoffement of trust. * Fide
comissario, a feoffar of trust, one that has authority from another to to
enfeoffe a man's son in lands after the fathers death, or may otherways
dispose of lands according to the giuers mind. * Fideos, m. a kind of paste
to eat, made of flower and butter, or oil. * Fiducia, trust, confidence,
faith, assurance. Fiebre, f. a fever, an ague. Fiel, faithful, trusty, as
good as his word: the pin set at buts or pricks which archers measure to: the
little tongue of a balance, showing which way the weight goes. Fiel de pezos,
the trial of weight, the little tongue of the balance to show which is the
heavier in waying. Fiele, or Fiel, vide Hiel. * Fieles, faithful men, officers
that had charge to see the temples and public building kept in reparations.
Fieldad, faithfulness, true dealing. Fielmente, faithfully, justly, without
fraud, honestly and truly. Fieltro, m. a felt, whereof felts are made, or felt
whereof riding cloakes and bases are made. Also a hat it self, or cloak made
of felt. Fiera, f. a wild beast. Fiereza, f. wildness, sauagenes, rudenes,
fierceness, cruelty. * Fierissimo, m. most wild, most rude, most savage,
most fierce or cruel. Fiero, m. fierce, wild, savage, rude, cruel. * Fieros,
rigorous bad dealings, fitter for bruit beasts then for reasonable men. Fierro,
vide Hierro, iron. Fiesta, f. a feast, a merriment, a making good cheer. *
Figueral, a place of figtrees. * Figueroa, a shire or county in Portingale so
called. also a proper name there. Figura, f. a figure, a shape, a form, a
fashion. Also a coat card. Figuradamente, figuratively, darkly. Figurar, to
figure, to form, to fashion, to frame, to make show or representation of some
thing absent. * Figuras, figures, shapes, forms. Also coat cards.
Figurativo, m. figurative, dark, hard to be understood, that represents some
thing. Figurilla, f. a little picture, form or fashion of some thing. * Fijo,
vide Hijo, a son. * Fila, f. a rank of soldiers in order, called a file. *
Filera, vide Hilera, idem. Filete, m. a lace, a bone-lace, a fillet.
Filipendola, an herb called filipendula, red saxifrage or dropwoort. *
Filipodio, m. an herb called polypodie of the oak. Filo, m. the edge of any
weapon that is used to cut with. * Filomena, vide Ruysen^or. Filosofar, to play
the philosopher, to be a studious lover of wisdom. Filosofia, f. philosophy,
which consists in the right discerning between virtues and vices, and in
having skill of natural and supernatural things. Filosofo, m. a philosopher,
a lover of wisdom and learning. * Filosomia, f. phisiognomie, or the skill to
judge of a man by beholding his face. Fin, m. an end, a conclusion, the vpshot
of a matter, death. Finado, m. ended, dispatched, finished, concluded, dead.
Final, final, to end with, at last. Finalmente, lastly, finally, to conclude,
to make an end. Finar, to end, to conclude, to make an end, to dispatch, to
die. Finamiento, m. the ending, the conclusion, the vpshot, the dying, the
deceasing. * Fincar, to stay and remain in a place. * Finchar, vide Hinchar, *
Fineza, f. finenesse, queintnes, subtlety. Fingidamente, fainedly,
counterfeitly, dissemblingly, hypocritically. Fingido, m. fained, dissembled,
counterfeited, forged. Fingidor, m. a fainer, a dissembler, a forger, a
counterfeiter. Fingimiento, m. faining, forging, counterfeiting, dissembling.
Fingir, yo Finjo, to feign, to dissemble, to counterfeit, to forge. * Finja,
Finjo, vide Fingir. * Finocho, vide Hinojo. Finiquito, m. an acquittance to
certify debt discharged, a quietus est. * Finissimo, most queint, cunning and
crafty. Fino, m. fine, queint, cunning, crafty, subtle. * Finocho, or
Finojo, vide Hinojo, fennel, a knee. * Finxidamente, vide Fingidamente,
fainedly, counterfeitly. * Finxido, vide Fingido. Firma, f. a seal, a signing
or such like confirming of a matter by assurance, a signing or setting down
ones name to any thing in writing. * la Firmada, f. vide Firma. * Firmado, m.
sealed, signed, confirmed, established, ratified. * Firmamento, the firmament,
the sky. Firmar, to sign, to seal, to confirm, to assure. Firm, steadfast,
firm, stable, sure. * Firmeca, vide Firmeza. Firmamente, surely, firmly,
steadfastly, strongly. Firmeza, f. assurance, stedfastnes, firmness,
stabilitie. * Fiscales personas, officers of the exchequer. Fiscal, m. a basket
pertaining to the exchequer, or the kings remembrancer in the exchequer. *
Fiscal procurador, an attorney of the exchequer for the king, the kings
attorney. Fisco, m. the princes exchequer. * Fisereta, or carcillo de la vid,
the tendrell or young string of vines that wind about the poles or props. *
Fisica, f. physic, medicine. Fisico, m. a physician. * Fisonomia,
phisiognomie, the art or rule to know his natural inclination by his face or
visage. Fistigo, vide Alhocigo, a Fisticke tree. Fistola, f. a dangerous bad
disease called a fistula, because it grows in length like a pipe. Fixado, m.
fastened, set fast. Fixamente, fast, surely, steadfastly. Fixar, to fasten, to
settle, to stablish. Fixo, m. fast, steadfast, sure. * Fizga, f. an instrument
to kill fish withal, a troutspeare or such like. Also a jest, a floute. *
Fizgador, m. one that kills fish with a troutespeare, or with some such like
instrument. Also a mocker or taunter. * Fize, Fiziera, Fisiesse, vide Fazer. *
Fizgar, to kill fish with a troute spear. To mock or floute. * Fizgon, m. a
mocker, a flouter, a taunter.
F L
Flaco, m. lean, weak, slender, feeble. * Flama, vide Llama, the flame of
fire. * Flamenco, m. a Fleming, a low Dutch man. A bird like a shoueler. *
Flamula, f. a streamer or pendent in a ship. * Flandes, m. Flanders, the low
Countries. * Flaquear, to become weak, feeble, lean, or slender. Flaqueza, f.
feeblenes, weakness, faintnes, leanenes, slendernes. Flarco, m. a bottle. *
Flasco, m. a flaske for a soldier. Also a great bottle or flagon. *
Flasquillo, vide Frasquillo. Flauta, f. a pipe of a reed, a flute, a fife.
Flautador, m. a player on a fife or flute. * Flebotomia, flebotomie or letting
of blood. Flecha, f. an arrow, a shaft. * Flechador, m. an archer, a shooter in
a long bow. * Flechadura, f. the stroke or wound with an arrow. The winding up
of a wound with clothes. Flechar, to shoot a shaft. * Flechazo, m. the
shooting of an arrow, the stroke or blow that an arrow gives. * Flechero, m.
an archer, a fletcher. * Flema, phlegm, one of the four humors reigning in
man's body. Also much patience. * Flematico, m. one that abounds with phlegm,
flegmatike of complexion. Also so one having much patience * Flemoso, m. full
of phlegm, vide Flematico. Also very patient. Fletar, to pay money for
ferrying over some water, or money for passage by boat or shipping, etc. To
pay custom or toll for wares transported, to set ships on flote. * Fletador,
m. one that pays ferriage, or passage money, one that pays toll or custom
for wares transported. A setter of ships on flote. * Fletamiento, m. paying for
passage, or toll or custom for wares transported. setting ships on flote.
Flete, m. passage money, money for ferriage, or transporting by water. Also
custom or toll money for wares transported. * Fleuco, m. fringe. Flocadura, f.
fringe, flocks. * Flojo, vide Floxo, slow, negligent, idle, slothful, weak,
apt to no goodness, blockheaded. * Floque, vide Fleuco, fringe. Flor, f. a
flower. * Flor de-lis, the Flowe-delice. * Flor de la muger, a woman's monthly
course. * Flor de parayso; flower of Paradise. * Flor de la barva, the first
mossie hair that grows on the beard. Flor en la color, a fresh color. * Flor
de acafran, Saffron. Florecer, or Florescer, to flourish, to blossom, to bear
flowers, to budde, to bring forth blossoms, to grow, to prosper, to be in
estimation or authority. * Florear, to dally withal, to make no reckoning or
account of. * Floresilla, or Florecilla, vide Florezilla, f. a little flower.
Floresta, f. a forest, a wilderness, a great wood. Florestero, m. a
forrester, a raunger, a keeper. Floretada, f. a fillip with the fingers, a
fillip given on the forehead, * Florezilla, f. a little flower. Florido, m.
flourishing, that which buddeth, blossometh, grows or prospers. Florin, m.
a kind of money in France called a Florin, in Dutch a Gulden, being in value
two shillings English. Flota de naves, a fleet of ships, a company of ships
consorted on a voyage. * Flotar, or Sobreaguar, to floate or fleet upon the
water. Floxamente, slackly, loosely, feebly, faintly, without courage,
negligently, idly, slothfully, heedlesly, like a block head. Floxedad,
slacknesse, looseness, faintness, feeblenes, idleness, negligence,
blockeheadednes, vnlustines, weakness. Floxo, slack, loose, feeble, faint,
negligent, weak, idle, slow, dull-headed, unapt, sluggish, heedlesse. * Flozo,
lither, slothful, idle, that plieth not his business, unlusty, that stands
still. Flucco, the young mossie hair that grows on the chin with young men. *
Flueco, a flock, such as is shorn off from cloth, or beaten off in the
fulling mill. Also fringe. * Flux, m. flush at cards when one has all of one
suit or sort. * Fluxo, m. a flux, an ouerflowing, as the flux of the belly. *
Fluxo de sangre, the hemorrhoides.
F O
* Focil, m. a little flash or flame of fire suddenly made and quickly out
again, as of gunpowder or such like. Also a steel to strike fire with, a
tinder box. Also the name of a certain bone in the arms. Fofo, m. that is
soft in feeling, a swelling or soft puffing up of any thing, a hollow thing. *
Fogar, vide Fogon. Fogon, m. an harth, the touch-pan of a piece, the cookeroome
in a ship, a place to make fire on, the little hole in a touch pan in a piece,
by which the fire gets into the powder of the piece. Fogoso, m. fiery, set
on fire. * Fogote, m. a match for a soldier which is lighted. * Foja, vide
Hoja. * Fois, a kind of money used in the kingdom of China, being of the
value of a quarto in Spain, which is four Maravedis. Follages, mantelling in
arms, flourishing, polishing, painting or setting a thing out trim to the
show. * Follajes, idem. Follon, an untoward fellow, a lewd person. * Folluz,
the third part of a blanke in money. * Fomentado, m. cherished, warmed,
comforted. * Fomentador, m. one that cherishes, warmeth or comfort. *
Fomentar, to foster, to cherish, to nourish, to seed, to comfort, to harten,
to encourage. * Fondaca, or Dogana, a custom house, a toll house where they
use to take toll or tax of people for carrying or transporting of goods. Also
a merchants storehouse or warehouse. * Fondo, the foundation of a thing, a
treasury or any thing whereupon a man does rely. * dar Fondo, to cast anchor.
* Fondon, m. the bottom, the ground, the depth. Fondoso, m. deep, profound,
high, of great receipt, large, insatiable. * Fonsadera, pay or tax for the
repairing of the ditches of a city. Fontenal, a place full of springs or
fountains, the head of a conduit whence the water is carried by pipes. *
Fontezica, f. a little fountain, a spring. Fontezuela, a little fountain, a
small spring. * Foradar, vide Horadar. * Forage or Foraje, provision for
horses, meat for cattle. Also furring, or lining of garments. Also lining
pikemen with shot. * Foragido, vide Huydo. * Foralmente, in open court. *
Forandos, vide Huydo. Foran^o, fierce, wild, savage, cruel. Forastero, m. a
stranger, one that comes from another country. Forcado, forced, compelled,
constrained, that needs must be. * Forcado de galera, vide Galleote, a gallie
slave. Forcador, m. a rauisher, one that gets by force or violence, a
deflourer of maidens or women by outrage. Forcar, yo Fuerco, to ravish, to
commit a rape, to use violence, to get by extortion or wrong. Forcejar, to do
his best, to endeavor to the uttermost, to do what he can, to try his cunning.
Forcosamente, violently, forcibly, by oppression, by extortion. Forcoso, m.
forcible, violent, very strong, of great power, auailable. * Forcudo, m. one
that is of great force or strength. Forera, f. current money, tax, tribute. *
Forero mayor, m. a chief collector or gatherer of tax or tribute money.
Forja, f. a smithes forge, a place where men frame or plot any thing. Forjado,
m. forged, framed, wrought, plotted or made. * Forjador, m. a forger, one that
frames or makes things. Forjar, to forge, to frame, to make. Forma, f. a
form, a fashion, a mould to make any thing by, a shoomakers last to set shoes
on. Formado, m. formed, fashioned, framed, cast in a mould, made after the
fashion. Formaje, vide Queso, cheese. Formal, formal, according to fashion, in
order. * Formalidad, formalitie, according to fashion. Formalmente, orderly,
formally, by due fashion. Formar, to frame, to fashion, to form, to cast in a
mould, to bring to a proportionate order. * Formidable, dreadful, terrible, to
be feared. Formulario, m. a book of presidents to make instruments by. A book
of copies to write by. Fornecer, or Fornescer, to furnish, to store, to
garnish, to arm, to fortify, to defend. * Fornecido, m. furnished, stored,
fenced, fortified, well appointed. Fornecimiento, m. furniture, store,
garnishing, fortifying. Fornicacion, f. whoredom, fornication. * Fornicador,
m. a whoremoonger, a leacherous person. Fornicar, Praes. yo Fornico, 1. Praet.
yo Fornique, to haunt harlots, to follow whores; to commit fornication.
Fornicario, m. a whoremoonger, a fornicator, an adulterer. * Fornicio, vide
Fornicacion. * Fornido, vide Fornecido, furnished, well appointed, etc. *
Fornique, vide Fornicar. * Fornir, vide Fornecer, to furnish, etc. Forodado,
vide Horodado. * Forqueta, f. a little forke to feed with, etc. * Forrado, m.
lined, furred. Forraje, or Forage, furring, lining. Also the lining of pikemen
with shot. Also forage, provision for horses. Fortalecer, or Fortalescer, to
build some bulwark, to make a rampire, to fortify a place. Fortalecido, m.
fortified, entrenched, rampired about. Fortalecimiento, m. fortification,
making strong a town or place with bulwarks, rampires, etc. Fortaleza, f.
strength, a fortress, a bulwark. * Fortezuela, or Fortezuelo, a little fort
or strength. Fortificador, m. a fortifier, one that has skill or bestows
cost on making strong a place. Fortificamiento, m. fortifying or making strong
of a place against danger of enemies. Fortificar, to fortify, to make strong,
to make impregnable. * Fortuito, as caso Fortuito, a chance that comes by
fortune, haphazard. Fortuna, f. fortune, chance. * Forxar, vide Forjar. *
Forza, vide Fuerca. * Forzoso, forcibly, of force. * Foso, vide Fosso, a ditch.
Fossa, or Fosso, a ditch, a pit. * Fossado muro, m. a wall ditched about.
Fossar, to dig, or ditch about, to make a ditch about a wall. * Fossillo, m. a
little ditch. Fracada, f. a blanket or couerlet for a bed. * Fracassar, to fall
into any chance or mishap suddenly, unawares. * Fracusar, idem. Fragada, vide
Fragata, a small bark called a frigot. * Fragancia, f. a fragrant and sweet
savor or smell. * Fragante, fragrant, or having a sweet sent or savor. Also
by and by, forthwith. * Castigar en fragante, to chasten by and by, or
forthwith. * Fragas, f. strawberries. Also craggie ways. * Fragata, a small
bark called a frigot. * Fragil, weak, feeble, frail, ready to break or to
fall. * Fragilidad, f. frailty, feeblenes, readiness to fall. * Fragmento, a
fragment, a piece. Fragoso, m. rough, stony, rugged, hard and sharp. *
Fragrante, fragrant, that smells sweet of flowers, etc. fresh of taste.
Fragua, f. a forge, the smithes coal. Fraguar, to harden, to dry, to wax
firm. * Fraguras, craggie ways. * Fraila, vide Frayla. Frail, vide Frail. *
Frailelizo, vide Fraylesco. Francamente, freely, liberally, bountifully,
frankly. * Frances, m. a frenchman. * Mal frances, the french pockes. Franco,
m. liberal, frank, free, endenized. Francolin, m. a bird called a Godwit.
Franjas, or Franzas, fringe to wear on the skirts of women's coats, etc. *
Franqueado, enfranchised, made free. Franquear, to make free, to give liberty,
to deliver out of bondage into freedom, to use liberally, to enfranchize or
make free. Franqueza, f. liberality, bountifulness, franknes. Also freedom,
liberty. * Franzas, vide Franjas. * Franzimiento, m. trimming with fringe,
making of fringe. * Franzir, to use fringe. * Frascas, rubbish, or baggage
refuse about repayring of houses, weedings of gardens, etc. Frasco, vide
Flarco, a bottle. * Frasco, vide Flasco, a flaggon, a soldiers flaske. *
Frasquillo, or Flasquillo, a soldiers touchboxe. Fraternidad, f. brotherhood.
* Fraterno, m. brotherly, lovingly, kindly. * Fraud, m. deceit, fraud, false
dealing, coosening. * Fraudelento, fraudulent, deceitefull, coosening. *
Fraxino, vide Frezno, an ash tree. Frayla, a Nun. Fray, or Frail, m. a
friar. Frail, idem. * Fraylesco, of the order of Nuns or Friars, belonging
to Nuns or Friars, cloth with which Friars are clothed. Fraylezillo, a bird
with black feathers on the head, like linget, called of some, an Owpe. Also a
little friar. Frazada, f. a couerlet, vide Fracada. Freca, hogs dung, sheep
dung. * Frecar, to dung as sheep or swine. Frecada, vide Fracada, or Frazada,
a couerlet. Frecha, vide Flecha, f. an arrowe, a shafte. Frechadura, f. the
stroke or wound with an arrow, the winding up of a wound with clothes,
drawing or shooting of a bow. Frechar, vide Flechar, to shoot. Frechero, m. an
archer, a fletcher. Fregadero, m. a rubber, a curricombe. Fregadientes, a
toothscraper. Fregado, m. rubbed, fretted, chafed. Fregadura, f. rubbing,
fretting, chafing. Fregar, Praes. yo Friego, 1. Praet. yo Fregue, to frot, to
rub, to chafe, to wipe. * Fregata, a small vessel called a Frigotte. *
Freir, vide Freyr, to fry. * Freidera, or Sarten, a frying pan. * Freido, vide
Freydo, fried. * Freidura, a frying. Frenar, to bridle, to curb, to keep
under. * Frenero, m. a bridle maker. Frenesia, m. a giddie disease of the
brain called the frenzy, coming by inflammation of the midriffe. Freneticar,
to be frantike, to play the mad man. Frenetico, m. frantike, mad.
Frenillo de la lengua, the string of the tongue. Freno, a bridle, the bit of a
bridle, a restraint. Freno de coscoja, a bridle with a sharp bit. * Frental,
the ornament of a horse bridle raines on his forehead. Frente, f. the forehead,
the brow, a front or forepart of a battle. * arrugada, or rugosa Frente, a
wrinkled forehead. * Frequencia, f. a haunt, often coming or using of a thing,
or of company. Frequentadamente, oftentimes, commonly, much used. *
Frequentado, m. haunted, often used, frequented. Frequentar, to haunt, to
frequent, to use often or commonly to, to keep company. Frequente, often, much
in use, much in request. Fresada de cevada, ptisane drink, barley water.
Fresar, to bruise, to rub one with another. * Frescamente, freshly, newly,
somewhat coldly. Fresco, m. fresh, new, somewhat cold, pleasant, sweet, fresh
and unsalted. Frescor, or Frescura, freshness, coolness, pleasantness of
air. Frescura, vide Frescor. * Fresno, vide Freno, an ash tree. * Freso, m. a
kind of fringe or silk lace, or such like to set on agarment. * Freson, m. a
young hog or weaned pig, a griese or step, a young infant. Fresquezito,
somewhat fresh weather, somewhat cool weather. * Fresquissimo, m. most fresh,
most pleasant, cool. * Fretar, to pay passage money in a ship or bark, to pay
custom for merchandise. Fretar nave, to hire a ship for to freight. Frete, the
freight money, passage money. * Frexno, vide Frezno. * Freydera, f. a frying
pan. Freydura, f. frying. Freyle, a brother of an order of knighthood. Freyr,
yo Frio, to fry as meat is fried. Frezar, or Frecar, to chew the cud. Also to
be of like condition to another. Frezno, m. an ash tree. Frialdad, f. cold,
coolness, a cold or stale jest. Friamente, coldly. * Friegue, Friego, vide
Fregar. Friera, f. a kibe, a chilblaine. Friera de pies, a kibe on the foot. *
Frigido, m. cold. Frio, m. cold, mild, soft, gentle. * Dicho frio, a cold or
stale jest. * Frio, vide Freyr. Friollego, m. very chill, cold. * Frisa, frise
cloth. * Frisada, a stuff called frise or frizado. * loba Frisada, a kind of
cottoned or frised garment worn by mourners and priests in Spain. Frisar, to
cotton or freeze cloth. * Frisol yerva, a kind of herb. Frisoles, a kind of
white pease called kidney beans. Frito, m. fried in a frying pan. * Frivolo,
frivolous, untoward, unorderly, paltering, wrangling. * Friyssimo, m. most
cold. * Froga, f. the mixing together of lime and sand. Frontal, a forehead
cloth. Also a cloth used before the altar. Also a cupboord cloth. * Front,
vide Frente. Frontera, f. the frontiers, the borders. Frontero, m. over
against, afront, a captain of a garrison. Frontispicio, the foreshew, the
first face. Frotado, m. rubbed, chafed. * Frotamiento, rubbing, chafing,
frotting. Frotar, to rub, to frot, to chafe. * Fructifero, m. vide Frutifero,
fruitful, that bears fruit. * Fructo, vide Fruto, fruit, profit, increase.
* Fructuoso, m. fruitful. * Frugal, frugall, near, sparing, thriftie. *
Frunzir, to draw cloth or such like into a ruff. Fruslera, f. a jest, a
scoff, mockery. * Frustrar, to make void or of none effect, to deceive.
Fruta, f. fruit of trees. * Fruta podrida, putrified or rotten fruit. * Fruta
tardia, fruit that comes late, winter fruit. * Fruta blanda, soft tender
fruit. Fruta de sarten, a fritter. Frutal, a place of fruit, or trees bearing
fruit. * Frutera, f. a woman that sells fruit, a fruit dish. * Frutero, m. a
man seller of fruit. Also a towell or napkin which they always in Spain use
to lay over the fruit when they bring it and serve it to the table. Frutifero,
m. fruitful, that bears fruit. Frutificar, Praes. yo Frutifico, 1. Praet.
Frutifique, to bear fruit, to yield plenty of fruit, to fructify. *
Frutifique, vide Frutificar. * Fruto, m. fruit, increase, plenty of corn or
other things. Frutuoso, m. fruitful, that yields fruit or increase.
F V
* Fucil, vide Focil. Fuego, m. fire. Fuelles, m. bellows to blow the fire
with. Fuellesuelos, or Fuellezuelos, small bellows. Fuente, f. a fountaiue, an
ewer, a lauer. * Fuentezica, f. a little fountain, an ewer, a lauer. *
Fuentezilla, a little ewer, spring or lauer. * Fuente rabia, f. a city betwixt
France and Spain in Biscay. * Fuer, vide Fuera, without etc. Fuera, without,
besides, moreover, unless. Fuerca, f. force, violence, strength, valor, a
force or hold of defense. * Fuerce, Fuerco, vide Forcar. * Fuercosamente, vide
Forcosamente, forcibly, violently. Fuero, m. the law, the custom, a court
where matters are heard and decided according to law. Fuerte, strong, valiant,
forcible, swift. * Fuertemente, strongly, forcibly, valiantly. * Fuertizillo,
m. a small fortress. * Fuesta, vide Fusta, a foyst, a pinnasse. * Fuga, a
running away, a flight, an escape, an overthrow. * Fugace, flying, escaping,
fugitive, flitting. Fugitivo, m. a runnagate, a fugitive, a runaway. Fulano, m.
one, a certain man, such a one. * Fulia, f. a dance or song. * Fuliador, m. a
dauncer or singer of such dance or song. * Fulle, vide Fuelle. Fullero, m. a
coosener in play, a pilferer, a lewd shifting fellow. * Fumo, vide Humo.
Fumosidad, f. smokinesse, fumositie. * Funda, f. a case for any thing. Also the
arming of a pike with cloth, velvet or such like, etc. Funda de Almohada, or
Colchon, a pillowbeere. Funda de mesa, f. a carpet cloth. * Fundacion, f. a
foundation. * Fundaco, a merchants warehouse. * Fundadamente, groundedly, upon
a good foundation. * Fundado, m. founded. Fundador, m. a founder, a layer of
foundations. Fundamiento, m. the foundation, the groundworke. Fundar, to lay a
foundation. * Funderia, f. a place to melt or found metal in. Fundicion, f.
melting of metal, casting of metal. * Fundidor, m. a bell founder, a melter
of metal. * Fundir, to cast or melt metal. * Funeral, pertaining to a
burial, funeral rites. * Funesta cosa, a lamentable thing, a thing polluted
with a dead body, mournful, cruel, detestable, lamentable, deadly. *
Funesto, defiled, or polluted with a dead body, mournful, cruel, deadly,
detestable. Furia, or Rabia, f. fury, raging, madness. * Furias, the three
furies, Alecto, Tisiphone, and Megera. * Furibundo, m. mad, raging, furious,
wood. Furiosamente, madly, furiously, ragingly. Furioso, m. raging, furious,
mad. Furor, m. furiousnes, rage, madness, woodnesse. Furriel, a harbinger, a
furrier, an appointer of lodgings. * Furrier, idem. Fuslera, f. brass that may
be melted. Fusta, Bergantin, or Galeota, a foiste, a brigandine, a pinnasse.
Fustan, m. fustian, a kind of dubletting. * Fustancillas, fustians, stuff
made of fustian. Fuste de silla, the saddle tree of a saddle. * Fusteda, vide
Fusta. * Fustete, yellowish stuff to die clothes withal. * Fustibal, or
Fustival, a certain warlike instrument used in old time. * Futuro, m. that
which is to come. Fuzia, or Auzia, f. trust, confidence.
G
* GAbellaro, vide Gabelero, a taker of toll or custom, a customer, a toll
gatherer. * Gabelero, a customer, a toll gatherer, a taker or gatherer of toll
or custom. * Gabia, or Gavia, f. the top on the mast of a ship. * Gaca, f. a
kind of silk stuff like cypers, whereof they use to make cloakes and women's
mantels in Spain for the summer. Also it is the loope of a coard, point, or
other string. Gacafatones, foolish talk, rauing talk, dotings. Gacapo, or
Gacapito, m. a rabbet, a young conie. Gacelo, m. a wild goat. * Gacha, f. a
kind of hodgepotch made of flower, water, butter and honey. * Gada, or Merluza,
a fish called a whiting. * Gadaneador, m. a mower, that moweth with a sieth. *
Gadiz, Cadis, or Calis, the city of Spain now called Cales, * Gaditano, m. a
man of Cales. * Gafar, to snatch away in haste or suddenly. * Gafari, vide
cafari, a very sweet pomgranate. Gafas, f. the bender of a crossebow. Gafedad,
f. a benumming of the hands that one cannot stretch them out. Also leprosy. *
Gafeti, or Gaferi, a kind of herb. Gafo, m. one that is benumbed in his
sinews that he cannot stretch them out. * Gafoso, m. benumbed in the hands,
leprous. * Gages, or Gajes, m, pay or wages. * Gaino, or Gayno, vide Gamo, a
fallowe dear. * Gaio, vide Gayo, a prong of a forke. Gaita, vide Gayta, a
bagpipe. Gaitero, vide Gaytero, a plaier on bagpipes. Gajes, vide Gages, m.
wages, pay. Gajo, m. a cluster of grapes. * Gal, a fish called a dare or
goldfish. Gala, f. bravery, liveliness, courage, neatness, daintiness. * a
la Gala, a la Gala, courageously, bravely, merrily, lively, finely, gallantly.
Galan, m. brave, lusty, courageous, gallant, neat, or trim. * Galana, vide
Gala. * Galano, vide Galan. Galanemente, lustily, bravely, courageously,
lively. * Galanez, f. bravery, gallantnes, neatnes, liuelines, courage, etc.
Galapago, m. a snaile, a welke, a perwinkle, a tortoise. * Galarda, vide
Gallardo. Galardon, m. reward for work or service done, wages, salarie.
Galardonado, m. rewarded, paid his wages, or his hire. Galardonador, one that
rewards, pays wages or hire. Galardonar, to reward, to pay wages or hire. *
Galas de un balde, the handle of a bucket. Galbanado, m. gummed with Galbanum.
Galbano, m. a gum called Galbanum. Galea, vide Galera, a galley that is rowed
by force of men. Galeaca, f. a galeasse, a ship so called. * Galear, to take
upon him much, to command. Galeon, m. a great ship among the Spaniards called a
Galeon. Galeota, or Fusta, f. a small bark called a foiste, a small pinnase or
a frigot. Galeote, a rower in a galley or small bark, a boat-man, a sayler.
Galera, or Galea, a galley. * Galeta, f. vide Galleta, a ship or Galley, a kan.
* Galfarro, m. a great eater or deuourer, a rakehell-fellow. * Galgas, f.
stones cast from a rock, tower or hill to annoy the enemy. Also greyhound
bitches. Galgana, a kind of pulse, called chiches. Galgo, m. a gallow-clapper
or ungracious wag, a greyhound. * Galha, vide Agalla, gals to die with, or to
make ink with. * Galicia, or Galizia, a Province in Spain so called, lying
between Portugal and Biskay. Gallardamente, lively, pleasantly, merrily.
Gallardetes, streamers, or pendents in ships. Gallardia, f. mirth, pleasantnes,
liuelines. Gallardo, m. lively, merry, pleasant, fine. Gallego, m. the
west-wind. Also a man of Galicia. * Galleote, a sayler, a rower. Galleta, f. a
kind of kan to drink in, a ship or galley. Gallillo, m. the Vuula, or falling
down of a part of the roose of the mouth, the weezell or little tongue at the
entrance of the throat, the throat boll. Gallina, f. a hen. Gallina ciega, a
woodcocke. Also a venomous blind worm called a sloworme or blind-worme.
Gallina ponedera, a hen that uses to lay eggs, a laying hen. * Gallina
assentadera, a broodhen. * Gallina enana, a little hen. * Gallina morisca, a
hen of Guynie. * Gallina de India, a Turkey hen. * Gallina del rio, a Moorehen.
* Gallina clueca, a clock-hen. Gallinaca, f. hens dung. * Gallinaro, vide
Gallinero, a hen roost, a poulterer. * Gallineria, a place or market where they
sell hens. Gallinero, a poulterer, a keeper of hens, a coupe to keep hens in,
a hen roost. Gallipavo, a Turkey cock. * Galliuda, f. a kind of dogfish
called a sea-hinde. Gallochas, f. winter shoes, sockes of woollen to wear in
shoes, shoes with wooden soles. Gallo, m. a cock. Gallocresta, an herb
called Clarie. * Gallo de I'ndia, a turkey cock. Gallofo, or Galloffo, a
beggar. * Gallofear, to beg. * Gallofero, m. a beggar. * Gallope, m. a gallop.
Gallopear, to gallop as a horse does. * Galvan, m. a proper name of a Moore. *
Galvano, a kind of gum or liquor issuing out of a tree. Gama, f. a do, a
dear. * Gamaruli, a kind of deformed thing that lives in the sea, but has
no ordinary proportion of a fish. * Gambini, or Babovini, pent-houses to keep
off rain. * Gama, m. a bucke, a dear. Gamon, an herb called Daffodill. *
Gamonera, the place where Daffodils grow. * Gamones, vide Gamon. Gamonital, a
bed of Daffodils. Gamonilla, f. the flower of Daffodill. Gamonito, m.
Daffodill. Gamucas, leather called Shamois, little dear. Gana, will, desire,
lust, appetite, mind. * de buena Gana, with a good will, gladly. Ganadero, m.
a heardman, a hayward, one that tends sheep or other cattle. Also a drouer
of cattle, a grasier. Ganado, cattle in general, a drove of cattle, a flock,
or heard of any cattle. Also won, gotten, gained. Ganancia, f. gain, lucre,
winning, advantage. Ganancioso, m. gainefull, on the winning side, on the
getting hand. Ganapan, m. a porter, a bearer of packes or burdens. *
Ganapierde, the game at cards called Loadhim. Ganar, to get, to gain, to
win, to obtain. Gancho, m. a shepherds hook, or shepherdes staff, knobs in
a greble staff, branches in a stags horn. Ganchoso, m. knobbie, branched. *
Ganga, f. a bird somewhat less then a hen. * Gange, a river of east India
coming from Paradise, that is called Phison: it is at the narrowest eight
miles over, in some place twenty miles, at the shallowest a hundred foot
deep. Gango, a barnacle, one that speaks in the nose. Gangoso, a man that
snaffleth in the nose, much snaffling in the nose. * Ganivete, or Ganibete, a
penknife. Gan^an, a ploughman, a herdsman. Gan^ir, to snarle, to grin as a dog
or a fox, to yelpe, to bark. Gan^ido, m. snarling, barking, grinning, yelling
as foxes and curre dogs do. Gan^on, the throat, the gullet, the cud of a
beast, the throat boll, the gargill, the craw, the crop or gorge. Sometimes
ravening, or gluttony. * Ganosamente, very willingly or gladly. * Ganoso, m.
desirous, willing. * Gansa, f. a goose. Ganso, m. a gander. Ganzua, a false or
counterfaite key, a picklocke. * Garabaco, m. a hook, a trammell, pothangers,
any crooked iron or hook. * Garabatillo, m. a little hook. * Garafa, or
Garaffa, a kind of vessel narrow at top, and wide at bottom, of glass. *
Garamon, vide Garan^on. * Garan^on, a stallion or great horse kept only to
cover mares and to breed. * Garavancillos, m. an herb called Milke-vetch.
Garavato, m. a hook of iron, a grappel, a pothanger. Garbo, the bulk of any
thing, the form, the fashion, the countenance, or behavior. * Garbo de
cuerpo, the fashion of the body, the carriage of a man's self. Garca, f. a
foul called a hearon. Garcetas, f. antlyers, or hearts horns, feathers of the
hearon. Garcon, m. a wooer, an amorous fellow. Garconear, to court women, to go
a wooing. Garco de ojo, gray eyed. Garco, agarike, a root at the Apothecaries.
* Gardadero, m. a keeper of the guardrobe. * Gardaropa, f. vide Guardaropa, a
guardrobe. Garfiar, to hook, to catch with a hook, to get with a grapple.
Garfio, m. a grappling hook that hooketh on every side, the hook of an ankor
that holds in the ground. Gargagear, or Gargajear, to gargarise or to wash
the throat, to spit out. Gargajo, phlegm, choler, melancholy, etc. that men
raise by the throat and spit out. Garganta, f. a throat. * Garganta de pierna,
the ham of the leg. Garganta del pie, an instep of the foot. Gargantez, f.
greedines of meat, gluttony, minding much of the belly. * Garganteza, idem.
Gargantilla, f. a carquenet to wear about the neck, a neck-lace, a chain. *
Garganto, vide Garganta, the gullet or throat boll. Garganton, m. a glutton, a
lurcher at victuals, a greedy gut. * Gargarismo, m. gargling or washing the
throat. * Gargarizar, to gargle or wash the throat. Gargaro, the top of the
mount Ida, being very fruitful. * Gargata, idem. Gargavero, vide Garguero, the
throat, the weasand, the throat pipe, the pipe of the lungs, the wind pipe.
Gargola, f. lineseed, seed of flax. Also a denting into a board to let in
another to be joined within it. Garita, a watchtower, a sentinel house upon a
wall for soldiers to watch in. * Garlear, to tattle, to prattle much. Garlito,
m. a we will made of wickars to catch fish in, a bownet to catch fish or birds.
Also a certain bird. * Garnacha, or Carnacha, a moorish garment. * Garote,
vide Garrote. Garra, f. a paw of a beast. * Echar la garra, to lay hold on, to
catch into his paws. Garrafa, f. a glass to keep any liquid thing in, a
drinking glass, a violl, wide at bottom and narrow at top. * Garrafado, m.
grapled, catched hold on. * Garrafar, to grapple, to catch hold on. *
Garrama, f. a gentle term for stealing, as in English, to take a thing where
he finds it, to find it before it was lost, to borrow it without the owners
leave. * Garrancho, a dung-forke, a thing to scrape with. * Garran^on, m. a
stallion kept to cover mares and for breed. Garrapata, f. a tike, a filthy
worm that sticks on sheep, calves, etc. Garridamente, finely, neatly,
deftly, elegantly. Garrideza, f. neatnes, handsomnes, finenes. Garrido, m.
fine, neat, handsome, deft, nice. * Garroba, vide Garrova. Garrocha, f. a
prick, a short dart to cast at the bull. * Garrochar, to throw the Garrocha at
the bull, to strike in the bull with a Garrocha. * Garrotaco, vide Garrotazos.
* Garrotazos, m. blows with a short cudgel. Garrote, m. a cudgel to wind a
coard as carriers do to pack their wantels with. Garrote dar, to strangle, to
rack. Garrova. f. a kind of fruit, or of pulse growing on a tree. *
Garroval, a place where such pulse grow. Garrovo, m. the tree that bears
such pulse. * Garruchas, f. coardes to get up the sail with. Also ropes ends
to tie the sail with. Garruvia, vide Garrova, pigeons pease. * Gartija, a
little serpent called a lysard. Garvanco, m. a pease. Garvines, m. night caps
of silk, caps to lie in. * Garvo, vide Garbo. * Garza, f. a hearon. * Garzera,
f. a place where herons breed. * Garzo, m. gray eied. * Gasajado, m. made
merry, well welcomed and entertained. Gasajo, mirth, delight, pleasantness,
courtesy. * Gasanhote, a locust or a great grasshopper. * Gaspacho, m. a sop
made with vinegar, oil, salt and bread. Gastado, m. spoiled, marred, consumed,
wasted, rent, destroyed. Gastador, m. a waster, a spender, a destroier, a
pioner in war. * Gastadores, pioners in the war, cutters down of wood in war.
Gastar, to spend, to waste, to lay desolate, to consume. Gasto, m. cost,
expense, charge, waste, consuming. * Gata, the castle at the stern of a
gallie, some use it for the top on a ships mast, and so it signifies most
properly. Also a she cat. * yr a Gatas, to go creeping on all four like a
cat. * Gatapata, f. vide Garrapata, a filthy woorme annoying sheep, calves,
etc. called a tike. Gatear, to creep on all four. * Gatera, f. an herb
called catmint or nep. Also a hole for a cat to creep in and out. * Gatico, a
little cat. Gatillo, a little cat. Also an herb called Cammocks. * Gatillo
casto, a tree called hemp tree, or Agnus castus. * Gatino, vide Gatillo. Gato,
m. a cat. * Gato montes, a cat of mountain, a wild cat. * Gato de mosco, a
musk cat. * trampilla del Gato, a trap to catch a cat. Gato cerval, a cat with
a skin like a heart. Gato paus, a munkey. Gavanco, m. a dog brier. * Gaveta, f.
a wooden platter. * Gavelero, m. a gatherer of custom, tole or tribute.
Gavia, or Gabia de nave, the top on a ship mast, whereon they sit or stand, to
spy. Gavilla, or Gavila, a stacke or houell of corn, a bauen or faggot.
Gavilan, a great hawk, as a goshauke, a ierfaulcon. Sometimes used for a
lesser hawk. Also an herb called groundswell, or the down of thistle
blossoms, etc. * Gavilanes de la pluma, the neb of the pen, or the nose or
inside of the pen where it is cut. * Gavion, a hand barrow to bear stones or
mortar, or such like between two men. Also the broad brims of a hat. Gaviota,
f. a sea gull, a sea cob. * Gayon, a ruffian, a swaggerer. Gayta, f. a bagpipe.
* Gaytero, m. a plaier on bagpipes. * Gazis, those that are descended of
progenitors Moors or Turks. Gaznar, to gaggle as geese use to do. Gaznate,
the throat boll, the windepipe. * Gazpacho, vide Gaspacho, a sop made with
vinegar, oil, salt and bread.
G E
* Gebelo, a wild hog. * Geliz, a broking fellow. * Gelo, id est, se lo that,
unto him. Gelosia, f. jealousy, Also a lattice window. Gemido, m. groaning,
mourning heavily, pytifull lamentation. * Gemidor, m. one that mourns
heavily, or that groneth. * Gemiendo, mourning heavily, gronyng, sobbing, and
sighing. Gemir, yo Gimo, to groan, to mourn heavily, to sob, to wayle, to make
a lamentable noise, to roar, to crack. * Gime, Gimo, vide Gemir. Genciana, f.
an herb called Gentian, or Bitterwoort. * Genealogia, or Descendencio, vide
Abolorio. Generation, f. begetting, lineage, descent of kindred, a stock, a
pedigree. General, general, universal. Generalidad, f. generality,
universality. Generalissimo, m. most general, most universal. Generalmente,
universally, generally. * Genere, vide Genero, a kind, stock, lineage,
pedigree, sort, or manner. * Generico, m. of or pertaining to a stock or
lineage, sort or manner. Genero, m. kind, stock, lineage, pedigree, a sort or
manner. Generosidad, f. noblenes of birth, gentilitie, generositie.
Generosamente, gentlemanlike, like one of noble parentage, like one of a noble
mind. * Generoso, m. a gentleman, one of a noble house, of a noble spirit or
courage. * Genesta, or Genista, broom. Gengibre, m. ginger, a spice usually
known. * Geniales lechos, beds whereon they beget and conceive children. *
Genil, m. a river in Spain in Andaluzia. * Genitivos, m. the coddes, cullions
of a man. * Genio, m. a man's angel or spirit, or rather his natural
disposition. * Genital, the priuitie of man or woman, serving to engender. *
Genizaro, or jenizaro, a captain or such like officer among the Turks. Also
some attendants about the Emperor of the Turks person which are called by that
name, they are of his guard. * Genoua, a city so called in Italy. * Genoues,
people of Genoua. * Gentalla, f. common, base people. Gente, f. a nation,
people, a company of folk. * Gentiana yerva, the herb called gentian, or
bitterwoort, or felwoort. Gentil, proper of personage, handsome, fine, comely,
goodly to look upon. Also a heathen, Ethnic, or Pagan, one that knows not
God. Gentileza, f. propernes, finenes, beauty, comlines. * Gentilhombre, a man
of a good proportion and carriage, a comely man, well qualitied, a gentleman, a
handsome some proper man. * Gentilhombre de la boca, a taster to a prince. *
Gentilhombre de la camara, a gentleman of the chamber bearing such an office.
Gentilico, m. of or pertaining to a Gentile or Pagane. * Gentilidad, f.
gentilitie, or paganism. Gentilmente, properly, finely, comely, neately,
handsomely. Geografia, f. Geographie, the description of the earth with the
several countries and parts thereof. Geografo, a describer of the earth, a
Geographer. Geometra, m. a measurer of the earth, a land measurer, a worker by
proportions Geometrical, a surueyor, a taker of heightes or distances.
Geometria, f. measuring of ground, surueying of land, taking the height of any
thing by the shadow, discerning of distances of places or matters by view,
casting of plots cunningly for camps, artificial fortification or doing any
thing by due proportion. Gerarchia, f. a Hierarchy, a state of priesthood,
ecclesiastical state, a royal priesthood, a hierarchy of angels. *
Gerigonca, Girigonca, vide Jerigonca, f. pedlers french, gibbrish. Geripliega,
a drugge called Hiera Picra. * Germinar, to spring, to spout, to budde.
Gerondio, the gerund of a verb. Gesto, m. the countenance, the gesture, the
carriage, the outward behavior. Lobitos en tal gesto, ah my pretty munkie
face. * Geta, a great lip, such as the black Moors have. Also a kind of
mushrom. * Geton, m. a great lipped fellow, a negro. Also a great mushrome. *
Gazmines, Iazmines.
G I
* Giba, vide Corcoba, f. a bunch or crookednes on the back. * Gibado, vide
Corcobado, m. crook backed, one with a bunch on his back or shoulders. *
Giboso, m. idem. Also hilly, full of hills. Gifero, m. one that sells flesh
by retaile dressed. Also sometimes used for a butcher. Gigante, a giant, a
monstrous man that was supposed to have his beginning from the earth without
having any natural parents, such as we read of Gog and Magog, with Corinaeus,
etc. Gigantea yerva, a certain herb. * Gilbarbeyra, a prickley shrub called
Butchers broom or kneeholme. * Giles, the names of men of a certain family
or kindred so called, in English Giles. * Gime, Gimo, vide Gemir. * Gimiendo,
groaning, vide Gemir. * Ginea provincia, the country or province of Guinie. *
Ginebra, or Ginebro, a sweet shrub or tree called Juniper. * Ginebra, the
town of Geneua. Gineta, f. a captains leading staff. * cavalgar a la Gineta,
to ride with the legs trussed up in short stirrups, with a target and a ginnet
lance. * cavalgar a la brida, to ride with their legs down long, as men use
to ride in England. Also to run at tilt or tourney. Ginete, a light horseman
that rides a la gineta, called a ginnet. * Ginete de Salamanca, a certain
kind of earthen pitcher. Also a light horseman of Salamanca. * Ginete
esquadron, a squadron of light horsemen armed with targets and lances. *
Ginete lanca, a ginnet lance. * Gineton, a certain weapon, a great leading
staff for a captain, etc. * Girabandera, f. a turning about of the ensign or
flag. Girafa, f. a leopard. * Giralda, f. the image of a woman of gilt brass
in the top of the great tower of Seuill in Spain, which turns with the
wind. Also the proper name of women in Spain. * Girar, to wheel or compass
about. * Girifalte, a great hawk called a ierfaulcon. * Girigonca, or
Gerigonca, vide Jerigonca, f. pedlers french. Girofe, a gilloflower, the great
sweet gilloflower, a carnation or such like. Giron, a lap, a guard, the skirt
or hem of a garment. Gironados, m. of many sundry colors, party colored.
Also with many skirts. * Gitano, m. a counterfeit rogue called a gypson or
Egyptian.
G L
Gleva, vide Greva, greaues, armor for the legs or thighs. * Globa, f. a
giobe, a round boule, etc. * Globo, m. a globe, a sphere. Gloria, f. glory,
praise, fame, renown, credit. Gloriarse, to brag, to boast, to glory, to make
a great show, to vaunt himself. Glorificar, Praes. yo Glorifico, 1. Praet. yo
Glorifique, to glorify, to set forth his praises, to magnify, to exalt, to
extol, to advance. Glorificacion, f. glorifying, setting forth with great
praises, extolling, lifting up to the skies, magnifying. * Glorifique, vide
Glorificar. Gloriosamente, gloriously, stately, pompously, magnificently,
famously. Glorioso, m. glorious, high, stately, magnificent, pompous, famous,
notable, excellent, renowned. Glosa, or Glossa, a gloss, an exposition, a
brief discourse expressing a thing, a commentary, a paraphrase. * Glosado, or
Glossado, m. commented upon, interpreted, briefly expounded. Glosador, or
Glossador, m. an expounder of dark sayings, a glosser, a commenter, an
interpreter. Glosar, to expound, to interpret, to comment, to open hard
sayings. Gloton, m. a glutton, a greedy gut, a belly god. Glotonear, to eat
unreasonably, to play the glutton, to have no mind but on his belly.
Glotonia, f. gluttony, too much eating and drinking, belly cheer. * Glova,
vide Globa.
G O
Gobio, m. a little fish called a gudgeon. * Gocar, vide Gozar. * Godos, the
Goths a kind of people. * Goffo, vide Gofo. Gofo, m. rude in speech, of no
good utterance. Goja, f. a basket, a pannier or skep. Gola, f. a gorget of
iron, such as soldiers wear about their necks. * Goleta, f. the name of a
fort upon the coast of Barberie. Also another in the low countries. * Golfano,
an herb called Nenuphar or water-Lillie. Golfin, or Gorfin, m. a fish called a
Dolphin. Golfo, m. a gulf of the sea, where it holloweth in between two
capes. * Golgonco, one full of gesture, a busy body, a medlar in all matters,
a smatterer in all things, one that has an oar in every man's matter.
Golondrina, f. a swallow. * Golondrino, a young swallow. Golosina, f.
gluttony, gourmandise, delight in belly cheer. Golosear, to play the glutton,
to eat unreasonably, to have al his delight in filling the belly. Goloso, m.
gluttonous, an unreasonable eater, one whose mind is all on his belly. *
Golozinar, to play the glutton, to eat and devour much meat. * Gollorias, f.
brothes, pottages, suppings. Also a kind of little birds. Golpe, m. a blow, a
stripe, a knocking at a door. * Golpe de gente, a throng of people, a great
number of people. * Golpe de guarniciones, a great number of garrisons of
soldiers. Golpear, to strike, to smite, to beat with a hammer, etc. Golpeado,
m. smitten, stricken, beaten with a hammer. * Golpezilla, f. a small stroke such
as lovers in jest give one another. Goma, f. gum, a clue of thread. *
Gomarabiga, gum of Arabia, which is the best gum. Gomitadura, f. vomiting,
casting of the gorge, loathing of the stomach. Gomitar, vide Vomitar, to
vomit, to spew, to cast the gorge, to loath. Gomito, m. vomit, spewing, casting
the gorge. * Gomo de lana, a pack of wool. Gomoso, m. gummie, full of gum. *
Gondola, a boat in Venice, so called, of the making and bigness of an English
wherrie. Gondrola, f. a kind of small bark or boat like a wherrie. * Gonce,
Gonze, or Gozne, the hinges of a door or window. * Gondola, f. a kind of
small bark, a wherrie. * Gonze, vide Gonce. * Gora, vide Gorra. * Gordillo, m.
somewhat fat. Gordo, m. gross, fat, heavy, vnwilsome, dulwitted, foolish.
Gordura, f. fatnes, grossenes, vnwilsomnes. Gordolobo, a great furrie herb
called Lungworke, bullocks Lungwort, woolblade, or torch herb. * Gorear, to
take off the hat often. * Gorejar, vide Gorgear. Gorgear, to chatter or chirpe
as birds do, to sing as a bird. Gorgeador, m. a chatterer, a pratler, a
babbler, a crier out, one that uses to make a disorderly noise. * Gorgeamiento,
m. chattering, prating, babbling. Gorgojo, m. a little worm that spoileth corn
much in the grainers or lofts, called a Weeuill or bowd. Gorguera, f. a gorget,
a partlet or neckband. Gorguzes, the head of a dart, a club. * Gorjal de malla,
a gorget of maile. * Gorilla, f. a little cap. * Gormado, m. full of spewing,
given much to vomit. Gormar, vide Gomitar. Gorra, a cap, a bonnet, a velvet
cappe made high, somewhat of the fashion of the courtiers wearing of velvet
caps in England, or like a woman's velvet cap, with somewhat broader brimmes.
Gorrion, m. a bird called a sparrow. Gorrioncillo, m. a young sparrow. *
Gorvaran, m. grograine. Gorvion, a thing at the Apothecaries called Euphorbium.
* Gorullo, m. any little knop in cloth. * Gorvoran, m. grograin. * Gosne, vide
Gonce. * Gososo, vide Gozoso. Gosque, m. a whelpe, a little dog, a curre
dog. * Gosquejo, a little dog, a whelpe, a curre dog. Gota, f. the gout,
a disease incurable after that it has seized on a joint. Also a drop. Gota,
coral, the falling sickness. Goteado, m. dropped on, spotted with drops. Gotear,
to drop. Gotera, f. a gutter wherein drops fall and so run away. Gotilla, f. a
little drop. Gotoso, m. goutie, troubled with the gout. Governacion, f.
government, rule, ordering, direction. * Governado, m. governed, guided,
directed, ordered. Governador, m. a governor, a ruler, a director, an orderer,
a tutor. * Governadora, f. a gouernesse, a tutresse. Governalle, or Timon, the
rudder, the helm of a ship or bark whereby it is guided in the course.
Governar, yo Govierno, to govern, to guide, to order, to direct, to rule. *
Govierne, Govierno, vide Governar. Govierno, m. government, order, moderation,
rule, direction. * Gozado, m. enjoyed, obtained. Gozar, to rejoice, to enjoy,
to obtain. * Gozne, vide Gonce, the hinge of a door. Gozo, m. joy, mirth,
gladness, merriment. Gozoso, or Gosozo, merry, glad, joyful. Gozque, vide
Gosque, m. a whelpe, a little dog, a curre. * Gozquejo, or Gosquejo, idem.
G R
* Gra, id est Gracia, f. grace, favor, comlines, beauty, pleasantness,
thanks. Gracia, grace or thanksgiving, grace or comeliness. Also merry and
witty jests. * Gracias dezir, to speak pleasantly, or wittily. * Gracias dar,
to yield thanks, to be thankful. Graciosamente, graciously, favorably,
comely, pleasantly, thankefullie, wittily. Gracioso, m. gracious, pleasant,
comely, thankful, well thought of, in favor, acceptable. * Grada, a step, a
degree, a staire, a round in a ladder. * Las Gradas en Sevilla, the greeses or
steps, as in entering the exchange at Seuill whereon the merchants entered do
walk in a fair place. * Gradas de yglesia, the greeses or steps of a church.
Grado, m. a degree, a dignity, an office, a state, a step. Also threescore
miles on earth, answering to a degree in heaven. Also a mean, an entry, a way
to any thing. Graduar, to prefer to a degree, to promote, to graduate, or
take degree in schools. Graduado, m. one that has taken degree, one come to
preferment, a graduate in the university. Gragea, f. carawaies that are eaten
in sauce. Graja, or Grajo, a chough, a jack daw. Some say a iay. * Grajea, f.
carawaies, Grajo, vide Graja. Grama, f. grass, an herb called dogstooth, or
rather the herb verueine. Gramatica, f. grammar, the art of speaking or
writing right of any tongue. Gramatico, m. a grammarian, one that can speak and
write in a tongue artificially and according to rule. * Gramonilla, f. a kind
of herb. Gramoso, m. grassie, a place where grass does grow. Also where much
dogstooth the herb grows. * Gran, vide Grande, great, big, large. Grana, f.
grain to die cloth with in grain, cutcheneale, seed, grain. Grana de
parayso, grains of paradise, a thing called Cardamomum. * Grana en Grano,
cutcheneale, scarlet grain. Granada, f. a pomegranate, so called because it is
full of grains. Also a city in Spain called Granada. * gente Granada, f. a
people strong, goodly and lusty, people of good stature proper and comely. *
Granadero, m. a seller of pomegranates. * Granadino, a man of Granada. Also a
little or young pomegranate. Granado, a pomegranate tree. * Granado trigo,
great lusty wheat, wheat of a lusty ear and goodly corn full of flower.
Granar, to kerne as corn does, to grain. * Granate, m. a precious stone. *
Gran capitan, the great captain, which name and title was given to Goncalo
Fernandes de Cordua duke of Sessa for his great valor and worth. * Grancas de
trigo, the barbes of wheat, the husks wherein the corn does lie, the chafe,
sometimes bran or cribble of meal that is boulted out. Grancas echar, to
winnow the chafe from the corn, to sift out the husks from the corn.
Grancer, vide Granizar, to hail, as when the hail falls. * Granchoso, vide
Grancoso. Grancones, ortes or refuse of things, barbes of the ears of corn,
husks, chafe, bran. * Grancones de arbol, the withered buds and leaves that
fall from trees. Grancoso, m. full of barbes, orts, chafe or bran. * Grandazo,
m. a thing very great or big. Grande, great, big, large, spacious.
Grandemente, greatly, hugely, extremely, largely. Grandeza, f. greatness,
largeness, hugeness, long continuance. * Grandezillo, m. somewhat big,
pretty and great. Granera, f. a granier, a place to keep corn in. * Granero,
vide Granera. * Granfausto, m. great stately pride, great pomp. * Grangeador,
m. one that lays up in the barn, a laier up in store, a good husband, a
thriftie man, a sauer of things. Grangear, to play the good husband, to get, to
heap up in store, to hoord up, to spare, to gather together. Grangeria, f.
gathering together, heaping up store, hoording, sparing, providing for a rainie
day, good husbandry. * Grangero, or Granjero, m. a good husband, a thriftie
man, a gathering fellow. Granja, f. a farm, a grange. * Granicar, vide
Granizar. * Granico, vide Granizo. * Granjeador, or Grangeador, a farmer, a
good husband. * Granjear, vide Grangear. * Granjeria, f. vide Grangeria. *
Granjero, or Grangero, a good husband, a thriftie fellow. Granillo, m. a little
grain, the kernel or stone in fruit, the weight of a grain, the stone in a
grape. Granito, or Granido, m. a stone in figs. Granizar, or Granicar, to
hail. * Granizo, m. hail that falls. Grano, m. grain, a corn, a stone in
a grape or such other fruit. * Grano de helecho, the seed of fern. * Granuja,
the husk of a grape. * Granzas, f. cribble or bran. Also chafe. * Granzer,
vide Grancer. * Granzones, vide Grancones. Grassa, vide Grassura, f. fatnes,
grease, varnish to set out things in show. Grassiento, m. fat, greasy, well
fed. * Grasnadores, gaggling geese. * Grasnar, to gaggle as geese do, to
chirp, chatter, or crake as birds or crows, to quackle as duckes. * Grasnido,
m. the gaggling of geese, or of such like fowls, the chirping or chattering of
birds, the quackling of duckes. * Grassura, or Grassa, fatnes, grease,
varnish. * Grassura en la barriga, the fat gut or tripe, the arsegut.
Gratificacion, f. doing a good turn, showing of thankefulnes. * Gratificado,
m. gratified, having had a good turn, pleasured, rewarded for a good turn.
Gratificar, to gratify, to do a good turn, to show a thankful mind, to
pleasure another. * Gratis, for God a mercy, gratis. * Gratitud, f.
thankefulnes, gratitude. * Grato, grateful, acceptable, thankful. *
Gratuitamente, of good will, freely, without benefit, without pain or travel.
* Gratuito, without recompense or hope of reward, vnhired, freely bestowed. *
Gratulatoria carta, a letter of congratulation or thanksgiving. * Gravado, m.
engraued, as in stone, metal, bone, or such like. * Gravadura, f. engrauing
in metal, etc. * Gravar, to engraue in wood, metal, stone, bone, etc.
Grave, grave or sober, grievous, heavy, troublesome, sorrowful. Also stately,
lofty, proud. Gravedad, f. authority, gravity or sobriety, grief, trouble,
sorrow, vexation. Also statelines, loftines, pride. Gravemente, gravely or
soberly, heavily, grievously. * Graveza, f. weight, grieuousnes. * Grayas,
Grecians. Graznar, to chirp, chatter, or sing as birds, to crake as crows, to
gaggle as geese do, to quackle as duckes do. Graznido, m. chirping, chattering
or singing of birds, craking of crows, gagling of geese, quackling of duckes.
* Greba, or Grevas, greues or armor for the legs or thighs. Greda, clay,
fullers earth which they use in thicking of cloth. Gredoso, m. chalkie,
clammish, clayie. Greguescos, m. great wide breeches, called galligaskoines.
Gremio, m. a lap, the place on the inside between the two thighs. Grevas,
armor for the legs. * Gray, f. a flock or people committed to to ones charge.
Greyes, f. idem. Gria, f. a nit, the spawne of a louse. * Griego, m. a Grecian.
Grieta, f. a disease on a horse called the scratches, the chaps or cranies on
the hands arising with extreme cold going without gloves. Grifo, m. a griphon.
Grillar, to chirpe or sing like a Cricket. * Grillo, m. a Cricket. Also a kind
of grasshopper. Grillos, m. fetters or gieues. Also a kind of grasshoppers. *
Grillones, m. great fetters, great grasshoppers or crickets. Grima, f. a fright,
the standing up of the hair on the head. * Grimal del ojo, f. the corner of
the eye. * Grimoso, m. one much afrighted, one whose hair uses to stand
upright. * Gripho, vide Grifo. Grisol, vide Crisol. Grita, f. crying for help,
lamentation, schriking. * Gritador, m. one that uses to schrike or cry out, a
maker of noise. * Gritamiento, m. schriking or crying out. Gritar, to schrike
or cry out, to make an outcrie. * Grito, m. a schriking, a noise, a crying
out. * Grosca, f. a kind of venomous serpent. Grossamente, grossly, rudely,
foggily, bungarly. Grossedad, f. grossenes, fatnes, foggines, vnwilsomnes.
Grosseria, f. grossenes of conceit, dullness of wit, doltishnes,
blockheadednes. Grossero, m. a grossehead, a blockhead, a dull witted fellow. *
Grossezuelo, somewhat thick, somewhat dull witted, none of the wisest.
Grossura, or Grosura, f. fatnes, grossenes, foggines. Grua, f. a crane to wind
up great burdens with. Also used for the crane bird. * Grue, vide Grulla, f.
a crane bird. * Gruella, vide Grulla. * Gruessero, a seller in gross.
Gruesso, gross, fat, thick, foggie, dull-witted, lined within. Grulla, f. a
crane bird. Grumete, m. a ship-boy, a drudge in a ship, a galley slave. Grumo,
m. a cabbage. Also a little cluster of grapes. Grunido, m. grunting like a
hog. Grun^idor, m. one that grunteth like a hog. Grun^ir, to grunt as a
hog. * Grupa de cavallo, f. the crupper that goes under a horses tail.
Grupada, f. a blow, a stroke of the waves of the sea, or such like, or a great
troop or company. Grupera, f. the crupper that goes under the horse tail.
Gruta, f. a den, a cave, a hollow place in the ground. * Gruz, vide Grulla, a
crane.
G V
* Guacumas, f. a fruit growing in the Indies. Guadafiones, m. manicles to tie
and wring the hands with, gauntlets, splints mittens, long gloves. Guadalqumir,
a river in Spain so called running by Seuill. * Guadameci, or Guadamecil, vide
Guadamecies. Guadamecies, or Guadameciles, hangings made of gilt leather for
their houses in Spain. * Guadalajara, f. a city in Spain in the kingdom of
Toledo. Guadan^a, f. a sieth to mow with. Guadan^ador, m. a mower that moweth
haie or corn. * Guadapera, f. a choke pear, a wild pear. Guadapero, m. a
wild pear tree, a choke pear tree. * Guadraman^a, vide Guadriman^a, f.
deceit, cosenage. Guadriman^a, f. deceit, a piece of cosenage. Guai, vide
Guay, alas, woe. * Guaiabos, a kind of fruit in the Indies. * Guaiador, vide
Guayador. Guaiar, vide Guayar. * Gualda, an herb to die yellow with. *
Gualdado, colored yellowe, more white than yellow. Gualdo, yellow. *
Gualdrapa, a footecloth for a noble man to ride on. * Guanabanos, a fruit in
the Indies. * Guantada, a blow with the palm of the hand. * Guantado, gloued,
one that wears gloves. Guante, m. a glove. * Guante de hierro, a gantlet. *
Salvo el guante, always excepting. Also in a woman always excepting their
honor and honesty. * Guantero, m. a glouer, one that makes or sells gloves.
Guantes, m. gloves. * Guantezillo, m. a little glove, a childs glove. Guarda,
f. a guard, or warding, a watch, custody, keeping. * Guarda de Balvarte, the
watch and ward at the bulwark. Guardado, m. warded, watched, kept, looked to.
Also a secret matter. Guardador, m. a sauer, a keeper, a warder by day, a
watchman by night. Guardar, to guard, to watch, to save, to look unto, to
keep, to reserve, to lay up. Also to defend, protect, to shield, to beware, to
look unto, to see unto. Guardaropa, a garde-robe, a place where clothes are
kept. Also a keeper of the garde-robe. Guardia, f. a guard, keeping safe,
looking to, a protection, a defense. * Guardiman^a, vide Guadriman^a. Guardian,
m. a warder, a guardian that has the tuition of a young lad and of his
revenues, a keeper or looker to things, one that takes charge. * Guardian de
navio, a ship keeper, one that looks to a ship when it is laid up. *
Guardin^a, the furre of a little beast. * Guarecer, or Guarescer, to heal, to
make sound. * Guarecido, m. healed. * Guarentigia, an obligation which is of
force to take execution according to the tenor of the bond without any process
in law, a statute. Guarida, f. a sconce, a place of refuge, a retiring place,
a place of rescue. Guarismo, m. arithmetike, algorisme, the art of numbering.
Guarnecer, or Guarnescer, to furnish, to fortify, to freight a ship, to
garnish. Guarnecido, or Guarnescido, furnished, trimmed up, fortified,
fraighted, garnished. Guarnescimiento, m. furniture, fortification, furnishing.
Guarnicion, f. a garnison, embrodery, garding of a garment, stitching of a
garment, hilts of a sword. Guarnicion de gente, a garrison of soldiers.
Guarnicionero, m. an armorer, a maker or seller of arms, an vpholster, an
embroderer. * Guarte, take thou heed, look well to thy self. * Guastar, vide
Gastar. Guay, alas for woe, out alas. * Guayador, m, one that waileth and
lamenteth, or a dog that howleth, or barketh. Guayar, to wayle, to lament, to
howl, to woe his wretched state. Guayas, f. lamentation, wailing, howling,
crying out upon their missehap. Guedeja, f. a tuffe or lock of hair. *
Guedeja enherrada, a lock of hair that is crisped or curled. Guedejoso, vide
Guedejudo. Guedejudo, or Guedejoso, one that uses to wear long tufts or
locks of hair. * Guedela, f. vide Guedesia. * Guelpe, a gulpe, as much as one
drinks at once without fetching his breath, vide Golpe. * Guerdar, vide
Guardar. * Guerdoso, vide Guardoso, sparing, niggardly, pinching. Guero, as
Huevo guero, an addle egg. Guerra, f. war, battle, martial affairs,
warfarre. Guerreador, m. a warrior, a souldior, a man at arms, a maker of
war and troubles. Guerrear, to make war, to play the soldier, to follow
the wars, to lead a soldiers life. * Guertera, a garter, as orden de la
Guertera, the order of the garter. * Gueso, vide Huesso. * Gueux, allies,
confederates, such as they be in league with. Guia, m. a guide, a leader, a
conductor. Also a guiding, leading, conducting, ordering. * Guiabara, f. an
herb called Hearts horn Plantain. * Guiabella, an herb called Crowe-foote.
Guiado, m. lead, guided, conducted. Guiador, m. a leader, a guide, a commander,
a conductor. Guiar, to guide, to lead, to command, to conduct. Guija, vide
Aguija, f. a needle. Also a peeble stone. Guijas, peeble stones, the beach or
shingle by the sea side. Guijarra, f. a stone, a peeble stone. * Guijarro,
idem. Guijuelo, a small peeble stone, a grauel stone. * Guilla, revenues of a
wards land. * Guinalda, f. vide Guirnalda. Guinda, f. a sower hard cherrie. *
Guindaleza, f. a great coard in a ship. * Guindamayna, id est, Guinda, y
amayna, that is hoise up sail and strike sail. * Guindar, to hoise up any
thing. Guindas, f. sower bad cherries. * Guindaleras, f. cherrie trees bearing
such sower cherries. * Guindaleta, a great coard a ship board, to hoise up
sail. * Guindaste, m. a coard in a ship. Guindo, a sower cherrie. Guin^ar, to
twinkle the eye, to wink with the eye, to beckon. * Guion, vide Guyon.
Guirnalda, f. a garland, a coronet of flowers. Guisa, a guise, a fashion, a
manner. Guisado, m. sod, baked, roasted, or otherwise dressed. Guisar, to dress
meat like a cook, to sees, to boil, to bake, to roste, etc. Guitarra, f. a
rebecke, a gitterne, a small instrument to play on. * Guyon, or Guion, m. a
cornet of horsemen. Gula, f. gluttony, the weazand or gullet, whereby the
meat passes. * Gulilla, f. a little throat, the throat boll. * Gulleria, f.
delicates, iuncates, dainty cheer. * Gullonias, idem. * Gumana, f. vide
Gumena. Gumena, f. the cable of a ship. * Gumera, vide Gumena, f. * Gurbias, a
carpenters chisell. Gurupera, f. a crowper of a horse. Gusanear, to be full of
worms, to have or breed worms. Gusanienta cosa, a thing full of worms.
Gusanillo, m. a little small worm. Gusano, m. a worm. * Guses, a kind of
poor pilgrim. * Gusque, m. a whelpe, a little dog, a cur dog. * Gusquejo, a
whelp, a little dog, a curre dog. * Gustado, m. tasted, assaied, tried, liked.
* Gustadara, f. tasting, assaying, proouing, liking. Gustar, to taste, to
assay, to prove, to like of. Gusto, m. taste, proof, assay, good liking. *
Gustoso, tasting well of, a sauorie taste. * Guvias, vide Gurbias. * Guyado, m.
guided, ruled, ordered, directed. Guyador, m. a leader, a guide, a directer, an
orderer. Guyar, to guide, to rule, to order, to direct. * Guyavas, vide
Guayavas, a kind of fruit in the kingdom of China. * Guyon, m. the guidon or
cornet of a company of horse. * Guzque, a little dog or whelpe, a curre dog.
H
HA, a voice of calling or speaking to one. Also a voice of affirming yea. *
Ha, ha, ha, of laughing. * Haba, a bean. * Habalraz, a kind of seed that
kills lice. * Habil, or A'bil, able, nimble, active. * Habilitar, or
Abilitar, to enable, to make fit, nimble, active, etc. * Habilidad, or
Abilidad, f. ableness, actiuitie, deftnes. * Habitacion, or Abitacion, f. a
dwelling, an habitation. * Habitacolo, vide Abitacolo, an abode, dwelling or
abiding place. * Habitador, or Abitador, m. a dweller, an inhabiter, one that
abides in a place. * Habitante, vide Abitante, dwelling, lodging, inhabiting.
* Habitar, or Havitar, to inhabit, to dwell. * Habito, or A'bito, m. a habit,
fashion, custom. Habla, f. speech, talk, prattling. Hablador, m. a talker, one
that has tongue at will, a prattling fellow, a busy body. Hablar, to speak,
to talk, to reason. * Hablar par cifras, to speak mistically, to talk
darkly. Hablar de espacio, to speak leisurelie. Hablillas, f. fables, trifling
tales. Habubilla, f. a bird called a Iay, some say a howpe, other a lapwing.
Ovid says a howpebird whereinto Tereus was transformed. Haca, or Hacanea, f. a
nag, a gelding, a hackney. Haoa, f. a plot of ground, a field, a closet. *
Hacan^oso, m. vide Hazan^oso, a doughtie man, he that does some worthy deed.
* Hacar, vide Hacer. * Hacar Hileras, to keep ranks or files as soldiers do
at their stands especially. Hace, m. a faggot, a bunch, a bundle, a sheafe of
corn. Hace hazer, to tie in a bundle, to make a faggot. Hacecillo, or
Hacezillo, m. a bauen, a small bundle. * Hacen^a, Hazen^a, or Acen^a, f. a
water mill. * Hacer, vide Hazer, to make, to do. Hacha, f. a twybill that
carpenters do make morteise holes with, an axe, a hatchet, a torch. * Hacha de
armas, a halbard, a battle axe. * Hacha de cera, a torch, a link to light the
way. * Hachero, m. one that cutteth with an axe or hatchet. Also the place
where a torch or link is set to give light. * Hacho de len^a, a bundle or
bunch of small sticks to set firing to any thing on a sudden. Hachuela, f. a
little hatchet. * Hacia, vide Hazia, toward. * Hacia, vide Hazia, I or he did
make or do. * Hacina, f. a woodstacke, a wood pile, a heap or stacke of
corn. * Hacino, a niggard. Hadado, fatal, that which is set down by the
destinies. Hadador, m. a teller of fortunes, a reader of destinies. Hadar, to
tell destinies, to tell what peoples fortunes shall be. * Hadas, f. the
destinies. Hado, m. destiny, that which is a man's fortune (as they say.) *
Haga, Hago, vide Hazer. * Haijar, vide Ahijar, to adopt or take for his
natural child. * Hay, or ay, alas for woe. * Hafiz, a keeper of silk. *
Haia, vide Haya, f. a beech tree. Haial, vide Hayal, a grove of beeches. *
Halado, m. pulled or plucked at. * Halador, m. a puller or plucker at. * Ha la
he, vide A la fe, in good earnest, in faith, in good sooth. * Halagado, m.
flattered, smoothed, mollified, appeased, mitigated, cockered, cherished.
Halagador, m. a smoothbootes, a flatterer, a fair spoken man, a cunning
tongued fellow. Halagadora cosa, a smooth matter, a pleasing matter. * Halagar,
Praes. yo Halago, 1. Praet. yo Halague, to cherish, to cocker, to make much of,
to flatter, to assuage, to mollify, to mitigate, to appease. Halago, m. fair
speech, cockering, making much of, flattery. * Halague, vide Halagar.
Halaguen^o, m. fawning, flattering, cockering. Halaguen^amente, cockeringly,
smoothly, flatteringly. * Halaguero, vide Halagador, a flatterer, a
smoothbootes. * Halar, to pluck at, to pull on, to draw to. Halcon, or Alcon,
m. a hawk. * Halconera, a place to keep hawks in, a meewe. Halconero, m. a
faulconer, one that keeps a hawk or hawks. * Halconete, a piece of
artillery called a faulkonet. Halda, f. the skirts of clothes, or the lower
part or skirt of a mountain. Haldas, f. skirts of clothes, the lowest parts in
clothes, welts, or gardes upon clothes. Also the lowest parts or skirts of
mountains or hills. * Haldeando, drawing the skirts of their clothes on the
ground, as some women use to do. * Haldeano, vide Aldeano, a countreyman, one
that dwells in a village. * Haldear, to draw a long the skirts of their
clothes, to go with a gown or long garment dragging on the ground. Haldudo,
m. he that wears clothes with long skirts. Hallado, m. found. Hallar, to
find. Hallazgo, m. reward for finding any thing, the finding of some thing.
Hallulla, f. pellets to cram pullen with. * Haloque, m. wine called Hollocke. *
Halvanega, f. a caul of net-worke for women. * Halvarda, vide Alvarda, f. a
packesaddle. Hamacas, m. hanging beds: brasill beds made to hang up against a
tree or wall, like a cabin bed in a ship. Hamago, m. bees meat. Hamapola, or
Pappoulla, f. wild poppie, or red cornerose. * Hambar, vide A'mbar, amber. *
Hamberes, the town of Anwarpe. Hambre, f. hungar, famine. Hambrear, to be
hungry, to long for to eat. Hambriento, m. hungry, longing to eat. *
Handador, vide Andador, m. one that goes or walks much, a trotter up and
down. * Handar, vide Andar, to go. * Handen, vide Anden, m. a walk, a place
to walk in. Handrajo, m. a ragge, a patch. * Handrajoso, m. full of rags,
ragged. Hanega, f. a measure containing a bushel and a half. * Hanegada, the
quantity of a bushel. * Hanelar, or Anelar, to gape, or gasp for breath. *
Hangelote, vide Angelote, a coin of gold in England called an angel. *
Hanpa, f. swaggering or quarrelling for queanes or whoores. * Hao, a voice of
calling, as hoa. Haragan, m. a lazy fellow, a sluggard, a retchles companion.
Haragania, f. sloth, lazines, carelesnes. * Harambel, vide Arambel. * Harana,
f. crafty deceit in buying and selling. * Haranero, m. a subtle deceiuer in
buying or selling. * Harcabuziero, vide Arcabuzero, m. a shooter in a
harquebuse. * Harcabuz, vide Arcabuz, m. a harquebusse. Harda, f. a squirrell.
Hardalear, or Haredalear, to be thin, to wax thin. * Hardid, or Ardid, m. a
wily policy, a stratag^me. * Hardilla, f. a little squirrell. * Hardor, m.
heat, burning, feruencie, earnest desire, great courage, exceeding love. *
Harduo, vide A'rduo, hard to compass, lofty. * Hare, I will make or do it,
vide Hazer. * Hare, vide Harre. * Harenca, or Harinca, f. vide Harenque; a
herring. * Harenga, f. an oration, a long speech. * Harenque, f. a herring. *
Hargamasa, vide Argamasa, a mixture of lime and sand. Harija, f. mill-dust, or
dust of the meal. Harina, f. meal. Harinal, a bin to keep meal in, a meal
trough. Harinillas, f. a kind of play at dice. * Harma, vide A'rma. Harma,
wild rue. * Harmada, vide Armada, a great fleet of ships. * Harmar, vide
Armar, to arm. * Harmas, vide A'rmas, arms. * Harmonia, vide Armonia,
music, melody, harmony. Harnero, m. a sieue to sift with. * Haron, an herb
called cuckoepit. Also an idle lazy fellow, a retchles companion. Harona
bestia, f. a restie jade, a jade that will tire quickly, a dull lazy beast.
Haronear, to be restie, to be lazy or slothful. Haronia, f. restines, dulnes,
lazines. Harpa, f. an instrument of music called a harp. Harpada cara, the
face crossed, the face wounded, the face slashed over with cuts. * Harpador, m.
one that does any thing in great haste or speed. Also a harper. * Harpadura,
f. a skotching or notching of any thing. Harpar, to cross the face, to wound
the face. Also to do any thing in great haste or with speed. Harpias, f. three
monstrous ravening birds, having faces like maidens. They were said to be be
gotten of Mars and Terra. * Harpon, m. a trout-speare with three or four
teeth. * Harponado, m. stricken or wounded with a trout-speare. * Harponar, to
strike or hit with a trout-speare. To kill fish with a trout-speare. * Harra,
vide Harre. Harre, a voice of carters to their horses, saying, aree, gee,
haight, etc. to cause them to go as they would have them. Harrear, to drive
beasts as carters do. * Harria, f. a drove or company of mules or asses
together. Harriero, m. a driuer of beasts, a carter, etc. * Harrio, m. the
proper name of Arrius, whereof the sect of the Arrians came. * Hartado, m.
filled, satisfied. Hartar, to fill, to satisfy. * Hartasgo, Hartazgo,
Hartazga, or Hartura, fulness of meat or drink, sacietie. * Hartiero, m. vide
Harriero, a horsekeeper. Harto, m. filled, satisfied, enough, full. Harto mas,
much more. Harto menos, much less. Hartura, f. fullness, sacietie,
sufficiency, enough, as much as is requisite. Haruero, vide Harnero. *
Hasador, m. vide Assador, a spit, a turnespit. * Haspa, vide A'spa. Hasta,
even, until, up to. Hasta agora, until now. Hasta alla, thitherto. Hasta
aqui, hitherto. Hasta que, until that. * Hasta quanto, until, how much. *
Hasta tanto, even to so much. * Hasta quando, until when. Hasta, vide A'sta. *
Hastado, m. a pikeman, a speareman. * Hastigado, vide Hostigado, pricked
forward. * Hastigar, vide Hostigar, Praes. yo Hastigo, 1. Praet. yo Hastigue,
to prick forward. Hastigue, vide Hastigar. * Hastil, m. vide Astil, the staff
of a spear, the stalk or handle of any thing. * Hastilla, f. a chip, a
splinter, a single quarter of timber. Hastio, loathing, abhorring, mislike,
disdain. Hastioso, m. one that has a queasie stomach, one that quickly will
loath or vomit at a thing. Hataca, f. a ladle, a great spoone, a pot-sticke. *
Hataca de Hierro, an iron ladle. * Hatacadera, or Atacadero, a pole to ram
powder into a piece of ordinance. * Hatajar, vide Atajar. * Hatalaya, vide
Atalaya, a beacon to watch and ward at. * Hatalayar, vide Atalayar. *
Hatambor, vide Atambor, a drum, a taber. * Hataraya, f. a small fishing net or
a casting net. * Hatasajar, to give or make cuts or slices. Hato, m. a herd, a
stock of cattle, a drove of any manner of cattle. * Hau, an aduerbe of
calling. Hava, f. beans, a bean. * Hava morisca, f. a kind of small beans.
* Havado animal, m. a living thing or beast having the lampas in the mouth.
Hava de bestias en la boca, the lampas, a disease in the mouth of beasts, when
such long barbles grow in their mouths that they cannot well feed. *
Havalorio, vide Avalorio. Also garnishing with bugles. Havar, a field of
beans, a bean close, a place to lay beans in. * Havas, beans. Also the
quincie in a beast, or lampas, vide Hava de bestia. Havas de perro, dog beans.
* da Dios Havas a quien no tiene quixadas, God gives beans to them that have
no jaws to eat them: God sends fools fortune. Havarraz, vide Avarraz, an
herb called stauesacre or lowsebane. * Havatido, m. beaten down, dejected. *
Haver, vide Aver, to have. * Haveres, vide Averes, m. goods, substance. *
Havestruz, vide Avestruz, m. * Havitar, vide Abitar. * Havito, vide Habito, the
habit, fashion or custom. * Haviesso, vide Aviesso. * Havilidad, vide
Abilidad. * Havolorios, m. garnishing with bugles. * Haxa, vide Faxa. * Hay, or
Ay, woe, out alas. Haya, f. a beech tree. Hayal, a grove of beeches. Haz, f.
the face, the outward show of a thing, or superficies, the outside of any
thing, the forefront, a camp or host of men in battle. * Haz de la tierra,
the face of the earth. * Haz de qualquier cosa, the outside of any thing. *
Haz, do thou, make thou, the Imperative of the verb Hazer. * Hazabache, vide
Azabache or Azavache, m. * Hazabra, f. a small ship or bark. * Hazagaya, f. a
iauelin, a moors weapon. * Hazaar, vide Azaar, the flowers of orenges.
Hazaleja, f. a cloak, a veil, a frenchhoode, a towell. Hazan^a, f. an
exploit, a deed, a famous act, a great matter done, a leude fact, a wicked
deed. Hazan^oso, m. a worthy man, he that does valiant or doubtie deeds, or
great exploits. * Hazar, vide Azar. * Hazazillo, m. a little bundle of sticks,
or wood, a little faggot or bauen. * Hazcona, f. a kind of weapon like a
halberd, a glaiue. Haze, vide Hace, a faggot, a bundle. * Hazebuche, vide
Azebuche. * Hazedia, sharpenes, sowrenes, tartnes. Also a sole fish. Also a
kind of root. * Hazedo, m. sharp, sower, eager. Hazedor, m. a factor, a
dooer, or dealer in matters. * Hazedora cosa, a thing easy to be done. *
Hazedura, f. sharpenes, tartnes, eagernes, sowernes. * Hazendado, m. rich in
substance, well furnished with goods. Hazen^a, vide Hacen^a, a watermill.
Hazer, Praes. Hago, hazes, Haze, 1. Praet. Hize, Hiziste, Hizo, Fut. Hare, ras,
ra, Sub. Praes. Haga, Imperfect. Hiziera, Haria, or Hiziesse, Fut. Hiziere, to
do, to deal, to bring to pass, to follow on a matter, to commit, to cause,
to bring or bear. * Hazer pesar, to make sorry. * Hazer pedacos, to tear in
pieces. * Hazer plazer, to make merry or joyful. * Hazer camara, to go to
stool. * Hazer aguada, to take in fresh water a shipboord. Hazer agua, to take
in fresh water a shipboord. Also to make water. * Hazer niebla, to be mistie,
to be a fogge. Hazer claro, to be clear or fair weather. * Hazer nieve, to
snow. * Hazer cuenta, to reckon, to cast accounts. Hazer dentera, to set the
teeth on edge. * Hazer caso, to make account or reckoning of. Hazer frio, to be
cold, to wax cold. * Hazer campo, to pitch the field with his enemy, or
fight with his enemy. * Hazer de barro, to work with clay, or to emplaister.
* Hazer cada un su officio, every man to fall unto his task, to do every man
what he should. Hazer A'rmas, to fight, or to combat. * Hazer vertud como
enzina, a palos, to become good, as an oak with cudgelling, for by throwing of
cudgels to beat down the acornes, the oak bears the better the next year.
* Hazerlo a la muger, to have to do with a woman. Hazer ventaja, to surpass,
to exceed, to go beyond. * Hazer papo, to eat much, to play the glutton. *
Hazer piernas, to stop on a sudden as a horse when he runs. Also to stand
strongly on his legs. Hazer a fuera, vide Hazer a lo largo. * Hazer se a lo
largo, to get aloof one from another, as two men offering to draw swords one
against another, or two ships meeting to fight. * Hazer A'lto, to make a stand
as soldiers in war. * Los esquadrones Hizieron A'lto, the squadrons made a
stand. * Hazerse de nuevas, to make a thing seem strange unto them which they
know of, to make himself strange in that he is aware of. * Hazer tiro, to
make a shot. Also to girde or taunt at one. Hazer turron, to make a kind of
meat of honey, almondes, the kernels of pine apples, grated biscuit, ginger, and
other spices. * Hazes, as con dos Hazes, with two faces. * Hazezillo, m. a
little bundle of sticks, a little faggot, or bauen. Hazia, toward,
thitherward. * Hazia, I or he did make or do, vide Hazer. * Hazia abaxo,
downwards. Hazia atras, backwards. * De hazia la mano derecha, on the right
hand as ye go hence. * Hazia do quiera, even where or whither you will. *
Haziago, vide Aziago, m. a dismal or dark day. Hazienda, f. wealth, riches,
goods, substance. * Haziendo, in working, in doing. * Haziente, one that does,
a dooer. Hazimiento, m. working, a doing, business. Hazino, or mesquino, a
poor wretch, a simple soul. * Hazituna, vide Azeytuna, f. an olive berrie. *
Hazumbar, vide Azumbar.
H E
* He, as a la He, in good faith, surely, of a certainty. * No lo he, I care
not for it. * Hea-pues, go to then. He aqui, behold, see here. * Hebano, or
Hebeno, vide ebano, the black wood called Ebanie. Hebra, f. a string of any
root, the barbes of any herb or flower being small like strings or threeds. *
Hebreo, m. a Jew. Hebrero, m. the month called February. * Hebro, rio, a
river called Heber. * Hecar, vide Hezar. * Heces, f. dregs, the lees of wine,
the grounds of beer, etc. * Hechado, vide Echado, m. * Hechar, vide Echar. *
Hechizado, m. bewitched, enchaunted, forespoken. Hechizar, to bewitch, to
enchant, to forespeake, to curse. * Hechizera, f. a she witch, an
enchantresse, a sorceresse. Hechizeria, f. witchcraft, sorcerie, enchantment.
Hechizero, m. a man witch, a sorcerer, an enchanter, a coniurer. Hechizo, vide
Hecho, any thing that is to be done, any thing to be plotted, or effected. Also
witchcraft or sorcerie. * Ruydo hechizo, a false alarm, a rumor made of one
thing when another is purposed. * Hechizos, witcheries, witchcrafte. Hecho, m.
a deed, a fact, any thing that is done or effected. * Hechos, or Hazan^as,
deeds, facts, exploits, matters brought to pass. Hechura, f. the making, the
fashion, the form. * Heco, vide E'cho, or E'co, the voice echo. * Hecuba, f.
the name of a queen of Troy, wife to king Priamus. * Hedad, vide Edad. f.
Heder, yo Hiedo, to stink, to have an ill savor. * Hedificar, vide Edificar,
to build. * Hedificio, vide Edificio, m. building. * Hediondez, vide Hedor,
stench, loathsome savor. Hediondo, m. stinking, ill sauouring. Hedor, m.
stink, stench, loathsome savor. * Hedos, a moist and rainie constellation
beginning in October. * Hegloga, vide E'gloga, f. a pastoral speech or
heardmans song. * Hela, behold there. * Helada, vide Elada, f. frost, freezing.
* Helear, to be somewhat bitter. * Hele, behold him, see him. Helecho, m.
fearne, female fearne. * Helecho de roble, petty oak fearne, polypodie.
Helgado, m. the parting of the teeth, the space between the teeth. Helgadura
de dientes, idem. * Helicon, m. a mountain at Boetia in Greece dedicated to
Apollo and to the Muses. * Helitropia, vide Elitropia, the herb Turnesole or
Sunflower, which turns with the sun both at rising and going down. *
Helitropio, vide Elitropio, a precious stone, which receuieth the sun like a
burning glass. * Helo, behold him, behold it. * Helo aqui, see here he is. *
Helos aqui, see, they be here. * Hemanar, to spring, to issue, to run as
water does, to descend, to proceed, to be conveyed. * Hemancipar, vide
Emancipar, to manumit or make free him that was bound. * Hembidia, vide
Embidia, envy, malice. Hembra, f. a woman, the female of any living sensible
thing. * Hembra de corchete, a maile, the eye of a claspe wherein the hook
takes hold. * Hembrar, to make or create women. Hemencia, f. vehemence, great
earnestnes, exceeding endeavor, heat in affections. Hemencioso, m. vehement,
very earnest, hot in his suit, instant, importune. Hemenciar, to be vehement,
to be earnest, to be hot in affections, to be instant, or importune. Hemendar,
vide Emendar, to amend. * Hemiendar, vide, Emendar. * Hemisperio, or
Hemispherio, m. the half sphere or circular globe, as much of the sky and
firmament as we can discern in our horizon. * Hemoroides, a disease about the
fundament called the hemorrhoides. * Henano, a dwarf. * Henbarcar, vide
Enbarcar, to ship in, to take on ship-boord. * Henbargar, vide Enbargar. *
Hencadenar, vide Encadenar. * Hencalar, vide Encalar. * Hencaminar, vide
Encaminar. * Hencanastado, vide Encanastado. * Hencandilar, vide Encandilar. *
Hencaperucado, vide Encaperucado. * Hencaramar, vide Encaramar. * Hencarar,
vide Encarar. * Hencarcar, vide Encarcar. * Hencarcelar, vide Encarcelar. *
Hencarecer, vide Encarecer. * Hencarnicar, vide Encarnicar. * Hencargar, vide
Encargar. * Hencastellar, vide Encastellar. * Hencavalgar, vide Encavalgar. *
Hencaxar, vide Encaxar. * Henclavijar, vide Enclavijar. * Henchimiento, m.
filling, stuffing full, swelling. Henchir, or Hinchir, to fill, to swell. *
Hencobrir, vide Encobrir. * Hencoger, vide Encoger. * Hencolar, vide Encolar. *
Hencombrar, vide Encombrar. * Hencomencar, vide Encomencar. * Hencomendar, vide
Encomendar. * Henconar, vide Enconar, to fester. * Hencontrar, vide Encontrar.
* Hencorar, vide Encorar. * Hencorbar, vide Encorbar. * Hencordonar, vide
Encordonar. * Hencorvar, vide Encorvar. * Hencostrar, vide Encostrar. *
Hencrespar, vide Encrespar. * Hencrudecer, vide Encrudecer. * Hencuadernar,
vide Encuadernar. * Hencubar, to put in a tub or barrel. * Hencubertado, vide
Encubertado. * Hencubertar, vide Encubertar. * Hencubrir, vide Encubrir. *
Hencuentro, vide Encuentro. * Hencumbrar, vide Encumbrar. * Hendechas, vide
Endechas. * Hendecasilabo, vide Endecasilabo. * Hender, yo Hiendo, to cleave
asunder, to riue as men riue or cleave blocks. Hendedura, f. cleaving asunder,
a riuing, a cranie or rift. Hendible, that which may be cleaued or riuen with
wedges, or such like. Hendido, m. cleaued asunder, riuen. Hendimiento, m.
cleaving or riuing with wedges or otherwise. * Henechar, vide Enechar. *
Henfadado, vide Enfadado, wearied, tired, offended. Henfadar, vide Enfadar. *
Henfado, vide Enfado. * Hengan^ar, Engan^ar. * Hengan^oso, vide Engan^oso. *
Hengarrafar, vide Engarrafar. * Hengasgar, vide Engasgar. * Hengastar, or
Engastar, to carue in metal, stone, etc. * Hengavilado, vide Engavilado. *
Hengordar, vide Engordar, to make fat, to wax fat. * Hengorrar, vide Engorrar,
to stay, to delay, demurre, drive off, or prolong time. * Hengrandecer, vide
Engrandecer. * Hengullir, vide Engullir. * Hengurria, vide Engurria. *
Henjezado, vide Enjezado. * Henivelar, vide Enivelar. * Henlacar, vide Enlacar.
* Henlardar, vide Enlardar. * Henlatado, vide Enlatado. * Henlaviar, vide
Enlaviar. * Henlazar vide Enlazar. * Henlevar, vide Enlevar. * Henllenar vide
Enllenar. * Henlodar, vide Enlodar. * Henlozar, vide Enlozar. * Heno, haie for
cattle to eat. Henplear, vide Emplear, to fill full. * Henpuxar, vide Enpuxar.
* Henquadernar, vide Enquadernar. * Henredar, vide Enredar. * Henrexar, vide
Enrexar. * Henrique, vide Enrique. * Henriscar, vide Enriscar. * Henristrar,
vide Enristrar. * Henrodelado, vide Enrodelado. * henRuviar, vide enRuviar. *
Hensangrentar, vide Ensangrentar. * Hensartar, vide Ensartar. * Hensayar, vide
Ensayar. * Hensen^ar, vide Ensen^ar. * henSen^orear, vide enSen^orear. *
Hensensio, vide Ensensios. * Hensillar, vide Ensillar. * Hensoalcar, vide
Ensoalcar. * Hensobervecer, vide Ensobervecer. * Hensordecer, vide Ensordecer.
* Hensuziar, vide Ensuziar. * Hentabiar, vide Entabiar. * henTablar, vide
enTablar. * henTallar, vide enTallar. * Hentallecer, vide Entallecer. *
henTapiar, vide enTapiar. * henTapicar, vide enTapicar. * henTenebrecer, vide
enTenebrecer. * henTerrar, vide enTerrar. * Hentesar, vide Entesar. * henTexer,
vide enTexer. * henTibiar, vide enTibiar. * Hentiscar, vide Entiscar. *
Hentollar, to put in the dirt or mire. * Hentonar, vide Entonar. * Hentorcer,
vide Entorcer. * Hentormecer, vide Entormecer. * Hentorpecer, vide Entorpecer.
* Hentortar, vide Entortar. * henTossicar, vide enTossicar. * henTracar, vide
enTracar. * henTristecer, vide enTristecer. * Henturbiar, vide Enturbiar. *
Henvarar, vide Envarar. * Henvejecer, vide Envejecer. * Henvelesado, vide
Envelesado. Henvestir, vide Envestir. Henxerir, vide Enzerir. * Henxabonar,
vide Enxabonar. * Henxaguar, vide Enxaguar. * Henxalmar, vide Enxalmar. *
Henxalvegar, vide Enxalvegar. * Henxambrar, vide Enxambrar. * Henxergado, vide
Enxergado. * Henxerir, vide Enxerir, to graft in. * Henxugar, vide Enxugar. *
Henxullo, vide Enxullo. * Henxundia, vide Enxundia. * Henxuto, vide Enxuto. *
Henyessar, vide Enyessar. * Hepta, the number of seven in Greek. *
Heptameron, a work of seven days, or seven parts. Hera, age, time. Also a
threshing floor, a plot of ground, or bed in a garden. A yard or court of a
house. * Herador, vide Herrador, a ferrier, a smith that shooeth horses. *
Heral, vide Eral. * Herario, vide Erario. * Herbato, vide Erbato. * Herbatum,
an herb called hogs Fennel or Brimstone-wort. * Herbero, m. the gullet or
throat boll. Also one that gathers herbs. * Herbolario, m. an herbarist, one
that has skill in herbs. * Herbor, vide Hervor, heat, chafing, rage. *
Herberoso, vide Herveroso, fervent, hot, hasty, quickly moved to anger. *
Herculeo, of or partaining to Hercules. * Heredad, vide Eredad, inheritance,
possession. * Heredar, to inherit, to possess by inheritance. * Heredero, m.
an heir, an inheritor. * Herege, or Hereje, an heretic, one that holds
erroneous opinions. * Heregia, or Herejia, heresy, error in matters of faith
and of salvation. * Heremita, vide Eremita, an hermitage or solitary place. *
Hermitan^o, vide Eremitan^o, an hermit. * Herencia, f. inheritance. *
Heren^uela, a kind of musical instrument, used in enchantments. * Heria, vide
Feria, a fair, a market. Herida, a blow, a wound. * Herida de las alas, the
clapping of the wings, as cocks use before they crow. Herido, m stricken,
wounded, smitten. Heridor, m. a striker, one that uses to fight and slash, a
cutting companion. * Herimiento, m. striking, wounding, cutting. Herir, yo
Hiero, to strike, to wound, to smite, to beat. Herir de punto, to thrust with
a weapon, to run desperately upon, to run through with a sword, etc. *
Herizar, vide Erizar. * Herizo, vide Erizo, * Hermafrodita, one that is both
man and woman, an hermaphrodite. * Hermana, f. a sister. * Hermana de abuelo, a
great aunt. * Hermanarse, to join in one as brethren, to make a league of
brotherhood, to become sworn brethren. * Hermandad, f. brotherhood, the order
or fraternity of friars. * Hermanico, m. a little brother. * Hermanito, idem.
Hermano, m. a brother, an own brother. Hermaphrodito, one that is both man and
woman. * Hermita, vide Ermita, an hermitage of an hermit. * Hermitano, an
hermit, one that has forsaken the world and betaken himself to a solitary
life. * Hermofrodita, vide Hermafrodita. Hermosamente, fairly, beautifully,
comely, orderly, in very good sort. * Hermoseado, m. made fair, become
beautiful, ordered very commendably, decked, garnished, set out. Hermosear, to
make fair, to make beautiful, to adorn, to deck, to set out. *
Hermosissimo, m. most fair, most fine, most neat, most handsome. Hermoso, m.
fair, fine, neat, handsome, trim, well decked, comely, beautiful. Hermosura,
f. beauty, fairness, finenesse, trimnesse, handsomnesse, delectablenesse. *
Heroes, famous worthy men of great valor, courage and virtues, which for
their notable exploites were deemed worthy to be numbered for gods. * Heroico,
or Eroico, valiant, courageous, heroical, valorous, courageous worthy men. *
Heroldo, a herald at arms, a royal messenger to carry speeches of truce or
defiance between princes. Herrada, f. a paile to fetch water in, a bucket to
draw water with. Herrado, m. bound or shod with iron. Herrador, m. a ferrier, a
smith that shooeth horses. * Herrador de pipas, one that hoopeth pipes of wine
or beer with iron hoops. Herradura, f. a horse shoo. * Herraje, much iron
work. Herrambre, or Herrumbre, rust of iron, dross or scales of iron. *
Herramental, a place where ferriers dwell or use. * Herramienta, iron tools,
iron work. * Herramiento, m. shooing of a horse, iron work. Herrar, to shoo
with iron, to mark with a hot iron. Herren, m. maslin, wheat and rye
together, prouender for horse, bullimong, that is, diverse sorts of grain sowed
together. * Herreria, f. a smithesforge, smithes work. Herrero, m. a smith,
one that works in iron or steel. Herreruelo, m. a long cloak or soldiers
cassocke. * Herreruelos cavallos, horsemen that serve with petronels, pistolets
and maces being well armed, swart rutters. * Herrete, m. a marking iron to
mark leather. Also the tag of a point. * Herrojo, a bolt of iron to bar a
door. * Herron, as jugar al herron, a kind of play used in Spain, to cast
with a dart that has an iron or pike in it. Also to play at coites. * Herror,
vide Error, an error. * Hervato, m. an herb called Hogs Fennel, Sulphurwoort,
or Maidenweede. Herver, yo hiervo, to be hot, to boil, to sees. Hervera, or
Ervera, the throat boll, the gullet. Herviente, hot, seething, boiling,
fervent. * Hervilla, f. a button, a claspe. Hervor, m. heat, feruentnes, rage.
* Hervoroso, m. hot, hasty, fervent, soon moved. * Herymantho, vide
Erymantho. * Hespan^a, vide Espan^a, the country called Spain. * Hespan^ol,
vide Espan^ol. * Hespan^olado, vide Espan^olado. * Hespavillar, vide
Espavillar. * Hesperia, f. a country now called Italy, so named of Hesperus. *
Heteroclito, declined otherwise then the common nounes. * Heterogenio, of
another kind, not of the common kind, contrary to Homegenio, or Omegenio. *
Hestiercol, vide Estiercol, the dung or ordure of a man, a privy or iakes. *
Hetico, a kind of disease. Hevilla, f. a button, a claspe, a tacke, hooks and
eyes of silver, a buckle. Hevillar, to button, to claspe, to buckle. Hevilleta,
a little button, a little claspe. * Hexe, vide E'xe, m. an axeltree of a cart,
wagon, etc. * Heys, id est aveys, ye have. Hez, f. dregs, the lees of wine,
the grounds of ale or beer, etc. Heziento, m. full of dregs, full of
grounds, or lees. * Hi, as Quien viene hi? who comes there? ho. * Hi, Hi, Hi,
when folk laugh sondly, or giggle. * Hia, or ia, as Perderse hia, id est,
Perderia a se Parescerme hia, id est Paresceria a me, as Hablarle hia, id est
Hablaria a el, he were to cast away himself, it would seem unto me I should
or he should speak unto him. * Hibernia, f. the country called Ireland.
Hica, hoise, or hale up, as mariners cry at hoising sail. * Hicaco, a kind
of fruit in the Indies. Also a kind of money there. Hicar, to hoise, to lift
aloft. * Hichado, vide Hinchado, swollen, puffed up. * Hidalgamente, like a
gentleman, gentlemanlike. Hidalgo, m. a gentleman, the son of a man of some
worth. * Hidalgo de solar, a gentleman of ancient house. Hidalguia, f.
gentry, noblenes of birth, gentilitie. * Hideputa, the son of a whore, a
whoores son. * Hidesputas, the sons of whoores. Hidiondo, vide Hediondo,
stinking, filthy, unsavory. * Hiede, Hiedo, vide Heder, to stink. * Hidra, a
monster with seven heads, with whom Hercules fought, who cutting off one
head, still two did rise in the place. Hiel, f. gaul, the gaul, the seat of
melancholy. Hiel de tierra, the lesser centorie, an herb so called for the
bitter taste, though it be medicinable. Hielo, vide Yelo, ice. Hieltro, m. a
felt. * Hiena, f. a kind of beast of all other the most subtle: it is like a
woolfe with a mane like a horse, which coming in the night unto shepherdes
houses will counterfeit a man's voice, and by harkening learn ones name and
call him forth, to the end to devour him. Also a beast known by the smell of
his dung which is ciuet. Hienda, f. dung, ordure, filth. * Hiende, Hiendo, vide
Hender, to cleave asunder. Hienes, vide Sienes, the temples of the head. *
Hieno, vide Heno, hay. * Hierarchia, f. the state ecclesiastical, the order of
priesthood, a holy governance or principality. * Hiere, Hiero, vide Herir, to
smite, to strike. * Hiermar, to ruinate, to make waste, to make desolate as
Yermo, a wilderness. * Hierman los zanganos a las colmenas, the drone bees
mar and destroy the beehiues. * Hiermo, vide Yermo, a desert. * Hierno, vide
Yerno, a son in law. Hierro, m. iron, a marking iron to brand sheep, horses,
etc. a surgeons instrument to cut with. * lo hare de mi Hierro, I will set my
brand on him, I will mark him for mine own. * Hierro del fuego, a marking
iron for cattle. * Hierros de pozo, an iron with three hooks to cast into a
well to catch hold of any thing that is lost or fallen therein. * Hierto, vide
Yerto. * Hierve, Hiervo, vide Hervir. * Jerusalem, a great city of the Jews
in times past, so called. * Hiestar, vide Enhestar. * Hiesto, vide Enhiesto.
Higa, f. as Higas dar, to put the thumb between the fore finger and the
middle finger, used in Spain in scorn or contempt of one. Higadillo, m. a
little liver. Higado, m. the liver, the receptacle of blood. Higo, m. a fig a
disease in the head, a kind of piles about the fundament. * Higo del rio, an
herb in rivers and waters called Nenuphar or Waterlilly. Higuera, f. a fig
tree. * Higuera loca, a Sycamore tree. Higuera, an herb called Palma Christi,
it grows in Egypt, and bears a seed like a tike. * Higuera de infierno, an
herb called Spurge. Higueral, an orchard of figs. * Higueruela, f. a little
fig tree. Hija, f. a daughter. * Hijadalgo, a gentlewoman, a maid or woman of
good bringing up: and Hijodalgo, a gentleman. * Hijada, vide Hijadas. Hijadas,
vide Yjadas, the flanks, the small guts, sometimes the collike. * Hijadear, to
pant in the flanks as horses do when they be hot. Hijares, or Yjadas, the
flanks. Hijastra, f. a daughter in law, a stepdaughter. Hijastro, m. a son
in law, a stepsonne. Hijo, m. a son. * Hijo dalgo, or Hidalgo, a gentleman. *
Hijuelo, m. a pretty little son. * Hila, f. lint that surgeons use. Also a
row, a rank, an order, a thread. * Hilacha, a thread. Hilada, f. a rank, a
row, an order, or thread spun. Hiladera, or Hilandera, a spinster, one that
uses to card and spinne. * Hilado, m. spunne, thread or such like spunne.
Hilar, to spinne. * Hilar trama, to spinne oufe yarne. Hilazas, threeds, small
strings, dregs in wine, and such like. Also it signifies woolworke in any
sort. * Hilera, f. a rank of men, a file of soldiers, or a wing in a battle.
Also any other thing in a rank. * Hillada, the ranks or orders of laying
brickes or stones in a walk, etc. vide Hilada. Hilo, m. thread, the edge of a
thing, a row, a rank. * Hilo de acareto, a packethreed. * Hilo de Can^amo, a
hem pen thread. * Hilo de carreto, vide Hilo de acareto. * Sudar hilo a hilo,
to sweat a pace, drop by drop. * Hilo de gente, a row of people. * Andar
al Hilo de gente, to go after the multitude, to do as others do. * Himno, m. a
song, a dittie, a hymn, a psalm, singing to the praise of God. Hincado, m.
fastened, made sure or fast, pinned to, driven in. * Hincapie, a fastening the
foot, a taking sure hold. Hincar, Praes. yo Hinco, 1. Praet, yo Hinque, to
fasten, to make fast or sure, to fill full, to drive in, to stick fast. Hincar
de rodillas, to kneel, to bow the knees. * Hincar romero, to plant Rosemarie.
Also Hincarromero used for a musket staff, having a forke of iron, somewhat
after the manner of gardeners setting sticks, to set rosemarie and other
herbs. Hinchado, m. swelled, puffed up, stuffed full. * Hinchadura, f.
swelling, puffing up, stuffing, a windy swelling. Hinchamiento, m. swelling,
puffing up. Hinchar, to swell, to puff up. Hinchazon, f. swelling, puffing
up. Hinchazoncillo, m. a little swelling, a wheale. Hinchir, vide Henchir, to
fill, to swell. Hinestra, vide Ventana, f. a window. Hingle, vide I'ngle. *
Hiniesta, genista, or retama, broom. Hin^ir, to knead dough or paste. Hinojo,
m. Fennel, a knee. Hinojo marino, Sampire used in sauce. * Hinque, vide
Hincar. * Hiperbole, a figure called Hiperbole, an excess in declaring,
showing, or setting forth any thing, beyond all credit, estimation or
likelihoode of truth. * Hiperbolico, beyond all likelihoode of truth,
hyperbolicall. * Hipotheca, f. a morgage, a bill of sale. * Hipocresia, f.
hypocrisy, deceitful dealing. * Hipo en estomago, the hicket that comes of
rawnes of the stomach. Hippa, f. the hicket, the yeske. Hippar, or Hipar, to
have the hicket. * Hippo, vide Hipo, the hicket. * Hippocras, m. a pleasant
made wine called hippocras. * Hippocrita, m. an hypocrite, a dissembler, one
that would seem honest and godly, but has a wicked heart. * Hiriendo,
striking, smiting. Hirviente, vide Herviente, fervent, hot, etc. * Hirvir, vide
Hervir, to be hot, to be fervent or earnest. Hiscal, a basin, a coard, a rope
platted in three. * Hispane, an herb called spinach. * Hisopo, m. the herb
hysope, a holy water sprinkle. Also a great pensill that painters use. *
Hissopillo, m. a little pensill that painters use, a little holy water
sprinkle. Historia, f. a history, a book of Chronicles, Annals, a
description of times and accidents of princes and people from year to year. *
Historiador, m. a Chronicler, a writer of histories, one that sets down the
notable deeds and accidents of countries in certain years happened. *
Historico, m. pertaining to histories, Chronicles or Annals. * Historiografo,
an historiographer, a writer of history. Hito, m. a mark, a white to shoot
at. * mudar Hito, to alter, to change, to be variable, not to be as one was.
mirar en Hito, to look earnestly upon, to behold. * Hito de madera, a wooden
pin or prick to shoot at. * Hivernal, pertaining to winter, winterly. *
Hiza, hoise, as mariners hoise up sail. * Hize, Hiziera, Hiziesse, Hizo, vide
Hazer.
H O
Hobacho, m. a greasy foggie jade unable to do service. By metaphor a heavy,
idle and lubberly fellow. * Hobo, m. a fruit in the Indies. Also a tree the
root whereof if a man hold but a piece in his mouth, it yields so much
juice that he shall feel no thirst. * Hocar, to root or dig up by the roots
as a hog does. Hoce, f. a sickle or hook to reap corn with, a sieth to mow
with, a hook to prune vines or trees with, etc. * Hocicar, to turn up as
swine with their snoutes do, to butte or strike or muZZle with the snout as
beasts do. Hocico, m. a long snoute such as a hog or badger has. * Hocicudo,
m. long snouted like a hog. Hocina, or Hocino, a hook or bill to lop trees
withal. * Hoder, to have to do with or lie with a woman. * Hodidor, m. one
that deals much or lies much with women. * Hodido, m. abused carnally or
buggered. * Ho^estamente, vide Honestamente, honestly. Hogaca, f. a loaf of
bread. Hogar, the harth, the chimney, any place to make fire in. Hoguera, f. a
great fire, a bonefire, such as men use at joyful triumphs, a flame of fire.
Hoguero, m. a harth whereon they make fire. Hoja, f. a leaf of a tree or
herb, a thin plate, the blade of a sword, a sheet of paper, a leaf of paper.
* Hoja gorda, a fat leaf. * Hoja rayada, a ragged leaf. * Hoja de Milan,
white thin plating, such as they use to plate cupboords for to keep meat
in. Hojalde, f. a custard, a tarte. * Hojaldre, idem. f. * Hojear, to turn
leaves of a book, to eye or mark. Also to drive away birds or foul, as in
English, shue. Hojecer, to bear leaves. * Hojo, vide ojo, m. an eye. Hojoso,
full of leaves. Also for ojoso, full of eyes. Hojuela, f. a pancake, a fritter,
a fine cake. * Hola, a voice of calling as hoa. * Holanda, or Olanda, the
Province called Holland. Also Holland cloth. * Holandeses, or Olandeses,
Hollanders, people of Holland. * Holfato, m. the sense of smelling. * Holgacan,
vide Holgazan, an idle fellow. * Holgacano, vide Holgazano. * Holgado, m.
rested, sported, feasted, made merry, delighted. * Holganca, f. rest, joy,
quietness, delight. Holgar, yo Huelgo, to delight, to content, to be quiet, to
rest, to be glad. * Holgazan, m. one that delights, rests, quieteth. An
idle fellow, one that follows nothing but idleness. * Holgazano, idem.
Holgura, f. rest, joy, quiet, delight. * Holla vide olla, a crocke, a pot for
to dress meat. Hollado, m. troaden, or trampled on. Holladura, f. treading or
trampling on, renting. Hollar, yo Huello, to tread or trample like a horse, to
rent. * Holleja de las culebras, the skin that a snake casts off. Hollejo, m.
the skin, the husk, the pill, the shale that any seed or corn is in. *
Holleria, f. a place where they make or sell pots. * Hollero, vide Ollero, m. a
potter. Hollin, m. smut, soote, such as falls or is swept from chimneis. The
oar of brass, a stone called Calaminaris, whereof is made a certain
medicinable brass. * Hollinar, to besmut with soote. Holliniento, sootie,
besmeered with soote, full of soote. * Hollinimiento, besmutting with soote.
Hollores, swellings. Homarrache, m. vide Moharrache, a vizard, such as men
wear before their faces because they would not be known, a mask. Hombre, or
O'mbre, a man. * Hombre sabio, a wise man, a man of skill; a man of experience.
* Hombrecillo, m. a little man, a dwarf. Hombrecillos, or Hombrezillos, hops
used in brewing of beer. Also little men. * Hombrillo, vide Hombrecillo.
Hombres de armas, armed men on horseback, or Lanciers. * Hombro, m. a
shoulder. * Homenage, o Homenaje, waging of law, an oath in law, the top of
a tower. Torre de Homenage, a castle holden by doing homage to the King for the
same. * Hastas homes, used in old time in war for this word, Arm, Arm. *
Homecida, m. a man-slear, a murderer. * Homezillo, paying for murdering a
man, 100. ducats or more, vide Homicidio. * Homicidio, m. murder,
manslaughter, killing of a man. * Homilia, a homily. * Homiziano, a privy
murderer, one that goes with a short sword or such like to murder one. *
Homogeno, m. of one kind. * Homonomia, when diverse things are signified by one
word. * Honca, vide O'nca, an ounce weight. Also the beast called an Ounce. *
Honciguera, vide Honcijera. * Honcijera, a grin to catch birds. Honda, f.
depth, a sling to cast stones with. Honda para tirar, a sling. * Hondable, that
may be sounded or gaged to the bottom. * Hondamente, deeply, highly, from the
foundation. * Hondeador, m. one that sounds the bottom, or a caster, or
thrower in a sling. Hondear, to gage or sound the bottom. Also to cast with a
sling. Hondero, m. a slinger, one that casts with a sling. * Hondido, vide
Hundido, drowned. Hondo, m. deep, far to the bottom. Hondon, m. the depth,
the bottom. Hondura, f. deepenesse. * Honestamente, honestly. * Honestidad, f.
honesty. Honesto, m. honest. Hongo, m. a mushrom, a toadstoole. * Hongo piece,
a kind of sea fish. Hongoso, m. full of mushroms, full of toadestooles, soft
as a mushrom. * Honor, vide Honra, honor, worship. * Honorifico, honorable,
worshipful. Honra, vide O'nra, honor or worship. * Honradamente, honorably,
worshipfully. * Honrosamente, or Onrosamente, honorably, worshipfully. *
Honroso, or Onroso, m. honorable, worshipful. Honsario, or Hossario, a place
to put dead men's bones in, a charnell. Hontanales, m. places of springs, spring
heads. * Hoque, m. bribes. Hora, f. an hour. Horadado, m. boared through,
pearsed, boared. Horadar, to boar, to pearse. Horado, m. a hole. * Horario, m.
a dial. Horca, f. a forke, a pair of gallows, a gibbet. * Horca de cebollas,
a rope of onions. * Horcajadura de valle, the hanging or side of a hill. *
Horcajo, m. a forke to pitch hay with. Horcar, vide Ahorcar, to hang. Horcaso,
m. a forke to make or pitch haie with. * Horco de cebollas, a rope of Onyons. *
Horden, vide orden, f. * Hordenar, vide Ordenar. * Horear, vide Horcar. *
Horendo, vide Horrendo. * Horganista, vide Organista, an organist, a plaier on
the organes. * Horganizo, vide Organizo. * Horgano, vide organo. * Horizonte,
vide Orizonte. Horma, f. a shooemakers last to fit his shoes on, or any other
mould or block to make any attire. Also a tracke, a trace, a footestep. *
Hormar, to set shoes on the last. Also to tracke, trace, or follow by the
footesteps. Hormiga, or ormiga, f. an Emmet, or Ante. Hormiguear, to tingle in
the feet, to have the feet a sleep or benumbed. Hormiguero, an ant-heape, a
hillocke where Ants breed and abide. Hormigon de pared, plaster or mortar
wherewith they whiten and trim walls, etc. * Hornaca, a furnace where gold or
other metal is melted. Hornaguear, to burn brakes on the ground. Hornaguera
tierra, ground that is used to be burned, as in Devonshire and Cornwall they
use much. * Hornato, vide Ornato, adorning, decking, or trimming. Hornaza, f. a
furnace where gold is melted, or any other metal. Hornazo, m. an egge-pie, a
custard. Hornear, to set bread into the oven, to set in the oven. * Hornera, f.
a woman that sets bread or other things into the oven. * Horneria, f. the
work or office of a furner, to set things into the oven. Hornero, m. a
furner, one that sets bread into the oven. Hornezino, m. a bastard, one that
is not lawfully begotten. Hornija, f. a bauen to heat the oven with. Hornillo,
m. a little oven, a place in a trench where the barrels of powder are laid.
Horno, m. an oven. * Horodado, m. boared, pierced. * Horquilla, f. a little
forke. Also a musket staff. * Horrendo, grievous, horrible, frightfull,
ghastly, grizley, ugly, hideous, dreadful, strange, to be eschewed. * Horrible,
horrible, grievous, loathsome. * Horrido, m. ugly, grievous to see, horrible,
terrible, cruel, hideous, dreadful, frightfull. * Horrifico, that makes one
quake, terrible, horrible. * Horrisono, m. that has a terrible sound or voice,
that makes a grievous noise, fearful, dreadful. Horro, one that of a
bondslaue is become a freeman, one whom his Lord has manumitted and set free.
* Horror, vide Orror, horror, fear, terror, fright. Hortalizas, f. herbs used
to be eaten, all wholesome herbs for to be eaten, or for the pot. * Hortelano,
m. a gardener. * Hortera, f. a woodendish. * Hortezuela, f. a little orchard.
Hortiga, f. a nettle. Hortiga muerta, a dead nettle, a nettle that can not
sting, Archangell. Hortigar, to sting with a nettle, to nettle one. Hortiguilla
muerta, an herb called Mercury. * Horuga, vide Orruga. * Horujo, vide Orujo,
or Borujo. Hosco, m. brown or dun of color. * Hospada, vide Huespeda, an
hostess, a woman that keeps an inn or victualing house. * Hospedable, given
to hospitality, keeping hospitality. * Hospedado, m. lodged, received as a
ghest. * Hospedaje, m. an inn, a lodging place, an alehouse or victualing
house where to lodge, lodging or entertainment for a ghest. * Hospedal, an
hospital for the poor, a spittle. * Hospedar, to host or lodge as a ghest, to
soiourne. * Hospederia, f. a lodging with a friend, a place of entertainment
for strangers, an inn, a victualing house. * Hospicio, a lodging for friends
only in traveling, friendship showed in hospitality, entertainment into a
house. * Hospital, m. a hospital, a place for the poor or diseased. *
Hospitalidad, hospitality, keeping of a good house. Hossario, vide Honsario, a
place for dead men's bones, a charnell. * Hostia, f. sacrifice offered up. *
Hostigado, m. pricked forward, called on, driven forward, spurred on.
Hostigamiento, m. driving forward, pricking on, urging to, spurring forward.
Hostigar, Praes. yo Hostigo, 1. Praet. yo Hostigue, to call earnestly on, to
prick or urge forward, to drive on, to scarre, to fear, to chastise. *
Hostigue, vide Hostigar. * Hostigo, m. a whisking and blustering wind. *
Hotero, vide O'tero. Hoto en Hoto, by egging and setting on, by temptation of
other, by others enticement. * Hovillar, vide Ovillar. * Hovo, vide O'vo. Also
a fruit in the Indies. * Hoxico, vide Oxico, m. * Hoy, vide Oy, to day, at this
present. * Hoy de man^ana, this day, very early. Hoyo, or Cava, a ditch, a pit.
Hoyuelo, a sawpit, a little ditch. * Hoz, f. a sickle or hook to reap corn
with. * Hozico, or Hocico, m. a snoute like a hog. * Hro^. id est, Heredero,
m. an heir, an inheritor.
H V
* Hua^no, id est, Humano, courteus, gentle, well mannered. Huebra, f. an acre
of ground, a daywork of land. Hueco, m. hollow. Huego, m. fire. * Huele, Huelo,
vide Oler, to smell. * Huelga, Huelgo, Huelgue, vide Holgar, to rejoice, to
rest. Huelgo, m. breath. Huelgo, I rejoice, vide Holgar. Huelle, Huello, vide
Hollar, to trample under feet. * Huerfana, f. a girl or young maid that is
fatherless and motherlesse, most properly without a father. Huerfano, m. a boy
that is fatherless and motherlesse, without a father. * Huerco, m. hell.
Huero, m. an addle egg, a rotten egg, the breast bone, or plate bone of the
breast. * Huerra, vide Guerra, war. * Huerta, or Guerta, vide Huerto, an
orchard. Huerto, m. an orchard. * Huesca ciudad, a city so called in Valencia
in Spain. Huesped, m. an host that keeps an Inn or victualing house. Also
a guest that comes to lodge. * Huespeda, f. an hostess, or a woman guest. *
Huessa, f. a ditch, a pit, a grave, a sepulcher. * Huessillo, m. a little bone.
Huesso, m. a bone. * Huesso de la garganta, the channel bone. Hueste, Huesto,
an host of men, an army, a camp of soldiers. Huevo, m. an egg. * Huevo
guero, an addle egg, or rotten egg. * Huevo empollado, m. an egg that has a
chicken in it. * Huevo de dos yemas, or amarillas, an egg with two yolks. *
Huevos de pescado, m. the spawne of fish. * Poner huevos, to lay eggs. * Yazer
sobre huevos, to sit brooding over eggs. * Hufano, vide Vfano, content. *
Huga, f. a Skatefish. * Hugia, or Tremielga, f. a rayfish, a Skatefish, a
Crampefish that benummeth the hands of such as touch it. * Hulano, m. some
body, some one. * Humanar, to make or be gentle, humane or courteous, to be
humane and not divine. Humano, vide Vmano, m. courteous, gentle. * Humareda, f.
the smoke. * Humbral, the top of the roof of a portall or door. Humear, to
smoke. Humedecer, or Humedescer, vide Vmedecer, to moisten, to make moist. *
Humeducido, Humedezido, or Vmedecido, m. moistened, made moist. Humero, m. a
tunnell for the smoke. * Humidad, f. moisture. * Humido, m. moist, dankish,
somewhat wette. * Humildad, f. humility, lowlines, meekness. Humilde, vide
Vmilde, humble, lowly, meek, creeping, crouching. * Humildemente, vide
Humilmente, lowly, meekely, gently. * Humillado, or Vmillado, brought low,
humbled, made meek and gentle. * Humillar, or Vmillar, to humble, to make
meek, to make lowly. * Humilmente, vide Vmilmente, lowly, meekely, humbly,
gently. Humo, m. smoke, fume. Humoso, m. smoakie, full of smoke. * Humor, a
humor. whereof be four in the body ruling, id est, phlegm, choler, blood,
and melancholy, moisture, or humor. Hundible, that may be cast, founded, or
molten. Hundicion, f. casting, founding, or melting of metal. Hundido, m.
cast, molten, founded like metal. Also drenched or drowned. * Hundiendo,
founding, casting, or drowning. Hundidor, m. a fownder of bells or other things
in metal, a myner. Hundimiento, m. sinking to the bottom, or a casting of
metal. Hundir, to found, cast, or melt metal, to sink to the bottom. *
Hune, a hole in the top of a ship maste, through which the coards are put. Hura
de cabeca, f. dandraffe on the head of children, a kind of scurffe. *
Hurgador, m. one that draws coals out with a colerake, or sweepeth the oven
with a mawkin. * Hurgado, m. drawn out with a colerake, swept with a mawkin.
Hurganero, m. a colerake to draw coals out of the oven with. Also a mawkin.
Hurgar, Praes. yo Hurgo, 1. Praet. yo Hurgue, to pluck or get out of some
place with a coale-rake or mawkin. * Hurgonazo, m. a blow or stroke with a
coale-rake or mawkin. * Hurgonear, vide Hurgar. * Hurgue, vide Hurgar. Huron,
m. a firret to catch conies with. Hurraca, vide Picaca, f. a bird called a Pie,
or a Hagster. Hurtadamente, by stealth, privily, theeuishly. * a Hurtadillos,
by stealth, privily. Hurtado, m. stolen. Hurtador, m. a stealer, a thief, a
robber. * Hurta agua, a watering pot full of hoales. Hurtar, to steal, to
purloine, to embesill goods away. Hurtible, that may be stolen or purloyned
away. Hurtiblemente, theeuishly, by stealth. * Hurtillo, m. pilferie, miching,
petie larcenie. * a Hurtillos, vide a Hurtadillos. Hurto, m. theft, robbing,
stealing. Husada, or Macorca, f. flax on the distaffe, as much flax as is
used to be put on the distaffe at once. Husar, vide Vsar. Husillo, or Huzillo,
m. a press to press Sidar or Perrie with, a wine press. Huso, m. a spindle.
* Hutia, f. a bird. * Huviera, Huviesse, or uviera, uviesse, vide Aver. Huvo,
or uvo, vide Aver. Huyda, f. flight, running away. Huydizo, a runnagate, a
fugitive, a vagabond. Huydo, m. fled, run away. Huydor, m. he that flies or
runs away. Huyr, to fly, to run away. * Huzillo, m. a press to press
Sidar, Perrie, etc. a wine press.
H Y
Hy, Hy, Hy, a laughing or giggling. * Hya, vide Hia. * Hyadas, the seven
stars. Some say five stars in the head of the sign Taurus. * Hydra, f. a
serpent with many heads in the lake Lerna, whereof one being cut away, two came
in place, which Hercules slew by fire when his sword would not prevail.
Hydropico, m. one that has the dropsy. * Hydropesia, f. a watrish humor
between the skin and the body. * Hyel, f. the gall. * Hyo, vide Hijo, m. a
son. * Hymnos, m. songs to the praise of God. * Hypo, m. the hicket. *
Hypocrita, a dissembler, an hypocrite, a double dealer. * Hyta, as a Call
hyta, all the street over not missing a house.
I
* I'a, vide hia. * I'a, vide ya. Jabonar, vide Xabonar. Jacinto, m. a precious
stone called a Iacint. Also a flower of that name. Jaco, m. a jack of maile.
Jactar, vide Jatar, to brag. * Jaen, a kind of Grapes. Also a city in Spain
so called. Iaezes, m. trappings for a horse. * Iaezes de cama, furniture for a
chamber. * Jagua, vide Xagua, f. a herb growing among the Indians. *
Jaharrado, plaster, parget. * Jaharrar, to parget, to plaster. * Jahezes,
vide Jaezes. * Jajagua, f. an herb in the Indians. * Iazer, vide Yazer. Jalde,
yellow. Jamas, for ever, never. Jamon, m. a gammon of bacon. * Iano, m. a
drinking cup, an ancient king of Italy, whom Numa Pompilius honored for a
God, and built him a temple, which always in the time of war was open and in
peace shut. He was a most wise and provident prince. Jaola, vide Jaula, a
coope, a cage to keep birds in. * Jaque, vide Xaque. * Jaqueca, vide Xaqueca.
Jaqueta, f. a kind of iacket of maile made close before, and open by the
sides. * Jaquimi, vide Xaquimi. Jara, Xara, or Flecha, an arrowe, a shafte. *
Jaral, vide Xaral. * Jarama, vide Xarama. * Jaramago, vide Xaramago. *
Jarandilla, vide Xarandilla. * Jarava, vide Xarava. * Jarave, vide Xarave. *
Jarcias, vide Xarcias. Jardin, or Vergel, m. a garden. Jardineria, f.
gardening. Jardinero, m. a gardener. * Jares, the small guts. * Jaretas, vide
Xaretas. * Jarete, vide Xarete. * Jarocho, vide Xarocho. * Jarope, vide Xarope.
* Jarrazo, m. a blow with a cup. * Jarretar, to hough, to cut the legs. *
Jarrete, m. the hip, a leg of mutton, or veale, or such like. Jarrillo, m. a
cruse, a little pot. Jarro, m. a pitcher, a pot. Jarro de estan^o, a pewter
pot. * Jarruma, f. an herb growing in the Indies. * Jasmin, vide Jazmin.
Jaspe, m. a Jasper stone. Jaspeado, trimmed with Jasper. Jassador, m. a
scarifier, a cutter of meat for carbonadoes. Also to lance the flesh to let
out blood. Jassadura, scarifying, cutting of carbonadoes. Also launcing the
flesh to let out bad blood. Jassar, to scarifie, to cut or carue, to lay on a
gridiron, to lance the flesh to let out bad blood. * Jatancia, f. boasting. *
Jatancioso, m. given to boasting, vaunting or bragging. * Jatar, to boast, to
brag, to vaunt. * Jattar, vide Jatar. Javali, m. a wild boar. * Javega, vide
Xavega, f. * Javeguero, vide Xaveguero. * Javelin, m. a wild boar. * Javia,
vide Jaula. Jaula, f. a coope for hens, capons, a cage for birds. Jayan, vide
Gigante, a giant. Jazmin, or Jasmin, a kind of white flower very sweet much
like the musk rose, the wild violet.
I B
* Iberia, an ancient name so called of Iberus. * Ibero, or E'bro, a chief
river in Spain.
I D
* I Would, or Y'd, go ye, vide I'r or Y'r. * I'da, f. a journey, a going on the
way. Idea, f, Dechado, or Exemplar, a true pourtraiture or semblance of a thing
conceived in mind, whereby to paint the like. * Idioma, a proper form of
speech. Idiota, one unlearned, a simple soul, an idiote. Also sometimes used
for a lay man. Idolatra, an idolater. Idolatrar, to commit idolatry.
Idolatria, f. worshipping of idols. I'dolo, m. an idol, an image to be
worshipped. * Idoneo, m. meet, very fit. Idropesia, f. the dropsy. Idropico,
m. sick of the dropsy, possessed with the dropsy.
I E
* Jelo, vide Yelo. * Jeme, vide Xeme. * Jenabe, vide Xenabe. * Jenable, vide
Xenable. * Jener, vide Xener. * Jenero, vide Genero. Jenezaro, or Genezaro, a
Ianizarie, a man of the Turks guarde. * Jerga, vide Xerga. * Jergon, vide
Xergon. Jerguerito, vide Xerguerito. * Jerigonca, or Gerigonca, f. pedlers
french, a speech invented and practiced with rogues. * Jeringua, vide Xeringua.
* Jeringar, vide Xeringar. * Jerno, vide Yerno, a son in law that has
married his daughter. * Jervilla, vide Xervilla. * Jervilleta, vide Xervilleta.
Jerusalem, vide Jerusalem.
I G
Iglesia, vide Yglesia, f. a church, a congregation of Christians. *
Ignipotente, powerful in fire. Ignominia, f. reproach, shame, opprobrie, ill
report. Ignominioso, m. reproachful, ignominious, of an ill name, shameful. *
Ignoradamente, ignorantly, unskillfully. Ignorancia, f. unskillfulness, ignorance,
want of knowledge. Ignorante, one that is ignorant, unskillful. * Ignorar, to
be ignorant, to want skill. * Ignoto, unknown. Igual, vide ygual, equal, like
in state or condition. * Igualado, m. vide Ygualado, made equal, or of like
estate and condition, compared with, equalled. Igualar, vide Ygualar, to make
alike. Igualdad, vide Ygualdad, f. equality, likelines. Iguales, or Yguales,
equals, matches. Igualmente, vide ygualmente, equally, one as well as another.
I J
Ijada, or Yjada, the small ribs, the collike, the belly piece of a fish, the
flank. * Ijadear, or Yjadear, to pant as a horse does after running. Ijares,
Hijares, or Yjares, the flank. * Jigote, vide Xigote, a leg of mutton
roasted.
I L
* Illegalidad, f. unlawfulness. Ilicitamente, unlawfully. Ilicito, m.
unlawful. * Iliaco dolor, an obstruction or stopping of the small guts causing
a great pain in the belly. * Illiaca, or Troiana, of Troy. * Illion, Troy. *
I'llios, the Trojans. * Illuminacion, f. limming with gold or silver,
lightening. * Illuminado, m. lightened, limmed with silver or gold. *
Illuminador, m. a lightener, a limmer with colors. Illuminador de libros, a
limmer with gold, silver, or colors. Illuminar, or Iluminar, to enlighten, to
illuminate, to lymme books, etc. with gold or silver, or colors. *
Illuminaria, a lightening, an illuminating. * Illustrado, m. made famous, made
notable, made excellent, illustrated, brought to light. * Illustrador, m. one
that makes famous, notable, excellent or illustrious, he that makes known,
he that brings to light. * Illustrar, to make notable, famous, illustrious,
or honorable, to make light or clear, to make known. Illustre, famous,
honorable, excellent, illustrious. * Illustrissimo, m. most honorable, most
excellent, most famous, most illustrious, most clear shining.
I M
* Imacular, vide Immacular. Imagen, f. an image, the semblance, or
pourtraiture of any person or thing. Imaginacion, f. imagination, conceit of
the mind. Imaginado, m. imagined, conceived in the mind, thought on.
Imaginar, to imagine, to cast or conceive in the mind, to suppose.
Imaginativo, m. given to imaginations, full of thoughts. * Imaginetas, f.
little pictures or small images, puppets or babies. Iman, vide Yman, f. a
loadstone. * Imenso, vide Immenso, m. exceeding great, huge, insatiable,
unmeasurable. Imitacion, imitation, following of another in fashions or
practices. Imitador, m. one that follows another in fashions or in doings.
Imitar, to imitate, to follow in fashions, or in deeds. * Imaculado, or
Immaculado, unspotted, undefiled, without spot, without blemish. *
Immediatamente, immediately, straightway, without delay. * Immenso, m.
unmeasurable, huge, monstrous great. * Immerito, without desert, undeserving,
unworthiness. * Immobible, vide Immovible, vnmoouable, that cannot be stirred,
unchangeable. * Immobil, immovable, unchangeable, steadfast. Immoderado, or
Imoderado, unmeasurable, immoderate, that has no stay of himself, that
keeps no bounds. Immortal, or Imortal, immortal, that never shall die.
Immortalmente, or Imortalmente, everlastingly, without end. Immortalidad, or
Imortalidad, f. everlasting life, continuance for ever. Immovible, Imovible,
vide Immobible. * Immudable, unchangeable, immutable. * Immundo, m. unclean. *
Immunidad, f. freedom, privilege, immunitie, exemption from tax or from
service. * Immutable, unchangeable, constant, immutable. Impaciencia, f. want
of patience. Impaciente, impatient, one that cannot suffer or endure any thing.
Impacientemente, impatiently, unquietly. * Impalpable, that cannot be felt. *
imPar, unlike, unequal, unfit, no match, ods, unequal, uneven. * imPassible,
that cannot suffer or endure. * Impedido, m. hindered, let, stopped,
debarred. Impedimiento, m. hinderance, letting, stoppage. Impedir, yo Impido,
to hinder, to let, to stop, to perturbe. * Impeler, to constrain, to urge, to
compel, to enforce. * Impelido, m. enforced, urged, compelled forward, thrust
violently. Impelir, to constrain, to enforce, to urge, to compel, to thrust
forward, to drive violently. * Impenitrable, that cannot be pierced,
impenetrable. imPensadamente, unwittingly, not thought. * imPensado, m. not
thought on. * Imperante, ruling, swaying, reigning, commanding. * Imperar, to
govern, to bear rule. * Imperativo, commanding, imperative. * Imperativo
modo, the imperative mood. imPerfecto, or imPerfeto, m. imperfect, not made
full up, not finished. Imperial. belonging to the Empire, or to the Emperor.
Imperiales, or cahones, startups or buskins of thick cloth, Gamasses.
Imperio, m. the Empire, the royal authority. * Impersonal, that has no
person, impersonall. * Impertinente, not belonging to it, nothing to the
purpose. * Impervio, overthwart, crooked. * I'mpeto, vide I'mpetu, force,
violence. * Impetrable, that may be obtained or gotten by entreatie or praying.
Impetracion, f. obtaining, getting, purchasing by prayer or entreatie.
Impetrar, to obtain, to get by purchase or by endeavor. I'mpetu, force,
violence, rigor, a violence in assault, earnest affection, a pang or passion,
vehement rage. * Impetuosamente, forcibly, rigorously, violently. Impetuoso, m.
rigorous, forcible, violent. Impide, Impido, vide Impedir, to hinder, etc. *
Impiedad, impiety, ungodliness, unrighteousness, wickedness. * I'mpio, m.
ungodly, wicked, ungracious. Implacable, implacable, that cannot be pacified,
that cannot be appeased, that will not be reconciled. * Implorado, m. besought,
earnestly entreated, called upon for help, entreated with tears. * Implorar,
to beseech, to entreat earnestly, to crave aid and succor. imPoner, Praes.
imPongo, imPones, imPone, 1. Praet. imPuse, imPusiste, imPuso, Fut. imPondre,
or imPorne, as, a, Sub. Praes. imPonga, Imperf. imPusiera, imPusiesse, or
imPornia, Fut. imPusiere, to lay upon, to impose, to charge, to put to. Also to
accuse. Also to teach, train, instruct or bring up. * imPonga, imPongo, vide
imPoner. * Importa, vide Importancia. Importancia, f. a matter of weight,
importance, a matter of charge, a thing of moment. * Importante, of weight,
important, of moment, of force, earnest. Importantissimo, m. of most great
importance, of most avail. Importar, to bring in, to infer, to import. *
importunacion, f. earnestnes in suit, urging often of a matter. Importunamente,
importunately, so earnestly that he will have no nay. Importunar, to follow a
suit diligently, to speak for a matter often, to solicit daily, to accept of
no denial. Importunidad, f. earnestness in suit, importunity, never giving
over until he obtain his purpose. Importuno, m. earnest in suit, importune,
still soliciting his case. Imposicion, f. laying on, charging with, putting
on. Imposibilidad, f. impossibility. Impossible, impossible, that cannot be
compassed, that which is beyond his power. Impotencia, f. impotencie, weakness,
want of natural strength or of ability. Impotente, unable, weak, impotent,
diseased. Impremir, yo Imprimo, to imprint, to press or thrust in. *
Imprescriptibile, that is without prescription, or past the memory of man. *
Impresa, an attempt, an enterprise, an undertaking. Impression, f. imprinting,
setting on surely. Impresso, m. imprinted, hard or fixed into, obstinate.
Impressor, m. a Printer, one that sets stamps on things. * Imprime, Imprimo,
vide Impremir. * I'mprobo, naught, wicked, ill, a caitife, malapert. *
Improperios, m. reproaches, opprobries. * Improprio, m. improper, not fitting,
unapt. * Improvable, that may be found fault with. * Improviso, sudden, at
unawares, unprovided. imPrudente, unwise, indiscreet. imPrudentemente,
unwisely, indiscreetly. * imPuesto, m. imposed, laid on, put on, charged with.
* Impugnar, to impugn, to strive against. * Impudente, vide Desvergoncado. *
Impunito, scotfree, unpunished. * Impuridad, f. vileness, impuritie. * Impuro,
unclean, impure, dishonest. imPuse, imPusiera, imPusiesse, imPuso, vide
imPoner. * Impusicion, f. laying on, imposing. * Imputado, m. laid to,
imputed, ascribed unto. Imputar, to impute, or lay to.
I N
Inabil, unable, unapt, unmeet. Inabilidad, f. unableness, unfitness,
unaptness, disabilitie. Inabilitar, to disable, to make unapt or unmeet.
Inabilmente, unfitly, unaptly. Inadvertencia, f. retchlesnes, carelesnes,
vnconsideratenes. inAdvertido, m. inconsiderate, retchlesse, careless. *
inAdvertir, yo in Advierto, to advise, to take heed, to observe, to mark. *
Inalienable, such as cannot be made away, or cannot be alienated. * Inanimada,
a thing without soul or life. * Inaudito, m. not heard of, uncouth, strange. *
Inavertencia, vide Inadvertencia. * inCapaz, incapable, of no conceit. *
inCauto, m. unwary, vnheedfull, not circumspect. * Incendio, m. kindling,
setting on fire, burning fire, kindled fire. * Incerar, vide Encerar, to dress
or do with wax. * inCerrar, vide EnCerrar, to shut in, to lock in. *
Incertidumbre, uncertainty. * Incessable, never ceasing, incessant. Incesto,
incest, unnatural copulation between father and daughter, or brother and
sister, etc. * Incestuoso, one that has committed incest with some of his
near kin, an incestuous person. * Inchar, vide Hinchar, to stuff, to fill
full, to puff up. Inchir, ynchir, vide Henchir. inCierto, uncertain,
doubtful. * Incircunciso, uncircumcised. Incitado, m. stirred up, incited,
provoked, urged forward. Incitador, he that stirs up, he that urges or
provoke forward. Incitamiento, m. an incitement, a provocation, urging, or
moving foreward. Incitar, to incite, to stir or provoke foreward, to call
upon earnestly. * Incitativa, a kind of letter written from superior
authority, to an inferior judge, willing him to further some matter before him.
Inclemente, severe, cruel, vnclement, fell, stern. Inclinacion, f. inclining,
bowing, leaning to, an addicting. Inclinado, m. bent, inclined unto, addicted
unto. Inclinar, to bend, to incline, or lean unto, to consent unto, to give
some token of liking. * I'nclito, noble, high, famous, glorious, of great
renown. * Incluido, vide Incluso, enclosed, shut in, included. * Incluir, to
shut in, to include. * Incluso, included, shut in, enclosed. * Incognito, m.
unknown, not acquainted. * I'ncola, an inhabiter that dwells in a country
where he was not borne. * Incomodo, troublesome, incommodious. * Incomparable,
unmatchable, incomparable. * Incompatible, that cannot be discharged with the
other, that cannot agree in one. * Incompensable, that cannot be made amends
for. * Incompetencia, unfitness. * Incomportable, insufferable. *
Incomprehensible, that cannot be comprehended, that is not contained in any
prescript place. * Inconsideracion, rashness, unadvisedness, inconsideratenes,
heedlessenes. inConsiderado, m. inconsiderate, heedlesse, without due regard,
rash, unadvised. inConsiderancia, vide inConsideracion, f. rashness,
unadvisedness, heedlessenes, want of due regard. inConstancia, f. inconstancy,
giddines of brain, unstableness of mind. InConstante, unconstant, unstaid,
giddie headed, variable, one while of one mind, another while of another.
inConstantemente, inconstantly, vnstedfastly. inContinencia, f. incontinencie,
want of chastity. Incontinente, incontinent, unchaste, one that has not stay
of his affections. * Incontrastable, firm, stable, that can not be ouerturned.
inConveniencia, vnconuenience, ill agreeing together, vnmeetenes.
inConveniente, not convenient, ill agreeing together, unmeet. * Incordio, m.
kernels growing about the groyne. * Incorporado, m. incorporated, made into one
body, enfranchised, matriculated. * Incorporar, to incorporate, to
infranchise, to make a member of the same body, to matriculate. * Incorporeo,
having no body, incorporall. * Incorrido, m. run in, fallen in, incurred. *
Incorrigible, blameles, not to be corrected. * inCorrimiento, m. running in,
incurring, falling in. inCorrir, vide Incurrir, to run in, to incur. *
inCorruptible, that cannot be corrupted or marred. * Incorruptible, that will
not be corrupted, incorruptible. * Incorrupto, whole, sound, uncorrupted. *
Incredible, incredible, marvelous. * Incredulidad, f. unbelief, incredulity,
distrust. Incredulo, m. incredulous, he that will not believe, distrustful. *
Incremento, augmentation, increase, a growing greater. Increpado, m. rebuked,
reproved, found fault with. Increpar, to reprove, to rebuke, to find fault
with, to chide. inCreyble, incredible, that is not to be believed. * I'ncubos,
m. wicked spirits or devils, which taking the form of men, lie with women.
Also the night mare, or badde spirits troubling men sleeping. * inCulto, m.
undressed, untrimmed, unhandsome, ill apparelled. * inCumbir, to lay to, to
apply, to be diligent at. * Incurable, that is past cure, that cannot be
cured. * Incurrido, m. run into, incurred, fallen to. * Incurrimiento, m.
running into, falling into, incurring. * Incurrir, to incur, to run into, to
fall to. * Indecencia, unseemliness, vndecencie. * Indecente, unseemly,
indecent, uncomely. * Indeciso, m. not decided, not resolved or determined
upon. * Indeclinable, that cannot be declined. * Indefenso, undefended. *
Indeterminable, that cannot be determined or decided. * Indeterminado,
undetermined, undecided. * Indevidamente, uncomely, unorderly, not duly. *
In-dias, old, in years. * Indicacion, f. showing, declaration. * Indicio, m.
a token, a show. Indiferente, indifferent, meetely well, so so. Indigesto, m.
undigested, not well concocted, not well taken. Indigestion, f. want of good
digestion, rawnesse of stomach, not well accepting. Indignacion, f. wrath,
disdain, indignation. * Indignado, m. disdained. Indignar, to take in evil
part, to disdain, to be offended. Indignidad, f. vnwoorthines, indignity.
Indigno, m. unworthy. * Indino, vide Indigno. * I'ndio, m. an Indian, a man
of the Indians. * Indirecte, unorderly, without order. * Indirecto, unorderly,
indirect, out of course. * Indiscreto, rash, indiscreete, fond. Indispuesto, m.
sickly, ill at ease. Indispusicion, or Indisposicion, f. sickliness.
Indivisible, that cannot be divided. * Indomable, that cannot be tamed,
without rule or order. * Indomito, m. untamed, unbridled, headstrong. * Indoto,
unlearned, ignorant. * Indubitable, assured, without doubt. Indulgencia, f.
cockering, pardon, indulgence. * Indulto, m. suffered, borne withal, pardoned.
* Indurar, to last, to endure, to tolerate, to suffer, to abide. Also to
harden or to grow hard. Industria, f. industry, diligence in following his
business, endeavor. Industrioso, m. one that follows his business, one diligent
about that which he has to do. * Induzga, Induzgo, vide Induzir, to bring in,
to persuade, to induce. Induzidor, m. a perswader, an inducer. Induzimiento, m.
persuasion, inducement. Induzir, yo Induzgo, to induce, to persuade. *
Inefable, unspeakable, that cannot be uttered or pronounced. * Inescusable,
that cannot be excusable, inexcusable. Inesperto, m. that is not experienced,
that has no knowledge. * Inespugnable, that cannot be won by fight,
inpregnable. Inestimable, inestimable, that cannot be valued, or judged of.
Inevitable, inevitable, that cannot be eschued or shunned. * Inexhausto, m. not
emptied, not drawn out dry, consumed or wasted, not satisfied. * Inexorable,
that cannot be entreated, that will not be persuaded. Inexpugnable,
impregnable, that cannot be won. * Infalible, that never deceives. Infamado,
m. defamed, ill reported of. Infamar, to defame, to speak or report evil of.
Infame, infamous, of ill report, evil spoken of. Infamia, f. infamy, evil
report, an ill name, disgrace. Infancon, m. an infant, a little sucking child.
* Infando, so wicked, heinous, or villainous as is not to be spoken off. *
Infanta, f. every daughter of a King that is not heir, whether first, second,
or third, etc. the heir is called Princesa, and the rest Infantas. *
Infantazgo, m. a dignity or Province in Spain which was at first given to the
Infant, that is to the Kings second son, now Dukes enjoy the same. * Infant,
m. a footman in war, or every son of a king, so he be not heir, whether
second, third or fourth, etc. the heir is called Principe, and the rest
Infantes. Infanteria, f. all the footmen in an army. * Infausto, m.
unfortunate, dismal, unlucky. * inFelice, unhappy. Inferior, the lower, the
inferior. * Inferioridad, f. inferioritie, the lower part. * Inferir, yo
Infiero, to bring in. * Infernado, m. made hellish or pertaining to the lower
parts. Infernal, being of, or belonging to the lower parts, hellish. *
Infernar, to lay below, to put to hell. * Infestar, to annoy, to hurt upon
malice, to envy. Inficionado, m. infected, poisoned, misled in opinions of
error. Inficionar, to infect, to poison with errors. inFiel, unfaithful,
untrusty, false of his word, an infidel that believes not on God. inFieldad,
f. infidelity, or distrust in God, unfaithfulness in word or in deeds. *
Infiere, Infiero, vide Inferir. Infierno, m. hell, the lower part, below. *
I'nfimo, lowest, most abject, base, vile, of no reputation. Infinidad, f.
infinitnes, without end. Infinitamente, infinitely, without end, for ever and
a day, vnmeasurably. Infinito, m. infinite, endless, unmeasurable, without
bounds. Inflamacion, f. an inflammation, a puffing up with heat, a hot swelling.
Inflamado, m. inflamed, swollen or puffed up with heat, burned. Inflamar, to
inflame, to set on fire, to swell or puff up with heat. * Influencia, f. an
influence, a flowing in. * Influer, to flow in. * Influxo, m. a flowing in.
Informacion, f. information, giving of instructions, giving notice or
understanding. Informar, to inform, to deliver instructions, to give to
understand. * Infortuitos, misfortunes, mischaunces, adversity. Infortunado,
m. unhappy, unfortunate, unlucky. * Infortunio, mishap, mischance,
misfortune. * Infrutifero, unfruitful, barren. * Infrutuoso, idem. Infundido,
m. powered in, infused. Infundir, to infuse, to power in. * Infurcion, f. the
rent or payment for tenements or lands holden from the Ecclesiastical
dignity, as from Deane and Chapter, and such like. * Infuso, infused, melted,
powered in. I'ngas, the names of the kings of Mexico before the conquest. *
Ingeniera, a trappe or snare to catch birds, etc. * Ingeniero, m. a maker of
engines or rare devises, a cunning workman. Ingenho, vide Ingenio. Ingenio, m.
wit. Ingeniosamente, wittily. Ingenioso, a witty fellow, ready witted. *
Ingen^o, vide Engen^o, an engine or rare devise for to effect some strange
thing in wars, etc. Also Ingen^o, vide Ingenio. * Inglatierra, f. England.
I'ngle, or I'ngre, the groyne, the bottom of the belly, the flank. * Ingles,
m. an Englishman. * Ingratitud, f. unthankfulness, ingratitude. * Ingrato, m.
an unthankful man. * Inguente, m. an ointment. * inHabil, unapt, unfit. *
Inhabilitar, to make one unable, incapable or unfit. * inHabitable, that no man
can dwell in. * Inhibir, to inhibit, to forbid. * Inhiesta, broom. Inhiesto,
m. lifted up. * inHumanamente, discourteously, ungently, cruelly. inHumanidad, f.
discurtesie, inhumanitie, cruelty. inHumano, m. vncurteus, ungentle, uncivil,
cruel. * Inimicitia, variance, enmity, hatred. * Iniquitad, f. iniquity,
vniustnes, unrighteousness. * Iniquo, m. unjust, unequal, unrighteous. Injuria,
f. wrong, injury, reproach. Injuriado, m. wronged, offered injury, reproched.
Injuriador, m. he that wrongeth, he that reuileth. Injuriadora cosa, a
wrongful matter. Injuriar, to do wrong, to offer injury, to revile.
Injuriosamente, wrongfully, injuriously, reprochfully. Injurioso, m. wrongful,
injurious. Injustamente, unjustly, unrighteously. Injusticia, f.
unrighteousness, injustice. Injusto, m. unjust, unrighteous. * Inmenso, vide
Immenso, m. unmeasurable, huge. * Inmovible, vide Immovible. * I'n^igo, vide
Y'n^igo, the proper name of a man. * Inobedecer, or Inobedescer, to disobey. *
Inobedecido, or Inobedescido, m. disobeied, disobedient. Inobediencia, f.
disobedience. Inobediente, disobedient, stubborn, rebellious. Inocencia, f.
innocence, harmelesnesse, freeness from evil. Inocente, innocent,
harmless, free from doing evil. Inocentemente, innocently, harmlesly. *
Inofficioso testamento, a will or testament bequeathing by legacy more than
the goods amount unto. Inogil, a garter. Inojales, the canion bone, or bone of
the knee pan. Inojo, or Rodilla, a knee. * Inopinadamente, unlooked for,
unthought of, by hap or chance. * Inordinado, vide Desordinado. Inorme,
enormous, heinous, passing all bounds of measure. * Inpertinente, vide
Impertinente. Inovacion, f. innovation, alteration, change, bringing in of some
new devise. Inovado, m. altered anew, changed from the old fashion, innouated.
Inovador, m. one that brings in new customs, a changer of ancient rites.
Inovar, to innouate, to alter ancient customs, to bring in new devises. *
inPoner, vide imPoner. * Inprobizo, Inproviso, or Inbrovizo, at unawares, on a
sudden. * inQuietado, m. disquieted, put out of quiet. * inQuietador, m. a
disquieter, a breaker of rest or peace. inQuietadora cosa, an unquiet matter, a
troublesome thing. inQuietar, to disquiet, to bring out of quiet. inQuieto, m.
unquiet, without rest, restless. inQuietud, f. unquietness, restlesnesse. *
Inquilino, m. one that has no house of his own, but as he hireth for his
money, he that dwells where none of his ancestors did, an inmate that
dwells within another. Inquiridor, m. a searcher, an inquirer, an inquisitor.
Inquirir, to inquire, to search, to make inquisition. Inquisicion, search,
inquiry. Inquisidor, m. an inquisitor, a searcher. * Inronia, f. scoffing,
speaking by contrary, speaking one thing, and meaning nothing so.
Insaciabilmente, vnsaciably, never having enough. Insaciable, insatiable, one
that never has enough, or is never satisfied^ * Insano, m. unsound, unwholesome,
mad, out of his wit, froward, foolish, outrageous, fierce, wood. * Inscrutable,
unsearchable, vnscrutable, not to be found out. * Insensato, m. senseless, one
that can neither hear, see, nor understand. * Insensible, senseless,
insensible, without sense or reason. * Inseparable, that cannot be severed,
inseperable. * Insidias, f. ambushes, layings in wait, privy traps. Insigne,
or Insine, notable, an ensign, a f^ag. Insignias, f. signs, marks or tokens
of honor whereby every estate is known, as robes, maces, swoords. Also badges
of arms for gentlemen. Signs or colors in the ensigns of captains, arms
or scutchions of gentlemen. * Insine, vide Insigne. * Insipido, m. unsavory,
without any taste or smacke, without relish. Also fond. * Insipiente, a fool,
an unwise body, without discretion, an ignorant person, sot or idiote. *
Insistir, to stand or stay upon a matter, to enforce, to labor earnestly, to
pursue diligently, to abide fast and firm. * Insolencia, f. pride, insolency,
want of knowledge of a man's self. * Insolente, proud, insolent, hautie,
vnwoont, not accustomed. * Insolito, unaccustomed, strange, unused. Insonoro,
untunable, that cannot be set in tune. * Insoportable, intolerable,
unsupportable, insufferable. * Inspiracion, f. inspiration, breathing in. *
Inspirar, to breathe in, to inspire, to blow into. Instabilidad, f.
unsteadfastness, inconstancy, folly, vnstaiednesse. Instable, unsteadfast,
unconstant, unstaid, unwise. Instancia, f. instant, earnestnes, standing to a
matter. Instante, instant, earnest in a matter, one that will not give over.
Instar, to be instant, to be earnest, to follow a matter without giving it
over. * Instauracion, f. renewing, repairing. * Instaurar, to repair, to make
new, to reform. * Instigado, m. set on, provoked, pricked forward. * Instigar,
Praes. yo Instigo, 1. Praet. yo Instigue, to set on, to prick forward, to
provoke. * Instigue, vide Instigar. * Instillacion, dropping or putting in by
little and little, instillation. * Instillar, to drop in by little and little,
to instill. * Instimulado, m. pricked on, spurred on. * Instimular, to prick
or spur on. Instinto, m. natural disposition or inclination. Institucion, f.
instruction, appointment, ordinance, a decree or statute. Instituir, to
instruct, to appoint. * Instituto, or Institucion, an appointment, order, a
decree, institution. * Instrucion, f. showing what to do, instruction. *
Instructo, m. instructed, taught what to do. * Instruyr, to instruct, to teach
what to do. Instrumento, m. an instrument, an evidence, a tool to work with,
an instrument of music. * Insuficiencia, insufficiency, unableness. *
Insuficiente, unable, insufficient. Insuffrible, that cannot be endured,
intolerable. * I'nsula, f. an i will. * Insultar, to insult or leap on, to
triumph or vaunt over in disdainful manner. * Insulto, m. an assault, a
setting upon, a leaping upon, a vaunting over one. * Integridad, vprightnes,
integrity, innocence, honesty, soundnes. * I'ntegro, whole, sound, entire,
not broken. Also righteous, upright. * Intelectual, belonging to the
understanding. * Intelegencia, f. understanding, intelligence, knowledge,
sense. * Inteletual, belonging to the understanding. * Inteligente,
understanding, knowing, perceiving, intelligent. * Inteligible, that may be
understood. Intencion, f. purpose, intent, meaning. * Intenso, set forth or
proved to the uttermost, strained, diligently bent or set to a thing, earnest
and vehement, wholly bent and fixed. * Intentado, assaied, tried or proved,
threatened. * Intentador, m. an assaier, a threatener. * Intentar, to assay, to
threaten, to menace, to charge. * Intento, m. intent, purpose. * I'nter, or
I'nterim, in the mean space. * Interceptar, to intercept, to take up by the
way. * Intercession, f. making a way, speaking or entreating for. Intercessor,
m. an intercessor, one that requesteth for another. * Interes, or Interesse,
interest, profit, avail. * Interessado, m. interessed, having right in. *
Interessar, to grant right in, to interesse. * Interesse, vide Interes. *
I'nterim, or I'nter, in the mean space. Interior, m. the inward. *
Interioridad, f. inwardnes, being within. * Interioramente, inwardly. *
Interlocucion, f. an interposition of speech, an interlocution. *
Interlocutoria sententia, the advice of a judge in a matter in controversy. *
Interlocutorio auto, a plea of appeal. * Interlocutor, m. a speaker between,
or that replieth by the way. * Intermedio, the intermeanes. * Interponer, to
set in the mean time. * Interposita persona, one set on to do a thing for
another. * Interposicion, f. a putting between. Interpretacion, f. an
expounding, a making plain of that which is difficult. Interpretar, to
expound, to interpret. Interpret, an expounder, an interpretor, one that
makes doubtful things plain. * Interpuesto, interposed, put betwixt.
Interrogatorio, that asks by way of question. interRomper, to break off, to
interrupt. * interRompido, m. interrupted, broken off. * interRompimiento, a
breaking off between, an interruption. * Interrupto, interrupted, broken off.
Intervalo, a distance or space between. * Intervencion, f. coming between. *
Intervenga, Intervengo, vide Intervenir. * Intervenir, Praes. Intervengo,
Intervienes, Interviene. 1. Praet. Intervine, Interviniste, Intervino. Fut.
Intervendre, or Interverne, as, a. Sub. Praes. Intervenga. Imperfect.
Interviniera, Intervernia, or Interviniesse. Fut. Interviniere, to come
between or in the mean time. * Intervine, Interviniesse, Intervino, vide
Intervenir. * Interveniente, that comes between. Intestino, m. an entrall,
an inward part, a bowell. * Intestina guerra, civil war, war between people
of one and the same nation and kingdom. * Intestinos, the bowels, the guts. *
Intimacion, f. a giving to understand, a signifying, a denouncing, or declaring
of a thing. * Intimado, m. intimated, signified, given to understand. *
Intimar, to signify, to intimate, to give to understand. * I'ntimo, most
inward, in the heart, entirely beloved, hearty, affectionate, deeply rooted in
the heart. * Intitulado, m. entitled, quoted, named, as the name of a book.
Intitular, to entitle, to give a name to a book or writing. * Intolerable,
insufferable, intolerable. * Intolerancia, impatience, intolerablenes. *
Intractabilidad, f. vntractablenes, headstrongnes. Intractable, intractable,
one that cannot be persuaded nor brought to any order, not to be dealt with. *
Intratable, idem. Intricado, m. intricate, hard to be understood, snarled in
many foldes, entangled. Intricar, to entangle, to snarle in difficulties.
Intrinseco, m. inward, familiar, acquainted. Introducion, f. a preparation or
persuasion to a matter, a bringing in. Introduzido, m. brought in. Introduzir,
yo Introduzgo, to bring in. * Intrusion, f. an intruding, intrusion. * Intruso,
intruded. * Invalido, of no strength or force, feeble, weak, of no power.
Invencion, f. an invention, a devise, a plot imagined. * Invencible,
invincible, that cannot be conquered. Inventar, to invent, to find out.
Inventario, m. an inventory, a findall, that is found to be so. Inventor, m.
an inuentor, a finder out, a plotter, or practiser of plots. Invernal,
pertaining to winter, the west wind. Invernar, yo Invierno, to winter, to
continue in winter. * Investidura, f. an inuesting, a placing in his office. *
Investigable, that may be searched, sifted or sought out. Investigar, Praes. yo
Investigo, 1. Praet. yo Investigue, to search out, to enquire out, to search by
the steps of the feet. * Investigue, vide Investigar. * Investir, yo Invisto,
to inuest or place in his office. Also to inuest or to run one within an other,
as battles in war or ships at sea. * Invictissimo, m. most unconquered. *
Invidia, hatred, rancor, envy, repining, malice, grudge, grief. * Invidiar,
to spite, malign, envy, hate, grudge, repine. * Invidioso, full of malice,
spite, envy, hatred, envious, hateful, spiteful. * Invierne, Invierno, vide
Invernar. Invierno, m. winter. * Inviolable, that may not be broken, violated
or corrupted. * Inviolado, unviolated, uncorrupted, unbroken. Invisible, that
cannot be seen. * Inviste, Invistir, vide Investir. Inumerable, innumerable,
without number, that cannot be rec^^^ed. * Invocacion, f. a calling upon, an
invocation for aid. * Invocar, to call upon, to require help. * Inusado, m.
unused. * Inusitado, unused, out of custom or use, not wont. * Inutil,
unprofitable. * Inxerir, to graffe * Inxerido, m. graffed.
I O
* Io, vide yo, Job, Job, a most patient good man. * Sacar de camino un Job, to
move or vex a saint. * Jocundo, m. iocund, merry, pleasant. * Jonjoli, an
apothecary drugge. * Jontar, vide Juntar, to join, to assemble, to set
together. * Jorfe, a wall of dry stone. Jornada, f. a journey, a days work,
a battle. Also an act in a comedy. Jornal, wages, or hyre for a day, a book of
daily reckonings. Jornalero, m. a day laborer, a hyreling that works by the
day. Jorro, as llevar la nao a Jorro, to tow a ship, or to draw her along.
Jota, a jot, a scrap, any little, the Queen at cards, a jewel. * Joven, m. a
young man, a man of able years. * Jovencilla, f. a pretty young girl. *
Jovenil, pertaining to a young body. * Joventud, f. lusty youth. * Jovido de
boca, blowing with the cheeks full of wind, puffed. Joya, f. a jewel,
household stuff. Joyel, a tablet, a chain, a carcanet. Joyero, m. a ieweller.
Joyo, m. cockle, darnell. Joyo silvestre, wild darnell, wall barley.
I P
Ipocresia, f. hypocrisy, dissimulation, double dealing. Ipocrita, m. an
hypocrite, a dissembler.
I R
* I'r, to go. I'ra, or Yra, f. anger, wrath, displeasure. * I'r abajo, or I'r
abaxo, to go below. * Iracundo, or Yracundo, angry, wrathful, displeased.
Irado, or Yrado, m. angry, displeased, wrathful. * Ironia, f. a figure in
speaking when one means (...) contrary to that he says, a scoffing,
flowting or mocking. * Irracional, Yrracional, without reason. Irregular, or
Yrregular, without rule, without order. Irregularidad, or Yrregularidad, f.
irregularitie, out of order. Irregularmente, irregularly, contrary to order. *
Irremisiblemente, without pardon or remission. Irreparable, past recovery,
that cannot be repaired. * Irreprovable, irreprooueable, not to be reprehended.
* Irrevocable, that cannot be called back. * Irritable, easily provoked to
anger. * Irritar, to stir up, to provoke, to incense, to anger. * Irronia, vide
Ironia.
I S
I'sla, or Y'sla, f. an i will. * Islado, or Yslado, m. made an i will, compassed
about with water. * Islanda. f. the country of Island. * Islandes, a man of
Island. * Islen^o, or Yslen^o, belonging to an i will, a man or dweller in an i will.
* Isleo, vide Ysleo. * Isleta, vide Ysleta, f. a little i will. * Isopazo, washing
with hysope, watering with the holy water sprinkle. Isopo, or Ysopo, m. a holy
water sprinkle. Also the herb hysope. * Isquierdo, or Ysquierdo, the left.
Istoria, or Ystoria, f. an history, a book of records. Istoriador, or
Ystoriador, m. a writer of histories. Istorial, or Ystorial, pertaining to
histories. * Istorico, vide Istoriador. Also of or pertaining to histories. *
Istoriographo, a writer of histories. * Istrumento, vide Instrumento.
I T
* I'tem, also. * I'ten, idem. * Iterar, vide Reiterar, to reiterate or
repeat. Itericia, f. a disease called the iaundise. Iterico, one sick of the
iaundise. * Itinerario, a book of remembrance, containing things don in
iourneys. Also the calendar of miles, with the distaunce of places, and the
time of aboade in every place.
I V
* I'va, the preterimperfect tense of the infinitive mood of yr, he went, it
went, or did go. * Juan, m. the proper name John. * Juanete, the top of a
mast, in a ship. * Juanico, as they say in english iockey, jack. Juanillo,
idem. * Jubetero, m. a maker or seller of doublets. Jubilado, m. freed from
travel. Jubilar, to be free from travel and labor. Jubileo, m. the iubilee, a
time when folk cease from labor and keep festival time. Jubon, m. a
doublet. * Juca, f. an herb in the Indies with the root whereof they make
bread. * Judas, m. Judas that betrayed Christ. Juderia, f. the Jewish
religion. Judia, vide Frisoles, Also a woman Jew. Judicatura, f. judgment,
the sentence of the judge. Judicial, belonging to judgment. Judiego,
pertaining to a Jew. Judihuelo, m. a Jew. Also a small kind of white pease.
Judio, m. a Iawe. * Juega, Juego, vide Jugar, to play. Juego, m. play, sport,
pastime. * Juego de can^as, skirmish with throwing canes on horseback one at
an other. * Juego del avejon, vide Abejon. * Juego de tablas, table play.
Jueves, m. thursday. Juez, m. a judge. Jugador, m. a plaier, a gamester. *
Jugador de manos, a iugler. Jugar, yo Juego, to play. * Jugar de manos, to
iuggle or to tell a tale with the hand. * Jugar de oreja, to talk or speak in
ones ear. * Jugar de pica, to toss a pike. Juglar, m. a iugler. Iugo, vide
Yugo, a yoke. * Jugoso, vide Xugoso. * Juguetes, m. trifles, toys to play
withal. Jujuba, vide Acofeyfa. Juyzio, judgment. Julepe, a kind of potion
called a iulep. * Julian, m. a proper name. Julio, m. the month called July.
Juncal, a place where rushes grow. Juncia, juniper. * Juncia avellanda,
gallingale. Junco, m. a rush. * Junco marino, salt marsh rush, hard rush. *
Junco ave, a bird in the Indies with a very long and narrow tail. * Junco
odoroso, galingale. * Junco, a kind of boat used in China. * Junco
amacorocado, or Bohordo, an herb called Water-torch or Cats-taile. Juncoso, m.
rushie, full of rushes. Junio, m. the month called June. * Junquillo, m. a
little bulrush. Junta, f. an assembly, a counsel, a synod. Juntado, m. come
together, joined, assembled. * Junta para hablar, a meeting to confer together.
Juntamente, together, jointly, with one accord. Juntar, to join, to assemble,
to set together. * Juntillas, f. joined together, close together. * a pie
Juntillas, with the feet close together. Junto, m. close to, joined. Junto, or
Cabe, near, hard by. Juntura, f. joining, coupling, tying together. Jura, f.
an oath. Juraderia, or Juradorio, f. a Conestableship. Jurado, m. sworn, a
Conestable. Jurados, m. magistrates, officers. Juramiento, m. an oath,
swearing, taking of an oath. Jurar, to swear, to call God to witness. *
Juridicamente, like a judge, according to order of law. Juridicion, f.
jurisdiction, the circuit of his authority. * Juridico, m. like a judge,
belonging to law, a court day. * Jurisconsulto, a counselor at law. *
Jurisperito, m. a man skillful in law. * Jurista, m. a lawyer. * Juro, as Juro
de heredad, right of inheritance. * Ser de juro, to be according to the
custom. Jusbarba, f. Kneeholme or Butchersbroome. * Iusion, or Iussion, a
precept, a commandment. Justa, f. a iusting, a running at tilt on horseback.
* Justador, m. a tilter, a runner at tilt or tourney. Justamente, justly,
righteously. Justar, to just, to run at tilt or tourney. Justicia, f.
justice, equity, law, righteousness. * Justiciado, m. having had the law, one
that has suffered according to justice. Justiciar, to do justice, to execute
the law. Justiciero, m. a severe judge, a iusticer, one that without
partiality administreth justice indifferently. Justo, m. just, righteous,
upright. Juvenil, youthful, belonging to lusty youth. * Juventud, f. lusty
youth. * Juysio, Juyzgio, vide Juyzio, judgment. Juyzio, judgment, giving of
sentence. Juzgado, m. judged, the office or place of a judge. * Juzgador, m. a
judge, a pronouncer of sentence. Juzgar. Praes. yo Juzgo, 1. Praet. yo Juzgue,
to judge, to pronounce sentence how it shall be. * Juzgue, vide Juzgar.
K
* KAlendas, the first of every month.
L
LA, she, or it, an article of the feminine gender. * Labaca, f. an herb
called Sower docke. * Labada, vide Abada. * Labanca, f. a water foul, a kind
of ducke. * Labanco, idem. the male or drake. * Labandera, f. a laundresse, a
washer of clothes. * Labar, to wash. Labios, m. lips. Labor, f. work, labor,
travel. Laborcica, f. a small work. Labor de campo, husbandry, plowghmans
trade. * Laborioso, laborious, painful. * Labrado, m. wrought, tilled as
ground, wrought with the needle. * Labrado de aguja, needle work. Labrador,
m. a workman, a ploughman, a husbandman, a labourer. Labranca, f. tillage,
husbandry. Labrandera, a seamster, a woman that gets her living with the
needle. Labrar, to work, to till the ground, to work with the needle. *
Labrios, vide Labios, lips. * Lacada, vide Lazada. Lacargama, an herb called
wild Buglosse. Lacayo, m. a footman, a lackie. Lacha pescado, a kind of fish.
Lacio, weak. * Laco, vide Lazo. Lacre, m. merchants wax. * Lacrimar, vide
Llorar, to weep, to wayle, to lament. * Lacrimoso, vide Lloroso, full of
weeping. Ladear, to lean the body to one side, as a ship, etc. that goes
aside, to hitch up and down. Ladera, f. the side of a hill. Ladillas, f.
crablice, nits on the eiebrowes. * Ladinamente, speaking a tongue or language
well and perfectly. Ladino, m. a man that speaks any tongue well and
perfectly. Lado, m. a side, a flank. * Ladrador, m. a barker, one that barketh
and bayeth. Ladrar, to bark, to bay. Ladrar, barking, baying. Ladrido, m. the
barking. Ladrillado, m. paued, brickworke. Ladrillar, to paue with brickes, to
tile. Ladrillejo, m. small brickes. Ladrillo, m, brick, tile. Ladron, m. a
thief, a robber by the way, a breaker into houses. Ladroncillo, m. a young
thief, a petie thief. Ladronia, f. the very stealing. Ladronicio, theft,
robbery. * Lafriera, a kibe on the heel, a chilblane on the hand. * Laga, f.
vide Lago. Lagan^a, f. filth on the eielids, matter in the eyes. * Lagn^oso, m.
bleere eied. Lagar, a great fat or tub to tread Grapes in. Lagar de viga, a
wine press, the poast over the press to wring out the wine. * Lagardizo, vide
Lagarto, a lizard. Lagareta, f. a small tub that the wine runs into from the
press. Lagartija, f. an efte, a swift, a lizard. Lagarto, m. a lizard, a swift
or eft, a little serpent so called. Lago, m. a lake, a mere, or great pond
having springs that feed it. * Lagos, a town in Portugal. Lagosta, a locust,
a grasshopper. Lagostines, a kind of fish. Lagrima, a tear from the eyes.
Lagrima, f. the bleeding or dropping of a vine when it is cut. Lagrimal del
ojo, the corner of the eye, the bleeding of a vine, etc. Lagrimar, to weep, to
drop or bleed as a vine does after the cutting. Lagrimoso, m. still weeping,
full of tears. Laguna, f. a lake, a moore. * Laico, a lay man, a secular man,
a temporal man. Lama, f. dirt, mire, mud. * Lama de hierro, a thin plate of
iron. * Lamber, vide Lamer, to lick. Lamedal, m. a puddle, a slough, a loach
to lick up. Lamedor, m. a licker, one that uses to lick. Also a Pothecarie
drug. Lamedura, f. a licking, a loach or medicine. Lamentable, lamentable,
worth the weeping for, pitiful. Lamentacion, f. lamentation, mourning,
weeping. Lamentar, to weep, to wayle, to lament. Lamer, to lick. * Lamia, a
certain dog-fish called a Breaknet. Also a fish that has so great a iaw, and
is so ravenous, that he will and can devour an armed man. Also a witch or an
hag. * Lamiendo, licking. Lamina, f. a plate of metal, a leaf of metal. *
Laminada, plated with plates, done over with leaves of plate. * Lamio, a
rayfish, or skatefish. Lampara, f. a lamp to burn. * Lamparada, f. a spot of
a lamp, oil of the lamp or something else falling from the lamp.
Lamparilla, f. a little lamp. Lamparones, or Puercas, kernels, a swelling in
the neck or armepits, the Kings evil. Lampazo, m. an herb called a
Burredocke. Lampino, m. smooth, without beard. Lamprea, f. a fish called a
Lamprey. * Lamprin^o, vide Lampin^o. * Lampugo, m. a fish that has finnes all
along from the head to the tail. Lana, f. wool. * Lana peynada, wool combed.
* Lana carmonada, f. carded wool. Lanca, f. a lance, a dart. * Lanca gineta,
a light horse man's spear. Lanca de ristre, a lance. Lancada, a blow with a
lance, a vomiting. Lancadera, f. a weauers shuttle. * Lancado, m. a vomiting,
a casting out. * Lancar, to throw out, to strik out, to strike with a lance. *
Lancar del el Demonio, to cast the devil out of him. Lancarotes, a kind of
gum to close wounds with, called Sarcocolla. Lance, a blow, a stripe, a
cast. Also a good hap in any business. * Lancear, vide Alancear. Lancero, m.
one that makes or sells lances. Also a lancier, a demilance. Lanceta, a
small dart, a iauelin, sometimes used for a surgeons launcer. Lancon, m. a
knife to let blood with, etc. a great lance. * Lancuda, vide Lancada. *
Lancuela, f. a small lance. Landre, f. kernels in the neck or thigh, the
blaines, botches, the pestilence. Landrezilla, f. blaines. * Lanes, vide
Ladrones. Lanero, m. a clothier, a woolman. * Lanevada, nep or cats mint.
Langosta, f. a great grasshopper, a locust which spoileth the wheat. *
Languido, faint, languishing, weak, lingering, pining, drooping. * Languir, to
pine, faint, languish, linger, droope. * Lanilla, f. a kind of stuff made of
black wool or camels hair. * Lan^a, f. an iron that they use in buildings to
hold the stones together. * Lan^ar. to set irons in buildings, to hold the
stones fast together. * Lanteja, f. lentils, a kind of pulse. Lanterna, f. a
lantern. * Lantisco, m. a certain tree, the wood is good to pick the teeth,
it bears no fruit. Lanudo, m. woollie. Lapa, the hollownesse under a banks
side, the purging of wine. Lapidario, m. one that has skill in precious
stones, and knows the difference, nature and property of each of them. *
Laquey, vide Lacayo, a lackey, or footboy. * Lardar, to larde or dress with
larde. Lardo, m. larde, bakon. * Lardo rancioso, restie bakon. * Laredoma, id
est, La redoma, the vial of glass. * Lares, supposed household gods, whom the
heathen imagined to have power of them and of their household. * Larga, a la
Larga, vide A lo Largo. Largamente, at large, largely. Largar, to set at large,
to set at liberty. Largo, large, wide, broad. * hazerse a lo Largo, to keep a
loofe, to step out as men do at drawing their weapon, or as ships when they
fight. * Largor, the largeness or greatness of a mate. Largueza, f. franknes,
liberality. * Larguillo, somewhat large. Largura, f. length, largeness,
longitude. * Larho, vide Largo. * Las, f. those. Lasan^a, f. a pancake. *
Lascivia, wantonness, lust, lasciuiousnes, uncleanness of life. * Lascivo,
wanton, lascivious, lecherous. * Laso, vide Lazo, a snare, a grin, a trap. *
Laso, vide Lasso, weary. * Lasso, weary. Lastar, to pay, to endure
punishment, to pay debt for another. Lastima, f. grieefe, hurt. Lastimar, to be
sorry, to hurt, to grieve, to wound. * Lastimero, vide Lastimoso. * Lastimoso,
or Lastimozo, full of griefs, troubles or wounds. Lastrar, to ballast a ship.
Lastre, m. ballast for ships. Larte, id est, la art, f, art, cunning. * Lata,
as oro de lata, f. plate, gold beaten to plates. * Latido, m. the leaping of
the heart, the beating of the heart. * Latiente, a leaping thing, as the
beating of the heart. Latigo, a leather strap, or a hempen lashe of a whippe.
Latin, latin. Latinidad, f. the perfection of latin, use of latin. * Latino,
m. latin, or a man of Latium. Latir, to pant, to breath. * Latitud, f. the
breadth or largenes of a thing. * Latolabo, m. a garment used among the Romans
in sign of honor. Laton, m. a fine kind of brass called latton. *
Latrocinio, m, robbery, theft. Lavadero, m. a washing place. * Lavado, m.
washed. Lavador, m. a washer Lavadura, f. washing. * Lavajal, Lavajo, wallowing
in water or dirt, to wash as swine do, a puddle. * Lavajo, idem. * Lavanca,
vide labanca. Lavanco, a drake, a mallard. * Lavandera, f. a laundres, a woman
that uses to wash clothes. Lavar, to wash. * Lavatorio, m. a lauer to wash at,
a bathe. Lavazas, filth washed off, dish wash, etc. * Laud, m. a lute. Laudano,
the gum Labdanum used in pomanders. * Lauds, f. praises. * Lavios, vide
Labios, m. lips. * Lauma, vide Launas. * Launas, vide Laminas, plates to make
corslets with, the blade of a sword. Also a laund or plain of a down. *
Lavor, vide Labor, work, labor. * Lavorcica, a small or little work. *
Laureado poeta, a poet laureate or crowned with laurel. Lauredal, a place
where many laurel or bay trees do grow. Laurel, m. a bay tree. Laureola, f.
an herb called laurie. Also the herb perwinkle. * Lauriero, m. a bay tree. *
Laura, f. the proper name of madame Laura whom Petrark so long loved. * Lauro,
vide Laureado. * Laxa, as dar Laxa a canes, a leash, to let dogs slip off the
leash. * Laxibia, a fish called a cuttle, whose blood is black as ink.
Lazada, f. a snare, a riddle, a laced button, a loope hole for lace, button or
such like, etc. * Lazadas, idem. * Lazerado, m. miserable, niggardly. Lazeria,
f. miserableness, niggardise. Lazillo, m. a little snare, a little trap, a
little knot. Lazo, a knot, a grin, a trap. * Lazul, a bright blew stone called
a lazul stone. * Lea, Leo, vide Leer. Leal, faithful, loyal. Lealmente,
faithfully, loyally. Lealtad, f. loyalty, faithful trustines. Lebrada, f. hare
broth or pottage made with a hare, hare worts, sauce for a hare. Lebrastilla,
f. a leueret, or young hare. Lebrel, m. a harrier, a greyhound. Lebrillo, m. an
earthen pot, an earthen pan. Lebrillejo, m. a little basin of earth. * Lebrixa,
f. a town of Andaluzia, called in Latin Nebrissa, of which AElius Anton.
Nebrissensis, was so called. Lebruno, m. pertaining to a hare. Leccion, or
Lecion, a reading, a lesson, a lecture. Lechal, made of milk, pertaining to
milk. Leche de gallina, a white field onion. Leche, f. milk. * Leche azeda,
rennet, such as they make cheese with. * Leche de manteca, butter-milke,
churnmilke. * Leche de pesce, the milt of a fish. Lechera piedra, a precious
stone called Galactite. * Lechera, f. a bed of timber work to lay a piece of
ordinance on. Also vide Lechetrezna. Lechetrezna, f. an herb called Spurge. *
Lechia, a kind of plum. Lechiga, f. a beer to carry dead bodies on. Lechin,
a kind of long Olive. Also the galling or wearing off the hair of horse or
mule when they first begin to work. Lecho, m. a bed. Lechon, m. a sucking
pig. Lechuga, f. a lettuce. Lechuga crespa, a curled or ragged leafed lettuce.
* Lechuga parrada por el suelo, a Cabbage lettuce, a leafed or headed Lettuce.
* Lechuguilla, f. the ruff of a ruff band. Also a little Lettuce. * mangas de
Lechuguilla, f. sleeves of lawne or fine linen that women wear which have
ruffes at hands. * cuello de Lechuguilla, a ruff band. Lechuguino, m. small
Lettuce. Lechuza, f. an owl. Lecion, or Leccion, reading, a lesson. Lectura,
vide Letura. * Leda faz, f. a merry countenance. Ledamente, merrily, joyfully,
gladly. * Leeldo, id est, Leed Io, read it. Leer, to read. Legacia, f. a
legacy, an embassage, a message from a Prince. Legado, m. an ambassador, a
legate. Legajo, m. a bundle of papers, a file of writings. * Legal, of or
pertaining to the law, triable by law, lawful. * Legalidad, f. lawfulnes. *
Legalizado, made lawful, or legitimate. * Legato, a legacy or bequeast of a
Testament or will. * Legenda, f. a legend, a book to be read often, scripture,
a writing. * Legeremente, vide Ligeremente, lightly, nimbly. * Legereza, vide
Ligereza, nimblenes, liuelines. * Legero, vide Ligero, light, nimble, active. *
Legible, that may be read, legible. Legion, an army of soldiers consisting of
6100. footmen, and 730. horsemen. * Legislator, m. a lawgiuer, a lawmaker.
Legista, m. a lawyer. * Legitimado, made lawful, become legitimate, or as one
lawfully borne. Legitimar, to make legitimate, or capable by law. Legitimo, m.
lawfully borne, legitimate. * Legno, m. len^o, a block. Lego, m. lay,
profane, a lay man, one of the vulgar sort. Legua, f. a league, three miles,
three miles and three quarters as some say. Legumbre, f. Pulse, as Beans,
Pease, Vetches, etc. * Leido, vide Leydo, m. read. * Leible, vide Leyble, that
may be read. Lena, f. breath. Lencal, any thing of flax. Lencero, m. a linen
draper. * Lendarse, vide Leudar. * Lendero, m. a linen draper. * Lendre, vide
Liendre, f. a neete, the spawne of a louse. Lendrero, m. a place where neets
breed. Lendroso, m. full of neets. Lengua, f. a tongue. Lengua de buey,
buglosse, called also Lange-de-beuf. Lengua de Ciervo, an herb called Hearts
tongue. Lengua de perro, an herb called hounds tongue. Lengua de cordero, an
herb called lambs tongue. Lengua de balanca, the tongue of the balance showing
which balance is heauiest. * Lengua cervina, Hearts tongue. Lengua de cavallo,
an herb called horse tongue, or laurel of Alexandria. * Lenguado, m. a fish
called a soale. Lenguage, or Lenguaje, language, the propriety of a speech. *
Lenguaz, full of tongue, full of words. Len^a, f. wood. Len^a hacinada, f. wood
piled up. Len^ador, m. a woodmonger, a carrier or maker of wood. * Len^a
enligada, f. limed twigs. Len^o, a block. * Leno, a fisherboate. Lentecer, or
Lentescerse, to wax weak, to wax slender. Lenteja, a kind of pulse called
Lentils. Lenteja de agua, an herb called duckes meat. * Lenterno, a
lantern. Lentisco, m. the masticke tree. * Lento, m. slow, bowing, pliant,
soft, negligent. * Lentorpecer, id est le Entorpecer, to make him dull,
heavy, or senseles. Lentura, f. bowing, bending, a slow going or creeping. *
Lenzeria, f. a place where they sell linen. Also much linen together. *
Lenzon, m. cloth of canuas, or very course linen cloth. Leon, m. a lion.
Leona, f. a lioness, a she lion. * Leona, a city of Cappadocia so called.
Leonado, m. lion colored. Leoncillo, m. a lions whelpe. * Leonera, f. a place
to keep lions in. * Leonpardo, m. a leopard. * Leopardo, m. idem. * Lepanto, a
sea so called. Lepra, f. the leprosy. Leproso, m. one that is troubled with
the leprosy, a lazer. * Lepusquia, f. the principal province in Biscay.
Lerdo, m. slow, lazy, cowardly. * Lesion, f. damage, hurt. * Lesnord este,
the east northeast, or the northeast by east. * Lest, m. the east. Letania, f.
the letanie, a certain order and number of prayers. * Lethargia, f. the
drowsy sickness whereof men die beastly. * Lethe, a river of hell as poets
feign, the water whereof being drunk makes men to forget all whatsoever they
have done or said. * Letiera, f. a horse litter. Letor, or Lector, m. a reader.
Letra, f. a letter. Letrado, m. learned, a lawyer. Letrera, f. a row of
letters, a writing. Letrina, f. a sink, a draught, a privy. * Letuario, an
electuarie. * Letura, a reading, a lecture, a lesson. * Leva, a press or
taking up men for the war. Also a weighing of anchor. Levada, f. a thing lifted
up. Also proved, tried, assaied. Also a bout or turn at fence. Levada en
juego, a bout at fence. Levadar, vide Lleudar, to leven bread. * Levadiza
puente, f. a draw bridge. Levado, m. taken up, weighed anchor. Levadura. f.
leven for bread. * Levandiza puente, f. vide Levadiza puente. Levantado, m.
that which is aloft, raised up. * Levantadas las mesas, f. the tables being
taken up. Levantamiento, m. a setting up, lifting, arising, rising, rebelling.
Levantar, to lift up, to raise, to swell, to puff up, to weigh anchor, to rise
in rebellion. Levante, m. a lifting up, the east, the east wind. * Levar, to
arise, to lift up. * Leudar, to leven bread. * Leudo, leuened as bread. * Leve,
light, easy, not burdensome. * Levecho, m. east southeast. Lexano, m. far off.
Lexia, f. lie to wash withal. * Lexion, a lie for diers with which they make a
false glass on their colors. Lexos, far off. Lexura, f. farnesse, distance
off. Ley, f. a law. * Ley de bueno juro, by the faith of an honest man I
swear. Leyble, legible, that may be read. Leydo, m. read. * Leyente, one that
reads. * Leyendas, f. legends of saints. * Leyla, an ancient custom of
dancing among the Moors. * Leyno, vide Linde, a limite, a bound.
L I
* Lia, f. a with of Osier twigs to bind withal. * Liaca, f. a bundle of
osiers. * Liar, to bind with withs of osier rods, or such like: to make or
bind up a bundle. Libacion, sacrifice offered. Also a tasting in offering. *
Libano, m the frankincense tree. * Libar, to taste, to assay, to cull out or
offer in sacrifice. * Libelo, m. a libell, a defaming libell, a pasquine. Also
a declaration of a man's plea or process. Liberal, liberal, bountiful,
honest, courteous, gentlemanlike. Liberalidad, f. liberality, bounty, honest
dealing. Liberalmente, liberally, bountifully, honestly, courteously. *
Liberamente, vide Libremente, freely. * Libero, m. free, clear, enfranchized,
set at liberty. Libertad, f. freedom, liberty, franchise. Libertado, m. set
at liberty, made free, enfranchized. Libertar, to set at liberty, to make
free, to discharge, to enfranchise. * Libertino, a free man, one that is
manumissed and set at liberty, a libertine. * Libia, f. the country called
Lybia. * Libidinoso, libidinous, lustful, luxurious, fleshly, incontinent.
Libra, f. a pound weight. Also a constellation in the firmament being one of
the twelve signs of the Zodiake. Librado, m. delivered, freed. Librado, served
or used. Librado, as el mejor Librado, he that sped best, dispatched, paid
his money. Librador, m. a deliverer or discharger. Also one that gives a bill
or warrant to receive money by. Libramiento, m. freeing or discharging. Also
vide Libranca. Libranca, f. a bill of receipt, a warrant to receive by. Librar,
to deliver, to make free, to give a bill or warrant to receive money by, to
dispatch or rid. Libre, free. Librea, f. a liuerie. * Libreados, m. such as
have liueries. * Libremente, freely, frankely. * Libremiento, m. freedom.
Libreria, f. a library of books. * Librero, m. a booke-seller, a keeper of a
library. Libreta, f. a little pound weight. * Librillo, m. a little book.
Also a little earthen pot or pan. Libro, m. a book. * Libro de caxa, or Libro
de raciones, a book of accounts, a reckoning book. * Libro de memoria, a note
book. Lica, or Trance de armas, a cumbat, a battle. Licencia, f. a license,
leave, liberty. Licenciado, m. licenced, a bacheler of law. Licenciar, to
license, to give leave or liberty. * Licencioso, sensual, luxurious,
licentious. * Licio, a man of Licia. * Licion, a lesson, a reading. *
Licitamente, lawfully, freely. Licito, m. lawful. Licor, or Liquor, m. liquor,
moisture. Lid, f. contention in law, strife, debate, fighting. Lidiar, to go
to law, to strive, to contend. * Lidiado toro, a baited bull. Liebre, f. a
hare. * Liebre de mar, an ugly fish called a sea hare. Lienco, m. linen
cloth. Also used for a picture or protraiture which, are done in cloth. *
Lienco sutil, fine linen cloth. * Lienco de muralla, the curtain of a wall.
* Liendre, f. a nit, the spawne of a louse. Liento, bowing, bending, leaning,
pliant, slow. * Lieua, a taking up, a leauying up. Liga, f. a league or band of
amity, bird-lime, a band, a garter, misseltoe, a green shrub growing on apple
tree, crabbe trees, etc. Ligado, m. bound, tied. Ligadura, f. a band, tying,
binding. * Ligamento, m. a band, a tying, binding. Ligar, Praes. yo Ligo, 1.
Praet. yo Ligue, to bind, to tie, to make fast. Ligeramente, lightly, nimbly,
actiuely. Ligereza, f. lightness, nimblenes, actiuenes. * Ligerissimo, m. most
nimble, most active, most swift, most light. Ligero, m. light, active, nimble.
* Ligue, vide Ligar. * Lijero, or Ligero, m. light, nimble, active. Lima, f. a
file, a limon. Lima, or Limon, a Limon, or a Lymon tree. * Limaca, f. a snaile.
* Limada, f. a deformed kind of dog-fish. * Limadamente, exquisitely, trickly.
* Limado, filed, tricked. Limadura, f. filing, saw-dust, pindust, whatsoever
comes of the filing or sawing of any thing. Limar, to file. * Limaza de uvas,
the garden snaile. Limera, f. a Limon tree. Limeta, f. a glass, a small violl.
* Limitaneo, m. which is limited or appointed his bounds. Limitar, to limit, to
appoint the bounds. Limite, m. a bound, a limit, a compass. Limo, m. mud,
dirt. * Limoges, or Limojes, a city in France within the Dukedom of Aquitane.
* Limon, m. a Limon. Also a Limon tree. * Limon del carro, the long snoute that
goes between the oxen in a waine. * Limon, a town in Poictow in France. *
Limonar, a place where Limons grow. Limosna, f. alms. * Limosnar, to give
alms. * Limosneador, one that beggeth or asks alms. Limosnear, to ask or
beg alms. Limosnero, m. an almoner. Limoso, m. durtie, mirie. Limpiadamente,
cleanly, neatly. * Limpiadera, a brush. Limpiadero, m. an instrument to make
clean with. Limpiaduras, f. the parings of any thing. Limpiamente, clearly,
finely, neately, handsomely. Limpiar, to cleanse, to make clean, to make fine
and neat. Limpieza, f. cleannes, purity, neatness, finenesse. Limpio, m.
clean, pure, bright, fine, neat. * Limpion, m. a cleanser of priuies, a iakes
farmer, a goldfiner. Lineage, m. a stock, a lineage. * Linaje, vide Lineage, m.
Linaloe, the tree of Aloes. Linar, a bed wherein flax is sowed or grows.
Linaza, f. line seed. * Lince, m. a spotted beast called a Lynx that is very
quick sighted. * Lincoya, m. a proper name of an Indian. Lindaco, m. a bound,
a border. Lindamente, cleanly, finely. * Lindar, to border, to bound out.
Linde, f. a bound, a border, a coast. Lindero, m. a bounder or butter out.
Lindeza, f. finenes, neatnes, cleanlines. Lindo, m. clean, neat, fine,
handsome. * Lindo, a city in the i will of Rhodes. Linea, f. any kind of line,
streake or draught, a line of kindred. Also with Mathematicians a length
without breadth or thicknes. Linea-vera, vide Carcax. Lino, m. flax or linen.
Lin^os, or caberos de la vin^a, the ranges or ranks in vines as they are set
and placed. * Linterna, f. a lantern. Lio, m. a fardle, a pack. Liquecer, to
melt. * Liquidacion, f. a clearing or making clear of any thing. Liquido, m.
moist, liquid. * Liquor, or Licor, m. liquor. Lira, f. a harp. * Liria, f.
birdlime to catch birds with. Lirio, a lilly. Lirio cardeno, garden flag,
flower deluce. Liron, m. a dormouse. Lironcillo, m. a little field mouse, or
little dormouse. * Lisamente, smoothly. Lisiado, m. hurt. * Lisiar, to hurt.
Lision, f. a hurt. Liso, or Lizo, m. smoothe, balde. Lisongeado, m. flattered,
smoothed up in words. Lisongear, to flatter. Lisongero, m. a flatterer, a
smoothbootes, a clawbacke. Lisonja, f. flattery. * Lisonjas de oro, embroderie
with gold. * Lisonjear, or Lisongear, to flatter. * Lisonjero, or Lisongero, a
flatterer. Lista, f. the list of cloth, a roll of names. Listada, striped with
many colors. Listones, garters, listes. Lisura, f. smoothnes. * Litargia, vide
Letargia. * Litargirio, the froth or foame of silver. Litera, f. a
horse-litter. Literas, vide Letras, letters. * Litigador, m. a wrangler, one
that goes to law. * Litigante, one striving, wrangling, or going to law.
Litigar, Praes. yo Litigo, 1. Praet. yo Litigue, to chide, to brawle, to go to
law. Litigioso, m. full of strife, contentious. * Litigue, vide Litigar. *
Litispendencia, a demur in law. * Litor, m. a kind of sergeant. Livianamente,
lightly. Liviandad, f. lightness. Liviano, m. light, idle headed. * Liviano
viento, a small pleasant fresh breathing of the wind, Livienos, or Bofes, the
lungs. * Livrado, or Librado, delivered, freed. * Livramiento, or Libramiento,
deliverance; freeing, or a bill or warrant to receive money. * Livrar, or
Librar, to set free, to deliver, to give a bill or warrant, to receive money. *
Liurea, a liuerie garment. Lixa, f. a skatefish, Lixo, vide Cieno, mudde. Lizo,
m. a web of cloth, the web in the loome. Lizos para texer, the owfe or thread
of linen wound up on the two beams, which the sleie does weaue up and
down.
Ll A
Llaga, f. a wound, a stripe. Llagado, m. wounded, beaten with stripes.
Llagar, Praes. yo Llago, 1. Praet. yo Llague, to wound, to strike. Llagoso, m.
full of wounds, full of stripes. * Llague, vide Llagar. Llama, f. a flame of
fire, a cry. Llamado, m. called. Llamador, m. a caller. * Llmalde, id est
Llamad le, call him. Llamamiento, m. a crying, a calling. Llamar, to cry, to
knock or call at the gate. * Llamarada, f. on a burning fire. Llanamente,
plainly. * Llanar, to make plain, to make easy. * Llaneza, f. plainnes,
sincerity, simplenes. Llano, m. plain, simple. Llanta, f. a plant. Also the
binding iron about the wheels of carts. Llantear, to bewail, to bemone.
Llanten, m. the herb called Plantaine. Llanto, m. a complaint, a crying out.
Llantura, vide Llanura. Llanura, plainness, a plain. Llares, or Ollares, pot
hangers. Llave, f. a key. Llaverizo, a key bearer. * Llavera, f. a key clog. *
Llauto, m. a kind of platted wire which the Indians wear on high on their
foreheads garnished with gold and checker work, with many precious stones, in
which they set their plumes (which they are much delighted in) but they wear
not this in war, for then they use head pieces.
Ll E
Llegada, f. an assembly or meeting. Llegado, m. assembled, gotten together,
come near to. Llegar, to gather together, to come near. * Llegar a caso, to
come together by chance, to come in the nicke. * Llenar, vide Henchir, to fill
or stuff full. * Llen^a, f. wood. Llenador, m. a woodmonger, a maker, hewer or
carrier of wood. Lleno, m. full. Llevador, m. a bearer, a lifter. Llevar, to
bring, to bear, to carry, to draw, to lift, to take away, to take up, to
levy or gather. * Llevar en buelo, to run away with, to carry quite away. *
Llevar en la cabeca, to carry on the head. * Llevar en la rienda, to lead by
the bridle. * Llevar a jorro, to towe a bark or boat. * Lleudado, vide
Lleudo. * Lleudar, to leven bread. * Lleudo, m. leuened as bread. Llexos, vide
Lexos, far off.
Ll O
* Lloradero, m. a place where they weep, a place to mourn in. * Llorado, m.
wept, lamented. Llorar, to weep, to wail, to lament. Lloro, m. weeping,
wailing. Llorosamente, weepingly, with wailing and lamentation. Lloroso, m.
mournful, lamentable, pitiful. * Llotrar, vide Aquillotrar, to make an end,
to dispatch. Llovediza agua, rain water. Llover, yo Lluevo, to rain. *
Llovido, m. rained. Lloviznar, to driZZle, to miZZle, to be showrie.
Ll V
Llubia, vide Lluvia, f. rain. * Lludar, to leven bread. * Lludir, idem. *
Llueve, Lluevo, vide Llover. * Lluvezita, f. a little small driZZling rain.
Lluvia, or Llubia, f. rain. Lluvioso, m. rainie, showrie.
L O
Lo, it, that. * Loa, f. praise, commendation. Loable, praise worthy.
Loablemente, commendably, laudably. * Loado, m praised. Loar, to praise. Loba,
f. a she woolfe, a ridge, a kind of cassocke. * Loba, as Loba frizada, a
freeze cassocke or cottoned cassocke. * Loba de la puerta, a great key for a
great door or gate. * Loba enter sulco y sulco, a space between furrow and
furrow. Lobadado, m. a swelling about the jaws, swollen with bunches. Lobado,
m. bunches in the flesh, a disease in a horse, called the fashions. *
Lobagante, a fish called a Lobster. Lobanillo, m. a swelling called a carbuncle
or plague soar, a bile or push. Lobera, f. a cassocke furred with woolfe. Also
the den of the woolfe. Lobezno, or Lobillo, m. a woolfes whelp. Lobillo, or
Lobezno, or Lobito, idem. Lobito, Lobillo, or Lobezno, idem. * Lobitos en tal
gesto, a flouting speech, id est, Come my pretty little munkie face, pretty
little woolfes face. Lobo, m. a woolfe. Lobo marino, a sea calfe. * Lobo
cerval, a linx. Lobrego, dark, sad, mournful. Lobuno, m. belonging to a
woolfe. Loca, f. vessels of earth. * A'nde la loca, let dishes walk, let us
make good cheer. * Loca, f. a she fool. * Locace, a prating fellow full of
words. Locamente, foolishly, madly. Locania, f. bravery, gallantnes,
wantonness. Locano, m. wanton, brave, gallant, frolike, a lusty blood. Loco, m.
a fool, a frantike man. Locura, f. foolishnes, madness. Lodo, m. dirt mire.
Lodoso, m. durtie, mirie. Logica, f. logic, the art of reasoning, skill how
to prove and disprooue by arguments cunningly. Logico, m. a logitian, a
cunning fellow in reasoning. Logrado, as malLogrado, unfortunate. Lograr, to
win, to gain, to get by usury, to enjoy any thing a long while. Logrero, m.
an usurer. Logro, m. usury, gain. * Logusta, f. a creuish, a sea lobster.
Also a worm, a destroier of wheat corn. * Loma de montana, the ridge of a
mountain. Lomas, ridges, tops of hills. * Lo de mas, the remainder, the
residue. Lombarda, f. a piece of ordinance. Lombardero, m. a gunner.
Lombriguera yerva, Southernwood. Lombriz, f. an earth-worme, a worm in the
belly. * Lomismo, id est, Lo mismo, the self same. Lomo, m. the loins, the
back, a ridge. Also the list of cloth. Lomo de libro, the bosse of a book. *
Lomo enter sulco y sulco, a ridge of a land. * Londres, the city London in
England. Longaniza, f. a pudding, a sawsige. * Longanizero, m. a sawsige maker,
a pudding seller. * Longitud, f. the length. * Longueron, a shell fish living
in the sand of the sea, of the length and bigness of ones finger. Longura, f.
length. Lonja, f. a great piece or part. Lonja de tocino, a lunch of bakon.
Lonja de mercaderes, a row or place for merchants to walk and confer in, for
to do their business. Lonja de casa, a low walk under pillars like a cloister.
* Lonja, or passeadero, idem. Loor, m. praise, laud, commendation. Loquear, to
be foolish, to be frantike or mad. Lo que, that, which. * Loquilla,
Loquillo, a little fool, he, or she. * Loquita, Loquito, idem. Loriga, f. a
brestplate, a maile, a habergeon. Lorigado, m. armed with a habergeon. *
Loriguillo, an herb with which diers die withal. Loro, m. dun colored. Also
a parret. Los, they. Losa, a trap for birds, a pauement. Losado, m. paued.
Losar, to paue. * Lovo, vide Lobo, a he woolfe. * Loytia, a knight of China. *
Loza, vessels of earth.
L V
* Lubrico, m. slipperie, inconstant. * Lucentor, painting for the face to make
it clear and bright. * Lucero, vide Luzero. Lucha, f. wrestling. Luchador, m.
a wrestler. * Luchamiento, m. wrestling. Luchar, to wrestle. * Lucidissimo,
vide Luzidissimo, most bright shining, most clear. * Lucido, vide Luzido,
bright shining or clear * Luciente, v. Luziente, bright, shining. Luciernaga,
f. a glow-worme that shines by night in the hedges like a little candle. *
Lucillo, vide Luzillo, a tomb. * Lucir, vide Luzir, to shine bright. Ludir, to
rub one thing with another. Luego, then, therefore, by and by. *
Luegoteniente, vide Lugar-teniente, a lieutenant. Luenez, long, a far off.
Also a man in Spain. Luengamente, at length. Luengo, m. long. * Luen^a, vide
Lexos. Lugar, m. a place: also a village. * Lugar, a village. * Lugarejo, m. a
little village. Also a little place. * Lugarteniente, or Lugar-tiniente, m. a
lieutenant, a deputy. * Lugubre, mournful, lamentable, with wailing and
weeping. Lumbral, the threshold, or groundsell of a house. Lumbre, f. light,
the fire, the piece of timber over the door, the brow piece, the transom or
lyntell. Lumbrera, that which gives light. * Lumbriz, f. worms in the belly,
earthwormes that be reddish and long. Lumbroso, lightsome, full of light.
Luminacion de libros, limning of books. Luminador de libros, a lymner of
books. Luminar libros, to lymne books. Luminaria, lights in the night. Luna,
f. the moon. * Luna llena, the moon at full. * Luna cuernuda, the moon at
the prime. Lunar, the moon light, a spot in the body. Lunar piedra, a stone
called Selenites. Lunatico, m. one that is sick, or mad at the full or change
of the moon, lunatike. * Lunco, m. a kind of boat, or small ship used in
China. Lunes, m. monday. * Lupercal, a place under the hill Palatine at Rome
dedicated to Pan, who was said to keep the woolfes from devouring the sheep.
* Lupo, or Robalo, a fish called a base. * Lupulos, a kind of herb. *
Lusarte, m. a portingale, a man of portingale. * Lusitania, f. the country of
Portingale. * Lusitano, m. one of Portingale, a man of Portingale. Luster, the
show, the glistering or glass of any color. * Lustroso, full of show,
glistering. Lutado, m. clad in mourning apparel. * Luteo, m. made of clay, or
dirt. * Lutherano, m. one of the opinion of Luther. * Lutico, a mourner. Luto,
m. mourning, lamentation, mourning apparel, Luxuria, f. leachery, wantonness,
excess in riot. Luxuriar, to be leacherous, to exceed in riot.
Luxuriosamente, leacherously, riotously. Luxurioso, m. leacherous, riotous,
wanton. Luz, f. light. Luzero, the morning star. * Luzidissimo, m. most
bright shining, most clear. * Luzido, m. bright shining. Luziente, bright
shining. Luziernaga, or Luciernaga, a glowworme. Luzillo, m. a tomb.
Luzimiento, m. the lightning. Luzio, m. shining, glistering. Luzir, to shine,
to show bright.
L Y
* Lyra, a harp, a skatefish. * Lyrios, lillies.
M
* MA'bos, pestles in oil milles, paper milles, etc. * Maca, f. a mace or club
with iron pricks, or plated with iron so that it cannot be cut, a hammer, a
beetle. * Maca de rueda, the naue of a wheel wherein the spoakes stand.
Macacote, m. lyme and sand mixed together, the stuff whereof glass is made.
* Macagua, f. a fruit in the Indies. * Macamorra, the crumbs or fragments of
biscuit bread. * Macan, or Macanero, m. a mace bearer, one that carries a mace.
* Macan de puerco, vide Mazan de puerco. * Macana, f. a kind of weapon in the
Indies as a clubbe done at the end with flint stone. Macapan, m. a marchpaine.
* Macarronado, m. made or done with fresh cheese and cream. Also like that
fashion. Macarrones, fresh cheese and cream. * Macas, a spice called mace.
Macero, m. a mace bearer. * Maceta, f. a flower pot of earth. Also a mallet. *
Macete, a little mallet. * Macher, m. a village in the kingdom of Granada in
Spain. * Macherra, f. vide Machorra, a barren woman. * Machete, m. a great
knife that the pesants and old men use in Spain to wear at their girdles
like a butchers knife, or a cooks knife. * Machina, f. an engine, a frame, a
piece of workmanship, a subtle devise or shift, a complot, a conspiracy.
Macho, m. the male kind of any creature, the man, a smithes sledge, or great
hammer. Also a he goat. * Macho de herrero, a smithes sledge or greatest
hammer, wherewith he works great bars of iron. * Macho de silla, a maile for
a saddle. A nag or gelding to ride on. * Machora, vide Machorra. Machorra, f.
barren, fruitless, childlesse. Machucado, m. stamped, beaten in a mortar. *
Machucador, m. a stamper, one that stampeth in a mortar or otherwise.
Machucadura, f. stamping, powning in a mortar. Machucar, Praes. yo Machueco, 1.
Praet. yo Machuque, to pound, to stamp. * Machuque, Machueco, vide Machucar.
Macias, m. the proper name of a young man, Page to a King of Spain, which died
for love he bare to his mistres, and is called the Idol of lovers. Macicar, to
make sound or whole. Macicez, f. soundnes. Macico, m. sound, solid, whole. *
Macico de la pluma, that which is above the hollownes of a pen, the solidenes
of a pen. * Macisso, a kind of massy paste to cast unto the fish in angling.
* Macizez, vide Macicez, f. solidenes, soundnes. Maco, m. a hammer, a beetle. *
Maco de hierro, an iron mace, a battle axe. * Maconadura, f. a ramming in, a
beating in. Maconear, to drive down with a hammer or beetle. Maconeria, f. a
free masons art or work. Macorca, f. flax on the distaffe, as much as is set
on at one time. * Macula, f. a spot, a blot, a blemish, an infamy, reproach,
discredit, or shame. * Maculado, m. spotted, blotted, defamed, reproched,
blemished, discredited. * Macular, to spot, to blemish, to reproach, to
discredit. * Madeja, vide Madexa, a skaine of thread or silk. Madera, f.
timber. Maderado, m. timbered, done with timber, planchered, boorded.
Maderamiento, m. doing with timber, planchering, boording. Maderar, to do with
timber, to board, to plancher. Madero, m. wood, a rafter, a plancke. Madero, a
beam, a rafter, a shingle, a quarter, a gibbet. Madexa, f. a skaine of thread.
Madexita, f. a little skaine of thread. Madrasta, vide Madrastra, f. *
Madrastra, or Madrasta, f. a stepmother, a mother in law. Madre, f. a mother, a
dame. Madre de rio, the channel. * Madre, or Matriz, the matrix or womb
wherein the child is conceived. * Madreja, a disease in a woman called the
mother. * Madre, or Alvan^ar, a common sincke or retraict. * Madrecilla, vide
Madrezilla. Madreselva, f. Wood-binde, or Hony-suckle. * Madrezilla, f. a poor
wretched old woman. * Madrigera, vide Madriguera. Madriguera de conejo, a
conie hoale, a borough for conies. Madrina, f. a godmother. * Madrina de la
boda, she that accompanies and brings home the bride to the bridegroomes
house. Madriz, f. the womb where the child or young thing is conceived. The
chief or Metropolitan city. Madron^o, or Medron^o, or Heyro, a kind of
wild Orange, the Strawberry tree, an Arbute tree or Wilding tree. Madrugada,
f. the twilight in the morning. * Madrugado, m. up early at the dauning of the
day. Madrugar, to rise early, to rise before the sun be up. Maduramente,
ripely, advisedly, in due time. Madurar, to ripen, to grow mellow, to do with
advise or discretion. Madureza, f. ripenes, mellownes, discretion. Maduro, m.
ripe, mellow, advised. * Maese de Campo, vide Maestre de Campo, a camp master.
* Maestra, f. a mistres. * Maestral, or viento maestro, the north west wind.
Maestrazgo, m. mastership. Maestre, m. a master. * Maestre de campo, vide
Maestro de campo, a campe-master. Maestre escuela, a head schoolmaster, a
chancellor or chief governor of the university. Maestre sala, a gentleman
usher. Also a caruer, a taster for the king or great nobleman. Maestria, f.
mastership, cunning. * Maestro, a master. * Maestro de gramatica, a
schoolmaster that teaches grammar. * Maestro, or Maestre de campo, a
campe-master. * Maga, f. an enchantresse. * Magan^as, f. coosenings, deceits,
guiles. * Magarca yerva, motherwoort, fetherfew. * Magazen, a storehouse.
Magestad, or Majestad, f. majesty, dignity of a great prince. * Magica art,
f. art magic, the black art. * Magico, a magitian, an inchanter. Magnanimo,
m. valiant, courageous, of a noble and puissant mind. Magnanimidad, f. valor,
courage, noblenes of mind. Magnanimamente, valiantly, courageously, like one
of a noble and courageous mind. * Magnifica cosa, a stately matter, a
worshipful thing. Also the song of our Lady called Magnificat.
Magnificamente, stately, worshipfully, bountifully. * Magnificar, to magnify,
honor or advance. Magnificencia, f. magnificence, bountifulnes, statelines.
Magnifico, m. worshipful, beautiful, stately. * Mago, m. a magician, an
inchanter, a sorcerer, a diuiner, a wise man, a great learned philosopher. *
Magran, tribute or toll. Magrecer, or Magrescer, to be lean, to pine. Magreza,
f. leanness. Magro, m. lean, lanke, gant. * Maguer, albeit, although.
Maguera, although, albeit. Magullado, m. bruised, beaten black and blew.
Magulladura, f. brusing, beating black and blew. Magullar, to bruise, to beat
black and blew. Maherimiento, m. pressing of soldiers. Maherir, yo Mahiero, to
press soldiers. * Mahiere, Mahiero, vide Maherir. * Mahoma, m. Mahomet the
false prophet of the Turks. Majada, f. a lodging, a fold for sheep, a sheep
house. Majadero, m. a pestell to stamp with, a blockehead, a dolt. *
Majaderuelo, a little pestle. Also the bones or wooden things that women make
bone lace with. Also a little dolt or asse-head. * Majado, m. powned, or
stamped. Majador, m. a stamper, a powner, he that beats with a pestle or
hammer, a baker. Majadura, f. stamping, powning, hammering. * Majagrancias, one
that beats out the husks of the wheat or corn to make it pure and fine.
Majar, to stamp or beat with a pestle or hammer. * Majestad, or Magestad,
majesty or dignity of a great prince. * Mayor, vide Mayor. Majorana, or
Mayorana, vide Amoradux, an herb called Marierom. Majuelas, f. hawthorne
berries. Majuelos, vines new planted. * Maiz, or Mayz, m. a kind of grain of
which they make bread in China and the Indians. Mal, ill, naught, a disease. *
Mal criado, ill brought up. Hazer mal a cavallo, to manage a horse. Mal estar,
to be sick, to be displeased. * Malacia, f. a disease of the stomach coveting
to eat coals and such like thing. * Malagorar, to divine or prophecy some
evil toward one. Malagueta, f. Cardamomum, or grains of paradise. Malamente,
naughtily, ill. * Malas, as Andar a Malas, to be fallen out, to wrangle.
Malatico, m. sick, ill at ease. Malato, vide Malatico. Malaventurado, or
Malabenturado, m. unfortunate, unlucky. Also a hard nigardlie and covetous
wretch that will not spare one penny out of his purse. Malavez, or Malaves,
very little, hardly, scarcely. * Malbaratar, to make an ill market, to sell for
little. * Malcinador, m. vide Malcin. * Malcin, or Malsin, m. a promoter, an
informer. * Malcinar, to play the informer, or promoter. * Malcriado, ill
brought up. Maldad, f. naughtines, wickedness, lewdnes, mischief. Maldadoso, m.
naughty, lewd, wicked. Maldadosamente, naughtily, lewdly. * Maldexas de seda,
vide Madexas. Maldezir, Praes. Maldigo, Maldizes, Maldize, 1. Praet. Maldixe,
Maldixiste, Maldixo, Fut. Maldire, ras, ra, Sub. Praes. Maldiga, Imperfect.
Maldixera, Maldiria, Maldixesse, Fut. Maldixere, to speak ill, to curse.
Maldicho, m. ill spoken, or bespoken, accursed. Maldicion, f. evil speaking,
cursing, a curse. * Maldiga, Maldigo, vide Maldezir. Maldiria, vide Maldezir.
Maldito, m. accursed. * Maldixe, Maldixera, Maldixesse, Maldixo, vide Maldezir.
Maldizidor, a curser, an evil speaker. Maldiziente, ill speaking, cursing.
Maldizimiento, m. an evil speaking, a cursing. * Maldoladas Razones, reasons
that are but ill hewed, unpolished reasons. * Maldolado, m. rough, unpolished.
Malear, to bring forth before the time. Maleficio, m. an evil deed, an
offense. Malefico, m. an offender, a malefactor. * Malencolia, f. melancholy.
* Malencolico, m. a melancholic man. Malenconia, f. melancholy, choler adust
or black choler. Malenconico, m. a melancholic man. Maleta, f. a budget, a
pouch, a maile, a clokebag. Maleza, f. a brier bush, a place full of weeds, a
young orchard, a nurserie for trees. * Malezillo, somewhat evil. * Malfetria,
f. an ill entreating or usage of a lord toward his tenants. * Malhadado, m.
unfortunate, unlucky. * Malharquiana yerva, f. sea moss. Malhecho, m.
misdone, an evil deed. Malhechor, m. a misdoer. * Malhorquiana, or
Malharquiana, sea moss. Malicia, f. malice, envy. Maliciosamente,
maliciously, enuiously. Malicioso, m. envious, malicious. Malignidad, or
Malinidad, f. naughtines, ill affection or disposition. Maligno, or Malino, m.
naughty, wicked, ill minded. * Malilla, f. a card picked out and agreed upon,
to make of him any card in the pack, that he that has him, may make him
king, queen, knave, ace, ten, nine, etc. and this at two or three sorts of
games. * Malino, vide Maligno. Malla, f. a maile or habergion. Malla de la red,
the meash of a net, a meash. Mallero, m. a maker of mailes, or habergions. *
Mallo, m. a hammer, a mallet. Mal mirado, m. unadvised, inconsiderate. *
Mallorca, and Menorca, two ylandes by Spain so called. Malo, m. naught,
wicked, evil. * Malocegallo, a cock that is an evil treader. * Malo, a city
in Sicilie so called. * Malpica, f. an herb called Cresses. Malquerer, to wish
evil. * Malquerido, vide Malquesto. Malqueriente, one that wishes ill.
Malqueriencia, f. evil will. Malquisto, m. ill beloved. Malsin, or Malcin, a
promoter, an informer, a pickthanke. * Malsinar, to inform as a promoter, to
pick a thank. * Maltallado, m. evil proportioned, ill fashioned. *
Maltiempo, m. foul weather. * Maltratado, m. evil handled, evil dealt
withal. Also ill apparelled. Malva, f. an herb called mallows. Malvadamente,
naughtily, lewdly, wickedly, ungraciously. Malvado, m. a lewd ungracious
person, wicked, naught. Malvar, a place where mallows grow. * Malvasia, m.
wine called malmesey. Malvavisco, m. marsh mallows. Malvavisco salvaje, cut or
iagged mallows. * Malzin, vide Malcin. * Malzinar, vide Malcinar. Mama, f. a
dugge, pappe, or teate. Also mam, as infants call their mothers or nurses. *
Mamais, a tree bearing fruit in the Indies. Mamanton, or Mamon, a sucker, one
that sucketh. Mamar, to suck. * Mameluco, a Lords son. * Mameys, m. a fruit
in the Indies bigger than a quince having a peele as the orange, and a great
stone or kernel in the middle, and the meat very dainty. * Mamon, a fruit
in the Indies. Also vide Mamanton. Mamparar, vide Amparar. * Mampastor, vide
Manpostero. Mampesada, or Mampesadilla, a disease called the mare, that takes
away the breath by night. Also a weighing any thing by hand. Mana, f. manna, a
kind of dew wherewith the Israelites were fed. Manada, f. a flock of
cattle, a drove. * Manada agua, flowing water. Manadero, m. a stream.
Manancial, a spring, a fountain. Manar, to flow. * Manatis, a fish in the
Indies, having a face like a man. * Mancado, m. maimed, wounded. Mancana, f. an
apple. Mancanal, an orchyard. * Mancanero, a costermonger, a fruiterer.
Mancanilla, f. an herb called camomill. Mancanilla bastarda, an herb called
maudline. Mancanilla loca, an herb called ox eye or mayweed. * Mancanillos de
la barva, the two little balls on the chinne. Mancano, m. an apple tree.
Mancar, Praes. yo Manco, 1. Praet. yo Manque, to want, to mayme. Mancebar, f. a
young girl, a harlot. Mancebia, or Mocedad, f. youth. Mancebia, f. the stews
where harlots are kept. * Mancebito, m. a little boy. Mancebo, or Mancevo, m. a
youth, a young man. * Mancera, vide Manzera. * Manceva, vide Manceba. *
Mancevia, vide Mancebia. * Mancevito, vide Mancebito. * Mancevo de hierro, a
loadstone. Mancha, f. a spot. Manchado, m. spotted. Manchar, to spot. *
Mancilla, f. a blot, a spot, mercy, compassion. * Mancillar, to spot, to blot,
to take pity or compassion on. Manco, m. maimed. * Mancomun, jointly. *
Manda, f. a bequeathing. Manda de Testamento, a legacy bequeathed. Mandado, m.
a commandment, a mandate, commanded, bequeathed. Mandado, or Commission, a
commission, a matter given in charge. Mandador, m. a commander, one in
authority, an imperious fellow. Mandadero, m. he that is commanded.
Mandamiento, m. a commandment. * Diez Mandamientos, the ten commandments, the
ten fingers. Mandar, to command, to bequeath by will. * Mandarecha, vide
Manderecha, the right hand. Mandatorio, m. he to whom any thing is bequeathed.
* Mandato, m. a command. * Manderecha, the right hand. * Mandidas carnes, vide
Manidas, tender, soft, delicate flesh. * Mandil, m. vide Delantal, also a
pandor, an applesquire, a baud. Mandilete, a baud, a pandor, an applesquire.
Mandillon, vide Mandilete. Mando, m. commandment, authority. * Mandoble, a
blow stricken with doubling the hand backward. Mandon, m. one that commands
much: Mandragora, f. an herb called a Mandrake. Mandragula, idem. Mandron, m.
a kind of instrument. A throwing under hand. Manear bestias, to fetter
beasts. * Maneca, or Manilla de mano, f. braslets for the hands. *
Manejamiento, m. the handling, managing. Manejar, to handle, to manage. *
Manejo, m. handling, managing. Manera, f. the manner, the fashion, the guise,
the sleeue of a garment. Manga, f. a sleeue. Also a cloakebagge or portmantew.
* Manga de pica, the arming of a pike. * Manga de broquel, vide Mango, the
handle of a buckler. * Manga de Madera, vide Mango. Mangado, m. long sleeued. *
Manginilla, f the herb Camomill. * Mango, m. the haft, the helue. Mango de
cuchillo, the haft of a knife. Mangonada, f. a bob on the nose, a toy to mock
withal. Mangorreo cuchillo, a knife hafted. Manguillo, a snufkin, a gauntlet.
Maniaco, m. unapt, unfit, untowardly, foul and lubberly. * Maniaco, m.
brainsicke, deprived of comma^, ^ence. * Manjava, he did eat. Manjar, to eat.
Also a mess of meat, any meat. * Manjar blanco, a white meat made of the
breast of a hen, milk, sugar, rice beaten, mixed all together, one of the
daintiest meats they make in Spain. * Maniatados, m. the hands tied. *
Maniatar, to tie the hands. Manida, f. a lodging. Also a tender thing. * Manida
carne, soft and tender flesh. * Manido, m. soft, tender. * Manifactura, or
Manifatura, handie-worke. Manifestacion, f. making manifest, showing abroad. *
Manifestado, m. made manifest, declared to all. Manifestamente, manifestly,
openly. Manifestar, yo Manifiesto, to make manifest, to show abroad. *
Manifieste, Manifiesto, vide Manifestar. Manifiesto, m. manifest, evident to
all. Manija, vide Manilla. Manilla, or Manija, a braslet. * Manjo, vide Manojo.
* Maniotas, f. fetters for the feet of horses. * Manipulo, a company or band
of ten soldiers under one Captain, a handful, a bunch, a little bundle. Also
a string of silk which the priest tieth about his left arm when he goes to
say mass. Maniroto, m. prodigal, unthrifty, wastfull. Man^a, f. wit,
quicknes of spirit, skill, deceit, cunning. Man^ana, to morrow, the morning.
Man^anear, vide Madrugar, to arise early in the morning. Man^ear, to devise
subtilties. Man^era, f. a barren woman. Man^ero, or Man^oso, m subtle,
cunning. Man^oso, or Man^ero, idem. * Man^osamente, subtly, cunningly.
Man^otas, f. fetters for the forefeet of beasts. * Manojo de trigo, a hand
gripe, or handful of wheat. Also a sheafe of wheat. Mano, f. the hand. * Mano
de bestia, the forefoot of a beast: although Mano be a hand, yet the Spaniard
always term the forefeete of all beasts Manos, and the hinder feet Pies. *
Y'r a la mano, to stay one, or to withhold him from fighting, or do any thing
to hinder, to stop, to let from his purpose. * Tomar la mano, to begin to
take upon him. * Venir a las manos, to come to handie blows. * Mano derecha,
the right hand. * Mano ysquierda, the left hand. Mano de papil, a quier of
paper. Manojo, a handful. Manopla, a gauntlet. * Manos de bestias, the
forefeete of beasts: the Spaniard calls the hinder feet of beasts Pies,
and the forefeete Manos. * Manopola, idem. * Manosear, to handle. * Manos de
carnero, sheep feet, trotters. Also forefeete of a sheep. Manpesada, or
Manpesadilla, the night mare that takes the use of speech from a man in his
sleep. Also the weighing of any thing with the hand. * Manpostero, m. one that
sets or puts any thing with the hands. * Manposteria, f. that which is
set or placed with the hands. * Manpuesto, m. a good aim. * Manque, vide
Mancar. Mansamente, meekely, gently, mildely. Mansedumbre, m. meekenes,
gentleness, mildenes. Manso, m. mild, meek, gentle, tame. * Manso, a captain
sheep that leads all the flock. Manta, f. a mantle, a blanket, a horse
cloth, hangings for a house, an engine of war as great as a cart, made so
that men may go under it, to undermine the gates or walls of a city. Manta de
pared, hangings for a house. * Manta de cavallo, a horsecloath. * Manta de
cama, a blanket. * Manteado, m. canuassed in a blanket or sheet. * Manteador,
m. a canuasser or tosser in a blanket or sheet. * Mantear, to canuas or toss
in a blanket. Manteca, f. butter, also sewet of a hog or beast. Mantel, m. a
table cloth. * Mantelero, a maker or seller of table-clothes, napkins, etc. *
Mantel, or Panizuelo, a table napkin, a towell. * Mantelines de la mar, men
among the Indies that have charge and oversight of their seas. Mantener, Praes.
Mantengo, Mantienes, Mantiene, 1. Praes. Mantuve, Mantuviste, Mantuvo, Fut.
Mantendre, or Manterne, as, a. Sub. Praes. Mantenga, Imperfect. Mantuviera,
Mantuviesse, or Manternia, Fut. Mantuviere, to maintain, to uphold, to keep,
to nourish, to feed, to eat, to get his living. * Mantenga, Mantengo, vide
Mantener. Mantenimiento, m. maintenance, food, nourishment. * Manteo, a
priests long garment, or long cloak. Also a garment that women wear next
their smock down to the foot in winter. * Manteo con las armas, a coat
armor, such as heralds use to wear. Mantequillas, vide Natas. Mantero, m. one
that makes or sells either Mantas, or Mantos. * Manterna, Manterne,
Manternia, vide Mantener. * Mantillo, m. a little Manto, for maids in Spain. *
Mantillo de nin^o, a childs mantle, or bearing cloth. * Manto, the upper
garment of women in Spain, covering the head and body, much like a dutch
woman's huke, a mantle or covering. * Manto escuro del air, a dark cloudie
weather. * Mantuve, Mantuvo, vide Mantener. * Mantuviera, Mantuviesse,
Mantuviere, vide Mantener, Manual, pertaining to the hand. * Manual libro, a
book to carry in the hand, a little book. * Manuela, f. a leauer of wood. *
Man ysquierda, the left hand, or side. * Manzana, vide Mancana, an apple. *
Manzanal, vide Mancanal, an orchard. * Manzanero, vide Mancanero, a
costermongar. * Manzanilla, vide Mancanilla, cammomill. * Manzanillas de la
barva, vide Mancanillas de la barva, the two little balls on the chinne. *
Manzano, vide Mancano. Manzera, f. the plough tail, upon which one lays hold
with the hand. Also the middle of a bow where one takes hold with the hand.
Manzilla, f. a spot, pity, mercy, compassion. Manzilla aver, to pity, to have
mercy. Manzillado, m. full of spots. Manillar, to spot, to pity, to have
mercy. * Mapa, f. a map, a globe, a description of a country. * Mapocho, the
name of a fair valley where the Spaniards fortified the city S.yago, whereby
they are called the people of Mapocho. Maqui, a spice called Mace, a kind of
Ginger. * Maquila, f. the toll that a miller takes for his griest or grinding.
* Maquilon de molina, one that takes toll of grinding. Maquina, f. an engine
or subtle devise. Mar, f. the sea. * Mara, f. a shrub. Maran^a, f. intangling,
making intricate. Maran^ado, m. entangled, brought into a perplexity.
Maran^ador, m. an intangler. Maran^ar, to entangle, to wrap in. Maravedi, m. a
piece of plate being of the value of the thirty and fourth part of a ryall of
plate, id est, 34. of them to an English six pence. Maravilla, f. a wonder, a
marvel, an astonishment. Maravillado, m. woondering, astonished. * Maravillador,
m. a woonderer, one that maruelleth. * Maravillamiento, m. woondering,
maruelling, astonishment. Maravillar, to marvel, to wonder. Maravillosamente,
woonderfully, maruellously. Maravilloso, m. wonderful, marvelous. Marca, f.
a mark, a note. * Marca mayor, the largest volume, large paper. Marcado, m.
marked, noted. palabras Marcadas, words worth the noting. * Marcador, m. a
marker, one that sets a mark upon any thing. Marcal, of March. Marcante,
vide Mercader, a merchant. Marcar, Praes. yo Marco, 1. Praet. yo Marque, to
mark, to set the mark on. * Marcar, vide Marchar. * Marcha, f. a marching of
soldiers. * Marchamado, marked. * Marchando, marching. * Marchar, to march as
soldiers do. Marchitable, that may wither or fade away. Marchitar, to wither,
to fade away, to pine. Marchito, m. withered. Marchitura, f. withering. *
Marcluz, a stockfish. Marco, m. march, the month. Marco de plata, a mark of
silver, the value of 65. ryals, id est of English money xxxij. s. iij. d. Marco
de oro, a mark of gold. * Marcola, a hedging bill, a bramble syeth.
Marcomador, m. one that sets mark on any thing. Marea, f. the tide of the
sea, the tide or ebb, the working of the sea this way or that. * Mareado,
tossed to and fro, sea sick, wet by sea. * Trigo mareado, wheat wet, or
spoiled at sea. * Mareantes, vide Marineros. Marear, to vomit at sea, to be sea
sick. Also to set sail and to pass and sail at sea. Mareta, f. a rough
tide. * Marfil, m. iuorie. Margarita, f. a pearl, a precious jewel. Also the
proper name of a woman. Margen, f. the margent of a book. Margomar, to
feather, to furnish with feathers. Marhojador, m. one that scrapeth off moss.
* Marhojar, to scrape off moss. Marhojo, m. moss. Maridable, marriageable,
old enough to be married. * Maridado, m. married. Maridar, vide Casar, to
marry, to be espoused. Marido, m. a husband. * Marihuela, a little girl
called Marie. * Marina, a creek of the sea. * Marineria, f. marinership.
Marinero, a sayler, a mariner. Marino, belonging to the sea. Mariposa,
Mariposo, or Pavelion, a butterfly. Mariscal, a marshall. Marisco, of the sea.
Marisma, the sea shore, a certain herb growing on the sea shore. Maritimo,
near the sea. * Marmaje, Marsh mallow. * Marmello, vide Membrillo, a Quince. *
Marmo, a white fish like a gilthead. Marlota, a cassocke used of the Moors.
Marmol, or piedra marmobena, marble stone. Marmolejo, a small pillar of marble.
* Marmoreo, made of marble. * Marmolen^o, of marble, belonging to marble.
Marmota, a munkie, a marmoset. Maroma, a cable for a ship. * Maronia, a coard
running in a pulley or windle to draw with. * Maron, a name of Virgill. *
Marone, a chestnut. Marquis, f. a Marquess. Marquesa, a lady marquis.
Marquesado, a marquessate. Marquesita, a fire stone, a marquesite, a stone of
brass color. * Marquesota, lead ore, and silver ore, a gallant long high
feather, such as great nobles use to wear on their heads. Marra, want. Also
vide Amarra. Marran^o, a hog of a year old. Marrar, to want, to err, to
miss. * Marro, want, missing. * Marrojo negro, black horehound. Marroqui, a
kind of red leather to make buskins with. Marrubio, horehound. * Marruvio
negro, black stinking horehound. Marsopa, a fish called a whirlepoole, a
porpuise. Marta, a beast that carries the sable furre. Also a proper name of a
woman. Martas, the furre so called. * Mart, a beast called a marten, bearing
the foynes furre. Also Mars the fained god of war. * Martelado, vide
enamorado. * Martel, a horsemans mace. Martello, a box tree. Martes, tuesday.
Martilladas, blows with a hammer. Martillado, hammered, beaten or wrought with
a hammer. * Martillador, a worker with hammers. Martillar, to hammer, to work
with a hammer. Martillejo, m. a small hammer. Martillo, m. a hammer.
Martilogio, m. a calendar. * Martilojo de Peapa, the spelling letters. *
Martinete, a high standing feather in the hat. Also the jack of a virginal
that strikes up the string. Also a kind of Instrument used in war. *
Martiniega, f. a kind of subsidy, tribute or custom. Martyr, m. a witness,
one that ventureth his life in testimony of truth, a martyr. Martirio, m.
martyrdom, testimony of truth. * Martirizado, m. martyred. * Martirizar, to
make a martyr, to put to death for testimony of truth. * Martragar, to be
drowned or sunk up at sea. * Marvisia, f. the wine called malmesie. *
Marzapane, marchpane, sugarbread, ginger. * Marzo, vide Marco. Mas, more but,
moreover. * Mas antes, but rather, before that, nay rather. * de mas de esto,
moreover. * Los de mas, the residue. * mas presto, more readily, rather. * a
mas Andar, with all haste and speed. Mascado, m. chewed, eaten. Mascar, to
chew, to eat, to gnaw, to bite Mascar, vide Mascara. Mascara, f. a mask to
cover the face with. Mascarado, masked, covered with a mask. * Masgozete, m.
the beuer of a helmet. * Masmorra, vide Mazmorra, a prison, a dungeon. *
Masmorrilla, vide Mazmorrilla. Massa, f. a mass, a lump, dough, paste. *
Massacre, m. a massacre, a murder, a slaughter of people. Massar, to heap up.
Mastegar, to chew in the mouth. Mastel, m. a maste of a ship. * Masticar, to
chew, to eat, to chaw, to play on the bit, to champ. * Mastil, vide Mastel. *
Mastil de gavia mayor, the maine mast. Mastin, m. a mastiue dog. Mastrando, an
herb called wild Mint. Mastratos, wild Sage. * Mastresala, a gentleman
usher. * Mastrescuela, a head schoolemaister, a superintendent in a college or
school, a vicechauncellor in an university. * Mastro de campo, vide Maestro
de campo, a camp-maister, or marshall of the field. Mastuerco, an herb called
Cresses. * Masza, Maza, vide Maca. Mata, f. a bush, a shrub. * Mata de varas, o
vergas, a bauen. * Matada haca, a nag or hackeney gauled. * Matadero, a
slaughter house, a place where they kill beasts. * Matado, m. slain or
murdered. Also gauled as a horse. Matador, m. a murderer, a killer. Matadura,
f. killing, murdering. Also a gauling or wringing horse backs. Mataduras,
gauled horse backs, the withers of horse gauled or wrung. Matalahuga, or
Matahalva, Anis herb or seed. Matalotage, victuals for the sea. * Matalovos,
an herb called Woolfes-bane. Matanca, f. slaughter, murder. * Matanza, idem.
* Matapozuelos, a place in Spain so called. Matar, to kill, to murder, to
destroy, to combat, to put out a candle, to wring or gaul a horse back.
Matas, f. thorns. * Mate, mate at chesse. * Matelaz, a mattresse. *
Matematica, vide Mathematica. * Matelazero, a maker of mattresses, or of
flockbeds. Materia, f. matter or substance of any thing. Also matter, rottennes
or filth of a soar. Also a copy in a writing book given to write after, or
such like. * Materia, or Podre, matter of a soar. * Materia de nin^o, a
childs copy written, which he is to follow and learn to write after.
Material, concerning some matter, substantial. * Materno, m. pertaining to the
mother. * Mathematica, the mathematical arts or speculatiue sciences. *
Mathematical, of or pertaining to the mathematickes. * Mathematico, or
Matematico, m. one that has skill in the mathematickes. Matiz, f. the shadow
of a picture, the glass or glistering show of colors. Matizado, painted,
shadowed in painting. Matizar, to shadow in painting. * Matorrales, a place
where many bushes or shrubsgrow. Matorrizales, vide Matorrales. Matraca, f. a
floute, a scoff, a gibe. Also a rattle or toy for a child. Matracas dar, to
laugh at, to mock, to scoff at. * Matrano, m. a barrow hog. * Matrero, m. one
that loves his mother. Also a cunning crafty sly fellow. Matricaria, an
herb called Feuerfew. * Matrecida, one that kills his mother. * Matricidio,
m. killing of the mother. Matricula, f. a roll of names, a catalogue.
Matricular, to matriculate, to inroll, to set his name in as one of the
society, to enregister into an university. Matrimon^ial, pertaining to
wedlock. Matrimonio, m. wedlock. Matrona, f. a matrone, a grave woman of great
modesty. Matronal, belonging to a matrone. * Maullador, m. a maulling cat. *
Maullar, to mawle or wrall like a cat. * Mauorcio, m. belonging to Mars the
feigned god of war. * Maxavilla, vide Maravilla, marvel, wonder. * Maxcado,
m. chewed, bitten, eaten. Maxcar, vide Mascar, to chew, to bite. * Maxcara,
vide Mascara, a mask. * Maxilla, vide Mexilla, a iaw bone. * Maximamente, most
of all, chiefly. * Maxim, idem. * Mayese de plata, i. Maestro de plata, a
master of the silver or Treasure: when the king sends to the Indies his
fleet, he appoints two masters, one of the ship, the other of the silver and
Tresure they bring home. * Maymoneta, f. the sail yard. * Maynar la vela, to
strike sail. Mayo, m. the month may. * Mayometa, a piece of wood, or great
timber pin, whereabout they wind the sheat or sail cord, least it should slip
whilst the ship is under sail. Mayor, the greater, the elder. Mayoral, the
chief, the principal herdman. Mayorana, f. sweet marierom. Mayorazgo, the
eldership, the elder brother, the heir. Mayordomia, f. a stewardship, a
baily-wike. Mayordomo, m. a steward, a bailife of husbandry. * Mayordomo de la
artilleria, a master of the ordinance. * Mayoria, greatness, principality.
Mayormente, chiefly. Maytinero, m. one that says or sings mattens.
Maytines, m. mattens, morning prayer. Mayueta, f. the herb that bears
strawberries. Mayuete, a strawberrie. * Mayz, a kind of grain in India of
which they make bread. * Mayzal, a place where Mayz grows. * Maza, Maca, or
Masza, a mace, a hammer, a beetle or naue of a wheel wherein the spokes of a
cart stick. * Mazacote, vide Macacote. * Mazaga, vide Macagua. * Mazamorra,
vide Macamorra. * Mazan de puerco, an herb called sowes bred. * Mazana, vide
Macana. * Mazapan, or Macapan, a marchpane. * Mazas, vide Macas. * Mazero, vide
Macero. * Mazeta, vide Maceta. * Mazete, vide Macete, a little mallet. *
Mazicez, vide Macizez, soundness, solidenesse. * Mazico, vide Macico, sound,
solid. * Mazico de la pluma, vide Macico de la pluma. * Mazisso, vide Macisso,
massy paste. Mazmorra, f. a prison, a dungeon. Mazmorilla de baldreses, a
leather whip. * Mazo, vide Maco, a hammer. * Mazonadura, vide Maconadura. *
Mazoneer, vide Maconear. * Mazoneria, vide Maconeria. * Mazorca, vide Macorca.
M E
Meada, f. pissing. * Meadero, a pissing place. Meado, m. pissed. Meados,
urine, piss. * Meadura, f. a pissing. Meaja, f. the little white in the yelke
of an egg. Also a pound weight. Also used for the half. Also a crum. Mear, to
piss. Mecanico, m. mechanical, of handie craft. * Mecenas, a patron of
learning. Mecedor, m. a mingler. Also one that rocketh a child in the cradle.
Mecedera, f, an instrument wherewith sand is mingled or beaten with lyme, to
make mortar withal. * Mecedero, m. idem. Mecedura. f. mingling, meddling. Also
a rocking of a cradle. Mecer, or Mescer, to mingle, to meddle or temper
together. Also to winck with the eye. Mecer el ojo, to twinkle with the eye.
Mecha, f. a tent for a wound, a week of a candle, a match for soldiers. Mecha
de candil, a week of a lamp candelestick. Mechero, the nose of a
candlestick, the nose of a lamp where they put the week to burn. * Mecido,
m. mingled. * Mecido, m. the week of a candle. * Meciendo, or Mesciendo, by
mixing, by twinkling the eye. Medalla, f. metal, old money, a brooch or jewel
to wear in the hat. Medanos, m. a kind of fruit of the Indies. * Mediado, m.
just in the midst, the middle. Medianamente, meanly, indifferently,
reasonably well. Medianaria, f. mediation, working by means. Medianero, a
mediator, one that persuadeth or sueth for another, a broker. Mediania, f.
mediocritie, a mean. Mediano, m. mean, indifferent. * Mediante, by means of.
* Mediante el qual, by means of which. Medias, f. stockings, knee hosen.
Medicamento, m. a medicine. Medicina, f. physic, a medicine. Medicinable,
that may be cured by medicine. Medicinal, medicinal, that cures. Medicinar,
to cure by physic or by medicine. Medico, m. a physician. * Medico, m. twins.
Medida, f. a measure. Medido, m. measured. Medidor, m. a measurer. Medio, m. a
mean, the middle, the half. Medio dia, noone, midday. * Medio jorno, the
south wind. * Mediocre, moderate, indifferent, mean, not too little, not too
big. Medir, yo Mido, to measure. * Medir la pica al enemigo, to come to push of
pike with the enemy. * Meditacion, a meditation. * Meditar, to meditate, to
muse. * Mediterraneo, m. that of the mid land, or that in the middle of the
earth. Medra, f. thrift, profit. * Medrado, m. thriftie, one that has thriuen.
Medrar, to thrive. Medroso, m. fearful. * Medula, or Medulla, marrow. *
Meercle, verily, in truth. Mejor, better. * Mejora, a bequeath, a legacy. *
Mejorado, one that has a legacy bequeathed him, bettered. Mejoramiento, m. a
bettering, mending, a bequeathing. Mejorana, vide Majorana, marierom. Mejorar,
to mende, to grow better, to bequeath or give by will. Mejoria, f. mending,
making or growing better. Meitad, vide Mitad, the moitie, the half. *
Melancolia, f. melancholy, choler adust. * Melancolico, m. one full of
melancholy. Melanconia, f. idem. Melanconico, one full of melancholy. *
Melaranja, or Melaranza, f. an Orange. * Melarchia, a kind of disease.
Melcochero, or Melochero, m. he that makes sugar pills, or sodden honey paste. *
Melcocha, bread made with honey, sugar pills. Melcocho, sugar pills, bread made
with honey. Melena, f. a horse collar. * Melera, a place in Spain. Melezina,
vide Melecina, a medicine. Meliloto, an herb called Melilote. Melindre, loving
looks and countenances. * Melindroso, very nice, precise, coy, dainty.
Mella, f. a gap or breach in a knife, sword, or other thing. Also the gap of a
tooth wanting in the mouth. Also the like of any other thing. Mellado, m. left
or made with a gap or sharde, as a sword, knife, or such like, or a gappe
between the teeth some being wanting. Melladura, f. a gap or breach in sword,
knife, or any other thing, the gap of teeth wanting in the mouth, etc. Mellar,
to make a gappe or breach in a sword, knife, or any other thing. Also to make a
gap by wanting a tooth or teeth in the mouth. Melliza, f. a kind of pudding
made with honey and flower. Mellizo, m. twins. Mellon de paja, a heap of
chafe. * Melochero, vide Melcochero. Melocoton, m. a peach. Melodia, f.
melody, sweet music. * Melodioso, melodious. * Meloja, vide Meloxa. Melon,
m. a Melon. Also a badger. Melonar, a bed of Melons. * Melongene, a love apple.
* Meloso, all-honied. Meloxa, f. water that honey is sod in, Metheglin. Meloxa,
wine sodden to the third part. Membrana, f. parchment, the skin over the
brain. Membrar, to recite, to remember. * Membrillada, f. conserve of Quinces.
Membrillo, or Marmello, a Quince. * Membro, vide Miembro. Membrudo, m. large
limmed, well made. * Memorable, worthy remembrance. * Memoralito, m. a
remembrancer. Memoralmente, memorably, by heart. Memoria, f. a remembrance.
Memorial, a memorial, a remembrance, a bill or petition in writing. *
Memorioso, m. very full of memory. Mention, f. mention, remembrance in
speech. * Mendigante, a beggar. Mendigar, Praes. yo Mendigo, 1. Praet. yo
Mendigue, to beg. Mendigo, m. a beggar. * Mendigue, vide Mendigar. Mendiguez,
f. beggary. Mendrugo, m. a cast of bread. Menear, to wag, to weeld, to shake
off. * Meneo, m. a countenance and gesture with gravity, a carrying of a man's
self, his behavior. Menester, want, penury, need. Menesteroso, m, needy,
wanting, bare. * Menestra, vide Potaje, pottage, broth. * Menestral, a
tradesman. Menestril, m. a minstrel, a fidlar. Mengua, want, poverty,
discredit, penury Menguado, m. in want, empouerished, diminished, poor.
Menguante de luna, the wane of the moon. Menguante de la mar, the ebbing of
the sea. * Menguante, waning, decaying, failing. Menguar, to diminish, to
empouerish, to fail, to wane, to decay. Menique dedo, m. the little finger.
Menjuy, a kind of sweet odor. Menor, the lesser, under age. Menorar, to make
less, to diminish. * Menorca, and Mallorca, two yles near Spain so called.
Menoria, f. nonage. * Menoriar, to lessen. Menos, less, lesser. Menoscabado,
or Menoscavado, diminished, impaired, or made less then it was, made worse by
diminishing or taking from a thing. * Menoscabar, or Menoscavar, to empaire, to
lessen, to take away some thing from any thing, to make it worse. Menoscabo,
or Menoscavo, m. a making less or diminishing of any thing to make it worse.
* Menospreciado, m. despised, contemned, set light by. Menospreciando,
despising, contempt, setting at naught. Menospreciar, to despise, to contemn,
to set at naught. Menosprecio, m. despising, setting light. Mensage, m. a
message. Mensagero, m. a messenger. * Mensaje, a message, an errand. *
Mensajero, m. a messenger. * Mensayar, id est, Me ensayar, to assay my self. *
Menstrual, menstruall, that which comes monthly to women, their monthly
disease. * Menstruo, m. women's monthly course. * Menta, f. the herb called
mint. * Mentado, m. mentioned, spoken of, made mention of. Mentar, to make
mention of, to speak of, to name. Mente, f. a mind, the highest and chiefest
part of the soul, the mind, the wit, understanding, will, intent, thought,
memory, remembrance, advise, counsel, opinion, judgment, wisdom, prudence.
* Mente capto, foolish, frantike, out of his wits. * Mentida, f. the lie. * fe
Mentida, the faith falsified. Mentir, yo Miento, to lie, to speak false.
Mentira, f. a lie, a false tale. Mentirosamente, lyingly, falsely. Mentiroso,
m. given to lying. * Mentremeter, id est, Me entremeter, to thrust my self in.
Menudamente, particularly, severally, by little and little, thickly, often.
Menudencias, f. small matters. * Menudico, m. very little, very small. *
Menudillos, that which is drawn from birds, fishes, and such like, when they
dress them: to eat the guts, the garbage. Menudo, m. small, little. Menudo a
Menudo, often. Meollo, m. the brain, marrow, the pith of bread, the kernel of
a nut. * Meollo de nuez, the kernel of the nut. Meollo de arbol, the sap or
pith of a tree. * Mera, f. a place in Flaunders. Mercadear, to play the
merchant. Mercaderia, f. merchandise. Mercader, m. a merchant. * Mercadero,
vide mercero, a mercer, a grocer. Mercado, m. a market, a fair. * Mercaduria,
f. merchandise. Mercancia, f. traffike, dealing in merchandise, etc. betwixt
one nation and another, intercourse of merchandise. Mercar, to buy. Merced,
courtesy, worship, pleasure, reward. Mercedero, m. a maulkin to make clean an
oven with. * Mercenal, vide mercenario. * Mercenario, that laboreth for hire.
Merceria, f. mercery, or grocery. * Mercero, a mercer. Also a haberdasher of
small wares, a grocer. Merchante, vide Mercader, a merchant. Mercurial, an herb
called mercury. Also belonging to the planet Mercury. * Mercurio, the god of
eloquence and merchandise, he is also called the messenger of the gods. Merda,
f. a turde, ordure. Merdoso, m. beraied, heshitten. * Merecedor, m. one that
deserves. Merecedora persona, a man of good desert. Merecedora cosa, f. a
matter of desert. Merescer, or Merecer, yo Meresco, to deserve, to merit. *
Merecido, m. deserved. Merecimiento, m. desert. * Merenda, or Merienda, f. an
afternoones nunchions or drinking, a beuer. Merendar, to eat after noone, to
make a beuer or drinking between dinner and supper. * Meresca, vide Merecer. *
Merguerite, m. the little finger. * Meridiano, m. the meridian, the south part.
* Meridional, of or belonging to the south. Merienda, f. afternoones eating. *
Meriende, Meriendo, v. Merendar. Merina, f. sheep driven from the winter
pastures to the summer pastures, or the wool of those sheep, the finest
wool. * Merindad, a kind of iusticeship. * Merino, m. a judge in Galizia
called Merino. * alcalde Merino, idem. * Meritamente, worthily. * Merito, a
desert, a merit. * Meritorio, meritorious. * Merla, f. a black bird. *
Merluza, f. a fish called a whiting. Merma, f. want in measure, loss in
measure. * Mermar, to want in measure, to become less in measure. Mermelada,
f. marmelade, conserve of quinces. Mermellon, a vermillion red color. * Mero,
simple, mere, pure, without mixture, very right. * Mero, or libre Sen^or, a
mere free Lord. * Merula, a cookefish. Mes, m. a month. Mesa, f. a table.
Mesadura, f. tearing or renting of the hair. Mesar cabellos, to tear the
hair. Mesaraicas venas, veins that go from the stomach to the liver. *
Mesciendo, or Meciendo, rolling up and down as the eyes, rocking as a cradle,
twinkling with the eyes. * Mescla, vide Mezcla, f. a mixture of lime and sand,
of colors, or any other medley. * Mescladura, vide Mezcladura, f. mingling,
medley. * Mesclar. vide Mezclar, to mingle. Mesmo, or Mismo, the same. Mesnada,
f. an host of men. Also vide Aposento. Meson, m. an Inn, an alehouse. * Meson
de la estrella, the sign of the star, an alehouse. Also by a metaphore the
open and wide field, where the stars are the sign. * Meson de la puente, a
lodging house at the bridge. * Mesonera, f. an hostess. Mesonero, m. an host
that keeps lodging. * Mespera, f. a fruit called a Medlar. * Mespero, m. the
Medlar tree. * Mesquino, m. wretched, miserable. * Messal, vide Missal. Messana
vela, the misne snaile. Messar, vide Mesar cabellos, to tear the hair. *
Messia, an Hebrew word signifying our Savior Jesus Christ and anointed Lord.
Messoria, a bucket. * Mesta, a monthly fair among heard-men. Also the
ordinance that al owners and keepers of cattle are to observe. Mestengo, or
Mostrenco, a strayer. * Mestizo, m. that which is come or sprung of a mixture
of two kinds, as a blacke-Moore and a Christian, a mungrell dog or beast.
Mesto, a kind of tree that bears mast or acornes. Mestruo, m. a woman's
flowers. * Mestura, f. mingling. Mesturar, to mingle. Mesura, f. modesty,
gravity, courtesy. Also measure. * Mesura muy profundo, very low obeisance, a
low leg, humble making of courtesy. Mesuradamente, courteously, modestly.
Mesurado,, courteous, grave, modest. Mesurarse, to put on a grave countenance.
Metad, or Mitad, f. the half, the moytie. * Metafisica, things supernatural,
the metaphisickes. * Metafisico, one that professes the metaphisickes. *
Metafora, a metaphor, a borrowed speech. * Metaforico, metaphorical. Metal,
metal, all that is dug and searched out of the veins of the earth.
Metalado, m. metalled. * Metamorfosis, or Metamorphosis, a transformation or
changing one likeness or shape into another. * Metaphora, f. a metaphor, a
borrowed speech, when figuratively we express one thing by naming another. *
Metatesis, a figure, a transposition, when one letter is put for another. *
Metheore, Meteors, imperfect mixed things engendered in the air. *
Metheorologica, f. the science of Meteors, as of stars and planets with their
operations, of exhalations of vapors causing comets, of the nature of
minerals. * Methodo, a method. Metido, m. put, set, placed. * Metropolis, a
chief city, the mother city or head city. * Metropolitano, m. a governor
of the head or principal city, pertaining to the chief city. Meter, to put,
to set. * Metodico, methodicall. * Metodo, vide Methodo. * Metrificado, made
into rythme or verse, made in meeter. * Metrificar, to make in meeter, rithme,
or verse. Metro, m. meeter, rhyme, verse. * Mexican^as, women of Mexico, things
of Mexico. * Mexicano, m. a man of Mexico. Mexillas, f. the jaws, the cheeks,
mushles of the sea. * Mexquino, vide Mesquino, a wretch, a miserable man. *
Meyar, vide Mear, to piss. * Meyor, vide Mejor, the better. * Meytad, vide
Mitad, f. the half, the moytie. Mezana, or Messana, f. the misne sail of a
ship. * Mezania, vide Mediania. Mezcla, Mescla, or Mezcladura, a medley,
mingling. Mezcladamente, by mingling or meddling together. Mezclado, or
Mesclado, m. mingled, meddled. Mezcladura, or Mescladura, f. mingling of things.
Mezclar, or Mesclar, to mingle or meddle together. Mezquinidad, or Mesquinidad,
f. wretchedness, miserablenes, covetousness. Mezquinamente, or Mesquinamente,
miserably, wrethedly, couetously. Mezquino, or Mesquino, m. a wretch, a
miserable man, a covetous man. Mezquita, f. the name of the turks temple.
M I
Mi, Mia, Mio, mine. Miar, to cry as a cat. Mica, f. a speech to call a cat
with, as we say, pusse. * Mica, a female monkey. Also used for a dronken
woman. * Mico, m. a he munkie, a dronken man. * Microcosmo, a little world.
Also used for a man. * Mide, Mido, vide Medir. Miedo, m. fear, dread. Miel, f.
honey. Mielga, f. a kind of fish. Mielga para arastrar paja, a rake. Mielgas,
an herb called Spanish trefoile or three leafed grass. Miembro, m. a member,
a part of the body. * Mienta, vide Mientra. Miente, Miento, vide Mentir, to
lie, to tell a false tale. * Mientra, among, between, whilst. Mientras,
whilst, as long as, among, between. Miera, f. oil of juniper. Miercoles, m.
wednesday. * Miercoles de ceniza, ashwednesday. Mierda, vide Merda, f. a turd,
dung, ordure. Mierla, f. a black bird, a black thrush. * Mierlo, vide Mierla.
Mierra, Marria, or rastra, a rake. Mies, f. harvest. Miesse, idem. * Miesgado,
vide Miezgado. Miezgado, vide Mayvete, a straweberry. Miga, f. a crum. Migaja,
f. a little piece, a crum. * Migas, crumbs. also a meat made among the country
folks in Spain, of oil, water, salt and garlic, with crumbs of bread
altogether, and so sod over the fire, and made thereof a kind of hodgepotch. *
Migrane, a pain in the temples of the head called the megrim. Mijo, m. a kind
of grain called Millet. * Mijo del sol, an herb called gromell. Mil, or
Millar, a thousand. Mil vezes, a thousand fold. Milagro, m. a miracle, a
wonder. Milagrosamente, miraculously, wonderfully. Milagroso, wonderful,
miraculous. * Milan, the city Milan in Italy. Milano, or Milan, a puttock,
glead or kite * Milheiro, a bird called the little titmouse. Milhoja, or
Mil-en-rama, an herb called milfoile, yarrowe, or nosebieede, which mingled
with oil heals wounds made with iron. Milicia, f. warfare, the art of war.
* Milite, vide Soldado, a soldier, a man at arms. * Militante, warring,
fighting, militant. * Militar, to serve as a soldier, to go on warfare. Milla,
f. a mile, or a thousand paces. Milladeres, millions of thousands. * Millado,
m. reckoned by thousands. Millar, or Mil, a thousand. * Millefolia, yarrow,
nosebleede. Millon, a million, a thousand thousand. * Milocho, vide Gavilan. *
Milza, f. the milt or spleen. Mimar, to flatter, to play the cogging parasite.
Mimbre, m. willowes, osiars, rods. * Mimbrera, f. the stock of osiars, twigs,
or such green rods, upon which the osiars grow. * Mimo, a iester, a vice. *
Mina, f. a mine, whereby to win a castle, etc. a cave in the ground. Minado,
m. mined, dug under ground. Minador, m. a miner, a digger under ground, a
deceiuer. * Minadura, f. mining, digging under ground, deceit. Minando, mining,
coosening by deceit. Minar, to undermine, to dig under ground, to beguile. *
Mincio, m. a certain river in Italy so called. * Mincion, f. mention, speaking
of. * Mineral, mineral, containing metals. Minero, the vein of metal where
the metal is found in the mine. Also a miner. * Miniador, a limner. * Minimo,
the least, very small, faint hearted, cowardly. * Ministerio, m. service,
discharge of any office or duty, doing of work. Ministril, a minstrell.
Ministro, m. a minister, a waiting man, an officer. * Minotauro, a minotaure,
half a man half a bull. * Mintir, vide Mentir, to lie or speak false. *
Mintroso, vide Mentiroso. Minuto, m. a minute, small, little, cutted, and
short. Mio, mine. Mira, f. looking on, a view, a sight. Mirabolano,
Mirabolanes. * Mirad, look, behold. Mirada, f. a looking on, an aspect.
Miradero, m. a watchtower, a loopehole. Mirado, m. looked on, beheld,
respected. * Mirador, m. a looker on, a beholder. Also a watchtower, a viewing
place. Mirar, to look, to see, to behold, to regard. * Mirar al traves, to
look crookedly on one. * Mirar en hito, to look earnestly on. Mirla, vide
Mierla, f. a black thrush, a black bird. * Mirlado, m. a man standing or
going without looking one way or another, very demure or precise as an
Hypocrite. Mirra, f. Myrrh, an incense. * Mirraustre, a kind of meat or
confection made by sweet meat makers or poticaries, to be served in banquets.
Mirtho, m. a Myrtle tree. * Mirto, idem. Miruedanos, m. Strawberries. * Misa,
vide Missa, the mass. Miserable, miserable, wretched, a caytife.
Miserablemente, wretchedly, miserably. Miseria, misery, wretchedness.
Misericordia, f. mercy, pity, compassion. Misericordioso, m. pitiful,
merciful, full of compassion. Misericordiosamente, mercifully, pitifully.
Misero, m. miserable, wretched, woeful, silly, poor, distressed, in a
pitiful case. * Mision, f. cost, charge, expense. Mismo, or Mesmo, the same.
Missa, f. the mass. * Missa de gallo, mass before day, when the cocks crow.
* Missa de alua, mass at the dawning of the day. * Missa de alguilando, mass
nine days together before Christmas. * Missal, m. a mass book. * Miss,
green corn or sedge. Misterio, m. a mystery, a matter hard to be understood.
* Mistico, mystical. * Mistion, f. a mixture, or mingling together. * Mistura,
f. idem. * Misturado, f. mixed, mingled together. * Misturar, to mix or mingle
together. * Mita, f. the tribute the Indies pay to the Caciques. Mitad, or
Metad, the half, the moitie. * Mitigado, m. mitigated, pacified, assuaged.
Mitigador, m. a pacifier, an asswager, a mitigater. Mitigar, Praes. yo Mitigo,
1. Praet. yo Mitigue, to mitigate, to appease, to pacify, to assuage. *
Mitigue, vide Mitigar. Mitra, f. a miter such as bishops used to wear on their
heads. Mitridatico, m. a sovereign preservative against infection called
Mithridate, so named of Mithridates king of Pontus, the inuenter thereof. *
Mixto, m. mingled.
M O
* Mobil, mooueable. Also Primum mobile in the heavens. * Moble, vide Movible.
Moca, f. a young maid, a wench, a woman servant. * Mocamientes, vide Mocedad.
Mocedad, f. youth, the age between childhood and man's estate, sometime
childhood. Mocetona, f. a big wench, a grown maid. Mocha, without horns,
notted. * Mochacha, or Muchacha, a girl. * Mochacho, or Muchacho, a boy, a
lad. Mochar, to maime, to cut off the horns. * Much, as atroche Much, upon a
head, without advise, headlong, hurling together without consideration.
Mochila, f. a wallet, a scrip, a budget, a false cover of a saddle, a
portmanteaw. * Mochila, or Mochilla de grano, the husk of a grain that is in
grapes or pomegranates. * Mocho, notted, without horns. Mochuelo, m. a horn
owl. * Mocita, m. a little young girl. * Mocito, vide Mocuelo, a little young
boy or lad. Moco, m. a boy, a servant. * Moco de stala, a horse keeper, an
hostler. Moco de espuelas, a lackie, a footeman or footeboy. Moco, m. snot,
sniuell. Mocoso, snottie. Mocuela, f. a little girl. Mocuelo, m. a little lad,
a boy. Modelo, or Modello, a pattern, a module or plot of a house or other
thing to be made. Moderacion, f. moderation, rule, ordering. Moderado, m.
moderate, measurable, temperate. Moderar, to moderate, to order. Moderatamente,
moderately, temperately. Moderno, of this time, of this age. Modestamente,
modestly, soberly, thriftily, comely. Modestia, f. modesty, comeliness,
soberness. Modesto, m. modest, sober. * Modificacion, bringing into measure,
measuring. * Modificar, Praes. yo Modifico, 1. Praet. yo Modifique, to measure,
to bring into measure. * Modifique, vide Modificar. * Modio, a bushel. Modo,
or Medida, the mean, the measure, the manner. Modorilla, f. a little second
watch. Also the lethargy. Modorra, the drowsy sickness, the lethargy, sleep
in the dead of the night. Modorra, or Modorilla, f. the second watch in the
night, a stiff disease, the watch in the dead of the night. * Modorrear. to be
foolish, or dull headed. Modorrilla, the third watch. Modorro, m. a fool, one
sick of the lethargy, or drowsy sickness. * Mofa, f. mockery, foolery, a bob,
a jest. Mofador, m. a mocker, a vice in a play. Mofadura, mocking, playing the
fool. Mofar, to mock, to scoff, to laugh at, to play the fool. Mofo, m.
mockery, iarring, scoffing. * Mogilon Mongil, a mourning garment for a woman. *
Mogronar vides, to prune or cut vines. * Mohada, f. a thing that is mossie or
moldy. Mohorrache, m. a vizard, a mask. * Mohata, vide barcta. * Mohatra, a
taking up money on usury. Mohatrar, to borrow of one for to pay another, to take
up money upon usury. * Mohatreros, deceivers, cooseners, coggers, shifters. *
Mohecer, to wax mossie, to become moldy. Moheda, f. a wood. * Mohina, a she
mule that has all the face and muzle black, which has always iadish tricks.
Also anger, passion, disquietnes, churlishenes. * Mohinas, f. angers, griefs,
passions, disquietnes, tediousnes, churlishnes. Mohino, offended, displeased.
Also mouse dun, a mule colt begotten of a horse and of a she ass with a black
muzle. Moho, m. moss, mouldines, snot. Also rust of iron, copper or of other
metals, etc. Mohoso, m. mossie, moldy. Also rusty as of iron, copper, etc.
Mojado, m. wet, moist. Mojadura, moisture, wetnes. * Mojadura de pimiento,
sauce, dipping, broth with pepper. Mojar, to wet, to moisten. Mojon, a bound,
a boundstone, a markstone. Mojonar, to bound, to appoint the limits. Mola, f.
sacrifice, the growing of unkind flesh in a woman's womb making her seem with
child. Molador, a sacrificer. Moladura, f. sacrificing. * Molatrar, to borrow
money upon usury, for to pay debts with. * Moldadura, f. a thing made or cast in
a mould. Molde m. a mattris to cast letters in, a moulde, a pattern. * Libros
de molde, printed books. * Mole, a lump, a mass, a chaos, or confused heap
of any thing. * Molebout, a fish called a lump. Moledor, m. a grinder, a
miller. Also used for a wearisome or ykresome fellow. * Moler, yo Muelo, to
grind. * Molero, m. a fish almost like a perch that spawneth always upon the
seaweedes. Molestador, m. a troubler, a molester. Molestamente, troublesomly,
grieuouslie. Molestar, to trouble, to molest, to grieve. Molestia, f. trouble,
grief, disquietnes. Molesto, m. troublesome, grievous. Molido, m. ground with
a mill. Molidura, f. grinding. Molienda, f. a griste, corn to be ground, a
grinding. * Molimiento, m. a grinding. Molinero, m. a miller. Molino, m. a
mill. * Molino de viento, a winde-mill. * Molir, to compass, to go about.
Molleja, f. the tender inner part of any bird, which in a goose is called the
soul. Mollentar, to make soft. Mollera de cabeca, the crown of the head, the
pate. Mollete, soft bread. Mollido, made soft. Mollidor, m. one that makes
soft. Mollidura, f. making soft, making of a bed. Mollinas, f. soft showers,
Scottish mists. Mollir, to make soft, to make up a bed. * Molondron, one naught
worth. * Momentaneamente, without ceasing, every moment. * Momentaneo, m. that
which endures but a while, that which is done in a moment. Momento, m. a
moment, a very short space, the twinkling of an eye. Momeria, f. mummerie, the
use of maskers or mummers. Momia, f. mummie, the liquor that runs out of the
Cedar trees. * Momio, a iester, a vice in a play. * hazer Momios, to make mops
and mowes with the mouth, to make visages and foolish faces. Momo, a vice in a
play, a iester. Also Momus the god of reprehension. Mona, a she ape. * Monaco,
m. a monk. * Monacillo, m. a nouice, a boy monk, a little priest. Monacordio,
m. an instrument with one string. * Monagico, a little monk, a boy monk. *
Monarca, m. a monarch, an absolute prince that reigns alone in authority
sovereign. Monarchia, f. a monarchy, a kingdom or land subject but to one
prince. Monazillo, a little monk, a little priest. Mondaduras, f. cleansings,
parings. Mondar, to make clean, to purge, to cleanse. Monda-dientes, a tooth
picker. Monda-orejas, an ear picker. * Mondado, m. cleansed. * Mondego, a
river of Portingale. * Mondongo, tripes, chitterlings, etc. * Mondonguero, or
Tripero, a tripeman or seller of tripes, chitterlings, and such like, etc. *
Mondon^edo, a city of Galizia in Spain, whereof Gueuara was bishop. Moneda,
money. Also a kind of money in Spain, whereof there were diverse kinds, the
single of three blankes an English farthing the Moneda of Plata some of them a
real, some of two reals, some of four, others of eight reals of plate. * cien
Monedas, an hundred pieces of money. * Moneda de oro, about a ducket of
English, five shillings ten pence halfpenny. * Monedear, to make or coin
money. Monedero, m. a coiner of money. * Monestelio, vide Monesterio.
Monesterio, m. a monastery, a religious house. * Monfies, robbers on the hills
or mountains. Monge, or Monje, m. a monk. Mongia, f. monkerie. * Mongibel,
mount Aetna. * Mongibello, a mountain in Sicilie called in Latin Aetna.
Mongil, m. a monks garment, a mourning garment for women. * Mongilon, a
mourning garment for a woman. * Mongo, vide Monge, a monk. Monja, f. a nun.
* Monicion, vide Municion. * Monje, or Monge, a monk. * Monicordio, m. an
instrument of one string. Monipodio, m. conspiracy. * Mon^aco. a rude
rusticall fellow. * Monilla, f. a little she ape. * Monillo, m. a little he
ape. * Monita, a little she ape. * Monito, m. a little he ape, a little
monkie. Mono, an he ape. * Monoculo, one that has but one eye. * Monodia, a
mournful song where one alone sings. * Monosilaba, having but one syllable.
* Monstro, m. a monster. * Monstruo, idem. Monstruoso, m. monstrous, ugly,
huge. Montan^a, f. a mountain, a wood. Montan^ero, m. vide Montanes.
Monta^nes, pertaining to a mountain, a man of the mountain. Montan^as, f.
mountains, woods. * Montaneta, f. a little hill. * Montante, a two handed
sword. Montar, to amount in reckoning. * Montaraz, a forlorn fellow that
lives on the mountains. * Montazgo, m. mountain tributes to the king. Monte,
m. a hill, a mountain, a wood. Montear, to hunt. * Montera, f. a hunters hat.
Monteria, f. hunting. Montero, m. a huntsman, or a hunters hat. Montesino, m.
of or belonging to the wood. Montesillo, or Montezillo, a little hill. *
Montezito, idem. * Montezillo, idem, m. Monton, m a heap, a pile. * Monton de
pan, a heap of corn. Monton, or Hacina de len^a, a woode-pile. * Monton de
heno, a stacke of hey. Montoso, m. hilly. Montuoso, m. full of mountains. *
Monviedro, a town in the Province Rioxa in Spain, where the wine called vino
de Monviedro, is made: it is white. Monumento, m. a monument, a thing kept for
a remembrance, a matter of antiquity. * Moquito, a little snot or sniuell.
Mora, f. a Mulbery. Also a woman black-Moore. Also an herb. * Mora yerva, an
herb called Nightshade, or Deaths-herbe. * Mora de la montan^a, a strawberrie
or blacke-berrie growing on briers. Morada, f. a lodging, a dwelling, a place.
* Moradilla, f. an herb. Morado color, murrey or iron color, dark color.
Morador, m. a dweller, an inhabitant. Moral, a Mulberrie tree. * Moralidad, f.
moralnes. * Moralmente, morally. Morar, to dwell, to inhabit. Morbo caduco, the
falling sickness. Morcella, f. a spark of fire. Morcielago, or Murcielago, a
bat, or flittermouse, or reeremouse. Morcilla, f. a hogs pudding, a pudding. *
Morcillero, m. a pudding maker, or seller. * Mordace, taunting, sharp biting.
* Mordaz, biting, taunting, sharp. Mordaza, f. the bit of a bridle, used in
Spain by the inquisition to put in the mouths of those that shall speak
against their religion, for a punishment for them. Mordedor, m. a biter.
Mordedura, f. biting. * Mordella, Mordelle, id est, Morder la, Morder le, to
bite her or it, to bite him or it. Morder, yo Muerdo, to bite, to gnawe.
Mordido, m. bitten. * Mordiscar, to bite or nibble as fish do at a bait, etc.
* More, vide Moro, a black Moore. * Morea, a province called Morea. * Moreja,
f. a lamprey. * Morel, brown duskish color. Morella, f. an herb called
nightshade, garden nightshade. Morena, a lamprey. * Moreno color, murrie
color, brown, dark, duskish. * hombre Moreno, a man of swartish hue. *
Moreno pan, brown bread. * Morera, a mulberie tree (vt opinor.) * Moretia, f.
moorish, of the moors. Morezillos, m. the muscles of the body. * Morillas, f.
and irons, cobirons. Morillo, m. brown, a little black Moore. Also cobirons to
support the fire. * Morion, a certain headpeece so called, a murrion. Morir,
yo Muero, to die. * Morisca, f. a woman Moore that is become a Christian. *
Morisco, m. a black Moore made or become a Christian. * Morisma, f. Moorisme,
Moorish religion. * Morismo, vide Morisma. * Morillo, m. a little high rock in
the sea, a little promontorie, the poll of a fish. Mormollo, m. a murmuring, a
muttering. * Moro, m. a black Moore of Barberie, or a Neager that follows
the Turkish religion. * Moronez, f. a blackish swartie color. * Moroydes, the
hemorrhoides. * Morrion, a headpeece called a murrion. Morro, m. a great high
rock in the sea. Also the poll of the head. * baxo el Morro, he held down his
head, or he bethought himself. Mortaja, f. a winding sheet. Mortajador, m. he
that shrowdeth, he that makes graves. Mortajar, to shroud, to bury. Mortal,
deadly, mortal. Mortalidad, f. mortality, subjection to death. Mortandad, f,
a great death, or dying of people. * Morterete, m. a kind of artillery in
war, of iron, a murdering piece. Mortero, a mortar to stamp spice in, a mortar
for masons. Morteruela, f. green sauce. * Morteruelo, m. idem. Mortesino, m.
carrion, a dead carcass. Mortuorio, m. a burial, a funeral. * Morzilla, f. a
hogs pudding. * Morzillero, a pudding maker. * Morzillo cavallo, a flea-bitten
gray horse. * Mosayaca obra, f. a curious workmanship in stone, so painted
that it seems graven. * Mosayco, m. of or pertaining to Moses. Also as
Mosayca. Mosca, f. a fly. Moscada, f. a nutmeg. Moscadero, m. a fan to make
wind, a flie-flap, an herb called horse tail. Moscador, m. idem. Moscarda,
f. a breeze, a gadbee, a horse fly. * Moscarel, vide Moscatel. Moscatel, wine
muscadell. Moscateles uvas, musk grapes. Moscon, m. a great fly. Mosillones,
a shelfish called Muscles. Mosqueador, m. he that drives away flies.
Mosquear, to drive away flies. * Mosqueta, f. musk flower. * Mosquetadas
clavellinas, musk gilloflowers. * Mosquetazo, m. a shot or blow with a
musket. * Mosquete, m. a musket. Mosquetero, m. a muskettier, one that uses a
musket. Mosquilla, f. a little gnat. * Mosquitillo, a little fly, a gnat.
Mosquito, m. a gnat. Mostajo, m. a little tree like a laurel. * Mostalla, vide
Mostaza. Mostaza, f. Mustard seed. * Mostazo, m. the tree that bears mustard
seed. Mosto, m. new wine. * Mosto torcido, new wine from the press. * Mosto
de Tintin, wine that runs first before the press forces much. * Mostoso,
mustie, of sweet wine. Mostrador, m. a shewer. * Mostrado, m. showed. Mostrar,
yo Muestro, to show. Mostrenco, m. a straier, a bill signed: belonging to
sheepeheards faires. Mota, f. a mote, or small mote, a heap. Mote, or Motete,
m. a word, a motto, a saying, a quip, a nippe. Motejado, m. quipped, taunted,
nipped. Motejador, m. a quipper, a taunter, a scoffer. Motejar, to quip, to
taunt. * Motelastimero, m. a cavil, a brabling, a quarrelling quippe.
Motilado, m. shorn near, polled near, notted. * Motilon, m. a lay friar
which serves the others. Motin, m. a mutiny, an uproar, a rebellion. Motivo,
m. a motive, a purpose, a persuasion. * Moton, a certain coard in a ship. *
Motorio, m. full of motion. * Motoso, full of motes or small hairs. Movediza,
f. birth, untimely borne. * Movedizo, moving, wavering. Movedor, m. a moouer,
a stirrer. Movedura, f. bringing forth before the time. Mover, yo Muevo, to
move, to stir, to remove. Mover la muger, a woman to bring forth child
before her time. Movible, mooueable, that may be removed or stirred. Movido,
m. moved. Movimiento, m. a motion, moving, stirring. * Movito, m. the
bringing forth child before due time. * Mourone, a kind of Lamprey. Moxama,
f. salt fish. * Moxar, vide Mojar, to wette, to moysten. * Moxi, a buffet or
blow on the head. * Moxiconazos, m. great bobs or blows on the nose. *
Moxiconar, to bobbe on the nose. Moxicones, bobs on the nose. * Moxillones,
shelfish called muscles. * Moxqueta, vide Mosqueta, f. a musk rose. *
Moxquetaco, or Moxquetazo, vide Mosquetazo, a blow or shot of a musket. *
Moxquito, m. a gnat. * Mozoneria, the bounds, the limits.
M V
* Mubles, moueables or goods moueables. Muceta de obispo, a bishops pall or
habit. Muchacha, or Mochacha, a girl. Muchacho, or Mochacho, a boy. Muchas
vezes, many times, often. Muchedumbre, f. multitude, manifoldnes. Mucho, m.
much. Mudable, mutable, changeable. Mudablemente, changeably. Mudado, m.
changed. Mudamiento, m. changing. Mudanca, f. change. * Mudancas de danca,
dancing tricks. Mudar, to change. Mudas, or Cerillas, painting for women's
faces. Mudecer, or Mudescer, to be dum, to be slow of speech. * Mudejar, one
that is descended of the Moors. * Mudexar, idem. * Mudin, vide Almudin, a
measure about a quarter of a pecke. Mudo, m. dumb. * Mudo silencio, mute, or
still silence. Mueble, mooueable. Muela, f. a great tooth, a grinding tooth, a
millstone, a smithes or cutlers grindstone. * Muela de mano, a handmill,
quernes. * Muela de baxo, the lower chocke tooth. * Muela de encima, the upper
chocke-tooth. * Muele, Muelo, vide Moler. Muelle, soft, a heap, a harbor for
ships. Muelle donde pueden surgir navios, a harborough or haven for ships.
Muellmente, softly. Muerdago, a green shrub growing on apple trees, crabtrees,
etc. called Missletoe. * Muerde, Muerdo, vide Morder. * Muere, Muero, vide
Morir. * Muergo, or Longueron, a shell fish living in the sand of the sea, of
the length and bigness of a man's finger. Muermo, m. a disease of a horse called
the glanders. * Muermol, idem. Muermoso, troubled with the glanders. Muerte, f.
death. Muerto, m. dead. * Muerto de amores, mad in love. * Muesca, a notch,
dent, cutting in, or scotch into any thing. Muestra, f. a show, a muster of
men. Also a pattern. * Perro de muestra, a dog that winding by sent the game,
as Partridges, etc. so after finding and seeing it, makes a stand and looks
on his master, making a show w^^re it is, that with a piece he may kill it. *
Muestre, Muestro, vide Mostrar. * Mueve, Muevo, vide Mover. Muger, f. a woman.
* Muger de su casa, a huswife, a good huswife. * Muger de punto, a woman of
chief or high account, a woman of honor and credit. Mugercilla, or
Mugerzilla, f. a little woman, a silly poor woman. * Mugeriego, m. hanting of
women. Also women's matters. Mugeril, pertaining to a woman. Mugeril hombre, an
effeminate person. Mugerilmente, womanlike. * Mugir, to loow like a cow. Mugre,
m. grease, sweat. Mugron, the sprowting of a vine. * Mugroso, m. full of
sweat or grease. Mula, f. a she mule. * Mulas de Madera, f. carriages for
great ordinance. Muladar. m. a dunghill. Also a haven in Spain so called
between new Castile and Andaluzia, where the greatest battle that ever, was
fought between the Moors with Spaniards and other Christians, where were
slain in one day, 50. or 60. thousand Moors. * Mulador, m. vide Muladar. *
Muladral, vide Muladar. Mular, pertaining to a mule. * Mulas, high soaled
shoes, or pantofles. Also mules. * Mulata, f. the daughter of a blackmoore,
and one of another nation. * Mulato, m. the son of a black Moore, and one of
another nation. * Muleta roma, a she colt of an ass and a horse. * Muletada,
a herd of Mules. * Muletas, croutches or stilts to go on. Muletero, m. a keeper
of mules or of asses, a driuer of mules. * Muleto romo, a he colt of an horse
and an ass. * Mulo, m. a he mule, the male of a mule. Mullidor, vide Mollidor.
Multa, f. an amercement, a fine set on a man. * Multado, fined, amerced. *
Multador, m. one that sets an amercement or fine on ones head. Multar, to
amerce, to fine. Multiplicacion, f. multiplying increasing in number.
Multiplicado, m. multiplied, grown to a number. Multiplicar, Praes. yo
Multiplico, 1. Praet. yo Multiplique, to multiply, to bring to a number. *
Multiplique, vide Multiplicar. * Multitud, f. a multitude, a great company,
great number. * Mumia, or Mummia, a drugge made of dead men's flesh called
Mummie: some say it to be the liquor that comes out of the cedar tree. *
Munchas vezes, vide Muchas vezes, often, many times. * Munchedumbre, vide
Muchedumbre, multitude, greatness. Muncho, vide Mucho, much. * Mundadura, f.
clensing, purging, making clean. Mundano, m. worldly, of the world. *
Mundificar, to cleanse, to mundifie. Mundo, m. the world. Mun^eca de nin^os, a
puppet, a babie. * Mun^eca de braco, the handwrest, sometime used for a
bracelet. * Mun^eco de nin^os, a babie, a puppet for children. * Mungil piece, a
kind of fish. Municion, f. necessary furniture, munition. * Municipal,
touching freedoms, franchises, or privileges. Mun^idor, m. a stirrer, a warner.
* Mun^oz, a proper name of a man so called. Mur, m. a mouse. Mura, f. a rope or
coard in a ship called the great tacke or sheate. * Muradal, vide Muladar. *
Murador, or Murero, a mason that makes or rough casts walls. Muralla, f. a
wall of a city. * Muramos, let us die, vide Morir. * Murangho, m. a field
mouse called a shrew. * Murar, to make walls. * Murcia, a city in Spain where
much silk is made and many silk worms live. Murcielago, m. a Batte, or
Flittermouse. Murecillo, Murezillo, or Morezillo, the sinews of the arm, the
muscles. * Mureza, f. clownishnes, country fashion. Murgan^a, f. a rat. *
Muriendo, dying. * Muriera, or Muriesse, should die, vide Morir. Murmullo de
gente, a murmuring, a muttering. Also a commotion or uproar, a mutiny.
Murmuracion, f. murmuring, a making of a muttering noise, a repining, or a
gainsaying of one. Murmurador, m. a murmurer, a repiner, a mutterer against
one. Murmurar, to murmur, to repine, to mutter or grudge at any body. *
Murmurio, murmuring, grudging, the noise of water running. * Murmuro, vide
Murmullo, a murmuring noise, a humming. Muro, m. a wall of a city. * Muros,
the walls of a city. Murta, f. priuet with which they make bowres and borders
in gardens. Muruges, an herb called pimpernel, some say white pimpernell, or
male pimpernell. * Musa, f. a muse, a song, music. Musaico, anticke works, or
works so curiously painted that they seem imbossed. * Musculo, m. a muscle in
the body. * Museo, the name of a famous poet son to Orpheus. Also the place
about Olympus dedicated to the muses. Musgan^o, m. a field mouse called a
shrew. Musgo, m. moss of the trees, etc. Musica, f. music. * Musica de
responso, singing of friars or priests at a dead man's burial. Musico, m. a
musicion, belonging to music. * Musiqui, a part of the head-peece or sallet.
Muslo, m. the thigh, the flank. * Muslos de calcas, the cannians of hosen. *
Musole, a kind of hound fish or dog fish. Mustio, m. withered, pined, fallen
away. * Mustos de calcas, vide Muslos de calcas. Muy, as Muy bueno, the best,
very good. Muy, as Muy doto, most learned, very learned.
M Y
* Mysterio, m. a mystery or dark secret. * Mytad, or Metad, f. the moitie or
half.
N
* NA'ba, a rising and falling in a field, as the going up and down of a ship
at sea. * Nabal, a place where turnips grow. Also a battle at sea. Also a
proper name Nabal. Also a kind of linen cloth in Spain so called. *
Nabecilla, vide Navecilla. * Nabegacion, vide Navegacion. * Nabica, f. a long
slender turnep. * Nabichuelo, or Navichuelo, a little ship. * Nabidad, vide
Navidad, Christmas. * Nabigable, vide Navigable. Nabo, m. a turnep. Nacar, the
mother of pearl. * Nacaron, vide Macaron. * Nacencia, f. an Ancome in the
body, a rising or bunch in the flesh, a blister, a bile. Nacer, or Nascer, to
be borne, to spring up. Nacida, f. a bile, a blister. Nacido, or Nascido,
borne, sprung up. Nacimiento, or Nascimiento, birth, springing up. Nacora, vide
Nata. Nation, f. a nation, country, people of a land. Nada, nothing. * no
Nada, nothing at all. * bolver en Nada, to come to naught. * servir de Nada, to
be to no purpose. Nadadero, m. a swimming place. Nadador, m. a swimmer.
Nadadura, f. swimming. Nadar, to swim. * Nadar, Nadar y ahogar en la orilla, to
swim well, and to be drowned on the shore side, to go through great matters,
and to stick at a small thing. Nadie, no man, no body. * a Nado, by swimming.
* Naguela, a poor thatched cottage. Naipes, or Naypes, playing cards. Nalga,
f. the buttocks. * Nalga de tocino, a gammon of bacon. Nalgada, f. a blow on
the buttocks. Nalguear, to beat the buttockes. * n^ames, a kind of fruit in
the kingdom of China. Nao, or Nave, f. a ship. * Naps, an herb called nauew
gentle, or french nauew. Naranja, f. an orange. * Naranjada, orange color,
pertaining to orenges. * Naranjado, spotted with orenges, pelted with orenges,
as in Spain on shrouetuesday they go casting of orenges, almonds and comfits. *
Naranjal, an orchard of orenges. Naranjo, m. an orenge-tree. Narciso, an herb
or flower called daffodill. Nardo, m. spikenard. Narigudo, m. long nosed. *
Narices, vide Nariz, f. the nostrils. Nariz, f. a nose. * Nariz sima, a flat
nose. * Nariz roma, a nose turned upward with the end. Narra, f. a tale. *
Narracion, f. a declaration, a recounting of a matter, a telling or expressing
of a matter. Narrar, to tell, to recount. Narria, Mierra, or Rastra, a rake. *
Nascer, or Nacer, to be borne, to spring up. * Nascimiento, or Nacimiento,
birth, springing up. * Nascido, or Nacido, m. borne, sprung up. Nascion, vide
Nation, f. a people, a country. * Naso, a town of Sicilie near mount Aetna.
Nassa, or Nasa, a bow-net, a we will of wickers to catch fish with. * Nasturcio,
or Malpica, cresses. * Nasturcio montese, wild cresses. * Nata, f. cream.
Natas, f. cream. * Natio, vide Nascimiento. Natividad, f. birth, nativity. *
Nativo, m. native, naturally engendered. Natura, f. nature. * Natura, vide
Con^o. Natural, disposition, natural. Natural de tal lugar, such a countrieman
borne. Naturaleza, f. a man's natural disposition or condition, or his native
country. Naturalmente, naturally, according to nature. Nava, f. a rising and
falling up and down in a field, as a ship goes up and down at sea. Navaja, f.
a rasor. Naval, pertaining to a ship, a place where turnips grow. Also a
battle at sea. * batalla Naval, war by sea. Navarisco, m. a man of Navarre,
pertaining to Navarre. * Navarra, Navarre. Navarro, vide Navarisco. Nauchel, a
master of a ship, a pilot. Nave, or Nao, f. a ship. * Navecilla, f. a small
bark, a boat. * Navecilla de encensio, a box to keep incense in, a censor.
Navegacion, f. sailing, navigations. Navegante, he that saileth, a mariner.
Navegar, to sail, to pass by sea. Naveta, f. a little ship. Also a censor. *
Navezica, or Navechica, a boat, a small bark. * Navezilla, vide Navecilla, a
small bark. * Naufragio, m. shipwreck. * Navichuelo, m. a little ship.
Navidad, f. Christmas. * Navigable, nauigable, that may be sailed over. *
Navigante, one that sayleth, a sea man. Navio, m. Nave, or Nao, f. a ship.
Navizilla de encensios, a censor. * Naupacto, a town in Achaia, called
Lepantum. * Nausea, a desire to vomit. Naypes, or Naipes, m. playing cards.
N E
Nebeda, an herb called Calamint or Nep. * Nebla, vide Niebla, a cloud. Nebli,
m. a hawke. Neblina, f. a miste. * Neceador, m. a foolish speaker, one that
plays the fool. Necear, to play the fool. Necedad, f. foolerie.
Necessariamente, necessarily, of necessity. Necessario, m. necessary *
Necessicida, vide Necessidad. Necessidad, f. necessity, need. Necessitado, m.
that is in necessity or need. * Necezuelo, m. a little fool. Neciamente,
foolishly. Necio, m. a fool. * Nefandamente, heinously, horribly, abominably,
detestably. * Nefando, m. heinous, horrible, mischievous, not to be named. *
Nefariamente, wickedly, abominably. * Nefario, m. wicked, abominable. Negacion,
denial. * Negado, m. denied. Negador, m. a denier. Negar, yo Niego, to deny.
* Negativo, negative. Negijon, vide Neguijon, m. the worm in the teeth.
Negligencia, f. negligence, carelesnes. Negligente, careless, negligent.
Negligentemente, carelessly. Negociacion, f. dealing in business. Negociado, f.
busy in dealing. Negociador, m. a dealer, a dooer. Negociante, a tradesman.
Negociar, to deal in business, to follow a trade. Negocio, m. business, trade. *
Negra hija, a disgraced, unfortunate, and unlucky daughter. * Negregueado,
blacked, made black. Negreguear, to wax black. Negregura, f. blacknes.
Negreta,, a kind of ducke. Negrillo, m. a little black Moore, somewhat
black. * Negrito, idem. * Negro, m. black Also a black Moore of Ethiopia.
Negromancia, f. negromancie. Negromantico, a worker by negroma^cy Negror, m.
blacknes. * Negrura, f. blacknes. Neguilla, vide Axeuz. Neguijon de dientes,
the worm in the teeth. Nema, f. a quire of paper. Nenufar, or Higo del rio, or
Escudete del rio, or Galpha, or Gelfano, the water lilly. * Nervadera yerva, a
kind of herb. * Nervar, vide Nerviar. * Nervezico, m. a little sinewe.
Nerviar, to work by sinews. Nervio, m. a sinewe. * Nervioso, vide Nervoso,
full of sinews. Nervosidad, f. fulness of sinews. Nervoso, m. full of sinews.
Nervudo, m. that has great sinews. * Nesgas, f. welts, gardes, or cuts in a
garment. Also small skirts. * Nespera, vide Nispola, a medlar. * Nespola, vide
Nispola. * Neto, m. neat, clear, pure. * Nevada, f. a drift of snow. Nevado,
m. full of snow, snowie. Nevar, yo Nievo, to snow. * Neveda, vide Nebeda,
Calamint. * Neurinas, Juniper berries. * Neutral, a neuter, neither on one
side, nor on another. * Neutralidad, f. neutralitie, holding of neither side. *
Neutro, neither of both.
N I
Ni, neither. * Nibel, vide Nivel. * Nibelar, vide Nivelar. * Nidada, f. a
nestfull. Nidal, that which is put in the nest. Nido, m. a nest. Niebla, f. a
miste. * Niega, Niegue, Niego, vide Negar, to deny. Niervo, vide Nervio, a
sinewe. Niespra, f. a medlar. Niespro, m. a medlar tree. Nieta, f. a niece, a
brothers or sisters daughter. Nieto, m. a nephew, a brothers son. * Nieto
vino, the third wine from the grape. * Nieve, Nievo, vide Nevar. Nieve, f.
snow. * Nigretta, a waterfoule called a coote. Nigromancia, f. nigromancie,
coniuration. Nigromantico, m. a coniurer, a worker by the black art. Nimfa,
f. a nymph. * Ninacion, id est Ni Nation, neither any nation. Ningun, or
Ninguno, no body, none. * Nin^a, f. a girl, child, or Infant. Nin^a del ojo,
the apple of the eye. Nin^ear, to play the child. * Ninhito, m. a little
child. * Ninha, vide Nin^a. * Ninho, vide Nin^o. Nin^erias, childish toys. *
Nin^ero, m. one that loves children. Nin^ez, f. infancy, childhood. Nin^eta
de los ojos, the apples of the eyes. Nin^illa de los ojos, idem. Nin^o, m. a
child, an infant. * Nispola, a fruit called a medlar. Nispero, vide Niespero,
a medlar tree. Nivel, a plumline, a carpenters rule. Nivelador, m. one that
makes level, or rules. Nivelar, to rule out, to level.
N O
No, No. No nada, nothing at all. * No menos, no less. No solo, not only. *
Nobelero, vide Novelero. * Nobelo, vide Novelo. * Nobilla, vide Novilla. *
Nobia, a married woman of one day, a bride. * Nobio, m. a married man of one
day, a bridegroom. Noble, noble. Noblecer, or Noblescer, to make noble, to
wax noble. * Noblecido, m. made noble, made of fame or renown, become noble.
* Noblemente, nobly. Nobleza, f. nobility. * Nocella, vide Nozella. Noche, f.
night. * Nochecido, m. waxed night. * Nocher, or Contramaestro, a boateswaine
in a ship. * Nocher, the wardrobe in a ship. Nocherniega, pertaining to the
night. * Nochecer, to wax night. * Nocible, hurtful. * Nocivo, noisome. *
Noctulupa, a disease in the eyes. Nocturno, vide Noturno, belonging to the
night. Nogada salsa, a gallimawfrie of nuts. Nogal, m. a walnut. * Noguera, or
Nogueyra, a nut called a walnut. Nolito, feriage or passage money by ship, or
by boat. * Nombradamente, namely, by name. Nombradia, f. naming by name. *
Nombrado, m. named, renowned, famous. * Nombrador, m. a namer, one that gives
a name to a thing. Nombrar, to name. Nombre, m. a name. * Dar el Nombre, to
give the watch word. * Tomar el nombre, to take the word. * Nomenclator, one
that knows the names of things and persons, and calls them thereby. * una
Nomina, a catalog of names. Also a little purse with some relickes of the
Saints hanging about ones neck in devotion. Nones, od, uneven, as 3. 5. 7. 9.
11. 13. 15. 17. 19. contrary to this is Pares, which is even, as 2. 4. 6. 8.
10. 12. 14. 16. 18. 20. * pares o Nones, even or od. Nono, m. the ninth. * Nora
buena, or mala, id est en ora buena or mala, in a good hour or in a bad. *
Nordestear, to coast northeast. * Norma, a rule, a level, a line, a direction.
* Norte, or Tramontana, the northeast wind. * Nose, id est, No se, I cannot
tell. Nosotros, we. Nota, f. a mark, a note. Notable, notable, excellent,
worth the marking. Notablemente, notably. Notacion, f. noting. Notado, marked,
noted. Notar, to note, to mark. * Notar cartas, to endite letters. * Notaria,
the office of a notarie, a clarkship. Notario, a notarie, a clarke that
writes, or keeps an office. Notezilla, a little note. Noticia, knowledge,
notice. Notificacion, giving notice, doing to understand. * Notificado, m.
notified, made to have knowledge of. * Notificador, m. he that gives notice.
Notificar, Praes. yo Notifico, 1. Praet. yo Notifique, to give notice, to do
to weet, to give to understand. * Notifique, vide Notificar. * Noto, vide
Vendeval, the south wind. Notorio, known, notorious. Noturno, m. belonging to
the night, of the night. Novecientos, nine hundreds. Novedad, f. newness,
strangeness. * Novela, f. news. Novelero, m. a carrier of news. * Novelo. m.
a bragger of his own virtues, a new comer, an vpstart. * Novenas, certain
prayers and oraysons called the ninthes in imitation of the nine festival
days. * Noveno, m. the ninth. * Novencana muger, a young woman proper and well
attired. * Nover, id est, No ver, not to see. Novia, f. a bride. * Novicia, a
new thing. * Noviciado an^o, the first year that any religious body does
enter into the monastery. Noviciar, to make new things, to do anewe. *
Novicientos, nine hundred. Novicio, m. a nouice, one newly entered religion.
Noviembre, November. Novilla, a h^ifer, a young cow. Novillo, a steer, a young
ox. Novio, m. a bridegroom, a new married man. * Nozella, wild flower
deluce. * n^ro, id est, nuestro, ours.
N V
* Nube, or n^uve, a cloud. n^ublado, cloudie, ouercast. n^ublarse, to be
ouercast with clouds. n^ubloso, cloudie. * n^ublo del pan, blasting of corn.
n^ublo en el trigo, blasting of wheat. Nuca de la cabeca, of the poll or nape
the head. n^udo, m. a knot. * n^udo de la mano, a knuckle. * n^udoso, m. full
of knots, knottie. * Nuebe, vide Nueve. Nuera, f. a daughter in law, a sons
wife. Nuestro, ours. Nueva, f. news, strangenes. * Hazer de nuevas, to make
himself strange of that he knows well enough. Nuevamente, newly, lately.
Nueve, nine. Nuevo, m. new, young. Nuez, f. a nut. * Nuez de la garganta, the
weesill or little tongue at the entrance of the throat. * Nuez de especie,
nutmegs. * Nueza blanca, an herb called white Brionie. Nueza negra, black
Brionie. * Numerado, m. numbered, reckoned, counted, told, paid. * Numerar, to
number, to tell, to reckon, to count, to pay. * Numerato, m. told, reckoned,
counted. * Numerato de dezenares y centenares, reckoned by tens and by
hundreds. Numero, m. a number. Numeroso, m. in great number. Nunca, never. *
Nuncio, a messenger or Ambassador from the Pope. Nusco, or Con Nusco, with us.
Nutria, f. a little beast called an Otter. * Nutrimiento, m. nourishment. *
Nutrir, to nourish, to maintain, to uphold. n^uvada, f. a storm. n^uve, f. a
cloud. n^uve de ojo, the white skin over the eye hindering the sight. * Nuz,
the nocke of a bow to hold on the string. * Nuziente, vide Provechoso.
O
O, or, either, or a voice of woondring. * Obal, a thing round as an egg.
Obedecer, or Obedescer, to obey. * Obedecido, or Obedescido, m. obeyed.
Obediencia, f. obedience. Obediente, obedient, diligent to please, humble.
Obedientemente, obediently. * Obeja, vide Oveja, a sheep. Obejerugo, vide
Abejaruco, m. Obelisco, m. a kings tomb. Obelo, m. a chapter of a book. *
Obencadura, the shrouds in a ship. Obgeto, vide Objeto, m. an object, that
which is before ones eyes. * Objeto, or Obgeto, idem. * Objecion, an objection.
Also a reproching or casting in the teeth. Objetura, f. an obiecting, a setting
before the eyes, an alleging of some cavil by the way. Obispado, m. a
Bishopric. Obispal, belonging to a Bishop. * Obispillo, m. a Bishop made in
jest at Shrouetide among students and scholars, which they hold up for a
week, doing him all honor, as though he were truly a bishop indeed.
Obispillo de puerco, a haggas, a hogs haslet, a chitterling. Obispillo de ave,
the rumpe of a bird. Obispo a Bishop, a Prelate. * Oblacion, a sacrifice, an
oblation. Oblada, f. an offering. Oblea, f. an offering, a round offering cake.
Obligacion, f. a bond, an obligation. Obligado, m. bound by covenant or duty.
Obligar, Praes. yo Obligo, 1. Praet. yo Obligue, to bind by covenant or
duty. * Obligue, vide Obligar. O'bra, f. work. * Obrada, f. a days work,
an acre of land. * Obrador, m. a workman, a worker. * Obraje, work, trade,
working, making. Obrar, to work. * Obrecita, or Obrezita, a little work. *
Obrecilla, or Obrezilla, vide Obrecita. Obrero, m. a workman. Obreticia, a
thing done against just and right, wrong. * Obrezilla, vide Obrecita. *
Obrezillo, vide Obrezilla. * Obrezita, vide Obrecita, f. a small little work.
* Obrojos, vide Abrojos, a certain kind of thistle, a bramble, caltrops in
war. * Obscuramente, vide Escuramente, darkely. * Obscuro, vide Escuro, m.
dark. Obsequias, f. funeral rites. Observancia, f. observance, reverence,
honor, good behavior, observing or custom. * Observante, one that marketh or
observes, one that reuerenceth. * Obstaculo, m. a let, a hinderance. Obstante,
as Nonobstante, that stands not against, that withstandeth not, or
withstanding. * Obstar, to stand against. * Obstinacion, f. obstinatenes,
stubbornnes, peeuishnes. * Obstinado, m. obstinate, stubborn, perverse,
peevish. * Obtenga, Obtengo, vide Obtenir. * obTenir, Praes. obTengo, obTienes,
obTiene. 1. Praet. obTuve, obTuviste, obTuvo. Fut. obTendre, or obTerne, as, a.
Sub. Praes. obTenga. Imperfect. obTernia, obTuviera, or obTuviesse. Fut.
obTuviere, to obtain, to get, to compass. * obTernia, vide obTenir. *
obTuviera, obTuviere, obTuviesse, vide obTenir. * Obtuso, m. blunt, dull. *
Obviar, to meet with.
O C
Ocasion, f. occasion, cause, opportunity. * Ocasionar, to cause, to give
occasion, to procure. Ocasionado, m. occasioned, caused, excused. *
Ocasionador, m. one that gives occasion, or cause. * Occurrido, happened,
chanced. * Occurir, to happen, to chance. * Oceano, as Mar oceano, the Ocean
sea. * Ochava, or Drama, a dram in weight. * Ochavado, m. made eight square.
Ochavario, the eight part. Ochavas, the eights. Ochavero, m. a diuider into
eight parts. Ochavo, m. a piece of coin worth two Maravedies. Ochenta,
eighty, four score. O'cho, eight in number. Ocho cientos, eight hundred.
Ocidental, westerly. Ocidente, the west. O'cio, m. idleness, leisure, rest
from work or business. Ociosamente, idly, leisurely, at leisure. Ociosidad,
f. idleness. * Ocioso, m. idle, at leisure. * Octavario, the eight part. *
Octobre, vide Octubre, the month October. * Ocultamente, privily, secretly. *
Ocultar, to hide, to keep secret. * Oculto, m. secret, privy, hidden.
Ocupacion, f. occupation, taking into his hands, holding or possessing of
things. Ocupado, m. busy, taken in hand, let with business, troubled. Ocupar,
to occupy, to get or take, to possess, to trouble. Occurrir, to chance upon,
to happen on. * Occurrido, chanced, happened.
O D
* Odiado, m. hated, despited. * Odiar, to hate, to despite. O'dio, m. hatred,
spite. Odioso, m. bent to hatred, spiteful. * Odirifero, m. that brings a
savor. * Odirifico, m. that causes smell. O'dre, m. a water budget, a bottle
for wine, oil, etc. made and dressed with the hair inward, with rosin and
pitch, they are great ones, to carry on a mule or ass from place to place. *
hinchar, or ynchar odre, to puff an odre full of breath, to see if he will
hold, or vent out any wind. Odreria, f. a bottle-makersshop. * Odrero, a maker
of odres. Odrezillo, m. a little bottle, a small budget. Odrina, or odre de
buey, a budget of an ox hide. Odrizillo, vide Odrezillo.
O E
* Oeconomia, the guiding and ordering of things belonging to the house. *
Oeconomico, one that does order or govern the house. * Oestre, or Poniente,
the west, the west wind, the west part.
O F
Ofender, or Offender, yo ofiendo, to offend, to hurt, to displease. *
Ofendido, or Offendido, offended, hurt. * Offendiendo, or Ofendiendo,
offending, hurting. Offensa, or Ofensa, an offense, a hurt, a damage, a
stumbling block. Offension, or Ofension, a small offense or damage, some
cause of dislike. * Offensivo, or Ofensivo, offensive, hurtful. Offerta, or
Oferta, an offer, a thing proffered. * Offertorio, or Ofertorio, m. the
offertorie. Official, or Oficial, a handycrafts man, a man of occupation. *
Officina, or Oficina, a shop. Officio, or Oficio, an office, a trade, an
occupation. Offiende, Offiendo, vide Ofender, to offend. Offrecer, or Ofrescer,
yo Offresco, to offer or profer, to offer sacrifice. * Ofrenda, an offering. *
Offresca, Offresco, vide Ofrecer. Offrecido, or Ofrecido, offered, proffered.
Offrecimiento, m. or Ofrecimiento, an offering, a making profer, a sacrifice.
Offrenda, or Ofrenda, an offer, a sacrifice. * Offuscado, or Ofuscado,
darkened, dimmed, dulled. * Offuscador, or Ofuscador, one that makes dim or
dull, an obscurer. Offuscar, or Ofuscar, Praes. yo Offusco, 1. Praet. yo
Offusque, to make dim, to make dull, to darken. * Offusque, vide Offuscar.
O G
Ogan^o, m. that of this year. * Ogear, or Ojear, to wink, to cast an eye at,
to eye, to look at, to drive away birds or such like. * Ogeatar, vide Ojeatar.
Ogibundo, m. gaping like a sluggard, one that cares for nothing but sleep. *
Ohir, or Ohyr, vide Oyr.
O I
* Oi, vide Oy, to day, at this present time. Oido, vide Oydo, heard, the
hearing, the ears. Oidor, vide Oydor, m. a hearer, a justice of the peace and
coram. * Oiga, Oigo, vide Oyr, to hear, to grant. * Oygamonos, no more of
this: let us hear some other matters. Oir, vide Oyr. * O'ja, or Hoja, a leaf
of a tree, a leaf of paper, a sword blade. * O'ja de Milan, a leaf of latten
metal. * Ojaco, m. a great eye. * Ojaco, m. a tacke of maile. * Ojal, a button
hole. * Ojalar, to make button holes. * Ojales, button holes. Ojear, or Ogear,
to wink, to cast an eye, to have an eye unto. Ojeras hundidas, eyes sunk into
the head. * Ojeatado, vide Ojeteado. * Ojeatar, vide Ojetear. * Ojete, m. an
aiglet hole for points. * Ojeteado, made with aiglet holes. * Ojetear, to make
with aiglet holes for the points. * Ojetes, m. aiglet holes for to put in
points at. O'jo. m. an eye, witching with the eye, the meish of a net, a
needles eye. O'jo de buey, an herb called Oxe-eie, or May-weed. * O'jo de
aguja, the eye of a needle. * O'jo, or Aojamiento, an eying or bewitching with
the eye. * O'jos verdes y rasgados, great blackish gray eyes: that is, great
and goodly fair eyes. * Ojudo, m. great eyed.
O L
O'la, or O'nda, f. a wave of the sea. * Olanda, or Holanda, Holland, a
Province in the low countries, or Holland cloth. * Olandezes, or Holandezes,
people of Holland. * Olata, f. the name of a comet. * Olea, Oil. Oleado,
oyled, anointed with oil. Oledor, m. a smeller. Oledora cosa, a thing that
smells. Oler, as Dar Olor, yo Huelo, to yield a savor. Oler, recibiendo
Olor, yo Huelo, to smell. * Oleroso, m. smelling well. * Olfacto, vide Olfato.
* Olfaro, vide Olfato. Olfato, the sense of smelling. * Olido, m. smelled,
sauored. * Oliente, smelling. * Olifero, m. a place of Olive trees. That which
brings forth Olives. Also vide Odorifero. * Olimpiada, or Olympiada, f. a
certain time of sporting, solemnized among the Greeks every four years.
O'lio, vide Azeite. Oliva, f. an Olive berrie, an Olive tree. * Olivado,
unleavened. Olivar, a garden of Olives. * Olivo, the Olive tree. O'lla, f. an
earthen pot, a pot to boil with. Also the ordinary provision, diet and fare
that one uses in the house every day. * O'lla podrida, a hotchpotch made of
diverse meats put in one pot, as beef, veale, mutton, kid, goat, hens,
birds, etc. * O'lla de cobre, a brass pot. * Ollaza, a great pot, or a stroke
with a pot. * Ollejo, vide Hollejo. * Ollera, a woman that sells or makes
pots. Ollero, or Hollero. a potter. * Ollero de vedriado, a maker of glass
pots or cruses. Olleta, f. a pipkin, a little pot. * Ollin, or Hollin, foot of
a chimney, furnace, etc. * Ollinar, or Hollinar, to beraie with soote. Olmedo,
a grove of elmes. Also a town in old Castile in Spain so called. Ol'mo, m. an
elm. * O'lmo silvestre, a witchelme. Olor, m. a smell, a stench. * O'lta, vide
O'la. Olvidadizo, m. forgetful. Olvidado, m. forgotten. * Olvidanca, f. vide
Olvido, forgetfulness. Olvidar, to forget. Olvido, oblivion, forgetfulness. *
Olympiada, or Olimpiada, f. pastimes used among the Greeks every fourth year.
O M
Ombligo, m. a navel. Ombligo de Venus, an herb called Peniwoort. O'mbre, or
Hombre, a man. Ombrecillo, Ombrezillo, or Hombrecillo, a little man, a poor
silly fellow. Ombrezillos, or Hombrezillos, hoppes to brew with. O'mbro, or
Hombro, a shoulder. * O'mbros, the shoulders. * Ombrudo, m. great shouldered.
Omecida, or Homecida, m. a manslear, a murderer. * Omeje, vide Omenaje. *
Omenage, Omenaje, or Homenaje, fealty, swearing to be true man to his Lord of
whom he holds lands. * Omezillo, vide Omizillo. * Omicida, a man killer.
Omicidio, or Homicidio, manslaughter. Omillado, vide Vmillado, humbled.
Omiciano, Omiziano, or Homiziano, a manslear, a murderer. Omizillo, m.
manslaughter.
O N
* Onagre, a kind of weapon of war used in old time. O'nca, f. an ounce in
weight, a beast called a Panther or Ownce. * O'ncia, f. an ounce weight. O'nda,
or O'la, f. a wave of the sea. Ondear, to toss as waves do, to flow. Ondoso,
m full of waves. Onestad, vide Onestidad, f. honesty, dignity, credit.
Onestamente, honestly, credibly. Onestar, to adorn, to beautify, to reward
with honor and credit. Onestidad, or Honestidad, honesty, worship, credit.
Onesto, honest, worshipful, credible. * O'ngo, vide Hongo. * O'n^a, f. a
double furrow. Also the name of a city in Spain. Onor, or Honor, m. honor,
nobility, worship, dignity, promotion, credit. Onorable, or Honorable,
honorable, worshipful, credible. O'nra, or Honra, f. vide Onor, honor.
Onradamente, vide Honradamente, honorably, worshipfully. Onrado, or Honrado,
honored, worshipped. Onrar, or Honrar, to honor, to worship, to hold in
reputation, to reverence. Onrosamente, honorably, worshipfully, credibly.
Onroso, or Honroso, honorable, worshipful. * Onsario, vide Honsario. *
Ontanales, vide Hontanales. * onza, or onca, f. an ounce weight, or a beast
called an Ounce. onze, eleven in number. Onzeno, m. the eleventh in order.
O P
* Opacidad, f. shadow. * Opederado, m. vide Apoderado. Operacion, f. working,
operation. * Opilacion, f. stopping of the liver, etc. obstruction. Opilado, m.
stopped, troubled with obstruction. * Opilar, to stop with obstruction.
Opinable, that may be thought or supposed. Opiniatico, m. opinionatiue, self
willed, one that will not be drawn from his opinions. Opinion, f. opinion,
that which one thinks and holds to be so. opio, m. juice of poppie. oPoner,
Praes. oPongo, oPones, oPone, 1. Praet. oPuse, oPusiste, oPuso, Fut. oPondre,
or oPorne, as, a, Sub. Praes. oPonga, Imperfect. oPusiera, oPondria, oPornia,
or oPusiesse, Fut. oPusiere, to oppose, to set against, to gainsay, to hold a
contrary argument, to lay a wager. * oPonga, oPongo, vide oPoner. * oPondra,
oPondre, vide oPoner. * oPorna, oPorne, oPornia, vide oPoner. * Oportunamente,
fitly, conveniently, in very good time. Oportunidad, f. fitnes, conuenientnes,
meetnes of time and place. Oportuno, m. fit, meet, convenient, as a man would
wish. Oposicion, f. setting against, taking the adverse part, holding a
contrary argument. * Opositor, an opposer, or one that tries the learning of
other. * O'pra, vide O'bra. Oppremir, or Opremir, to oppress, to ouerbeare, to
weigh down, to stop, to ouercharge, to come upon suddenly. Oppression, vide
Opression. Opremido, m, oppressed, ouerborne, ouercharged. Opremir, vide
Oppremir. Opression, f. oppression, ouerbearing, ouerweighing. * Oprimido, vide
Opremido, m. * Oprimidor, m. one that oppresses or ouerweigheth. * Oprobrio,
m. an opprobrie, a check, a taunt, an vpbraiding. * Opthalmia, a disease of
the eyes when the uttermost skin of the eye is inflamed, proceeding of too much
fullness, or of biting choler, or of windiness. Opuesto, m. set against,
opposite, clean contrary. * Opulencia, f. riches, plenty, abundance. *
Opulento, rich, plentiful, abounding, wealthy. * Opuse, Opusiera, Opusiesse,
vide oPoner. * Opuso, vide oPoner. Oquedad, f. hollownesse, concauitie.
O R
O'ra, now, whether of two, now this, now that. O'ra, an hour. * Oraculo, an
oracle. * Orar, vide Rezar. * O'ras, a prayer book, beads said over, hours
spent in devotion. Oracion, f. a prayer, an oration or long persuasiue speech.
Oraculo, m. an oracle, an answer from God, a notable saying or sentence, a
matter of counsel. * Oracuz, licorice. Orador, m. an orator, one that prays
or entreats. * Oran, a city in Barbary which the king of Spain holds.
Orar, to pray, to entreat, to persuade by oration or speech. * Orates, fools.
Oratoria, f. rhetoric, the art of persuading. * Oratorio, pertaining to a
rhetorician. O'rca, f. a pitcher or pot for oil. * orca, as yr a orca, to
sail with a side wind, to go aside. Orchilla, a certain herb coming from
the Canaries. orcuelo, or orcuzelo, a trap for beasts, a pitfold, spring, or
grin to catch birds or beasts with. Orcuelo de ojo, a pin and web in the eye.
* Ordeate, a confection made of barley, barley water, ptisan water. orden, f.
order, a method, a row, a rank, a course, a calling or dignity of men.
Ordenado, m. ordered, appointed, ordained. Ordenadamente, orderly, ordinarily.
Ordenamiento, m. ordering, an ordinance or decree. Ordenanca, f. an ordinance,
a decree. Ordenar, to ordain, to institute, to order, to appoint. * Orden^ar,
to milk. Orden^ada azeytuna, an olive berry pressed. * Ordiata, f. barley
water, or ptisan water to drink, for those that are sick of the burning
fever, or of the ptisicke. Ordiate, barley water, ptisane drink. * Ordido,
warped as weauers do their webs, complotted, contrived, devised. Ordidura, f.
a warping, a weauing, a devise, a complotting, a contriuing. Ordiembre, the
warpe of a web put into the loome to be wouen, the web. * Ordinario, m.
ordinary, usual. Ordir, to begin to put a web into the loome, to warpe a
cloth as weauers call it, to lay as weauers do their webs before it be wouen:
to plot, to complot, to devise. Ordir tela, to lay the yarne on the loome to
begin their weauing withal. * Oreadas, Venus nymphs, or waiting women. Orear,
to lay abroad in the air, to bleach as they bleach clothes, to dry. Oregano,
an herb called Origanie, or wild Marierom. Oreja, f. an ear. Oreja de raton,
an herb called Mouseeare. Orejar, to wagge the ears, to shake the ears. *
Orejas, flap-eared, loll-eared. * Oreja de Abad, an herb like Iuie growing in
mudwals. Orejas de abad, a pancake. * Orejon, one that has large ears. *
Orejon de balvarte, a corner of a bulwark in round form like an ear.
Orejudo, m. one that has great long ears. Orfandad, f. wanting of parents. *
Organero, one that makes or sells organs. Organista, m. a player on the
organes. * Organizado, m. organized, drawn into parts and members of the
body, well proportioned. * Organizo, m. the organizing or drawing the body
into his parts and members. O'rgano, m. an instrument, the organes. Also the
organes or parts of the body. Orgullo, m. loftines, pride, wrath, haughtines,
disdain. Orgullosamente, proudly, loftilie, disdainfully, hautilie. Orgulloso,
lofty, high minded, proud, disdainful. Oriental, easterly, belonging to the
east, borne, or bred in the east, bright, as the easterly sunrising. Orient,
the east, orient, shining. * Orificio, the mouth, brim, or orifice of any
thing. Origin, f. the beginning, the birth. Original, the original. Orilla, f.
the shore, the brinke, border, or outside of a thing, a beds side. Orilla de
ropa, the skirte of a gown, the hemme of a garment. Orina, f. urine, piss.
Orin, m. rust. Orinal, m. an vrinall. Orinar, to make water, to piss. *
Orinecer, or Orinescer, to become rustie. Oriniento, m. rustie. Orizonte, or
Horizonte, the Horizon, that part round about of the heavens which we may
discern within our sight. O'rla, f. a skirt, a border, a hem. Orlador, m. one
that makes hems, borders, or the out parts of a garment. Orlar, to make a
border, hem, or welt of a garment, or such like. * O'rma, vide Horma, also a
tracke, a footing, a trace. * Ormar, to tracke, trace or follow by the footing.
Also to set shoes on the last, or other things on the mould or block. *
Ormiga, or Hormiga, f. an Emmet or Ant. * Ornado, m. adorned, decked, trimmed.
* Ornador, m. a decker, a trimmer, an adorner. Ornamento, m. decking, trimming,
garnishing. Ornar, to garnish, to deck, to trim. O'ro, m. gold. * O'ro hilado,
gold thread. * Oromusico, a kind of gold which painters use to paint withal.
* O'ro tirado, gold drawn into threads. Oroguan^in, Amber. * Oron, vide
Orones. Orones, banks of earth. Oropel, gilt leather, painters gold, Orpin or
base gold for painters. Oropendola ave, f. a bird called a Witwall, a
Woodpecker. Oropimiento, m. a color like gold called Arsnike Orpin. Orosuz, m.
Licorice. Orrible, horrible, terrible, dreadful, unpleasant. Orriblemente,
horribly, terribly. Orror, m. horror, dread, terror, fear. Orruras, f. dregs.
Ortaliza, f. herbs used to be eaten. Ortelano, m. a gardener. * Ortera, a trey
or great bowl of wood. * Orthografia, vide Ortographia. * Orthografo, vide
Ortografo. * Ortholano, vide Ortelano. * Ortiga, vide Hortiga, f. a nettle.
Also a kind of fish pricking like a nettle. * Ortigar, vide Hortigar, to
prick, to sting like a nettle. * Ortiguilla, vide Hortiguilla. * Ortografia,
or Ortographia, the art of true writing, Orthographie. * Ortografo, or
Orthographo, an Orthographer, or one that can teach Orthographie, or the art
of true writing. * Oruga, an herb called Rocket. Also a. Caterpiller or
Palmer-worme. Orujo, vide Borujo. O'rza, or O'rca, a pitcher of earth. Also the
name of a coard in a ship. Also a side, side-waies. * navigar a O'rza, to sail
with a side wind.
O S
* Os, or Vos, you. Osadamente, boldly, hardily. Osadia, f. boldness, hardines.
Osado, m. hardy, bold, venturous. Osar, to dare, to be bold, to hazard. O'sca,
f. an herb wherewith the Indians anoint themselves when they offer sacrifice
to their Gods. Oscurecer, or Escurecer, to darken, to obscure, to make dark.
Oscurecido, or Escurecido, m. darkened, obscured, dimmed. Oscuro, or Escuro, m.
dark, obscure. Osdiembal, vide Ordiembre, the woofe of a web. Osi, would to
God, O if. * O'so, vide O'sso, m. a bear. Ospedable, that does lodge, that may
be lodged. Ospedablemente, courteously, friendly, like a good housekeeper.
Ospedador, m. one that keeps hospitality. Ospedage, or Ospedaje, lodging.
Ospedamiento, or Hospederia, a lodging place, harborough, an inn. Ospedar, to
lodge, to host, to ly as a ghest. Ospital, an hospital for the poor, a
spittle. Ospitalero, m. the master or keeper of an hospital. * O'ssa, f. a
she bear. * Ossamenta, the bones in a body, the whole compacting of the
bones in any body. Ossario, m. a place to keep bones in, a charnell. Ossero,
m. a beare-heard. O'ssia, f. vide O'stra, an oister. O'sso, m. a bear. Ossudo,
m. one that has great bones. Ostay, a coarde that goes from the boltsprit to
the sail of the foremast. O'stia, f. an ost or offering, a wafer cake made to
offer. Also an oister. Ostiario, m. an oister bed. Also a place where they
keep the wafer cake or ost. Ostiero, vide Ostiario. Ostigado, vide Hostigado.
* Ostigar, vide Hostigar. Ostinadamente, obstinately, stubbornly, peruersly,
wilfully. Ostinado, m. obstinate, crooked, wilful, perverse. Ostinar, to be
obstinate. * Ostion, m. an oister. O'stra, or O'stria, f. an oister.
O T
* Oteador, m. a spy, a looker about from on high. Otear, to look about, to
spy from a high place. Otero, an high hill or watch tower to stand upon for to
ouerlooke the country every way. * Otero del rey, a place in Castile in Spain
so called. * O'to, vide Hoto. Oton^ada, harvest time, harvest, autumn tide. *
Oton^al, belonging to harvest. Oton^ar, to apply harvest, to reap and get in
the corn. Oton^o, harvest season, autumn. * Otorgado, m. bestowed upon,
freely given. Otorgamiento, m. a free grant, bestowing upon. * Otorgante, a
bestower upon, a free giver. Otorgar, Praes. yo Otorgo, 1. Praet. yo Otorgue,
to grant freely, to bestow upon. * Otorgue, vide Otorgar. Otravez, another
time, again. * O'trie, another, either of two. O'tro, idem. * Otrosi, also.
O'tros tantos, as many. Otro tanto, as much. Otubre, m. the month October.
O V
O'va, sea weeds, reeke, sea grass, ducke weed. * Oval, vide Obal. * O vala
me Dios, O God help me, God have mercy on me. * Ovando, in laying of eggs.
Ovar las aves, to lay eggs. * Ovegica, f. a little sheep. Oveja, f. a sheep,
an ewe. Ovejero, m. a shepherd. Ovejuela, f. a little sheep. Ovejuno, m.
pertaining to sheep. * Ovelo, vide Obelo, a chapter. * Ovencadura, vide
Obencadura, the shroudes in a ship. Overa, f. a hens nest. * Oviedo, a place in
Spain so called. * Oviera, Oviesse, vide Aver. * Ovieron, or uvieron, they
had, vide Aver. * Ovimos, or uvimos, we had, vide Aver. * Ovillado, m. made up,
wound up as a thread is on a clue or bottom. * Ovillar, to wind up thread. *
Ovillo de hilo, a bottom of yarne. * O'vo, or uvo, vide Aver.
O X
* Ox, Ox, Ox, a voice to fear away birds or such like, as in English, shue,
shue, shue. Oxala, would to God. * Oxaldado, vide Hojaldado. * Oxaldre, or
Oxalde, vide Hojaldre, a custard. * Oxeador, m. a driuer away, as men drive
birds or fowls with crying, shue. Also one that eieth or marketh with the
eyes. * Oxeado, driven away with shue. Also eyed or marked with the eyes. *
Oxear, to drive away with crying shue, as men use in driving away birds and
fowls. Also to eye or mark with the eyes. Oxeo, driving away, or chasing away
with the voice. * Oxico, m. the snout of a beast. Oxizacre, Oximell, honey and
vinegar together.
O Y
Oy, to day. * Oy dia, now a days, now at this present. Oydo, or Oido, m.
heard. Oydor, m. a hearer, a justice. * O'yga, O'ygo, vide Oyr. * Oygo lo, I
hear say so. * Oyr, Praes. Oygo, Oyes, Oye. 1 Praet. Oy, Oiste, Oyo. Sub.
Praes. Oyga to hear.
P
PAcedura, f. feeding, pasture. Pacer, yo Pasco, to feed, to keep at pasture.
* Paces, f. peace, truce, league, agreement. * Pachochada, f. vide Patochada, a
foolerie, a folly, an asses trick. Pacido, or Pascido, m. fed, kept at
pasture. Paciencia, f. patience, sufferance. Paciente, patient. Pacientemente,
patiently. Pacificacion, pacification. Pacificado, pacified. Pacificador, m. a
pacifier. Pacificamente, peaceably, quietly. Pacificar, Praes. yo Pacifico. 1.
Praet. yo Pacifique, to pacify, to appease. Pacifico, peaceable, a
peacemaker. * Pacifique, vide Pacificar. * Pacio, he fed, grased, or eat as a
beast, vide Pacer. * Paco, m. a kind of wild beast in the Indies of the
bigness of a great goat. * Paction, a bargain or covenant. Pacto, Pato, or
Concierto, an agreement, a concord, a match, a bargain. Padecer, yo Padesco,
to suffer, to endure, to abide. Padecido, or Padescido, suffered, endured.
Padecimiento, or Padescimiento, m. a suffering, an enduring. Padescer, or
Padecer, to endure, to suffer. Padilla, f. a frying pan. Padrasto, m. a
stepfather. The pilling of the skin about the nails. Also a place where one
may batter with the canon at a castle, fortress or wall. Padrasto del dedo,
the pilling of the skin about the nails of the fingers. Padre, m. a father.
Padrino, m. a godfather, a judge, or stickler in any controversy. * Padrino en
desafio, one that brings the chalenger into the listes or field. Padrino de
boda, one that bears sway at a wedding, one that gives the bride at Church.
* Padron, a patron, a register, an owner. * Paes, vide Pays, a country, a
land. Paga, or Sueldo, pay, wages or hire for soldiers. Pagado, m. paid,
contented, pleased. Pagador, m. a paymaister, the treasurer of a camp. *
Pagador de la artilleria, the treasurer, or paymaister of the ordinance. *
Pagamiento, m. payment. * Paganesmo, Paganismo, or Pagania, Paganism, the
professing of heathens and Pagans. Pagano, m. a pagan, a heathen man. Pagar,
Praes. yo Pago, 1. Praet. yo pague, to pay, to please, to content, to be
punished. Page, or Paje, a page, a servant next hand that waits next his lord
or master, one that waits at an ynche. * Pagel, a rotchet fish. * Pagello, a
sea breame. * Pagezico, vide Pajezico. Pagezillo, a lakey, a footeboy, or a
little page. * Pagina, a page or side of a leaf in a book. Pagiza casa, f. a
small thatched cottage. * Pagizo, or Pajizo lugar, any place or village
thatched. * Pago, m. a pay, payment or reward. Pago de vin^as, or vin^edo, a
vinyard. * Pago de nin^as, vide Pago de vin^as. * Pago, I pay, vide Pagar. *
Pagose mucho de verle, he was very glad to see him. * Pague, vide Pagar. Paja,
f. chafe, straw, litter. Pajar, a place to keep chafe or straw in. * Paje,
or Page, a page, one that waits next hand to his lord or master. * Pajezico,
or Pagezico, a little page. * Pajezillo, or Pagezillo, idem. * Pajiza casa, or
Pagiza casa, a thatched cottage. * Pajizo, or Pagizo lugar, a strawy place, a
thatched place. * Pais, or Pays, a country, a land, a province. Pajuela, f.
small straw, short-straw. * Pajuelas de cufre, matches of brimstone to light a
candle with. Pala, a spade, a shouel, a peele, a pickax, a scoope, a peele to
set bread into the oven. * Pala de acadon, the broad end of a shouell or
mattocke. * Pala de remo, the broad end of an oar. * Pala de hierro, a fire
shouell, a peele. Pala de grandes dientes, a row of great broad teeth in ones
head, like horse teeth. Palabra, f. a word. * Palabrimuger, one given to
tatling like a woman. Palabrero, m. a talker. Palabrilla, f. a little word, a
short word. * Palaciano, m. a courtier. Palacio, m. a palace, a princes court.
Paladar, the roof of the mouth, the pallet. Paladear, to gasp for breath. *
Paladino, a valiant man at arms, a warrier, a Paladine. Palafren, m. a
palfrey, an ambling nagge. * Palafrenero, m. a hackeney man. * Palamenta, the
oars in a galley. Palanca, f. a leauer, a cowlestaffe. Palanciano, m. a
courtier. * Palanco, or Palanque, a leauer, a cowlestaffe. * Palandra, a long
turkish garment, a horsemans coat. Palanguero, a maker of leauers, or one that
lifts, or bears with a leauer or cowlestaffe. Palanguin, m. vide Palanquin,
a porter to carry burdens. * Palanque, vide Palanco. * Palanquin, a porter,
or properly one that carries a burden, or vessels as brewers do between two
with a Palanque, id est a cowle staff or leauer. Palazo, m. a blow with a
cudgel. * Palenco, vide Palenque. Palenque, or Palenco, listes to fight in. *
Palestra, vide Lucha, f. wrestling. * Palermo, m. a haven town in Sicilie so
called. Paleta, f. a trapsticke. * Paleta, or Paletta de estomago, the mouth of
the stomach. * Paletilla, f. the shoulder bone. Also a little trapsticke. *
Paletoque, m. a ierkin with short skirtes. * Palliado, m. cloked or clothed
with a long robe. Also muffled or hidden. * Palicada, vide Palizada. * Palido,
vide Amarillo, pale colored. Palillo, m. a little stick, a little cudgel, a
small forke to eat with, stubble. * Palillo encufrado, a match or little
splinter having brimstone on it to kindle a candle with. Palio, a goal at
running, a canopie to bear over a prince. * correr el Palio, to run a race.
Palizada, or Pallicada, a bulwark or rampire made of wood. Also listes to
fight in. * Palla, an Indian word signifying Lady: but none obtain this name,
except she come of a noble house, and be very rich and have many subjects. *
Palleja, vide Pelleja de gama, a deeres skin. * Palleta de la espalda, the
shoulder blade. Palma, the palm of the hand, a palm tree, a hand breadth.
Also victory, a prize, a goal, glory, honor, sign of reward for a victory.
Palma, or Palmera, a date tree. Palma, vide Pala de remo, the broad end of an
oar. * jugar a la Palma, to play at tennis. * Palmada, a clap with the palm
of the hand. * Palmadatil, the palm tree that bears dates. Palmar, a grove
of palm trees. Palmatoria, or Can^aheja, a ferula, such as they clap school
boys on the hands with. * Palmear, to clap with the hands. * Palmilla, f. a
kind of cloth in Spain of small price, course cloth. Palmito, m. a leaf or
branch of the wild date. Palmo, m. a hand breadth. Palo, timber, wood, a
stick, a cudgel, the pillorie, a staff. * Palo de soto, a stake. Paloma, f.
a female dove. * Paloma torcaz, a ringdoue. Palomar, m. a douehouse.
Palomareja, f. a little poor pigeon. Palomariega, a little poor pigeon. *
Palomera, f. a douehouse. * Palomia, vide Palomina, an herb called fumitorie.
Palomilla, vide Palomina. Also a little dove. Palomina, f. an herb called
fumitorie. * Palomino, a little pigeon, a young pigeon. * Palomo, m. the male
dove. Also a wood culuer, a ringdoue. * Palotada de atambor, the striking up
the drum. * Palotear, to cross with pikes, to give a dash aslope. Palpar, to
grope, to feel. * Palpitante, leaping as flesh new killed, panting or beating
as the heart or brain does sometimes. Palpitar, to pant, to beat up and down
as the pulse, or veins and sinews on the wrest of a sick man, to beat,
pant, or throb, as ones heart does. * Palude, f. a moore or marrish ground. *
Pamgueso, an herb called wild seen. Pampano, m. a vine branch. * Pampano, a
kind of fish. Pampanoso, full of vine branches. * Pamplona, f. the name of the
chief city in the kingdom of Navarre. Pan, m. corn, bread, wheat. * un
Pan, or Hogaca, a loaf of bread. * Pan de offrecho, bread made of bran. Pan
porcino, an herb called Sowes-bread. * Pan grancoso, vnranged bread, breads
full of bran. Pan y queso, an herb called Sheepherds pouch. Also bread and
cheese. * Pan levado, or de levadizo, leauened bread. * Pan baco, household
bread. Pan cenceno, unleavened bread. * Pan de acemite, sodden bread, or
simnell bread. * Pan moliento, or Mohoso, mouldie bread. * Pan de Borona, bread
made of a seed like mustard seed, which grows in Galizia, and the poor
eat it. * Pan sponjoso, light bread. * Pan de especias, spiced bread. *
Panada, f. vide Empanada. Also great store of bread. * Panaderia, f. bakers
trade. Panadero, m. a baker. Panal, m. vide Panar, a honey comb. Pan^al, or
Pan^ales, swathing cloutes for children. * Panar, or Panal, a honey comb.
Panarizo, a fellon that breeds betwixt the nail and the flesh. Pan^arizo de
la vn^a, idem. Panca, f. the paunch. Pancudo, m. gorbellied. * Panda, f. a
certain place within the city of Antwerpe. * Pandera, a taber, a rattle or
such like toie for children to play with. Pandero, Adufe, or Atabal, a drum, a
tabor. Panderetero, m. a drumplaier, a taborer. Also one that sells or makes
them. Pandilla, f. a pack made in playing at the cards. Pando, m. one that
goes doubling, bowing or stowping. * Panegirico, that contains commendations
and praise. Also a kind of glosing and flattering oration in the commendations
of kings, wherein lies are joined with flatteries. * Panera, f. a binne, a
basket for to keep bread, or to carry bread in, a tub to keep corn or meal
in, a granier for corn. * Panero, idem. Panezillo, m. a little loaf, a little
round ball. Pan^ezuelo, m. a towell, a table-napkin, handkercheife. Panfarron,
vide Fanfarron. Paniaguados, household folks. * Panica, vide Paniza. * Panico,
vide Panizo. * Paniculo, or Pericraneo, the skin over the skull. * Paniega
tierra, a ground fit or good to bring forth bread corn. * Panificar, to
fructify or bring forth bread corn. * Panilla, a quarter weight. Paniza, a
grain called Pannike, a place where corn is sowed. * Panizo, idem. *
Pan^izuelo, vide Pan^ezuelo. Pan^o, m. cloth. Pan^o baxo, or gruesso, course
cloth. * Pan^os negros, mourning garments. * Pan^ojo, having a skin before the
eyes or impediment in the sight. * Pan^ol, a place where the victuals are kept
in a ship or gallie. Pan^oso, m. ragged, ill apparelled. Also full of corn. *
Pantamimo, vide Pantomimo, a iester or plaier, a common iester, a diZard that
moving his body can counterfeit the gesture of any man. Pantano, m. a bog, a
moorish ground. * Pantanoso, m. full of bogges or quagmires. * Pantarba, or
Pantarva, a precious stone called the stone of the Sun, which with the heat of
it, has the force to draw the Loadstone to it, or any other. Pantera, f. a
beast called a panther. Pantorilla de pierna, the calfe of the leg. *
Pantomimo, a iester or plaier, a common iester that moving his body
counterfeiteth the gestures of any man. Pantufles, m. pantofles, slippers. *
Pantufos, or Pantuflos, idem. Panuelo, m. a hand-kerchiefe. * Panzudo, vide
Pancudo. Papa, m. the pope. * Papa, f. pap, the gorge. Papal, belonging to the
pope. Papa arriba, lying on his back wide open with his face upward, the gorge
upward. Papada de buey, the dewlap of a bullock. Papada de puerco, the kernel
or buttons under a hogs iaw. Papadgo, m. the popedom. * Papado, idem. *
Papagayado, m. of the color of a parret or popingeay. Papagayo, m. a parret or
popingeay. Papahigo, the sail of the foremast. Also the beauer of a hat to
pull down in cold weather and set up again, as one lists. * Papaigo, or
Papaygo, the forecourse of a sail near the middle next above the bonnet. Also
the beauer of a hat for cold weather. Papal, pertaining to the pope. Papar, to
gorge up, to fill the gorge. * Paparesolla, m. a hobgoblin, robin good fellow
or such like, wherewith they fear children. * Paparo, a clown, a rusticall
fellow. Papel, m. paper. * Papel grandaso, royal paper. * Papel de straca,
brown paper. * Papelico, small paper. Papelon, m. a paper to put comfits in.
Papera, f. the swelling in the cheeks. Paperote, vide Papirote. * Papilla, pap
for children. * Papirote, m. a fillip. Papo, m. the throat, the gorge. Papon,
m. a kind of Melon, a great large throat, a great eater. * Papoulla, f. wild
poppie, cornerose. Papudo, m. one with a great throat. Par, a pair, a couple,
a yoke. * Par, or a Par de una cosa, just, even with any thing. Para, to, for.
* Para que, for that. Para con, toward. * Para bien, let it be for his good,
much good may it do him. * Parabola, a parable, a similitude, resemblance or
comparison. * Parada, f. a staying or stopping. Also a standing, or staying
place where hunters stay for to shoot at a Dear, etc. * Para dar, id est
Paradar, to give. * Paradero, m. a staying place, a stop, the end whereat we
stay. Paradillas, stays, stops, delays. Parado, m. stayed, let, stopped.
Parafo, m. a paragrafe, whatsoever is comprehended in one sentence. * Paragon,
vide Parangon. * Paragrafa, a mark in a margent. * Paragrafo, a paragrafe, a
parafe, whatsoever is contained in one sentence. Paraje, over against. *
Paralitico, m. one troubled with the palsy. * Paralogismo, a deceitful
conclusion, or captious reasoning, or arguing. Paramentado, m. hanged, trapped.
Paramentar, to hang with tapistrie. * Paramento, vide Paramentos. Paramentos,
hangings for a chamber, curtains, coparisons, trappings for a horse. *
Paramientes, mark well, observe and take heed well. Paramo, m. a desert, a
down, a plain country not inhabited. * Parangon, or Paragon, an equal, a
fit man to match him, one comparable with. * Parangonar, to compare, to equal,
to confer together. * Parapeto, m. battlements of a wall to defend from small
shot, and which shadoweth the soldiers from the sight and annoiance of the
enemy, a parapet or wall breast high. Also a brestplate or defense for the
breast. Also a kind of bulwark and defense. * Paraphrasis, f. an exposition of
one and the same thing by other words. Parar, to stop, to stay, to rest, to
end, to be at a non plus, to pause. Parar mientes, to mark, to look unto. *
Parar, a kind of play. * Parayso, paradise, a place of pleasure. * Parcas, f.
the destinies of life, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos. * Parche, a patch, or
piece set upon any thing. * Parchie, vide Parche. Parcial, partial, that
affects one more than another. * Parcialidad, f. partiality, leaning to one
side more than to another. Parcionero, m. a partaker, a partner. * Parco, a
park or warren. * Parda, a gray color. * Pardal, or Gorrion, m. a sparrow. *
Pardel, equal with one, just even against one. * Pardiez, a manner of
swearing, as it were by ten, as the ten commandments. * Pardisco, m. somewhat
grayish or duskie color. Pardillo, vide Pardisco. Pardo, or Pardillo, gray of
color. Pardo, m. a leopard. Pares, as doze Pares, equals, matches, such as be
like the twelve Peers of France. Pareado, coupled, fitted, made equal.
Parecer, yo Paresco, vide Parescer, to seem, to be like, to appear. *
Parecer, a substantive, as mi Parecer, tu Parecer, su Parecer, opinion,
judgment, advise, my opinion, thy opinion, his opinion or judgment. *
Parecido, m. seeming like, appearing. * Pareciome bien, I think well, it
seemed well to me. Pared, f. a wall of a house. * Pared de carco, or de
emprenta, a wall of hurdles. * Pared y medio, only a wall between, the next
wall to. * Paredado, m. walled as a house. Paredon, m. a wall. Parejamente,
equally, alike. Parejas, as Bever a parejas, to drink hand to hand, every man
alike. Parejo, equal, even. Parejura, f. equality. Parentela, f. kindred,
consanguinitie, affinity. * Parentero, m. a friend, or of kindred. Parentesco,
m. kindred. * Parentesi, a parenthesis, or interposition of words within a
sentence, or a clause comprehended within an other sentence, which may be left
out, and yet the sense perfect. Pares, even, paires. Pares de muger, the
secondine or afterbirth. * Parescer, yo Paresco, or yo Parezco, to seem, to
appear, to be likely. * Parescer, or Parecer, Subst. opinion, advise,
judgment. * Parescido, or Parecido, appeared, seemed. * Parezca, or Parezco,
or Paresco, vide Parescer. Pargamino, m. parchment. * Paria, an Island from
whence Marble is brought. Parias, tribute that one king pays after he has
been taken by another king. * Pariada, a parricide, a murderer of his father,
mother, or near kindred. Also he that kills his equal, he that wittingly and
willingly has slain a freeman: any heinous murderer. Parida, a woman
delivered of child, or a woman lying in childbed. * Paridad, f. equality,
euennes. * Parienta, f. a kinswoman. Pariente, a kinsman, an allie. * Pariente
consagrado, a godfather. Parieteria yerua, f. an herb called Pellitorie.
Paricion, vide Parta. * Parilla, f. a gridiron. * Parizion, vide Parto. Parir,
to bring forth young. Parla, or Parleria, speech, prating, prattling.
Parlamentar, to parley or speak together of grave matters. Parlamento, m.
speech, a parley, a conference. Parlar, to speak. * Parleria, or Parla, f.
prattling, prating. Parlero, m. a talker, a pratler, a prating fellow. *
Parletico, vide Paraletico. * Parmesano, m. a cheese of Parma in Italy. Also a
man borne in Parma. * Parochia, f. a parish. * Parochiano, m. a parishioner. *
Parocismo, the fit of an ague, the coming again of an ague. * Parola, f. a
speech, a word, a saying. * Paropa, f. a kind of serpent. * Paroxismo, m. a
kind of disease that comes on one like a vehement shaking ague. Parpadear,
to twinkle the eyes. Parpado de ojo, m. the eye lid. Parpuja, f. an herb good
for sallets. Parra, f, a vine. * Parral, the whole rail whereupon the vine
runs. * Parras, vines that spread and grow to a stem. Parrilla, f. a
gridiron. Parrochia, or Parochia, a parish. Parrochiano, or Parochiano, m. a
parishioner. * Parsemano, vide Passamano, lace. Part, f. part, some. Partera,
f. a midwife. Parteria, f. a midwiues skill. * Partezilla, f. a little part, a
small part. * Participacion, f. taking part. Participar, to take part.
Participe, a partaker. * Participio, a participle. Particular, particular,
several. * Particularidad, f. seueralnesse. Particularmente, particularly,
severally. Partida, f. a departing, a condition, a volume of a book, a part or
parcel. * leyes de Partida, laws that king Alonso of Spain made and divided
into seven parts. Partida, as en toda esta partida, in all this coast or
region. Partidamente, by parts. Partido, m. departed, divided, gone. Partido, a
condition, wages, salarie, reward for service done. Partidor, m. a diuider or
parter. Also the divisor in arithmeticke. Also a dealer or one that deals the
cards. * Partidor de las naypes, the dealer at cards. * Partija, f. a part of
any thing divided to be distributed every one his part. Partimiento, m.
parting, division. Partir, to divide, to sever, to depart, to go away. Parto,
m. a birth. * estar de Parto, to be ready to be delivered of child birth. *
Pasadizo, or Passadizo, a place to pass from one place to another, as a
gallerie, a cloister, or such like. * Pasado, vide Passado, passed, stricken
through. * Pasaje, passage, transporting. * Pasar, vide Passar. * Pasatiempo,
vide Passatiempo, pastime. * Pascer, or Pacer, to feed, to eat, to graze, to
nourish. * Pascido, vide Pacido. Pascua, f. a festival time, Easter. * Pascua
de Navidad, Christmas. * Pascua florida, Easter. * Pascua del Espiritu santo,
Whitsontide. * Pascua de Pentecoste, idem. Pascual, belonging to Easter.
Pasmado, m. swouning, in a swoune. * Pasmadura, f. a swouning. Pasmarse, to be
in a swoune. Pasmo, a disease benumming the body, a trance or swoune. *
Pasmose, he fell into a swoune or trance. * Paso, vide Passo. * Pasqua, vide
Pascua. * Pasqua de Navidad, vide Pascua de Navidad, Christmas. * Pasqua
florida, Easter. * Pasqua del Espiritu santo, Whitsontide. Pasquines, m. libels
in defamation of men. * Pasquino, a statue or image in Rome, upon whom all
libels, detractions, railings, and satyricall inuectiues are fathered. Passa,
f. a raisin. * Passa de medido, more then half. Passa, as juego de Passa,
iuglers playing pass and repasse. Passada, f. a pace. Passadera, f. a passage.
Passadizo, a place to pass along, as a gallerie or cloister, or such like.
Passado, m. passed. * Passado de un arcabuzazo, shot through with a harguebus.
Passador, m. a quarrel of a crossebowe. Passage, or Passaje, m. passage,
transporting. Passagero, or Passajero, a passenger, one that carries over. *
Passaje, or Passage, passage, transporting. * Passajero, or Passagero, a
passenger. * Passallas, Passallos, id est, Passar las, Passar los, to pass
them, to pass those. Passamano, m. lace. Passamano de oro, a broad gold lace.
* Passamano de seda, any kind of silk lace. Passamiento de muerte, the point
of death. * Passamuro, m. a piece of ordinance called a sling. * Passante, one
that passes or goes by. Also at Primero at cards they call him that has
above 60. Passante. * Passaporto, a pasport. Passar, to pass over sea, to
pass by, to strike through, to make grapes dry. * Passar por el pensamiento,
to enter into his thought. * Passar por la memoria, to come into his
remembrance. * Passar a un hombre de part a part, to run a man quite through.
* Passar a nado, to swim over. * no es de Passar enter Renglones, it is not to
be ouerslipt or left unwritten. * Passas, f. raisons. Passatiempo, pastime,
sport. Passeadero, m. a walk, a walking place. * Passeadizo, vide Passadizo, a
gallerie. Passeador, m. a walking place, a walk, or one that walks much. *
Passeandose, walking. Passear, to walk. Passeo, m. a walking place or a
walking that one makes. Passion, f. passion, grief. * Passionado, or Enfermo,
grieved, sick. * Passivo, passive, passiuely, importing passion, that which
signifies or causes passion, trouble or grief. Passo, m. a step, a pace in
going or striding, the measure of two foot and a half. Passo, fair and soft,
softly. * Passo ante Passo, one step now another anon, soft and fair. * Passo
de asino, the herb called horsefoote. Pasta, f. paste. Pastel, m. a little pie
made of small meat. Also an herb with which they die a blew color, called
woade. * Pastelera, f. a woman that makes pies or pasties. * Pasteleria, f.
the pastrie, a pie-house. Pastelero, m. a man that makes pies or pasties. *
Pastillas, kinds of mixtures or pastes for to perfume withal. Pasto, m.
pasture, feeding, food. Pastor, m. a shepherd, a heardman. Pastora, f. a
shepherdess, a woman that keeps sheep. * Pastoral, rural, pastoral,
pertaining to swains or shepherds. * Pastorcico, m. a little shepherd, a
silly swain. Pastorcillo, a little shepherd, a boy that keeps sheep.
Pastoril, belonging to a shepherd. Pata, f. a goose. Pata, a pawe or foot, a
hoof, the sole of the foot. Pata de osso, the pawe of a Bear. * Patas
apartadas, cloven footed. Patache, m. a pinnasse, a small swift ship. * Pataco,
a clownish fellow, a pesant. Patada, a step. * Patage, or Pataje, a pinnasse,
a swift ship. * Pataje, or Patage, idem. * Patan, or Paparo, m. a clown, a
pesant. * Patata, f. Potatoe roots. * Patatal, a place where Potatoes grow. *
Patatero, m. one that eats Potatoes, or one that sells Potatoe roots. *
Pateado, trampled on with the feet. Patear, to make a noise with the feet, to
bargain, to trample or tread underfoot. Patena, f. a little dish. Patente,
open, letters pattents. Paternal, fatherly. Paterno, m. of or pertaining to a
father, fatherly. Patico, m. a goseling. Patihendido, cloven footed. Patilla,
f. a little foot, a little goose. * Patin, a goseling: Also the foot of the
stocking. Patin de la casa, a square court. * Patino, a patten. Patio, m. a
square court by a house, a vaulted place, a penthouse, a place to save rain
water in. Patituerto, m. club-footed. Pato, m. a gander, a drake. Pato, Pacto,
or Partido, a bargain, a covenant. * Patocha, vide Patochada. * Patochada, f.
foolerie, folly. Patran^as, f. old fables or stories, old wives tales,
leasings, lies. Patria, f. a man's own country, or natural soil, where he
was borne. Patriarca, a patriach, a chief bishop, a religious father.
Patriarcha, idem. Patricio, m. a senators son of Rome. Patrimonial beneficio,
a benefice impropriate. Patrimonial, belonging to the patrimony or inheritance
of his father or ancestors. Patrimonio, inheritance or goods that come by the
father. * Patrio, m. of ones country. Patronazgo, a patronship to give
benefices or other ecclesiastical promotions. * Patronadgo real, a princes
prerogative to give bishoprikes, abbeys, etc. Patron, a pilot of a ship, a
patron or defender, a pattern. * Pava, f. a Peahen. * Pavana, or Pabana, a
dance called a pauin, playing. * Pavelion, a butterfly. Also vide Pavellon.
Pavellon, m. a tent for to lodge in, in the field: a canapie, a sheet, a
blanket to hang about the bed. Paves, or Escudo, m. a shield, a target, a
bucklar. Pavesa, f. the snuff of a candle when it is dead: also dead sparks of
fire. Pavesada, f. a battle of targettiers, or a battle at sea with some
defense, that they be not seen of their enemy. * Paveson, vide Paves. *
Pavido, timorous, fearful. Pavilo, the snuff of a candle, the week of the
candle. Pavimiento, m. a pauement. Paviota, f. a sea foul called a gull. *
Pavo, Pava, or Pavon, a peacocke, a peahen. Pavo, a peacocke. Pavo real, the
kingly peacocke, or chief large and great peacocke with fairer plumes than the
other. Pavon, vide Pavo. Pavonado, made of a sanguine color, as they use to
sanguine sword hilts. Pavonear, to sanguine, to vernish. Pavor, m. fear,
dread. Pavorosamente, fearfully, timorouslie. Pavoroso, m. fearful, timorous.
* Pauperimo, m. most poor. * Paurosamente, vide Pavorosamente. * Pauroso, vide
Pavoroso. Pausa, f. a pause, a stop, a stay, a rest. * Pausada, f. a pausing,
resting, stopping, staying, taking leisure, tarying upon some thing. *
Pausadamente, by pauses, by stops, by stays, resting or staying now and then.
Pausar, to pause, to stop, to stay, to rest. * Paxa, f. vide Paja, straw.
Paxarero, m. a birder, a catcher of birds. * Paxareto, m. a little bird. *
Paxareta yerva, a certain herb. * Paxarico, m. a little bird. Paxarillo, m. a
little bird. Paxaritos, little birds, or such toies made of bread, etc. for
children to play with. Paxaro, a bird. * Paya, as Paya de mequa, the sweet
rush. * Paya de camelos, idem. * Payla, a paile, a bucket. * Pays, or Pais, m.
a country. * Pays baxo, the low countries. * Paysano, vide Aldeano, a
countreyman. Paz, f. peace. * Pazo, vide Passo.
P E
Peage, or Peaje, toll money, custom, rent, revenues. * Peagero, or Peajero, a
customer, a toll gatherer. * Peaje, vide Peage. * Peajero, vide Peagero. Peal,
a woollen socke, a socke to wear on the foot. * Peapa, the spelling of
letters, as Pe, a, Pa. * Pebetes, m. a kind of small perfume. Pebrado, m.
peppered. Pebre, vide Pimiento, m. Pepper. * Pebre, or Pimiento de Hespan^a,
Spanish pepper, Pepperwort, Dittander. Peca, f. a specke or spot on the face, a
pimple on the face. Pecado, m. sin, offense, any thing done amiss. Pecador,
m. a sinner, an offender, one that does amiss, a wicked or lewd fellow *
Pecadorcita, a woman sinner, or somewhat a sinner, or a small sinner. *
Pecadorico, m. a man sinner, or a small sinner, or somewhat a sinner. Pecar,
Praes. yo Peco, 1. Praet. yo Peque, to sin, to offend, to do amiss. Piece, m.
fish. * Pieces en escabeche, fish in pickle, or in sowsing drink. * Pecezico,
m. a little fish. Pecha, f. tribute, tax, subsidy, payment of money. * Pechar,
to pay tax or subsidy. Pechero, m. he that paieth tribute, tax, or subsidy.
Pecho, m. the breast. Also the dugge of a woman. * Pecho, tribute, or task.
Pechuga, f. the breast of a bird. Pechugar, Praes. yo Pechugo, 1. Praet, yo
Pechugue, to set the breast against any thing with all his force and strength,
to withstand or resist with the breast. * Pechugue, vide Pechugar. Pechuguera,
the whole bulk of the breast, a pain of the breaste. * Peciguerol, m. a
fishmonger. Pecilgar, Praes. yo Pecilgo, 1. Praet yo Pecilgue, to pinche, to
pluck by the ears, etc. Pecilgo, m. a pinche. * Pecilgue, vide Pecilgar.
Pecina, f. a fish poole. * Probatica Pecina, the poole that cured the diseased
that first could get in after the angel had stirred the water. * Peco, m. the
breast bone. * Pecolada, the thrumme left of cloth weauing. Pecon, a nipple, a
small stalk, or stem, a stalk, whereon the fruit or leaf grows. Pecon de la
tera, the teat or nipple of a dug. Pecoso, m. full of spots. * Pedaceria, f. a
patch or piece of any thing, full of pieces. Pedacico, m. a little piece. *
Pedacito, m. a little patch or piece, a thong of leather. Pedaco, m. a piece, a
patch, a gobbet, a shine. * Pedacuelo, a little piece, a small patch, a
morsel. * Pedazico, vide Pedacico. * Pedazito, or Pedacito, idem. * Pedazuelo,
vide Pedacuelo. Pedernal, a flint stone. Pedestal, the base or foot of a
pillar, the groundwork or foundation to support any thing, a plate or
trencher laid under a dish on the table. Pedido, m. required, requested,
asked, demanded. * Pedidor, m. an asker, one that requesteth or demands any
thing. Pediguen^o, one that demands often and much, wanton, froward, an
earnest suter or wooer. Pedimiento, m. asking, request, demanding. Pedir, yo
Pido, to ask, to request, to demand, to require. Pedo, m. a fart. Pedocio,
vide Pedorro. Pedorro, m. one that farteth. Pedrada, f. a blow with a stone. *
Pedrado, m. stoned, beaten with stones. * Pedrecica, vide Pedrezica, a little
stone. * Pedrecita, vide Pedrezita, idem. * Pedrega, vide Pedregal. Pedregal, a
stony place. Pedregoso, m. stony, full of stones. * Pedren^al, m. a
petronell, a large pistol used in war. Pedrera, f. a quarrie whence stones
are dug. Pedrero, m. a free-mason that works in stone. * Pedrero, a
murdering piece used in wars, to shoot chain shot or stones from. *
Pedresuela, vide Pedrezuela. * Pedrezica, f. a little stone. Pedrezita. idem. *
Pedrezuela, f. idem. * Pedril, a place where much stone is. Pedrisco, or
Granizo, great hail. Peer, to fart. Pega, vide Picaca, a bird called a Pie. *
Pegadiso, or Pegadizo, sticking to, or cleaving to, sticking or cleaning fast
to. * Pegado, pitched with pitch, or stuck to with other things. Pegadura, f.
soldering, cleaving to, gluing. Pegajoso, sticking, cleaving to, gluing.
Pegajoso mal. an infectious disease, a disease that sticks fast to one.
Pegamiento, m. sticking, cleaving fast to, etc. pitching with pitch. Pegar,
Praes. yo Pego, 1. Praet. yo Pegue, to pitch with pitch, to stick, to cleave
to, to cling unto, to solder, to kerne as fruit do, to infect, to glue. *
Pegar fuego, to set on fire, to set fire to. * Pegno, m. a pledge, a gage, a
pawn. Also a surety, bail, or assurance. Pegones para vello, round bals to
pull off the hair. * Pegue, vide Pegar. Pegujal, a stock of goods or of
cattle, or substance given to a man's son or servant to occupy for
themselves, or goods gotten by ones own labor or industry. * Peixe voador,
or volador, a fish called a sea swallow. Pelado, m. pilled, bald. Pelador, m.
one that pilleth, makes bald, or bare. Peladura, f. pilling. Pelambre, m. the
pilling of the chin or beard, pilling of hides. Pelambrera, f. a tanners or
glouers lime pit, wherein skins are laid to make the hair come off. Pelar, to
pill, to make bald, to make bare. * Pelayo, a proper name. * Pelayre, m. one
that teazeth cloth with cards of teazell, a cloth worker, also a fuller.
Pelea, f. fight, battle, skirmish. Peleador, a fighter, a warrier. Pelear, to
fight, to skirmish, to strive. Pelecano, vide Pelicano, m. a pellicane, a foul
that is said to feed her young ones with her blood, some say a shouelar.
Pelechar el ave, to pluck off the feathers. * Peler, vide Pelar. Pelicano,
vide Pelecano. * Pelicraneo, the skin over the skull. Peligrar, to be in
peril, or in danger. * Peligro, m. peril or danger. Peligrosamente,
dangerously. Peligroso, dangerous, perilous. Pelillo, m. a little hair. *
Peliquero, or Pelliquero, a skinner, a tanner, a glouer, a leather dresser, a
leather seller. Pelitre, an herb called wild Pelitorie, pelitorie of Spain.
Pella, a ball, a pellet, a bullet. * Pellada, f. a throwing snowbals or such
like. * Pelle, vide Pella. * Pellegeria, vide Pellejeria. * Pellegero, vide
Pellejero. * Pelleja, a skin, a hide. * Pellejeria, the place where skins or
hides be sold, store of skins. Pellejero, or Pellizero, a skinner, a tanner, a
glouer, a leather dresser, a leather seller. Pellejo, a skin, a hide. *
Pelleteria, vide Pellejeria. Pellico, or Pellico, a leather ierkin, a quip, a
taunt. Pellico, idem. Pelliscar, Praes. yo Pellisco, 1. Praes. yo Pellisque, to
pinch. * Pelliscos, pinches. * Pellisque, vide Pelliscar. * Pellizero, vide
Pellejero. * Pellote, vide Pelliquero. Pelo, m. hair, the hair of the beard,
horse hair, or mules hair. * Pelo malo, bad, or naughty hair, as that of
beasts when they cast their old coats or hairs, to have new hair, evil
estate, poor fortune, base and abject condition. * Pelo de camelo, grograine.
* Pelo arriba, against hair. Pelo abaxo, down the hair. Pelon, m. a pild
palterie fellow, a poor wretch. Peloso, hairie, full of hair. Pelota, f. a
pellet, a ball, a bullet to shoot in a gun with. Pelota, a bottom of yarne.
Pelota, or ovilla de Hilo, a ball of yarne. * Pelota, as jugar a la Pelota, to
play at tennys. * Pelotilla, f. a little pellet, ball, bullet, or little
bottom of yarne. Peltre, m. pewter. Peltrechos, vide Pertrechos, furniture,
provision. * Peludo, m. hairie, rough. Pena, f. pain, punishment, a fine, or
amercement. * a Penas, hardly, with much ado. Pen^a, or Penasco, a rock.
Penacho, m. the crest of the helmet, a great plume of feathers. * Penado, m.
pained, grieved. Penal, penal, subject to punishment, or to forfeyture. Penar,
to punish, to be punished, to fine, or amerce. * Pen^ascal, a place where many
rocks are. * Penasco, or Pen^asco, a rock. * yertos Pen^ascos, steep rocks.
Penascola, an island, a little rock. * Pen^ascoso, rockie, full of rocks. *
Pen^atas, fowls on rocks. * Penates, idols worshipped of the heathen, calling
them their household gods. Penca, f. the stalk of a lettuce or colewoort.
Pendejo, m. hair about the privy parts. Pendencia, f. a suit in law, a
quarrel or matter in controversy. * Pendencias Publicas, public
controversies or quarrels. * Pendenciero, m. one full of quarrels. * Pender, to
hang, to slip, to go sloping. * Pendido, m. hanged, going sloping. Pendiente,
hanging, depending, sloping. Pendola, or Pen^ola, a pen. Also a painters
pensill. Pendon, m. a cornet, an ensign of horsemen, a sign of a tavern, a
streamer of a ship, a standerd. Penetrar, to pearce, to enter in or thorough. *
Peniscola, almost compassed with water. Penitencia, f. repentance, penance.
Penitencial, vide Penitente. Penitente, one that is penitent, one that does
penance. * Pen^on, or Pen^asco, a rock. * Penol, the end of a ship-yard. *
Penosamente, painfully, grievously. Penoso, painful, grievous. * Pensadamente,
heedfully. Pensamiento, m. thought, esteeming. Pensar, yo Pienso, to think, to
meditate, to dress cattle. Pensativo, m. pensive, full of thought, or of
care. Pension, f. a pension, a pay allowed. * Penzilla, f. vide Renzilla. *
Peojo, vide Piojo, a louse. Peon, m. a footeman, a pawn at chesse, a pioner, a
labourer. Peonada, f. a days work. Peonadura, f. working of pioners. Peonca,
or Trompo, a top or gigge for boys to play with. * Peonero, m. a pioner that
works under ground. Peonia, f. an herb called piony. * Peonia, or Trimpo, a
top that boys wind a packthreed about, and after throw him to the ground to
set him up. * Peonias, medicinable herbs, so named of Peon a famous physician.
* Peonza, vide Peonca. Peor, worse, more evil. Peoria, f decaying, growing
worse. Peormente, worse than before. * Peorar, to become worse. Pepino, m. a
cucumber. Pepita, f. the pip of a hen, the kernel of an apple. Pepitoria, f.
the giblets of a goose, or of any other foul or bird. * Pepon, or Melon, a
melon, a pumpion. * Peque, vide Pecar. * Pequen^eza, f. smallnes, littlenes.
Pequen^ico, m. very little. * Pequen^ito, m. idem. Pequen^o, little, small. *
Pequen^uelo, very little. * Pequin^ito, vide Pequen^ito, very little. *
Pequito, vide Poquito. Pera, f. a pear. Peral, a pear tree. Perayle, or
Perayre, a fuller. Also a clothworker. * Perca, f. a peach. * Percebir, yo
Percibo, to perceive. * Percevir, yo Percivo, idem. Percha, f. a rafter of a
house, a perch or pole to measure with, a prop of a vine. * Perciba, Percibo,
vide Percebir. * Perciva, Percivo, vide Percevir. Perder, yo Pierdo, to loose.
Perdicion, f. loss, destruction. Perdida, f. loss, damage. * Perdidamente,
desperately. Perdido, m. lost, destroyed, cast away. Perdidoloso, a traitor, a
treacherous fellow. Perdidoso, he that has lost, one subject to losses.
Perdigar, to broile partridges, to lay partridges on coals. Perdigon, m. a
young partridge, a male partridge. * Perdiguaro, vide Perdiguero. Perdiguero
perro, a land spaniell. * Perdimiento, m. loss. Perdiz, f. a partridge.
Perdon, m. pardon. * Perdonado, m. pardoned, forgiven. * Perdonador, m. a
forgiuer, one ready to pardon. Perdonanca, f. pardon, forgiveness. Perdonar, to
forgive, to pardon. Perdurable, lasting, continuing. Perdurablemente,
continually, long lasting. Perecer, yo Peresco, or Perezco, to perish, to die,
to come to naught. Perecido, or Perescido, perished, come to naught.
Perecimiento, or Perescimiento, perishing, death, destruction. * Peregil, vide
Perexil, parsley. Peregrinacion, traveling into strange countries. *
Peregrinage, or Peregrinaje, pilgrimage, going into strange countries.
Peregrinar, to go on pilgrimage, to travel into strange countries. Peregrino,
m. a pilgrim, one that trauelleth into strange countries. * Peremptorio,
peremptory. Perenal, continual. Perenalmente, continually. Perexil, or
Perrexil, parsley. * Perexil Macedonico, an herb called Alisanders. * Perexil
de la mar, sampier. Pereza, f. sloth, lazines, idleness. * Perezca, Perezco,
vide Perecer. Perezosamente, slowly, idly, slackly. Perezoso, slothful,
idle, lazy. * Perfectamente, vide Perfetamente, perfectly, absolutely, fully.
* Perfection, vide Perficion. * Perfecto, vide Perfeto. Perfetamente,
perfectly, fully. Perfeto, perfect. Perficion, f. perfection. * Perficionar, to
bring to perfection. * Perfidia, disloyalty, treachery, falsehood, against
promise and trust. * Perfido, m. unfaithful, disloyal, traiterous. *
Perfidioso, idem. Perfil, drawing out of a picture. Perfiladura, f. the drawing
out of a picture. Perfilar, to draw a picture. Perfumado, perfumed. Perfumar,
to perfume, to make a sweet smell. * Perfumero, m. a perfumer. Perfumes, m.
perfumes, sweet smelles made. * Pergama, the palace or kings house of Troy.
Pergamino, parchment. * Pergolo, or Pulpito, a pulpet, a place for orators, or
readers of lectures. * Pericia, f. knowledge, skilfulnes. * Perico, Perrico, or
Perillo, a little dog, a whelpe. * Perilla, or Perizilla, a little pear, a
little dog. * Perillo, vide Perizillo, a little dog, a whelpe. * Perinola,
f. a thing of bone or wood made for to play with. * Periodo, m. a full point.
* Peripatetico, m. or Peripathetico, a peripatetike, a philosopher that used to
dispute walking. * Perito, skillful, having knowledge. Perjudicar, yo
Perjudico, 1. Praet. yo Perjudique, to preiudicate, to give sentence before, to
conceive opinion before, to judge hardly of before hand. * Perjuizial,
hurtful. * Perjudique, vide Perjudicar. * Perjura, f. forswearing, perjury *
Perjurado, forsworn. * Perjurat, to forswear. * Perjuro, forsworn, perjured.
Also perjury or forswearing. Perjuyzio, m. prejudice, hurt, hard judgment or
opinion. * Perizilla, vide Perilla. * Perizillo, Perillo, or Perico, a whelp, a
little dog. Perla, f. a pearl. Perlado, or Prelado, a prelate, a chief
churchman, as bishop, deane, etc. Perlatico, m. sick of the palsy. Perlesia,
f. the palsy. * Perlica, f. a little pearl. Permanecer, or Permanescer, to
remain, to continue. Permission, f. sufferance. * Permisso, m. suffered.
Permitir, to suffer, to permit. * Permitido, m. suffered, permitted, granted,
licenced. * Permudacion, vide Permutacion, f. change. Permudar, to change.
Permutacion, change. Permutar, to change. * Pernal, vide Perenal, continual. *
Pernalmente, vide Perenalmente, continually. * Pernecuela, or Pernezuela, f. a
little leg. * Pernicioso, pernicious, noisome, hurtful, deadly, execrable.
Pernil de tocino, a gamon of bakon. * Pernos, m. the greatest nails to nail
the principal timber of a ship or house. Pero, but, yet, therefore. Pero, m. a
pear tree. * Pero silvestre, a wild pear tree. * Pero, vide Pedro, Peter. *
Perozoso, very slothful. Perpetuar, to continue, to make perpetual. *
Perpetuidad, f. continuance, perpetuity. Perpetuo, m. continual, that lasts
long. Perpian^os, the whole stones that go through a wall. * Perplexidad, f.
perplexity, doubtfulnes, at his wits end, not knowing which way to bend, much
care and vexation. * Perplexo, m. one perplexed or at his wits end, entangled,
in a pecke of troubles, full of cares. Perque, m. a defamatorie libell. Perra,
f. a bitch. Perrazo, m. a curre dog. * Perrico, or Perilla, a little dog, a
whelpe. * Perrico de falda, m. a little dog for a ladies lap. Perrillo, a
whelpe, a little dog. Perrito, a little dog, a whelpe, a puppie. Perro, m.
a dog. * Perro de rastro, a bloudhound, a dog quick of sent. * Perro
peludo, or Veludo, a water spaniell. * Perro de muestra, a dog that senteth
out the game, and spying it shows it his master, that he may with his piece
kill it. * Perro sabueso, or Perro ventor, a hound. Perruno, belonging to a
dog. Persecucion, persecution, pursuing of one, troubling of a man.
Perseguir, yo Persigo, to persecute, to pursue. Perseguido, m. persecuted.
Perseguimiento, m. persecuting, pursuing. Perseueracion, perseuering,
continuance. Perseuerancia, f. idem. Perseuerar, to continue, to abide, to
persevere. Persego, m. a peach. * Persiga, Persigo, vide Perseguir. Persiles,
the laying on of colors in painting. Persona, f. a person. Personal,
pertaining to a person. Personalmente, personally, himself in person. *
Personero, m. one that represents the person of another, ones attorney. *
Persuadido, m. persuaded. * Persuadidor, a perswader. Persuacion, f. a
persuasion. Persuadir, to persuade. Pertinacia, f. stubbornness. Pertenecer,
yo Pertenesco, or Pertenezco, to belong, to pertain. Perteneciente, or
Pertenesciente, belonging, pertaining. Pertenencia, f. belonging, pertaining. *
Pertenescer, vide Pertenecer, yo Pertenesco, or Pertenezco, to belong, to
pertain. * Pertenezca, Pertenesco, vide Pertenecer. Pertiga, f. a perch or
pole to measure with, a cross beam a piece of timber framed cross the
rafters. Pertiga de carreta, the tongue of a plough, the end of the plough that
is before betwixt the horses. Pertiguero de yglesia, the verger of the church.
* Pertinas, vide Pertinaz. Pertinaz, stubborn, perverse, obstinate, untoward.
* Pertreas, f. hard bunches or swellings in the flesh, blaines, biles or pox.
Pertrechos, m. furniture, provision. Perturbacion, f. trouble, vexation,
disquietnes of mind. Perturbado, m. troubled, vexed, disquieted. Perturbar, to
trouble, to bring out of quiet. * Perverso, m. untoward, overthwart, froward,
perverse. * Pervertir, to pervert, to turn to the worse, to deal crossely.
Pervetano, or Guadapera, a choke pear, a choke pear tree, or a wild pear or
wild pear tree. * Pervetir, vide Pervertir. * Perivinca, an herb called
perwinkle. * Pes, vide Pez, pitch. Also fish. Pesadamente, heavily,
sorrowfully. Pesado, m. weighty, heavy, sorrowful. Pesador, m. he that
weighs. Pesadumbre, f. weight, grief, displeasure. * Pesame, it greeueth me.
Pesar, to weigh. Pesar, or Pena, sorrow, grief, repentance. * Pesca, f.
fishing or catching of fish. * Pescada Sicial, or Pescado Sicial, a kind of
fish. * Pescada, vide Merluza, a whiting. Pescaderia, the fish market.
Pescadero, m. a fishmonger. * Pescadillo, m. a little fish. Pescado, m. fish.
Pescador, m. a fisher. Pescar, Praes. yo Pesco. 1. Praet. yo Pesque, to fish,
to catch fish. * Pescar con can^a, or Pescar con vara, to angle, to catch fish
with an angle rod. * Pesces polidos, fishes smooth without skales. Pescocado, a
buffet on the neck. Pescocon, m. a blow on the neck. Pescuda, f. a question,
a demand. Pescudar, to search, to sift out a matter. Pescueco, m. the neck. *
Pescuezo, idem. * Pese, vide Piece. Pesebre, m. a manger. Pesebrera, the place
or rank of mangers. * Pesia, vide Pen^asco. Peso, m, weight. * Peso de plata,
eight rials Spanish, four shillings English. * Peso de oro, sixteen rials
Spanish, eight shillings English. * contra Peso, a counterpoise. * Pespuntado,
m. stitched, sowed up. * Pespuntar, to stitch, to sow up, that the stitches may
appear, as they stitch nightcaps. * Pespunte, m. a stitch, a sowing up. *
Pesque, vide Pescar. Pesquera, f. a fishing place. Pesqueria, or Pesquera,
idem. Pesquisa, f. search, examining. Pesquisar, vide Pescudar, to search, to
examine. Pesquisidor, a searcher, an examiner, an inquisitor. * Pessado,
weighed. * Pessar, to weigh. Pestan^as, f. the hair on the eie-browes Also the
welts of a garment. * Peste, f. the pestilence, the plague. * Pestifero,
pestilent, pestiferous, plaguie, contagious. * Pestillo, a pestle to stamp
with. Pestilencia, f. pestilence, called the Plague. Pestilencial, belonging to
the pestilence. Pestillo, m. a doore-bar. * Pestorejo, m. the forepart of the
head. Pestorejo de puerco, a hogs cheek. Pesun^a, f. a disease of horses
called the fashions. Petaca, f. a basket, a hamper. Petafio, m. an Epitaph to
set on a dead man's grave, in setting forth his praises. * Petar, a kind of
artillery to batter, lately invented. Peticion, f. a request, a petition. *
Peto, m. a breast plate. * Peto volante, a light breast plate. * Petral, a
poitrall for a horse breast. Petril, a rail to lean the breast on, as before
some colleges, and before the Innes of court. * Petrina, f. a girdle: also
used for the girding place about the middle. * Petroleo, a kind of slimie and
chalkie ground. Pexe, the glue of a certain kind of fish. * Pexego, a peach.
* Pexiguera yerva, water pepper. Peynado, combed, carded. Peynado cerro, a
plain steep hill without trees or bushes. * Peynador, m. a comber, a carder
of wool, a dresser of flax, hair, or such like. Peynar, to comb, to card
wool. Pain, m. a comb. Pain, as Pain muy sobre Pain, briefly. * Peynero,
a comb maker. Pez, pitch, a fish. * Pezon de la teta, the teate of the dug,
the nipple of the dugge. * Pezpica, a wagtaile. Pezpita, f. a wagtaile. *
Pezpitalo, a bird called a wagtaile.
P H
* Phagro, a sea Breame. * Phalange, a squadron or troup of 8000 men, with
which the Persians were wont to war. * Phantasma, f. a vain vision, a false
imagination. * Pharmace, a medicine, a remedy. Also that part of physic that
cures with drugges. * Pharol, Farol, or Falol, the great lantern on the
poupe or stern of the ship. * Phebeo, m. pertaining to Phoebus. * Phebo, m.
Apollo, the sun. * Philosofar, Philosophar, vide Filosofar, to play the
philosopher, to reason skilfully of moral and natural matters. * Philosophia,
Philosofia, vide Filosofia, f. philosophy, skill of moral and natural
causes. * Philosofo, Philosopho, vide Filosofo, a philosopher, one learned in
moral and natural matters. * Phisica, vide Fisica. * Phisico, vide Fisico. *
Phisiognomia, vide Fisiognomia.
P I
Piadosamente, pitifully. Piadoso, pitiful. Piar, to peep as a chicken
does. Piara, f. a flock, a heard. * Pibetes, vide Pivetes. Pica, a pike for a
soldier. * Pica de nin^o, a childs prick. Picaca, or Picaza, f. a bird
called a Pie. * Picada, f. a peck that a bird or foul gives with the beak.
Picadillo, m. a kind of broth or pottage. Picado, m. a prick, a pecking,
mocked, galled, provoked, urged. Picadura, f. pricking, galling, a provoking,
urging. Pican^o, m. a lewd fellow, a base fellow. * Picapleytos, a wrangler, a
pettisoggar at law. Picar, to pick or pecke, to bite as a fish does at a
bait, to stinge as a Be or such like. Also to prick or pick as with a pin
or needle. * Picarse de ello, to chafe or grieve at it. * Picarel, a fish
almost like a perch. * Picaro, m. a simple base fellow, a poor labourer, a
porter. Picarras, peeble stones. * Picas secas, with only pikes without their
corslets on. Picaviento, a contrary wind. * Picaza, or Picaca, a bird called
a pie. * Picha, vide Picaca. * Pichel, a pot to drink in. * Pichellece, a
little pewter pot to drink in. * Pichelillo, vide Pichellete. * Pichon, m. a
pigeon. Pico, the beak or bill of a bird, a handspike, a mattocke, a pike of
iron, the spoute to power out at, a wound or hurt. Pico de ciguen^a, an herb
called Storks-bill. * Pico de arroz, a certain measure of Rice. * Pico de
jarro, the spoute of a pot. * Pico de oro, a certain herb. Picota, f. a
pillorie. Picote, a sackcloth, a soldiers cloak or cassocke. * Pida, vide
Pedir. * Pide, vide Pedir. * Pido, vide Pedir. Pie, m. a foot. * Pie de
bestia, the hinder foot of a beast, the Spaniard calls the forefeete of
beasts Manos, id est, hands: and the hinder feet Pies, id est, feet. Pie de
hebre, a Hares foot, an herb so called. Pie de an^ade, an herb, called
Duckes-foote. Pieca, f. a piece, a while, a space. * Pieca, as Estar vna buena
pieca recordando, to be a pretty while in remembering. * Piececuela, f. a little
piece. Piedad, f. pity, mercy. Piedra, f. a stone. * Piedra yman, or Iman,
the Loadstone. * Piedra pomez, a Pumice-stone. * Piedra de leche, a stone good
for women's milk. Piedra cufre, Brimstone. Piedra toque, the touchstone. Piedra
de muger, a stone good for women's milk. * Piedrecilla, or Piedrezilla, a small
stone. * Piedra de aguzar, a whet-stone. Piel, or Pelleja, a skin. * Piel
curtida, tanned leather, leather curried. Pielago, m. the broad sea, the maine
sea. * Pielgo del odre, a bottle or vessel to carry wine, made of a beasts
skin the hair inward. * Pien^a, vide Pen^a. * Pie negro, black foot. *
Piensa, Piense, Pienso, vide Pensar. * Pierda, Pierde, Pierdo, vide Perder.
Pierna, f. a leg. * darse de Piernas, to run away. * Piertega herrada, the
plough share or culter. * Pies de bestias, the hinder feet of beasts: the
Spaniard calls always the forefeete of beasts Manos, hands, and the hinder
feet Pies. Piesgo, the nose of a bottle. * Pieza, vide Pieca. * Pifano, or
Pifaro, a fife or flute to play on. Pifaro, vide Pifano. * Pigaca, vide Picaca,
f. a bird called a pie. Piguelas, or Pihuelas, hawks iesses. Pihuelas, vide
Piguelas. * P^issimo, m. most holy, most godly, most religious. Pila, f. a font
in a church, a water pot, a pot of water. Pilar, m. a pillar. * Pilar de agua,
a great cesterne of stone to receive water as it runs from the house. *
Pilage, or Pillage, vide Pilaje, pillage, spoil. Pilaje, Pilage, or Pillaje,
idem. * Pilatero, m. one that dresseth or ordreth the cloth in the fulling
mill. Pildora, f. a pill to purge. * Pileo, m. a cap. Pilica, a little pot, a
little font. * Pilo, m. a targettier his dart among the Romans. Pilon, m. a
mortar, a little trough. Piloto, m. a pilot of a ship. Pimienta, f. pepper.
Pimpinela, f. an herb called Pimpernell. Pimpollo, m. a sprout that grows
out of the sides or roots of trees called a sucker. Pin^a, f. the uttermost
shell of a Pine nut. * Pinaca, f. a pinnasse, a small swift ship. * Pinaculo,
m. a pinnacle of a tower or church. Pinal, or Pinar, a grove of Pines. Pinar,
or Pinal, a grove of Pines. Pinariego, belonging to the Pine. * Pincas, f.
pincers. Pinguela, f. vide Piguelas. Pinjado, a Bardasso: a Ganimede, one that
suffers himself to be buggered, vide Bardaxo. Pinijantes, spangles. Pinillo,
m. an herb called ground pine. Pinillo oloroso, wild Dill. Pin^on, m. the
kernel of a pine nut. Pino, m. a pine tree. * Pino negro, the pitch tree. *
Pinon, m. vide Pin^on. Pinsapo, m. a kind of pine. Pinta, f. a spot. *
Pintacilgo, m. a bird called a Linnet. Pintado, m. painted. Pintar, to paint.
* Pintas, f. spots. * Pintazilgo, vide Pintacilgo. Pintor, m. a painter.
Pintura, f. painting. * Pinzas, vide Pincas. Pinzel, m. a painters pensill. *
Pio, m. godly. Piogera, or Piojera, f. a place where lice breed. * Piogento,
vide Piojento. * Piojenta yerua, stauisagre, or lowse bane. Piojento, Piogento,
or Piojoso, lousy, full of lice. Piojo, m. a louse. Piojoso, or Piojento, full
of lice. Pipa, f. a vessel called a pipe. * Pique, m. a fish called a pike. *
Pique, vide Picar. * Piquero, m. a pikeman, a soldier. * Piramide, f. a
pyramid or great speere, great below and sharp in the top, a spire of a
steeple. * Pirata, a robber at sea, a pyrate. * Piretra, an herb called
Pellitorie. * Pirlitero, m. the hawthorne bush, or Barberie bush. Pisada, f. a
step, a footestep, a path. * Pisado, m. trodden, paued. Pisar, to tread on, to
paue. * Piscina, a ponde, a lake. Pison, m. a rammer to beat in earth or
pauement. * Pispote, m. a chamberpot. * Pistado, beaten in a mortar. * Pistar,
to beat in a mortar. Also to give the seed Piste to birds. * Piste, m. a
kind of seed which they give canarie birds. * Pistol, m. vide Pistolete, a
pistol, a dagge. * Pistolete, a pistol, a dagge. * Pitanca, f. a pittance, an
allowance of meat or drink. Pitan^oso, m. bleare eied, tender eied. * Pitado,
m. paid in ready money. Pitar, to pay ready money. * Pitima, a medicine. *
Pitiroxo, m. a bird called a Robin red-brest. Pito, m. a bird called a
Woodwall, a certain herb wherewith the Woodwall makes any wood or iron
pegge driven into the hole of a tree, where his nest is, for to leap out. Also
the whistle of the Boteswaine when he weighs anchor. Pivetes, a kind of
perfume. Pixa, f. a pizell, or yard of a beast or of a man. Pixita, a little
prick, a childs prick. * Pizara, Pizarra, f. a pibble stone. * Pizeria, vide
Tapiceria.
P L
* Placa, f. a piece of money worth a styuer in Dutch, or a French souse, in
English about penny farthing. Placa, f. a street, a market place, pay. * Placa
muerta, dead pay. Placartes, m. letters patents. * Placentero, or Plazentero,
m. a pleasant conceited fellow. * Placentino, a man of Placencia in Italy. *
Placer, vide Plazer, to please or pleasure. Placeramente, publicly, commonly.
Placero, m. common, public. * Placiego, m. a man that uses much the public
walking place, as in London, Paul's and the Exchange. * Placiesto, vide
Placiego. * Placo, vide Plazo, the prefixed day of appeerance after sommons. *
Placuela, f. a little street or market place. * Plaga, a wound, a plague, a
grievous thing. Plaia, vide Playa, f. a wharfe, a plain place by the sea side
to land at. Plana, f. a side of a sheet of paper, an instrument called a
plane. * Plancha, f. a planke, a board, a sheet of metal. * Plancha de Plomo,
a sheet of lead. * Planchones, m. great planks or great boords. Planeta, f. a
planet, whereof be seven. * Plan^ido, m. bewailed. * Plan^ir, to lament, to
bewail. * Planquin, vide Palanquin. Planta de pie, the sole of the foot.
Planta, f. a plant. * Plantado, m. planted. Plantar, to plant. * Plantar
estacas, to plant or set stocks to graffe on. * Plantilla, f. a little plant,
the sole of the foot. * Planto, m. lamentation, bewailing. * Plasma, f. an
emplaister. * Plasma, as hoja plasma, a certain herb. * Plasmador, m. one that
cures with emplaisters. Also a creator. * Plaso, or Plazo, a prefixed day of
appeerance or performance of a thing. Plasta, vide Pasta, paste. Plata, f.
money, silver. * Plataforma, a platform. Platano, m, a plane tree. Plateado,
plated with silver. Platear, to cover with silver. * Plateria, f. a place where
they work silver. Platero, m. a siluersmith, a goldsmith. Platel, m. a
platter, a dish. Platica, f. practice, talk, speech. Platica gente, f. a
practiced people. * Platicar, Praes. yo Platico, 1. Praet. yo Platique, to
talk, to confer together, to practice. * Platicos soldados, practiced
soldiers, experienced soldiers. * Platillo, m. a sawcer. Plato, m. a platter, a
dish. * hazer Plato, to keep hospitality, to keep a general table for all
comers. Also to manifest the secrets of another. * Platon, a great platter.
Also Plato, a proper name. Playa, f. a wharfe, a plain place by the sea side
to land on. * Plaza, vide Placa, a market, a street. * Plazeme, it pleases
me, it likes me. Plazentero, or Placentero, a pleasant conceited fellow.
Plazer, pleasure, mirth, delight. Also the shallow sea. * Plazer, or Agradar,
verbum impersonale, to please. * Plazero, vide Placero. * Plaziente, pleasing.
Plazo, m. a prefixed day of appeerance after sommons, or a prefixed time of
performing or doing any thing. Plebeyo, m. belonging to the comminaltie,
vulgar, nothing excellent. * Plectro, m. a quill or such like thing to strike
the strings of a harp, psalterie or such like instrument. * Plega a Dios,
would to God. Plegado, m. folded, pleited. Plegadura, f. folding, pleiting.
Plegar, yo Pliego, 1. Praet. yo Plegue, to fold. Plegaria, f. prayer. * Plegue,
vide Plegar. * Pleiades, the seven stars. * Pleides, vide Pleiades. * Plenar,
vide Llenar. Pleyteador, a pleader, a pettifogger at law, a wrangler.
Pleyteante, he that has a suit in law, a client. Pleytear, to go to law.
Pleytesia, f. a suit in law. Also to do homage for the holding of a castle
or such like. Pleytista, m. a solliciter. Pleyto, m. law, suit in law, a plea,
an extract of a record in court, a note of matters passed in the court. Pleyto
omenage, a public oath of fealty. * Plico de papel, vide Pliego de papel, a
sheet of paper. Pliega, f. a pleite or fold in a garment. * Pliega, Pliego,
vide Plegar. Pliego, m. a sheet of paper, letters patents. Also a city in
Andaluzia in Spain. * Pliegue, a pleite of a garment. Plomada, f. a plummet.
Plomado, m. leaded. Plomar, to do over with lead, to set a leaden seal on a
popes bull or pardon. Plomo, m. lead. * Plomo de alvan^i, the lead or square of
a mason. * Plubia, Pluvia, vide Lluvia, f. rain. * Plugo, as como a cada uno
le Plugo, as every man pleased. * Pluguiera, or Pluguiesse a Dios, would to
God. Pluma, f. a feather, a pen, a quill, a reed. * Plumaje, m. any thing of
feathers, plumes or feathers in the hat.
P O
* Poblacho, m. a great town, the multitude. Poblacion, f. peopling,
furnishing with people. * Pobladas plumas, f. plumes or feathers very thick
together. * Poblado de huessos, full of dead bones. * Poblados penachos, thick
or great plumes of feathers. Poblador, m. he that peopleth a country. Poblar,
to people, to inhabit. Poblazo, m. the multitude. * Poblezuelo, m. a little
village where few folk dwell. Pobre, poor. * Pobreto, very poor. Pobreza, f.
poverty. Pobrezillo, a silly poor wretch. * Poca sabiduria, little wit or
knowledge. Pocas vezes, seldom times. Pocilga, or cahurda, a hogs stie. *
Poco, vide Pozo, a well, a pit. Poco, m. a little. * Poco antes, a little
before. Poco mas o menos, a little more or less. Poco a Poco, by little and
little. * Poco a Poco hila la vieja la copa, by little and little the old wife
spinneth up her distaffe. Podacon, m. pruning time. Podadera hoce, a pruning
hook. Podado, pruned. Podador, a pruner. Podar, to prune. Podar vides, to
prune vines. Podenco, m. a blood-hound, a tumbler. Poder, power, ability,
wealth. Poder, Praes. Puedo, puedes, puede. 1. Praet. Pude, pudiste, pudo. Fut.
Podre, podras, podra. Sub. Praes. Pueda. Imperfect. Pudiera, podria, or
Pudiesse. Fut. Pudiere, to be able, to may or can. Poderio, m. power,
authority. * Podero, vide Podador. Poderosamente, mightily, powerfully.
Poderoso, mighty, powerful. * Podido, able, as He podido, I have been able.
* Podiu^, a place like a pulpet where professors do read to their hearers the
arts or toongs. Podre, f. rottennes, filth, corruption. Also powder, sniuell,
thick phlegm, or white matter. Podrecimiento, m. rotting, ranckling. * Podria,
vide Poder. * Podricion, rotting. * Podrida olla, a pot wherein are sodden many
kinds of meats together, as mutton, veale, kid, hens, birds: a hotch-potch.
Podrido, rotten. Podrimiento, or Podricion, rottennes, rotting. Podriqueria,
vide Podricion. Podrir, to rot, to corrupt. * Podrition, vide Podricion, f. *
Poemia, a certain stone that has virtue against the falling sickness. Poesia,
f. Poetry. Poeta, m. a Poet. * Poetico, m. belonging to a Poet. Poial, vide
Poyal, a cloth to lay on a bench. Poio, vide Poyo, a bench. Polaymas, hosen
without feet, hand ruffes. Polea, f. a pulley to wind up things with. An
herb called Penniroyall. Poleada, f. pap for children, water gruell or thick
pottage. * Poleadilla, diminut. of Poleada, thin pap or water gruell. * Polejo,
m. the herb called Penniroyall. * Poleo, vide Polejo. Polica, f. the charter
party in a ship, a ticket to lodge. A bill set up to get a master. Policia, f.
policy or cunning dealing in matters, dealing in state matters, finenes,
neatnes, trimnes. Polidamente, neatly, finely. Polidero, m. a polishing tool.
* Polidez, f. finenes, neatnes. Polideza, f. comelines, finenes. Polido, neat,
clean. * Poliganota yerva, a kind of herb. Polilla, a moth. * Polillado. m.
moth-eaten. Polipodio, m. a small fearne growing upon oaks called Polipodie.
Polir, to polish, to trim up. * Politico, a politician, of or belonging to
policy. * Politricho, an herb called Mayden-haire. * Polla, a female young
chicken or bird. Pollazon, bringing up of chickens. * Polleria, f. poultery,
the place where pullen, as hens, chickens, geese, duckes, rabbets, etc. are
sold. Pollero, m. a poulterer, a seller of hens, chickens, etc. * Pollico, a
little chicken, or the young of any thing. Pollino, m. an ass colt. * Pollio,
the name of a famous citizen of Rome in great favor with Augustus the
Emperor. * Pollito, m. a chicken, the young of any thing. Pollo, m. a
chicken, or young foul, or bird. Polo, a pole star. * Polvillos, m. powder,
perfumes. Polvito, m. small dust. Polvo, m. dust. Polvora, f. powder,
gunpowder, dust. Polvoramiento, dusting, raising of dust. Polvorear, to beat
to dust. * Polvoreda, f. a raising up of much dust with the wind. * Polvorin,
touchpowder, priming powder. * Polvorizado, made to powder. * Polvorizar, to
make into powder. Polvoroso, m. dustie. Poma, f. a pomander. * Poma de
balvarte, a fortification in a bulwark round in manner of a pomander. * Poma
de agua, a vial of sweet water. * Pomo, m. the pummell of a rapier. Pompa, f.
pomp, a glorious and stately show. Pomposo, m. pompous, stately in show. *
Poncar, to pounce, to prick. Poncon^a, f. poison. Poncon^ar, to poison, to
infect. Poncon^oso, venomous, poisoned. Ponderar, to weigh, to ponder, to
consider with himself. Ponedera gallina, f. a hen that lays eggs. *
Pondre, Pondria, vide Poner. * Ponente, vide Poniente. * Ponentino, m. of, or
pertaining to the west. Poner, Praes. Pongo, Pones, Pone, 1. Praet. Puse,
Pusiste, Puso, Fut. Pondre, or Porne, as, a, Sub. Praes. Ponga, Imperfect.
Pusiera, Pornia, Pondria, or Pusiesse, Fut. Pusiere, to put, to set, to lay. *
Poner la mesa, to cover the table, to lay the cloth. Poner fin, to make an end.
* Poner la lengua en Algun, to backebite any. * Poner campo, to pitch a field.
Poner en deposito, or Terceria, to sequester. * Poner yervas, to set herbs, to
plant herbs. * Poner los cuernos, to graffe horns, to make a cuckold. * Poner
los huevos, to lay eggs. Poner en cobro, to set safe. * Ponga, Pongo, vide
Poner. Poniente, m. the west part, a setter down. * Ponta, f. the snoute or
beak of a ship. * Pontezuela, a little small bridge. Pontificado, m. a
bishoprike, the estate of a chief bishop. Pontifical, belonging to a chief
bishop, stately, pompous. * Pontificial, idem. Pontifice, m. a chief bishop, a
high priest. * Ponto, m. the sea between Meotis and Tenedos, so called of
Pontus the son of Nereus. Ponton, a little bridge of a planke, a ferrie
boat. Popa, f. the stern of a ship. * Popa, as Andar en Popa, to go with a
fore wind. * Popar, to dally withal, to make no account of. * Popar, as
Quien a su enemigo Popa, a sus manos muere, whosoever dallieth with his enemy,
kills himself with his own hands. Popular, popular, common to all. *
Populento, m. populous, full of people. Populoso, m. populous, full of people.
* Populonia, a city so called, in Lombardie near to Pisa in Italy. Poq^dad,
vide Poquedad. Poquedad, f. smalnesse, baseness of mind, littleness of
ability. * Poquillo, m. some very little. * Poquirito, idem. * Poquissimo,
most little. Poquito, m. very little. Por, by, for, near. * Por lo qual, for
or by the which. Poraventura, peradventure, perhaps, what? yea? is it so? *
Porcellana, f. a kind of earthen vessel painted, costly fruit dishes of fine
earth painted. * Portion, a portion, a share. * Porcuno, m. belonging to swine.
Pordemas, in vain. * Pordicha, by chance, by fortune, by hap. * Pordioseros,
m. men that ask for Gods sake, beggars. Pordonde, which way? whereupon.
Porende, therefore. * Por tanto, for so much. Por ventura, by chance, by
haphazard. Por esso, Por esto, for this cause, therefore. * Por medio de lo
qual, by means whereof. Porfia, f. contention or earnest laboring in a
matter, standing stoutly to a thing. * Porfiadamente, earnestly laboring,
standing to it stoutly, without taking naie. Porfiado, m. one that contendeth
about a matter, one that will have his purpose without any naie. Porfiando,
standing to it stoutly. Porfiar, to contend about a matter, to stand to it.
Porfido, m. red marble. * Porgar, vide Purgar. Porhijar, to adopt, to take for
his son, or daughter. Poridad, f. a secret matter. * Por lo, as Por lo qual,
for the which. * Porna, Porne, Pornia, vide Poner. * Porosidad, f. porines. *
Poros, m. the pores of the body, whereby the hairs, sweat, etc. have the
issuing out. * Porpujante, ouerpoising. Porque, wherefore? for which cause.
Porqueria, f. swinishnes. * Porquerizo, a hoggeheard. Porquero, m. a
hoggeheard. Porqueron, m. a portreeue, a bailiffe. Porquerones, m. sergeants,
bailiffes, catchpols. Porra, f. a club. Porrada, f. a blow with a club. *
Porral, vide Portal * Porrazo, m. a blow with a club. Porretas, f. Leeke
blades. Porrilla, f. a little club. * Porsen^a, a king of the Hetrurians so
named, who to restore Tarquin the proud again to his kingdom, took arms
against Rome. * Porsospecha, id est, Por Sopsecha, f. through suspicion. Porta
cartas, a deske to write on. Also one that carries letters. Portada, f. the
vaulting or cunning working in stone upon a door, ornaments or garnishing
fastened or nailed on the iambes or door posts. Portadgo, m. tribute, toll,
custom. Portadguero, m. a toll gatherer. Portal, m. a porch, a walking place.
* Portamanteo, m. clokebagge, a male, a portmanteaw, a wallet, etc. Portanario,
the gut that passes from the stomach to the belly. Portan^ola, f. a
port-hole. * Portante, carrying. Also ambling. * Andar de portante; to amble. *
Portar, to carry, to behave himself. * Portatil, that which carries. *
Portazgo, or Portasgo, m. tribute, custom or toll. * Portazguero, or
Portasguero, m. a tribute, or custom gatherer. * Port, m. carriage, burden.
* Port, as Nave de mas port, a ship of more or greater burden. Port de
cartas, hire for carriage of letters. * Portento, m. a monster, monstrous,
strange, seldom seen, a sign of somewhat what to fellow. * Portentoso, idem.
Portero, m. a door keeper, a porter. * Porteros de cadena, porters at the out
gates of a Prince, which gates in Spain are ordinarily chained with chains,
that coches nor horses may not enter, till the porter take up the chain.
Portezuela, f. a little gate, a wicket. * Portigo, vide Pertiga. * Portillo, m.
a breach made in a wall by great ordinance or shot. Also a style or gap in a
hedge. Portillo de muro, the battlements of a wall. Also a breach made by the
battery of ordinance. * Portugal, m. the kingdom of Portingall. * Portuguez,
m. a man of Portingall. * Portuno, an imagined god of the heathens, unto whom
they attributed the charge of the heavens to belong. * Porventura,
peradventure, perhaps. * Pos, vide Empos. Posada, Posiento, or Albergeria, a
lodging, a resting place, a tavern, an inn, an alehouse. Posadero, m. a
seat, a stool, a resting place, a thing to lean on, a musket rest. * Posado,
m. rested, lodged. Posar, to sit, to rest, to lodge. * Poseer, vide Posseer. *
Posiento, vide Posada. * Posicion, a plea, a matter propounded, a position. *
Positivo, positive. Pospelo, against the hair. posPoner, Praes. posPongo,
posPones, posPone. 1. Praet. posPuse, posPusiste, posPuso. Fut, posPondre, or
posPorne, as, a. Sub. Praes. posPonga, Imperfect. posPornia, posPondria,
posPusiera, or posPusiesse. Fut. posPusiere, to set back, to set behind. *
posPonga, posPongo, vide posPoner. * posPorna, posPorne, posPornia, vide
posPoner. * posPuesto, m. set behind, set back. * posPuse, posPusiera,
posPusiesse, vide posPoner. * posPuso, vide posPoner. Possedor, m. a possessor,
an owner. Posseer, to possess, to have and hold. * Posseher, vide Posseer, to
possess. Possession, f. possession, owing, holding as his own. * Posseydo, m.
possessed, held as his own. Possibilidad, f, possibility, that may be.
Possible, possible, that which may be obtained. Possiblemente, possibly. Posta,
f. a Post that goes with letters, or on messages in haste: a watchman, a
sentinel. Also a slice or piece of flesh, fish, or such like. Also a place
where a sentinel is set to watch: likewise a place where soldiers on
shipboord, or on land, are appointed to stand and abide to fight. * Postas de
vaca, pieces or slices of beef. Post, m. a post, or pillar. Postema, f. an
impostume, or corrupt gathering of matter in any part of the body, rage or
fury. * Postiga, vide Postigo. Postigo, m. a wicket or little gate within a
great one. * Postiguillo, m. a little wicket. Postilla, f. a push, a wheale, a
swelling called wild fire, making hot blisters, a bladder or blister rising of
heat or chafing. Postilloso, full of pushes, wheales or blisters. Postillon,
m. a guide for one that rides post. * Postiza, f. the place where the oars
are laid for to row with. Postizo, m. counterfaited. * Postizo nin^o, a
changling, a child that was foisted in in steed of his own. * Postliminio, a
law made for restoring that which was unlawfully gotten away. The return and
restoring to his house of one that was thought to be dead. * Postrado, m.
prostrate, lying flat on his face, overthrown, destroyed. * Postrarse, to
overthrow himself, to lie flat, to prostrate himself, to destroy himself. *
Postre, the last, the last service at a table, as fruit, etc. * Postre, as Para
Postre, for the last course. * Postremo, vide Postrero. Postrero, or
Postrimero, the latter, the last, the former. Postrimeria, f. the latter days
of a man. Postrimero, vide Postrero. Postura, f. laying down, laying a wager,
the disposition, the habit, rating the price of things, lying at a ward in
fence. * Potacion, f. a drink. Potage, or Potaje, pottage, broth made to eat.
* Potaje, or Potage, m. idem. Potencia, f. power. * Potentado, m. one that has
power, authority, puissance, a potentate. Potente, mighty, powerful, able.
Potestad, f. power. * Potista, m. a tippling drunkard. Potra, f. burstnes.
Potroso, m. a man that is burst. Potranca, f. a mare colt of three years old.
Potrico, m. a horse colt. Potro, m. a colt, a pissepot, a brothel-house. *
Potro poledro, a colt. * Potros cerriles, colts never backed. Poyal, m. a cloth
to lay on a bench. Poyo, m. a bench. Pozero, m. a maker of wels. Pozo, m. a
well.
P R
* Practica, vide Pratica. * Pradecico, vide Pradezico. * Pradecuelo, vide
Pradzeuelo. * Pradera, f. a meadow. * Praderia, f. much meadow ground. *
Pradezico, m. a little meadow. Pradezuelo, m. idem. Pradillo, a little meadow.
Prado, m. a meadow. * Pragmatica, vide Pregmatica. Pratica, f. practice.
Praticar, Praes. yo Pratico, 1. Praet. yo Pratique, to practice. * Pratico, as
Hombre Pratico, a man of experience. * Pratique, vide Praticar. * Pravedad,
perverseness or untowardness. * Pravo, wicked, perverse, untoward, corrupt,
dishonest. * Praxarico, m. vide. Paxarico. Preambulo, a preamble, a preface, a
proheme, an entrance into a matter. * Prebaricacion, vide Prevaricacion. *
Prebenda, a title of office in the church that contains under it canons,
demicanons, prebends, etc. Preceder, to go before. * Precedencia, precedencie,
senioritie, eldership. Precedido, m. going before. * Precepto, vide Preceto, m.
a precept, a commandment. * Preceto, m. a commandment, a precept. * Preciado,
m. prized, valued, esteemed of, accounted of. Preciar, to prize, to esteem, to
account of, to vaunt. Precio, m. price, value. * Preciose, be esteemed
himself. Precioso, m. precious. * Precipitar, to cast down headlong. *
Precipitoso, headlong. * Precipuamente, chiefly, especially. * Precipuo,
chief, principal. * Precisamente, precisely, determinatelie. * Preconial,
publishing, as a crier does. * Preconio, a glory, a praise, a renown. Also a
solemn cry, or publishing any thing to be sold by the crier. * Predecessor,
m. an auncestor, a predecessor. * Predestinacion, predestination. *
Predestinado, foreordained, predestined. * Predestinar, to fore ordain, to
predestinate. * Predicable, that may be spoken and published abroad.
Predicacion, f. preaching, publishing abroad. * Predicado, preached, published
abroad. Predicador, a preacher. Predicar, Praes. yo Predico, 1. Praet. yo
Predique, to preach, to publish abroad. * Predicatorio, m. a pulpit, a
preaching place. * Predique, vide Predicar. * Predominacion, f. lordship over
other. * Predominar, to bear lordship over other. * Predominio, m. lordship
above the residue. * Preeminencia, vide Preheminencia, or Preminencia, f.
pre-eminence, chief sway, chief rule or authority. * Preeminente, bearing
chief swaie, rule, or authority. Prefacion, f. a preface. * Preferido,
preferred, exalted, set before. Preferir, yo Prefiero, to prefer, to advance,
to set before. * Prefiere, Prefiero, vide Preferir. Pregarias, vide Plegarias,
prayers. * Pregmatica, the statute law, a law made by Act of Parliament.
Pregon, m. a proclamation. * Pregonado, proclaimed. Pregonar, to proclaim.
Pregonero, m. a crier, one that proclaims a matter, a warner to appear, etc.
* Pregun, vide Pregunta. Pregunta, f. a demand, a question. Preguntar, to
demand, to ask a question. Preheminencia, or Preeminencia, f. bearing chief
sway or authority. Prelacia, f. prelacie, bearing chief rule or office in the
church. Prelado, or Perlado, m. a prelate, a chief churchman. Prematica, f. a
law, a statute, a decree made by Act of Parliament. Premia, f. force,
compulsion. Premiador, m. a rewarder. Premiar, to reward, to esteem. *
Premias, compulsion, force. Premilla, f. the first fault pardoned. *
Preminencia, vide Preheminencia, f. pre-eminence. Premio, m. a reward. Premir,
to press, to thrust. * Prencipe, vide Principe. Prenda, f. a pawn, a gage, a
pledge, a bribe. * Prendado, taken as a pawn, bribed. * Prendado el Iuez, the
Judge being bribed on the one side, sessed for subsidy. Prendar, to lay to
gage, to take in pledge. Also to bribe. Prendedero, m. a silver bodkin, such as
women use for their hair. Prender, to take hold on. Prender la Planta, to take
root. Prendimiento, taking hold. * Prendido, taken hold. Pren^ada, f. with
child, great with young. Pren^ez, f. childbearing, being with young. Prensa, f.
a press with a wrinch to press clothes. * Prensar, to press clothes with a
press that has a wrinch. * Preocupado, m. prevented, ouerreacht. * Preocupar,
to prevent, to ouerreach. Preparar, to provide, to prepare, * Preparatoria, m.
a place where any thing is prepared or made ready. * Preponer, Praes. Prepongo,
Prepones, Prepone, 1. Praet. Prepuse, Prepusiste, Prepuso, Fut. Preporne, or
Prepondre, as a, Sub. Praes. Preponga, Imperfect. Prepusiera, Prepondria,
Prepornia, or Prepusiesse, Fut. Prepusiere, to put before, to set before. *
Preponga, Prepongo, vide Preponer. * Preporna, Preporne, Prepornia, vide
Preponer. * Prepuesto, m. put, or set before. * Prepuse, Prepuso, vide
Preponer. * Prepusiera, Prepusiesse, vide Preponer. * Prerogativa, a
prerogative, a pre-eminence, a privilege. Presa, f. a pray, a booty, a handle,
a floudgate or floudhatch. * carne sal-Presa, flesh beginning to take salt.
Presado, a press. * Presagio, a divination by tokens, a presage. * Presago, or
Divino, one that prophesies or tells of strange things to come. *
Presbytero, an elder. * Presciarse, to value himself, to prize himself, to
esteem himself. * Prescio, the price of a thing. * Prescripcion, a
limitation, a rule, an ordinance, an exception, a color. * Prescripto,
limited, appointed, ordered. * Prescrivir, to limit, to order, to except, to
appoint, to show what to do. Presea, f. a jewel, a pearl, a precious stone.
Presencia, f. presence, being at hand. Presentacion, f. presenting or setting
before the eyes, making show of, a present or gift, preferring to a benefice.
Presentado, presented, offered, made show of. Also a degree among friars and
religious persons, as Licenciado, a master of arts. * Presentador, an offerer,
a presenter, a setter before his sight. * Presentante, a presenter, an offerer.
Presentar, to offer, to present with, to give, to make show of. Present,
present or at hand, a present or gift. * Presera, or amor de hortelano, an
herb called goose grass, cleauer or clauer grass. * Preservacion,
preservation, keeping. * Preservar, to keep or maintain, to preserve. *
Preservativo, a preservative that will preserve. Presidencia, f. presidentship,
government of a country. Presidente, a president, a governor, a captain. *
Presidio, a garrison of soldiers to defend a town or fort. Also all manner of
aid or defense, a place of refuge or succor, force of men, a fortification of
a thing, a camp. * Presidir, to govern any place or people, to have
authority. Presilla, vallence for a bed. Preso, taken, fastened, a prisoner. *
Presontuosamente, presumptuously, proudly, arrogantly. * Presos, devises. *
Presso, vide Preso. Prestadiza cosa, any thing lent. Prestado, m. lent.
Prestado tomar, to borrow. Prestador, a lender. Prestamo, m. lone, usury.
Prestamente, quickly. * Prestamo, a rent and office of the church. Prestar, to
lend, to suffice. Presteza, f. nimblenes, quicknes. * Prestida, a thing lent.
Prestido, vide Prestado, lent. Presto, ready, quick. Presumir, to presume, to
take prowdlie upon him. * Presumptuosamente, vide Presuntuosamente. *
Presumptuoso, vide Presuntuoso, proud, arrogant. Presuncion, f. presumption,
arrogance, pride, taking too much upon him. Presuntuosamente, proudly,
arroga^tly. Presuntuoso, presumptuous, arrogant, proud. * Presuponer, Praes. yo
Presupongo, 1. Praet. yo Presupuse, to presuppose, to think before hand. *
Presuponga, Presupongo, vide Presuponer, to think or imagine before. *
Presupuesto, m. supposed or imagined before. * Presupuse, vide Presuponer. *
Presuroso, very hasty. Pretal, a poitrall that is put before a horse breast to
stay the saddle from slipping back. * Pretencion, a pretense or meaning
before. Pretender, yo Pretiendo, to pretend a right, to think before. *
Pretensor, one that pretends a right. * Pretiendo, vide Pretender. Pretil,
vide Petril. Pretina, f. a girdle for a man with buckles. Praetor, m. a mayor, a
governor, a Lord president. * Pretorial, of, or belonging to a Praetor. *
Pretorio, a place of judgment, a guildhall, the house or pauillion of the
praetor, chief captain, mayor, judge, or alderman. Prevalecer, yo Prevalesco,
or Prevalescer, to prevail, to get his purpose. * Prevaler, yo Prevalgo, to
prevail, to get his purpose. * Prevaricacion, preuarication, false dealing
with a man, pretending to help him, and betraieth him to his enemy, collusion
in pleading. Prevaricador, one that pretends to help a man and betraieth him
into his enemies hands, an ambidexter, a coosening, foisting, cogging gamster
at play. a taker of bribes on both sides. Prevaricar, Praes. yo Prevarico, 1.
Praet. yo Prevarique, to leave that unspoken or little touched that should be
earnestly stood on, to pretend to help a man: yet to betray him into his
enemies hand, to play the ambidexter, to hold with the hare and run with
the hound. * Prevarique, vide Prevaricar. Preveer, to foresee, to forecast. *
Prevenciones, f. preuentions, or means to put him by his purpose, forerunners
or foregoers, * Prevendre, Prevendria, vide Prevenir. * Prevenga, Prevengo,
vide Prevenir. * Prevenido, prevented, put by his purpose. Prevenir, Praes.
Prevengo, Previenes, Previene, 1. Praet. Previne, Previniste, Previno, Fut.
Prevendre, or Preverne, as, a. Sub. Praes. Prevenga, Imperfect. Previniera,
Prevernia, Prevendria, or Previniesse, Fut. Previniere, to prevent, to come
before, to put by his purpose, to go between. * Preverne, Prevernia, vide
Prevenir. * Previene, Previenes, Previene, vide Prevenir. Previlegiado,
priuileged, allowed by authority. Previlegiar, to privilege, to grant by
authority. Previlegio, m. a privilege, allowance by authority. Previne,
Previniera, Previniesse, Previno, vide Prevenir. * Previsto, foreseen,
prevented, forecast, seen before. * Prevoste, a provost marshall. Prez. f.
price, value. * Prezentado, vide Presentado. * Prezentar, vide presentar. *
Prezidio, vide Presidio, a garrison. * Priato, vide Prieto. Priessa, f. haste,
speed. Priessa dar, to make haste. Prieto, or negro, black, brown. Prima, f.
a she cosen, the minikin or small string of an instrument. * Primacia, f.
primacie, the chief state. * Primado, a primate or chief in the clergy,
chosen or preferred first. Also primacie, chief place. Primavera, the spring
time, the beginning of the spring. * Primera, the game called Primero at
cards. Primeramente, chiefly, principally. * Primerica, f. a woman that
brings forth her first child. * Primerilla, vide Primera. Primeriza, f. a
woman of the first childebirth. Primero, the first, the chiefest. * Primicia,
f. vide Primicias. Primicias, the first fruits. * Primitivo, the foremost, the
first. Primo, the first, the best, the chiefest, a coosen german. * Primos
hermanos, brothers or sisters children, coosen germans of the first degree. *
Primos segundos, coosen germans once removed. Primogenito, m. the first
begotten. Primor, m. the excellency of any thing. Princesa. f. a princess. *
Principado, a soueraignitie, a principality, a dominion, a rule, a
pre-eminence. Principal, chief, principal. Principalmente, chiefly,
especially. Principe, m. a prince. Principiar, to begin. Principio, a
beginning. * Pringada, f. larde to larde things with. * Pringado, m. larded.
Pringar, 1. Praet yo Pringue, to lard. * Pringor, m. the lard or basting. *
Pringue, vide Pringar. * Pringue, f. the dripping of meat roasted, or such
like, etc. Pringue de Torrezno, barrows grease, lard of bakon. Prior, a prior,
the head of a company of friars. Priorado, a priory, a house of Friars.
Priorazgo, idem. * Prisa, Prissa, vide Priessa. Prisco, vide Aprisco. *
Priscos, vide Aprisco. Prision, f. a prison, a taking captive. Prisionero, m. a
prisoner, one that is taken captive. * Prissa, vide Priessa. Privacion, f. a
depriving, debarring or putting by. Privada, f. a privy, an house of office.
Privadero, a iakes farmer. Also one that depriueth. Privado, deprived, made
void. Also familiar, a favorite. * Privanca, f. familiarity, near
acquaintance with one, inward familiarity. Privar, to deprive, to take away.
Also to be familiar, and to be in place of a favorite. * Priverno, a city in
Italy so named. * Privilegiado, vide Previligiado. * Privilegio, a privilege,
allowance by authority. Pro, as Buen Pro os haga, much good may it do you, a
benefit. * Pro, y contra, for, and against. Proa, the prow or forecastle of a
ship. * Probable, vide Provable, that may be proved, likely, probable. *
Probado, or Provado, proved, tried. * Probanca, Probanza, or Provanca, trial,
proof, assaying. * Probar, or Provar, to try, to prove. * Probatica piscina,
a poole where sheep were washed that should be sacrificed: the poole spoken of
in the gospel where the diseased were healed that next went in after the
angel had stirred the water. * Probeer, vide Proveer, to provide, to puruey. *
Proberbio, vide Proverbio. * Probeydo, vide Proveydo. * Problema, f. a dark
and hard question. * Probocacion, vide Provocacion. * Probocado, vide
Provocado. * Proceder, to proceed, to go forward. * Procella, a storm. *
Procelloso, stormy, full of tempests. * Procession, a procession, a going
forward, a proceeding. Processo, a process, a writ. * Proconsul, a proconsul.
* Procreacion, a begetting. * Procrear, to engender or beget. Procuracion, a
procuring, looking to a cause, an atturneyship. Procurador, an attorney, a
proctor, a procurer, a follower of a matter. * Procurador fiscal, the kings
attorney. Procuradora cosa, a procuring matter. Procurar, to procure, to look
to, to play the attorney. Prodigal, wastfull, riotous, prodigal. Prodigalidad,
f. wastfulnes, riotousnes, prodigality. * Prodigalmente, prodigally. *
Prodigio, or Portento, a thing monstrous, strange, seldom^ seen, that
signifies somewhat. * Prodigioso, monstrous, strange, significant. Prodigo,
unthrifty, riotous, wastfull, prodigal. * Produzga, Produzgo, vide Produzir.
Produzir, yo roduzgo, to bring forth. * Proel, the boy in a galley which
serves the rest. * Proeles, galley boys. * Proemial, of or pertaining to a
proeme. * Proemio, a proeme, a preface. * Proeza, f. prowess, valor. *
Profacador, a reuiler, one that outrageth another in words, one that evil
entreats with injurious terms. Profacar, to revile, to outrage in words, to
injury with hard speeches, to reproach, to cast in the teeth. Profacio en la
missa, the preamble to the mass. Profanar, to profane, to unhallow, to use
like a godless man. * Profano, m. unholy, profane, godless. Profecia, f.
prophecy, foretelling of things to come. Proferir, yo Profiero, to bring
forth, to utter, to speak. Profession, f. profession, that which a man does
acknowledge. Professo, professed. Profeta, m. a prophet, one that can tell of
strange things to come. * Profetico, of or belonging to a prophet,
prophetical. Profetizar, to prophecy. * Proficiente, helping, profiting. *
Profunda mesura, a low courtesy, a low leg or obeisance. Profundamente,
deeply, profoundly. Profundidad, f. depth, profoundnes. Profundo, deep,
profound. * Progression, a proceeding, a progression. * Progresso, a
proceeding, a progress. Prohejar, to bear against the wind. Prohemio, m. a
preface, an entrance into a matter. * Proheza, or Proeza, prowess, valor. *
Prohibicion, f. a forbidding, a charge to the contrary. Prohibido, forbidden,
charged to the contrary. * Prohibidor, m. a forbidder, one that gives
otherwise in charge. Prohibir, to forbid, to charge to the contrary. *
Prohijado, adopted, taken for his son. * Prohijamiento, m. adopting, taking
for his son. * Prohijar, to adopt, to take for his child. * Proiz, vide
Proeza. * Prole, f. issue, children. * Prolifico, m. able to get children.
Prolixamente, largely, at length. * Prolixar, to draw at large, to make long,
tedious and prolixe. Prolixidad. f. largenes, length of course. Prolixo, long,
large. Prologo, a prologue, a speaker aforehand. * Prolongado, prolonged,
driven forth at length. * Prolongamiento, a prolonging, a driving at length,
or to the uttermost. Prolongar, Praes. yo Proluengo. 1. Praet. yo Prolong, to
prolong, to drive off from day to day. * Proluengo, vide Prolongar. Promessa,
f. promise. Prometer, yo Prometo, to promise. Prometedor, one that promises.
Prometido, promised. Prometimiento, a promising, granting of a thing. *
Promonton, a promontorie, a cape, or high place that stands far into the
sea. * Promover, to promote, to prefer. * Promptamente, readily. Promptitud, f.
readiness. Prompto, ready, quick to conceive. * Promuctor, vide Promutor. *
Promulgado, published abroad, procliamed. * Promulgamiento, publishing abroad.
Promulgar, 1. Praet. yo Promulgue, to publish abroad, to proclaim. *
Promulgue, vide Promulgar. * Promutor, a promoter, an informer. * Promutor de
iusticia de Rey, the kings solicitor. Pronosticar, Praes. yo Pronostico, 1.
Praet. yo Pronostique, to prognosticate, to foreshew, or foretell. Pronostico,
prognosticating. * Pronostique, vide Pronosticar. * Prontamente, vide
Promptamente. * Prontitud, vide Promptitud. * Pronto, vide Prompto.
Pronunciacion, pronuntiation, utterance. * Pronunciado, pronounced, uttered.
Pronunciar, to pronounce, to utter, to deliver forth in speech. * Prophano,
vide Profano. * Propheta, vide Profeta, m. * Prophetico, vide Profetico. *
Prophetiza, or Profetiza, a she prophetisse, a prophesying. * Prophetizar, or
Profetizar, to prophecy. Propiamente, properly, peculiarly. * Propicio, m.
merciful, pitiful, favorable, gentle. * Propina, f. a right or duty of
custom paid by Doctors that do commence, to those that have already taken
degree. * Propinquo, m. near. Propio, or Proprio, proper. Proponer, Praes.
Propongo, Propones, Propone. 1. Praet. Propuse, Propusiste, Propuso. Fut.
Proporne, or Propondre, as, a. Sub. Praes. Proponga. Imperfect. Propusiera,
Propornia, or Propusiesse. Fut. Propusiere, to propound, to set forth, to
propose. * Proponga, Propongo, vide Proponer. Proporcion, proportion. *
Proporcionadamente, proportionably. * Proporcionado, proportionate. *
Proporcionar, to lay out in proportion. * Proporne, Propornia, vide Proponer.
Proposicion, propounding of a matter. Proposito, m. a purpose propounded. *
Propriamente, properly. Propriedad, a property. Proprietario, he that has
the property. * Proprio, proper, peculiar. Propuesta, f. purpose. * Propuesto,
m. propounded. * Propuse, Propusiera, Propusiesse, Propuso, vide Proponer. *
Prora, or Proa, f. the forecastle or forepart of a ship. * Prorogacion, a
driving off of a matter. * Prorogar, to prorogue or drive off. Prosa, prose,
plain speech, speech not in verse. * Proscrevir, yo Proscrivo, to outlawe, to
banish, to sell openly. * Proscription, outlawing, banishment, open sale. *
Proscripto, or Proscrito, proclaimed to be sold, proscribed or banished. *
Proseguido, prosecuted, followed on to the uttermost. * Proseguimiento,
following on of a matter. * Proseguir, Praes. yo Prosigo, Sub. Praes. yo
Prosiga, to prosecute, to follow on. * Proserpina, f. the daughter of Ceres
whom Pluto stole away, and kept as his wife. * Prosiga, Prosigo, vide
Proseguir. Prosperamente, prosperously. * Prosopopeia, a feining any person to
speak, a representing of persons. * Prosperar, to prosper, to have good
success, to speed well. Prosperidad, prosperity, good success, good luck.
Prospero, prosperous, happy, fortunate. * Prospicio, vide Propicio. * Prostrat,
to prostrate, to fall down flat. * Prosupuesto, presupposed. * Protectora, a
she defendresse. * Protector, m. a protector. * Protervia, f. frowardnes,
untowardness, peruersenes, sauciness, pride, folly, malapertnes, waiwardnes,
snappishnes. * Protervo, froward, perverse, untoward, snappish, wayward,
malapert, saucy, proud. * Protestar, to protest, to affirm solemnly and
earnestly. Protesto, a protestation. * Protocolo, a Scriueners or Notaries note
book or register book, in which he in a brief manner notes, registreth and
sets down for a memorial all bargains, sales, contracts, and dealings, or
any other manner of writings he makes between party and party. *
Protomedico, m. a principal physician. Protonotario, m. a chief Notarie, a
principal Secretary, a chief scribe. Provable, that which may be proved,
probable, that is able or likely to make proof. Provablemente, probably, by
due proof. * Provacion, f. proouing, trial. Provanca, or Probanca, trial,
proof, assaying. Provado, tried, proved, assaied, tasted. Provador, a
proouer, a trier. Provar, yo Pruevo, to try, to prove, to assaie, to taste. *
Provea, vide Proveer. Provechar, to profit, to gain, to get or obtain.
Provecho, m. profit, gain, good. * Buen Provecho os haga, much good may it do
you. Provechosamente, profitablie. * Provedidor, a prouider, a purueyor. *
Proveedor, a muster-master in a camp, an ouerseer, a purueyor. Proveer, to
provide, to take heed, to foresee, to puruey. Proveidamente, prouidently, with
due foresight. Proveido, furnished, provided, foreseen, or taken heed unto.
Proveimiento, providing, foreseeing, looking well unto, furnishing. Provena, or
Mugron de vid, a sprout or young branch of the vine. Proverbio, vide Refran, a
proverb, adage, or common saying. * Provervio, vide Proverbio. * Providencia,
providence, taking heed to, taking care of. Provincia, a province, a country
lying far off and ruled by a lieutenant, labor, business, a matter hard to be
effected. Provincial, pertaining to a province, a governor of a province.
Provision, f. provision, store, victuals or other things aforehand, a prouiso.
Provisor, a prouider, an ouerseer, a deane, a provost. * Provisoria, f. the
office of a deane, provost or prouider. Provocacion, f. provoking, urging to a
matter. * Provocado, provoked, urged, exhorted, challenged. * Provocador, a
prouoker, an vrger, a procurer. Provocar, 1. Praet. yo Provoque, to provoke, to
urge to a matter, to call forth, to exhort, to challenge. * Provoque, vide
Provocar. * Proximo, m. a neighbor. Prudencia, f. wisdom, prudence, skill to
discern matters. Prudente, wise, prudent, that can discern well of matters.
Prudentemente, wisely, prudently. Prueva, f. proof trial, taste, a searching
instrument. * Prueve, Pruevo, vide Provar. * Pruevo, I prove, vide Provar. *
Pruna, f. a plum, a prune. * Pruno, a sloe tree or plum tree.
P V
Pua, f. a stock to graffe on, a prickle, a thorn, the tooth of a comb, any
nail or such like sticking or gagging out that may prick, scratch, tear or
hurt one. * Puas de puerco-espin, pricks or sharp quils that grow on the
porcupine. * Puas de rastrillo, the long iron teeth on the hatchell with which
they hatchel hemp. Puagre, m. the gout in the feet. Publicamente, publicly,
openly, commonly. Publicacion, publishing, setting abroad, making common.
Publicado, published abroad, set forth commonly. Publicar, Praes. yo Publico,
1. Praet. yo Public, to publish, to set forth. * Publicidad, f.
publikenesse, commonnesse. Publico, m. public, common, known abroad.
Public, vide Publicar. Pucha, or Puchas, pulse, a kind of pap, water gruell,
thick pottage. * Puche de pan en vinagre, et azeite, a kind of pap or
pottage. * Pucherias, f. vide Puchericos. * Puchericos, m. the face and gesture
children make when they begin to cry. Puchero, m. a porredge pot. * Pude, vide
Poder. * Pudiendo, the gerund of Poder, having power, being able. * Pudiera,
Pudiesse, Pudo, vide Poder. * Pueblar, to furnish with people. Pueblezuelo, a
small sort of people. Also a little town or village. Pueblo, m. people. Also a
town, a village. * Puede, Puedo, vide Poder. Puente, f. a bridge, a half
deck on shipboord. * Puentezuela, or Puentecuela, f. a little bridge, a little
deck of a ship. Puerca, f. a sow, a hog-louse. Puerca de husillo, a spindle of
a distaffe. Puercamente, swinishly, filthilie. * Puercas, or Lamparones,
kernels, swelling in the armepits or neck. Puerco, m. a hog. * Puerco
cevado, a fat hog. Puerco espina, a Porcupine. Puerco montes, vide Javali,
a wild boar. * Puerquero, m. a swinheard. Puerro, m. a leeke. Puerro
silvestre, a wild leeke. Puerta, f. a door, a gate. * Puertezuela, a little
door. Puerto, m. a kay, a haven, a harborough for ships. Pues, then. Puesta, f.
a piece, a slice, a portion, an allowance. * Puesta de vaca, a piece or a slice
of beef. Puesto, put, placed, a standing. Puesto que, although,
notwithstanding, albeit. * Pugnal, m. a dagger. * Pugnar, to fight. Puja, f.
setting to sale, an outbidding of another in price. * Pujado, outbidden in
price. Pujamiento, buying or selling by the great, renting of a commodity, an
outbidding another in price. * Pujamiento de sangre, a fresh increase or
coming of blood at the spring of the year. Pujanca, f. or Puzanca,
puissance, might, power. * Pujante, puissant, mighty, powerful. Pujar, to
rent a subsidy, to cheapen, to bid money, to outbid another in price.
Pujavante, a smithes buttrice, wherewith he pareth the horse hoofes. Pujeshiga,
holding out the middle finger, or boring the nose with the finger in scorn of
another man. * Pujetes, vide Pun^etes. Pulga, f. a flea. * Pulgad, vide
Pulgada. Pulgada, f. the breadth of a thumb, an ynch. Pulgar, m. the thumb,
the great ^e. Pulgaradas, f. brusing with the thomb. Pulgon, m. a worm that
eats vines. Pulgoso, full of fleas. * Pulicia, f. a making of neat, fine,
trick or trim. * Pulir, to polish, to make fine or neat. Pullas, mockes,
scoffs, brables, brals. Also wanton lascivious speeches. Pulmon, m. the lungs.
Pulmon marino, a froath in the sea that gives light. Pulmones, the lungs.
Pulpa, soft or fat flesh without bones. Pulpa, a pudding. * Carne de pulpa,
flesh that has no bones in it, soft flesh. * Pulpe, a fish with many feet
called a poor Cuttle. Pulpejo, the soft flesh of the hands or arms. Pulpito,
m. a pulpet. Pulpo, a fish called a cuttle. Pulso, f. the pulse of the veins
in the body. Puncada, f. a prick. Puncadura, pricking, a mark with a hot
iron, a foyning. Puncar, to prick, to pounce, to foyne. Puncon, m. a bodkin, a
pouncing iron, a punchion. Punconcico, m. a little bodkin. * Pundo, a point, a
particle. * Pundonor, id est, Punto de honor, a point of honor. * Pungido,
pricked. * Pungidor, a pricker. * Pungimiento, pricking. Pungir, yo Punjo, Sub.
Praes. Ponja, to prick, to foyne, to sting, to nettle, to vex. * Ponja,
Ponjo, vide Pongir. * Punica, of Carthage. Punicion, f. punishment. * Punido,
punished. Punir, to punish, to chastise, to correct, to take vengeance of. *
Pun^ada, f. a blow with the fist, a handful. Pun^ado, m. a handful, a gripe,
as much as one can take in the fist at one time. Pun^al, m. a dagger, a
poynado. Pun^alada, a stab with a dagger. * Pun^ete, m. a blow with the fist. *
Pun^etes, m. ruffes at the hand wrests. Pun^o, m. a fist, a coard in a ship
called the clue, the handle of a sword, dagger, etc. Pun^os, m. ruffes or
cuffes for the hand wrests. Punta, f. the point of a rapier or other thing.
Puntada, f. a stitch with a needle or such like, a pricking or stitching in
with a needle. Puntado, pointed. Puntal, a post to underprop a house, the post
which bears up the hatches on ship-boord. Puntapie, or Puntillazo, spurning
with the feet. Puntar, to point, to sharpen, to spurn, to kick, to foyne, to
prick. * Punteria, directly, by due point. Puntero, a marking iron. Also one
that points. Puntillazo, or Puntapie, spurning with the feet. * Puntillo, m.
a little point of a weapon. Punto, a point, a moment, the sise of a shoo, a
stitch in sowing. Also the ace at cards. * Punto, as Curar de Punto, to cure
with stitching up. * Puntos, the sise of shoes, stitches of a needle, any
other points. * Puntual, direct, certain, pointing. * Puntualidad, certainty,
pointing to a matter. * Puntualmente, from point to point. * Puntura, pointing,
pricking. Pupilo, m. a pupil, one that is under tuition and guiding of
another. Puramente, purely, clearly, sincerely. Pureza, f. purity,
cleanness, sincerity. Purga, f. a purgation. Purgacion, cleansing, purging,
acquiting. Purgar, 1. Praet. Purgue, to purge, to cleanse, to discharge, to
make amends for, to abide. Purgativo, that which purges. * Purgatorio,
purgatory, a place of cleansing. * Purgo, vide Purga. * Purgue, vide Purgar. *
Puridad, f. purity, cleannes. * Purificacion, a cleansing, a making pure. * la
Purificacion de nuestra Sen^ora, the Purification of our Lady, or Candelmas
day. * Purificado, cleansed, made pure. Purificar, 1. Praet. Purifique, to
purify, to cleanse, to make pure. Puridad, f. purity, cleannes, a secret
purpose. * Purifique, vide Purificar. Puro, pure, clean, neat, unspotted,
undefiled. Purpura, f. purple. * Purpureo, m. of a purple color, made of
purple, belonging to purple. * Pusante, vide Pujante. * Puse, vide Poner. *
Pusiera, Pusiesse, vide Poner. Pusilanimidad, f. cowardlines, faintnes of heart,
effeminate dastardlines of men. Pusilanimo, m. faint hearted, a coward, a
dastard, a meacoke, a white liuered fellow. Puta, f. a harlot. * Puta vellaca,
a naughty vile whore. * Puta matrera, f. a cunning harlot. Putanear, to
follow harlots, to haunt whoores. Putan^ero, m. a whooremonger. * Putaria,
vide Puteria. * Putear, to play the whore. Also to follow whoores. Puteria, or
Burdel, a stews, or brothel house. * Putesco, m. belonging to whoredom. *
Putico, a little beastly brothell knave, a little Ganimedes or Bardaxo. Puto, a
shameless brothell, or beastly knave, a Ganimedes or Bardaxo. * Putrefaction,
corruption, rottennes. * Puxa, an outbiding another in price. * Puxado, m.
outbidden in price. * Puxamiento, m. an outbidding another in price. *
Puxamiento de sangre, a fresh increase or coming of blood at the spring of the
year. * Puxando, by out-bidding another in price. * Puxar, to out-bid another
in price in buying a thing. Puxavante, vide Pujavante, a smithes buttrice,
wherewith he pareth the horse hoofes. * Puxo, a desire to go to stool, and
yet in vain. * Puxo, as Puxo de vientre, the griping of the belly, a desire
to go to stool, and yet in vain. * Puya, vide Puja. * Puzanca, vide Pujanca,
power, ability. * Puzante, vide Pujante.
Q
QUadernas, f. the sides of a ship. Quaderno, the fourth in account, a sheet
folded, a roll written. * Quadra, f. a great hall square, or a square dining
room in a house. Quadra de casa, the four corners or square of a house. Also
a square room in a house. Quadrada, f. a thing squared, made square, fitted. *
Quadrado, squared, fitted. * Quadragesima, vide Quaresma. Quadragesimo, the
fortieth in number. * Quadran me sus costumbres, his manners and mine are alike.
Quadrangula, a form four square, a quadrangle. * Quadrangulo, m. four
square. Quadrante, a quadrant, a little circle to discern the winds by, a
circle of the the sun, a thing four square. Quadrar, to make square, to make
fit. Quadratura, squaring, fitting. * Quadrete, m. a square little banner.
Quadril, m. the hippe. Quadrilla, f. a little company of footmen, a squadron
of some 25. or fewer soldiers. * Quadrillero, m. a captain or leader of such a
company or squadron, an officer in war that draws out, or takes out such
a squadron of soldiers, to go with him in the fields in the army, to see if
there be any robbers, or other such misorders, and to correct them. *
Quadrillo, a little square court. Also a little company of footmen, or a
squadron of 25. or fewer soldiers. * Quadrin, m. a farthing. Quadro, a four
square, a squadron of soldiers, a square form of setting a battle, a company
or quadret in war. * Quadrupede, fowerfooted. * Quadruplo, fowerfold. *
Quajada, or Quaxada, f. a posset, a syllibub. Also any thing curded or
congealed. * Quajadilla, or Quaxadilla, f. a syllibub, a posset. Quajado, or
Quaxado, curded, congealed. Quajamiento, or Quaxamiento, m. curding,
congealing. Quajar, or Quaxar, to curde, to congeale. * Quajo, rennet to make
cheese. Qual, which, whither. * Qualesquier, whithersoeuer, which so ever. *
Qualesquiera, idem. * Qualidad, vide Calidad, the quality or condition.
Qualquier, whosoever. * Qualquiera, idem. Quando, when. * Quando quiera,
whenever. Quantas vezes, how often, how many times. * Quantia, f.
quantity. Quantidad, vide Cantidad. Quanto, how much. Quantos, how many? *
Quanto meedia legua, about the quantity of half a league. * Quanto, as Por
quanto, for how much. Quanto mas, how much more. * Quantos se quiera, how
many soever. * Quaranta, vide Quarenta. Quarenta, forty. * Quarenteno, or
Quarentesimo, the fortieth in order. * Quaresma, f. Lent. * Quarta, the quarter
of a yard, the fowerth part, a kind of tax for pardons, etc. Also a mule or
mare that is put to cart. Quartago, m. a nagge, a small horse. * Quartal, a
quarter, a measure containing the fowerth part of an other measure. * Quartana,
f. the fever quartaine. * Quartear, to quarter in pieces, to quarter arms.
Quartel, m. a quarter to lodge soldiers every company their quarter, a hatch
a shipboard which covers the hole of going down or under hatches of a ship,
a place to lay up sails in. Also the fourth part of a galley. * Quartel
maestre, a quarter master, who appoints every company in a camp, their
places of lodging. * Quarteles, the hatches on shipboorde, a place to lay up
the sails in. * Quarteron, m. a quarter of a tun, that is a hogshed, or half
pipe, a small basket of figs. Also the quarter of any thing whether it be of
weight or measure. Quartilla, f a piece of threehalfe pence, a kind of duty or
tribute that the country people in Spain pay of their corn to Saint James,
every year. Also the pasterns of a horse or other beast. * Quartilla, or
Doblegadura, the pasternes of a horse, etc. * Quartillo, the fourth part of a
hundred, the fourth part of six pence, a quarter of any measure of wine, oil,
etc. the fourth part of any weight. Quarto, m. the fourth. Also a small piece
of money of four marauedis, of English money about a penny half penny
farthing. Also a quarter of mutton, veale, lamb, etc. or the fourth part of
any other thing. * Quartos, pieces of money of four marauedis, a penny half
penny farthing. Also quarters of mutton, veale, lamb. etc. * Quartos, as
hazer Quartos, to quarter a man. * Quasinada, id est, Casi nada, as it were of
nothing, as a thing of no worth. * Quasinadas frascas, sweepings of a house,
leaves or sticks fallen from trees, rubbish or paltrie stuff naught worth,
unprofitable folk. Quatro, four. Quatro cientos, four hundred. * Quatro
tanto, four times as much. * Quatro mil, four thousand. * Quatre cuentos,
four millions of thousands. * Quaxada, vide Quajada, a congealing, a curding.
* Quaxadilla, or Quajadilla, f. a posset, sillibub, etc. * Quaxado, vide
Quajado. * Quaxamiento, or Quajamiento, curding, congealing. * Quaxar, vide
Quajar.
Qu E
Que, what, that, as. * Quebanto, vide Quebranto. Que cosa, what matter.
Quebrada, f. a breach or breaking. Quebrada de monte, a vallie or breach
between hills. * Quebradamente, brokenly. * Quebradas, as Hondas quebradas,
waves or billows broken at sea. Quebrado, broken, burst. Quebrado, or Potroso,
m. burst bellied. * Quebrador, a breaker, one that breaks. Quebradura,
breach, a breaking, a rupture. * Quebrando, breaking. Quebrantado, broken,
burst. Quebrantador, a breaker. Quebrantahuessos, a kind of eagle that
breaks bones. Quebrantamiento, m. breaking. Quebrantar, to break. Quebrar,
yo Quiebro, to break, to burst. * Quebrar el credito, to loose his credit. Que
cosa, what? how now? * Queda, f. the nine a clock bell, after which hour in
Spain the watch apprehends those that be abroad, takes away their weapons
as forfeited, and imprisoneth the persons. Quedada, f. staying, resting. *
Quedado, stayed, abidden, rested. Quedar, to stay, to tarry, to abide, to
rest, to stand still. * Quedar el campo por alguno, to be conqueror, to
overcome. * Quedito, m. still, quiet, soft. Quedo, quiet, still. Que es cosa y
cosa? a riddle. * Quejar, vide Quexar. * Quejoso, vide Quexoso. * Quiero, or
Breco, a shrub called heath, linge or sweet broom. * Quel, id est, Que el,
the which. * Quella, id est, Que ella, that she, that it. * Quello, id est,
Que ello, that it. * Que es? what is the matter? Quema, f. burning, blasting. *
Quemada, f. a blast. Quemado, burned, scorched, blasted. Quemadura, f. a
burning, a blithe, a blasting. Quemar, to burn, to blast. * Quenca, or Cuenca,
any little round vessel or dish of wood. * Quenca del ojo, the round hollownes
wherein the eye stands and is seated. * Quenta, or Cuenta, an account, a
reckoning. Also a bead of the prayers. * Hazer quenta, to reckon, to make
account of, to think for, to be sure of. * Quentar, vide Contar. * Quentas, or
Cuentas, a pair of beads. * Quento, or Cuento, a million, a tale, a number, a
history, the blunt end of a pike or staff. * Quepa, vide Caber. Querella, a
complaint. Querellar, to complain. Querelloso, complaining. Querencia, f.
love, liking. Querer, Praes. Quiero, Quieres, Quiere, 1. Praet. Quise,
Quisiste, Quiso, Fut. Querre, ras, ra, Sub. Praes. Quiera, or Querra,
Imperfect. Quisiera, Querria, or Quisiesse, Fut. Quisiere, to desire, to
endeavor, to will, to love. * Querer, Subst. vide Querencia. * Querido,
disposed, affected. * Querra, Querre, vide Querer. * Queseadero, vide Queseria.
* Queseador, one that makes cheese. * Queseria, a place where cheese is made.
* Quesero, a cheesemonger, one that sells cheese. Queso, cheese. * Questa, id
est Que esta, that she, that this thing. * Queste, id est, Que este, that he,
that this. Question, or Quistion, a question or demand, a quarrel, a
controversy. * Questionero, or Quistionero, a demander of questions, a
quarrelling fellow. * Questo, id est, Que esto, that, this. * Questor de las
ordenes, a limiting or begging friar, a pardoner. * Quetar, vide Quietar, to
quiet, to still. Quexa, f. a complaint. Quexar, to complain. Quexigo, m. a
kind of oak, a wild ash tree. Quexoso, complaining, given to quarrel or
complaint. Quexura, haste, instance, earnestnes.
Qu I
Quica, peradventure, perhaps. Quicial, or Quicio, hinges of a door. * Quicial
de ventana, the hinges of a window. Quicio, or Quicial, hinges of a door. *
Quicios cherriadores, creaking hinges, or hinges making a creaking noise. *
Quiebras, f. breach, as in a man's word, or credit. Also sorrow, hartbreaking,
grief, vexation. Also breaking in of water into a field. * Quiebre, Quiebro,
vide Quebrar. Quien, who? he which. * Quien en tallugar, Quien en tal, some in
such a place, and some in such. * Quienquier, whosoever. Quienquiera,
whosoever. * Quinentos, vide Quinientos, five hundred. * Quiere, Quiero, vide
Querer. * Quier, as, Como quier, howsoever. * Quier, as Quien quier, whosoever.
* Quiera, as Como Quiera, howsoever. * Quietado, quieted, pacified.
Quietamente, quietly, peaceably. Quietar, to make quiet, to pacify. Quieto,
quiet, at rest. * Quieto, a river in Cappadocia so called. * Quietud, f. quiet,
rest, ease. * Quilar, vide Quilate. * Quilatado, tried, or touched as gold.
Quilatar, to try or touch as gold, to make perfect or excellent. Quilate, m.
the touch of gold, etc. finenes, a caract. Quilla, f. the keele of a ship. *
Quilma, f. a wallet, a bag. Qumientos, five hundred. Quin^on, a part, a
portion. Quin^onero, a diuider, a parter. * Quinquiera, vide Quienquiera.
Quintal, m. a hundred weight. * Quintar, to take away the fifth. Quinterno, the
number of leaves in printing being five to a letter. Quinto, the fifth. Quinze,
fifteen. * Quinzeno, the fifteenth. * Quise, vide Querer. * Quisiera,
Quisiere, Quisiesse, vide Querer. * Quiso, vide Querer. * Quistion, or
Question, a question or demand, a controversy. * Quisto, as Bien quisto, mal
quisto, well beloved, ill beloved. * Quistoncilla, f. a short question or
demand. * Quitacion, vide Quitanca. Quitado, taken away, given over, removed.
Quitamiento, taking away, discharge, giving over, release, riddance. *
Quitanca, or Quitanza, riddance, discharge, taking away. Quitar, to take away,
to remove, to withdraw, to break off, to cut off the hair, to put off
clothes, etc. * Quitasol, a broad thing made in the manner of a canopie put on
a staff to carry over ones head in hot countries to keep away the sun, as
in China and in Spain they use on horseback. The word coming of Quitar,
which is to take away, and Sol the sun: and so Quitasol, a taker away of the
sun, or such a canopie for that use. * Quitate de ay, stand aside, stand out of
the way, remove thence. Quixada, f. a iaw. Quixar, m. vide Quixada. Quixones,
bastard parsley, or wild cheruill. Quixotes, m. terces, armor for the knees.
R
RAbacas, water parsley, yellow water cresses, belrags. Rabadan, m. a chief
shepherd, a principal among shepherds. Rabadilla, f. the skut of a bird, the
rumpe. Rabanos, or Ravanos, m. radish roots. Raban^o, vide Rebano, m. a flock
of cattle. * Rabdo, vide Raudo. Rabear, to wag the tail. * Rabeco, vide
Raveco, a wild goat. Rabel, m. an instrument called a rebecke. * Rabela, vide
Ravela, f. idem. * Rabia, or Ravia, f. fury, rage, madness. * Rabiar, to
rage, to be furious or mad. Rabicano, id est, Rabo cano, an horse with a gray
tail. * Rabillo, m. a little tail. * Rabiosamente, furiously, madly,
rauingly. * Rabioso, furious, raging, mad. * Rabirubio, a bird with a red tail
called a wagtaile. Also a kind of fish. * Rabiseco, a dry tail, a poor
starueling beast. Also a poor wretch lean and ill clothed. Rabo, m. the
tail, the fundament. * Rabo de vestidura, a long train of a woman's gown, a
long garment that plaiers used. * Rabo, or Coda de mula, an herb called horse
tail. Rabo de puerco, an herb called Mayden-weed. * Rabon, m. a short or
stumpe tail, any beast curtailed, or the tail cut off, a curtall. * Rabudo,
m. with a great tail. Raca, f. a ray or beam shining through a hole. Also a
race, stock, kind, or breed. Raca de sol, the sunne-beame. Raca de pan^o,
the place where cloth is sear or thin, a bracke in cloth. Racado, full of
bracks in cloth. Specked or spotted as a horse or beast. Racamenta, f. the
parle of the yard of a ship, which holds the yard to the mast. *
Raciocinacion, reasoning. * Raciocinio, reason. Racion, f. a piece, a portion,
allowance of victuals, etc. * Racional, reasonable, that has the use of
reason. * Racionar, vide Raciocinar, to reason, to argue, to dispute.
Racionero, m. an inferior prebend in a Church, that has but half so much
revenues by year as a Prebend has. * Racon, vide Razon, f. reason. *
Raconar, vide Razonar. Raedera, f. a raser to shave with, any thing that one
shaueth with. Raedura, f. shauing, rasing of writings. Raer, yo Raygo. Sub.
Praes. Rayga, to raze, to shave, to blot, to plain with a plainer. * Raer heno
con el Rastro, to rake. Raez, easy. * Rahez, f. easy, not hard to be done. *
Raia, vide Raya, a ray fish, a struck. Raja, f. a chip, a lathe, cloth rash.
* Raja de len^a, f. a billet or shide of wood. * Rajador, one that razeth or
marketh out any thing, a liar. Rajar, to hew out, to cut into lathes, to shave,
to cut into small pieces. Rajar madera, to hew into lathes, to cut out timber,
to make into small pieces or shingles. * Raigado, vide Raygado. * Raigar, vide
Raygar, to take root. * Raio, vide Rayo. * Raiola, vide Rayola. Rajuelas, f.
little chips. * Raiz, vide Rayz. * Raiz del alla, f. an herb called
Elecampane. * Rala, as Cosa rala, a thin matter or thing. Ralas vezes, seldom
times. * Ralas batallas, f. thin battles, weak companies of men. Ralea, f. a
race, streene or breed of horses. Ralear, to make thin. * Ralecer, yo Ralesco,
to wax or make thin. * Ralecido, made thin. * Raleer, vide Ralear. Ralero, a
sieue for to sift with. Raleza, f. seldomnes, thinnes. * Ralidad, idem. *
Ralladura, f. a grater to grate spice or bread, and. Also a shauing iron. *
Rallar, to grate bread, spice, etc. Also to shave with a shauing iron. * Rallo,
a bread-grate, a grater for spice, a shauing iron. Ralo, thin. Rama, f. or
Ramo, a bough. * Ramaca, f. vide Ramada. Ramada, f. an arbor, a tent of
boughs. Ramal, or Ramon, a dead bough, or the end of a coard. * Ramar, to
dress, or do with boughs. * Rambla, a grauelly place. Ramera, f. a harlot. *
Ramillete, m. a nosegay of flowers. * Ramilletes de plata, m. counterfaited or
false flowers of silver or other metal. * Ramillo, a little bough. Ramo, m.
or Rama, a bough. Ramon, or Ramal, a dead bough. Ramoso, full of boughs. *
Ramua, a village in Zeland so called. Rampojos, the pricks of briers. *
Ramplon, m. cawkes on a horse-shoo. Rampones, vide Ramplon. Rana, a frogge. *
Rana de las carcales, a land toade. Rancuajo, m. a little frogge, a poolwig, or
toadpoole. * Rancheria, f. a rank of tents or cabins for soldiers. * Rancho,
m. a rank, an order or place where every one is to keep or abide. Rancio, m.
rusty, rammish in smell, ill willing. Rancioso, rusty, full of rammishnes.
Rancor, rankor, hatred, malice. * Ranzio, vide Rancio. * Ranzioso, vide
Rancioso. Randa, f. network, open-worke. * Randado, made as network. *
Randilla, f. little network. * Ranudo, of or pertaining to frogs. * Ranzon,
vide Rescate. * Rapacejo, vide Rapaz, a soldiers boy, a great waggish boy.
Rapacejos, fringe. * Rapacova, f. a moth. * Rapado, shaued, pared, filed.
Rapar, to shave, to pare, to file. Also to rampe as a lion does. * Rapax, vide
Rapaz, ravenous. Rapaz, a soldiers boy, a waggish boy. Also one that is
ravenous or greedy given to pilling. Rapin^a, f. rapine, catching by violence.
Raposa, f. or Zorra, a she fox. * Raposeras, f. fox holes. * Raposeria, f.
crafty wiliness, foxie craftiness, or subtilnesse of a fox. * Raposo, a he
fox. Raposuno, belonging to a fox. * Rapto, m. any thing taken or snatched
violently. * Raqueta, f. a racket to play at tennis with. * Raras vezes, vide
Ralas vezes, seldom. * Raridad, vide Ralidad, f. seldomnesse, strangeness,
thinness. Raro, seldom, thin. * Raros cabellos, thin hairs. * Rasa, vide
Raca. * Rasador, vide Racador. Rasadura, the striking of a measure. Rasar, to
strike a measure, to pare. Rasar medida, to strike a measure. * Rasca cavallos,
an ostler, a horsekeeper, one that currieth horses. Also a base fellow. *
Rascado, scraped, scratched or combed, as a horse. Rascador, a scraping tool,
or one that scrapeth or scratcheth. * Rascaduras, f. the marks or signs made
by scratching. Rascar, 1. Praet. yo Rasque, to scrape, to scratch, to currie. *
Rascun^ado, scratched. Rascun^ar, to scratch, to scrape. Rascun^o, m. a
scratch. Rasero, m. a strike of a measure. Rasgados ojos, fair large eyes.
Rasgar, Praes. yo Rasgo, 1. Praet. yo Rasgue, to tear in pieces. * Rasgo, a
scrape, a scratch, a dash with a pen, to make a great or first letter. Rasgon,
m. a scratch, a scrape. * Rasgos de letras, a dash with the pen to make a great
letter, or when one begins to write. * Rasgue, vide Rasgar. Raso, plain
shaued, a plain field, satin. * Raso tiempo, clear weather without any
clouds. Raspa, f. a file, an ear of corn, a shoomakers cutting knife.
Raspado, filed, shaued, spared. Raspar, to file, to pare, to shave, to fret. *
Raspa de espiga, the beard of an ear of corn. * Rasgue, vide Rascar. * Rassa,
vide Rasa. * Rastel, vide Rastillo. Rastilla, or Rastillo, a card or comb for
flax, a percullis for a gate. Rastillado, carded, combed. Rastillar, to card,
to comb flax. * Rastillo, m. or Rastilla, a comb for flax, a rake, a
percullis for a gate. * Rastra, mierra, or Narria, a drag, a slead. * Rastrar,
vide Rastrear. * Rastrear, to follow diligently, to follow by the footesteps,
to vent or wind as a spaniell does. * Rastrero, one that hunteth or follows
by the foot. Rastrillo, a little rake. Also a hatchell or comb for hemp.
Also a percullis for a gate. Rastro, a harrow, a step, a trace, a sent or
smell, a rake, the residue or remainder, a market for cattle, etc. * Caer en
el rastro, to find out the footsteps, to hit upon the sent or smell by the
foot. Rastrojo, or Restojo, stubble of corn. Rasuras, parings, shauings,
dross, dregs, lees of wine, etc. Rasuras de cuba, dregs, lees, or dross of
wine vessels. Rata, f. a part, a portion. Rata, a rat. * Ratificar, to approve
for good, to ratify or allow. Rato, m. a space, firm, approved. * A ratos,
otherwhile. Raton, a mouse. * Ratonado, mouse-eaten, eaten with mise.
Ratoncilla, or Ratonzillo, a little mouse. * Ratoncito, idem. * Ratonera, f. a
mouse trap. Also a mouse hole. * Ratonzillo, a little mouse. * Ratonzito, idem.
* Ravan^o, vide Raban^o. Ravano, or Rabano, a radish root. Ravano gagisco,
black heilebor. Raudal, a swift stream of water. Raudo, ravenous, violent,
swift in course. * Ravear, vide Rabear. Raveco, m. a wild goat. * Ravejar, to
stand wavering or tottering. * Ravel, vide Rabel. * Ravela, idem. Ravia, or
Rabia, f. rage, fury, madness. Raviar, to rage, to be furious or mad. *
Ravicano, vide Rabicano. * Ravillo, vide Rabillo. Raviosamente, or
Rabiosamente, furiously, madly, rauingly. Ravioso, or Rabioso, raging, furious,
mad. * Ravirubio, vide Rabirubio. * Raviseco, vide Rabiseco. * Ravo, vide Rabo.
* Ravudo, vide Rabudo. * Raxa, vide Raja. Raya, the grain of wood, a line, a
struck, a fish called a ray or scate fish. * Raya, a struck or mark by
straking. Also a fish called a ray. Rayado, lined, marked out, rased, straked
out. * Rayadura, casting of beams as the sun does, straking or drawing out.
Rayar, to mark out, to draw strakes or lines, to cast beams as the sun
does. * Raydo, shaued, pared. * Rayga, Raygo, vide Raer. * Raygado, rooted,
having taken root. * Raygadura, f. rooting or taking root. Raygar, 1. Praet.
yo Raygue, to take root. * Raygue, vide Raygar. Rayo, a flash of lightening,
the sun beam, the spoke of a wheel. Rayola, f. a rasor. Rayz, f. a root, a
round head of garlic, an onion, etc. * Rayz del alla, an herb called
elecampane. * Raza, vide Raca. * Razamento, vide Racamento. Razimo, m. a bunch
of grapes. * Razion, vide Racion. Razon, f. reason. Razonable, reasonable.
Razonablemente, reasonably. Razonamiento, reasoning, discourse, conference.
Razonar, to reason, to discourse in talk, to confer.
R E
Real, royal or king-like, a camp or army of soldiers in the field. Also a
riall or six pence. Realengo, belonging to the king. * Realidad, f. the
substance, effect, or very truth of the matter. Realmente, really, in very
deed, in sooth. * Reamado, loved again. * Reamar, to love again. Reata, a
binding or tying again. Reatadura, binding again. Reatar, to bind or tie
again. * Reban^ado, gathered into a flock. Also licked, as the dish or
platter when the broth is eaten up. Reban^ar, to gather into a flock. Also to
lick a dish or platter after the broth is eaten. Reban^ego, of the flock.
Reban^o, a flock of sheep, etc. Rebatado, snatched, catched. Rebatar, to
snatch, to catch. * Rebatido, rebated or abated of price or reckoning,
rebounded as a ball, beaten back. Rebatina, f. a sudden skirmish, a
scambling, a musse. * Rebatimiento, m. rebating in a reckoning or account,
rebounding back. Rebatir, to rebate in reckoning, to rebound, or beat back
again. Rebato, m. a tumult, a sudden stir, an uproar. * a Rebato to car, to
strike up alarm, to make an uproar. Rebeco, m. a wild goat. Rebelar, to
rebel, to begin a mutiny. Also to reveal. Rebelde, a rebel, a mutinous
fellow. Rebeldia, f. rebellion, mutiny, insurrection, a writ of rebellion when
a man refuses to appear and answer his case in law. Rebellin, or Rebelin, a
platform or bulwark to lay ordinance on, a fort where ordinance is planted. *
Rebellon, m. insurrection, mutiny, rebellion. Rebellion, vide Rebeldia.
Rebentacon, a breach, a crack. * Rebentado, broken, cracked, burst out, as the
bowels out of the body. Rebentar, yo Rebiento, to break in sunder, to crack,
to burst, as bowels out of the body. Reberdecer, or Reverdecer, to wax green
again. * Rebes, or Reves, backward, contrary, cross. Rebezar, to keep turn.
Rebezero, he that keeps turn. Rebidar, to reuie. * Rebienta, Rebiento, vide
Rebentar. * Rebistir, vide Revistir. Rebite, m. a reuie. Rebivir, to revive. *
Rebocado, called back, revoked. * Rebocado, masked over the face, muffled. *
Rebocar, to revoke, to call back. Rebocar, to mask, to cover with a mask or
vizarde, to muffle the face, to wimple, or go with the face covered. * Rebo, a
man so called. * Reboco, m. a mask, a vizard, to wimple the face. Rebolar, to
fly again, to fly back. * Rebolcado, tumbled, or wallowed. Rebolcadero, a
poole to tumble in, a puddle or place where swine use to wallow. Rebolcar. 1.
Praet. yo Rebolque, to tumble, to wallow. * Reboldon, m. a caterpiller or such
like worm, a worm called the devils goldring, which spoileth vines. *
Rebolear, to revolt, to fly back. * Rebolque, vide Rebolcar. Rebolton, vide
Reboldon. Reboltoso, a turmoyler, an ouerturner, a disquieter. * Reboltura,
turmoile, disquietnes. Rebolvedero, any thing turned over. Rebolvedor, a turner
over, a disquieter. Rebolver, yo Rebuelvo, to ouerturne, to roll up, to
turmoile, to disquiet. Rebolvimiento, ouerturning, turmoyling, disquieting. *
Reborujar, to entangle, to snarle together, as thread or silk, or such like.
Rebossadura, ouerflowing. Rebossar, to run over, to ouerflow. Rebotado vino,
dead wine, wine past the best. Rebotado, made dull, or blunt of edge. Also put
back. Rebotadura, dulnes, bluntnes. Also a putting back, with the hand, or such
like. Rebotar, to make dull, or blunt, to wax naught. Also to put back. *
Rebote, m. a putting back, a making dull or blunt. * Rebramiento, roaring like
a lion. * Rebramar, to roar like a lion. * Rebuelque, Rebuelco, vide Rebolcar.
* Rebuelta, f. an ouerturning, a tumult, a disquietnes. Rebuelto, ouerturning,
turmoiling, disquietnes, a lusty stirring horse. * a Rebuelto ser, to be in a
troublesome state. * Rebuelve, Rebuelvo, vide Rebolver. * Rebullir, to move a
little, to wrinch, to strive being oppressed. Rebusca, f. gleaning of corn,
gathering of the ears that are fallen. Rebuscar, 1. Praet. yo Rebusque, to
seek again. * Rebusque, vide Rebuscar. Rebuznar, to cry like an ass. *
Rebuzno, m. the crying or braying of an ass. * Recabado, recovered. Recabar,
to obtain, to shake off. * Recabdo, vide Recaudo. * Recadero, one that
carries a letter or present, or such like. * Recado, vide Recaudo. * Todo esta
en recaudo, all is safe. Recaer, Praes. yo Recaygo. Sub. Praes. Recayga, to
fall again. * Recaga, the last, the rereward. * Recagua, f. vide Recaga, idem.
Recalcadamente, thickly, fully. Recalcar, 1. Praet. yo Recalque, to stuff, to
stop clifts, to beat in. * Recalque, vide Recalcar. * Recalte, a thing used
about diers trade. Recamado, laid with lace, laced, embrodered. Recamar, to
lace, to lay on with lace, to embroder. Recamara, f. a wardrobe, a dining
chamber, a closet. * Recambiar, to change. * Recambio, m. change. * Recamera,
vide Recamara. Recamo, m. lacing, wauie, embroderie. * Recanbio, vide Recambio.
* Recador, vide Rezador. * Recar, vide Rezar. * Recatadamente, warily,
heedfully. Recatado, wary, heedfull, circumspect. Recatamiento, warines, heed.
Recatarse, to be wary, to be circumspect. * Recado, m. heed, warines. Recaton,
m. or Regaton, the pike of a staff or spear at the lower end. Also a
huckester or seller of victuals at second hand. Also a pinching or hucking
fellow in buying or selling. * Recaudado, recovered, sped, succeeded, happened.
Recaudador, a recouerer, one that gets, a receiver of rents. Recaudamiento,
recovery. Recaudar, to recover, to procure, to speed. Recaudo, a warrant,
success, a letter of attorney, a caveat or warning, advise or admonition,
answearing to a plea. * todo esta en buen Recaudo, al is safe. Recaydo, fallen
again. * Recayga, Recaygo, vide Recaer. Recebido, received. Recebidor, a
receiver, an allower. Recebimiento, receipt, allowance. * Recebimiento de casa,
a by parlor, hall or place to receive folk in a house. Recebir, or Recevir, to
receive, to take. * Recelado, fearing, wary of, suspicious. Recelar, or
Recelarse, to fear, to take heed of, to suspect. Recelo, fear, wariness,
suspicion. * Receloso, fearful, suspicious, wary. * Recental, vide Rezental.
* Recentarse, to make himself fresh, or to be made fresh. * Recente, fresh,
new. Receptar, vide Recetar. Receptor, a receiver. * Receptoria carta, or
Recepteria, a bill of receipt, a letter of exchange. * Recesso, m. a going
back. * Receta, a receipt of physic. * Recetado, the receipt of physic
written or delivered. * Recetar, to write or ordain a receipt in physic. *
Recevir, or Recebir, yo Recivo, to receive, to take. * Receumando, leaking as a
pot that runs out at a crack or broken place. * Receumar, to leake or run
out as a vessel runs out at a cracked place. Rechaca, f. a driving back, a
repulse. Rechacar, to beat or drive back, to repel. Rechinar, to make a
whiZZing noise by hasty breaking of the air, as a bullet shot from a piece
does, or as the wind does in the shroudes of a ship. Also to gnash the teeth.
* Recia, vide Rezia, strong. * Reciba, Recibo, vide Recebir. * Recientemente,
vide Rezientemente, freshly, newly, lately. * Reciente, vide Reziente. * Recio,
vide Rezio. * Recive, Recivo, vide Recevir. Reclamacion, calling back,
gainsaying. * Reclamado, called back. Reclamar, to call back. Reclamo, a call
for birds. * Reclinado, inclined, bowed down, abated, waxed worse. * Reclinar,
to abate, to decline, to wax worse. * Reclusion, a shutting in. Recobrado,
recovered. Recobrador, a recouerer. Recobrar, to recover. * Recodado, m. leaned
on the elbow. Recogedor, a gatherer, a taker up. Recoger, yo Recojo, Sub.
Praes. Recoja, to gather up, to take up, to retire, to withdraw. Recogido,
retired, gathered, withdrawn. Recogimiento, gathering, retiring, withdrawing.
* Recoja, Recojo, vide Recoger. * Recojer, vide Recoger. Recomendacion,
recommending, sending of greeting or salutations. Recomendado, recommended.
Recomendar, yo recomiendo, to recommend, to send salutations unto. *
Recomiende, Recomiendo, vide Recomendar. Recompensacion, recompense, amends. *
Recompensado, recompensed, made amends. Recompensar, yo Recompienso, to make
amends, to recompense. * Recompiense, Recompienso, vide Recompensar. *
Recompuesto, set in order again. Reconcentrado, united together in his center.
* Reconcentrar, to meet or unite together in his center. Reconciliacion,
reconciling, atonement. Reconciliado, reconciled. Reconciliar, to reconcile,
to make atonement. * Reconciliamiento, m. reconcilement. Recongador, m. a
murmurer, a grudger, one that goes mumbling and repining at any thing.
Recongar, 1. Praet. yo Recongue, to murmur, grudge, or mumble at a thing. *
Recongero, one that murmureth, mumbleth, or grudgeth at a thing. * Recongue,
vide Recongar. Reconocedor, an acknowledger, a viewer, a scoute or spiall.
Reconocer, yo Reconosco, or Reconoscer, Sub. Praes. Reconosca, to acknowledge,
to view, to ouerlooke. Reconocido, viewing, acknowledging, Reconocimiento, a
view, acknowledgment, ouerlooking. * Reconosca, Reconosco, vide Reconocer.
Reconoscer, or Reconocer, to acknowledge, to view, to give knowledge, to
ouerlooke. * Reconoscer baterias, to view batteries. * Reconoscido, vide
Reconocido, viewed, ouerlooked, acknowledged. * Reconoscimiento, vide
Reconocimiento. * Recontado, m. recounted, told, declared Recontar, yo
Recuento, to recount, to tell, to relate. * Recontrado, met with, encountered. *
Recontrar, yo Recuentro, to meet with, to encounter. Reconvalecer, yo
Reconvalesco, Sub. Praes. Reconvalesca, to recover health again, to wax well
again. * Reconvalesca, Reconvalesco, vide Reconvalecer. * Reconvencion, f. a
reconquering, or ouercomming. * Recopilacion, compiling, or gathering out of
books. Recopilado, compiled, gathered out of books. Recopilador, m. a
compiler or gatherer out of books. Recopilar, to compile, to gather out of
books. * Recordacion, remembrance, calling to mind. * Recordado, called to
remembrance. * Recordador, a remembrancer. Recordar, yo Recuerdo, to remember,
to reckon up, to call unto mind. Recorrer, to run back, to run unto. Recoser,
to sow again, to amend. * Recosido, sowed again, amended. * Recostar, yo
Recuesto, to lay down upon one side. Recozer, to sees or boil again. *
Recozido, sodde again, well tried, refined. Recreacion, refreshing. Recrear,
to refresh, to recreate. Recrecer, yo Recresco, Sub. Praes. yo Recresca, to
increase, to grow afresh. * Recrecido, increased. Recrecimiento, increase,
growing afresh. * Recresca, Recresco, vide Recrecer. Recrescer, or Recrecer, to
increase, to grow afresh. * Recrescido, vide Recrecido. Recrescimiento, or
Recrecimiento, increase, growth. * Rectaguardia, the rereward. * Recto, right.
* Rector, a chief schoolmaster, a chancellor or governor of a university.
Recua, a drove of horses or mules, such as carriers use to drive. * Recuaje, m.
many droues of horses or mules together, such as carriers and packemen drive.
Recuajo, the spawne or fry of fish. The crudding of milk. Recudimiento,
restoring, paying rent. Recudir, to restore, to pay rent. * Recuente, Recuento,
vide Recontar. * Recuentre, Recuentro, vide Recontrar. * Recuentro, an
encounter or meeting with. * Recuerde, Recuerdo, vide Recordar. Recuero, m. a
carrier that drives mules or horses laden with packes. * Recueste, Recuesto,
vide Recostar. Recuesto, the hanging or steep side of a hill. * Recumando,
leaking as a pot that runs out, or taking or licking the juice. * Recumar,
to leake as a pot, to lick the juice. Recuperable, recouerable, that may be
recovered or gotten. Recuperacion, recovery. Recuperar, to recover, to
obtain. * Recupilado, vide Recopilado. * Recupilar, vide Recopilar, to
compile, to gather or heap together. * Recusacion, f. refusal. * Recusado,
refused. Recusar, to refuse. Red, f. a net. Also a grate or a lattise. Redan^o,
the caull wherein the bowels lie. Redarguimiento, reproof. Redarguir, to
reprove, to find fault with. * Redeado, vide Rodeado. Rededor, round about. *
al Rededor, about, round about. Redemcion, redeeming, purchasing again.
Redemido, redeemed. Redemir, yo Redimo, to redeem, to purchase again. *
Redemption, or Redemcion, redeeming, purchasing again. Redemptor, a redeemer,
a purchaser a fresh. * Redencion, vide Redemption. * Redentor, vide Redemptor.
Redero, a net-maker. Redezilla, a little net. * Rediezmo, a retithing, taking
of every fifteen one. * Redil, m. hurdles to fold sheep in. * Redilla, vide
Raqueta, a racket. * Redima, Redimo, vide Redemir. * Redoblado, doubled.
Redoblar, to double, to line. Redoble, double. Redoma, f. a glass vial.
Redomado, vide Refalcado. * Redomilla, f. a little vial of glass. *
Redondamente, roundly. Redondear, to make round. Redondez, f. roundnes. *
Redondillas, a kind of verse, rounde-layes. Redondo, round. Redrojo, a new
bud. Redropelo, against the hair. * Redundar, to redound back. * Reduto, a
barricado to defend from small shot. * Reduzga, Reduzgo, vide Reduzir.
Reduzido, brought back. Reduzimiento, a bringing back. Reduzir, yo Reduzgo,
Sub. Prae. Reduzga, to bring back. * Reedificado, builded up again, repaired.
* Reedificar, yo Reedifico, 1. Praet. yo Reedifique, to build again, to
repair. * Reedifique, vide Reedificar. Refalcado, malicious. * Refectorio, or
Refetorio, a dining place, a baiting place. * Referendar, vide Refrendar. *
Referido, that which has been declared or set down. Referir, yo Refiero, to
report, to declare, to tell. Refetorio, or Refitorio, vide Refectorio. *
Refiere, Refiero, vide Referir. * Refino, that which is very fine, as cloth or
such like, etc. Refitolero, m. one that has charge or government of the
victuals in the covent among friars, a clarke of the kitchen. * Refligerio, or
Refrigerio, a refreshing. Reflorecer, yo Refloresco, Sub. Praes. Refloresca, to
flourish again. * Reflorecido, or Reflorescido, flourished again. *
Refloresca, Refloresco, vide Reflorecer. * Refluxo, the ebb of the sea, after
tide, the flux of the belly. * Reforcado, reinforced. Reforcar, yo Refuerco,
to reinforce. Reformacion, a reformation. * Reformado, reformed. Reformador, a
reformer. Reformar, to reform. Refran, m. a proverb. Refregado, rubbed,
fretted. Refregadura, f. rubbing, fretting. Refregamiento, fretting, rubbing.
Refregar, yo Refriego, Sub. Praes. Refriegue, to rub again, to wear, to
fret. * Refregerio, vide Refrigerio. * Refrendado, signed with the secretaries
hand. * Refrendar, to sign with the secretaries hand. Refrenar, to refrain.
* Refrescado, refreshed, renewed. Refrescar, to renew, to refresh. * Refresco,
a renewing, a refreshing. * Refriarse, to wax very cold. Refriega, f. a
skirmish. * Refriego, vide Refregar. * Refriegue, vide Refregar. Refrigerio, or
Refligerio, a refreshing. * Refuerce, Refuerco, vide Reforcar. Refugio, a
refuge. * Refulgiente, shining. Refunfun^ar, to murmur, to mumble, to mutter. *
Refutar, to refute, to confound. Regacado, tucked up. Regacar, to tucke up the
clothes. Regaco, the lap. Regadio, or Regadura, a place watered, watering of
herbs or plants. Regadizo, waterie, full of water. * Regado, watered. Regador,
a waterer. Regadura, or Regadio, watering. * Regajal, a place or low vallie
which receives the quantity of rain water from the higher places, and is
thereby much watered. Regaladamente, gently, courteously, daintily, cockeringly.
* Regalado, cockered daintily, bred up nice, dainty, fine. Regalamiento,
melting, thawing, cockering. Regalar, to cocker, to make much of, to melt. *
Regalicia, f. licorice. Regalillo, a woman's glove, a favor, a muffe or snufkin
to put the hands in. Regaliza, f. licorice. Regalo, gentle usage, daintiness.
* Regalon, one that cockereth himself, a wanton, full of pleasure, niceness
and wantonness. Regan^ar, to grin like a dog, to gnash. Regan^ar los dientes,
to gnash with the teeth. Regano, vide Regan^on. Regan^on, a grinning fellow,
the north wind. Regar, yo Riego, to water, to bedeaw. * Regatear, to pinch or
hucke in buying or selling. Regaton, m. or Recaton, a peddler, a huckster, a
pinching fellow in buying and selling, a mercer, a retailor of wares, the blunt
end of a staff. * Regaton^a, vide Regatonia. Regatonear, to sell pedlarie
ware, to play the huckster, to pinch or hucke in buying or selling. Regatonia,
pedling, buying of small wares. * Regazado, vide Regacado. * Regazar, vide
Regacar. * Regeneracion, new birth, spiritual conception and birth. *
Regenerado, begotten and borne again. * Regenerar, to beget and bring into the
world anew. * Regerminar, to bud again, to spring anew. Regibado, or
Corcobado, crook backed. Regidor, a governor, an alderman, a burgomaster, a
clarke of the market, or an officer in a city that is to reform civil
matters, but not criminal. Regimiento, rule, government, regiment. * Regio,
kingly, royal, princely. Region, f. a country. Regir, yo Rijo, Sub. Praes.
Rija, to rule, to govern, to bear sway or authority, to stir a ship, to play
the pilot. * Registrado, registered, reckoned up. * Registrador, a keeper of a
register, a Custos-rotulorum, a master of the roles, a Custos-breuium.
Registrar, to reckon up, to register. Registro, or Registre, a register, a
book of remembrance. Regla, f. a rule, a line to write by, a precept. * Regla,
a rule to rule withal. Also women's flowers. * Reglado, ruled, ordered. Reglar,
to rule. * Regoldar, yo Regueldo, to rospe, to belch in the stomach, to vomit.
Regolfo, a whirlepoole. Regordido, or Regorgido, swollen, full, puffed up with
fat. Regorgido, or Regordido, idem. * Regostar, to taste or prove again. *
Regosto, a tasting or proouing again. Regozijado, feasted. Regozijar, to
rejoice, to solace, to make merry. Regozijo, or Regozixo, joy, gladness. *
Regresso, a going back again. * Reguelde, Regueldo, vide Regoldar. Regueldo,
rosping, belching of the stomach. Reguera, a path betwixt beds in a garden.
Reguizar, to be stiff. Regularmente, by rule. Regular, belonging to rule. *
Rehaga, Rehago, vide Rehazer. * Rehara, Rehare, Reharia, vide Rehazer. Rehazer,
Praes. Rehago, Rahazes, Rehaze, 1. Praet. Rehize, Rehiziste, Rehize, Fut.
Rehare, ras ra, Sub Praes. Rehaga, Imperfect. Rehiziera, Reharia, or
Rehiziesse. Fut Rehiziere, to do again, to renew, to make afresh.
Rehazimiento, making or doing a fresh. Rehazio, m. a lazy idle fellow.
Rehecho, strongly set in the body, great limmed. Rehen, m. an hostage, a man
pledge. * Rehenchido, filled again. Rehenchir, to fill again. * Rehize,
Rehiziera, Rehiziesse, vide Rehazer. * Rehizo, vide Rehazer. * Rehollado,
trodden or trampled under foot. Rehollar, to tread or trample under foot. *
Rehuir, or Rehuyr, to run away again. * Rehundido, drenched again. Rehundir,
to drench or drown again. * Rehusado, refused. Rehusamiento, a refusal.
Rehusar, to refuse. * Rehuzar, idem. Reja, or Rexa, a plough, the culter of a
plough, an iron grate. Also a bar of iron to put in a window. Reja para arar,
a plough irons. Rejalgar, poison, arsenick or rats bane, charmed potions. *
Rejetton, a branch with fruit. * Reina, vide Reyna. * Reintegrar, to restore,
to renew. * Reintegracion, a renewing. Rejo, m. the prick of a goade or any
other iron prick or point. Also the country folk of Spain use it for Rezio,
stout, strong. Rejo de cinto, the tongue of the buckle of a girdle. * Reir,
vide Reyr, to laugh. * Reiteracion, a repetition, a reiteration. * Reiterar, to
repeat, to reiterate. Relacion, recounting, telling. Relamer, to lick again.
Relampago, a flash of lightening. Relampaguear, to flash with lightening, to
lighten. * Relance, peradventure. * Relapso, fallen or sunk down again.
Relatado, related, told at length. Relatar, to relate, to tell a history or a
matter at length. Relator, a recounter, a teller, a reporter, an informer, an
officer in Spain that is to inform the judges or justices truly of matters,
according as clients have informed of their causes: a clarke of the peace, a
recorder or such like officer, a remembrancer. Relavar, to wash again. *
Relaxado, released, let loose, set at liberty. * Relaxamiento, m. a releasing,
a setting at liberty, a loosing, a slacking. * Relaxar, to set loose, to
release, to discharge, to set at liberty. * Relejes, vide Relexes. Relentecer,
yo Relentesco, Sub. Praes. Relentesca, to wax weak, to relent, to yield. *
Relentesca, Relentesco, vide Relentecer. * Relevado, lifted up, eased,
relieved, set at quiet. * Relevado de trabajo, resting from labor. * Relevado
pecho, a quieted mind. Also a breast high bulked. * Relevar, yo Relievo, to
relieve, to lift up, to quiet, to set at ease. Relexes, m. knobs, or bunches in
a table or other smooth thing. Also rowtes or signs of a cart wheel, which
has been at a stand, and has made many says to get out, those signs so made
of the cart whele, be called Relexes. Relicario, a box to keep relickes in.
Relieve, m. that which is overplus of meat, fragments, broken meat, crumbs,
etc. Also embossed work, any manner of work in ioyners or free masons trade,
bossing or bunching out, lifted or elevated higher then the rest of the
workmanship. * Relieve, Relievo, vide Relevar. * Relieves, m. fragments or
broken meats. Religion, religion, devotion, a matter of conscience.
Religiosamente, religiously, devoutly. Religioso, religious, devout.
Relinchar, to neigh as a horse. Relinchido, the neighing of a horse. *
Relinchamiento, idem. * Relincho, the neighing of a horse. * Relinga, f. a
coard in a ship called the bolt rope. Reliquario, a box to keep relikes in.
Reliquias, f. relikes. Rellanado, any thing plained over. * Rellanar, to plain
with a planer. Rellenado, filled, stuffed, made full, fatted. Rellenar, to fill
full, to make fat. Relleno, a pudding, any thing that is filled full. *
Relogero, or Reloxero, a clock maker, a dial maker: also one that keeps or
orders a clock, a clock keeper. Relox, m. a clock, a dial, an hour
glass. * Relox del sol, a sun dial. * Reloxero, or Relogero, a maker of
clockes or dials, or one that keeps the clock and sets him in order. *
Relucir, or Reluzir, to shine, to glister. * Relumbrado, lightened with light.
Relumbrar, to shine, to lighten. Reluzir, to glister, to shine. * Remachado,
flat, not bunching up. * Remachado de nariz, flat nosed. * Remachar, to make
flat and even without bunches. * Remado, rowed. Remador, a rower, one that
roweth with oars. Remadura, rowing with oars. * Remallar, to do or dress a
thing with maile, to mende iackes of maile. Remanchado de nariz, flat nosed.
Remanecer, or Remanescer, to remain, to abide. Remaniente, remaining. Remanso
del rio, a calm passing or running of the river: the calm or still water of a
river, which after it has run with a swift current, it comes into a plain
broad plot, and becomes calm and still water. Remar, to row with oars.
Rematar, to sum up sundry reckonings into one. * Remate, the sum of an
account, a full reckoning, an end, a top. Remedamiento, imitating, following in
fashions. Remedar, to imitate, to follow in fashio^s. Remediar, to remedy, to
cure. Remedio, or Rimedio, remedy, help. Remembranca, remembrance. Remembrar,
to remember, to put in mind Remendado, amended, patched, ragged. * Remendado
cavallo, a flea bitten horse. * Remendado lebrel, a pied greyhound. Remendar,
yo Remiendo, to amend. Remendon, a botcher, a cobbler. Remendon de capatos, a
cobbler. Remero, a rower, a gallie-slaue. Remessar, yo Remiesso, to tear the
hair. * Remiende, Remiendo, vide Remendar. Remiendo, a patch, a piece. * lleno
de Remiendos full of patches, all ragged. * Remiesse, Remiesso, vide Remessar.
Reminicencia, remembrance. Remirar, to ouerlooke, to look on. * Remission,
forgiveness, slacking. * Remisso, remiss, not vehement, slack, loose, lewd,
negligent. Remitido, remittted, forgiven, pardoned, released, given over suite.
Remitir, to remit, to forgive, to release, to give over suite. Remo, an oar.
Remocar, to be young again. Remocecer, idem. * Remojado, wet again. *
Remojamiento, wetting again. * Remojar, to wet again, to water. * Remojar la
saladura, to water salt meat. Remojo, wetting, steeping. * Remolado, m.
battered, rugged, or craggie. * Remolcado, towed along. Remolcar, 1. Praet. yo
Remolque, to towe along with a boat. Remolinado, turning round as a whirle
poole. Remolinar, to turn round. * Remolinear, to turn round as a mill.
Remolino, a whirle-poole, a whirle-winde, the turning of the hair. * Remolino
de la cabeca, the crown of the head. * Remolinos vientos, whirle-windes.
Remondar, to make clean again. Remontar, to go up the hill, to run.
Remorder, yo Remuerdo, to bite again, to have a pricking in conscience. *
Remordido, bitten again. Remordimiento, remorse, sting of conscience.
Remostecerse el vino, to wax mustie. * Remoto, far off, remote. Remover, yo
Remuevo, to remove, to take away. * Removido, removed, put away. Rempuxar, or
Rempujar, to push forward. Rempuxon, or Rempujon, a thrust. Remudar, to change.
* Remuerda, Remuerdo, vide Remorder. * Remueve, Remuevo, vide Remover.
Remuneracion, rewarding. * Remunerado, rewarded, recompensed, requited.
Remunerar, to reward, to recompense, to requite or make amends. Ren, or Ren^on,
the kidney, the reins of the back. Renacer, yo Renasco, to be borne again,
to spring again. * Renascer, idem. * Renacimiento, or Renascimiento, new
birth, an after spring, or growing again. * Rencilla, vide Renzilla. *
Rencilloso, vide Renzilloso. * Rencor, or Renquor, hatred. * Rencontrar, yo
Rencuentro, to encounter, to meet. * Rencontrado, met with. * Rencuentre,
Rencuentro, vide Rencontrar. * Rencuentro, an encountering or meeting with
again. Rendajo, m. a iay. Rendido, yielded, given up. Render, yo Rindo, Sub.
Praes. Rinda, to yield, to give up. Renegado, an apostata, one that has
forsaken the faith. * Renegador, idem. Renegar, Praes. yo Reniego, 1. Praet. yo
Renegue, to deny or forsake the faith. Renglada, or Ren^onada, fat about the
kidneyes or loins. Renglon, m. a written line. Reniego, m. apostasy, falling
from the faith. * Reniego, vide Renegar. * Reniegue, vide Renegar. * Ren^ido,
chidden. Ren^ida guerra, contentious or wrangling war. * Ren^ir. yo Rin^o, to
chide, to braule, to wrangle. * Renobado, vide Renovado. * Renobar, vide
Renovar. Ren^onada, fat about the loins or kidneyes. Renombre, m. a renoune,
also a surname. Renovacion, renewing. Renovado, renewed. Renovamiento,
renewing, refreshing. Ronovar, yo Renuevo, to renew, to make or do a fresh, to
budde out as trees do. Renovero, an usurer. * Renquentrar, vide Rencontrar, to
encounter, to meet with. * Renquentro, an encounter, a meeting, a skirmish.
Renta, rent, revenue, yearly coming in. Rentar, to let to farm, to hire.
Rentero, he that lets to farm, he that hireth. * Renueve, Renuevo, vide
Renovar. Renuevo, usury, increase, the budding of a tree. * Renuevo de arbol,
the sprouting or budding of a tree, a young sprout newly grown. *
Renumeracion, a paying again of money, telling over again, reckoning.
Renumerado, money paid again, money told again, recounted. * Renumerar, to
pay again, to tell again, to recount or reckon again. Renunciacion,
renouncing, casting off, giving over. Renunciar, to renounce, to give over, to
cast off. Renzilla, a braule, a brabble, wrangling. Renzilloso, bent to
brauling or wrangling. Reo, accused, charged with, guilty. * Repagulo, a bolt
or bar of a door, a rail or bar which staieth horses from running. *
Repajo, vide Repaxo. Reparar, to repair, to amend, to defend. Reparo,
reparation, a bulwark, a defense. * Repartido, divided, parted. Repartimiento,
parting, division, distributing. Repartir, to divide, to part asunder, to
appoint by course. Repastar, to feed. * Repaxo, or Repajo, a thicket of young
trees. Also a place of grazing for cattle. * Repechado, leaned on the breast. *
Repechar, to lean on the breast. Repecho, the side of a hill, a bulwark. *
Repelado, plucked off, as hairs are plucked away. * Repelar, to pluck off, to
pluck again. Repelo, Respigon, or Padrasto, the pilling of the nails, too
much skin growing over the nails. * Repelon, a plucking off of hairs.
Repentimiento, repentance, penance. * Repentinamente, suddenly. Repentino,
sudden, unawares. Repentir, yo Repiento, to repent. * Repero, vide Repelo,
against the hair. * Repeticion, repeating, rehearsing, saying again.
Repetidor, a repeater, a rehearser. Repetir, yo Repito, to rehearse, to
repeat, to say over again. Repicar, 1. Praet. yo Repique, to sound as bells,
to iangle, to clatter. * Repiente, Repiento, vide Repentir. * Repilogar, to
repeat again and again. * Repique, vide Repicar. Repique, m. a noise like
the iangling of bells. * Repiquete, m. a little noise or clattering together of
bells, weapons or such like. * Repiquete de broquel, a clashing or clattering on
a buckler. * Repiso, sudden, on the sudden. * Repita, Repite, Repito, vide
Repetir. * Repleto, full, replenished, replete. * Replica, replying, answering
again. Replicacion, vide Replica. Replicar, Praes. yo Replico, 1. Praet. yo
Replique, to reply, to answer again. * Replique, vide Replicar. Repollo, a
cabbage that grows very round together. * Repoquito, very little. *
Repoquitos, very few. Reportado, quieted, settled, pacified, Reportamiento,
settling, quieting. Reportar, to quiet himself, to settle himself, to write
down or set in a book. Reportorio, a memorial, a calendar or almenacke.
Reposado, rested, reposed. Reposar, to rest, to repose, to be at quiet. Reposo,
rest, ease, quietness of mind. Repostero, a carpet, a couerlet of arras, or
hangings that has ones arms wouen in it. Also he that has charge of keeping
such hangings. Also one that has the charge of plate. * Repostero de plata,
one that has charge of the plate in great houses. * Repostero de remiendos, a
couerlet of shreads of many colors. * Repregunta, straight examination, a
re-asking or asking again. Reprehendedor, a chider, a finder of faults.
Reprehender, yo Reprehiendo, to reprove, to find fault with. Reprehendido,
reproved, found fault with. Reprehension, reproof, blame, finding fault with.
* Reprehensor, a reprouer, a finder of faults. * Repremido, repressed, kept
down. Repremir, yo Reprimo, to repress, to keep down, to keep back. *
Reprender, to reprehend, to find fault. * Reprendido, vide Reprehendido. *
Represa, f. a stop or stay, an arrest. Represada agua, a standing water, water
that is stopped that it cannot run. Represar, to stop a water course.
Representacion, a representing, making a show. * Representado, represented, set
before ones face in show. * Representador, a representer of persons in action,
a player of comedies. * Representante, idem. Representar, to represent in show,
to play a comedy. * Repretar, to streighten. * Reprimido, repressed,
reprehended, kept under. * Reprimo, Reprime, vide Repremir. * Reprobable,
reprooueable. * Reprobar, to reprove. * Reprocha, or Reproach, reproache,
reproof, captiousnes. * Reprochadamente, reprochfully, captiously. *
Reprochador, m. a reproouer, a reprocher, a captious fellow. Reprochar, to
reprove, to reproach, to check or cast in ones teeth, to be captious.
Reproach, or Reprocha, reproof, reproach, casting in ones teeth, captiousnes.
Reprovacion, reproouing, disallowing. Reprovado, reproved, disallowed.
Reprovar, yo Repruevo, to disallow, to find fault with. * Reprueve, Repruevo,
vide Reprovar. * Reptado, challenged, defied. * Reptador, m. a challenger, a
defier. * Reptar, to challenge, to defy. * Reptilia, all creeping things on the
ground, as vermin, worms, etc. * Reptos, or Desafios, defyings, challenges. *
Republica, f. a commonweal. * Repudiado, divorced, cast off. Repudiar, to
divorce, to cast off. Repudio, a divorce. * Repuesto, laid up, a storehouse.
Repugnancia, strife, debate, controversy in law. Repugnar, to strive, to
contend against. Repulga, f. a hem, a skirt of clothing. Repuntar, to begin to
point out, of break out, as the wind, the sea, or water: to begin to point
out or appear, as a hill that first begins to discover it self to our
sight: to begin to grow in choler or anger: to begin to break out into rage.
Reputacion, estimation, reputation. Reputar, to esteem, to account of.
Requebrado, a woer, a lover. Requebrador, idem. Requebrar, yo Requiebro, to
make love, to woe. * Requemada colera, choler adust, melancholy. Requemado,
burned, combust. * Requemar, to burn. * Requerido* sought, requested.
Requerimiento, requiring, request. Requerir, yo Requiero, to require, to warn,
to request. Requeson, curds made of whey. Requesta, a request. Requestado,
requested. Requestar, to request, to ask, to require. * Requiebre, Requiebro,
vide Requebrar. Requiebros, love toys. * Requiere, Requiero, vide Requerir.
Res, f. all cattle, and beasts under man's government, as oxen, sheep etc.
sometimes for game in hunting. * Resabiar, to play or use iadish tricks, to
have an evil taste or savor, to use ill fashions and tricks. Resabido, a
crafty subtle fellow, a taunting fellow. Resabio, m. an ill or untoward
trick, custom or fashion in a man, a iadish trick in a horse. * Resar, vide
Rezar. Resbaladero, or Resvaladero, a slipperie place. * Resbalador, or
Resvalador, vide Resbaladero. Resbalar, or Resvalar, to slip, to slide. *
Resbalizo, or Resvalizo, vide Resvalizo, a slipperie place. Resbaloso, vide
Resvaloso, slipperie. * Rescatado, ransomed. Rescatar, or Resgatar, to ransom,
to redeem. * Rescatas, or Resgatas, vide Rescate. Rescate, or Resgate, m. a
ransom. Rescolde, m. hot imbers. Rescrevir, yo Rescrivo, to write again, to
write back. * Rescrito, or Rescritto, a writing back, letters dimissorie or of
favor. * Rescriva, Rescrivo, vide Rescrevir. * Reses, all cattle and beasts
that are under man's government, as sheep, oxen, etc. Also sometime for any
game in hunting. * Resedir, vide Residir. Resen^a, or Alarde, a muster of men.
* Resentir, yo Resinto, to feel again plainly. * Resentido, felt again,
plainly perceived. * Reservar, to reserve, to keep back. * Resfregar, vide
Refregar. Resfriado, cooled, cold, taken cold. Resfriar, to cool, to wax
cold, to take cold. * Resgatar, to ransom, to redeem. * Resgate, m. ransom,
redeeming. * Resible, ridiculous. * Residencia, residence, aboade. Residir, to
be resident, to abide. Resignacion, resigning, giving over to another.
Resignado, resigned, given over. Resignar, to resign, to give over. Resina,
rosin. Resinoso, full af rosin. * Resinte, Resinto, vide Resentir. *
Resinvenido, one new come. Resistencia, resistance, standing against. *
Resistero, the reflexe of the sun. Resistido, withstood, resisted. Resistir,
to resist, to withstand. * Resitolero, vide Resitolero. * Resma, a reame of
paper. * Resmilla, vide Reznilla. * Resnilla, f. the top of a man's yard. *
Resno, vide Rezno, a tike. * Resolana, f. a place where the sun shines
warm, and the wind comes not. Resolgar, Praes. yo Resuelgo. 1. Praet. yo
Resolgue, to breath, to fetch his wind. * Resolgue, vide Resolgar. * Resolla,
vide Resuello, also used for one that breaths thick or fetches his wind
hard. Resollar, yo Resuello, to breath, to fetch wind. Resolver, yo Resuelvo,
to resolve, to determine, to untie, to open, to dissolve, to rid from snares or
danger. Resolucion, resolution, a determinate purpose. * Resoluto, resolved,
undone, loosed, rid from. * Resonante, sounding again. Resonar, yo Resueno, to
sound again. * Resoplar, to blow, to fetch wind. * Resoplo, a blowing with the
breath or a fetching of wind. * Resorber, to soope again. Respectado,
regarded, respected. Respectar, to respect, to regard. Respecto, vide Respeto,
regard, respect. * Respeluzar cabellos, to pluck off the hairs of the head. *
Respetar, or Respectar, to regard. * Respeto, or Respecto, regard, respect. *
Respiar, vide Respirar. Respigon, the pilling about the nails, too much skin
growing over the nails. Respiracion, breathing. Respiradero, a breathing
place. Respirar, to breath, to take breath, to take comfort, to be refreshed or
eased, to pause, to rest. Resplandecer, yo Resplandesco, Sub. Praes.
Resplandesca, to shine bright, to glister. Resplandeciente, glistering, bright
shining. * Resplandesca, Resplandesco, vide Resplandecer. * Resplandescer, vide
Resplandecer. * Resplandesciente, vide Resplandeciente. Resplandor, brightness,
clear shining. * Resplendescer, vide Resplandecer. * Resplendor, vide
Resplandor. Responder, to answer. Responso, an answer. * musica de Responso,
singing of priests at burials, when they answer one the other. Respuesta, an
answer. Respuso, he made an answer, or he answered. Resquebrajado, clift,
chapped. Resquebrajadura, a chinke, a choppe, a clift. Resquebrajarse, to chap,
to cleave in two. Resquicio, a chap, a clift, a chinke. * Ressabiar, to have an
ill taste or savor: to use ill fashions or tricks. * Ressabio, an evil taste
or savor: an evil trick, fashion, or custom. * Ressollar, yo Resuello, to
breath, to fetch wind. * Resuelle, Resuello, vide Ressollar. * Ressuello, a
breathing or a fetching the wind. Restan^ar, or Restrin^ir, to stench, to
stop. * Restante, remaining. Restar, to remain, to rest, to substract in
Arithmeticke. Restaurar, to restore, to renew. Restitucion, restoring,
renewing. Restituir, to restore, to renew, to make good again. Restituydo,
restored, renewed, made good again. Resto, the residue, the remainder,
substraction in arithmetike. Restran^ar la sangre, to stanche or stop bleeding.
Restribar, or Restrivar, to strain, to enforce. * Restringido, restrained,
strained, hard stopped, let, severe and straight. * Restringir, to
restrain, to stop, to let, to stay, to bind hard. * Restrin^ido, restrained,
kept back, bound hard. Restrin^idora cosa, a thing that is stiptick.
Restrin^ir, to restrain. * Restrivar, or Restribar, to strain, to enforce. *
Resvaladero, or Resbaladero, a slippery place, a sliding place. * Resvalador,
or Resbalador, idem. Resvalar or Resbalar, to slide, to slip. * Resvalizo, or
Resbalizo, a slipperie place. * Resvaloso, or Resbaloso, slippery. * Resuelgo,
Resuelgue, vide Resolgar. * Resuelle, Resuello, vide Resollar. Resuello,
breathing. * Resuelto, resolved. * Resuelue, Resueluo, vide Resolver. Resuene,
Resueno, vide Resonar. * Resultado. resolved, redounded, rebounded. Resultar,
to result, to redound. Resumir, to begin again, to go over again with.
Resurreccion, a rising again. Resurtir, to rebound. Resuscitado, raised
again, risen from death. Resuscitar, to raise. Retablo, a painted table. *
Retaco, m. a shred or piece of cloth. * Retaguarda, f. the hinder part or
rereward of a battle. * Retaguardia, the rereward, or hinder part of a
battle. Retajado, or Circuncidado, circumcised. Retajar, to cut off short, to
circumcise. Retal, or Corradura, the cutting off, circu^cising, a shred or
cutting off of cloth. Retama, f. a kind of binding shrubbe, or broom, green
broom. * Retamal, a place where such broom or shrubs grow. * Retardado,
delaied, stayed. Retardar, to delay, to stay. * Retassar, to task again.
Retencion, holding, keeping still. Retener, Praes. Retengo, Retienes, Retiene,
1. Praet. Retuve, Retuviste, Retuvo, Fut. Reterne, or Retendre, as, a. Sub.
Praes. Retenga, Imperfect. Retuviera, Retuviesse, or Reternia, Fut. Retuviere,
to hold, to keep still. * Retenga, Retengo, vide Retener. * Retenido, holden,
kept still. * Retentriz, f. a woman that keeps or holds back. * Reterna,
Reterne, Reternia, vide Retenir. Retesamiento, strouting out. Retesar, to
strout out, to swell or look big. * Retesgar, idem. * Retiene, vide Retener.
* Retificado, straightened. Retificar, Praes. yo Retifico, 1. Praet. yo
Retifique, to make straight. * Retifique, vide Retificar. * Retinado, vide
Retirado. Retin^ir, to sound as a bell, to tingle. Retinte, m. a tingling
sound. * Retirada, a retrait, a retiring. * Retirado, retired, withdrawn.
Retirar, to retire, to withdraw. * to car a retirar, to sound a retrait on the
drum. * Reto, right, a challenge. * Retocado, tickled. Retocar, to tickle, to
play the wanton. Retoco, m. tickling, wantonness. Retocon, m. a wanton, a
ticklish fellow. * Retolica, or Retorica, rhetorike, the art of persuading by
cunning speech. Reton^o, the bud of a tree. Reton^ecer, yo Reton^esco, Sub.
Praes. Reton^esca, to bud out. * Reton^esca, Reton^esco, vide Reton^ecer.
Retor, a rhetorician, a cunning man to persuade. Also a rector, governor or
corrector in schools. Retorcer, yo Retuerco, Sub. Praes. Retuerce, to wreathe,
to bend back. Retorcedura, wreathing, bending back. Retorcido, wreathed, bent
back. Retorcimiento, wreathing, bending back. Retorica, or Retolica,
rhetorike, artificial persuasion. * Retorico, a rhetorician, one that can with
speech persuade well. Retornado, returned, coming again. Retornar, to
return, to come again. Retorno, a return again. * Retorzer, vide Retorcer.
* Retorzido, vide Retorcido. * Retorzimiento, vide Retorcimiento. * Retostado,
scorched, toasted. Retostar, to scorch, to burn, to toast. Retozado, vide
Retocado. * Retozar, vide Retocar. * Retozon, vide Retocon. Retraer, Praes.
Retraygo, Retraes, Retrae, 1. Praet. Retruxe, or Retraxe, Retruxiste, or
Retraxiste, Retruxo, or Retraxo. Fut. Retraere, ras, ra, Sub. Praes. Retrayga,
Imperf. Retruxera, or Retraxera, Retruxesse, or Retraria, Fut. Retruxe^e, to
withdraw, to retire, to draw back. * Retrahamiento, vide Retraimiento. *
Retraimiento, drawing back, the inward part of a house, a place to bestow
things in out of the way. * Retratado, pourtraied, pictured out. * Retratador,
a pourtraier, a drawer of plots in proportion. Retratar, to pourtray, to draw
out plots, to picture proportionably. Also to go back from that he has
spoken. Retrato, m. a portraiture or lively plot showing the proportion and
fashion of any building, etc. Also a repurchase or getting again into ones
hands. * Retraxe, Retraxera, vide Retraer. * Retraydo, drawn back,
withdrawn, retired. * Retrayga, Retraygo, vide Retraer. Retraymiento, a
closet, a withdrawing place, a retreat, drawing back or aside. * Retribuir, to
retribute or reward for merit. * Retrogradar, to go backward. Retronar, yo
Retrueno, to sound again as thunder. * Retruecano, a changing one thing for
another. * Retruene, Retrueno, vide Retronar. * Retruxe, Retruxera, Retruxesse,
vide Retraer. * Retruxo, vide Retraer. * Retuerce, Retuerco, vide Retorcer.
Retuerto, bent back. * Retulo, a writing or subscription that declares some
act or matter. * Retumbando, tumbling, coming with a noise or rumbling. *
Retumbar, to tumble, to come with a rumbling noise, to fall back again. *
Retumbo, tumbling, rumbling. * Retuve, Retuviera, Retuviesse, vide Retener. *
Retuvo, vide Retener. * Revalidar, to reinforce, to make strong again.
Revanada, f. a shred of cloth, a slice of bread. Revanar, to cut, to shred.
Revelacion, revealing, opening of dark matters, or of secresies. Revelado,
revealed, lifted up. Revelar, to reveal, to lift up. * Reveldo, or Rebeldo, a
rebel, a mutinous fellow. * Revellin, or Rebellin, a certain fortification
upon a wall called a Rauelin. Revender, yo Reviendo, to sell again. *
Revendido, sold again. * Revenga, Revengo, vide Revenir. * Revenido, come
back, come again. Revenir, Praes. Revengo, Revienes, Reviene, 1. Praet.
Revine, Reviniste, Revino, Fut. Revendre, or Reverne, as, a, Sub. Praes.
Revenga, Imperfect. Reviniera, Revernia, or Reviniesle, Fut. Reviniere, to
return, to come back, to come again. * Rever, to see again, to review.
Reverberacion, beating back. * Reverberado, beaten back. Reverberar, to beat
back. Reverdecer, yo Reverdesco, Sub. Praes. Reverdesca, to wax green. *
Reverdecido, grown green. * Reverdesca, Reverdesco, vide Reverdecer. *
Reverdescer, or Reverdecer, to wax green. * Reverencia, reverence.
Reverenciar, or Acatar, to reverence or to hold in great estimation. *
Reverendo, reverend, worthy of great estimation. * Reverne, Revernia, vide
Revenir. * Reverso, turned inside outward. Reves, backwarde, contrary, cross,
overthwart. Revesado, or Trav^esso, froward, cross, untoward. Revesar, vide
Revessar. * Revessar, or Revesar, yo Reviesso, to ouerturne, to belch mightily,
to vomit up his meat and drink again. * Revestido, clothed again,
apparelled a new. Revestir, yo Revisto, to cloth again. * Revienda, Reviendo,
vide Revender. * Reviene, vide Revenir. * Reviesse, Reviesso, vide Revessar. *
Revine, Reviniera, Reviniesse, vide Revenir. * Revino, vide Revenir. *
Revisabuelo, a fathers great grandfather, or a great great grandfather. *
Revista, f. a reuiew or fresh sight, an ouerlooking. * Reviste, Revisto, vide
Revestir. Reuma, the rheum, waterishnes of the stomach. * Revocacion, a
repeal. * Revocado, called back, revoked, called in again. Revocar, Praes.
yo Revoco, 1. Praet. yo Revoque, to call back, to call in again. * Revocar,
vide Rebocar. * Revolar, vide Rebolar. * Revolcar, vide Rebolcar. * Revoldon,
vide Reboldon. * Revolear, vide Rebolear. * Revolton, vide Rebolton. *
Revoltoso, vide Reboltoso. * Revoltura, vide Reboltura. Revolucion, reuoluing,
tumbling over. * Revolvedor, vide Rebolvedor. * Revolver, vide Rebolver. *
Revolvimiento, vide Rebolvimiento. * Revossar, vide Rebossar. * Revotado, vide
Rebotado. * Revotar, vide Rebotar. * Reupontico, an herb called Centorie. *
Reutador, an accuser, a layer to other men's charge, a challenger. * Reutar, to
accuse, to lay to men's charge. * Revuelto, vide Rebuelto. * Revuznar, vide
Rebuznar. Rexa, Reja, or Rexal, a lattise window, a grate of iron or wood, the
coulter of the plough, a bar of iron. Rexado, lattised, grated. Rey, m.
aching. * Rey catolico, the catholic king, the king of Spain. * Reyezuelo, m.
a petty king. * Reyme, m. I laughed. * Fiesta de los Reyes, Twelfe day. * El
dia de los Reyes, idem. Reyna, a queen. * Reynar, to reign, to rule, to
govern. Reyno, m. a kingdom. Reyr, or Reir, yo Rio, to laugh. * Reytes, swart
rutters. * Reytres, idem. * Rez, vide Res. * Rezado, prayed, meditated on. *
Rezador, a prayer, one that uses to pray, or to meditate. Rezagado, the last
of all. Rezar, to pray, to recite, to meditate or consider well off. * Rezelo,
or Recelo, fear, dread. * Rezeloso, vide Receloso. Rezental, fresh, a lamb or
kid taken out of the dams belly that never sucked. Rezentar, to make fresh. *
Reziamente, stoutly, lustily, strongly. Rezien, newly, lately. * Rezien hecho,
idem. * Rezientar, vide Amassar, to make dough. Reziente, fresh, new. *
Rezientemente, newly, lately. Rezio, strong, lusty, hard. Reziura, hardness,
difficulty. Rezma de papel, a reame of paper. Rezmilla, f. the top of a man's
yard. * Reznilla, f. idem. Rezno, a tike.
R H
* Rheno, the great river called Rhine. * Rhetorica, f. Rhetoric.
R I
Ria, the mouth of a river, a port or haven. * Riachuelo, a little stream.
Riatillo, vide Riachuelo. Ribaco, or Ribazo, a high bank. * Ribadavia, a town
in Galizia in Spain, where the vino de Ribadavia is made: it is white, and a
secke, but very delicate. * Ribadoquin, a certain piece of artillery.
Ribera, the bank by a river, or by the sea, a shore. * Ribera alta, a cliue
or high bank by the sea. * Ribete, a hem of a garment. * Ribeteado, made with
hems as a garment. * Ribeton, m. a great hem or welt of a garment. * Ricamente,
richly, costly. * Rica, a slaughter or overthrow in war, discomfiture, great
misery. Ricazo, wealthy, rich. Rico, a tuffe of feathers, unshorn velvet.
Rico, rich. Ridiculo, ridiculous. * Rye, Rio, vide Reyr. * Riego, vide Regar,
to water. * Riegue, vide Regar. Riel, a kind of jewel, a carquenet. Rienda,
the reins of a bridle. * Rienda suelta, the reins loose or at liberty. *
Reyr a Rienda suelta, to laugh his fill. * Riente, laughing. * Rieptos, or
Desafios, defyings, challenges. * Riesgo, vide Riezgo, danger. * Riestra de
ajos, a bunch of garlic. * Riestra de cebollas, a rope of onions. * Rieto, m.
a challenging, a defying. Riezgo, danger. Rifa, wringing, grinning, fretting,
brauling, chafing. Rifador, one that chafeth or brauleth. Rifar, to grin, to
chafe, to fret, to braule. Also rifling at dice, etc. * Rigir, vide Regir, to
rule, to govern. Rigor, m. rigor, cruel or hard dealing. Rigorosamente,
rigorously. Rigoroso, rugorous, cruel, stern. * Riguroso, vide Rigoroso. *
Rigurosamente, vide Rigorosamente. * Rija, vide Regir. * Rijo, vide Regir.
Rima, or Rimero, a heap, a stacke. Rimero, or Rima, a heap. * Rinchaon, an
herb called rocket gentle. Rincon, m. a corner. * Rinconcillo, m. a little
corner. * Rinda, vide Rendir. * Rindo, vide Rendir. Rin^a, f. chiding, a
braule. * Rin^e, Rin^o, vide Ren^ir. Rin^on, m. the kidney. * Rinoceronte, vide
Abada. Rin^ones, the reins of the back. Rio, m. a river. * Rio, I laugh, vide
Reyr. * Riose, he laughed. * Ripa, vide Ripia. * Riparia ciudad, a city near
the sea shore or coast. * Ripera cosa, a thing on the shore, or on the banks
side. Ripia, f. rubbish that falls from a decayed house. Ripias, chips,
shingle to cover houses, laths. Ripiar la pared, to lath or to rod a wall. *
Ripio, vide Ripia. Also an axletree. Riqueza, f. riches, goods. * Riquissimo,
most rich, most wealthy. Risa, f. laughter. Risada, f. laughing. Risco, a
crag, a rock. Ristra, a rope of onions. * Ristrar, to set a lance to his rest,
to make ropes of onions, or bunches of garlic. Ristre, as Lanca de Ristre, a
horsemans lance. Ristre de ajos, a bunch of garlic. Risuen^o, a laughing
fellow, a ieering fellow. * Rithmo, m. rithme, meter. Rito, m. a custom, a
rite. * Rival, m. a fellow lover. * Rivete, vide Ribete. * Riveteado, vide
Ribeteado. Rixa, fretting, chafing, quarrelling, falling out. Rixoso, bent to
fretting or chafing. * Rixoso cavallo, m. a horse neighing or lusting after
mares. Riza, or Rica, a scattering, a putting to flight. * Rizadas, f. the
frizling of hair with a hot frizeling iron. * Rizo, vide Rico. Rizo
terciopelo, unshorn velvet.
R O
Robado, robbed, stolen. Robador, a robber, a thief. Robar, to rob, to steal.
Roble, m. a hard oak, a great grown oak. * Robleco, of an oak, as strong as an
oak. Robledal, a grove of oaks. Roblezo, strong as an oak. Robo, m. theft,
robbery, spoil or taking by violence. * Robra, a writing upon a bargain,
articles of agreement. * Robre, vide Roble. Robusto, strong, sturdie, stout.
Roca, or Pen^a, a rock. Roca, f. ground new grubbed or cleansed from bushes
and briers, a hedging bill, a sieth to cut bushes and brambles with. *
Rocadero, m. a piece of paper rolled up together like a grocers coffin. Also
vide Coroca. * Rocado, grubbed. Rocador, a grubbing tool. Rocagante vestido, a
long side garment. * Rocal, a place of rocks. Rocar, to grub or pluck up, to
weed corn, to enterfier. * Rociada, or Ruciada, bedeawing. Also a volley of
shot. * Rociadero, the holy water sprinkle. Rociado, bedeawed. * Rociador, one
that waters or bedeaweth. Rociar, to bedeaw, to besprinkle. Rocin, m. a
horse, a gelding. Rocio, m. the deaw. Rocioso, full of deaw. * Roda, round in
figure. * Rodaballa, vide Rodavalla. * Rodaballo, vide Rodavallo. * Rodada de
camino, the trackes in a way, the cart rowtes, or the sign that the wheels of
a carte make upon the way. * Rodado, tumbling or running as a boule runs on
the ground. Also a horse of dapple gray color. * Rucio Rodado, dapple gray
color. * Rodador, a roller about, or that which goes tumbling or rolling as a
wheel or boule running on the ground. Rodaja, f. a rowell of a spur, a dance
called the round. Rodajo, a pulley. * Rodante, a thing rolling. Rodapies, a
settle about a bed. Rodar, to run or tumble round as a wheel or boule runs
on the ground. * Rodavalla, a fish called a turbut. Rodavallo, m. a turbut
fish. * Rodavillo, m. a fish called a plaise, a colerake. Rodeado, compassed
about. * Rodeador, one that goes compassing or wheeling about. * Rodeando,
wheeling or compassing about. Rodear, to compass about. Rodela, a target.
Rodeo, the turning of a way, a certain attire about women. * Rodeos, far
fetched speeches, or turnings of a way. Rodetes, rolls for the head of women.
Rodezno, a piece of wood or timber that draws the upper millstone about when
it grindeth. Rodilla, a knee, Also a dishclout. * Rodillaco, vide Rodillazo. *
Rodillazo, m. a blow or stroke with the knee. * Rodo, vide Rodeo. Rodovallo, a
turbut. Rodrigar, to under prop. Rodrigon, a pole or prop for a vine to lie
upon. * Roedor, a gnawer. * Roedora cosa, a gnawing or eating thing. Roedura,
gnawing. Roer, yo Roygo, Sub. Praes. Royga, to gnaw. Rofian, or Rufian, m. a
whoremaster, a ruffian, a baude, a champion for a whore. Rofianeria, f.
bawderie, whoredom. Rofianear, to play the whoremaster. * Rogado, requested. *
Rogador, one that requesteth or wishes. Rogar, Praes. yo Ruego, 1. Praet. yo
Rogue, to request, to wish, to ask, to desire, to pray. * Rogue, vide Rogar.
Rojo, vide Roxo, red. Rollete, a roll for the head. Rollete de muger, vide
Rodete. * Rollico, vide Rollizo. Rollizo, round, a rowler, any round piece of
wood or timber. * Bracos rollizos, round arms. * Rollon, a roll, or side of a
sheet written wide, as lawyers copied things. Rollo, any round thing, a pibble
stone, a gallows, a gibet, a roll, or scroll of writing. * Roma, Rome the
city. Also a mule gotten of a horse and an ass. Also a woman with a flat
nose. * Romadicarse, vide Romadizarse. * Romadico, vide Romadizo. Romadizarse,
to take the rheum. Romadizo, the rheum. * Romana, f. a pair of balance or
scales to weigh with, a pomgranate. Romance, the Castilian tongue, a song in
Spanish. * Romancar, to write in Spanish. * Romancista, one that understands
and speaks Spanish. * Romanero, a clarke that keeps a book of all the
cattle that each butcher kills, used in Spain. * Roman^edor, idem. Romaza,
f. sorrel, or sower docke. * Rombo, vide Rumbo. Rombon, a stopper, or stopple.
Romeria, f. going on pilgrimage. * Romerillo, a little pilgrim. Romero, a
pilgrim, the herb Rosemarie. Romo, m. flat nosed. * Rompenecios, one that
wears out fools to the hard stumps, one that serves his turn so long of
the simple, that he makes them past recovery to serve for any thing ever
after. Romper, to break. Rompidamente, brokenly. Rompido, broken. Rompimiento,
breaking. * Roncador, one that uses to snort, and to route, a fish like a
whiting. * Ronca, hoarse, snorting. Roncar, Praes. yo Ronco, 1. Praet. yo
Ronque, to snort, to route. * Roncas ondas, hoarse, roaring waves. Roncear, to
be idle or lazy. Ronceria, f. flattery, setting at debate. Also lazy
idleness. Roncero, m. a flatterer, a glosing fellow that by his speech goes
about to set debate. Also a lazy idle fellow. * Ronces, or Halagos,
flatterings, pleasant allurements. * Roncesvales, a monastery between France
and Spain where the great battle was fought between the Spaniards and the
French, wherein were lost Charlemaigne the Emperor and king of France with
the twelve Peers of France, only except Roldan, which escaped. Roncha, f.
the prick of a nettle, the mark of a stripe, the mark that a flea or louse
leaves after biting the flesh. * Ronchas, a disease called the meaZels. Ronco,
hoarse, snorting. * Ronco sonido, such a hollow noise as Bees make in the
evening before they swarm. Also the waves of the sea make such a noise upon
the rock. Ronda, f. the round, a watch. * Rondador, one that goes the round
to see whether the watch be duly kept. Rondar, to go round about, to go about
to see whether the watch be duly kept in night. * Rondelero, a gentleman of
the round. * Rondo, the circuit of the liberty. * Rondon, as entrar de Rondon,
to enter in roundly without asking leave. Ron^a, f. scabbines, a scab. Ron^oso,
scabbed, full of scabs. * Ronque, vide Roncar. Ronquedad, f. hoarsnes.
Ronquera, f. idem. Ronquido, hoarsnes, snorting. * Ronquito, somewhat hoarse.
Ropa, f. a garment. Ropavegero, vide Ropavejero. Ropavejero, m. a seller of
old clothes, a broker. Ropero, a tailer. * Ropeta, a little coat or garment,
a cassocke. Ropilla, f. a cassocke. Ropon, a gown, a rug gown. Roque de
axedres, the rooke at chesse-play. * Roquedo, the bottom of the sea where many
rocks be, or a castle built on rocks of the sea. * Roquera, f. a place of
many rocks. Roquete, m. a bishops rotchet. Rosa, a rose, a flower. * Rosa
castellana, a red rose. * Rosa albardera, vide Rosa montes. Rosa sylvestre, or
Garvanca, sweet brier, Eglantine. * Rosa montes, or Rosa de monte, Pionie,
hill Rose, or Kings bloome. * Rosada, f. many roses together. Also an
Electuarie made of roses. Also color of roses. Rosado, rose colored. Rosal, a
bed or bank of roses, the rose tree. Rosario, a prayer book, a prayer of
beads. * Rosca, f. a roll of bread. Rosca de huzillo, reeling of thread, lying
round of a snake or adder. * Rosicler, color of roses. Rosquete, m. a pancake.
Also vide Rosquilla. Rosquilla, f. a clue of thread. Also a little roll of
bread. Also lying round like a snake. Rostrituerto, looking awry. Rostro, m.
the face, the visage. Rosuz, Licorice. * Rota de nao, vide Derrota, a course
that the ship takes. * Roto, or Rompido, broken. Rotura, or Rompimiento, a
breaking, a breach. * Rove, a bramble bush. * Roxear, to blush. Roxo, or Ruvio,
reddish, yellow, blushing. * Roxura, f. a reddishnes, a blushing. Roydo,
gnawed. * Roydo de gente, vide Ruydo. Royendo, gnawing. * Royga, vide Roer. *
Roygo, vide Roer. * Roza, vide Roca. * Rozador, vide Rocador. * Rozar, vide
Rocar. * Rozeta, f. a little rose, the rowell of a spur. * Roziada, vide
Rociada. * Roziar, vide Rociar. * Rozin, or Rocin, a horse, a gelding. *
Roznar, to bray as an ass. * Roznido, m. braying of anasse. * Rozio, vide
Rocio, m. * Rozquete, vide Rosquete. * Rozquilla, vide Rosquilla.
R V
* Ruan, a kind of linen cloth. Also the town Roan in France. * Ruando,
walking the streets, roming up and down. * Ruar, to walk the streets, to
roame abroad. * Ruar calls, to go up and down the streets. * Ruar las
tardes, to go late abroad. * Ruas, f. streets. Rubi, a precious stone called a
rubie or carbuncle. * Rubia liga, an herb or rather the juice of an herb
called madder wherewith they die red. * Rubicundo, reddish of color, ruddie,
shamefaste. * Rubio, or Ruvio, red colored. * Rubioso, very red colored.
Rubrica, f. the mark in a book, or a knot under ones name after he has
written it, as most use, that it may not so easily be counterfeited. *
Rubricado, marked, signed. * Rubricar, Praes. yo Rubrico, 1. Praet. yo
Rubrique, to sign, to put to a mark, to set to the hand. * Rubrique, vide
Rubricar. * Rucca, vide Rueca. Ruciada, vide Rociada, a volley of shot. Also a
bedeawing. Ruciado cavallo, a dapple gray horse. Rucio, gray, dapple gray.
Rucio, as Rucio rodado, gray, dapple gray. Ruda, the herb called rue.
Rudamente, rudely, grossly. Rudeza, rudenes, vnhandsomnes. * Rudillo, somewhat
dull, somewhat rude. Rudo, rude, dull. Rueca, a distaffe or rock. Rueda, a
wheel, the rim of a wheel. * Rueda del arcabuz, the nut of a cross bow. *
Ruedo, the lower skirt or hem of a garment which goes below compass round. *
Ruego, vide Rogar. Ruego, a request, entreaty, prayer. * Ruegue, vide Rogar. *
Rufas, a place of Campania in Italy. Rufian, vide Rofian, a ruffian, a
whooremaster. * Rufianado, become a ruffian or a haunter of harlots. *
Rufianaria, f. bawderie, whooredome. * Rufiano, vide Rufian. Ruga, a wrinkle.
Rugido, vide Ruydo, a noise, a crying. Rugimiento de tripas, the crying of the
guts. Rugir, to roar. Rugoso, full of wrinkles. Ruibarbo, vide Ruybarbo,
Ruybarbaro, or Ruypontico, Rhubarbe. Ruido. vide Ruydo. * Ruido hechizo, vide
Ruydo. * Ruin, vide Ruyn. * Ruina, vide Ruyna. * Ruindad, vide Ruyndad. *
Ruinmente, vide Ruynmente. * Rujo, a fish called a tench. * Ruiponces, vide
Ruyponces. * Ruipontigo, vide Ruypontigo. * Ruisen^or, vide Ruysen^or. Rumbo, a
stopper, or stopple, a course, a way. * Rumbo derecho, the right course, the
right way. Rumiar, to chewe the cud. * Ruminar, idem. Rumor, a report, a rumor,
a noise. Rumper, vide Romper, to break. Rusticamente, rudely, clownishly.
Rusticidad, or Rustiqueza, clownishnes, rudenes. Rustico, rude, clownish.
Rustiqueza, or Rusticidad, clownishnes. * Rutilante, or Replandeciente, bright
shining, glistering. * Rutilar, to glister, to shine. * Rutilo, glistering,
shining like gold. * Rutilos, ancient people of Hetruria. Ruvia, Roja, or
Graneza, madder to die red with. * Ruvicundo, vide Rubicundo. Ruvio, or Roxo,
red of color. * Ruvioso, reddish. Ruvion, red wheat. Ruybarbo, or Ruybarbaro,
rhubarbe to purge choler with. Ruydo, a noise, a hurliburly, an affray. * Ruydo
Hechizo, a rumor made of one thing when another is meant. * Ruydo manso, a
soft noise. Ruy, m. naught, lewd. * Ruyna, or Ruina, destruction, ruin, decay.
* Ruynmente, naughtily, badly. Ruyponces, rapes, wild turnips. Ruypontigo, an
herb called Centaurie. Ruysen^or, a nightingale. * Ruziada, vide Rociada.
S
SA'bado, m. saturday. * Sabalo, a fish called a shadde. * Sabanas, vide
Savanas, f. sheets. * Saban^on, vide Savan^on. * Sabato, a wooden shoe, a
patten, a slave. Saber, Praes. Se, Sabes, Sabe, Imperfect. Sabia, Sabias,
Sabia, 1. Praet. Supe, Supiste, Supo, Fut. Sabre, Sabras, Sabra, Sub. Praes.
Sepa, Imperfect, Supiera, Sabria, or Supiesse, Fut. Supiere, to know, to
understand, to savor or taste, to perceive. * Sabia, vide Saber. Sabia, or
Sabiamente, wisely, discreetly. Sabia, y Prudentemente, very wisely, with much
advise. Sabido, known. Sabidor, one that knows or understands the matter.
Sabidora, known, knowing. * Sabidoria, vide Sabiduria, Sabiduria, f. wisdom,
knowledge, discretion, understanding. * a Sabiendas, wittingly, knowing of it.
* Sabieza, vide Sabiduria, knowledge, understanding. Sabina, or Savina, savin.
* Sabinos, people of Italy not far from Rome. Sabio, wise, skillful, cunning.
* Saboga, f. a fish called a shad, as some say, other say it is a pilchard. *
Sabolo, idem. Sabor, or Savor, savor, taste. Saborear, to make sauory. *
Saboyana, f. a woman's peticoate. * Sabra, Sabre, vide Saber, * Sabrosamente,
sauorily. Sabroso, sauory. * Sabucal, m. a place where elder trees grow. *
Sabuco, Sauco, or Caninero, the elderne tree. * Sabuco pequen^o, danewort or
walewort. Sabuesso, m. a spaniell. Saca, f. a sack, a bag, a delivery out of
prison by pardon, etc. a getting out. * Saca de bachilleres, a kind of hoode
worn of graduates. Sacabuche, an instrument of music called a sackbut. *
Sacado, drawn out, gotten out, brought up. * bien Sacado, well brought up. *
Sacador, a getter out, one that bayleth another out of prison. * Sacadores,
miners that get metals out of the ground. Sacalin^a, the obtaining or getting
any thing by entreatie and request. Also a dart to hurl with a string. *
Sacapelotas, a vice or skrew to pluck out bullets with. Sacar, Praes. yo Saco.
1. Praet, yo Saque, to get out, to draw out, to pull or dig out, to bring up. *
Sacar a raso, to take out quite and clean. * Sacco, vide Saco. Sacerdocio,
priesthood. Sacerdote, a priest, a minister of the Church. Sacerdotissa, a
nun, a she priest. Sachador, a harrower. Sachadura, harrowing. Sachar, or
Escardar la tierra, to harrow. * Sachar, vide Sacar. * Sacho, a mattocke, or
pickaxe. * Saciado, satisfied, filled. * Saciamiento, filling, satisfying. *
Saciar, to satisfy, to fill. Saco, a sack, the spoil of a town. *
Sacomanear, to sack, to spoil, to ruinate, or overthrow. Sacomano, a sacking
or spoiling. Also one that sacketh, spoileth or wastes. Sacramento, a
sacrament, an oath. * Sacranos, ancient people of Italy near to Rome. *
Sacrar, to hallow. Sacre, a hawk called a Saker. Also a piece of ordinance so
called. Sacrificar, Praes. yo Sacrifico, 1. Praet. yo Sacrifique, to sacrifice.
Sacrificio, m sacrifice. * Sacrifique, vide Sacrificar. Sacrilegio, sacrilege,
stealing of church goods, violating of holy things. Sacrilego, a sacrilegious
person, a church robber, a violater of holy rites, a notable lewd person. *
Sacrista, m. vide Sacristan. Sacristan, a clerk or sexten in a church.
Sacristania, f. the office of a sexten or clerk in a church. * Sacristia, a
vestry of a church. * Sacro, holy. * Sacudida. f. a shaking off. Sacudidamente,
snappishely. Sacudido, shaken off. Sacudimiento shaking off. Sacudir, to shake
off. Saeta, f. an arrow, a dart, a shafte. Saetera, or Tronera, a loope hole to
lay ordinance out at. Sagacidad, f. sharpnes of wit. * Sagacissimo, most
quickwitted. Sagaz, wise, witty, circumspect, sharpewitted. Sagazmente, wisely,
wittily. Sage, a diuiner, a wise man, a soothsayer. Sagittario, the sign
called sagittarius. * Sagorida, or Axedrea, an herb called sauory. * Sagra, as
Sagra de Toledo, a county or shire about Toledo, as Middlesex about London. *
Sagramento, vide Sacramento. Sagrado, holy, sacred. Sagrario, m. a sanctuary,
a hallowed place, whence malefactors might not he fetched to punishment. *
Sahio, vide Sabio, wise, skillful, cunning. Sahornado de sudor, filthy with
sweat. Sahornamiento, filthiness of sweat. Also heating in an oven. Sahorno,
galling with sweat, stink of sweat. Also heating in an oven. Sahumado,
perfumed. Sahumador, a perfuming pan. Also a perfumer. Sahumadura, perfuming.
Sahumar, to perfume. Sahumerio, f. perfume. * Sain, fat, sewet, dropping of
meat. Sal, f. salt. Sala, f. a hall. Salacio, a sawsedge. Salada, salt meat. *
Saladia, f. saltnes. * Saladilla* flesh somewhat salted. Salado, salted,
witty. Saladura, salting, seasoning with salt. Salagarda, f. a trap, an
ambush. * Salamanca, a chief city and university in old Castile in Spain so
called. * Salamandra, f. a salamander that is said to live and be nourished by
fire only, it is like a lizard, but full of spots. * Salamandria, vide
Salamanquesa. * Salamanquesa, vide Salamandra, a salamander. Salar, to salt. *
Salariado, paid his hire or wages, one that receives wages. Salario, salary,
wages, hire. * Salarmoniac, a gum so called. * Salce, a willow, a sallow.
Salchicha, a sawsidge. * Salchichon, a great sawsidge. * Salcicia, or
Salchicha, a sawsidge. * Saldo, or firm, solid, whole, firm. * Saldra,
Saldre, vide Salir. * Saldria, vide Salir, did go out, or did sally out. *
Saledizo, the iuttie of a house, the bearing out of a wall. * Salema, f. a
stockefish. Salero, a saltseller. * Salga, vide Salir. * Salgada yerva, a kind
of herb. * Salgema, a kind of stuff which painters use. * Salgo, vide Salir.
* Salgueiro, Salzer, or Sauz, a willowe, a withie, a sallow. Salida, f. a
sally, a going out, an escape. Saledizo, the iuttie of a house, the bearing out
of a wall. * Salido, sallied out, gone out. * Salina, f. a salt pit. Salinas,
tribute for salt. Also salt pits. Salinero, a salt maker. Salir, yo Salgo, Sub.
Praes. Salga, to sallie out, to go forth, to escape. * Salir en blanco, not to
come to effect or purpose. * Salir de madre, to ouerflowe the banks and drown
the land. * Salir de rebuelta, to get out of a labyrinth and entangling wherein
a man stands wrapped in, to get out of trouble. * Salitrado, done with salt
peter. Salitral, a place to dig or make salt peter. Salitre, m. salt peter.
Salitroso, full of nitre. Saliva, spettle. Salivoso, full of spettle. * Salma,
a great sack, a half quarter sack or bag. Salmista, a psalmist or maker of
psalms. Salmo, a psalm. Salmon, a salmon. * Salmonete, a fish called a
barbell. * Salmonete, or Barvo de la mar, a fish called a mullet. Salmorejo,
pickle or brine to keep olives, sampire or such things in. Salmorejo, or
Salmuera, pickle for fish. Salmuera, brine, pickle. Salobre, sower, sauorie.
Also brine or salt water, as the sea. * Salpicado, dashed with dirt. *
Salpicado de agua, dashed with water. Salpicaduras, dashings. Salpicar, Praes.
yo Salpico. 1. Praet. yo Salpique, to dash with dirt, to beray. * Salpimienta,
salt and pepper together. * Salpique, vide Salpicar. Salpresa cosa, any thing
beginning to take salt. * Salpreso, beginning to take salt, beginning to be
powdered, somewhat powdered, corned with salt. Salsa, sauce. * Salsera, a dish to
put sauce in, a sawcer. * Salsereta, a sawcer. Salsero, a sawcer. * Salsero, or
Tomillo, the herb Thime. * Saltaparedes, anticke work. Also one that leapeth
over walls. Saltar, to leap, to skip. * Salteada, f. a robbing, a leaping on. *
Salteada melodia, music broken off, upon some sudden fright or accident. *
Salteado, set upon, leaped on, assailed, robbed. Salteador, a robber,
a^assailer. Saltear, to assail, to rob. Salterio, a psalter or psalm book,
or a musical instrument called a psalterie. Saltero, m. a forrester, a
wood-man. Salto, a leap, an assault, a robbery. Also a forest. Salva, a
taste. Also a salutation. * hazer Salva, to taste meat or drink, before
another eats or drinks thereof, as they do to Princes and great Potentates.
* Salvation, f. salvation. Salvadera, a dust box. Salvado, bran, cribble.
Salvados, idem. * Salvador, a savior. Also a kind of nagge. Salvage, or
Salvaje, savage, wild. * Salvagina, wild cattle or wild foul. *
Salvaguardia, safeguard. * Salvaje, or Salvage, wild, savage. Salvamente,
safely. Salvamiento, a saving. Salvar, to save. * Salvaroba, a wardrobe. *
Salvay, vide Salvia. Salud, f. health. Saludable, wholesome. Saludablemente,
wholesomly. * Saludadle, id est, Saludad le, salute him. Saludador, a saluter,
a charmer, or one that helps the biting of mad dogs. Saludar, to salute, to
greet, to charm. * Salvia, or Salvay, sage. Salvo, safe, sound, except. *
Salvo el guante, always excepting: for a woman to say, Salvo el guante, is
always excepting her honor and her honesty. * Salvo conduto, a safe conduct.
Salvonor, saving your reverence. Also a close stool, the fundament.
Salutacion, greeting, saluting. Salze, a willow. * Sambra, a kind of bark in
old time used. * Sambuco, or Sabuco, an elderne. * Samo, the Island of Samos. *
Sampon^a, vide campon^a, a fluite. * Sampuzar, vide campuzar. * San, Sancto,
Sant, or Santo, holy, a saint. Sanable, that may be healed. * Sanahoria, or
canahoria, a caret root. * Sanahoria blanca, a parsnep root. Sanamente,
soundly. Sanamunda, a gilliflower. Sanar, to heal, to cure. * Sanbenito, id
est Santo Benito, Saint Bennet. Also a deformed coat* put on such as are
found and proved protestants. * Sanca, vide Sancta, holy. * Sancadilla, vide
cancadilla. * Sanco, vide canco. * Sanctidad, vide Santidad, holiness. Sanction,
as pragmatica sanction, a law established by royal authority. * Sancto, Sant,
Santo, or San, holy. * Sandalias, sandals, pantofles, or pattens of wood. *
Sandalo arbol, a certain tree. Sandalos, sandales, pantofles, or pattens of
wood. Sandia, f. a kind of Melon. Sandio, m. a fool. Saneado, satisfied.
Saneamiento, satisfying. Sanear, to satisfy, to make good. Sangluto, the
hickot, or yeske. Sangostar, id est Se Angostar, to streighten, to bind. *
Sangraca, vide Sangraza. Sangradera, f. a tool to let blood with a pipe or
trench to let out water. Sangrador, a blood letter. Sangrar, to let blood, to
bleed, to drop as rain does. Sangraza, ill, or corrupt blood. Sangre, f.
blood. Sangrelluvia, a bloody flux, bleeding much, monthly terms in women.
Sangrentar, yo Sangriento, Sub. Praes. Sangriente, to defile with blood.
Sangria, f. letting of blood. * Sangriente, Sangriento, vide Sangrentar.
Sangriento, m. bloody. Sanguaza, blood and matter together, matter of a
wound. * Sangu^juela, a worm in ditches called a bloudsucker or horseleach. *
Sanguilento, bloody, cruel. * Sanguinaria yerva, an herb stopping blood. *
Sanguineo, or Sanguilino, of a sanguine complexion. * Sanguino, idem.
Sanguisuela, f. a bloudsucker. * Sanja, vide canja. * Sanjado, vide canjado.
Sanidad, f. health. San^a, f. wrath, fury, rage. San^udo, wrathful, furious.
Sano, sound. * San Pablo, saint Paul. * San Martin, Saint Martin. Also a town
in new Castile in Spain, where the wine called Vino de San-Martin is made, it
is reputed for the most delicate wine of Spain, the color is white. * San
Pedro, saint Peter. * Sanqueamiento, vide canqueamiento. * Sanquear, vide
canquear. Santero, an heremite. * Santiago, or Santyago, saint James. Santidad,
f. holiness. Santificacion, f. making holy, sanctifying. * Santificado,
sanctified, hallowed, made holy. Santificador, a hallower, one that makes
holy, the holy ghost. Santificar, Praes. yo Santifico, 1. Praet. yo Santifique,
Sub. Praes. Santifique, to hallow, to make holy, to sanctify. * Santifique,
vide Santificar. * Santiguada, as por mi santiguada, by my holidome. Santiguar,
to bless, to hallow. * Santillana, a towns name in Castile. Santo, Sancto,
Sant, or San, holy. * Santochado, or Santuchado, m. foolish, frantic. *
Sanze, vide Sauze, a willow. * Sapatero, vide capatero. * Sapatillo, vide
capatillo. * Sapiencia, f. wisdom. * Saphir, m. a precious stone so called.
Sapo, a toade. Sapo, or Escuerco, a toade. * Sapuzar, vide capuzar. * Saque,
vide Sacar. Saqueado, sacked, spoiled. Saqueador, a sacker, a spoiler of
towns, etc. Saquear, to sack, to spoil, to make havoc. * Saquicami, vide
caquicami. Saquillo, a little bag, a satchell. Saquito, a little sack. *
Saracas, vide caracas. * Saragoca, vide caragoca. * Saraguelles, or
caraguelles, m. great Venetian breeches. Sarampion, m. a tetter, a ringworme. *
Saranda, vide caranda. Sarao, m. a feasting, dancing or sporting of great
persons in a great hall, or a royal feasting or dancing. * Saratan, vide
caratan. * Sarazinesca, f. a percullis made of wood at the gate of a city, for
to defend men when they skirmish. * Sarba, vide Sarva. * Sarca, vide carca. *
Sarcal, vide carcal. * Sarcaparillo, vide carcaparillo. * Sarcillo, vide
carcillo. * Sarco, m. a hurdle. Sardina, a little pilchard, a sardine. * Sarga,
f. searge, say. Sargal, any thing made or done with searge or say. * Sargas,
searge, say. Sargenta, f. a weapon like a halbard. * Sargentear, to do the
office of a sargeant of a band. * Sargento, a sargeant in a band of soldiers.
Sargo, m. a sea breame, a fish. * Sarisa, f. a long pike, spear or iauelin,
used of the Macedonians in war, being ten cubits long. * Sarmentar, yo
Sarmiento, Sub. Praes. Sarmiente, to gather the branches of vines cut off, into
bundles or fagots. * Sarmentera, a place or house to lay up vine branches. Also
a house to lay wood in, a wood house. * Sarmiente, Sarmiento, vide Sarmentar. *
Sarmiento, a branch pruned or cut off, a dry branch of a vine. Sarna, a scab,
a sore, scuruinesse, mangines, or the wild scab. Sarnoso, scabbie, mangie,
scuruie. * Sarpar la ancora, to weigh anchor. * Sarpas, vide carpas. * Sarpe,
vide Sarpe. * Sarpedon, a king of Lycia who aided the Trojans. * Sarraja, the
sowthistle. * Sarta, f. a file or putting on a string of pearls, beads, or of
any other thing that may be filed up in that manner. Sarta de higos, a rope of
figs. * Sartal, vide Sarta. Sartal de cuentas, a pair of beads. * Sartalejos,
little necklaces of pearls or such like, as women wear about their necks.
Sartar, to put on a string, or file up. Sarten, m. a frying pan. * Fruta de
sarten, fritters, pancakes, or such like. * Sarzo, m. a hurdle, a dragge to
break clods, a grate. Sassifragia, an herb called Saxifrage. Sastre, m. a
tailor. * Satan, vide Satanas. * Satanas, or Sathanas, the devil. * Satano,
vide Satanas. * Sateadora muerte, vide Salteadora. * Satira, vide Satyra, a
Satyr, a biting or taunting poem. * Satiricamente, bitingly, tauntingly. *
Satirion, vide Satyrion, an herb called Ragwoort. Satisfacion, satisfying,
contenting. * Satisfar, vide Satisfazer, to satisfy, to content. Satisfazer,
to content, to satisfy. * Satisfecho, satisfied, contented. Satyra, a sharp,
biting or taunting poem. Satyrion, an herb called Ragwoort. * Savado, vide
Sabado. Savalo, a kind of fish like a shadde. * Savana, a sheet for the
bed, sometime used for a horsecloath. * Savanas, sheets. * Savandija, all
kind of worms or vermin creeping on the earth. * Savanilla, a little sheet.
Savan^on, m. or Frieras, a kibe on the heel. * Savanon^e, idem. Sauco, Sauz,
or Sambugueyre, the Elderne tree. * Savete, understand thou. * Saver, vide
Saber, to know, to understand, etc. * Savia, vide Sabia. * Saviamente, vide
Sabiamente. * Savido, vide Sabido, understood. * Savidor, vide Sabidor, a
knower or understander. * Saviduria, vide Sabiduria, skill, knowledge, wisdom,
understanding, cunning. * Saviendas, vide Sabiendas, wittinglie. * Savieza,
vide Sabieza, wisdom. * Savio, vide Sabio, wise. * Savina, or Sabina, Sauin.
* Savolo, a shad fish. * Savor, vide Sabor, m. savor, taste. * Savorear, vide
Saborear. * Savoyana, vide Saboyana. * Savra, Savre, he shall know, I shall
know, vide Saver. * Sauz, m. a sallow, a willow. Sauze, m. a willow. Sauzedal,
a place full of willowes. Sauzegatillo, a little willow. * Saxar, to lance the
flesh, to let the blood out. Saxifragua, or Sassifragia, an herb called
Saxifrage. Saya, f. a woman's peticoate. Sayal, m. course stuff, such as horse
couerings are made of, course sackcloth. Sayalero, one that makes such course
sachcloth. Sayete, m. a little cassocke. * Sayete de armas, a coat armor.
Sayn, m. fat, grease. Saynar, to fatten, to feed fat. Saynete, dainty meat,
pellets made of paste to cram fowls with. Sayno, m. an upper and loose
wastecoate, or kind of cassocke. * Sayo, m. a coat, a ierkin. Sayon, m. a
hangman, a great cassocke. * Sayuela, a little petticoate for a woman, or an
under peticoate. * Sayuelo, m. a ierkin, a little cassocke, such as women use
in Spain. Sazon, f. season, due time. Sazonado, seasoned, done in due time. *
Sazonador, one that does things in due time, an obseruer of seasons or fit
times. Sazonar, to season, to ripen.
S C
* Scacos, m. vide Escaques, checker works, one of one color, another of an
other, as the chesseboord. * Scalentador, one that warmeth, or a warming pan. *
Scalentador de cama, a warming pan. * Scambrones, hearts thorn, a shrub so
called. Also a kind of white bramble very fruitful called rhamne. Scamonea,
f. scammonie, the juice of an herb used to purge choler vehemently. *
Scaragol, a shell fish called a whelke, a perwinkle. * Scea, one of the gates
of Troy so called. * Scelerado, ungracious, wicked. * Scena, as much as is
acted in a comedy at one show on the stage, the playing stage or forepart
thereof, the place where plaiers dress themselves. * Sciencia, knowledge,
skill, cunning. * Scifa, a cockhoate, a shipboate, a little boat made of a
tree used on rivers. * Scopeta, f. a fouling piece, a birding piece to kill
foul or birds. Scopetina, f. spittle. * Scordio, an herb called water
germander. * Scorpion, a serpent most venomous so called. * Scrofularia, an
herb called the lesser celidonie or figwoort. Scota, or Escota, a rope in a
ship wherewith they hoise or strike sail, called the sheate. * Scuerta, f.
vide Escucha, a scoute watch. * Sculpido, vide Esculpido, graued, carved. *
Scurzo, an herb called vipers grass.
S E
* Se, the pronoune signifying him or them. Sometimes a sign of the passive
voice of a verb, as Se dize, it is said. * Se, I know, vide Saber. * Sea, vide
Ser. * Seays, you may be, vide Ser. * Seberidad, vide Severidad. * Sebero, vide
Severo. * Seboso, or Sevoso, fat, full of tallow. Seca, drouth or dryness, a
kernel in the armehole. Secaces, followers. Secar, Praes. yo Seco, 1. Praet.
yo Seque Sub. Praes. Seque, to dry up. Seco, m. dry. Secrestacion, or
Secresto, sequestration, putting of goods into an indifferent man's hands.
Secrestar, to sequester, to put into indifferent men's hands. * Secresto, vise
Secrestacion. Secretamente, secretly, privily, closely. Secretario, a
secretary, one that writes his masters letters, and is participant of his
privy dealings. Secreto, secret, privy, close. * Secta, f. a sect, a faction
where some hold of opinion contrary to other in matters of religion, etc.
Secura, f. drouth, dry weather. * Secutivo, following, or one that follows.
Sed, f. thirst, dryness of stomach. * Sed, be ye, vide Ser. Seda, silk.
Also a bristle or stiff hair. * Seda de ajel, raw silk. * Seda de puerco, a
hogs bristle. Sedadera, f. an instrument, with which they dress and make the
silk. Sedal, m. a fishing, a hair line. Seden^a, f. the hurds of the silk.
Sedero, a silke-man. Sediente, thirsty. * Seer, vide Ser. * Segada, f. or
Segazon, f. harvest. * Segado, mowed, reaped. Segador, a mower, a reaper, a
harvest man. Segar, Praes. yo Siego, 1. Praet. yo Segue Sub. Praes. Siegue, to
mow, to reap, to cut. Segazon, f. or Segada, harvest. * Seglar, secular, lay,
not of the clergy. * Segiuda, f. a following, a train. * Seguida, as Mugeres
de seguida, common brothell harlots or queanes. * Seguido, followed. Seguidor,
a follower, one that waits or attends upon any. * Seguilla, Seguille,
Seguillo, id est Seguir la, Seguir le, Seguir lo, to follow her, to follow him,
to follow it. Seguimiento, following, attending on. Segui^, Praes. yo Sigo, 1.
Praet. Seguy. Sub. Praes. Siga, to follow. * Seguito, m. a train of men,
success of matters. Segun, according, as. * Segundamente, secondly. *
Segundar, to second. * Segundariamente, secondarily. Segundo, the second.
Segur, m. an axe, a battle axe, a hatchet. Seguramente, surely, safely,
securely. Segurar, to make safe or sure. Segureja, a hatchet. * Segurella,
Sagorida, or Axedrea, an herb called Sauorie. Seguridad, f. safety,
assurance, security. Seguro, sure, safe, secure, safety, security. * Seguro
real, a safe conduit. * Seguro, as a buen Seguro oso jurar, I dare safely
swear. Seguron, m. a battle axe, an axe, a chip-axe. * Sellada, f. vide
Selada. * Sellado, m. sealed. Sellador, a sealer. Selladura, sealing. Sellar,
to seal, to sign. * Sellinis, a city so called in Sicily, that has plenty
of Dates and Palm trees. Sello, a seal. * Selva, f. a wood. * Selvatico,
woodie, full of woods. Semana, f. a week, a seuen-night. Semanera cosa, a
weekly matter. Semanero, one hired by the week, from week to week.
Semblante, like, semblable, making show of. * Sembrada, f. a sowing or setting
of beans, seeds, or such like. Sembrado, sown, a corn field, beset with
pearl, etc. embrodered. Sembrador, a sower. Sembradura, sowing, setting of
beans or such like, etc. Sembrar, to sow seed or corn. * Semejable, like,
semblable, making show of. Semejanca, resemblance, likelihoode, semblance, an
image or picture of. Semejante, like, the pattern or image of. Semejantemente,
likely, semblably. Semejar, to liken, to resemble, to be like. Semental, that
which is sown. Sementar, yo Semiento, to sow. Sementera, f. a sowing season.
Semiente, f. seed. * Semiente de Papagayos, Alacor, or Cartamo, bastard
asaffron. * Semiente, Semiento, vide Sementar. * Semilla, f. seed. * Semillas,
seeds, grain. * Semitierra, vide Alfango, or Cimitarra, a woodknife,
fauchion, or hanger. Semola, vide A cemite. * Semoviente, putting aside. *
Sempiterno, everlasting, perpetual, continual. * Sempreviva, or Yerva
puntera, the greater Sengreene, Housleeke. Sen, Seny, an herb to purge with.
Senado, m. a senate, a council of Aldermen. Senador, a senator, an alderman. *
Senatorio, belonging to a senator, or of the senate. * Sencillamente, vide
Senzillamente. * Sencillo, vide Senzillo. Senda, f. or Sendero, m. a path. *
Sendas vezes, several times. * Cada sendas peras verdin^ales, every one a
pear of such a kind. * Con sendas Mochachas, with every one his wench.
Sendero, m. or Senda, f. a pathway. Sendilla, f. a little path. Sendos, m,
every one, one by one. * Senectud, or Senetud, old age. * Senetud, f. idem.
Sen^a, f, or Sen^al, a sign, a token, a beck, a watchworde, a nodde, a wink.
Sen^al, f. or Sen^a, f. a sign, an ensign, a mark, a show, an earnest penny.
* Sen^al de Herida, a skarre after a wound. * To car en la sen^al, to hit the
mark, to win the goal. * Sen^al de compra, an earnest penny.
Sen^aladamente, excellently, notably. Sen^alado, excellent, notable, especial.
* Sen^alador, one that marketh or points out any thing. Sen^alar, to note, to
mark, to point at. * Sen^aleja, f. a little sign, mark, token or show.
Sen^eramente, solitarily. Sen^ero, alone, solitary. * Sen^o, vide Seno, the
bosom, a creek. Sen^or, a lord, a master. * Sen^or de titulo, a lord of high
calling. Sen^ora, a lady, a mistress. * Sen^ora, as Nuestra Sen^ora, our
Lady Marie. Sen^oreado, ruled, governed. Sen^oreador, a ruler, a governor, a
man in authority. Sen^orear, to govern, to rule, to bear sway or authority.
Sen^oria, f. lordship, a title of honor. Sen^oril, lordlike. Sen^orilmente,
lordly. Sen^orio, m. lordship of the possessions, manors and lands a noble man
holds. Sen^uelo, m. a lure to call hawks with, a stale to take birds with.
Seno, a creek of the sea. Also a bosom. * Senogiles, garters of cruel or
such like stuff. * Senoso, m. full of creekes and crooked banckes. * Sensato,
of or pertaining to sense, sensible, with sense, that can feel or perceive.
Sensible, sensible, that may be felt or perceived. Sentado, sitting, set,
placed. Sentar, yo Siento, Sub, Praes. Siente, to sit. Sentarse en ^uclillas,
to sit on his buttocks, to sit rucking or cowring down, to sit cross legged
like a tailor. Sentencia, a sentence, an opinion, a judgment. Sentenciado,
judged. *Sentenciador, a pronouncer of sentence or of judgment. Sentenciar, to
judge, to pronounce sentence of judgment, to adiudge. Sentido, feeling, sense.
Also felt or perceived. * Sentidos, the five senses. Sentimiento, sense,
feeling, perceiving. Sentina, f. a sink, a pumpe in a ship. Sentiir, yo
Siento, to feel, to perceive, to judge, to be grieved. * Senziida dehesa, a
common pasture abounding with grass where no cattle have yet come.
Senzillamente, simply, singly. Senzillez, f. singleness, not double. Also
simplicity and plainnes. Senziillo, single, not double. Also simple, plain,
pure. * Sepa, may know, vide Saber. * Seperacion, a separation, a putting
asunder. Seperadamente, severally, asunder, one from another, apart. *
Seperado, severed, parted. Seperar, to separate, to part asunder. * Seps, a
kind of serpent, whose biting causes a wonderful swelling, and makes the
flesh to rot. * Septimo, the seventh. Sepulcro, a grave, a burying place. *
Sepultado, huried. Sepultar, to bury. Sepultura, a burial. Sepulturero, a
digger of graves. * Sequace, or Secace, a follower. * Seque, vide Secar.
Sequedad, f. drouth, drines. * Sequedales, dry countries or places. * Sequera,
vide Sequedad, drines, drouth. * Sequeria, f. extreme, drouth or dryness.
Sequero, dry by nature, that cannot be watered, or made moist. Sequillas,
kernels in the neck. Ser. Praes. Indicat. Soy, eres, es. Imperfest. E'ra,
eras, era. 1. Praet. Fuy, fuiste, fue. Fut. Sere, ras, ra. Sub. Praes. Sea.
Imperfect. Fuesse. Seria, or Fuera. Fut. Fuere, to be. Sera, f. a great basket.
* Sera, he, or it shall be, vide Ser. * Serafin, or Seraphin, m. a seraphin. *
Serao, m. vide Sarao, a royal festing or sporting. Serapino, a kind of gum or
Rosin. * Serapis, m. an Idol, among the Egyptians worshipped as their chief
God. * Serba, vide Serva. * Serbal, vide Serval. * Serbicio, vide Servicio. *
Serbil, vide Servil. * Serbilla, vide Servilla. Serena, a Mermaide, which was
said to have been half a woman, half a fish. Serenar, to make clear or
fair. Serenidad, f. cleernes, fairenes of weather. * Serenissimo, most clear,
most illustrious. Sereno, clear, bright. * Sereno, the eeuening dew,
oftentimes blasting those that lie in it, in Spain and other hot countries. *
Sergesto, a captain of one of the ships of AEneas. * Seringa, vide Siringa.
Sermon, m. a sermon, speech. Sermonear, to preach, to make a sermon. * Serna,
vide Sarna. * Sernas, harrowes. * Serojas, f. sticks. Seron, m. a big
basket, such as they load a horse or beast withal. Serpa, mother thime, wild
thime. * Serpal, a place where mother thime grows. * Serpentina, a long piece
of ordinance, called a Basiliske. Also the cock of a musket or harquebuse,
wherein they put the match to give fire to shoot it off. * Serpentino, m. like
a serpent, belonging to a serpent. Also a stone called a Serpentine. Serpiente,
f. a serpent. * Serpo yerva, a kind of herb. Serpol, or Serpollo, wild
thime, mother thime. * Serrana, a hilly place, belonging to a hill. *
Serracenesca, vide Sarracenesca. * Serrado, vide Cerrado. * Serraja, vide
Cerraja. * Serrajas, a kind of herb. * Serran, a sea fish like a perch.
Serrania, f. a hilly country. Serrano, hilly. * Serrar, vide Cerrar. *
Serrazon, vide Cerrazon. * Serrejon, m, a hill. * Serro, vide Cerro. Serva, a
fruit called a Saruice. Serva fruta, idem. Serval, a service tree, or a place
where they grow. * Servar, to keep, to observe, to vpold. Servenda, late ripe.
Servicio, service, bondage. Also a privy, a close stool. * Servido, served,
pleased. * Si Dios fuere servido, if it shall please God. Servidor, m. a
servant, a close stool, a trey or trugge. Servidubre, f. bondage, servitude. *
Serviente, or Sirviente, a servant. * Servieta, vide Servilleta, a table
napkin. Servil, slavish, servile. Servilla, f. a clout. Also pinsens for
pantofles. * Servillas, pinsens that women in Spain were in pantofles.
Servilleta, f. a table napkin. Servir, yo Sirvo, to serve, to wait. Sessar,
vide Cessar, to cease. Sessenta, threescore. Sesgo, calm, quiet, deep. Also a
slope, aswash, a thwarte, a side. * Sesgo pecho, a quiet pacified breast. * un
golpe a Sesgo, a blow athwarte or aswash. * Sesgo, or al trauers, ouerthwarte,
aswash, a slope, sidelong. * Sesillo, little wit, or little brain. Sesito, m.
little wit. * Sesmero, a knight of the shire, one that solliciteth the case
of the commonaltie. Sesmo, the sixth. Seso, brain, wit, sense. Sesteadero, or
Sesteador, a summer house, to pass the heat of the day in. Sesteador, or
Sesteadero, a summer house, to pass the heat of summer in. Sesudo, sensible,
witty. Seta, f. a sect. Setecientos, seven hundred. Setenal, one of seven
years old. Setenar, to punish by the seventh. Setenas, the seventh, seven
fold, a kind of fine or forfeyture imposed on men for breach of the kings
prerogative of laws, etc. * Seteno, or Septimo, the seventh. Setenta,
seauentie. * Setentrion, the north. * Setentrional, northerly. Setiembre, the
month September. Setimo, Septimo, or Seteno, the seventh. Seto, vide Soto, a
hedge, an enclosure. Setro, a kings scepter. Severamente, severely, rigorously.
Severidad, f. severity. Severo, severe, rigorous, stearne, the name of a hill
in Italy. Sevilla, the chief city of Andaluzia in Spain. * Sevilla la veja,
the old town hard by it. Sevo, vide Sebo, tallow, fat. Sevooso, or Seboso, fat,
full of tallow. Sexo, the sex, male or female. * Sextario, a certain measure
about a pint and a half. * Sezeno pano^, a very course base cloth. * Sey,
be thou, vide Ser. * Seydo, been. * Seyendo, being. Seys, six. Seyscientos,
six hundred.
S I
* Si, the pronoune, him. * Si, as Fuera de Si, besides himself, out of his
wits. * Por si, by himself. Si, the preposition or aduerbe, signifying if,
yea. * Sica, vide Siza. * Sicania, the country of Sicilie. * Sicano,
Siciliano, or Siculo, a Sicilian. * Sicheo, the husband of Queen Dido, whom
his brother Pygmalion slew for covetousness of his treasure. * Sicial, as
pescado Sicial, a kind of fish in Galizia in Spain, of great bigness and very
dainty. * Siciliano, Siculo, or Sicano, a Sicilian. * Siclecolore, or
Sirguerito, a bird called a linnet. * Siculo, vide Sicano. * Sidereo, starlike,
bright shining. * Sido, as yo he Sido, tu as Sido, I have been, thou have been.
* Sidra, f. sider made of apples. * Siega, vide Segar. * Sieglo, vide Siglo. *
Sieque, vide Segar. * Siembra, Siembre, vide Sembrar. Siempre, always, ever,
continually. Siempreviva, syngreene or housleeke. Sien, or Sienes, the temples
of the head. * Siendo, being. * Sienta, Siento, vide Sentir and Sentar. *
Siente, Siento, vide Sentar, and Sentir. Sierpe, f. a serpent. Sierra, a hill,
a mountain, a saw, a rock. * Sierra morena, a high hill in AndaluZia, dividing
Andaluzia from the kingdom of Toledo, so called because of the dark swarty
color it has. * Sierro, vide Sierra, a saw. Sierva, a maydseruant. * Slerva,
Siervo, vide Servir. Siervo, a man servant. Siesso, a close stool. Also the
tail, the buttocks. Also a seat or sitting down on the buttockes. Siesta, f.
heat of the summer. Siete. seven. * Sietecientos, seven hundreds. Siete en
rama, seven leafed grass. Sieten^al, of seven years old. * Siga, vide seguir.
Siglo, an age. * Siglo, a buen Siglo aya, god have mercy upon the soul.
Signar, to sign, to seal. Signatura, signing, sealing. Significacion,
signification, betokening. * Significado, signified. Significar, Praes. yo
Significo, 1. Paet. yo signifique, to signify, to give, to understand.
Signifique, vide Significar. Signo, a sign, a token, a seal. * Sigo, vide
Seguir. * Sigualdad, f. vide Desigualdad, inequality. * Siguenc, f. a city of
Castile in Spain. * Siguiendo, following. Siguiente, following. * Sigurado,
assured, having security. * Siguridad, vide Seguridad, security, assurance. *
Sigurar, vide Segurar, to assure, to make secure. * Siguro, vide Seguro, safe,
sure, secure. Silaba, f. a syllable. Silla, a chair, a seat, a stool, a
saddle. * Silla real, a throne, or kings seat. Silencio, silence, holding the
peace. * Sillera, f. vide Silleta. * Silleria, a place where they make or sell
either chaires or saddles. Also works called Cillerie works on the heads of
posts or pillars, and made as cloth or leaves turning diverse ways: a kind
of carved work. Sillero, a maker of chaires or stools, a saddler. Silleta, a
little stool. * Sillica, f. a little chair. Silo, a granier to lay up corn
in. * Silogizar, to argue or reason like a Logitian. Silva, or Selva, a wood.
Silvar, to hiss, to whistle. Silvestre, woodish, or of the wood, wild. Silvo,
m. hissing, whistling. * Sima, a deep pit, a dungeon. * Sima de vicios, a
gulphe or depth of vices. Simar, vide Sima. * Simethio, a river of Sicily so
called. Simiente, f. seed. * Similagines, that part of meal or wheat which is
neither mere meal or pure flower. * Similar, alike. * Simois, a river so
called, that passes by Troy. Simonia, f. symonie, buying and selling of
ecclesiastical livings for money, corrupt briberie in church matters.
Simoniaco, a dealer with such briberie or symonie. Simple, simple, unmixed,
sincere, pure, plain, without deceit, fraud or guile. * Simplecito, vide
Simplezito. Simplemente, honestly, simply, plainly. Simpleza, f. simplenes,
plainenes, honest dealing. * Simplezito, a poor simple fellow. * Simplicidad,
f. simplenes, plain dealing and meaning. Simuladamente, fainedly,
counterfaitlie. Simulador, a dissembler, a counterfaiter. Simular, to
counterfaite, to dissemble. Sin, without. Sincel, or Sinzel, a grauing tool,
carved work. Sincelado, carved, graued. * Sinceladura, caruing, grauing.
Sincelar, to grave, to carue. * Sinceridad, f. sincerity, pureness, cleerenes
of conscience. * Sincero, pure, sincere, perfect, upright, no dissembler. *
Sindicado, judged, the office of a judge. * Sin este, besides this, without
this. * Singular, singular, notable, excellent. * Singularmente, notably,
singularly, excellently. * Siniestra mano, the left hand. * Siniestramente,
awkly, untowardly. Siniestro, the left. * Sinjusticia, injury, without justice
or right. Sino, if not, unless. * Sino, vide Signo, a sign, a token, a seal.
* Sinon, a famous thief among the Grecians, by whose industry and crafty
invention, in devising the huge horse of wood, and mangling himself, Troie
was betrayed. * Sino que, unless that. * Sinrazones, injuries. * Sinsabores,
vnsauerines, unpleasantness. * Sinte, vide Siente, and Sentir. * Sinzel, or
Sincel, a grauing tool, graued work. * Sinzelado, or Sincelado, graued,
carved. * Sinzelador, or Sincelador, a caruer, a grauer. * Sinzelar, or
Sincelar, to grave, to carue. * Sinzelo, or Sincelo, m. grauing, caruing. *
Sinzero, or Sincero, pure, sincere, perfect, upright. * Siquiera, only. Sirga,
a rope to tow along with. * Sirgano, a silkeworme. Sirgo, silk twist.
Sirguerito, m. a bird called a goldfinch. Sirguero, one that draws a boat
along with a rope. Siringa, a clister. Also a siring, a spout. * Sirve, vide
Servir. Sirviente, or Serviente, a servant. Sisa, an assise, solder for gold,
a keeping or a saving back something for ones self. * Sisar, to keep back,
or save something into his own purse. * Sistra, an herb called Spikewell or
Bearefoote. Sitial, f. a stool and a cushion. Sitiado, seated, besieged.
Sitiar, to besiege, to seat himself. Sitio, m. situation, seat, siege laid
to a town. * Situado, situated. * Situar, to situate. * Sivil, courteous,
civil, well manered. * Sivilidad, cur^^sie, civility, good manners. * Siza, a
kind of bird which cries zize, zize.
S O.
So, under. * Soagem, an herb called Alkanet. Some say it is Buglosse, other
say, Burrage. * Soagen, idem. Sobacar, or Sobarcar, to trusse up under the
armepits. Sobaco, the armepit. Sobado, vide Sovado. * Sobar, vide Sovar.
Sobajar, or Sobaxar, to mould dough, to groape. Sobaquina, stinch of the
armepits. * Sobar, vide Sovar. * Sobarado, trussed up under the armepits.
Sobarcar, or Sobacar, Praes. yo Sobarco, 1. Praet. yo Sobarque, to trusse up
under the armepits. * Sobarque, vide Sobarcar. * Soberado, vide Algorfa, a
sollar, a loft. Soberadar, to make a loft, or sollar. Soberamente, or
Soberanamente, soueraynly, from above. * Soberanamente, highly, soueraignely. *
Soberania, f. souerainty. Soberano, a sovereign, a head or high governor. *
Soberbia, or sobervia, pride. Sobervia, or Soberbia, pride, insolency.
Soberviamente, proudly, insolently. Sobervio, proud, arrogant, insolent.
Sobornal, a surplus in measure. Also a kind of bottle to carry wine. *
Sobornado, suborned* hired, maynteined. * Sobornador, a suborner, a maynteiner,
one that sets on. Sobornar, to suborne, to set on, to procure to some ill. *
Soborno, advantage, whatsoever is given over more than bargain, a bribe. *
Sobra, over and above. Sobrado, excellent, passing, superfluous, a lofte, a
parlour, a dining chamber, a main beam of a house. * Sobra nombre, a surname.
Sobrar, to pass, to surpass, to be too much Sobre, upon, above. * Sobreaguar,
or flotar, to floate or fleet upon the water. * Sobrean^o, any young of more
then a year old. * Sobrecamerero, a chief chamberlain * Sobrecarga, a
surcharge, an ouercharge. * Sobrecargar, Praes. yo Sobrecargo, 1. Praet. yo
Sobrecargue, to surcharge, to ouerweigh. * Sobrecargue, vide Sobrecargar, *
Sobrecedula, a writ or warrant granted upon another. * Sobrecejo, an eie-brow.
* Sobregueado, vide Sobreaguado, gone on the water. * Sobrehaz, the outward
show, the utter face. * Sobrel, id est, Sobre el, upon it. * Sobrello, id est,
Sobre ello, upon it. * Sobremesas, carpets. * Sobre Nadar, to swim above. *
Sobre Natural, supernatural, above nature. Sobre Nombre, a surname. *
Sobreojo, a lowering or hanging countenance. Sobrepelliz, f. a surplice.
Sobreponer, Praes. Sobrepongo, Sobrepones, Sobrepone, 1. Praet. Sobrepuse,
Sobrepusiste, Sobrepuso, Fut. Sobreporne, or Sobrepondre, as, a, Sub. Praes.
Sobrponga, Imperfect. Sobrepusiera, Sobrepornia, or Sobrepusiesse, Fut.
Sobrepusiere, to put upon, to set upon. * Sobreponga, vide Sobreponer.
Sobrepongo, vide Sobreponer. * Sobreporne, Sobrepornia, vide Sobreponer. *
Sobrepujado, m. excellent. Sobrepujar, to excel. * Sobrepuse, Sobrepusiera,
Sobrepusiesse, vide Sobreponer. Sobreropa, an upper garment. Sobresalido,
impatient, rash, headstrong, hasty, soon moved to anger. * Sobresaliente,
headstrong, rash, impatient. * Sobresaltado, moved with a sudden passion.
Sobresalto, m. a sudden passion. * Sobresanaherida, a wound cured up above, and
within imperfect. Sobrescrevir, to write upon, to write a superscription.
Sobrescripto, written upon, a superscription. Sobreseer, to sit on, to
surcease. * Sobresedo, vide Sobreseydo, surceased. * Sobreseymiento, a demurre
or stay of a suite in law. Sobrestante, standing over. * Sobrestera, id est,
Sobre estera, upon a matter. * Sobrevarda, an ouerseer of the guard. Also a
guard upon a garment. * Sobrevenga, Sobrevengo, vide Sobrevenir. Sobrevenir,
Praes. Sobrevengo, Sobrevienes, Sobreviene, 1. Praes. Sobrevine, Sobreviniste,
Sobrevino, Fut. Sobreverne, or Sobrevendre, as, a, Sub. Praes. Sobrevenga,
Imperf. Sobreviniesse, Sobrevernia, or Sobreviniera. Fut. Sobreviniere, to come
upon, to come in the nicke, to take one napping. * Sobreverne, vide Sobrevenir.
* Sobrevernia, vide Sobrevenir. * Sobrevine, Sobreviniera, Sobreviniesse, vide
Sobrevenir. Sobrevista, the beuer of a caske or horsemans head piece. Sobrina,
a niece, a brothers or sisters daughter. Sobrino, a nephew, a brothers son. *
Sobrio, sober. * Sobroso, vide Sabroso. * Socapa, privily, under the cloak.
Socarren, m. the eaues of a house. Socarrar, or Chocarrar, to jest, to mock, to
sing. * Socarren^a, a crannie, a chinke. Socavar, to undermine. * Sochantre, m.
an vnder-chaunter in the Church. * Sociable, fellowlike, able or fit to be kept
company with. Socio, a fellow, a companion. * Socolor, under color, by
pretense. Socorrer, to succor, to help, to relieve, to aid. * Socorrido,
succored, relieved, aided. Socorro, aid, succor, help, relief. Socrosio, a
medicine. * Socrosio mitridatico, Mithridate. Sodicho, vndermentioned, spoken
of below. * Sodoma, the city Sodom. * Sodometico, a buggerer with mankind. *
Sodomia, buggerie, the sin of Sodom. * Sodomita, m. a Sodomite or Buggerer. *
Sodomo, vide Sodomita. * Soficiente, or Suficiente, sufficient, able to
satisfy or content. * Sofista, a sophister. * Sofistico, belonging to
sophistry. Sofrenada, f. a chocke with the bridle, a twitch, gird or snatch
back with the bridle. A restraint. Sofrenado, refrained, kept back. Sofrenar,
to refrain, to keep back. Soga, f. a roape. Sometime a long coard to tie
beasts with at pasture. * Soguero, a maker of roaps, a roape maker. *
Soguilla, f. a little roape. * Sohes, f. dregs or adust matter in the body. *
Sojusgado, subjected, subdued. Sojuzgar, to subdue, to bring in subjection.
Sol, m. the sun. Solado, floored, planchered, paued. Solado, a floor, a
pauement. Solamente, only, alone. olana, f. a sunnie place, a sollar or loft
in a house, a sunne-diall. Solana, vide Resolana, a pension paid to the Prince
for to live out of common business, rent that one pays yearly for a house: a
sollar or loft. * Solano, the east-winde. Solapado, hidden, concealed. Solapar,
to hide, to conceal, to keep close. * Solar, the court yard near a house, a
place not fully builded, a foundation, a floor. A stock or kindred. *
Solariego, the original of a stock or kindred. * hidalgo de Solar conocido, a
gentleman of an ancient house. Solaz, m. solace, pleasure, delight,
recreation. Solazar, to solace, to delight, to sport. Solda, or Sonda, the
plum-line wherewith they sound the depth of the water. Soldada, payment of
wages to soldiers or servants, soldering with lead, tin, etc. * Soldadar gente,
to take up men for the war, to press soldiers forth. * Soldadesca, f. the
skill or profession of soldiers. Soldado, a soldier. Also soldered, as metal
is in setting on ears, etc. Soldadura, or Atincadura, soldering of metal.
Sultan, a sultan, an emperor of Persia. Soldar, to solder things of metal.
Soledad, solitariness, being alone. * Solemnizado, solemnised, observed
solemnly, celebrated. * Solemnizador, a keeper of ancient observations and
rites. * Solemnizar, to solemnize, to celebrate, to observe solemnly. *
Solene, or Soleno, solemn. Solenemente, solemnly. Solenidad, solemnity.
Soleno, solemn, annual, yearly used, ordinary, public, accustomed. Soler,
yo Suelo, to be wont. * Soleta, the foot or sole of the stockings. * Solho,
Sollo, or Sullo, a fish called a sturgeon. * Solicitado, solicited, set on.
Solicitamente, carefully. Solicitar, to solicit, to call on, to prick
forward. Solicito, careful, pensive, heavy minded. Solicitud, carefulnes,
diligence. * Solido, firm, solid. Soliman, m. mercury sublimate. Solitario,
solitary, alone. Soliviar, to relieve, to succor, to rescue. * a Solla
saliva, id est, al Sol la saliva, at the sun the spittle. Sollamar, to sear,
to burn off hairs, to scorch. Sollar, yo Suello, to blow, to breath, to
pant. Sollo, a sturgeon, a pike fish, a sea pickrel. Sollocar, to sigh, to sob.
Solloco, a sigh, a sob, the hicket. Solo, alone. * Solomos de el puerco, a hogs
hasselet. * Solo que, only that. * Solo uno, one alone. * Solsticio, the stay
of the sun, when it is at the highest and at the lowest, as when it enters
into Cancer and Capricorn. * Solsticial, belonging to those stays of the
sun. Soltador, a looser, an expounder of dreams and riddles. Soltar, yo
Suelto, to loose, to let loose, to release, to abate. Soltera, a single woman.
Solteria, single life. Soltero, a single man. * Soltura, loosing, delivering,
untying. Somas, bran, crible. Sombra, f. shadow. Sombrajo, a shadowie place.
Sombrerera, butter Burre. * Sombrerero, a hatmaker. Sombrero, m. a hat. *
Sombrero de obispo, a bishops myter. * Sombrero de Albanez, a high crowned hat.
* Sombria, or Caban^uela, a place where stage players dress themselves.
Sombrio, shadowy, dark. Sombroso, full of shadow. * Somergujador, one that
diueth under water. * Somergujar, to diue under water. * Somergujo, a certain
water bird called a Diuer, or Diuedapper. Somero, the higest. Someter, to
submit, to put under. Sometido, submitted, put under. Somo, upon, above.
Somorgujador, vide Somergujador. Somorgujar, vide Somergujar. Somorgujo, or
Somorgujon, vide Somergujo. Son, a sound, a noise. * Son, they are, vide Ser.
Sonable, that which may be sounded. Sonada, a deed much spoken of, a famous
deed. Sonaja, or Sonajeras, or Tarrena, a little bell or rattle for children to
play with. Sonajeras, vide Sonaja. Sonar, yo Sueno, to sound, to make noise,
to blow the nose. * Sonchos yerva, an herb. * Soncochado, a kind of pottage.
Sonda, a plummet to sound the depth of waters with. * Soneto, m. a sonnet.
Sonido, or Sono, m. a sound, a noise. Son^ar, yo Suen^o, to dream, to trifle,
or dally. Son^oliento, sleepie, drowsy. * Sonora voz, a hollow sounding voice.
Sonoro, sounding hollow. * Sonoroso, very sounding. * Sonreyr, to smile. *
Sonrire, vide Sonreyr. * Sonriso, a smiling. * Sonsacar, to subduce. *
Sontuosamente, or Suntuosamente, stately, costly, sumptuously. * Sontuoso, or
Sumptuoso, sumptuous, costly, stately. Sopa, a soppe. * Sopar, to make sops, or
to sop into any thing. Sopear, to soppe, to put under feet. * Sopercha,
superfluity, overmuch. * Soperchadamente, superfluously. * Soperchar, to
exceed, to have too much. * Soperchear, idem. * Sopercheria, f. an exceeding. *
Sophista, vide Sofista. * Soplada, a blaste, easy to blow. Soplar, to blow, to
breath. * Soplido, blown, puffed up. Soplo, breath, a blast. Soplodora, that
may be blown. * Soplon, a great blast. Soporifero, that brings sleep. *
Soportado, supported, vpholden. * Soportal, a supporter or vpholder. Soportar,
to support, to uphold, to maintain. * Soppa, vide Sopa, a soppe. Sopplo, vide
Soplo, a blast, a breath. * Soprecejo, vide Sobrecejo, the eiebrow. * Sorbas, a
fruit called Saruices. * Sorber, yo Suerbo, to sowpe up. * Sorbo, a sowping.
Sordecer, yo Sordesco, Sub. Praes. Sordesca, to be deaf. Sordedad, vide
Sordez. * Sordez, f. deafenes. * Sordesca, Sordesco, vide Sordecer. *
Sordescer, vide Sordecer, to wax deaf. Sordo, deaf. Sortear, to cast lots. *
Sortero, a teller of fortunes, a caster of lots. * Sortija, a lot, a round
hoope ring, a kind of weapon. * Correr la sortija, to run at the ring. *
Sortijon, m. a great hoope ring. Sorva, a Saruis fruit. Sorver, yo Suervo, to
sowpe up. Sorvible, that may be sowped up. * Sorvido, sowped. Sorvito, a little
sowpe. Sorvo, a sowping. Sorze, a rat. * Sosacar, to seduce, to entice under
hand. Sosedad, f. vnsauorines. Soslayo, a swash, thwarte, aslope. Soso,
unsavory. * Sosobrar, to ouerwhelme. Sospecha, suspicion. * Sospechado,
suspected. Sospechar, to suspect. Sospechosamente, suspiciously. Sospechoso,
suspicious. Sospirar, to sigh. Sospiro, sighing. Sossacado, seduced, deceived.
Sossacar, vide Sosocar, to deceive, to seduce, to undermine. Sossegadamente,
quietly, peaceably. * Sossegadillo, somewhat quiet, somewhat calmed. Sossegado,
quiet, calm, pacified. Sossegar, Praes. yo Sossiego, 1. Praet. yo Sossegue, to
pacify, to quiet, to make calm or still. Sossiego, m. quietness, calmenes,
stilnes. * Sossiego, vide Sossegar. * Sossegue, vide Sossegar. sos Tener,
Praes. sos Tengo, sos Tienes, sos Tiene, 1. Praet. sos Tuve, sos Tuviste, sos
Tuvo, Fut. sos Terne, or sos Tender, as, a, Sub. Praes. sos Tenga, Imperfect.
sos Tuviera, sos Ternia, or sos Tuviesse, Fut. sos Tuviere, to sustain, to
maintain, to uphold. * Sostenga, Sostengo, vide sos Tener. Sostenido,
sustained, vpheld. Sostenimiento, sustaining. * Sosterne, Sosternia, vide sos
Tener. * Sostitucion, substituting, putting of another under him. * Sostituto,
substituted, set under another. * Sostituydo, idem. Sostituyr, to substitute,
to make his deputy, to set another in his place. * Sostrado, a bolt to shoot
withal. * Sostuve, Sostuviera, Sostuviesse, vide sos Tener. Sota, the knave at
cards. Sota de Navio, the place in a ship where the balast is. * Sotano, a
cave or place under ground to keep wine cool in summer. * Sotaviento, the lee
side under the wind. Soterran^o, a vault under ground. Soterrar, yo Sotierro,
to bury under ground. * Sotierre, Sotierro, vide Soterrar. * Sotil, or Sutil,
fine, subtle, crafty, slender. Sotileza, subtlety, slenderness, craft,
finenesse. Sotilmente, subtly, craftily, slenderly, finely. Soto, or Seto, a
hedge. * Sovado, kneaded as dough. Sovadura, kneading of dough. Sovajadura,
idem. * Sovajamiento, idem. Sovajar, to knead dough, to beat with the hands.
Sovar, idem. Sovar la massa, to knead the dough. * Sovervia, vide Sobervia,
pride. * Sovervio, vide Soberbio, proud. Sovina, a wooden pin to pin boords, a
swallow tail to join timber. * Soy, J am, vide Ser.
S P
* Spargoil, a kind of sea fish almost like a breame. * Sparzido, spread. *
Sparzir, to spread abroad. * Spelta, beer corn. * Spetto, a fish called a
spitfish, or sea pickrell. * Sphera, a sphere or round form, a circle, a
rundell, a bowl. * Spigo, or Languda, Lauender spike. * Spinal, a thornie
place. * Splendido, bright, clear, shining, famous, notable, excellent,
honorable. * Sponja, a sponge. * Sponjoso, spungie, light, full of holes. *
Spudar, vide Escupir, to spit. * Spurio, a bastard.
S T
* Staffero, one that helps his Lord to horseback. * Statua, f. a statue or
image. * Statuto, an ordinance, a statute, a decree. * Statuydo, appointed,
decreed, set down as a law. * Statuyr, to appoint, to decree, to determine. *
Steril, barren, fruitless. * Stopa, hurds of flax. * Straca, as Papel de
straca, waste paper to wind up ware in, brown paper. * Sturion, a foul
called an Ostrich. * Styge, the infernal lake, Styx near hell, as Poets feign.
S V
* Su, a pronoune signifying yours or his, as Su padre de vuestra A'lteza, your
fathers highness. Suave, sweet. Suavemente, sweetly. Suavidad, sweetness. *
Suavissimamente, most sweetly. * Subcessivamente, vide Successivamente,
successively, by order of succession. * Subdelegado, substituted, one that
serves another man's turn. * Subdelegar, to set under him, to appoint in his
room. Subdito, a subject. * Suberano, vide Soberano, a sovereign, or head
Prince. Subida, f. a going up, an ascending. * Subida de quilates, a pure thing
that will hold touch and trial with the best. * Subidissimo, most lofty or
proud. Subido, lofty, proud. * Subidor, one that gets up. * Subjecto,
subject, bound unto, beholden or in debt unto. Subiente, going up. * Subjetado,
subjected, brought under. * Subjetar, to bring under. Subir, to go up. * Subir
la vela, to hoise sail. Subitamente, suddenly, on a sudden. Subito, sudden,
unlooked for. * Sublimado, lifted up, extolled. Sublimar, to extol, to lift
up. * Sublime, lofty, hautie, high, that is above us. * Subornar, to suborne,
to mislead to evil, or to bear false witness. * Subpeditar, to put under
feet. * Subrepticio, that comes by stealth, counterfaited. * Subrogar, to
set as deputy. * Subscripcion, a writing under. * Subscripto, subscribed,
written below. * Subsidio, aid, help, relief. * Substentar, to uphold, to
maintain. * Substituyr, to substitute as his deputy, to set under him. *
Subtileza, f. subtlety, craft. * Sucio, vide Suzio, foul, filthy. Suceder,
to succeed, to go forward, to prosper. * Sucedido, succeeded, prospered. *
Succudimiento, a shaking back. Succudir, to shake again, to beat back.
Succession, succession, posterity, following on by course. * Successivamente,
successively, one after another, as son after father, etc. Sucessivo,
successiue, by course. Sucesso, success, posterity, issue, somewhat to
follow. Sucessor, a succeeder, one that follows another in place, either in
office, heritage, or possesion of goods. * Suciedad, or Suziedad, f. fowlenes,
sluttishnes. Sudadero, a sweating place. * Sudado, having sweat. Sudario, a
handkerchiefe. Sudar, to sweat. Sudito, m. a subject. Sudor, m. sweat.
Suegra, the wives mother, or husbands mother, a mother. Suegro, the wives
father, or husbands father, a father in law. Suela, the sole of a shoe. *
Suelas de capatos, the soles of shoes. Suelda, an herb called Comferie.
Sueldo, pay or wages. * Suele, vide Soler. * Suelle, Suello, vide Sollar.
Suelo, the ground or soil of a place, a floor, the bottom, a court yard to
a house. Sueltamente, freely, lightly, nimbly. * Sueltas, stays, or fetters of
cords for horse feet in the stable, to keep them from striking one another.
* Suelte, Suelto, vide Soltar. Suelto, loose, free, at liberty, nimble,
quick, lusty. * Suene, Sueno, vide Sonar. * Suen^e, Suen^o, vide Son^ar. *
Suenho, vide Suen^o. Suen^o, sleep, a dream. Suen^o suber, a kind of swouning
dream. * Suerbe, Suerbo, vide Sorbar. Suero, whey. Suerte, f. a lot, a chance.
* Suertes echar, to cast lots. * Sueste, or Siroco, southeast wind. Suez,
base, filthy, naughty. Suficiente, or Soficiente, sufficient, able enough.
Sufre, m. brimstone. Sufrible, tolerable. Sufrido, patient. Sufrimiento,
sufferance, patience. Sufrir, to abide, to suffer, to endure. Sugecion, or
Sujecion, subjection. Sugetar, vide Sujetar, to bring under. Sugeto, vide
Sujeto. Sugoso, full of juice. * a la Suica, after the Switzers fashion. *
Suico, m. a Switzer or a man of SwitZerland. * Sujecion, or Sugecion,
subjection. * Sujetar, or Sugetar, to bring under, to make subject. * Sujeto,
subject. Sujusgar, vide Sojuzgar, to subdue, to make to yield. * Sul, or Sur,
south. * Sulcado, made into furrows. Sulcar, Praes. yo Sulco, 1. Praet. yo
Sulque, to make into furrows. Sulco, a furrow, a gutter on a house. Sulfonete,
m. a match with brimstone. * Sulfureo, belonging to brimstone. * Sullo, vide
Solho. Suma, a sum. * Sumamente, summarily, all together. * Sumaque, or
cumaque, a kind of herb that curriers use to thicken their leather with.
Sumar, to sum up. * Sumariamente, briefly. Sumario, the gross sum, the
effect, a brief. * Sumbra, vide Sombra. * Sumidero, a sink, an ouerwhelming
place. Sumido, overwhelmed, drenched. * Sumiente de nabos, a place where
turnips do grow. Sumir, to overthrow, to drench. * Summaria, a summarie or
brief matter. Summamente, especially, excellently. * Summo, highest,
excellent. * Sumo, vide Summo. * Sumo, vide cumo, juice. Sumptuosamente,
costly, sumptuously, stately, pompously. Sumptuosidad, sumptuousness,
costlinesse. Sumptuoso, sumptuous, stately, costly. * Supe, vide Saber. *
Superar, to overcome. * Supeditar, to give or minister sufficiently, to be
enough or sufficient, to furnish with. Also to subdue and overcome, to tread
under. * Supercherias, overmuch, superfluity. * Superbo, vide Sobervio, proud.
* Superficie, the outside of any thing, the superficies. * Superficionario, one
appointed by an other, to dispatch business for another. Superfluamente,
superfluously, excessiuely. Superfluidad, superfluity, excess, too much.
Superfluo, superfluous, more than enough. * Superlativo, the superlatiue or
chief degree. * Superior, the upper, the ouermost. * Supersticion,
superstition, standing too much upon points. * Supersticiosamente,
superstitiously. * Supersticioso, superstitious, standing too much upon points.
* Supiera, Supiesse, vide Saber. * Supitamente, vide Subitamente. Suplicacion,
earnest entreaty, supplication, beseeching. * Suplicado, beseeched, earnestly
entreated. * Suplicante, a suppliant, one that entreats earnestly. Suplicar,
Praes. yo Suplico, 1. Praet. yo Suplique, Sub. Praes. Suplique, to entreat, to
beseech. * Suplildo, id est Suplidlo, beseech him. Suplimiento, a supply, a
making up. * Suplique, vide Suplicar. Suplir, to supply, to make good that
which lacks. * Supo, vide Saber. * Supplemento, vide Suplimiento. * Supponer,
to put under, to put in place of another. * Suppuesto, put under, put in place
of another, suborned, underset. * Supremo, supreme, chief. * Sur, or Sul, the
southwinde. * Surcar, to cut through waves of the sea, as a ship does. *
Surcir, vide Surzir. * Surgido, risen, come to anchor. Surgir, yo Surjo, Sub.
Praes. Surja, to arise, to come to an anchor. * Surja, Surjo, vide Surgir. *
Surron, vide curron, a leather scrip. * Surtir, to rise; to rebound. * Surto,
risen or come to an anchor. Surzidera, a woman botcher. Surzidor, a botcher, a
mender of clothes. * Surzidura, f. a botching, a mending of old clothes.
Surzir, to amend, to botch, to stitch up. * Sus, as, Sus vamos, up, up let us
go. * Sus, as, alto Sus, up, let us go. * Suscitar, to raise, or rouse up.
Suso, up, above. * de Suso, above. * Susodicho, above said. Suspencion, doubt,
want of resolution. Suspender, to suspend, to doubt. * Suspendido, suspended.
Suspention, vide Suspencion, doubt, suspending. Suspenso, suspense, doubt. *
Sussuradero, vide Susuradero. Sussurar, vide Susurar, to murmur, to mutter, to
mumble. * Sussurro, vide Susurro. Sustantia, substance, matter, goods, riches.
Sustantial, substantial, material, of some worth. * Sustener, vide Sostener,
to sustain, to maintain, to uphold, to nourish. Sustengo, sustenance,
nourishment. * Sustenido, sustained, vpheld, maintained. Sustentamiento,
sustaining, holding up, sustenance. Sustentar, yo Sustiento, to sustain, to
prop up, to maintain, to nourish. * Sustento, a sustayning. * Sustiente,
Sustiento, vide Sustentar. * Susurradero, a place where Bees keep a humming. *
Susurrador, m. a whisperer, a mutterer, a mumbler. Susurrar, or Sussurrar, to
murmur, to mutter, to mumble. * Susurrido, or Sussurrido, a muttering, a
whispering, a humming of Bees. * Susurro, or Sussurro, idem. Sutil, or Sotil,
subtle, crafty. * Sutileza, or Subtileza, subtlety, craft, finenes. *
Sutilezar, to make fine. * Sutilmente, subtly, finely. * Suya, hirs, his. *
Suyco, a Switzer. Suyo, his. Suziamente, filthily, fowly, sluttishly. Suziedad,
f. filthiness, fowlenes, slouenlines. Suzio, m. foul, filthy, slouenly,
durtie. * Suzuelo, somewhat foul, or filthy, somewhat slouenly or durtie. *
Sylvestre, wild, of the wood.
T
* TA'ba, vide Tava. * TAbaco, m. the herb Tobaco. * Tabano, or Abispon, a
horse fly, a hornet. * Tabaque, a little basket, a basket wherein women put
their needle work. * Tabaquera, the place where Tobaco grows, or a place
where Tobaco is kept. Tabaquillo, a little basket. Tabardillos, plague tokens,
blew spots, called Gods marks. Also another kind of disease. * Tabardo, vide
Tavardo. Tabarro, a hornet. * Tabellario, a carrier of letters; a carrier of
news. * Taberna, or Taverna, a tavern. Tabernaculo, a tabernacle, a tent. *
Tabernear, vide Tavernear. * Tabernero, a vintner. Tabique, a thin wall of
rods, a wattle-wall. Tabla, a board, a planke. A table or record written for a
memorial, a table to play on. The table or index of a book. * Tablachina, a
kind of bucklar made in China, used in Italy. * Tabladillo, a little board, a
little planke, a little floor of a house. * Tablado, planked, boorded, a
planke, a board. The boording, or planking of a house, a flooring or floor of
a house. * Tablage, m. the play at tables. Also a dicing house where they play
at tables, cards, and dice. Tablaje, m. idem. * Tablajero, or Tablagero, the
owner, or master of a dicing house. Also one that uses much play there.
Tablas, f. tables to play at. Tablero, m. a chesse board, playing tables. Also
any board or planke, such as taylers or men of occupation cut their work out
on. * Tablero, as Poner, or Meter la vida al Tablero, to put his life at
hap-haZard. * perder en los Tableros, to loose at play or games. * Tableta, a
little table or planke, a horn book, such as children learn their A, b, c,
in. Also a kind of confection that Apothecaries use, very cordial. * Tablica,
f. idem. * Tabletas, an apothecarie receipt or drug, very cordial. Tablilla,
the sign of an Inn. Also a trencher. Also a writing slate or tables. Tablon,
or Tablones, large boards. * Taburno, a mountain of Campania in Italy,
abounding in Olives. Taca, or Tacon, a cup of silver, or such like to drink
in. Tacan^eria, f. lewdnes, villainy. * Tacan^o, a lewd villainous fellow. *
Taceador, a drinker up of many cups, a quaffer, a tossepot. * Tacear, to
quaffe, to carowse. Tacha, a fault. Tachar, to find fault with. Tachonado, m
studded, nailed. Tachones, studs, a kind of nails. * Tachuelas, f. little
studs or nails. Tacitamente, secretly, without making any words. * Tacito,
still, quiet, hushed, silent. * Taco, that which is put in between the powder
and bullet in a piece, whether it be paper or hurds, or such like. * Taco de
madera, a wooden stopple that is put in the mouth of ordinance to keep out
the moisture of rain from the powder. Tacon, a great cup of silver, or such
like to drink in. * Tacto, the sense of feeling. * Tafetan, m. taffeta silk.
* Tafuera, vide Tafurea. Tafurea, f. a horse boat, a boat to ferrie over
horses with. * Tagalo, vide Regalo. * Tagarmina, a kind of thistle sweet to
eat. Tagarote, m. a kind of hawk. * Tahen^o, a bourne brown color. *
Tahona, f. a horse mill, Bridewell. * Tahones, or Atahones, horse milles.
Tahur, m. a Barretor, a gamster, a dicer. Tahurazo, m. a great gamster, an
unthrift or great dicer. Taja, f. a score, a tallie. Tajada, f. a cut of flesh,
a sliue or slice of bread, a sliue or cutting of any thing, a shred, a piece. *
Tajadero, vide Tajador. Tajado, cut, skored, tallied up. * Tajador, or
Tajadero, a trencher, a chopping board. Tajante, cutting, skoring. Tajar, to
cut, to skore. * Tajete, a small cut, gash or slice. Tajo, m. a cut, a slice.
Also the river Tagus in Spain. Also the chopping board or stock that butchers
use to cut out their flesh on. Tajon, a board to cut flesh on, a dresser.
Tajoncillo, m. a little boorde to cut flesh on, a dresser board. * Tajonzillo,
idem. Taita, or Tayta, m. a word used of little children, as in English Dad.
Tal, such, such manner. Tal qual, such as. Tala, forraying, spoiling. Talabarte,
m. sword hangers. Taladrar, to boar through. Taladro, m. a wimble, a pearcer,
any thing to boar with, an instrument to help off the ordinance. * Talaga,
vide Talega. Talamo, m. a bed chamber where the bride and bridegroom do lie.
* Talanguera, vide Talenquera, the place where people are beholding stage
plays. Talanquera, f. a gallerie or railes about a bear baiting place, or
about a play house. Talante, desire, will, lust, voluptuous affection.
Talantoso, wilful, desirous, lustful, given to voluptuous pleasure. Talar, to
spoil, to forray, to cut down. * Talavarte, vide Talabarte. Talega, or
curron, a wallet, a scrip, a shepherdes pouch, a knapsacke. Talegon, m. a
budget, a pouch, a scrip. Taleguilla, f. a little budget, a little wallet or
knapsacke. * Talento, a talent, a sum of money among the Greeks, whereof
were two sorts, the greater talent of 80. minas, every mina of 100. drachmas,
or groates sterling, the same containing 133. pound odd money starling, the
other of 60 minas. Talion, m. the punishment of equal loss for a wrong done.
Talla, f. a grauing, a caruing. * Talla que saca el buril, the chippings, the
tool heweth out in caruing or grauing. Tallado, carved, fashioned. * bien
Tallado, well proportioned, of a good shape, stature, or proportion. Tallar, to
carue, to cut out. Talle, m. shape, proportion, stature, fashion. Tallecer, yo
Tallesco, to grow to a stalk. * Taller, a place where free masons or
engrauers work. Tallo, m. a stalk or stem of herb, a young sprig or bough of
a tree beginning to grow. * Talpaire, a sea fish being of huge greatness in the
forepart, and very small in the hinder part. * Tallon, m. a great stalk or
stem of an herb. Also a kind of tribute or subsidy. Talludo, m. grown to a
stalk. Talon, m. the ankle. Talque, clay to make gold smithes pots. Talvina,
water and bran, or froth and foam. Taman^o, the bigness, bulk, stature or
proportion. Also so great. * Tamaras, or Datiles, dates. Tamaraviento, an herb
called horehound. * Tamargueira, f. a shrub called Tamariske. Tamarindos, an
Indian date. Tamaris, Taray, or Tarahe, a shrub called Tamariske. Tamariz,
idem. Tambien, as well, well, also, alike. * Tamborete, m. the cross pieces of
wood where the flag is fastened in a ship. * Tamborilero, m. one that plays
on a taber. Tamborin, m. a taber. * Tamo, m. straw worn so short as when it
is come to dust. Also chafe. Tampoco, as little. Tampresto, as soon, so
soon. * Tan, vide Tanto, as, as much. * Tanda, a lot, a chance, a turn. *
Tan^ar, vide Tan^er. Tan^edor, a plaier on instruments, a sounder on
instruments. Tan^er, to sound, wind, or play upon any instrument. * Tanjar, a
city in Africa. * Tan poco, as little. Tan solamente, only. Tantas vezes, so
often, so many times. Tantear, to account, to rate, to sesse or tax, to reckon
how many he is at any game at cards, derived of Tanto. Tanto, as much, so
much. Tanto mas, so much the more. Tanto menos, so much less. Tanto que, as
much as. * Tapadero, a stopple, a covering. * Tapado, stopped. Tapador, a
stopper, a stopple. * Tapadura, stopping. Tapar, to stop, to cover a cup, etc.
Tapetados, m. the inside of leather turned outward in shoes or ierkins, and
made black. Tapete, m. carpet work, tapestrie. * Tapezeria, arras, tapestrie.
* Tapia, f. a mud wall. * Tapiador, m. a maker of mud walls. Tapial, boords
betwixt which they make mud walls, a mawle to beat down earth. Tapiar, to make
a mud wall. * Tapiar los medios cuerpos, to set one and ram him fast in the
ground up to the middle, and so to let him die. * Tapicado, hanged with Arras.
Tapicerias, or Tapizerias, tapistrie, arras. * Tapicero, a maker of arras or
tapistrie. Tapices, m. arras cloth, tapistrie work. * Tapiero, m. a maker of
mudde walls. Tapion, or Tapin^o, a stopper, or stopple. * Tapino, vide Tapion. *
Tapon, m. a stopple, a bung of a barrel. Taponcico, m. a little stopple. *
Taque, knocking at a door. * Taracana, a docke or place where ships are made. *
Taracea, the enchasing of checker work one with another. Taracones, m. pieces,
fragments. Taragoncia, f. an herb called Dragons. * Taragontia, vide
Taragoncia. Tarahe, Tamariz, or Atarfe, a shrubbe called Tamariske. Tarantola,
f. a little serpent called a Swifte, an Efte, or an Euet. Tarasca, f. a giant
made of clothes and things, such as they use in Pageants and May games. Also a
hobbie, horse such as they dance withal in a May game. * Tarbea, a square
trencher. Tardador, one that staieth or delayeth the time. * Tardamudar, to
stammer or stutter in speaking. Tardamudo, m. a stammerer, a stutterer.
Tardanca, stay, tarriance, delay. Tardar, to stay, to stop, to delay, to
demurre, to drive off. Tarde, late, the evening. Tardiamente, slowly, slackly,
late. Tardio, m. late, late in the evening, after due time. Tardo, slow,
slack. Tardon, m. a slow fellow, a dullard, a heavy sluggard. * Tarea, f. a
task, a quantity of labor or work prescribed within a prefixed time. *
Tarento, a principal city of Greece called Tarentum. * Targa, f. vide Darga,
a targuet. Tarja, f. a piece of money worth nine marauedies, three half pence
English. * Tarjeta, f. a great long dagger, or a short sword. * Tarjete, m. a
little shield. * Tarifa, f. a haven town of Andaluzia so called. * Tarima, a
Moors bed made of wood. * Tarina, f. a worm that eats timber. * Tarpeia,
the name of a vestall virgin, who sold the chiefest fort and castle of Rome to
the Sabines for the bracelets that they did wear, of whom when she demanded
the bracelets, she was slain, and of her the castle was called Tarpeia. *
Tarpeio, or Tarpeyo, one of the seven hills about Rome so called. Taren^as,
Sonajas, or Tan^eres, bells, or rattels for children to play with. Tarro, m. a
paile, a bucket. Tarrugo, or Tarugo, a swallow tail to join timber, a wooden
pin. * Tarta, vide Torta, a cake. Tartago, m. an herb called five leafed
grass. Some say it is the herb Spurge. * Tartajoso, one given to stammering
or stuttering, a stammering fellow. Tartamudear, to stutter, to stammer.
Tartamudo, one stammering, or stutting. * Tartareo, y infernal, hellish,
belonging to hell. * Tartaria, the country Tartaria. * Tartaros, the
Tartarians. * Tartaxear, vide Tartamudar. * Tarugo, a certain fastening of
planks in a ship called a Swallow tail, a wooden pin. * Tasa, vide Tassa. *
Tasacion, vide Tassacion. Tascar, Praes. yo Tasco, 1. Praet. yo Tasque, Sub.
Praes. Tasque, to play on the bit as horses do in champing it. Tascos, tow,
flocks, locks shorn or clipped off. * Tasque, vide Tascar. * Tas por tas,
like for like, one good turn for another. * Tassa, vide Tassacion. Tassacion,
f. taxing, rating, sessing. * Tassadamente, ratably, taxingly, limitingly. *
Tassado, taxed, sessed, limited, rated. Tassador, a sesser or taxer, a setter
of rays, an appointer of prices. Tassajo, m. a cut or slice of flesh. Tassar,
to tax, to rate, to sesse, to value. * Tasseador, vide Taceador, a drinker of
many cups, a quaffer, a tospot. * Tassear, vide Tacear, to drink many cups, to
quaffe, to carowse. Tassugo, m. a little kind of beast. * Tata, out, alas!
Also a river in Chile. Tataranieto, a nephew of the fourth degree. * Tava, f. a
buckle bone in a sheep wherewith children use to play at cock and blanke, or
cock and all. Tavano, a horse fly, a hornet. * Tavaque, a little basket that
women put their work in. * Tavaquera, vide Tabaquera. * Tavaquillo, vide
Tabaquillo. * Tavardillos, vide Tabardillos. * Tavardo, m. a kind of garment
like a coat. * Tavarro, or Tabarro, a hornet. Taverna, f. a tavern, a tippling
house, an inn. * Tavernaculo, vide Tabernaculo. Tavernear, to keep a tavern,
to keep a victualing house. Also to haunt the tavern much. * Tavernera, an
hostess or woman keeper of a tavern. Tavernera cosa, any thing belonging to a
tavern. Tavernero, a vintner, a keeper of a tavern or inn. * Tavique, vide
Tabique, a wattle wall of rods. * Taxar, to tax, to sesse tributes or
subsidies. * Taxia, work in wood or iron. * Taxon, vide Tajon. * Taxoncillo,
vide Tajoncillo. * Taymada ramera, a close cunning harlot. Taymado, a close
subtle fellow. * Tazmia, casting of accounts.
T E
Tea, f. the middle of the heart of the pine tree when it is grown to be so fat
and full of liquor, that being kindled it burns like a torch. Also taken for
any match or piece of wood-dressed with brimstone and rosin, to burn like a
torch. Also a torch. Teatro, m. a theater, a place for public shows or
plays, Techar, or Tejar, to cover a house with tiles. Techo, Teache, Teja, or
Tejo, a roof or covering of a house. * Techo de paja, a roof of a house that
is thatched. Techumbre, vide Acotea. * Tecla, as Musica de Tecla, music of
organes, virginalles, clauicordes or such like. * Tegoda, a ticket or warrant
for to have lodging, victuals, apparel, etc. Teja, a linden or tillet tree,
that bears fruit as great as a bean, in which are seeds as great as anise
seeds. Also a tile, a slate, to cover houses with. Teja de Tejado, a tile. *
Teja, Tejo, or Techo, the roof of a house. * Teja de huevo, an egg shell. *
Teja de piece, a shell of fish. Tejado, or Techo, a roof of a house. Tejar, to
tile, to cover with slate, etc. Tejero, a tiler, a slater. Also a maker of
tiles or brickes. Tejo, m. a tile, a covering or roof. Tejuela, a piece of a
tile. Also a little tile. Tela, a web, a tilt, the heart string, a web of linen
most properly. * Tela de iuizio, the web of justice or judgment, the which to
pass through, will refine the party. * Tela de la granada, a filme dividing
one grain of a Pomegranate from another. * Telamon, the name of a certain
king of Salamin son to Aeacus, brother to Peleus, father to Ajax. Also a bird
so called. Telar, a weauers loome, wherein he weaueth his cloth. Telaran^a, f.
a cobweb. * Telaran^iento, full of cobwebs. * Telaran^oso, idem. * Telas de
coracon, the heart strings. Telica, f. a little web. * Telilla, a kind of
striped canuas or sackcloth, a border. * Telliz, a saddlecloth. Tema,
wilfulnes, earnestnes in his purpose, peruersenes. Also a theme to be spoken
on or written on. * de Tema traer la gorra, to wear the hat or cap on one side
of the head fantastically. * Tematico, contentious, obstinate. * Temblado,
trembled. Temblador, one that trembles, a fearful fellow. Temblar, yo
Tiemblo, to tremble, to shake for fear. Temblor, m. trembling, shaking or
quiuering for fear. Temedera cosa, a fearful matter. Temer, to fear.
Temerario, rash, harebrained. * Temeridad, f. rashness, indiscreet hastiness
in dealing, fool hardiness, unadvisedness. Temerosamente, fearfully. Temeroso,
fearful, timorous. * Temido, feared, dreaded. Temor, m fear, dread. * Temoso
coraje, one of a perverse nature or spirit. Tempano, m. a bung or cover of
cork to stop withal. Tempero, temper, season, ordering aright. Tempestad, f.
blustering foul weather, a tempest, a storm. Tempestoso, stormy,
tempestuous, foul weather. * Tempestuoso, idem. * Tempineque, vide Diezmos,
the tenth penny. Templa, f. temper, temperature, moderation. Templadamente,
temperately, moderately. Templado, temperate, moderate, not exceeding,
seasonable, modest, sober. * Templador, a temperer, moderator or causer of
modest soberness and temperance. * Templanca, f. temperance, soberness,
moderation. Templar, yo Tiemplo, to temper, to rule, to moderate, to order. *
Templario, a kind of religious man called a Templar. Temple, vide Templa,
temperature, moderation, order. * Templezillo, m. a little church or temple.
Templo, m. a temple, a church. * Temporada, f. a time, space, a tract of time.
Temporal, temporal, for a time, that is but for a season, worldly. *
Temporalidad, f. promotion or living not belonging to the church. * Temporizar,
to serve the time, to do as may best like those with whom he deals at that
time, to follow the fashions of times. Temprano, early, soon ripe, in good
time. * Ten, hold thou, the Imperative of Tener. * Ten punto, stay, stop,
pawse, hold a while, give me leave a little. * Tenaca, or Tenaza, f. a pair
of tongs or pincers. * Tenacidad, f. holding fast, keeping still. Tenada, f. a
hay loft. * Tenaz, covetous, a hold fast. Tenazadas, pluckes with pincers. *
Tenaza, or Tenaca, a pair of tongs or pincers. Tenazar, to pluck with
pincers. Tenazas, pincers, tongs. * Tenazear, to pluck with pincers. *
Tenazicas, little pincers. * Tenazidad, vide Tenacidad. * Tenazuelas, little
pincers. * Tenca, f. a fish called a Tench. * Tendal de popa, the stern castle
of a galley, or small bark. * Tendalete de popa, idem. * Tendara, a tent or
tilt to keep off the rain. Tendedero, a place for a tent. Also a place where
one lays out or stretches cloth. Tendejon, m. a tent, a tabernacle. Tender,
yo Tiendo, to bend, to stretch. Tendero, a shop keeper, a keeper of a tent. *
Tendido, stretched out. Tenebregoso, dark, obscure. * Tenebroso, idem. *
Tenedon, m. a strong tower in Troy. Tenedor, m. a forke to eat meat withal.
One that holds in possession. * Tenedos, an I Will in the Aegean sea over
against Troy. Tenencia de fortaleza, holding or keeping of a fort or strong
place. Tener, Praes. Tengo, Tienes, Tiene, 1. Praet. Tuve, Tuviste, Tuvo. Fut.
Tender, or Terne, as, a. Sub. Praes. Tenga. Imperfect. Tuviera, Tendria,
Tuviesse. Fut. Tuviere, to hold, to apprehend, to keep in, to know, to
perceive. Tener el moco, to have fifty and one, at primero. * Tener las
novenas, to be in the church nine days together praying and fasting. Tener en
poco, to esteem little. Tener de yr, to be bound to a place, to have business,
to be come. * Teneria, f. a house where they tanne leather, as in Spain is
used. And those houses stand from the city. * Tenga, Tengo, vide Tener.
Teniente, he that holds, a lieutenant. Ten^ido, dyed in color. Ten^idura,
dying of color, tincture. Ten^ir, yo Tin^o, to die colors. Tenor, the tenor,
sound, tune. Tentacion, trial, temptation, proof. Tentador, a tempter, one
that tempts. Tentar, yo Tiento, to prove, to try, to assay, to feel. *
Tente un poco, hold thy peace awhile, or stay a while. * Tenura, the holding or
keeping. Teologia, f. divinity. Teologo, a divine. * Teorica, or Theorica, f.
speculatiue knowledge. * Terar, vide Tirar. Terceria, f. brokerie, mediation,
or working by means. Tercero, m. a broker, a third man, a mediator between
two other, an vmpier, one that gathers the Tercias, id est, the tithes.
Tercerol, the hindermost rower in a galley. * Tercia, f. a kind of tax, three
quarters of a yard or measure, the third part of any other thing. Also three of
the clock, also a place where they lay up the tithes of the church. Terciados,
short arming swords. Terciana, f. a tertian, or second day ague. Terciar, to
plough the ground, to shake a lance. Also to play the broaker. * Terciar la
pica, to shake or brandishe a pike, to come to pushe of pike with the enemy.
Terciazon, or terciacon, ploughing of the ground, fallowing the land. * Tercio,
a regiment of souldiars, or as many companies as were leuyed upon service out
of one country, a tierce, a kind of measure. Terciopelo, m. velvet. *
Terciopelo riso, uncut velvet. Terco, a sower fellow, a boisterous person. *
Terera, f a kind of bird. * Terero, vide Terrero. * Tergiductor, a leader of
the rereward or hinder part of the battle. Tericia, vide Itericia. Terliz, f.
tissue made of three threeds of diverse colors. * Termas, f. a place or kind
of theater in Rome where they held their feasts. * Termentina, f. turpentine.
Termentino, idem. Termino, m. an end, a bound. * Terna, vide Tener. * Terne,
vide Tener. * Ternera, a little calf. Ternero, idem. Terneza, or Ternura,
tenderness. Ternezuelo, or Ternecuelo somewhat tender. * Ternia, vide Tener.
Ternilla, f. a gristle. Ternilloso, full of gristles. Ternura, or Terneza,
tenderness. Terrado, m. a flat covering of a house. * Terraplenado, rammed up
with earth. * Terraplenar, to ram up with earth. * Terrapleno, a ramming with
earth for defense, a rampire of earth within the wall, as is used in the low
countries. Terregoso, cloddy. Terremoto, an earthquake. Terrenal, earthly,
belonging to the earth. * Terreno, idem. * Terreno, as Quadro de Terreno, a
geometrical instrument, a square. * Terrera, f. a kind of bird. Terrero, m. a
but to shoot at. Also a bank, a walking place or mount of earth higher than
the other ground. * Terrezuela, or Terrecuela, a little plot of ground.
Terrible, terrible, dreadful, to be feared. * Terriblemente, terribly,
fearfully. * Terripleno, vide Terrapleno. Territorio, the bounds or limits of a
city how far their jurisdiction may extend. Terron, m. a clod. Terroncillo, a
little clod. * Terronoso, full of clods. Terror, terror, fear, dread.
Terrun^o, a vein of earth, a layre. * Terso, clean, pure, neat. * Terziana,
vide Terciana. * Terziar, vide Terciar. * Tesario, vide Maestro. Tesbique, or
Tezbique, m. a wall made of rods, a wattle wall. * Tesgustado, vide des
Gustado. * Tesgustar, vide des Gustar. * Tesno, vide Tezno. Teso, stiff,
rough, wilful, headstrong. Teson, m. obstinacy, wilfulnes, contention.
Tesoneria, idem. Tesorar, to heap up treasure. * Tesoreria, f. a treasury.
Tesorero, a treasurer. Tesoro, m. treasure. * Tesson, m. wilfulnes, contention,
obstinacy. Testador, m. a testator, one that makes a will. Testamentario,
belonging to a will or testament. Testamento, a last will or testament. Testar,
to make a will or testament. * Testera, f. armor for the forehead of a horse.
* Testiculos, stones of man or beast. * Testificacion, testifying, witnessing.
* Testificado, testified, witnessed. Testificar, Praes. yo Testifico, 1. Praet.
yo Testifique, Sub. Praes. Testifique, to testify, to bear witness. *
Testifique, vide Testificar. * Testigar, vide Testiguar. Testigo, m. a witness.
Testiguar, to witness. Testimonio, a testimony or witness bearing. Testo, the
text, a writing of authority, an authors own words without glossing. *
Testuz, m. the head of a hog. Teta, f. a dugge, a pappe. * Tetilla, the
nipple of the dug. * Tetricos penascos, craggie rough mountains and rocks. *
Tetta, vide Teta. Tetuda, one that has great dugges. * Teucros, the Trojans. *
Teutonicos, Dutchmen. * Texa, vide Teja. * Texado, vide Tejado, covered over,
or the roof of a houfe. Texbique, vide Tesbique, a wall of rods, a wattle
wall, a trench or fortifying against the enemy. Texedor, or Tejedor, a weauer.
Texedura, or Tejedura, weauing. Texendo, by weauing. Texer, to weaue. * Texero,
vide Tejero. Texido, weaued. * Texidor, or Texedor, a weauer. Texillo, m. a
girdle that is weaued. Texo, or Tejo, an ewe tree. Also a tile. Texon, or
Tejon, m. a beast called of some a badger, of other a gray, of other a brocke.
* Tez, f. the outmost part of the skin. * Tez liza y lustrosa, a fine smooth
skin. * Tezbique, or Tesbique, a wall made of rods, a fortifying against the
enemy. * Tezno, or Tesno, a worm called a tike that annoieth sheep, calves,
and other beasts. * Tezo, vede Teso. * Tezon, or Teson, obstinacy,
wilfulness.
T H
* Thalia, the name of one of the nine muses. * Thama, a certain sea fish like
a perch. Thapna, an herb like ferula, but having leaves like fennel, with a
yellow flower, growing in tuftes like dill, with a flat round seed and white
root, out of which being cut, comes a juice as white as milk. * Theatro,
vide Teatro. * Theologia, f. divinity. * Theologo, vide Teologo. * Theorica,
vide Teorica. * Theosopino, id est, Theosopino, a pine having in it much fattie
or clammie matter which will burn like a torch. * Theriales dialogos, talk in
praise of women. * Thesorero, a treasurer. * Thesoro, treasure. * Thetis, the
mother to Achilles, daughter to Nereus, and wife to king Peleus.
T I
Tia, an aunt. * Tiara, f. a popes crown or miter, an emperors or kings
crown, properly a round attire for the head used in Persia of princes,
priests and women, such as the Turks now use. Tibar, as oro de Tibar, fine
puregold, gold thoroughly fined. Tibiamente, luke warmely. Tibieza, luke
warmenesse. Tibio, luke warm, blood warm. * Tiburones pieces, a sea fish of
bigness more then a mastiue dog, great deuourers of any thing. Also eating man's
flesh. * Tico, vide Tizo. * Ticon, vide Tizon. * Tiembla, vide Temblar. *
Tiemble, Tiemblo, vide Temblar. * Tiemple, Tiemplo, vide Templar. Tiempo, time.
* quanto Tiempo ha? how long is it since? * mal Tiempo, foul weather. * Tiempo
que esta assi y assi, indifferent fair weather. Tienda, f. a tent to abide in,
a shop. * Tienda por arrendar, a shop that is to be let. * Tienda, Tiende,
Tiendo, v. Tender. * Tiene, vide Tener. Tienta, a searching instrument, a tent
to put in a wound, heed or carefulnes. Tiente, Tiento, vide Tentar. Tiento,
assaying gessing, heedfulnes. * a Tiento responder, to answer by guess or
aim. * Tierna cosa, a tender thing. Tiernamente, tenderly. Tierna virgen, a
young and tender maid. Tierno, soft, tender. Tierra, f. the earth. Tiesso,
stiff, tough. * Tiesta, f. vide Cabeca. Tiesto, m. a potsheard. Tigeras,
Tijeras, or Tixeras, sheares, scizers. Tigeretas, Tijeretas, or Tixeretas,
small sheares, scizers, snuffers. Tigeretas de la vid, or Tixeretas de la vid,
tendrels of a vine, the small strings that tie the branches to the poles or
supporters. Tigeruelas, Tijeruelas, or Tixeruelas, little scizers. Tigre, m. a
beast called a tigar. * Tigris, m. a river so called. * Tijeras, Tigeras, or
Tixeras, sheares, scizers. * Tijeretas, vide Tigeretas. Tijeruelas, or
Tixeruelas, vide Tigeruelas. Tilde, f a tittle, a little prick. Tilla, f. the
hatches of a ship. * Timano, a river in the province of Venice, now called
Brenta. * Timido, m. fearful, timorous. Timon, the stern wherewith a ship is
guided, the long piece of timber in a coach or wagon running before betwixt the
horses, whereto they are tied. Timonear, to steare at the rudder or helm. *
Timonero, a steares man, he that guides the helm of a ship, as the master or
pylot. Tina. f. a Diers copper or cauldron. Also any tub, or great vessel.
Tin^a, f. a moth. * Tin^a de la cabeca, the scurffe or white scaule. Tinada de
len^a, a woodpile, or woodstacke. * Tinagica, or Tinajica, f. a little tub, a
small vessel. Tinaja, a barrel, a tub, a steane. * Tinaxa, vide Tinaja. *
Tinaxica, vide Tinagica. * Tinca, a fish called a tench. * Tinelo, a dyning or
supping place for servants in a house. * Tineta, a fish called a Hoar or
Spring-wall, which casts water abundantly out of his head: some say it is a
kind of whale. Tinieblas, f. darkness. * Tinieblas, f. certain prayers or
euensongs, said in the night, the wednesday, thursday, and friday night next
before Easter day in mournful tune, and after every Psalm to put out a light
till all be put out, and so to say or sing Miserere in the dark, and then
depart. * Tiniente, m a lieutenant. Tin^a, a moth. * Tin^a, vide Ten^ir. *
Tin^e, Tin^o, vide Ten^ir. Tin^oso, scuruie, scalde. Tino, m. guess,
conjecture. Tinta, f. ink. * Hoja Tinta, a leaf of reddish and blackish
color. * Tinta de capatero, blacking for shoomakers. Tinte, m. a Diers house,
or a die house. Tintero, m. an inkehorne. * Tintinabulos, little belles. *
Tinto, died. * vino Tinto, a blackish wine in Spain. Tintor, vide Tintorero. *
Tintoreria, f. dying, diers craft. * Tintorero, a Dier. Tintura, dying. *
Tinuela, or Guzanuelo, a little moth. Tinuelo, a little moth in flax. Tio, m.
an uncle. * Tiphis, or Typhis, the first Pilot, who went in the ship Argos in
company of Jason, for to steal away the golden fleece. * Tiple, as
Cantortiple, one that sings small, the treble voice. * Tiple de la yglesia,
he that sings the treble voice in the church. * Tipocosmia, a tipe or figure
of the whole world. * Tipografia, the art of printing books. * Tipografo, a
printer of books. Tira, f. a guard or welt of cloth or other stuff, a drawing
out of some thing. * Tira de raso, a guard or welt of satin. Tira braguera, a
trusse for one that is broken in the belly. Tirado, drawn as an arrow, shot,
cast, thrown, hurled. * Tirado oro, gold wire drawn. * Tirador de oro, a
drawer of gold wire. * Tirador, an archer, a shooter, a hurler. * Tiranamente,
tyrannouslie. Tirania, f. tyranny, ruling by lust and wilfulnes, rather than
by reason. * Tiranico, cruel, tyrannous, tyrannical. * Tiranizado,
tyrannized. Tiranizar, to tyrannize, or rule wilfully, rather as he lust, than
by law or reason. Tirano, vide Tyrano, a tyrant, a cruel imperious ruler.
Tirar, to pluck, to throw, to hurl, to shoot. * Tirar la barra, to throw the
bar. * Tirar un arco, to shoot in a bow. * Tirar de camarada, to discharge, or
shoot a volley of shot. * Tirasol, or Quitasol, a kind of hat used in China
very broad, which the principal men carry over their heads, with a short
pole or staff like a canopie, to keep the extremity of the sun from them.
* Tirar, vide Quitar. * Tiren^o, vide Tyran^o. * Tiricia, vide Itericia. *
Tiriciado, vide Itericiado. * Tirilla, a little guard or welt. * Tirillo, a
small piece of ordinance. * Tiritar, to tremble, to quake. * Tirizia, vide
Tiricia. Tiro, a cast, a throwing a dart. Also a serpent called a Dart. Also a
haling, drawing or pulling, a plucking. Also a feate, a pranke. Also a stroke,
a blow. Also a taunt, nip, or quip. Also a shoot out of a bow, a cast at
dice, or shot of ordinance. * Tiro de arcabuz, a hargabuz shot. Tirones,
plucks, pulls. Also used sometime for young soldiers. * Tiros de espada, sword
hangers. * Tirsos, or Tyrsos, lances or spears wound about with vine
branches, borne in sacrificing to Bacchus. * Tirte a fuera, away, be packing. *
Tisana, Ptisan water. * Tiseras, vide Tigeras. * Tiseretas, vide Tijeretas. *
Tiseruelas, vide Tijeruelas. Tisica, or Trefeda, a disease called the Ptisicke,
when the lungs are so stopped as hardly a man can fetch his breath. Tisico, one
diseased with the Ptisicke, short winded, pursie. * Tisiphone, or Tysiphone,
one of the three furies of hell, as Poets fained. * Tisnado, vide Tiznado. *
Tisnamiento, vide Tiznamiento. * Tisnar, vide Tiznar. * Tisne, vide Tizne. *
Titan, a son of Coelum and Vesta, so called, as Poets said, the sun. *
Titolo, vide Titulo. * Titubar, to folter in his speech. * Titubear, to
stumble. Titulo, a title, the inscription of a book, dignity, honor, praise,
a monument, or remembrance. * Sen^or de Titulo, a Lord of a great honor or
title, a principal noble man. * Tivar, vide Tibar. * Tiviamente, luke warmely.
* Tivieza, luke warmenes. * Tivio, luke warm. * Tivurones, vide Tiburones. *
Tixeras, or Tijeras, sheares, scizars. * Tixereta, or Tijereta, f. a pair of
small scizers. * Tixeruelas, or Tijeruelas, little sciZers. Tiznado, smeared,
soote, sullied. * Tiznamiento, besmearing, or sullying with soote. Tiznar, to
smeare with soote. Tizne, vide Hollin, soote of a chimney, etc. * Tizo, vide
Tizon. Tizon, a firebrand being quenched.
T O
Toaja, a towell. Toalla, or Tovalla, a towell. * Toallica, a little towell. *
Toba, vide Tova. * Tobera, vide Tovera, f. the nose of a pair of bellows. *
Tobillo, vide Tovillo. * Toca, or Tocado, a woman's kerchiefe or coife, a veil
for the head. Toca de camino, a kind of muffler that both men and women wear
(when they travel) in Spain, to keep the dust from their faces, it is
commonly of very fine linen. * Toca de red, a caul, such as women use to
wear on their hair. Tocada, vide Toca, or Tocado. * Tocadillo, m. a game at
tables called ticke, tacke. * Tocado, or Toca, a kerchief, a coife. Also the
little tuffe of feathers or cop on birds heads. * Tocado, touched. * Tocador, a
night coife or night kerchief. Also one that touches. Tocamiento, m. touching.
Tocante, touching, appertaining to. Tocar, Praes. yo Toco, 1. Praet. yo Toque,
Praes. Sub. Toque, to touch, to sound a trumpet, horn, or any wind
instrument, to play upon a drum or any musical instrument, to appertain unto,
to come unto. * que me Tocas, what are you to me? what have I to do with you?
* Tocar a lerta, to sound alarm. * Tocar arma, idem. * Tocar uno Tocado, to
put on a kerchiefe. * Tocar trompeta, to sound a trumpet. * Tocar cuerno, to
wind a horn. Tocino, bacon. Toco, or Tocador, a kerchiefe, a night coife or
night kerchiefe. * Tocuelo, m. a kind of hawk. Also the thicknes or fatnes in
the neck. Toda via, nevertheless, notwithstanding. * Todesco, or Tudesco, a
Dutch man. Todo, all, the whole. Todo poderoso, almighty. * Todos, all. *
Toga, f. a gown. * Togado, apparelled with a gown, which among the Romans was
holden for an honor. * Toilandalo, vide Limada. Tolano, a disease of horses or
kine called the lampas. Toldado, hanged with clothes. Toldo, a pauilion, a
tent. * Toledano, a man of Toledo. * Toledo, m. the chief city of Spain so
called in new Castile. * Toleracion, sufferance, permission, toleration.
Tolerar, to suffer, to tolerate. Tollido, vide Tullido, one lame of a limme.
Tollo, a kind of fish. * Tollondron, a swelling, a bunche. * Tolva de molina,
the bin of a mill out of which the corn runs by a tunnell into the
milstones, and so is ground. Toma, f. taking, accepting. * Tomo para tu ojo,
vide Higas. * Tomado, taken, accepted, taught. Tomador, a taker, catcher, or
accepter. Tomamiento, taking, accepting. * Tomani, an herb called French
Lauender. Tomar, to take, to accept, to get, to win, to cope with. Tomar por
esta part, to go this way. * Tomar la mano de respondelle, to take upon him to
answer him. * Tomar a manos, to take in hand to fight. * Tomar sus baracos, y
yrse con Dios, to pack up and away. * Tomar calcas de villa Diego, to run
away like a coward. * Tomar el nombre, to take the watch word in war. *
Tomar prestado, to borrow. * Tomar la voz, to take part with one. * Tombre de
armas, vide Hombre de armas. * Tomices, hempen cords used about horses trace.
Tomillo, m. the herb called Thyme. * Tomin, a kind of weight weighing the
quantity of a real in Spain, near six pence English. Tomiza, a kind of
small coarde made of Spart. * Tomizas, idem. * Tomo, substance, weight, the
tome or body of a book. * No tener Tomo, to have no substance or weight. *
Tondidor, a sheareman. Tonel, a tun, or pipe vessel: * Tonelado, idem.
Tonelero, a maker of tons. Ton^ino, a great fish called a porpuis. * Tono, m.
a tune. * Tonsura, f. shauing. * Tontear, to be foolish, doltish, astonished,
amazed. * Tontecer, to wax or become foolish, doltish, astonished, amazed.
Tontedad, f. foolishnes, folly, doltishnes. Tonto, a fool, a dolt. * Topa,
the ship top, or cords wherewith the sail is trussed up. * Topa, or
Garruchas, tackling of a ship. Topar; to meet. * Tope, a meeting, the top of
a mast or of any thing. Topetar, to push with the head as a ram does. Topo, m.
a little black beast living in the earth called a Moll, or a Want. * Toque,
vide Tocar. Toque, m. a touchstone, a touch with the fingar, etc. * Toque del
atambor, a sounding or striking up of a drum. * Torbellino, or Torvellino, a
whirlewinde. * Torbisco, vide Torvisco. * Torbulento, vide Turbulento. *
Torcal, a little string under the hat band, to keep the hat in fashion, or
other like lace. * Torcasa, a woodculuer, a risingdoue. Torcaza, idem.
Torcecuello ave, a bird called a wrienecke. * Torcedor, a wrester of a matter,
a bender, bower, or wrester any way. * Torcedura, wresting, bending, bowing. *
Torcella, id est, Torcer la, to wrest or wrie it. Torcer, yo Tuerco, to wreath,
to wrest. * Torcida, or Mecha, a tent to put in a wound. * Torcidamente,
wrestingly, bowingly. Torcido, wreathed, wrested. * Torciendo, wresting,
wreathing. Torcon, or Torocon, griping in the belly, wringing of the guts.
Torconado, one that is troubled with griping in the belly. Torcuelo, a musket
or tassell of any hawk. Tordillo, flea bitten color. Tordo, m. a bird called
a stare or starling, a thrush also, or (as some say) a gnat snapper. *
Toreador, a bull baiter. * Torear, to play with a bull. Also to bait the bull.
* Torero, a bull baiter. Toril, an ox stall. * Torillo, a little bull.
Torionda, a cow that is with calfe. * Tormar, vide Tomar. Tormenta, f. a
tempest, a storm. Tormentar, to torment, to punish grievously. Tormento, m. a
torment, a grievous punishment. * Tormes, m. a river at Salamanca in Spain so
called. Tornaboda, f. an after banquet at a marriage. Tornada, f. a return, a
coming again. * Tornadiza, a woman turnecoate. Tornadizo, a turnecoate, a
runnagate. Tornadura, a kind of measure of ground being about ten foot.
Tornar, to turn, to return, to restore. Tornasol, an herb called Turnesole,
so called because it turns with the sun. Also changeable silk. Tornatiles,
turning up. Torneado, turned as turners make round by turning. * Torneador, m.
one that fights at turney or barriers. Tornear, to turn as a turner does. *
Torneo, a iusting, a turney, a running at tilt. * Torner atras, to return
back again. * Tornera, vide Tronera. Tornero, a turner. Tornillo, a little
turn, a skrew, vice or winch of any weapons or other things. Tornillo de
fuente, the winch of a well. * Tornillo de mosquete, the skrew of a musket. *
Torniscon, m. a blow on the ear with the back of the hand. * Tornizuelo, m.
the ankle near the foot. Torno, a turn, a winch for a press, a press.
Torno de hilar, a wharle to spin with. Toro, m. a bull. * Toro, a city of old
Castile in Spain so called, where the wine called Vino de Toro does grow: it
is like the claret wine of France. * Toros correr, to bait bulls. Torocon, or
Torcon, griping in the belly, wringing in the guts. Torondon, vide Tolondron.
Torongil, vide Abijera, balm. Toronja, f. a kind of limon, a citron, an
orange. Toronjo, m. a citron tree, an orange or limon tree. Torpe, dull, slow,
soul, a loute, a varlet. Torpedad, f. lowtishnes, filthiness, doltishnes,
heavy dulnes. * Torpemente, foully, slothfully, lowtishly. * Torpeza, f.
dulnes, heaviness of spirit, fithines. * Torpeza de lengua, slownes of speech,
rudenes of speech. Torpigo, a crampfish. * Torradas, slices of bread spread
with honey and so fried. Torre, f. a tower. Torreado, full of towers. Torrear,
to make towers. * Torrecilla, vide Torrezilla. * Torrejon, a town near Toledo
in Spain. * Torrejoncuelo, m. a little pretty tower. * Torrente, forcible and
vehement, rough, and flowing like waters that fall down by mountains or
rocks, a torrent or swift stream. Torreon, m. a turret on a wall. Also a
strong hold or castle. * Torresno, vide Torrezno, a piece of bakon fried or
broiled, a rasher on the coals. * Torrezilla, a spur or turret in a sort.
Torrezno, or Torresno, a piece of bakon fried or broiled, a rasher on the
coals. * Torridazona, the burning circle, or clime inhabitable for heat. *
Torrido, dry, scorched, burnt. Torrijas, slices of bread spread with honey and
so fried. * Torixas, idem. Torta, or Tarta, a cake, a tarte. * Tortada, f. a
kind of fritters. * Tortarosa, f. a kind of herb. Tortedad, f. crookednes,
wrines. Tortella, f. a certain kind of herb good against the stinging of a
scorpion. Tortero, he that wresteth, or wreatheth. Also one that makes cakes
or tartes. Tortero de huso, the wharle of a spindle. Tortilla, a little fine
cake. * Tortola, a turtle dove. * Tortolilla, a little turtle dove. Tortora, f.
a turtle dove. Tortorilla, f. a little turtle dove. Tortuga, vide Gallapago, a
tortuys. Torvellino, or Viento remolinado, a whirlewinde. Torvisco, m. a kind
of shrubbe whereupon Coculus Indie does grow. * Torzicuello, m. a bird that
uses to wrie her neck aside. * Tos, f. or Toss, the cough. * Toscana, or
Tuscia, a province of Italy called Tuscia, where the best Italian is spoken. *
Toscano, or Tusco, one of Tuscanie. Tosco, or Grossero, rude, gross,
unwrought. * Tosco sin limar o acabar, rude, and vnfiled, or unfinished. *
Toscoso, very rude, gross, unpolished. * Tosigo, m. poison, intoxication.
Tosquedad, f. rudenes, grossenes. Toss, f. or Tos, the cough. * Toss seca,
the cough of the lungs. Tosser, to cough. * Tossicoso, full of coughing, still
coughing. * Tossigioso, one that cougheth much. * Tossigo, or Toxigo, poison,
intoxication. Tossigoso, vide Tossicoso, subject to the cough, still coughing.
Tostado, toasted. * Tostada pica, a pike toasted or hardened in the fire, to
make the iron more hard. Tostador, a toasting iron. Tostar, to toast, to parch
with heat. Tova, f. the ruste or corrupting of the teeth, a Pumice stone. Also
a kind of white Thistle bearing a head like a Artichoake. Touaja, vide Toalla,
a towell. * Tovera, or Tobera, a place where the white Thistle having a head
like a Artichoake grows. Tovillo, m. the ankle. * Tovimos, or Tuvimos, we
have holden, or we held, vide Tener. * Toxico, or Tossigo, intoxication,
poison. * Toxo, or Taxo, an Ewe tree.
T R
* Trabado, or Travado, joined, or knit together. Trabajado, or Travajado,
traveled, payned, grieved. Trabajador, or Travajador, a traveler, one that
labors, or takes pains. Trabajar, or Travajar, to travel, to labor, to
take pains, to be grieved. Trabajo, or Travajo, m. travel, labor, pain,
grief. * Trabar, or Travar, to join or close together. * Trabaxo, vide
Trabajo, labor, travel, etc. Trabucar, Praes. yo Trabuco, 1. Praet. yo
Trabuque, Sub. Praes. Trabuque, to cast down, to overthrow, to ouerturne.
Trabuco, m. a sling, a kind of ordinance, a crosse-bow. * Trabuque, vide
Trabucar. * Traca, f. a trace or tract, a marking out, a foot-step, a token or
sign. * Tracado, tracked or traced out, followed by foot-step, marked out,
striked out. * Tracador, a tracer, a follower by foot, a marker out. Tracar, to
mark out, to strike out, to follow by foot, to trace. * Trachollano, the plat
form of a building drawn in paper. Traco, marking or drawing out of any
thing. * Traductor, or Tradutor, m. a translator. * Traduxe, Traduxo, vide
Traduzir. * Traduzga, Traduzgo, vide Traduzir. * Traduzido, or Traslado,
translated, drawn aside. * Traduzidor, or Traslador, a translator. Traduzir,
yo Traduzgo, 1. Praet. Traduxe. Sub. Praes. Traduzga, to translate, to draw
aside. Traer, Praes. Traygo, Traes, Trae. Imperfect. Traia, or Traya. 1. Praet.
Truxe, or Traxe, Truxiste, or Traxiste, Truxo, or Traxo. Fut. Traere, ras, ra.
Sub. Praes. Trayga. Imperfect. Truxesse, or Traxesse, Traeria, or Truxera. Fut.
Truxere, to draw, to fetch, to carry, to bring, to wear. * Traer al
Retortero, to bring one into a Labyrinth. Trafagar, Praes. yo Trafago. 1.
Praet. yo Trafague. Sub. Praes. Trafague, to traficke, to borrow of one for to
pay another. Trafago, m. traficke. * Trafague, vide Trafagar. * Tragadero, m.
the throatboll, or windpipe, a gulf, a deep water. * Tragado, swallowed
down, devoured. * Tragador, m. a deuourer, a swallower down. Tragar, Praes.
yo Trago. 1. Praet. yo Trague. Sub. Praes. Trague, to devour, to swallow down.
Trage, or Traje, m. apparel, a fashion of a garment. Tragedia, or Trajedia, f.
a tragedy. * Tragediar, or Trajediar, to act a tragedy, to make a tragedy,
to become tragical. * Tragenero, a carrier, a packeman, driving horses with
packes. * Tragico, tragical, dismal. * Tragicomedia, a trage-comedie. *
Traginar, to transport by packhorses. * Tragitos, vide Traguitos, small
deuourings, petie gluttonies. Trago, m. a swallowing, a draught. Tragon, a
glutton. * Tragona bestia, a devouring beast. Tragonia, f. gluttony. *
Traguitos, small deuourings. Traguncia, an herb called taragon. * Traher, vide
Traer. * Traia, Traya, vide Traer. Traicion, vide Traycion, f. treason. Traido,
vide Traydo, drawn. Traidor, vide Traydor. * Traje, or Trage, apparel, etc. *
Trajedia, or Tragedia, a tragedy. Trailla, vide Traylla, a slip or leashe for a
dog. Trama, the owfe in weauing of cloth, a quill of ouf yarne. Also by a
metaphor a subtle devise, plotte or trick, contrived to deceive one. *
Tramado, a cunning plot laid, a veil of white silk, or Cypres. Tramar, to
weaue, to warpe. Also to work some subtle fetch. Tramontana, or Cierco
viento, the north wind, the sun set. * Tramontanas, vide Trasmontanos. *
Tramontar, to hide ones self, or to be hidden by the interplacing or coming
between of some hill, turret, house or other high place, but properly of a
mountain, whereof this word comes of Tras monte, id est, behind the
mountain or hill, to go down or set as the sun does. * Trasmontar, idem. *
Al Trasmontar del sol, at the sun set, when she goes under the mountains to
hide her self. Trampa, a trap to catch with. Trampales, myery places, durty
puddles. Trampear, to delay payment, to drive one of with delays. * Trampilla,
f. a little trap. * Trampero, vide Tramposo. * Tramposo, deceitful, full of
delays in paying, a shifter, a coosener. * Tramuse yerva, an herb. Tranca de
puerta, a bar, or bolt to make fast a door or gate with, a door bar.
Trancada, f. a fillet, a hairelace. * Trancado, a fillet or hairelace. Trance
de armas, a single combat of one to one, a battle. * Trancheria, vide
Rancheria. Tranchete, m. a shoomakers paring knife. Tranco, a pasing as wide as
one can stride. Also a lifting up the feet. de Tranco andar, to pase and go as
wide as one can step one stride from another, to lift up the feet. * Trando,
a difficult matter. Tranquilidad, f. a calm, quiet. * Tranquillo, calm,
quiet. * Transacion, f. the manner of pleading a matter. * Transferido,
transferred. * Transferir, yo Transfiero, to transfer or carry over. *
Transfiere, Transfiero, vide Transferir. * Transido, passed over, gone with
hunger or thirst, almost dead with hunger or thirst. * Transfiguracion, a
transformation or changing of shapes. * Transfigurar, to change from one shape
into an other. * Transito, m. a passage over from one place to an other, a
trance. * Transitorio, transitory, frail, soon passing away, fading. *
Transnochado, vide Trasnochado, watched all night. * Transparencia, the showing
through as water, air, glass. * Transparente, vide Diaphano. * Transuersal,
ouertwart, not the right way. * Transunto, vide Trasunto, * Tranze, vide
Trance. * Tranzido, very thirsty, almost dead with thirst, gasping with drines.
* Tranzito, v. Transito, a passage over. * Tranzitorio, that which has but a
time. * Trapaca, f. a trap, a catching, and ouerreaching in buying and selling.
* Trapacar, to catch or ouerreach in buying or selling. * Trapajo, a clout, a
shoe clout to wipe shoes. Trapala, vide Estruendo, a noise. * Trapala de
palabras, a noise of words. * Trapaza, vide Trapaca. * Trapazar, to catch or
ouerreach in buying or selling. Traperia, f. drapers trade. Trapero, m. a
draper, a seller of woollen cloth. * Trapiche, m. the art of making sugar. Also
the place where it is made. Trapo, m. a clout of any cloth. Traquear, to cry
as a storke does. Also to make a noise as the drum when it is strooken up.
Traquido, the noise of the blow of a piece, the noise the drum makes when it
is played on. * Traquitantos, id est, Trae aqui tantos, bring hither so many,
the name of a giant. Tras, behind, after. * muy atras, much behind. *
Trasaguelo, or Trasabuelo, a great grandfather. * Trasan^ar, to pass the
year. Trascordado, forgetting, mistaking. Trasdoblado, made triple or
threefold. Trasdobladura, tripling, making threefolde. Trasdoblar, to triple,
or make threefold. Trasdoble, triple or threefold. * Trasegado, m. passed or
conveyed from one vessel to another. * Trasegar, to pass from one vessel to
another. * Trasera cosa, any thing behind the hinder part. Trasero, the hinder
part, the latter. * Trasfiguramente, transformedly. Trasfigurar, to transform,
to change shape or fashion. * Trasformado, transformed, altered in shape. *
Trasformar, to alter in shape. Trasgo de noche, or Duende, hobgoblin, Robin
goodfellow. * Trasgucar, to go by night like a hobgoblin or Robin goodfellow.
* Trashoguero, m. a woodstacke remaining behind. Trasijado, lanke, thin
bellied. Traslacion, translating. * Trasladador, or Traduzidor, a translator or
copier out. Trasladar, to copy out or write out of one book into another.
Traslado, copied, a copy of a writing. Traslador, vide Trasladador. *
Trasluzga, Trasluzgo, vide Trasluzir. * Trasluzido, shined through.
Trasluziente, shining through. Trasluzir, yo Trasluzgo, to shine through.
Trasman^ana, the next day after to morrow. * Trasmiera, a province in Spain. *
Trasmontanos, people dwelling beyond the mountains. * Trasmontar, vide
Tramontar. * Trasnochado, watching all night. Trasnochar, to watch, to stay all
night. Traspallar, or Traspalar, to pale, to cast from one place to another.
Trasparente, vide Diaphano. * Traspasamiento, passing over. * Traspassado,
ouerpassed, ouergone. Traspassar, to ouerpasse, to ouergo, to trespass or do
amiss. Traspie, tripping, supplanting. * Transplantar, to transplant or set a
plant in another place. Trasponer, Praes. Traspongo, Traspones, Traspone, 1.
Praet. Traspuse, Traspusiste, Traspuso, Fut. Trasporne, or Traspondre, as, a,
Sub. Praes. Trasponga, Imperfect. Trapusiera, Traspornia, or Traspusiesse, Fut.
Traspusiere, to remove, to set over, to bring into order, to vanish away. *
Trasponga, Traspongo, vide Trasponer. * Trasporna, Trasporne, v. Trasponer *
Traspornia, vide Trasponer. * Trasportado, carried over, transported. *
Trasportar, to transport, to carry over. * Traspuesto, transported. * Traspuse,
vide Trasponer. * Traspusiera, Traspusiesse, vide Trasponer. * Trasquilado,
polled, shorn, the hair or wool cut off. * Trasquilamiento, a polling, a
clipping off of hair or wool. * Trasquilar, to pull or cut off the hair, to
sheare sheep, or cut off the hair or wool of any other thing. Trasquilones,
notches in the hair. Trassegador, he that straineth, he that powers from one
vessel to another. Trassegar, Praes. yo Trassego, 1. Praet. yo Trassegue, Sub.
Praes. Trassegue, to strain through a strainer, to pour out of one vessel
into another. * Trassegue, vide Trassegar. Traste, m. lumber of household, or
the fret of an instrument. Trastejadura de casa, tyling of a house. Trastejar
casa, or Trastechar, to tile a house. Also to rob, filch, steal: a borrowed
speech from the going on the tops of houses, to break in and rob. * Trastexar,
idem. Trastes de laud, the frets of a lute. * Trastocado, vide Trastrocado. *
Trastocamiento, vide Trastrocamiento. * Trastocar, vide Trastrocar.
Trastornado, overthrown, turned vpside down. * Trastornador, one that turns
vpside down. Trastornadura, f. overthrowing, turning vpside down. Trastornar,
to overthrow, to turn vpside down, to turn hay with a forke. * Trastravado,
ouerthwarted, crossed. * Trastrocado, removed, chopped, or changed. *
Trastrocadas palabras, words turned, the cat into the pan. Trastrocamiento,
remoouing, chopping, and changing. Trastrocar, Praes. yo Trastrueco, 1. Praet.
yo Trastroque. Sub. Praes. Trastroque, to remove, to chop and change.
Trastroque, vide Trastrocar. * Trastrueco, vide Trastrocar. * Trastumbar, to
fall over and over. * Trasudar, to sweat with pain, to sweat much. Trasunto,
the counterfaite, the pourtraiture. * Trasvenga, Trasvengo, vide Trasvenir. *
Trasvenir, Praes. Trasvengo, trasvienes, trasviene. 1. Praet. Trasvine,
trasviniste, trasvino. Fut. Trasverne, as, a, Sub. Praes. Trasvenga. Imperfect.
Trasviniera, trasvernia, trasviniesse, Fut. Trasviniere, to vary, to disagree.
* Trasviene, vide Trasvenir. * Trasvine, Trasviniesse, Trasviniera, vide
Trasvenir. * Tratado, handled. Tratamiento, dealing, handling. Tratante, one
that uses dealing. Tratar, to handle, to deal with. Trato, m. traficke,
trade. Trato de cuerda, a kind of torment by tying the thumbs to make
confess. * Trato doble, double dealing. Trava de pared, the ioints of a wall.
Travado, joined, knit together. Travajar, vide Trabajar, to travel, to take
pains. Travajo, vide Trabajo. * Travaquentas, f. interchange of reckonings
from one to another. Travar, to knit, to join, to join battle, to cross, or
clinch one within another. * Travar con gravato, to clinch or catch hold with a
grapple. * Travar palabras, to be at words one with another. * Travar amistad,
to be in league one with an other. Travas de bestia, shackles for a horse. *
Travaxo, vide Trabaxo. Travazon, m. the joining of timber work in walls. *
Travers, vide Traves, overthwart. Traves, cross, overthwart. * La nao dio al
Traves, the ship was cast away. * Travesan^o, crossing or thwarting one thing
with another. Travesar, or Travessar, yo Traviesso, to lay overthwart, to lay
cross the way. Traveseros, bolsters, transoms. Travesia, vide Travessia,
crossing. * Travessear, to cross the way, to play the wagge. * Travessero, or
Travesero, a bolster to lay under the head. * Travessia, or Travesia, crossing
of the way. Also a waggish part. Travessura, frowardnes, untowardness,
waggishnes, wantonness. * Travez, or Traves, overthwart, cross. * Travezon, or
Travazon, joining close of timber work, crossing one thing with another.
Traviesso, froward, untoward, waggish, wanton. Travilla de gorra, the knot of
a hatte band. * Traxe, vide Traer. * Traxera, Traxesse, vide Traer. * Traxin,
carriage, the office of a carrier. * Traxo, vide Traer. Traycion, f. treason.
Traydo, drawn, also betrayed. Traydor, a traitor. * Trayno, a train, or
following. * Traylla, a leash or slip for a dog. * Traza, vide Traca, a tract
or trace, a footestep, a token or sign. * Trazar, vide Tracar. * Trazo, vide
Traco. * Treba, or Halda, a skirt of a garment. * Trebejar, to interdeale by
tugging one with another. Also to dandle and play with a child. Trebejo,
chesse men to play at chesse. Also a childs rattle or such like, to play
withal, etc. Trebol, m. an herb called Trifoly, or three leafed grass.
Trebol real, sweet Trifoly, or garden Trifolie. * Trecha, vide Trecho. Trecho,
m. space of time or place. Trefe, one troubled with the ptysicke. Trefedad, or
Tisica, the disease called the ptysicke. Tregua, a truce or peace made for a
time. * Tremblor, trembling. Tremedal, a durtie place. Trementina, turpentine.
* Tremer, to tremble. Tremesino, three months old. Tremielga, a crampfish that
benummeth the hands of him that meddleth therewith. * Tremielgo, or
Entormecimento, heavy dulnes, or unaptness to any good exercise. * Tremienda,
a trembling, a quaking. * Tremolante, vide Tremulante. * Tremolar, vide
Tremular. Trempo, vide Tiempo. * Tremulante, quiuering or wavering. * Tremular,
to waver or quiver. Trena, or Trenca, a lace, a pointing riband. Trenca, vide
Trenca. Trenca de vid, the prop of a vine. * Trencado, platted with riband or
such like. * Trencar, to plat with ribands, etc. * Trence, vide Trance. *
Trenchado, the parting of the hair. * Trenchar, to part the hair of the head.
* Trenchea, f. a trench. * Trenea, a cord wouen of three. * Trenza, vide
Trenca. * Trenzado, vide Trencado. Trepa, the border of a garment, the train
of a gown, dancing on a rope, tumbling. * Trepa negra, an ill favored
tumbling cast, a foul disgrace. Trepado, a garment embrodered. Also nimble,
strong. Trepador, a vaulter, a tumbler, a dauncer on ropes. Trepar, to dance
on ropes, to climb. Trepido, fearful, timorous. Tres, three. * Tres tanto,
three times as much. * Trespontine, a wool pack, or a bolster stuffed hard. *
Tresquiladero, m. a place where they sheare or clip, a sheepeshearing place. *
Tresquiladizo, a thing that may be shorn. Tresquilado, clipped, shorn, notted
the hair. Tresquilador, a shearer, a clipper. Tresquilar, to clip, to sheare,
to notte, to crispe or trim the hair. *Tresquilar a cruzes, to notte and
scotch the hair making him like a fool. Treta, a venue at fence. * Treudes, a
treuet to set on the fire. Trevede, idem. * Trevejar, to dandle as nurses use
to dance their children. Also to enterdeale one with another. * Trevejos, the
chessemen, a childs rattle. * Trevol, three leafed grass. Treynta, thirty in
number. Treyntenario, the thirtieth in order of account. Treyntena, f. idem.
Treze, thirteen in number. * estarse en sus Treze, to be in his thirteenes, to
be obstinate, to stand still in his purpose. * Treze mil, thirteen thousand.
Trezeno, the thirteenth. Trezientos, three hundred. Triaca, f. treacle.
Triangulo, or Triangolo, a triangle, a form that is three square. * Trianos,
footmen in the rereward. Triaquero, he that makes treacle. * Triarios, vide
Trianos. Tribulacion, f. trouble, anguish, vexation. Tribunal, a judgment
seat. Tributario, tributarie, one that lives under tribute. Tributo, tribute,
tax, poll money. Trica, Trisa, Triza, a certain coard in a ship called a
halliard. * Tridente, a threefold mace, an instrument with three teeth. *
Trifauce, that has three throtes or three chaps, as poets fained Cerberus to
have. Trigaco, m. pertaining to wheat. * Trigazo, idem. Trigo, m. wheat. *
Trigo candial, fine white wheat. * Trigo tremesino, summer wheat, wheat of
three months. Triguera, vide Alpiste. Triguero, m. a sparrowe that uses to
wheat. * Trilingues, skilled in three toongs, having skill in three toongs.
Trilla, f. threshing. * Trillacon, f. threshing. * Trillada materia, f. a
common ordinary matter. Trillado, m. threshed. * Trillador, a thresher.
Trillar, to thresh corn. Trillazon, f. threshing. Trillo, m. a flaile to
thresh with. * Trinacria, f. the I Will Sicylie. * Trinca, as Poner la vela a la
trinca, to put a ship that the edges of the sails may be to the wind, to hull
with the ship. * Trincar, to hull up and down with a ship. Trinchante, a
caruer. * Trinchado, carved as meat is carved. * Trinchadura, f. a caruing of
meat. * Trinchante, a caruer. * Trinchar, to carue meat. Trinchaa, f. a
trench. Trincheo, m. idem. also a cutting board, a trencher. * Trinchera, f. a
trench. * Trinchete, m. a minsing knife such as cooks use. Trinchete, m. de
capatero, a shooemakers cutting knife. * Trinco, m. a sledde, a draie. *
Trinidad, the holy trinity, the number of three. Trinquete, m. the foremast,
the foresaile. * Trino, threefold. * Triones, m. the stars called Charles
waine being in the north. Tripa ciega, the paunch. Tripas, f. the guts. *
Triperia, f. the tripe market. * Tripidacion, f. a threefold motion. * Tripies,
a tressle to lay a table on. * Tripodas, f. tables of three feet in the temple
of Apollo, upon which went the prophetesses to their oracles. Tripon, m. a
great gorbelly, a grandpanch. * Triquete, m. a corner or bench in a brothell
house where the queanes practice their filthiness. * Trisca, f. a jesting
withal, a toying withal. Triscar, Praes. yo Trisco, 1. Praet. yo Trisque, to
jest, to gibe, to toy with. * Trisilabo, of three sillables. * Trisque, vide
Triscar. Triste, sad, heavy, sorrowful. Tristel, Cristel, or ayuda, a
clyster to purge with. Tristeza, f. heaviness, sadness, sorrow. * Tristura, f.
vide Tristeza. * Tritonia, a surname given to Pallas, of the lake Tritonia,
where she was first seen. * Trivia, a name given to Diana. * Triud, vide
Trevede. * Triumfal, or Triumphal, triumphant, victorious. Triumfar, to
triumph, to carry away the victory. Triumfo, or Triumpho, a triumph, or
reioicing upon victory, a game at cards so called. * Triumviral, of, or
belonging to the office of triumuirs. * Trivuto, vide Tributo. * Triza, or
Trica, a coard in a ship called a halliard. Troba, f. a rhyme, a verse. *
Trobado, made in rhyme. Trobador, a rimer, a versifier. Trobar, to rhyme, to make
verses. * Trocado, m. chopped, changed, bartered. Trocar, Praes. yo Trueco, 1.
Praet. yo Troque, Sub. Praes. Troque, to change, to barter one thing for
another. Trocatinte, changeable silk. Trocha, vide Trecho. Trochisco, a little
round ball flat in the end, of sundry powders, any kind of medicine made
round like a ring or loaf of bread, the apothecaries call it a trochiske. *
Trocho, or Rodete, a woman's wire. Troco, m. a truncheon, a planke. * puente de
Troco, a timber bridge or a planke bridge. Trofeo, or Tropheo, m. a trophee, a
sign of victory. * Troga, Froga, Argamasca, or Mescla, f. mortar, a mixing of
lime and sand. * Tromba, f. a trumpet, a round instrument of brass. Trompa, a
trumpet, an elephants trunk, a top for a child to play withal. * Trompa de
Paris, a Jews harp. * Trompa para trompar, a childs top to play withal. *
Trompear, to play at top and scourge. Trompecadero, a stumbling block.
Trompecadura, f. stumbling. Trompecar, yo Trompieco, to stumble. * Trompecon,
m. a great stumbling. Trompeta, a trumpet, a trumpeter. * Trompeta de bueltas,
a sagbut. Also a trumpet with many windings and turnings. Trompetear, to sound
a trumpet. Trompetero, m. a trumpeter. * Trompezadura, vide Trompecadura, f. *
Trompezar, vide Trompecar. * Trompezon, vide Trompecon. * Trompicar, Praes. yo
Trompico, 1. Praet. yo Trompique, Sub. Praes. Trompique, to stumble apace, to
stumble headlong. * Trompico, m. a top for a child to whip. * Trompiece,
Trompieco, vide Tro^pecar. Trompillar, to throw down, to fall down, to cast
down. * Trompique, vide Trompicar. Trompo, or Peonca, a top to play with. *
Trompon, m. idem. Tronar, yo Trueno, to thunder. * Troncal, belonging to a
stock or trunk. Tronchado, m. broken as boughs from a tree. Tronchar, to
break down bows of a tree, and such like. Troncho, m. the stalk of a
colewoort or other herb. Tronco, m. a stock, a trunk. Also a body without a
head. Also a truncheon. * Troncon, a stock or trunk without boughs. Tronera,
f. a loope hole to lay out ordinance at, or a loope hole for small shot to
shoot out at. Tronido, or Trueno, m. thunder. * Trono, m. a throne, a kingly
seat. * Tropa, f. a troop. Tropecar, yo Tropieco, to stumble. * Tropecon, a
stumbling block. * Tropecoso, given to stumble. Tropel de gente, a band or
company of folk. Tropellado, overthrown. Tropellar, to overthrow. *
Tropezar, vide Tropecar. * Tropheo, a mark or token of timber or stone set up
in a place where enemies were vanquished, with their harness or other spoil
hanged thereon. Tropico, a tropicke, whereof be two, one of Cancer, another of
Capricorn. Also a disease so called. * Tropiece, Tropieco, vide Tropecar.
Tropieco, stumbling. * Troque, vide Trueco, exchange, bartering. * Troque, vide
Trocar. * Trota conventos, a gadder abroad, a staier in no place. Trotar, to
trot as a horse trotteth. Trote, m. trotting. * Troton, a horse that trotteth,
a trotter. * Trovado, vide Trobado. * Trovar, or Trobar, to rhyme, to make
verses. * Trovellin, or Trovellio, vide Torvellin. * Trovellio, vide Torvellin.
* Trox, f. a garner to keep corn in. Troxe, f. a granier to keep corn in. *
Trozo, vide Troco. * Truan, or Truhan, m. a parasite, a prattling fellow, a
iester, a knauish fool. Trucha, f. a fish called a Troute. * Truchaman, vide
Faraute, an interpreter. Trueco, change, bartering one thing for another,
chopping and changing. * Trueco, I change, vide Trocar. * Truene, Trueno, vide
Tronar. Trueno, m. thunder. Also a handgun. * Trueque, vide Trocar. * Trufa, f.
a gibe, a jesting or ieering. * Trugillo, a kind of great red wheat. Also the
name of a city in Spain. Truhan, m. a parasite, a iester, a knauish fool. *
Truhana, a she parasite, a tatling housewife. * Truhaneando, by playing the
iester. Truhanear, to jest, to play the fool for advantage. Truhaneria, f.
jesting, playing the fool and knave withal. Trujaman, or Truchaman, m. an
interpreter of a language. Trujamanear, to interpret in his natural speech
what a stranger says. * Trulla, a rout of people. * Trulos, a people in the
Indies. * Truxe, Truxesse, Truxera, vide Traer. * Truxillo, a kind of great
red wheat. Also the name of a city in Spain. * Truxo, vide Traer.
T V
Tu, thou, thy self. * Tubrir, to stop chinkes or cliftes, to enuiron, to fill
up, to compass, to defend or guard. * Tudesco, or Todesco, m. a Dutch man. *
Tudido, bound straight. * Tudir, to bind or tie. * Tuerce, Tuerco, vide
Torcer. Tuero, vide Tizon, a firebrand. Tuerto, crooked, awrie, one eied. *
Tuesta, Tueste, Tuesto, vide Tostar, to burn, to toaste. Tuetano, or Tutano,
marrow. Also the kernel of nuts or such like. * Tuetonico, a Dutchman. Tufo,
m. the smell of the stomach after wine. Tullido, benumbed, taken lame or number.
Tullimiento, a benumming. Tullir, to benumme, to wax lame or numme. * Tullose,
or se Tullo, he became number. Tumba, a tomb, a burying place, a place where they
burned dead bodies. Tumbadera red, a toil to overthrow dear with. * Tumbando
venian, they came tumbling. * Tumbar, to tumble. * Tumbo, a tumbling. Tumulo, a
tomb, a heap of stones, etc. a sepulcher. * Tumulto, a tumult, a hurliburlie,
an uproar, a sedition, a stir, a broile, insurrection of people. *
Tumultuamente, with much adoo, or with an uproar. * Tumultuar, to raise
sedition, hurliburly, or tumult. * Tumva, vide Tumba. Tumvar, vide Tumbar. *
Tuna, a kind of herb with very broad leaves and marvelous thick with
prickles in them, a kind of docke or thistle. * Tundido, dressed, shorn as
cloth. Tundidor, a clothworker, a shearer of cloth. Tundidura, a shearing of
cloth. Tundir, to sheare cloth at the clotheworkers. * Tunes, a city of Africa
the lesser so named. Tunica, f, a coat of a friar. Also cloth to cast over the
beer to carry a dead body to church. * Tupido, wouen thick, or made thick
by fulling. Tupir, to weaue thick or make thick. Tura, durance, lasting,
continuance. Turar, to endure, to last. * Turba, f. seacoale. Also turfe of
earth. Also multitude, a rout or crew of common people, the rabble, the rout.
Turbacion, trouble. Turbadamente, troublesomely. Turbado, troubled, molested,
grieved. Turbamiento, trouble, much ado. Turbar, to trouble. Turbio, thick,
troubled, pudly. Turbion, m. a storm, a tempest, a whirle wind. Turbit, a
root, called Turbith, good to purge phlegm. * Turbulento, troublesome,
seditious, full of contention. * Turco, a Turk. *Turdo, a certain sea fish
like a Breame. * Turin, the chief city in Piemont so called. Turma, a goats
stone, or rams stone. Also the stones of other beasts. Turma de tierra, a
puff, a bull fiste: a kind of round root of russet color, of the hignes of
a Turnep growing under ground, very dainty to be eaten, and is found out by
the bulking out of the earth where he grows, as by the herb Turmera, growing
by it. * Turmas, vide Cojones. * Turmera, f. the place where the Puff grows.
Also the herb called Turmera, growing by the Turma, vide Turma de tierra.
Turnio, m. goggle eied. *Turno, a course or turn, as Por su turno, by his
turn. Turon, m. vide Turron, a field mouse. Also a kind of cake of honey,
Almonds, grated biscuit, etc. Turonero, a maker of cakes of honey, Almonds,
grated biscuit, etc. * Turvacion, vide Turbacion. * Turvar, vide Turbar. *
Turvino, m. Turpentine. * Turvio, squint-eied, one that looks awry. Also vide
Turbio, troubled, pudley. * Turvion, vide Turbion. * Turvit, vide Turbit. *
Turvulento, vide Turbulento. Tusar, to poll the hair. *Tuscia, or Toscana, a
Province in Italy so called, where is spoken the best Italian. * Tusco, or
Toscano, a man of Tuscanie. * Tuson, as Tuson de oro, the golden fleece. *
Tutar, vide Tutelar, to take charge of bringing up a young body. * Tutelar, to
take charge of bringing up a young child or person. Tutela, f. tutorship,
charge to bring up some youth, protection and defending another man's cause.
Tutia, f. an apothecarie drug, called Tuttie, good for bruses. Tutor, a tutor
that takes charge of some youth, a protector of another man's right. * Tuve,
vide Tener. * Tuviera, Tuviesse, vide Tener. * Tuvieron, they have held, vide
Tener. * Tuvimos, we have held, vide Tener. * Tuvo, vide Tener. Tuyo, thine. *
Tuzia, vide Tuscia. * Tuzon, vide Tuson.
T Y
* Tygre, a beast called a Tiger. * Tygris, the river Tigris. * Typhis, the
name of the first Pilot, who went guide to Iasons ship, called Argos, when he
stole the golden fleece. * Tyranizar, to play the tyrant, to rule too
imperiously, rather by will, than by law or reason. Tyrano, or Tirano, a
tyrant, one that rules by will, rather than by laws or reason. * Tyrrheno, or
Toscano, belonging to Tuscanie. * Tyrso, or Tirso, a lance or spear wound
about with vine branches, borne of the sacrificers to Bacchus. * Tysiphon, one
of the three furies of hell, as Poets feign.
V
* VAbor, vide Babor. * Vaborda, vide Baborda. * Vaca, vide Baca. Vaca, a cow.
Vacacion, f. vacation, leisure, idle time, emptines. * Vacada, a heard of
cowes. * Vacado, void, empty, at leisure. * Vacalaos, vide Bacalaos. * Vacan,
vide Bacan. * Vacancia, or Vacantia, vacation time, holly day, time of rest.
Vacant, void, at leisure. Vacar, Praes. yo Vaco, 1. Praet. yo Vaque. Sub.
Praes. Vaque, to be void, to have little to do, to be at leisure. * Vachara,
vide Bachara. * Vachilla, vide Vaquilla, a heifer. * Vachilleria, vide
Bachilleria. * Vacia, f. a barbers basen. Also a basen of earth, pewter, tin,
or silver, of the fashion and making of a barbers basen. * Vacillante,
staggering, fickle, wavering, unconstant, reeling. Vacillar, to stagger, to
waver in thoughts, to be inconstant, to stagger, to reele. * Vacin, vide Bacin,
m. * Vacinete, a little basen, or basenet. * Vacinilla, idem. * Vaco, void,
vacant. * Vaco, vide Baco. * Vactros, vide Bactros. * Vacuno, of or pertaining
to cowes. * Vadajada, vide Badajada. * Vadajo, vide Badajo. * Vadana, vide
Badana. * Vadeando, wading. * Vadeha, vide Badeha. Vadear, to wade. * Vadil,
vide Badil. Vado, a shallow place in a river, a foorde, where men or beasts may
go over without danger. Vadoso, full of shallowes, or foords. * Vaeca, vide
Baeca. Vagabundo, or Vagamundo, a vagabond, one that wandereth up and down. *
Vagaje, vide Bagaje, m. luggage, lumber, baggage, trumperie. Vagar, Praes. yo
Vago, 1. Praet. yo vague, Sub. Praes. Vague, to wander up and down, to be
idle, to stray. * Vagaroso, spacious, large. * Vagel, or Bagel, a vessel, a
boat, a skiffe. Vago, wandering. * Vague, vide Vagar. * Vaguear, to wander or
gad up and down. Vaguido, m. turning of the brains, swouning. * Vahari, a
kind of hawk. * Vahear, to reeke, to fume, to smoke, to vent, to exhale. *
Vaia, let him go, let it go. * Vaia, vide Baya, a bay, a creek. * Vajel,
Vagel, or Vaxel, a vessel, a boat, a skiffe. * Vajeles, or Vaxeles, skiffes,
boats, vessels. * Vailar, or Vaylar, vide Baylar, to dance with clacking the
fingers. * Veil, vide Bail. * Vaio, vide Baio. * Vajo, vide Bajo. Val, vide
Valle. * Vala me Dios, God help me. * Valadi, any thing of little or no worth,
light, having no substance in it. * Vala lo el Diablo, the devil take him. *
Valadron, m. a prater, a cogging companion. * Valadronear, to prate, to cog. *
Valago, vide Balago. * Valancar, vide Balancar. * Valancia, vide Balancia. *
Valando, vide Balando. * Valax, vide Balax. * Valazo, vide Balazo. *
Valbuciente, vide Balbuciente. * Valcon, vide Balcon. * Valde, vide Balde. *
Valdia, vide Baldia. * Valdio, vide Baldio. * Valdon, vide Baldon. * Valdonado,
vide Baldonado. * Valdra, Valdre, vide Valor. * Valdres, vide Baldres. *
Valdronear, vide Baldronear. * Valedor, an intercessor, a mediator, a defender
of another man's cause, a parttaker, a man of worth. * Valencia, f. a city in
Spain so called. * Valena, vide Vallena, a whale fish. Valenton, a fencer, one
that makes himself valiant. Valor, Praes. yo Valgo, Fut. Valdre, as, a, Sub.
Praes. Valga, to be worth. Valeriana yerva, an herb called valerian. *
Valerosamente, valorously, puissantly, valiantly. Valeroso, valorous, puissant,
courageous, valiant, magnanimous. * Valesta, vide Vallesta. * Valestazo, vide
Vallestazo. * Valestero, vide Vallestero. * Valga, Valgo, vide Valor. * Valia,
I or he were of avail. Valia, f. the value or worth of a thing. * Valico, vide
Vallico, m. * Valida, f. a matter of worth. * Validacion, the worth. * Valido,
of avail, of force or to the purpose. * Valido, m. a bleating of sheep.
Valiente, valiant, strong, courageous, a fencer. Valientemente, valiantly. *
Valija, a male, clokebag, budget, wallet or portmanteaw. * Valista, a
crossebowe. * Valitar, to bleate as sheep or fawnes. * Valiza, vide Vallija.
Valladar, or Vallado, a hollow trench made for defense, a rampire, a bulwark.
Vallado, idem. * Valladolid, a town in old Castile in Spain. * Vallador, m.
one that makes valleys. Valle, m. a valley. Vallena, or Ballena, f. a whale
fish. * Vallesta, or Ballesta, f. a crossebowe. * Vallestar, to shoot in a
crossebowe. * Vallestazo, m. the shot or blow of a crossebowe. * Vallestear,
to shoot in a crossebow. * Vallestero, Vallestrero, or Ballestrero, a
crossebowe-maker, or one that shoots in a crossebowe. * Vallestrero de maca,
a kind of battle axe. Vallico, a weed or noisome grain called cockle. *
Vallija, or Valiza, f. a budget, a wallet, a male, a clokebag or portmanteaw. *
Vallon, m. a great valley. * Valon, or Balon, a Wallon, a Burgundian. * Valona,
Wallons fashion. * Valones calcones, great Spanish breeches. * Valor, m. valor,
worth, courage, fortitude. * Valtrueto, vide Baltrueto. * Valuacion, the value.
* Valuarte, m. a bulwark. * Valume, or Balume, vide Valumen. * Valumen, m. any
thing that is made to show great or huge. * Vamonos, id est, Vamos nos, let us
be going. * Vamos, let us go. Vanagloria, vaineglorie, ambition. *
Vanagloriarse, to be vaineglorious, to boast himself. Vanagloriosamente,
vainegloriously. Vanaglorioso, vaineglorious. Vanamente, vainly. Vanasto, a
pannier, a dorser. Vanca, or Vanco, a bench, a settle or seat to sit on. *
Vancal, m. a bench cloth. * Vancaroto, a bankrupt. Vanco, vide Banco, a bench,
a stool, a shelfe in the sea. Vanda, or Banda, a side, a band or company of
men, a band or bend to tie with. * tener a la Vanda, to hold or keep on one
side. * Vanda, or Esquadra, a squadron of soldiers. * Vanda de cavallero, a
horsemans belt or arming girdle. * de la otra Vanda del rio, on the other side
the river. * Vandalia, the province of Andaluzia in Spain. Vandear, to help a
side, to follow a faction, to become factious. Vandeo, m. following of a
faction, helping a side. Vandera, f. a banner, a streamer, an ensign, the
flagge on a ship top, a standert. * Vanderado, m. an ensigns servant to carry
his banner or ensign. * Vanderilla, f. a little banner, ensign, or standart,
a little flag on a ships top. Vanderizamente, factiously. Vanderizo, one that
leans to a faction. Vandero, idem. * Vanderola, vide Banderola, a little
flagge or streamer, etc. * Vandines de Popa, m. the sides of the stern in a
galley. * Vando, m. a faction. Vandolero, m. he that follows a faction. *
Vandujo, vide Bandujo, a pudding. * Vanduxo, idem. * Vandurria, vide Bandurria.
Vanear en palabras, to trifle or talk foolishly. * Vanguardia, the vangard or
foreward of a battle. * Vanidad, f. vanity. * Van^ado, bathed. Van^ar, vide
Ban^ar, to bathe. * Van^il, m. a mason, a plaisterer. * Van^o, or Ban^o, a
bathe. Vano, vain, naught worth. * Vanquero, m. a money changer. * Vanquete,
or Banquete, m. a banquet, a feast, good cheer. * Vanqueteado, banquetted,
feasted. * Vanquetear, or Banquetear, to feast, to banquet, to make good
cheer. * Vanquillo, m. a little bench, a little stool, a footestoole. Vapor,
m. a vapor. Vaporoso, vaporous. * Vaque, vide Vacar. Vaquero, a heardman that
keeps kine. Vaqueta, f. a gunsticke, a heifer, neates leather. * Vaquilla, a
little cow, a heifer. Also a kind of creeping worm. * Vaquina, f. idem.
Vara, a rod, a stick, a yard, a cudgel, a twigge. * Vara de liga, a lime
twigge. * Vara de pescar, an angle rod. Vara real, a mace of justice, or
sword of justice carried before the magistrate. * Varaca, vide Baraca.
Varahustar, vide Barahustar. * Varaja, or Baraja, a shuffling of cards, a
brabling. * Varajar, or Barajar, to brabble, to shuffle cards. Varal, a forked
pole to thrust a boat from shore with. Varallos de heno, a swathe of grass or
corn as it lies new mowed. Varanda, f. a sieue to sift meal, etc. also
railes to lean the breast on. Varar, to set ships on land, to strike with a
ship on ground. * Varatija, f. small household stuff, as pots, pans, platters,
spoones, etc. * Varato, good cheap. * Varaton, one that sells good cheap, a
broker. * Varatro, vide Baratro. * Varavala, id est, Varavala, vide Varar. *
Varbechar, vide Barbechar. * Varbero, vide Barbero. * Varca, vide Barca. *
Varco, vide Barco. * Varda de cavallo, vide Barda de cavallo. * Vardar, to
cover mudde walls. * Vardajo, a Ganimede. * Vardaxo, idem. Varear, to strike
with a rod, stick, or cudgel. * Variacion, difference, variation. Variable,
variable, changeable, mutable unconstant. Variado, made diverse, varied,
altered. Variar, to vary, to alter diversely. Variedad, variety, diversity of
change. Varilla, a little wand or stick. Varilla de cuello, the throat. *
Varniz, vide Barniz, f. * Varnizado, vide Barnizado. Vario, diverse, sundry, not
all of one sort. Varon, or Baron, a man, a baron. Varonia, or Baronia, a barony
or lordship. * Varonica, f. the holy varnicle, the picture of Christ's face.
Varonil, manlike. Varonilmente, manly, courageously. * Varquero, or Barquero, a
boatman, a ferriman, a bargeman. * Varqueta, vide Barqueta. * Varquilla, or
Barquilla, a little bark. * Ducado de la varquilla, a ducate with the sign of
the bark on it, less weight then an another. * Varra de liga, silver metal
with his mixture to make money of. * Varraca, f. a cabin of boughs or such
like, a cottage of boughs, etc. * Varrachel, vide Barrachel. * Varragan, vide
Barragan. Varraganete, vide Barraganete. * Varran, vide Barran. * Varranca,
vide Barranca. * Varranco, vide Barranco. * Varraquillo, vide Barraquillo. *
Varreado, vide Barreado. * Varrear, vide Barrear. * Varredera, vide Barredera.
* Varredero, vide Barredero. * Varredor, vide Barredor. * Varreduras, vide
Barreduras. * Varrena, a wimble, an awger, a pearcer. * Varrenado, boared
through. * Varrenar, to boar through. * Varreno, a boaring through, a hole
boared. * Varrer, to sweep, to brush. * Varrera, a barrier, a skaffold, to
stand and behold the bull-baiting: a clay pit, the front of a wall. * Varreta,
vide Barreta. * Varri, vide Barri. * Varrial, vide Barrial. * Varrido, vide
Barrido. * Varriento, vide Barriento. * Varriga, vide Barriga. * Varrigudo,
vide Barrigudo. * Varril, vide Barril. * Varrilejo, vide Barrilejo. *
Varrilero, vide Barrilero. * Varrio, or Barrio, the ward of a parish. * Varro,
or Barro, clay, earth. * Varros de rostro, wheales or pimples in the face. *
Varroso, vide Barroso. * Varruchas, vide Barruchas. * Varruntar, vide
Barruntar. * Varvero, vide Barvero. * Varuntar, vide Baruntar. * Vasar, a
cupboord to set vessel on, a court cupboord. * Vasallo, vide Vassallo, a
vassal or subject. Vasca, or Basca, a pang, a throng, a vehement inward
passion, griping or panting within the body. Vascas, pangs, throngs, extreme
passions, gripings or pantings within the body, the pangs of death. *
Vascosear, vide Vasquear, to be panged with throngs or vehement passions,
gripings, or heart beatings within the body. Vascosidad, skum or filth of any
thing, vide Suziedad. * Vasija, or Basija, f. a vessel. * Vasilisco, a serpent
called a Basiliske, or a piece of ordinance so called. Vasillo, m. a small
vessel. Vaso, a vessel. * Vasquearse, to be panged with throngs, or extreme
passions, gripings, or heart beatings within the body. * Vasquin^a, a woman's
petticoate, a kirtle. Vassalaje, m. a vassall-ship, or duty of a vassal to
his Prince. Vassallo, m. a vassal, a subject. Vassura, f. dust, rubbish. *
Vastage, vide Bastage. * Vastardo, vide Bastardo. * Vaston, vide Baston, m. *
Vatanero, vide Batanero. * Vatel, or Batel, a skiffe, a ship boat. * Vateria,
or Bateria, battery with ordinance. * Vatido, vide Batido. * Vatir, vide
Batir. * Vaxar, vide Baxar. * Vaxel, Vajel, or Vagel, a vessel, a skiffe or
boat. * Vaxillo, a small vessel, skiffe or boat. * Vaxio, m shallow, not
deep. * Vaxo, vide Baxo. * Vaya, f. let him go, a showting when men go. * Vaya
de mar, a bay, a creek of the sea. Vayas, Bayberries. * Vayben, a swaying or
rolling from one side to another. Also the tossing of fortune. * Vayeta, or
Bayeta, baies or black cloth frised, used for mourners in Spain. *
Vayladera, a little toye that boys set up with their fingers to go on a table
as a top. Also a woman dauncer. * Vaylar, to dance with snapping the fingers.
Vayna, f. a sheath, a scabberd, the skin of the stones. Vaynica, f. a stitch in
ruffes. Vayo, or Bayo, bay colored, a horse. * Vayven, Vayben, or Bayben, vide
Vayben. * Vaziadizo, a molten image, any thing emptied or hollow within.
Vaziamente, emptily. Vaziar, to empty, to make void. Vaziedad, emptines. *
Vazija, vide Vasija, a vessel. Vazio, empty.
V B
V'bre, f. a dug, an vdder. Vbrera, a soar in a child's mouth.
V E
* Ve, go, pack, be gone. Vebra, f. vide Huebra, an acre of ground a days
work. * Vebra, f. the first figs a fig tree bears. Vecindad, or Vezindad, f.
neighborhood. * Vecino, vide Vezino, a neighbor. * Veco, vide Hueco, hollow.
* Ved, see ye, the Imperative mood of Ver. Vedado, forbidden. * Vedados, m.
several grounds or pastures to a man. Vedamiento, forbidding, letting of his
purpose. Vedar, to forbid. Vedegambre, an herb called beare-foote. * Vedija, a
lock of wool. Also a shag of hair. * Vedijoso, shagge-haired, or having long
shaggie wool. * Vedixoso, idem. * Vedriero, m. a glasier. Vedrioso, glassie,
brittle. Veedor, a seer, an ouerseer, a muster master, a controller, a clarke
of the check, a searcher. * Veedor general, a muster master general. * Vega,
f. ground or pasture running along near unto the rivers side. * Vega de
Granada, the pasture ground of Granada running along the rivers banck. Vegada,
a turn, when a man takes his turn as yt falls. * Vegadilla, f. a little
turn as it falls to a man, by taking his turn as it falls. * Vege, vide
Bege. * Veges, or Vejes, f. old age. * Vegetativo, that has life. * Vegezuela,
or Vejezuela, a silly old woman. * Vegezuelo, or Vejezuelo, a poor old man.
* Vehemencia, vehemency, earnestness. * Vehemente, earnest. Vejazo, an old
fellow. Vejedad, f. age, antiquity. Vejes, or Vejez, age, old age. Vejezuela,
or Vegezuela, an old wretched woman. * Vejezuelo, or Vegezuelo, a silly old
man. * Veintequatro, twenty and four. Also an alderman. * Vejo, old, very
ancient. Vela, f. a veil, a sail, a candle, a watchman. * Vela maestra, or
Vela mayor, the maine sail. * Vela mezana, the misne sail. * Vela del
trinquete, the fore sail. * Vela mayor, the maine sail. * Vela menor, the
lesser sail. * Velacion, f. covering with a veil. Velada, f. a watching. *
Velado, a spouse or married man. Velador, a watchman. Also a socket
candlestick. Velar, to watch, to cover with a veil, to become a nouice in a
house of religion. * Velartes, a kind of black cloth very fine. * Velda, or
Veldo, for Ved la, or Ved lo, look on it, see it, or see her. Velen^o, a
noisome herb called henbane. * Velero, m. a chandler, a maker or seller of
candles. Velesa, f. an herb growing in Spain called in Latin Gingidium.
Veleta, f. a vane for the wind, that stands on the top of churches and high
places to show where the wind is. Also the top of a fishing rod. * Velico,
warlike. * Velicoso, m. valiant in arms, fierce, warlike. * Velites, the
Romans in ancient time called the shooters or darters Velites. * Vella, Velle,
Vello, for Verla, Ver le, Ver lo, see her, to see him, to see it. * Vellaria,
vide Vellaqueria. * Vellacazo, m. a great knave, a notable villain, a great
rakehell. Vellaco, a knave, a villain. * Vellador, a watcher, a sentinel that
stands wacth in the war. Vellaqueria, f. villainy, knauerie. * Vellaquillo, a
little knave, a little villain. * Velle, for Ver le, to see him. Velleguin, m.
a sargeant, a summoner, a servant attending upon an officer. Velleza, f.
beauty. Vello, the hair of a man's body, the hair or mossinesse of the
beard, cotton or nap on cloth. Also fair, beautiful. Vellocino, or Vellon, m.
a fleece of wool. * Vellon, a fleece of wool. * moneda de Vellon, copper or
brass money. Velloso, hairie, mossie, woollie, rough. Vellota, or Bellota, f.
an acorne. * Vellotero, he that gathers acornes. * Vellutado, made after the
manner of acornes. Velluda, or Villoso, shag haired. * Velluda de tripas,
velure, fustian a napes, tufted mocado. Velo, a veil for a nun, a kerchiefe.
* Velocidad, f. swiftnes, nimblenes. * Velocissimamente, most nimbly, most
swiftly. * Velox, or Veloz, swift, nimble, active, full of life. Veloz, idem. *
Ven, come thou. Vena, a vein, the natural disposition or vein of a man, a
pulse or artery. Also a vein of the earth. * Vena cefalica, the head vein. *
Vena basilica, the liver vein. * Vena mediana, the common vein in the arm,
the middle vein, the black vein. * Vena sagitalia, a vein in the middle
finger. Venable, vide Venablo. * Venablo, m. a iauelin. * Venada, f. a thing
having many veins. * Venado, dear, venison. * Venador, m. a hunter. Venage,
the stream. Also many veins. * Venaje, idem. * Venaizon, f. venison. * Venal,
any thing vendible or saleable. Vencedor, a conqueror, an ouercommer. *
Vencedora, f. a conqueresse, a woman that overcomes. Vencejo, a bird without
feet called a martlet or marten. Vencejos, straps to bind with, hawks
iesses. Vencer, yo Vienco, to conquer, to overcome. Vencido, overcome,
conquered. Vencimiento, conquering, ouercomming. Venda, a bend, a labell, a
ribband. * apretar la cabeca con Vendas y faxas, to tie the head with ribbands
and fillets. Vendabal, or Vendabar, the southwind by west, the southwest.
Vendado, bound with a ribband or fillet. Vendar, to bind, to tie. * Vendaval,
or Vendabal, the south wind by west. Vendedor, a seller. Vender, yo Viendo, to
sell. * Vendera. vide Vandera. * Vandello, id est, Vender lo, to sell it. *
Vendicar, vide Vengar. * Vendicho, vide Bendicho. * Vendida, or Venta, a sale
or selling. Vendido, sold. Vendimia, wine harvest, grape gathering time,
vintage, the gathering of grapes to make wine. * Vendimiadera, a woman maker of
wine. Vendimiador, a wine maker. Vendimiar, to gather grapes and to make wine.
Venedizo, or Advenedizo, a stranger come from another place. Veneficio, vide
Benificio. Veneno, poison. * Venenos de las manos, wheales or pustles in the
hands. Venenoso, venomous, full of poison. Venera, f. a scallop shell, signs
worn to show that a man has been on pilgrimage. Venerable, worshipful,
worthy of reverence. * Venerando, idem. Veneracion, worship, reverence.
Venerar, to worship, to reverence. * Venereo, luxurious, fleshly, wanton,
lecherous. * Venero, a vein of metal. * Venga, Vengo, vide Venir. * Venga,
as Que le Venga, that which may fit him. Vengado, revenged. Vengador, a
revenger. Vengadora cosa, a wreakefull matter. Venganca, f. revenge. Vengar,
Praes. yo Vengo, 1. Praet. yo Vengue, Sub. Praes. Vengue, to revenge.
Vengativo, reuengfull. * Vengue, vide Vengar. * Venia, reverence, curtesy,
leave, license, favor. Venida, f. a coming. * Venial, pardonable, that may be
pardoned, venial, remissible. Venidero, that is to come, that shall come. *
Venido, come. * Venino, wheales, pustles or scabs. Venir, Praes. Vengo, Vienes,
Viene, 1. Praet. Vine, Viniste, Vino, Fut. Verne, as, a, Sub. Praes. Venga,
Imperfect. Viniera, Vernia, or Viniesse, Fut. Viniere, to come, to fit as
apparel. * Venir a menos, to become worse. Venta, f. a sale, an inn, a
bayting place. Ventaja, f. vantage. * Ventajar, to surpass, to have more.
Ventalle, a fan. * Ventallina, f. a little fan. Ventana, a window. Ventana
enrexada, a lattice window. * Ventanas de la nariz, the nostrels of the nose. *
Ventanage, or Ventanaje, a placefull of windows. Ventanilla, a little window, a
casement of a window. Ventar, to sell by retayle, to fan, to make wind. *
Ventaxa, vide Ventaja. * Ventear, to air abroad, to put into the wind. *
Ventera, a woman keeping an inn or bayting place. * Ventera de almenas, the
space between the battlements of a wall. Ventero, an inn keeper, or keeper of
a lodging, inn, or alehouse in the country. * Ventezico, a little wind. *
Ventillar, to winnowe, to purge from chafe, to make pure and clean.
Ventisquero, a whirlewind, a blast of wind, a storm of wind with hail.
Ventor, m a bloodhound, a hound. Ventosa, a gourd, windines, farting. Also a
vessel to let blood by boxing or cupping, a cupping glass. * Ventosear, to
make wind, to farte, to let blood by cupping or boxing. * Ventosidad,
ventositie, windines. Ventoso, windy, vain. * Ventriculo, the ventricle,
whereto the meat conveyed by the stomach is there digested. Ventrudo, one
that has a great belly, gorbellied. Ventura, venture, luck, chance, fortune,
hap. Venturera cosa, a matter that comes by chance. Venturosamente,
fortunately, happily, by chance. Venturoso, fortunate, happy. * Veodez, or
Beodez, f. drunkenness. * Veodo, or Beodo, drunken. Ver, to see. * a mi Ver, in
my opinion. * Veramente, truly, verily, indeed, according to the truth. *
Verangenas, or Veranjenas, vide Berengenas. Veraniego, of, or belonging to
summer. Verano, the summer season. Veras, earnest, goodsooth, indeed. * de
Veras, in very deed, in earnest. * con tantas Veras, so, in truth and earnest.
* Veratro, vide Verdegambre. * Verbasco, or Gordolobo, an herb called
woolfeblade or torchherbe, or the great lungwoort. Verbena, or Vervena, an
herb called verueine. * Verbi gracia, as for example. * Verca, a Colewort, a
stalk of an herb. * Vercera, a seller of colewoortes. * Vercetas, small
colewoortes or cabbage. Verdad, f. truth. Verdaderamente, truly, verily.
Verdadero, true, very right. * Verdazuro, the Lazul stone. Verde, green,
young, fresh, in prime, youthful. * Verdear, to appear green. Verdecer, yo
Verdesco, to wax green. * Verdeclara, a light green. * Verdegambre blanco,
neese powder. * Verdegambre negro, black Elleborus. * Verdegear, to appear
green. Verdeguear, to seem green. * Verdeguerar, vide Verdeguear.
Verdescara, f. vide Verdescuro, a sad green. Verdescer, vide Verdecer, to
wax green. Verdescuro, id est, Verde escuro, a dark green. * Verdinegro,
brownish green, black and green. Verdolaga, f. an herb called Purslane.
Verdon, m. a Canarie bird. * Verdugado, m. a verdingall reaching to the feet,
a long verdingall. Verdugo, a hangman. Also a tucke or rapier made four square
like a spit. * Verdugos estrechos, tuckes, swords or rapiers made square like
a spit. Verdura, greenenes, freshnes, grass for horses. * Verduricas, f.
green herbs, green places. * Vere, I shall or will see, the future tense of
Ver, vide Ver. * Verecundia, shamefastnes, modesty, bashfulnes. * Verecundo,
bashful, shameful, modest. Vereda, f. a path. * Verega, vide Verga.
Verengena, or Berengena, f. a kind of fruit eaten with beef or mutton
commonly in Spain, vide Berengena. * Verenjena, idem. * Verfano, vide
Huerfano, an orphan, a fatherless child. Verga, a rod, a man's yard, a
measuring yard, a wande, a twigge. Also a sail yard. Vergajo de Toro, a bulls
pizell. * Vergante, a base fellow. Vergantin, or Bergantin, m. a small ship
called a Brigandine. * Vergel, m. a garden. Vergoncosamente, shamefully.
Vergoncoso, shameful. Verguenca, shame, shamefastnes. Verguencas, the
priuities. Verguencosamente, shamefully, foully. * Verguencoso, shameful. *
Verguere, m. an officer called a Vergier. * Verguero, an officer called a
Vergier. Verja, a lattice for a window, an iron grate. * Vericle, a kind of
steel glass. * Verificar, Praes. yo Verifico, 1. Praet. yo Verifique, Sub.
Praes. Verifique, to verify, to avouch. * Verifique, vide Verificar. Veril, m.
the berill stone. * Veriloquio, a true tale, report, or speech. Also the true
exposition of a word. * Verisimil, like to be so, very likely. * Verissimo,
most true. * Vermegito, somewhat red. * Vermejecer, to wax reddish or red. *
Vermejito, somewhat red, ruddie. * Vermejo, red colored. * Vermellon, or
Bermellon, m. a liquor as red as blood called vermillion, brought out of
Africa, red lead. * Verna, Verne, vide Venir. * Vernegal, vide Bernegal. *
Vernis, m. gum of Juniper, varnish. * Veronica, or Varanica, the holy
Varnicle, the picture of Christ's face. * Veros, id est Veros, to see you. *
Verraco, m. a barrow hog, a bore. * Verriondez, vide Berriondez. * Verruca,
vide Berruca. * Verrueco, vide Berrueco. Verruga, f. a wart. * Verrugoso, full
of warts. * Versa, Verza, vide Verca, a colewort. * Verse, id est, Ver se, to
see him. * Versificar, to make verses, to versifie. * Versifico, that
versifieth, one that makes verses. Verso, a verse. * Versos, verses. * Verter,
to spill over, to pour over, or shed. * Vertido, powered out, spilled,
scattered. * Vertiente, pouring, spilling. * Vertiente del monte, the pitch of
a hill. * Vertiente del rio, the sloping banks of a river which turns the
water in the channel. Vertir, yo Vierto, to convert, to turn. * Vertud, vide
Virtud, f. virtue, valor, worthiness. * Vervie pan^o, fine black cloth. *
Verza, vide Verca. * Vesle aqui, see him here. * Veslo aqui, see it here. *
Vespa, f. vide Abispa, a waspe. * Vespertino, of the evening, pertaining to the
evening. * Vesta, white apparel, the goddess Vesta. * Vest, f. vide
Vestidura, clothing, apparel. Vestido, clothed, apparelled. Vestidos,
apparel, clothes. Vestidura, a garment. * Vestidura afeytada, a new garment
made of an old. * Vestidura que ondea, a garment of chamlot. Vestir, yo Visto,
to cloth, to apparel, to put on clothes. * Vestuario, a place where apparel
is kept. * Vesugo, a kind of fish much like a gurnard. Veta, a vein of metal
running in the ground. Also a beete. * Veterano, old, ancient. * Veterano
cavallero, an old trained soldier. * Vete, get thee hence. * Vete, Vete de ay,
be packing hence. * Vetonica, an herb called betonie. * Vetumen, vide Betumen.
* Vever, vide Bever. * Vexacion, vexation, grief, anguish, trouble of mind. *
Vexamen, m. the trial or examination. Vexiga, or Bexiga, f. a bladder. *
Vexiga de perro, an herb called alkakenge or winter cherries. * Vexigazo, m. a
blow or stroke with a bladder. * Vexiguilla, f. a little bladder. * Vexuco, a
kind of With. Veynte, twenty. Veyntenal, of twenty years. * Veynteno, the
twentieth. * Veyntequatro, twenty and four, an alderman. Vez, f. a time or
turn. * una Vez, dos vezes, tres vezes, cien vezes, once, twice, thrice, a
hundred times. * a Vezes, at times, by turns. * a las Vezes uno, a las vezes
otro, one while one, another while another. * Vezado, accustomed, taught,
kissed. * Vezar, to accustom, to teach, to kiss. * Vezero, one going by
turn. * Vezerico, a little calf. * Vezerillo, idem. * Vezerro, vide Bezerro.
Vezindad, neighborhood, a row of houses where neighbors dwell thick. Vezino,
a neighbor. * Vezo, vide Bezo. * Vezugo, vide Bezugo, a fish like a gurnard.
V F
* Vfanamente, contentedly. * Vfania, contentfulnesse, contentedness, content.
Vfano, content.
V I
Via, f. a way. Viage, a voyage, a journey. * Viaje, vide Viage. Vianda, f.
victual. Viandante, a wayfaring man. * Vianderos, victuallers to a camp. *
Viatico, all things necessary for a journey be it victual or other things. *
Viaxe, vide Viaje. Vibrado, brandished, shaken, cast with violence. Vibrar, to
brandish, to shake threateningly, to quiver, to curle, to ruffle. * Vicaria, f.
a vicarage. Vicario, a vicar, one that supplieth another man's place. * Vicarro,
vide Bicarro. Vicio, a vice. Also rankness or superabundance. Vicioso,
vicious, fruitful, rank. * Viciosos campos, fruitful fields, rank fields.
Victima, f. a beast killed for sacrifice, an oblation, a sacrifice. * Victor, a
conqueror, an ouercommer. Victoria, victory, conquest, getting the better.
Victorioso, victorious, one that conquereth or overcomes. * Victu, m.
sustenance. * Vicun^a, f. a beast in the Indies like a mountain goat, having
the beuer stone. Vid, f. a vine. * Vid parrada, a vine growing like a bower,
arbor, or vault. * Vid pasmada, a vine that is blasted. * Vid barvada con
rayzes, a vine planted with the root. Vida, f. life. Vidriado, glased with
glass. Vidrial, vitrioll, of or pertaining to glass. * Vidriera, f. glass
for windows, or glass made into quarrels or panes. Vidriero, a glasier.
Vidrio, m. glass. * Vidro, idem. Viduen^o, a kind of vine. * Vieja, vide
Veja, an old woman. * Viejamente, vide Vejamente, oldly. Viejo, Viego, vide
Vejo, old. Vieldo, a fan. * Vience, Vienco, vide Vencer. * Vienda, Viende,
Viendo, vide Vender. * Viene, vide Venir. * Vientar, to fan, to gather wind,
to winnow corn. * Viente, Viento, vide Ventar. Viento, the wind. * Viento
remolinado, or Torvelino, a whirlewinde. * Vientrazo, the paunche. Vientre, m.
a belly. Viernes, friday. * Vierte, vierto, vide Vertir. Viga, f. a pile, a
post, a beam. * Vigesimo, the twentieth in number. Vigilancia, watchfulnes. *
Vigilante, vigilant, watchful, wakefull. Vigilia, or Vigilias, dirges for the
dead, a holy day eeuen, watches, fasten eeuens, ember days. * Vigones, small
square pieces of timber, called quarters. Vigor, force, vigor, strength.
Vigoroso, forcible, strong, mighty, vigorous. Vigornia de Albeytar, an anuile,
such as smithes beat their iron upon. * Vigota, vide Bigota. * Vigote, vide
Bigote. Vihuela, an instrument called a vial, sometime a bandore. * Vihuela de
arco, a vial de Gamba, or a great vial that men set between their legs to
play on. Vil, or Vile, vile, base, naught worth. Vilecer, yo Vilesco, to be
vile, to be naught worth. Vileza, f. vileness, baseness, cheapnes. Villa, a
town. * Villanamente, villanously, clownishlie. * Villancico, m. a song.
Villania, villainy, lewdnes, clownishnes. Villano, a country man, a clown. *
Villeta, a little town. Also vide Villota. * Villete, a little bill, a little
letter. * Villoso, or Velludo, hairie, course cloth, lining. * Villotas,
Acornes. * Vilma, vide Bilma. * Vilmente, vilely, basely, abiectly. Vimbre, or
Mimbre, a band, a strap, an osiar, a lythe willow twig, a with to bind
withal. Vimbrera, the osiar stock, upon which the osiars grow. * Vinadero,
vide Vin^adero, a dresser of vines, one that keeps the vineyard. * Vinagera,
a little glass or bottle to keep the wine that is used in the mass. Also a
vinegar bottle. * Vinageria, f. a place where they sell vinegar bottles, or
Vinageras, which are little bottles to keep the wine the priest uses at the
mass. Vinar barvecho, to break vpground. Vinagre, m. vinegar. * Vinagrera, f.
a vinegar bottle. * Vinagreria, a shop where they sell vinegar. Vinagrero, a
seller of vinegar, one that sells vinegar. Vinatero, a wine sellar, one that
sells wine. * Vinculado, laid in fetters, laid in bolts. Vinculo, a band. *
Vindemia, vide Vendemia. * Vine, vide Venir. Viniebla, an herb called hounds
tongue. * Viniera, Viniesse, vide Venir. Vino, wine. * Vino de Manzanas, Sydar.
* Vino de racion, ordinary wine, wine for the meynie. * Vino de aguapie, idem.
* Vino tinto, Hullocke wine, blackish wine. * Vino, he came, vide Venir. *
Vinolento, one given to drink much wine, a drunkard. Vin^a, or Vinedo, a
vineyard. Vin^adero, he that keeps a vineyard. Vin^eda, a vineyard. Violable,
violable, that may be violated, broken, or defiled. Violado, violated, broken,
defiled. Violar, to violate, to break. Violencia, violence. Violento, violent.
Violeta, a violet. * Violetas blancas, stock Gilliflowers. * Violetas, or
Violettas amarillas, wall gilliflowers. Vira, a turning, a pin, also a shaft. *
Virago, a manly or stout woman, a mankind woman. Virar, or Birar, to turn. *
Viratalon, a fine double soaled shoe. Virey, a viceroy, a kings lieutenant. *
Virga, vide Verga. Virgen, f. a virgin, a pure maid. Virginal, of a maid or
virgin. * Virgineo, belonging to a virgin. Virginidad, virginity, maidenhood.
Virgo, a filme in a maidens privy member, the maidenhead. * Viril, manlike,
meet for a man, stout, grave, substantial. * Viripotente, ripe for marriage.
* Virlar, vide Birlar. * Virotazo, a blow with an arrowe, shaft, or bolt.
Virote, or Birote, m. a bolt, a shaft. * Virrey, vide Virey, a viceroy. Virtud,
virtue, force, valor. Virtuosamente, virtuously, valiantly. Virtuoso,
virtuous, well addicted. Viruelas, or Viruellas, a disease called the small
pockes. * Visabuela, or Bisabuela, a great grandmother. Visabuelo, or
Bisabuelo, or Visaguelo, a great grandfather. Visage, the visage, the face or
countenance. Visagra, the hinges of a table or of a portall. * Visaguela, vide
Visabuela, a great grandmother. * Visaguelo, vide Visabuelo. * Visaje, vide
Visage. * Visarma, or Bisarma, a kind of weapon with two pikes in it. *
Viscaya, vide Bizcaya, the province of Biskay in Spain. * Viscayno, vide
Vizcayno, a man of Biskay. Visco, or Liga, birdlime. Viscocho, vide Biscocho,
biscuit bread. * Visconde, vide Vizconde, a Viscount. * Viscoso, viscous,
clammie, tough like birdlime. Visera, f. a vizard, a beuer of a headpeece, a
covering of the face. * Visibilmente, vide Visiblemente, visiblie. * Visible,
visible, to be seen, apparent. Visiblemente, visiblie. * Visiesto, or
Bisiesto, the leap year. Vision, a vision, an appearance. Visita, f.
visiting, going to see. Visitar, to visit, to go to see. * Visivo, to be seen
visible, apparent. Vislumbre, f. the twilight of the evening. Visnaga, or
Bisnaga, an herb good to make clean the teeth. Visnagra, idem. * Visnieta, a
daughters daughters daughter, a grandchildes daughter. Visnieto, or Bisnieto, a
sons sons son, a grandchildes son. * Viso, the visage, look, sight or
face. Visojo, squint eied. * Vison^as, maid servants that be new come.
Vison^o, or Bison^o, a young soldier, a fresh or young come. * Visorey, or
Vi^ey, a viceroy, a kings deputy. * Visperadas, f. things of the evening tide.
* Visperas, euensongs. Also the eve of every day following. Vissiesto, or
Bissiesto, leap year. Vista, sight, beholding, view, presence. * Viste,
Visto, vide Vestir. * Visto, seen. * Vistorta, vide Bistorta. * Vistoso,
sightly, seemly, comely. Vistuario, a wardrobe, a vestrie. * Vitacula, vide
Bitacula, a place where the compass is kept in a ship. * Vitaal, vital, that
may live, or hope for life. Vitima, vide Victima. Vito, sustenance, living,
feeding, victuals, provision, necessaries to live by. * Vitor, vide Victor. *
Vitoria, victory. Vitorioso, victorious, triumphant. Vituallas, victuals.
Vituallero, vide Viandero, a victualer. Vituperable, worthy to be despised. *
Vituperado, found fault with, dispraised. Vituperar, to dispraise, to reproach,
to find fault with. Vituperio, dispraise, reproach, finding fault. * Vivace,
quick, lively. * Vivandero, or Viandero, a victualer. * Vivar, or Vivares,
living or dwelling. Also a warren for conies. * Vivaro, vide Bivaro. * Viuda,
or Biuda, a widow. * Viudez, f. widowhood. * Viudo, a widower. * Vivienda,
living or dwelling. * Vivir, vide Bivir, to live. * Vivo, vide Bivo. * Vivora,
or Bivora, a viper. * Vivorezno, vide Bivorezno. * Vivorino, vide Bivorino, *
Vizarma, or Visarma, a staff with two pikes which with a shoot forward the
pikes will come out. * Vizarria, vide Bizarria. * Vizarro, vide Bizarro. *
Viscaya, Biscaya, or Lepuscua, a province in Spain called Biskay. * Vizcayno,
or Biscayno, a man of Biskay * Vizco, or Visco, birdlime. * Vizcocho, or
Biscocho, biscuit bread. Vizconde, or Visconde, a vicount. * Vize, vide Bize. *
Vizera, or Visera, a visard, a beuer of a headpeece. * Vizorey, Visorey, vide
Virrey.
V L
* V'lcera, an ulcer, or impostumation of a wound. * Vlcerar, to grow to an
impostumation. Viceroso, full of ulcers. * Vltimado, brought to the last.
Vltimamente, last of all, lastly, to conclude. V'ltima, the last. V'ltimo, the
last. * V'ltra desto, moreover than this. * Vltrage, or Vltraje, outrage,
violence, furiousnes, madness. Vltrajado, offered outrage, wronged by violence.
Vltrajar, to commit outrage, to offer violence. * Vltraje, or Vltrage, outrage.
Vltra marino, beyond sea.
V M
Vmanamente, gently, courteously. Vmanidad, gentle usage, curtesy, humanity.
Vmano, courteous, gentle. * V'mbalo, a beast like an ox, steer or runt, a
buffle. Vmbral, a threshold of a door. V'mbrio, vide sombrio, shadowy. *
Vmbroso, vide Sombroso, idem. Vmedecer, yo Vmedesco, to moisten. * Vmedecido,
moistened, wetted. * Vmedescer, vide Vmedecer. * Vmero, vide Humero. Vmidad,
moisture. V'mido, moist. Vmildad, humility, lowlines. Vmilde, humble, lowly. *
Vmildemente, vide Vmilmente, humbly, lowly. Vmilmente, idem. * Vmillado, or
Humillado, humbled, made lowly, meek, and gentle. Vmillar, to humble, to make
lowly. Vmor, moisture, humor.
V N
Un, or V'no, one. * V'na, as a V'na, together. * en V'na, at one time, at
once. V'na vez, once. * Vnanimes, being of one mind, or of one accord,
consenting in one. * Vnanimos, idem. Vncion, anointing. * Vndear, vide Ondear.
* V'nga, vide Vn^ir. Vngido, anointed. Vngir, Praes. yo V'njo, Sub. Praes.
Vnja to anoint. * V'ngo, vide Vn^ir. * Vngria, f. the country of Hungary. *
Vngueneco de V'mbres, the wild wine, or bindewith. Vnguentario, an ointment
maker. Vnguento, ointment. * Vnha de asno, an herb called Foale-foote. * Vnja,
Vnjo, vide Vngir. * Vnicamente, alone, only. V'nico, one only. Vnicornio, or
Vnicuerno, a unicorn. Vnidad, unity, atonement. * Uniform, uniform, of one
form or proportion. * Vniformidad, f. uniformity. Vnigenito, the only
begotten. Union, a union, an agreement in one. Universal, universal, general
over all. Vniversalmente, universally, generally. Vniverso, universal,
general to all. V'n^a, f. a nail of the finger or toe, a hoof of a beasts
foot. V'n^a olorosa, a shell fish like the claw of a bird. Vn^ero, parting of
the flesh from the nails. * Vn^ido, joined together, united. Vn^idor, a ioyner
together. Vn^idura, joining together, yoaking. Vnir, to unite. * Vn^ir,
Indicat. Praes. V'ngo, V'nzes, V'nze, Imperfect. Vnzia, 1. Praet. Vnzi, iste,
o, 2. Praet. he Vnzido, Fut. Vnzire, etc. to couple, or yoke together. V'no,
one. * Un poco, a little quantity. * Vntado, anointed. Vntador, an annointer.
Vntar, to anoint. * Vntaza, or Vntazo, an anointing. V'nto, fat, grease,
ointment. Vntoso, fat, greasy, oily. * Vntura, greasing, anointing. *
Vnturillas, little ointments, or annointings. * V'nze, vide Vn^ir. * Vnzido,
yoaked or coupled together. * Vnzira, vide Vn^ir. * Vnzire, vide Vn^ir.
V O
Vo, id est Voy, I go, vide yr. Vocable, vide Vocablo, a word. * Vocablo, vide
Vocabulo, a vocable, a word. Vocabulario, a dictionarie to show the
signification of words. Vocal, a vowell, * Vocativo, the vocative case. *
Vociferar, to cry out aloude, to make exclamation. * Vodas, vide Bodas. Voga,
rowing. * Vogar, vide Bogar, Praes. yo Vogo. 1. Praet. yo Vogue, Praes. Sub.
Vogue, to row. * Vogavante, vide Bogavante. * Vogue, vide Vogar. * Vojar, vide
Bojar. * Volador, a flier, a fish called a Sea swallow. * Volante, flying,
going, running swiftly. * Volar, or Bolar, to fly. * Volateria, the flying of
hawks. * Volatile, that flies or passes, or can fly, a foul. * Volcan, vide
Bolcan. * Volear, vide Volar. * Voleo, vide Boleo. * Volina, vide Bolina. *
Volseos, the people of Tuscanie in Italy. * Volteador, a tumbler, a vauter. *
Voltear, to vaut, to tumble. * Voltejador, vide Volteador. * Voltejar, vide
Voltear. * Volubile, unconstant, mutable, voluble, tumbled, rolled. * Volver,
vide Bolver, to turn, to tumble, to roll, to alter or change. * Volvible,
vide Bolvible. * Volume, vide Volumen. Volumen, m. a volume, or part of a great
book, a folding, turning, or rolling about, a tumbling and mutabilitie, a
bulk or bigness. Voluntad, will, good will, mind, affection. *
Voluntariamente, willingly. Voluntario, willing, voluntary. Voluntariosamente,
willingly. Voluntarioso, willing. Vomitar, to vomit, to spue. Vomito, vomiting.
* Voragine, f. a gulf. * Vordar, vide Bordar. * Vordon, vide Bordon. Vos, or
Vosotros, you. Vosco, with you. * Votado, vowed, reported, declared. Votar,
vide Botar, to vow, to give the voice, to dispatch, to put forth, to thrust
forth, to give over, to leave off. * Vote, vide Bote. Voto, a vow, a voice. *
Voto a Dios, I vow to God. * tener Voto en concejo, to have a voice in
election, to be heard speak in a matter of counsel. * dezir su Voto, to tell
his opinion. * dar su Voto, idem, or to give his voice. * Voz, or Boz, f. a
voice. * dar vozes, to cry out, to make a noise. * Vozear, or Bozear, idem. *
Vozeria, or Bozeria, a noise. * Vozina, vide Bozina. * Vozinero, vide Bozinero.
* Vozingleria, a humming or noise of many voices together. Vozinglero, or
Bozinglero, one that cries out, one that makes a noise. * Vozios, vide
Bozios.
V R
* V'ra, vide Hura. * Vrbanidad, civil life, courtesy, civility. * Vrbano,
civil, courteous, gentle in speech. * Vrdida tela, a web taken in hand or
warped. * Vrdido, warped, begun. Vrdiembre, vide Ordiembre, m. the warp put
into the loome, to be wouen. * Vrdilla, an instrument to beat or hammer money.
Vrdir, vide Ordir, to take in hand, to go about. * Vrdir la trama, to warp a
web of cloth, or to put it into the loome. To plot or practice a deceit. *
Vrgebaom, an herb called Veruein. * Vrgente, urgent, forcing. Vrina, urine,
piss. * Vrinal, an vrinall, a chamber pot. * Vrinator, one that makes urine.
* Vrive, m. a goldsmith or workman of gold plate. V'rna, a pitcher, a pot, a
vessel, wherein the ashes of the dead, after they were burned were kept. *
Vrraca, vide Hurraca.
V S
Vsagre, a tetter or ringworme. * Vsanca, usage, use. * Vsanza, vide Vsanca.
Vsar, to use, to enure, to accustom. * Vsasse, Vsace, vide Vsar. V'so, m. use,
usage, wont, fashion, custom, guise, manner or ure. Also the use, profit, or
occupation of any thing. Vsofruto, profit, and use of a thing (but not the
propriety.) Vsofrutuario, he that takes the profit, and use of a thing, but
not the propriety. Usual, usual, that is commonly used. Vsura, usury.
Vsurario, an usurer. * Vsurero, idem. Vsurpado, usurped. Vsurpar, to usurp. *
Vtensilios, household stuff. V'til, profitable. Vtilidad, profit. Vtrero, a
steer. U'va, a grape. * U'va crispa, a goosebery. * U'va de perro, the wild
bay tree. V'va passa. or passada, a raysin. * U'vas de la olla, gooseberies. *
U've, vide Aver. * Vuessa merced, idest. Vuestra merced, your worship, or
worthiness, or mastership. Vuestro, yours. * Uviera, Uviesse, vide Aver. *
Vulcanias, an yland in the AEolian sea called AEolias. Vulgar, common.
Vulgarmente, commonly. Vulgo, common people. * Vulto, a countenance. *
Vulturno, a river of Campania in Italy.
V Z
* Vzura, usury. * Vzurero, an usurer.
X
XAbon, m. soap. Xabon oloroso, sweet soap. * Xabonado, soped, washed with
soap. * Xabonar, to soap. Xabonero, a soap maker. Xagua, a kind of herb in
the Indies. Xaharrar, to plaster a wall with white lime. * Xahartar, vide
Xaharrar. * Xantho, m. a river of Troy, the drinking of which water makes the
sheep woll red. * Xaporado, vide Xaropado. * Xaque, m. a check at chesse.
Xaqueca, f. a kind of disease called the megrim. * Xaqueacon, id est, Xaqueca
con, the megrim with, etc. Xaques, a check at chesse, a budget of a saddle. *
Xaquimas, f. halters. Xaquima, or Cabestro, a headstall of a horse. Xaquina,
vide Xaquima, a halter. Xara, f. a bramble, a shaft. * Xaral, a place full of
brambles. * Xarama, f. a river falling into the river Tagus in Spain.
Xaramago, wild rape. * Xarandilla, the proper name of a witch. * Xarava, vide
Xarave. Xarave, m. or Xarope, a sirrupe, a potion. Xarcias, f. the tackling or
coardes in a ship. * Xardin, vide Jardin, m. * Xaretas, carriages of great
ordinance, certain networke of coardes or grates of wood cast over the ship to
let or keep out the enemy from boording or entering the ship. * Xarete de
navio, idem. Xarocho, vide Emxarocho. * Xaropado, prepared with sirrups. *
Xarope, m. or Xarave, sirrupe, a potion. * Xauega, f. a net to catch Tunnie
fish. * Xaveguero, m. he that draws a draught for Tunnie fish.
X E
Xeme, m. a span. * Xenabe, mustard seed. Xenable, mustard. * Xeres, a town
in Andaluzia upon the sea coast near Cadis. Xerga, f. sackcloth. Xergon, a
straw bed. Xerguerito, a goldfinch. * Xeringa, an instrument to give a glister
withal. Also a siring spout to spout into the yard of him that cannot make
water. * Xeringar, to spowt ones yard with a siring. Also to give a glister. *
Xervilla, f. a pumpe or pinsen to were in pantofles. * Xervilleta, f. a little
pumpe or pinsen. Xibia, f. a kind of cuttle fish. Xibion, a cuttle bone or
fish. * Xigote, a gigot or leg of mutton roasted. Ximia, f. a she ape. *
Ximio, m. a he ape. * Ximirias, f. apish tricks. Xira, or comida plazentera,
good cheer, dainty meat. Xiringua, or Siringa, a siring, a glister, vide
Xeringa. * Xiron, m. the lap of a skirte.
X O
* Xo, as in English they say hoa, to horses when they would have them stand
still.
X V
* Xuarda, f. the gresines or oil in cloth for want of good fulling at the
mill. Xugo, m. juice. Xugoso, full of juice. * Xurdia, f. an instrument to fish
withal.
Y
* Y, and. ya, now, already so. Ya, Ya, now, now. Yago, as Sant-yago, Saint
James. * Yanaconos, m. Indian boys. Yantar, to dine. * Yantar, a kind of toll
or custom. * Yares, vide Yjares, the small guts. * Yaro, an herb called
Cuckopit or Calves foot. Yazer, to lie. Yazija, f. lying, condition, estate,
quality, or being. * Yberas tierras, land or grounds near the river Hiberia
in Spain, whereof Spain was called. yca, yca, a voice used of sailors one to
another in hoysing of sail. * yda, f. a going away, a parting. * Ydea, f. a
form or fashion, conceived in imagination, as it were a during substance,
being a pattern of all other like kinds. * Ydiaques, a surname so called of a
house in Biskay descended of ancient gentry. * Ydiota, a man or woman
unlearned, on that is simple witted, an idiote. * ydo, gone, parted. * Ydoneo,
or Idoneo, meet, fit, convenient. * Ydropico, one troubled with the dropsye. *
Yedera, vide Yedra. Yedra, f. Iuie. * Yegarizo, a keeper of mares. Yegua, f. a
mare. Yeguada, a race or breed of mares. Yeguarizo, a keeper of mares to bring
forth colts. Yelar, to freese with cold. Yelmo, or Capecete, m. a helmet, a
head piece. Yelo, or Elada, frost. * Yelo, as yo Yelo, I freese, vide Yelar.
Yema, f. the yolke of an egg, the bud that comes before the blossom. Also
the first wine that comes of the grape. * Yente, going. * Yerma casa, a house
that stands alone without a dweller. * Yermar, to make waste or desolate.
Yermo, m. a wilderness, a desert. Yerno, m. a son in law by marrying with
ones daughter. * Yerrar, vide Errar, to go astray, to do amiss. Yero, a kind
of tare. Yerro, m. an error. * Yerro, I err, vide Errar. Yerto, rough,
bristled, stiff, standing up an end, stark. * Yertos cuerpos, bodies stark
or stiff either with cold or death. Yerva, f. an herb, grass. Also poison.
* Yerva bendita, Valerian, or Setwall. * Yerva puntera, or Siempreviva,
Singreene, Housleeke. Yerva lombriguera, Soothernwood. * Yerva de ballestro,
vide Verdigambre blanco. * Yerva de la Bivora, wild Buglosse, neesing woort.
Yerva buena, Mint herb. Yerva cana, an herb called Groundswell. * Yerva del
muro, walwort. Yerva estrella, buck-horne plantaine or harts-horne. Yerva
gatera, cats mint. * Yerva gigante, an herb called cowpersnip or branck
vrsine. Yerva de golondrina, celandine. Yerva lanaria, diers weed. Yerva
artetica, ground iuy. Yerva mora, broom rape. * Yerva pagana, a herb with very
broad leaves. Yerva pin^uela, or pine, liblong. * Yerva Almisclera, musk
herb. * dar Yervas, to poison. Yervato, vide Yervatun, Hartstrong. * Yervatun,
m. the comforting called Hartstrong. * Yervesica, f. a little herb or little
grass. * Yervos, bitter tares. * Yesado, done with plaster or white mortar.
Yesca, f. tinder to kindle fire with. Also bait. Yesgo, or Yezgo, an herb
called Danewoort, or dwarf Elderne. Yesso, mortar, plaster, pargetting stuff
wherewith writing tables are done over to make them bear writing. * Yesso o
sperjugo, a kind of plaistering mortar.
Y G
* Yglesia, f. a church. * Ygresia, vide Yglesia. * Yguala, f. a bargain, a
condition. Ygual, equal. * Ygualado, made equal, compared. Ygualar, to make
equal, to compare. Ygualdad, f. equality. Ygualmente, equally.
Y J
Yjada, the small ribs, the collicke, the flank. * Yjadas, ijadas, Hijadas, or
Hijares, the small ribs the flank. * Yjadear, or Hijadear, to pant for breath.
* Yjares, or Hijares, the small ribs or guts, the flank. * Ylluvias, vide
Lluvias. * yma, a root great and white like a turnep. Ymagen, f. an image, a
picture. * Ymaginar, to imagine. * Yman, a loadstone. * Ymetalum, to the mines.
Y N
* Ynchir, Inchir, vide Henchir. * Ynes, a proper name. * yngle, the groine
above the thigh. * yngres, idem. * yn^igo, a proper name. * Ynocencia,
innocence, harmelessenes. * Ynojo, the herb Fenell. * Hincarse de Ynojos, to
kneel, to set his knees to the ground. Ynvierno, or Invierno, winter.
Y O
Yo, I. * Yojo, Darnell. * Ypelencia, a kind of disease. * Ypocrasia,
hypocrisy, dissimulation. * Yporquesia, vide Ypocrasia, hypocrisy.
Y R
yr, Praes. Voy, Vas, Va, Imperfest. yva, yvas, yva, 1. Praet. Fuy, Fuiste,
Fue, Sub. Praes. Vaya, Imperfect. Fuera, Yria, or Fuesse, Fut. Fuere, to go. *
yra, or ira, f. anger. * Yra, he shall or will go. Yracundo, or Iracundo,
angry. * Yrlandes, one of Ireland, an Irish man. * Yrlandia, f. Ireland. *
Yrritado, provoked, stirred up, angered. * Yrritador, a prouoker to anger. *
Yrritamiento, m. provoking to anger. * Yrritar, to provoke to anger. *
Yrvesica, f. a small grass, a little herb. * Y'sla, or I'sla, an isle, an
yland. * Yslen^o, or Islen^o, an ylander, or of or pertaining to an yland. *
Ysleo, or Isleo, a little small isle, or yland. * Ysleta, or Isleta, f. a little
isle. * Ysopear, to be sprinkle, or cast water on, to besprinkle with the holy
water sprinkle. * Ysopo, m. the holy water sprinkle. Ysquierdo, vide Yzquierdo,
the left.
Y T
* Ytata, m. the name of a river.
Y V
Y'va, I went, he went, vide Y'r. * Yuca, a root great and white like a
Turnep, with a blackish rind over it: the Indians grate it and strain it, and
so make their bread thereof. Yugada, an acre of ground, or as much as a yoke
of oxen can ear up in one day. Yugo, m. a yoke. * Yuguero, m. a yoaker of
oxen. Yunque, m. an anuile. Yunta, f. a yoke of oxen. * Yuso, beneath, under.
* Dios en yuso, next under God, or God excepted.
Y Z
* Yzquierdamente, awkly, untowardly Yzquierdo, the left, awke. Yzquierda mano,
the left hand.
Z
* ZA'bra, a kind of small ship. * Zabullido, or cabullido, put or ducked
vnderwater. * Zabullir, to diue or ducke under water. * Zafiro, m. a Sapphire
stone. * Zafra, vide cafra. Zaga, vide caga. * Zagal, m. a shepherd. * Zagala,
a she shepherd. Zagano, m. vide Zangano, a droane Be. * Zaguan, caguan, a
porch. * Zaguera, vide caguera. * Zaguero, vide caguero. * Zaharen^o, vide
caharen^o. * Zaherir, vide caherir. * Zahinas, vide cahinas. * Zahiz, vide
cahiz. * Zahondar, vide cahondar. * Zahones, vide cahones. * Zahorda, vide
cahorda. * Zahucho, vide cahucho. * Zahumerio, vide cahumerio. * Zalema, vide
calema. * Zamarilla, an herb called Poley (Jnchanters say) being cast into an
army, will cause the soldiers to be in fear. * Zamarra, vide camarra.
Zamarro, vide camarro. Zambra, a kind of boat, a kind of dance among the
Moors. * Zamora, vide camora. * Zamotano, vide camotano. * Zampon^a, vide
campon^a. * Zampuzar, vide campuzar. * Zanahoria, carret roots. * Zanca de
pierna, v. canca de pierna. * Zancadilla, vide cancadilla. * Zancajoso, vide
cancajoso. * Zanco, a stilt. * Zancudos, gnats with long legs. * Zango, or
cango, vide Zangano. Zangano, a drone Be. Zanges, or Zagues, a water bottle. *
Zanja, a hollow bank where the water passes. Also the first foundation of a
house. Zanjado, vide canjado. * Zanquear, vide canquear. * Zapa, vide Acada. *
Zapato, vide capato. * Zaphiro, m, a Sapphire stone. * Zapo, vide capo, a toade.
* Zapuzar, vide capuzar. * Zaque, a leather bucket. * Zaquizami, or caquicami,
the space or place between the plaistring and the roof, tyling or covering of
a house. * Zaracas, vide caracas. * Zaragoca, vide caragoca. * Zaraguelles,
vide caraguelles. * Zaranda, vide caranda. * Zaratan, vide caratan. * Zarca,
vide carca. * Zarcal, vide carcal. * Zarcillo, or Zarzillo, vide carcillo. *
Zarco, one that is gray eied. Zargatona, an herb called Felwooort or Fleabane.
Zarzaganillo, a cold wind. Zarzahan, a kind of cloth which the Moors make.
* Zarzir, or Zarcir, vide Zurzir, to amend. * Zarzo de Vergas, vide carzo de
Vergas.
Z E
* Zebo, vide Cebo. * Zebolla, vide Cebolla. Zebra, f. a kind of beast most
swifte, in Africa, his breath is smelling like musk. * Zebrata, vide
Zebratana. Zebretana, a birding trunk to kill birds with pellets of claie. *
Zecear, vide Cecear. * Zecerro, vide Cecerro. * Zecina, vide Cecina. *
Zedacillo, vide Cedacillo. * Zedaco, vide Cedaco. * Zedibones, vide Cedibones.
* Zedicio, vide Cedicio. * Zedro, vide Cedro. * Zedula, vide Cedula. *
Zefalica, vide Cefalica. * Zefiro, the west wind. * Zegages, vide Cegages. *
Zegajoso, vide Cegajoso. * Zeguedad, vide Ceguedad. * Zeguejar, vide Ceguejar.
* Zeguera, vide Ceguera. * Zeguta, vide Ceguta. * Zeja, vide Ceja. * Zejunto,
vide Cejunto. * Zejunzo, vide Cejunzo. * Zelar, vide Celar. * Zelemin, vide
Celemin. * Zeleno, vide Celeno. * Zelicio, vide Celicio. * Zelador, a Zealous
affectionate man. Zelo, Zeal, feruentnes in affection. * en Zelos andar, to go
on catterwralling as cats do. Also as any other beast or living thing once a
year go braying or lustful to the mate. * Zeloso, or Zelozo, Zealous, fervent
in religion. * Zencerrar, vide Cencerrar. * Zencio, vide Cencio. * Zendal, vide
Cendal. * Zen^idor, any thing that girdeth about, a girder about, one that
girdeth a girdle. * Zenith, the point of the firmament directly over ones head,
wheresoever one be, the verticle point. * Zenteno, vide Centeno. * Zentoria,
vide Centoria. * Zenzillo, vide Senzillo. * Zeperar, vide Ceperar. * Zephiro,
or Zefiro, the west wind. Also the southwest wind. * Zero, a cipher.
Z I
Zifrar, vide Cifrar. * Zilindro, vide Cilindro. Zimborio, m. a chapel. *
Zimbro, m. Juniper. * Zimitarra, vide Cimitarra. * Ziza, a bird that uses to
cry Ziza, Ziza. * Zizado, vide cicado. Zizan^a, f. cockle. * Zizar, vide
cizar.
Z O
* Zoca, f. a place for to keep a fair. Zodiaco, m. the Zodiake, a cross
circle in the firmament in which are the twelve signs. Zohori, one that sees
well, one that finds springs on the earth. Zona, f. a Zone or circle in the
heaven, a girdle. * Zorcal, vide corcal. * Zorita, vide corita. Zorra, f. a
she fox. * Estar hecho Zorra, to be drunk. * Cacar vna zorra, to be drunk.
* Zorrilla, a little fox, a cubbe. * Zorro, m. a he fox. Zorzal, or Zorcal,
a Thrush, a Felfare. * Zorrerias, f. craft of a fox. * Zorzal, vide corcal.
Z V
Zuane m. vide Cisne, a swan. * Zuanete, vide Juanete, the top of a maste in a
ship. Also a young swan. Zufre, or cufre, m. brimstone, Sulphur. * c Zuin, a
robin redbrest. Zuiza, bulba^ting, a muster or show of soldiers. Also
Switzerland in Germany. * Zumaque, vide cumaque. * Zumaya, vide cumaya.
Zumbar, to buZZe, to humme. Zumbas, buZZing, humming. Zumbido, humming,
buZZing. * Zumbre, vide Acumbre. * Zumillo, vide cumillo. * Zumo, vide cumo. *
Zun^o, a beck, a nod with the head. * Zupia, wine of evil taste. Zurana
paloma, vide curana paloma. * Zurdo, vide curdo, left handed. Zurra, a beating,
a chastizing, a lamming, a swinging, a cudgelling. Zurrador, a curriar. *
Zurrana, vide currana. * Zurrapa, a todpolle. * Zurrar, vide currar. * Zurron,
vide curron. * Zurujano, vide curujano. * Zurzir, or Zurcir, to patch, to
mende, to botch. * Zutano, vide cutano, or Fulano, such a one. * Zuzon, vide
cuzon, an egging on.
FINIS.
A DICTIONARIE IN ENGLISH AND SPANISH.
AAron, vide Aaron. to Abandon, put away, or forsake, vide Abandonar. Abandoned
or forsaken, vide Abandonado. an Abandoner or forsaker, vide Abandonador. an
Abandoning or forsaking, vide Abandonamiento. to Abase or bring low, vide
Abatir, Abaxar. Abased or brought low, vide Abaxado, Abatido. an Abasing or
bringing low, vide Abatimiento, Abaxamiento. to Abash or make ashamed, vide
Afrentar. Abashed, vide Afrentado. an Abashment, vide Afrentamiento. to Abate
or diminish, vide Diminuyr. Abated or diminished, vide Diminuido. Abating or
diminishing, vide Diminucion. to Abbet, maintain or aid, vide Ayudar,
Sustentar. an Abbey, vide Abadia. an Abbess or Abbatisse, vide Abadessa. an
Abbot, vide Abad. an Abbotship or dignity of an Abbot vide Abadia. pertaining
to an Abbot, vide Abadengo. to Abbreuiate, abridge, or make short. vide
Abreviar. Abbreuiated or abridged, vide Abreviado. an Abbreuiation, vide
Abreviacion. to Abridge or cut short, vide Abreviar. Abbridged or abreuiated,
v. Abreviado. an Abbridgement, register or compendious draught or abstract,
vide Abreviatura. to Abbut, or to border or bound, vide Alindar. an Abecedarie
or alphabet, vide Abece. an Abecedarie or teacher of petties, vide Abecedario.
an Abomination, vide Abominacion. Abominable or detestable, vide Abominable,
Nefando. Abhominably, vide Aborridamente, Abborrecidamente, Nefandamente. to
Abhor or detest, vide Abominar, Aborrecer, Aborrir, Enfastidiar. Abhorred or
detested, vide Abominado, Aborrecido. an Abhorrer or detester, vide
Aborrecedor. an Abhorring or detesting, vide Aborrecimiento. to Abide or
tarry, vide Quedar. Abidden, vide Quedado. an Abider or dweller, vide
Abitador. an Abiding, abode or dwelling, vide Abitacion, Estancia, Quedada. an
Abject, of no estimation, vide Abatido, Desechada criatura. Abiectly, vide
Abiltadamente. Abject vide Abatido. to Abjure or forswear a thing, vide
Perjurar. Abiured or forsworn, vide Perjurado. an Abiuration or forswearing,
vide Perjura. the Ablative case, v. Ablativo caso. to be Able, vide Poder. Able
or sufficient men, vide Fide dignos habiles. to make Able, vide Abilitar. Able,
strong or mighty, vide Abil. Ability, ablenes, strength or power, vide
Abilidad, Habilidad, Pujanca. made Able or fit, vide Abilitado. Abode, vide
Abiding. to Abolish, abrogate, repeal or disanul, vide Abrogar, Cancelar.
Abolished, vide Abrogado, Cancelado. an Abolishing, vide Antiguamiento,
Abrogacion. Abomination, or Abomination, vide, Abominacion. Abortiue, or borne
before time, vide Abortado, Abortivo. Above, vide Arriba. over and Above, vide
Ademas. Above said. v. Suso dicho. to Abound, vide Abondar. Abundance or
overplus, vide Abondamiento, Abundancia, Abundosidad, Copia. Abundant,
plentiful, copious or abounding, Abondoso, Abundante. that Abounds, v.
Abondo. Abounding, vide Abundante, Abondoso. Abundantly, plentifully or
copiously, v. Abondosamente, Abundantamente. About, v. Cerca, Derredor. to go
About, v. Andar al derredor. an Abricote, vide Albarcoque or Alvarcoque. to
Abridge, or Abridge, v. Abreviar. an Abridgement, vide Abreviacion,
Abreviatura. to set, Abroach, v. Broach. to set Abroad, or publish, v.
Publicar. to Abrogate or abolish, v. Abrogar. to be Absent or away. v.
Ausentarse. Absence, v. Absencia, Ausencia. Absent or away, vide Ausente,
Absente. to Absolve, acquit or make perfect, vide Absolver. Absolved, v.
Absuelto. Absoluing, v. Absolucion. an Absolution, vide Absolucion. to be
Absolute, Absoluto ser. Absolutely, v. Absolutamente. to Abstain, vide
Abstener. that has Abstained, v. Abstenido. an Abstainer, v. Abstenidor.
Abstinence or abstaining, v. Abstinencia, Astinencia. to Abstract, v.
Abbreuiate. an Abstract. v. Abbridgement. an Absurdity or foolishnes, vide
Deslate, Desparate, Desvario. Absurd or foolish, v. Desvariado. Absurdly, vide
Desvariadamente. to Abuse or misuse, v. Abusar. an Abuse, vide Abusion. Abused,
vide Abusado. an Abuser, vide Abusador.
A C
to Accent, sing tunably or pronounce truly, vide Accentuar. Accenting or true
pronouncing, vide Acento. an Accent over a letter, vide Accento. to Accept or
take in good part, vide Acetar, Aceptar. Acceptable, vide Aceptable.
Acceptance, vide Aceptacion. Acceptance, vide Aceto, Acepto. Accepted, vide
Aceptado. Accepting, vide Aceptacion. to have Access unto, vide Allegar.
Accessarie to a fault or culpable, vide Accessorio. that is Accessarie, vide
Accessorio. an Accessarie, vide Accessor. Accessarily, vide Accessoriamente. an
Accidence, or book so called, an Accidence or Grammar, vide la Gramatica. an
Accident, or that which chances or happens, vide Acaecimiento,
Acontecimiento, Successo. to Accompany or go with one, vide Acompan^ar.
Accompanied, vide Acompan^ado. an Accompanying, vide Acompan^amiento. one that
Accompanies, vide Acompan^ador. to Accomplish, vide Cumplir, Complir.
Accomplished, vide Cumplido, Complido. an Accomplishment or accomplishing, v.
Cumplimiento. to Account or reckon, vide Contar. an Account, vide Cuenta. a
book of Accounts, vide Libro de caxa, Libro de cuenta. Accomptable, vide
Contable. to Account or esteem, vide Preciar, Estimar, Reputar. of no Account
or estimation, vide Despreciado, de poca cuenta, de poca estimacion. of great
Account, v. Reputado, Acreditado, Preciado, Estimado, Sublimado, de gran
estima. to Accord, v. Acordar, Concordar. to Accord in music, vide Acordar.
an Accord or agreement, v. Acuerdo. of one Accord, vide Hechos a una.
According, vide Segun. with one Accord, De un parescer. to Account, v. Account.
to Accumulate or heap together, v. Acumular. to Accurse, vide Curse. to
Accuse, appeach or impeach, vide Acusar, Reutar. to Accuse falsely and
maliciously, vide Calumniar. Accused, vide Acusado, Reo. Accused maliciously,
vide Calumniado. a malicious Accuser, vide Calumniador. an Accuser, vide
Acusador, Reutador. a malicious Accusation, vide Calumnia. an Accusacion, vide
Acusacion. Accusative or full of accusations, vide Acusatiuo. the Accusative
case, v. Acusatiuo caso. an Accusing, vide Acusacion. to Accustom, vide
Auezar, or Acostumbrar, Vezar. to be Accustomed, vide Tener por estilo.
Accustomed, vide Auezado, Vezado, Acostumbrado. Accustomably, vide
Ordinariamente. the Ace point, vide Point. an Ace at dice or cards, vide A's.
to have an Ache, vide to Ache. an Ache, vide Dolor. to Achieue, vide Cumplir.
Achiued, vide Cumplido. an Achieuer, vide Cumplidor. Achieuing, vide
Cumplimiento. to Acknowledge, and confess, vide Confessar, Reconoscer.
Acknowledged, Confessado, Conocido, Reconoscido. an Acknowledger, vide
Conocidor, Reconoscidor. Acknowledging, vide Conocimiento, Reconocimiento,
Conociente. Acornes, vide Vellotas. an Acorne, vide Vellota, Bellota. to be
Acquainted, vide Tener conoscimiento. Acquaintance or familiarity, vide
Conoscimiento, Familiaridad. Acquainted, vide Conoscido. to Acquit or
discharge, vide Descontar, Descargar. an Acquittance, vide Alvala, carta de
paga, Finiquito. an Acre of ground, v. Alancada, Huebra. an Act or decree,
vide A'cto. a Wicked act or deed, vide Vellaqueria, Maldad. an Act in a
comedy, vide Auto, Jornada. an Action in the law, vide Accion. an Action, v.
Acion. to make Active, vide Abilitar, habilitar. Actiuitie, or nimblenes, vide
Agilidad, Desemboltura, Habilidad, Ligereza. Actiuenes, vide Agilidad. Active
or nimble, vide A'gil, Desembuelto, Habil, Ligero. Actiuely, vide Agilmente.
A D
an Adamant stone, vide Yman, Calamita. to Add, vide An^ad^r. Added or joined,
vide An^adido. an Addition, or putting to of any thing, vide Addicion,
An^adidura. an Adder, v. Culebra. Adderwort or Snakeweed, vide Bistorta. an
Addice, a cowpers instrument, vide Acuela, or Azuela. to Addict himself to
somewhat, vide Aficionarse, Inclinarse. Addicted, vide Aficionado, Inclinado.
an Addicting, v. Aficion, Inclinacion. to Addoulse or mitigate with sweetness,
or alay, vide Adulcir. to Address, or make ready, vide Arrear, Aderecar.
Addressed, vide Arreado, Aderecado. an Adjective, vide Adjectivo. Adieu, or
farewell, vide a Dios, Quedad con Dios. to Adioine, vide Juntar, Vn^ir.
Adioining or lying to, vide Juntura. to Adiorne to another day, and appoint a
day of hearing a matter, vide Emplazar. Adiorned, v. Emplazado. to Adiudge or
determine of, v. Determinar, Sentenciar. Adjudged or determined of, v.
Sentenciado, Determinado. an Adiudger or determiner, v. Sentenciador. Adiudging
or determining of, vide Sentencia, Determinacion. to Adjure, or conjure, v.
Conjurar. an Adle egg, v. Guero, Huero. to Administer or solicit a man's
cause, vide Solicitar la causa. an Administration, or administering, vide
Administracion. an Administrator, or that has the handling of any business,
vide Administrador. Admirable, vide Admirable. an Admiral of the seas, vide
Almirante. the Admirall-ship of a fleet of ships, vide Capitanar nao. to
Admire or wonder at, v. Admirar, Espantar. Admired or wondered at, v. Admirado,
Espantado. an Admiration or wondering at, vide Espanto, Admiracion. to Admit or
allow of, v. Admitir. Admit it be so, Que sea assi. Admitted or allowed, vide.
Admitido. Admixtion or mingling, v. Mixtura. to Admonish, vide Amonestar,
Avisar. Admonished or warned, vide Amonestado, Avisado. an Admonisher, v.
Amonestador. Admonition, v. Amonestacion, A viso. to Adnihilate or bring to
nothing, vide Aniquilar. much Ado, or great stir, v. Ruido, Bullicio, Tumulto.
Adolescencie or growing youth, v. Juventud, Mocedad. to Adopt or choose one for
an heir, vide Adoptar, Prohijar. an Adopted child, v. Adoptado, Prohijado. an
Adopter, or he that makes another his own by adoption, v. Adoptador,
Prohijador. an Adoption, v. Adoption, Prohijamiento. to Adore or worship, v.
Adorar. Adored or worshipped, v. Adorado. Adorned, decked or trimmed, v.
Adornado. to Adorn or deck, v. Adornar. to Advance or extol, vide Encarecer,
Preferir. Advanced or preferred, v. Encarecido, Preferido. an Advancing or
extolling, v. Encarecimiento, Preferimiento. Advancement, v. Preferimiento.
Advantage or gain, v. Ganancia. to Adventure, enterprise or assay, vide
Aventurarse. an Adventure, v. Aventura, Ventura. an Aduenturer, vide
Aventurero. an Aduenturing, vide Ventura, Aventura. Aduenturous, v. Animoso. an
Aduenturous fellow, v. Aventurero. Aduenturously, v. Animosamente. an Aduerb,
v. Adverbio. Aduerbially, v. Adverbialmente. to be an Adversary, vide
Enimistar, Contrariar. an Adversary or enemy, v. Adversario, Enemigo.
Adversity or calamity, vide Adversidad. to Advertise or give knowledge, vide
Amonestar. Advertised or admonished, v. Amonestado, Avertido. Advertisement, v.
Amonestacion. to Advise, counsel, or give advise, vide Aconsejar, Avisar,
Consejar. Advise, v. Aviso, Consejo. Advised, v. Aconsejado, Avisado.
Advisedly. vide Avisadamente, Consideradamente. Aduisement, v. Aviso, Consejo,
Consideracion. Adulation, or flattery, v. Adulacion, Lisonja. to commit
Adultery, v. Adulterar. an Adulterer, v. Adultero. an Adulteress, v.
Adultera. Adultery, v. Adulterio. Adulterous, or given to adultery, v.
Fornicario, Fornicador. to play the Advocate, v. Advogar. an Advocate or
counselor in law, vide Abogado or Avogado.
A F
Afeard, vide Afraid, Temeroso, Espantado. Affability, v. Afabilidad. Affable,
courteous in speaking, vide Afable. Affably, v. Afablemente. Affairs or
business, v. Negocios. Affection or natural motion, v. Aficion, Afeto.
Affectioned, v. Aficionado. to Affect, v. Afectar, Querer. Affectation, v.
Afectacion. Affected, v. Afectado, Querido. to Affiance, or betrothe, v.
Desposar. Affianced or betrothed, vide Desposado. Affiancing or betrothing,
vide Desposorio. Affiance or confidence, v. Confianca. Affinity, aliance or
kin by marriage, vide Affinidad, Parentela. to Affirm or assure, v. Afirmar.
Affirmed, v. Afirmado. Affirmation, or affirming, vide Afirmativo.
Affirmatively, v. Afirmadamente. Affirming, vide Afirmacion, Afirmativo. to
Afflict, trouble or molest, vide Afligir. Afflicted or vexed, v. Afligido. an
Afflicter, v. Afligidor. Affliction or molestation, vide Afligimiento.
Affluence, or abundance, vide Abundancia. to make Afraid, or afeard, vide
Amedrentar, Atemorizar, Espantar. to make Afraid with thunder, vide Atronar.
made Afraid, v. Atemorizado, Espantado. made Afraid with thunder, vide
Atronado. to be Afraid, v. Ciscar. Afraid. v. Amedrentado, Ciscado. making
Afraid, vide Atronamiento, Amedrentamiento, Atemorizamiento. Afresh, v. De
nuevo. After, v. Despues empos. After that, v. Despues que. Afternoon, v.
Noone.
A G
Again, vide Otra vez. to come Against, v. Contravenir. Against, v. Contra.
over Against, v. De frente. to be Aghast or amassed, v. Espantado. Aghast or
abashed, v. Afrentado. an Age, v. Edad, E'ra, Hera, Siglo. to be Aged, v. Ser
vejo, Ser decrepito. Agedly, vide Vejamente, Decrepitamente. an Agent, v.
Fator. to Aggrauate, or make worse then the matter is, v. Engrandecer.
Aggravating, v. Engrandecimiento. Agilitie, or nimblenes, vide Denuedo,
Agilidad. an Aglet or tag of a point, vide Herrete, Clavillo de agujeta. to
make Aglet holes, vide Ojeatar. an Aglet hole, vide Ojete. an Agnaile or corn
growing on the toes, vide Callo. a while Ago, vide Poco ha. an Agony or
grief, vide Agonia. to Agree, assent, or yield unto, v. Concordar, Concurrir,
Consentir. to Agree in music, vide Acordar. Agreed, vide Acordado. Agreed or
concluded on, vide Convenido. Agreement, vide Acorde, Acuerde, Auenencia,
Composicion, Concierto, Concord, Concordia, Consentimiento, Paces. Agreeable,
vide Convenible, Concordable, Congruo. Agreeably, v. Conveniblemente,
Co^cordamente. Agreeing, vide Consentiente. sick of an Ague, vide Calenturoso,
Calenturiento, Acalenturado. an Ague or fever, vide Calentura, Callentura.
A H
Ah, alas, vide Ay, Guay.
A I
to Aid or help, vide Acorrer, Ayudar, Asistir, Auxillar. that comes to
Aid or rescue, vide Auxilario. Aid or help, vide Acorro, Socorro. an Aider
or helper, v. Ayudor. Aiding, vide Asistendo. what Aileth thee? Que as? Que
tienes? Que te duele? to Aim or level at, vide Asestar, Enamentar. Aimed at,
v. Asestado, Enamentado. to Air or blow through, v. Ventear. to Air or breath
sheets, vide Ventear savanas. Air, one of the four elements, vide Air.
Airie, vide Airoso.
A K
to Ache, vide Doler. an Aching tooth, vide Tooth. an Akorne, or acorne, vide
Bellota or Vellota. an Acorne gatherer, vide Bellotero. an Akre, vide Acre.
A L
Alabaster, vide Alabastro. made of Alabaster, v. Alabastrino. an Alarm, vide
A'rma. to strike up Alarm, v. Arma tocar. Alas, vide A'yme, Guay. Alate or of
late, vide Rezien hecho. to Alay or mitigate, vide Mitigar. Alayed, vide
Mitigado. an Albe that priests did use to wear, vide A'lba. Albeit or
although, vide Aunque, or Bienque, Maguera. the art of Alcumie, vide Alquimia.
an Alcumist, vide Alquimista. an Alderman, vide Veinte quatro. an Alder tree,
vide Sabuco, Sauco. an Alder-bed where alders grow, vide Sabucal. Ale or
beer, vide Cerbeza, Cerveza. an Alehouse, vide Bodegon. an Alehouse keeper,
vide Bodegonero. Alength, vide Length. Aliance, vide Alliance. Aliant or
stranger, vide Estrangero. to Alienate, estrange or draw from, vide Agenar,
Enagenar, Estran^ar. Alienated or estranged, vide Agenado, Enagenado. an
Alienation, vide Agenamiento, Enagenamiento. to Alight, vide Abarar, Apearse.
Alighting from horse, vide Apeamiento, Descavalgadura. to Alight off an horse,
Apearse, Desencavalgar. Alighted, vide Apeado. Alike, vide Like. Alive, vide
Bivo, Vivo. All, the whole, vide Todo. to Allay, vide Mitigar, Aplacar. to
Allege or say for himself, vide Alegar. Alleged, vide Alegado. an
Allegation, vide Alegacion. an Alleging, vide Alegamiento. an Alleager, vide
Alegador. an Allegory, vide Allegoria. Allegorically, vide Allegoricamente. an
Alley or place to walk in, v. Callejuela, Calleja, Estrecha. Allies or
associates, vide Gueux, Aliados, Allegados, Confederados. Alliance or kindred
by marriage, vide Afine or Afinidad, Alianca. Allied, vide Aliado, Allegado,
Confederado. to Allow, vide Aceptar, Comprovar. Allowance for diet, etc.
Racion. Allowance, vide Accepcion, Privelejo, Privelegio. Allowing, vide
Aceptacion. Allowed, vide Aceptado. Allowable, vide Aceptable. to Allure, toll
or entise, vide Atraer, Acariciar. Allured or intised, vide Conciliado,
Atraydo. Allurement, vide Atraymiento. Alluring, vide Atrativo. to Allude or
speak that that has some relation to any thing, vide Aludir. an Almanacke or
prognostication, vide Almanach, Calendario, Almanaque. to give Alms, vide
Limosnar, Dar limosna. to ask or require Alms, v. Limosnear. Alms, vide
Elimosina, Limosna. an Alms deed, vide Limosna. an Almoner or amner, vide
Limosnero. an Alms house, vide Hospital. Almighty, vide Poderoso. an Almond,
vide Almendra. Almond milk, vide Almendrada. Almond butter, vide Almendrada.
an Almond tree, vide Almendro. a garden of Almond trees, v. Almendral. Almost,
vide Casi. Aloes, vide Acibar, cavila. Aloft or on high, vide Arriba. Alone,
vide Solo. to Keep alone, vide Desacompan^ar. Alone without company, v.
Desacompan^ado. Along, vide Long. Aloof, vide Alargo. Alowde, vide Loud.
Alkakengie or winter cherrie, vide Bexiga de perro. the Alps or mountains so
called, vide A'lpes. an Alphabet or abecedarie, vide Alphabeta. Already, vide
Ya. Also, vide Tambien, Otrosi. an Altar, vide Altar, or ara. to Alter or
change, vide Alterar. Altered or changed, vide Alterado. an Alteration, vide
Alteracion. Altering or changing, vide Alteracion. Although, vide Aunque,
Maguera. Altitude or height, vide Altura. Altogether, vide Abbarrisco. Alum,
vide Alumbre. dressed with Alum, vide Alumbrado. Always, vide Siempre.
A M
I Am, vide, To be, Yo soy. to Amase or astonish, vide Embevecer, Embevescer,
Tontecer. to be Amassed, vide Embevecerse, Tontecerse. Amazed, vide Embevecido,
Tontecido. to send in Embassage, vide Anunciar, Embiar embaxada. an Embassage,
vide Anuncio, Legacia, Embaxada. an Ambassador, vide Embaxador, Legado. Amber,
whereof beads are made, vide A'mbar, Esclarimento, Oroguan^in. Ambergreese,
vide A'mbargris. Ambiguitie, or doubtfulnes, vide Ambiguidad. Ambiguous, vide
Ambiguo. Ambiguously, vide Ambigua, or Ambiguamente. Ambition, or immoderate
desire of honor, vide Ambicion. Ambitious, vide Ambicioso. Ambitiously, vide
Ambiciosamente. to Amble, or go smoothly, vide Amblar, Andar de portante. an
Ambler, vide Amblador. an Ambling nag, vide Palafren. an Ambrey or cupboord,
vide Alhazena, Almario, Armario. to lie in Ambush or wait, vide Acechar,
Embuscar, Assechar. one that lies in Ambush, vide Acechador. an Ambushment
whereby an host of men is intrapped, vide Aguaitamiento, Emboscada, Assechanca.
Amen, vide Amen. to Amend, vide Correct. to Amend or wax better, v. Emendar.
to Amend or repair, vide Emendar, Adobar. Amended or repaired, vide Emendado,
Adobado. to make Amends, vide Recompense. Amends, vide Emmienda. Amendment,
vide Emendadura. Amender, vide Emendador. to Amerse or set a fine upon, v.
Multar. one that Amerceth, vide Multador. an Amercement or penalty, vide
Multa. Amerced, vide Multado. an Amesse or robe of a priest, v. Amito. a stone
called Amethist, vide Amethisto. Amiable, lovely, or having a good grace, vide
Amable. Amiable, v. Amablemente. to do Amiss, vide to Offend. Amity, or
Friendship, vide Amistad. an Amner, v. Almoner. Among, v. E'ntre. an herb
called Amonie, v. Amonio. an Amorous person, v. Enamorado, Amoroso. Amorous
potions, vide Echisos. Amorously, vide Enamoradamente. to Amoue or put away, v.
Abandon. to Amount, vide Mount. an Amphitheater, or place made with scaffolds
to see plays, v. Amfiteatro. Ample or large, vide A'ncho. to Amplify, vide
Ensanchar, Amplificar. Amplification, vide Ensanchamiento, Amplificacion.
Amplified, vide Ensanchado, Amplificado.
A N
an Anatomy, vide Anathomia. Ancestors, vide Abuelos, Antepassados. an
Ancestor, vide Antecessor, Antepassado. Ancestrie, vide Ascendencia,
Acendencia. an Anchor or religious man pend up betwixt two walls, v. Emparedado.
an Anchor, vide Anchor. Anchoues, v. Anchoveta, Enchudas, Enchugas, Anchovas. to
wax Ancient, vide to be Old, Envejecer. Ancientnes, vide Anciania. Ancient,
vide Anciano, Antiguo. most Ancient, vide Antiguissimo. Anciently, vide Oldly.
an Ancient in war, vide Ensign. the Ancle of the leg, vide Tovillo. And, vide
Y. Andirons or cobirons, v. Morillas. an Anduile, or anuile, vide Yunque. an
Angel, vide A'ngel. an Angel of Gold, vide Angelote. Angell-like, vide
Angelico. a little Angel, vide Angelico. the herb Angelica, vide Angelica. to
Anger, vide Amohinar, Enojar, Ensan^ar. to be Angry, vide Ayrarse, Enojarse.
Anger or indignation, v. Ayramiento, Enojo, Ensan^amiento. Angered, vide
Amohinado, Ensan^ado. Angry, vide Ayrado, Enojado, Enojoso, Enojadizo, Irado,
Iracondo. Angrily, vide Ayradamente, Enojadamente. to Angle or take fish, vide
Pescar con can^a, or Vara. an Angle, vide Anzuelo. an Angler or fisher with an
angle, vide Pescador con can^a. an Angling rod, v. Can^a de pescador. Anguish
of the body or mind, vide Cuyta, Congoxa. full of Anguish, v. Cuytado. to
Animate, v. Encorage. Animated, v. Animado. Aniseede, vide Matalahuga. an
Anchor, vide A'ncora. to some to Anchor, v. Surgir, Dar fondo. Ankored, vide
Amorrado. an Ankle, vide Ancle. to Annex or join together, vide An^adir,
Anexar. Annexed, vide Anexado, Anexo. Annotations, vide Notes. to Annoie or
hurt, vide Dan^ar. Annoyed, v. Dan^ado Annoyance, v. Dan^o. to Anoint, v.
Crismar, Vngir, Vntar. to Anoint between, v. Entreuntar. Anointed, v.
Crismado, Vntado. an Annointer, v. Vntador. Anointing, v. Vntura. Annual or
yearly, vide Cado an^o. Annunciation day, vide Day. Anon, by and by, quickly,
forthwith, or out of hand, vide Luego. Another, vide O'tro. Another time, vide
Otraves. to Answer, vide Responder. to Answer together, v. Corresponder.
Answering together, vide Correspondiente. an Answer, vide Responso, Respuesto.
an Ante or emmet, vide Pismire. an Antheme or responsorie sound, vide Musica de
responso. Anticke work, v. Musaica obra. the Antipodes, v. Antipodes.
Antiquity, vide Anciania, Antiquidad. Antiquities, vide Antiguallas. an
Anuile, vide Yunque. Any, vide Qualquier.
A P
Apace or with great speed, vide Priessa. well Apaide, vide Glad. to stand
Apart, vide Apartarse. an Ape, vide Mona, Mono, Ximia, Zimio. a little Ape,
vide Monota. Apish toys, vide Xirimias. an Aphorism, or principle in an art,
vide Aphorisma. an Aple, vide Apple. the Apoplexy, vide Apoplexia. to become
an Apostata or reuolter, vide Apostatar. Apostacy or backesliding, v.
Apostacia. an Apostle, vide Apostol. Apostlleship, vide Apostolado. Apostolic,
v. Apostolico. an Apostume or breaking out, v. Impostume. an Apothecarie, v.
Boticario. an Apothecaries shop, vide Botica. Apparent, v. to Appear. to
Apparel or deck, v. Ataviar, Vestir, Adornar. Apparel, v. A'bito, Traje,
Vestidura. Apparelled or clothed, vide Vestido. Apparelling, vide Vestidura,
Vestido, Atavio. to Appeach or impeach, v. Acusar, Denunciar. Appeached, v.
Acusado, Denunciado. Appeaching, vide Acusacion, Denunciacion. to Appeal, vide
Apelar. an Appealer, vide Apelante. Appealing, vide Apelacion. to Appear, or
beseene, vide Aparescer, Parescer, Parecer. an Appearing, vide Aparescimiento,
Aparencia. Appeared, Aparescido, Parescido, Parecido. Apparent or manifest,
vide Manifiesto, Aparente. to Appease or pacify anger, vide Apaziguar,
Aplacar, Mitigar, Ablandar. Appeased, made gentle, vide Ablandado, Apaziguado,
Aplacado, Apagado, Mitigado. an Appeaser, vide Ablandador, Apaziguador. an
Appeasing, vide Apaziguamiento, Ablandamiento, Mitigacion. to Appertain or
belong to, vide Pertenescer, Tocar, Atan^er. Appertaining, vide Perteneciente,
Tocante. Appertinence, v. Pertinencia. to get an Appetite, vide Tener gana de
comer. an Appetite or desire, vide Apetito. Applause, vide Aplauso. an Apple,
vide Mancana. an Apple tree, vide Mancano. an orchard of Apple trees, vide
Mancanal. a pine Apple, vide Pin^a. an Apple core, v. Cuexco de mancana. the
Apple of the eye, or the ball of the eye, vide Nin^a or Nin^ete de los ojos. an
Apricot, vide Albarcoque, or Alvarcoque. to Apply or bend unto, vide Aplicar,
Atender. that may be Applied, v. Aplicadero. Applied or bent unto, v. Aplicado.
Applying or application, vide Aplicacion, Atencion. an Applier, vide Aplicador.
to Appoint or ordain, vide Asignar, Consignar, Estatuir, Statuir. to Appoint
exercises for scholars, v. Ditar, or Dictar. Appointed, ordained or provided,
v. Consignado, Asignado, Estatuido. an Appointer, v. Constituydero. to Appoint
another, vide Delegar, Constituir. Appointing another in his steed, vide
Delegacion, Constitucion. Appointed for another, v. Delegado. an Appointing or
appointment, v. Consignacion, Constitucion. to Appose or examine, v. Examinar.
an Apostate, vide Apostata. to become an Apostate, vide Apostatar. to Apprehend
or lay hold on, vide Prender. Apprehended, vide Prendido. Apprehension, vide
Prendimiento. an Apprentise, vide Aprendiz. to Approach or draw near, v.
Acercar, Llegar. Approached, v. Acercado, Llegado. an Approaching, vide
Acercamiento, Llegamiento. one that Approaches, v. Allegador. to Appropriate,
vide Apropriar. to Approve, vide Averiguar, Comprovar, Ratificar. Approved,
vide Averiguado, Ratificado. Approving, v. Averiguamiento. April, vide Abril.
an Apron, vide Delantal. to make Apt or meet, vide Ataviar. Apt or meet,
vide A'pto, Ataviado. Aptnes, vide Conveniencia. Aptly, or fitly, vide a
Proposito, Convenientemente.
A R
to Araie, or apparel, vide to cloth and deck. Araied, vide Arreado. Araying,
vide Apparel. to Arbitrate, or give sentence, vide Alvedrar, Arbitrar. an
Arbitrament, vide Adbitrio, Arbitrio. an Arbitrator, vide Arbitrante,
Arbitrador. a green Arbor, vide Lugar vmbroso. Archangell, vide herb. an
Archangell, vide Arcangel. an Archbishop, vide Arcobispo. an Archbishopricke,
vide Arcobiscopado. the dignity of an Archbishop, vide Arcobispado. an
Archdeacon, vide Arcediano. an Archdeacons office, vide Arcedianadgo. an
Archduke, vide Archiduque. an Archdukedome, vide Archiducado. to make an Arch,
vide Arquear. an Arch, vide A'rco. made Archwise, vide Arqueado. an Archer or
shooter, vide Archero, Flechador, Flechero. the Archees, vide Archivo, Archibo,
an Archhereticke, vide Hereje principal. an Architect, vide Architecto,
Architeto, Arquiteto. and Archpriest, such as was among the Gentiles, vide
Archipreste, Arcipreste. Ardent, or eager, vide Ardiente. Ardently, or
earnestly, vide Ardientemente. to Argue, or dispute, vide Arguir. an Argument,
vide Argumento. an Argument or first entry into a Comedy, vide Prologo,
Argumento. to Arise, or rise up, vide Leventar. an Arising, vide Levantamiento.
Arithmeticke, or the art of numbering, vide Alguarismo, Arithmetica, Guarismo.
Arithmeticall proportion, Proporcion Arithmetica. an Arithmetician, vide
Arithmetico. to Arrive, vide Arrivar, Arribar. one that Arriueth, vide
Allegador. an Arriving, vide Allegamiento. an Arc, vide A'rca. to Arm, vide
Armar. Armed with a targuet, vide Broquellado. Armed, vide Armado. Armed men,
vide Hombres de armas. men Armed at all points, vide Catafrates. any Army,
vide Campo. Arms, vide A'rmas, Blason. Armor, vide Armadura. Armor for the
arms, vide Bracales. Armor for the thigh, vide Cuxote, Grevas. an Armorie or
storehouse of armor, vide Almario, Almazen, Armario. an Armourer or harneis
maker, vide Armero, Guarnicionero. Armor for the chinne, vide Barbote. an
Arm, vide Braco. a little Arm, vide Bracito, or Bracillo. the Arm hole, vide
Sobaco. fitting for the Arm, vide Embracadura. to make fit for the Arm, vide
Embracar. an Arm of the sea, vide Braco de mar. the Arm of a vine, vide Braco
de vid. the Arming of a pike, vide Manga de pica, Funda de pica. an Arquebusse,
vide Harquebuz. to Arrest or lay hands upon, vide Embargar. Arrested, vide
Embargado. an Arresting, vide Embargo, Embargacion. to Arrive, vide Aportar,
Arribar, cabordar. an Arrival, vide Arribada. Arrived, vide Aportado,
Arribado. an Arriving, vide Aportamiento. to Arrogate, or attribute, vide
Atribuir a si. Arrogant, or proud, vide Arrogante, Superbo. an Arrowe, vide
Flecha, Saeta. an Arrowe head, vide Caxquillo de saeta. the Arse or fundament,
vide Culo. the Arsegut, vide Barriga. Arsenicke, or orpiment, vide Arsnico. an
Art or science, vide A'rte. a thing made by Art, vide Artimada. an
Artichocke, vide Alcarchofa, Artichofa. of the color of an Artichocke, vide
Alcarchofado. an Artery or sinewe, vide Arteria. to set down Articles, vide
Articular. an Article, vide Articulo. an Artist that studieth an art, vide
Artista. an Artificer, vide Artero. Artificial, vide Artificioso.
Artificially, vide Artificiosamente. to furnish with Artillery, v. Artillar.
furnished with Artillery, vide Artillado. Artillery, vide Artilleria. a
master of Artillery, vide Artillero.
A S
As, vide Como. As Well as, vide Tam bien. As little, vide Tam poco. As soon,
vide Tam presto. to Ascend, or go up, vide, Arribar, Subir. an Ascending, vide
Arribada. Ascended, vide Arribado. to Ascertaine, vide to Assure. to Ascribe,
attribute, or to impute, vide Atribuir, Imputar. to make Ashamed, vide
Avergoncar, Envergoncar. Ashamed, vide Avergoncado, corrido, Envregoncado.
Ashaming, vide Corrimiento, Envergoncamiento. I am ashamed of it, vide Corrido
estoy. an Ash, vide Fresno, frezno. Ash color, vide Color. to bring into
Ashes, vide Cenizar. to straw with Ashes, Encenizar. Ashes, vide Ceniza. full
of ashes, v. Cenizoso, Ceniziento. Ashwednesday, vide Miercoles de Ceniza.
Aside, or aparte, vide Aparte. to Ask, require, or demand, vide Pedir,
Requestar. Asked, vide Pedido. an Asker, vide Pedidor. Asking, vide Pedimiento.
Askew, awrie, or crooked, vide Torcido, de mal O'jo. to bring Asleep, vide
Sleep. an Aspe, or serpent, vide A'spide. Aspect, or sight, vide Acatadura,
Acatamiento. Asperitie, or sharpenes, vide Agrura. to Aspire, vide Aspirar. to
Aspire, vide Ambition. an Aspiring, vide Ambicion. Asquint, or askewe, vide
Torcido, de mal O'jo. to Assaie, try, or prove, vide Atentar, Ensayar,
intentar. Assaied, vide Ensayado intentado. an Assayer, Ensayador intentador.
an Assaying, vide Ensayo. to Assail, assault, or set upon, v. Acometer,
Asaltar, Arremeter, Envestir, Saltear. one that assaileth, v. Acometedor,
salteador. an Assault, vide Asalto, arremetida. Assaulted, or assailed, vide
Acometido, Asaltado, Arremetido. an Assaulter or assailer, vide Acometedor,
Arremetidor. Assailing, vide Acometimiento, Arremetimiento, Asalto. an he Ass,
vide Burro. a she Ass, vide Burra. an Ass colt, vide Borrico. an Asseheard
or keeper of Asses, vide Asnerizo. to Assemble, or gather together, vide
Congregar, Llegar. Assembled or come together, vide Llegado, Congregado. an
assembling, vide Llegamiento, Congregation. an assembly, vide Colegacion,
Congregation, Llegada. an Assembly of Jews, vide Aljama. to Assent or agree
to, vide Consentir. an Assent or consent, vide Consentimiento. Assentation, or
flattery, vide Lisonja. to Assert or affirm, vide Afirmar. an Assertion, vide
Afirmacion. Assiduitie, or continuance, vide Continuacion. to Assiege, or
besiege, vide Asediar. to Assign, or consigne a letter, vide Cometer. to
Assign or point, v. Apuntar, Assignar, Consignar. Assigned, vide Cometido,
Consignado. to Assist, vide Asistir. Assistance, vide Asistencia. an Assistant,
vide Agudante. Assisting, vide Asistendo. to Associate, or join together in
fellowship, vide Associar, Confederar. Associated, vide Confederado, Associado.
to Assoile a question, vide Absolver. Assoyled, vide Absuelto. Assoyling, vide
Absolucion. to Assure or to warrant, vide Segurar, Assegurar. Assured, vide
Acertado, Assegurado. an Assurance, vide Certeza, Certidumbre, Fermeza,
Seguridad. Assuredly, vide Ciertamente. to Aswage or mittigate, vide
Amollentir, Mitigar, Ablandar. Assuaged or mittigated, vide Mitigado,
Ablandado. an asswager, vide Mitigador, Ablandador. an Asswaging, vide
Amollentadura, Mitigacion, Ablandadura. to Astonish, amaze, or dismay, vide
Atemorizar, Aturdir, Embacar, Embevecer, Espasmar. Astonished, vide
Atemorizado, Aturdido, Embevecido. Astonishing, vide Espasmo. Astonishment,
abashment, or great fear, vide Espasmo. an Astrolabe, or instrument whereby
the motion of the stars is gathered, vide Astrolabio. Astrology, the part of
Astronomy concerning iudicialles, and practice, vide Astrologia. Asunder, vide
Aparte. to take Asunder, vide Desencaxar. taken Asunder, vide Desencaxado. a
taker Asunder, vide Desencaxador. a taking asunder, vide Desencaxadura. As Well,
vide As.
A T
At, vide A. to Atchieue, vide Conseguir. Athenians, vide Athenienses. to
Attach, vide Prender. Attached or apprehended, vide Prendido. an Attaching,
vide Prendimiento. an Attachment, vide Prendimiento. to Attain or come to, to
obtain or purchase, vide Conseguir. to Attaint, or corrupt, vide Corrumper.
Attainted or stinking flesh, vide Corrumpido, Podrido. to Attempt, vide Assaie.
to Attend, or hearken to, or be attentive, vide Atender. Attendance, vide
Atencion. to be Attentive, vide Ser Atento. Attentive, vide Atento.
Attentiuenes, vide Atentamiento. Attentively, vide Atentamente. to Attire, vide
Cloth. Attire, vide A'bito, Vestido. a little form or fashion of Attire, vide
Abitillo. to make Atonement, or agreement, vide Reco^ciliar, Concertar,
Componer. an Atonement, vide Composicion, Concierto, Reconciliacion. an
Atonement maker, vide Componedor, Reconciliador. to be an Attorney, or
proctor for any one, vide Procurar. an Attorney of the exchequer, vide
Procurador fiscal. an Attorney, vide Procurador. Attractiue, vide Atrativo. to
Attrappe, vide Trapping. to Attribute, or impute, vide Atribuyr. Attributing,
vide Atribuyendo. Attributed, vide Atribuydo.
A V
to Avail, or profit, vide Aprovechar. it Avails, vide Aprovecha. to be of
Avail, vide Devaler. to Auance, vide Advance. Avarice, or covetousness, vide
Codicia, Avaricia. Audacitie, vide Atrevimiento, Audacia. Audacious, vide
Atrevido, Audaz. Audaciously, vide A osadas, Atrevidamente. Audience, vide
Audiencia. an Auditor, vide Contador. an Auditorship, vide Contaduria. an
Auditorrie, or Audite, v. Auditorio. Auditors of the exchequer, vide
Contadores. to Avenge, vide Vengar. to Auerre or affirm, vide Afirmar. to
Augment or increase, vide Aumentar, Acrecentar. Augmented, vide Acrecentado,
Aumentado. Augmenting, vide Acrecentamiento. Augmentacion, vide Aumento. an
Augre or wimble, vide Barrena. August, vide Aosto, Agosto. Ancient, vide
Ancient. Ancestors, vide Ancestors. an Aunt, vide Tia. to Avoid, to
eschew, or shun, vide Evitar. Avoided, vide Evitado. an Avoiding, vide
Evitamiento. an Auoidance, vide Escusa. to Avouch or affirm boldly, vide
Afirmar, Averiguar. Avouched, v. Afirmado, Averiguado. an Auouching, vide
Averiguacion. Austere or grim, vide Austero. Authentike, authorized, or of
undoubted truth, vide Antentico. an Author, vide Author. to put out of
Authority, vide des Autorizar. Authority, vide Autoridad. Authorized, vide
Auctorizado, Autorizado. one bearing Authority, vide Autorizante. to set one
in Authority, vide Autorizar. Autumn, vide Oton^o.
A W
to Awake or stir up, vide Abivar, Despertar. Awaked or stirred up, vide
Abivado, Despertado. an Awaker, vide Despertador. broad Awake, vide Despierto.
Aware of, vide Sabidor. an Awarde, vide Arbitrio. Away, get thee hence, vide
Vete de ay. Awe, vide Fear. Awke, vide Ysquierdo. Awkely, vide Ysquierdamente.
a shoomakers Awle, vide Alesna. Awry, or crooked, vide Torcido. one that looks
Awry, vide Rostrituerto.
A X
an Axe, vide Segur. a battle Axe, vide A'cha. a little Axe or hatchet, vide
Acuela. an Axeltree, vide E'xe. an Axiom, or position in any science, vide,
Regla general. Azure color, vide Azul.
B
a Babe, vide Child. a Babie for children to play with, vide Mun^eca de
nin^os. Babiship or infancy, vide Infancia, Nin^eza. a Babian, or monkey, vide
Mico. to Babble, prate, or speak foolishly, vide Baladronear. a Babbler, a
prater, vide Baladron. a Bacheler, or man unmarried, vide Albarran. a Bachelor
of art, vide Bachiller. Bacchus, vide Baco. to Backbite, v. Detractar,
Profacar. Backbitten, vide Detractado, Backbiting, vide Detractamiento. a
Backbiter, vide Detractor. Backward, vide Atras, Reves. a Back, vide Las
espaldas, Los lomos. broken Backed, vide Derrengado, Deslomado. the Back bone,
vide, Espina. breaking of the Back, vide Derrengadura, Deslomadura. to break
the raines of the Back, vide Derrengar. Bacon, vide Lardo, Tocino. restie
Bacon, vide Lardo rancioso. a gammon of Bacon, vide Pernil de Tocino, jamon de
Tocino. Bad, or evil, vide Mal. Badly, vide Ruynmente. a Badger or Graye, vide
Bivaro. a Bag, vide Costal. Bags or budgets, vide A'rguenas. a money Bag,
vide Bicaca. a Bag to carry bait for fish, vide Esquero. Bag and Baggage,
vide Bagaje, Bagage. a little Bag, vide Saquillo. a meal Bag, vide Costal,
Quilma. a cloak Bag, vide Valija. a Bagpipe player, vide Gaytero. a Bagpipe,
vide campon^a, Cornamusa, Gaita, Gayta. a Baye, station or road for ships to
lie in, vide Baya. a Baye tree, vide Lauriero, Adelfa, Laurel. Baye-berries,
vide Vayas. Bays, vide Bayetas. to Bail, or become surety, vide Abonar. to
put in Bail, vide Fiar. that goes under Bail, vide Abonado. a putting in of
sureties or Bail, v. Abonamiento. a Bail, maineprise, or band of appearance,
vide Caution. Bayling of prisoners, vide Fianca. a putter in of Bail, vide
Abonador. a Bailiefe or sergeant, vide Alguazil, Baylio, Porqueron. a Bailiefe
or ouerseer of lands, vide Capataz, Mayordomo. a Bailiwicke, vide Alguazilazgo,
Mayordomia. a Baine, vide Bathe. to lay Bait for fish or birds, vide Cevar.
Bait, vide Cebo, Cevo. a bull Baiting, vide Corro de Toro. Baize, or fine
freese, vide Bayetas. to Bake, vide Amassar. Baked, vide Cocho. a Baker, vide
Panadero. a Bakers trade, vide Panaderia. Baking, vide Amassadura. a Bakehouse,
vide Panaderia. a Ballad, or Ballet, v. Canto, Copla. to Balaste a ship, vide
Alastrar, Lastrar. the Balast wherewith a ship is balasted to sail upright,
vide Lastre. a Balasting or counterpoizing, v. Lastre. o be Balde, vide
Encalvecer. to make Balde vide Encalvar. talde, or pilde, vide Calvo. Baldnes,
vide Calva, Calvez. a Baldrib, or ribspare of a hog, vide Entrecuesta. a Balke
or furrow, vide Sulco. Balked or furrowed, vide Sulcado. a Ball, vide Bola,
Pella. a wind Ball, vide Bola de viente. a Ball of yarne, vide Pelota. a Ball
of wild fire, vide Bomba de fuego, Boton de fuego. the Ball that the
silkeworme makes, vide Capulla de la seda. a sweet Ball, vide Pomander.
Balls of earth filled with ashes, vide Alcanzia. a Ball filled with powder,
vide Alcanzia de fuego. to Balance or weigh any thing, vide Balancar. a
Balance or pair of scales, vide Balanca. Balm, vide Balsamo, Abejera. to do
or dress with Balm, vide Balsamar. Balm gentle, an herb, vide Abejera. a
Band of soldiers, vide Compania de soldados. a Band or rerewarde, vide
Retaguarda. a Band of a hundred soldiers, vide Centuria. a Band or thong
wherewith any thing is tied, vide Atadura, Atamiento, Ligadura, Ligamiento.
Band or tied, vide Ligado. a Band, recognisance, or obligacion, vide
Obligacion. to Bandie or take part with a faction, vide Bandear, Vandear. a
Bandying, vide Bandeo, Vandeo. a Bandogge, vide Dog. a Bandore, vide
Bandurria, Vihuela. Bane, or poison, vide Poncon^a. Bangle eared, v. Encapotado
de orejas. to Banish or exile, vide Encartar, Desnaturalizar, Desterrar.
Banished, cast out, or exiled, vide Bandido, Encartado, Desnaturalizado,
Desterrado. Banishment or exile, vide Encartacion. a Banisher, vide
Destierrador. Banks of earth, vide Orones. a Banker or usurer, vide Vsurero. a
Banner, or ensign, vide Bandera, or Vandera. a little Banner, vide Banderilla,
or Banderola. a square Banner, vide Quadrete. to be Banquerupt, vide
Bancarotar. a Banquerupt, vide Banquerota. to Banquet together, vide
Banquetear, Vanquetear. a Banquet, vide Banquete, Colacion, Combite. a
Banquetor, vide Banqueteador. to Baptize, vide Bautisar. Baptism, or baptime,
vide Baptismo, or Bautismo. Baptized, vide Bautizado. Barbarousnes, vide
Barbaria, or Barbaridad. Barbarous, vide Barbaro, Barbarously, vide
Barbaramente. Barbed horses, vide Bardados cauallos. a Barbel fish, vide Barbo,
or Barvo. a Barber, vide Afeytador, Alhajeme, Barbero, or Barvero. Barbed, vide
Afeytado. a Barberie bush, v. Espina de Majuelas. a Barbers shop, vide
Afeytadera, or Barveria. a Barbers basin, vide Bacia. Barbes of corn, vide
Grancas, Grancones. full of Barbes, vide Grancoso. Barberies, vide Berberis. a
Barbel fish, vide Salmonete. Bare, vide Cencen^o. to Bargain, or make
bargain, vide Contraer paction, Pato, or Concierto, Concertar. a Bargain or
contract, vide Contracto, Yguala, Concierto. a Barge, vide Barca. a Bargeman,
vide Barquero. to Bark, as a dog, vide Ladrar. a Barker, vide Ladrador.
Barking, vide Ladrido. to Bark, or pill trees, vide Descortezar. the Bark or
rind of any thing, vide Corteza. Barked, or pilled, vide Descortezado. the
Bark of a tree, vide Corteza de arbol. a Bark or little ship, vide Barca, or
Barco. a kind of Bark or boat, vide Alvatoca. Barely, scantly, vide, Asecas.
Barley corn, vide Cevada. made of Barley, vide Cevadizo. Barley water, vide
Fresada de cevada. a Barnacle, vide Gango. a pair of Barnacles to hold a horse
by the nose with, vide Asial. a Barn, vide Alhondiga. a Baron, vide Baron,
Varon. a Baronie, vide Baronia, Varonia. to Bar, bolt or keep from, vide
Cerrar. to Bar or make fast the door, v. Atrancar. Barred or bolted, vide
Cerrado. a Bar or bolt of a door, v. Cerrojo, Cerradura, Barra. to set with
Bars of iron, vide Barrear. made with Bars of iron, vide Barreado. a Bar
where causes are pleaded, vide Cadenas. a little Bar of iron, vide Barreta. a
Barrel, vide Candiota, Baril. a maker of Barrels, vide Barilero. the Barrel
of a gunne, vide Can^on. a little Barrel, vide Barilejo. a Barren woman, vide
Machorra. Barren, vide Esteril, Steril. Barrennes, vide Esterilidad. Barrenly,
vide Esterilmente. a Barricado, vide Barbacana. a Barrier, vide Barrera,
Varrera. Barriers, or the feate of playing at barriers, vide Barriera. a
Barricado, vide Reduto. a Barretour or troublesome knave, vide Tahur. a Barrow
hog, vide Berraco marrano. Barrowes grease, vide Pringue de toresno. a hand
Barrow, vide Gavion. to Barter one thing for another, or change, vide Abaratar,
Trocar. Bartring, vide Trueco. a Barton, vide Poultrie. Base money, vide
Vellon, or Bellon. a Base fellow, vide Picaro, Cevil. the Base, vide Music.
the Base string of a vial, vide Bordon de Vihuela. Baseness, vide Avilteza, or
Baxeza, Baxura. Base, vide Abatido, or Bajo, Cevil. to make Base, vide Abaxar.
Basely, vide Abatidamente, Abiltadamente, Baxamente. a Basenet, vide Bacinete.
a Basen, vide Bacin. to be Bashefull, vide Ashamed. Bashefulnes, vide
Verguenca. a Basiliske or cockatrice, a serpent so called, vide Cocadriz. a
Basiliske, vide Gunne. a Basket, maund, or pannier, vide Canasta, Cesta, Cofin,
Espuerta, Goja, Petaca. a Basket, vide Altabaque, Sera. put in a Basket, vide
Encanastado. a wicker Basket, vide Cuevano de vimbres, Cesto. a small Basket,
vide Alhazen^a, Cestilla. a Basket or hamper to carry garments for players,
vide Ceston. to hang out in a Basket, vide Encanastar. a Basket maker, vide
Cestero, Esportillero. a Basin to wash hands in, vide Aguamanil. a Bassa or
commander over soldiers among the Turks, vide Baxa. a Bastard or base
child borne, vide Bastardo spurio. Bastardie, vide Bastardia. Bastard wine,
vide Wine. to Baste meat, vide Empringar. Basting, vide Pringor. to Bate as a
hawk, vide Abatir. the gerfalcon Bated, vide Abatiose el girafalte. to give
the Bastinado, vide Aporrear. given the Bastinado, vide Aporreado. to Bathe,
vide Ban^ar. Bathed, vide Ban^ado. a Bathe keeper, vide Ban^ador. a Bathe or
baine, vide Ban^o, or Van^o. a Bathing place, idem. a Batte or flittermouse,
vide Morcielago, or Murcielago. a Batte or club, vide Staff. a Battle, or
conflict, vide Batalla, Guerra. a petty Battle, vide Batallon. to Battle or
fight, vide Batallar. a Battle between two, vide Combat. a Battle axe, vide
A'cha, Hacha, Maco de hierro. a Battle like a half moon, vide Falangia. the
wing of a Battle, vide A'la de Batalla. a Battle by sea, vide Batalla navall.
Battlements in walls, vide Adarues, Almena, Parapetos, Portillo de muro. a
little Battlement of a wall, vide Almenilla. to Batter, or beat down with
canon, or great ordinance, vide Canonear. to Batter with strokes, vide
Abollar, Batir. Battery, vide Bateria. Baulme, vide Balm. a Baude ruffian or
pandor, vide Alcahuete, mandil, Mandilete, Mandillon. to make or become a
Baude, vide Arrufianar. made or become a Baude, vide Arrufianado. Baudrie, vide
Alcahueteria, Rufianaria. a woman Baude, vide Alcahueta. a house of Bauderie,
vide Stews. Bawdkin, vide Tinsell. a Bawdkin or jewel that women wear vide
Prendedero. to Bawle or cry out, vide Dar bozes. a Bawling vide Bozeria. a Bay
or creek, vide Baia, Baiha, or Baya. Bay Berries, vide Bayas, or Vayas. Bay
colored, vide Baio, or Bayo. a Bay window, vide Balcon.
B E
to Be, vide Ser. Being, vide Essencia. Beach or shingle, vide Guijas. a
Beacon, vide Almenara de fuegos, Atalaya. a Beacon or watch-towre, vide Faron.
Beade, as a pair of beads, vide Cuentas, Rosario. a little pair of Beads,
vide Contezuela. a Beagle, vide Dog. a Beak, nebbe, or bill of a foul, vide
Pico. a Beakon, vide Beacon. a Beam that runs cross the upper part of a
house, vide caquesami. a Beam or great piece of timber, vide Viga. a
principal Beam of any house or building, vide Arquitrave. a Beam of the
sun, vide Rayo. a Bean, vide Haba, Hava. a Bean field, vide Havar. french
Beans, vide Feyones. the Beak head of a ship, vide Bege, or Beje. to Bear or
carry, vide Llevar. a Bearer, vide Llevador. Bearefoote, or beareclaw, vide
Acantho. to Bear, vide suffer. Bearing good will, vide Bienquerencia. the
Bearing of an office, vide Office. a Bear, he, or she, vide O'sso, O'ssa.
Bearefoote, vide Branca vrsina, Eleboro. a Beareward, vide Ossero, Ossario. to
begin to have a Beard, vide Barvar. one that has a Beard, vide Barbado, or
Barvado. one whose Beard begins to sprout, vide Barbiponiente. a little
Beard or cocks beard, vide Barbecilla, or Barvezilla. thick Bearded, vide
Barbudo, or Barvudo. a Beard, vide Barba, or Barva. a hoare white bearde, vide
Barva cana. Beardlesse, vide Desbarbado. a Beast, vide Bestia. a bearing beast,
vide Bestia de alvarda. a kind of Beast in the Indies, vide Abada. Beastly,
vide Bestial. a little Beast, vide Animalejo. Beastlines, vide Bestialidad. a
company of beasts, vide Bestiame. to Beat or smite, vide Apalear, Batir. to
Beat gold, vide Batir hoja. to Beat back, vide Reverberar. to Beat down or
discourage, vide Abatir. Beaten, smitten or knocked, vide Abofeteado, Apaleado,
Batido. Beaten together or crushed, vide Abollado. a Beater, vide Batidor. to
beat black and blew, vide Magullar. Beaten black and blew, vide Magullado. a
Beater about the ears, vide Abofeteador. Beaten black and blew, vide
Magulladura. a Beating, vide Bateria. to offer to Beat, vide Amagar. offered
to be Beaten, vide Amagado. one that offers to Beat, vide Amagador. to Beat
with the fists, vide Appun^ar. to Beat on the sea waves, vide Embatir. Beaten
on the sea, vide Embatido. Beating of the waves, vide Embate. Beauty, vide
Beldad, or Belleza, Hermosura. to Beautify, or adorn, vide Hermosear.
Beautiful, vide Bello, Hermoso, or Ermoso. Beautifully, vide Bellamente. to
Beck, or nodde, vide Cabecear, Hazer sen^as. a beck, vide Zun^o,
Cabeceamiento. to Become, vide Deuenir. to Become calm or quiet, vide Abonarse
el tiempo. a Bed, vide Cama, Lecho. to make Beds in a garden, vide Aporcar.
Beds making in a garden, vide Aporcadura. a Bed of wool or flocks, vide
Colcedra, Colchon. a Beds head, vide Cabecera de cama. hanging Beds, vide
Hamacas. a Bedstead, vide Armazon de cama. Bedellium stone, vide Bedel. a
Bedlem or mad body, vide Loco. Bedlem or a place of mad folks, v. Hospital de
locos. a Be, vide Abeja, Aveja. a great Be, v. Abejonazo. a drone or humming
Be, v. Abejon. the sting of a Be, v. Aguijon del abeja. Bees meat, v.
Hamago. a keeper of Bees, v. Colmenero. a place of Be hiues, Colmenar. a Be
hiue, v. Colmena. a company of Bees or a place where many bees are, v.
Abejeria. a Beech, v. Haya. a grove of Beeches, v. Hayal. Beef, v. Carne de
vaca. Beer, v. Cerbeza, or Cerbeca, Cerveza. Beer corn, v. Espelta. a Beer
whereon dead bodies are carried, v. A'ndas or A'ndaz. Beestings, that is the
first milk that comes in the teates after the birth of any thing, be it in
woman or beast, v. Calostre, Colostro. a Beetle, v. Maco. to drive with a
Beetle, v. Maconear. a Beete an herb, vide Aselga, Beta or Veta. Beewoort an
herb, v. Abejera. to Befall or to chance, vide Acaecer, Acontescer. Befallen
or chanced, vide Acaecido, Acontecido. to be Before, v. Adelantar. Before, v.
Adelante, ante or antes, Delante. Before in presence, v. Enpresencia. to Beget
or engender, v. Engendrar. Begotten, v. Engendrado. first Begotten, v.
Primogenito. a Begetter, v. Engendrador. a Begetting, v. Engendramiento. to
Beget anew, v. Regenerar. to Beg or ask pitifully, vide Gallofear, Mendigar. a
Beggar or poor body, v. Gallofeo, or Gallofero, Mendigante, Mendigo. Beggerie
or beggerlinesse, v. Mendiguez. Begging, v. Mendigando, Gallofeando. to Begin,
vide Comencar, Empecar, Encomencar, Principiar. a Beginner, v. Comencador. to
Begin again, vide Rasumir. the Beginning, v. Origin, Principio. Begun, v.
Comencado, Empecado, Encomencado. a Begle, v. Dog. to Begrease, v Anoint. to
Beguile or deceive, v. Engan^ar. Beguiled, v. Engan^ado. to Behave, vide
Comedir. Behavior, v. Ademan, Comedimiento, Gesto. good Behavior, v. Buena
crianca, Comedimiento. to Behead, v. Degollar, Descabecar. Beheaded, vide
Degollado, Descabecado. a Beheader or hangman, v. Dogolladero. a Beheading, v.
Degolladura, Degollamiento, Descabecamiento. to be Behind, v. Hazerse atras.
Behind, v. Atras, Tras. to Behold or see, v. Catar, Contemplar. to Behold
steadfastly, v. Desencapotar. Behold, v. Cata, or Mira. Behold there, v. He la.
a Beholder, v Mirador. Behold it, v. He lo. Beholding or earnest looking, vide
Catadura. Beheld, v. Mirado, Catado. it Behooves, or it is requisite, v.
Conviene, Cumple. Behoueable, v. Conveniente. to Beleager, v. Campanear,
Asidiar. to Believe or give credit unto, v. Creer. Belief, trust and credit,
v. Creencia. Believed, v. Creydo. to make Believe, v. Embabucar. made Believe,
v. Embabucado. to Belch, belke, or break wind, vide Regoldar. a Belch, v.
Regueldo. Belched, v. Regoldado. a Belcher, v. Regoldador. Belching, v.
Regueldo. a Bell, v. Campana. a little Bell, v. Campanilla, Chocallo. a saints
Bell or any bell that may be rung in the hand, vide Esquila, Esquilla,
Esquilon, Esquileta. a hawks Bell, v. Hawk. a cow Bell, v. Cencerro. to ring
a cow Bell or low bell, vide Cencerrar. a child's bell or rattle, v. Matraca. a
Bell founder, vide Campanero, Fundidor. a Belfrie, v. Campanario. a Bell
weather, v. Weather. to Bellow like an ox or cow, v. Mugir, Bramar. Bellowing,
v. Mugido, Bramido. Bellows to blow fire with, v. Barquin^o, Fuelles. little
Bellows, Fuellezuelos. smithes Bellows, v. Fuelles de herrero. a Belly, womb
or panch, v. Vientre. a Belly-god, v. Glutton. to Belong or pertain to, vide
Atan^er, Pertenecer. Belonging or appertaining, vide Perteneciente. Beloved, or
loved tenderly, v. Amado, Caro, Bienquerido. ill Beloved, v. Malquisto. Below
or beneath, v. Baxo, or a Baxo, or Bajo. that is below, v. Baxero. a Belt or
girdle, v. Correa de cuero. to Belly, v. Levantar falso testimonio. Belyed, v.
Calun^ado. to Bemone, v. Condoler. a Bench or form to sit on, vide Banco,
Escan^o, Poyo. a Bench or carpet, v. Bancal. to Bend back, v. Retorcar. to
Bend a bow, vide Empulgar arco, Estender. Bending of a bow, v. Empulgadura. to
Bend, crook or bow, v. Corcibar, Empandar, Tender. to Bend out, v. Estender.
the Bender of a crossebowe, v. Gafas. to Bend by beathing, vide Bornear.
Bending of a staff or timber by beathing at the fire, v. Borne. Bent by
beathing at the fire, v. Borneado* to Bend as a bow, v. Entesar, Estender.
Bending or stretching abroad, vide Entesamiento. Beneath or that is beneath, v.
Abaxo. a Benediction, v. Benedicion. a Benefice or spiritual promotion, vide
Beneficio. to be Beneficial or do a good turn to, v. Beneficiar. a
Benefactor, v. Bien-hechor. Beneficence or doing of good turns, vide
Beneficio, or Bien-hecho. a Benefit or good turn, v. Beneficio. Benefited, v.
Beneficiado. Benevolence or good will, vide Benevolencia. Benignity, v.
Gentleness. to be Benumbed, or want feeling and sense, v. Tullir. to Benum, v.
Arrinconar. Benumbed, v. Arrinconado, Tullido, Gafo, Gafoso. a Benumming or
deprivation of feeling, v. Gafedad, Tullimiento. to Bequeath or assign, v.
Mandar. Bequeathed. v. Mandado. a Bequeather, v. Mandador. a Bequeathing, vide
Manda de testamiento. a Bequeast or legacy, vide Manda de testamento. to
Beray, v. Ensuziar. to Beray with ordure, v. Emmerdar. Berayed, v. Ensuziado.
to Bereave or deprive, v. Privar. Bereaved, bereft or deprived, v. Privado.
Bereauing, depriving or taking away, v. Privamiento. a black Berry, vide
carca. a goose Berry, v. uva de la olla. to Beseech or desire, v. Suplicar.
Beseeching, praying or desiring, vide Suplicacion. Beseeched or besought, v.
Suplicado. a Beseecher, v. Suplicador. to Beseem or become, v. Convenir. a
Beseeming or comelines, vide Conveniencia. to Beset, v. Cercar. to be Beset or
to be besieged, v. Cercado ser, or Ser assidiado. Besides, v. Fuera, Mas.
Besides himself or mad, v. Fuera de si. to Besiege, beset or assault, v.
Asediar, Cercar. Besieged, beset or environed. v. Asediado, Cercado. a Besieger
or he that lays siege, v. Cercador, Asediador. a Besieging or compassing
about, v. Cerco, Asedio. Beshitten, v. Merdoso. to Besmeare or anoint, v.
Encevar, Untar. Besmeared, v. Untado, Encebado. a Besmearing or anointing, v.
Untura, Encebadura. a Besome or broom, v. Escoba. to Bespew, v. Spew. to
Bespot, v. Amanzillar. to Besprinkle, v. Ysopear. the Best. v. Muy bueno. Best
or most excellent, v. Bonissimo. to Bestow a good turn, v. Colar beneficio,
Otorgar. Bestowing or placing vide Colocacion. Bestowed, vide Colocado. to
Bestow or place, vide Colocar. to Bestow or lay out, v. Gastar, Emplear,
Consumir. Bestowed or laid out, vide Gastado, Empleado, Consumido. a Bestowing
or laying out, vide Gasto, Empleo, Consumo. Bestract, or mad, v. Loco
frenetico. Betimes, early in the morning, v. Amaneciendo. to Bet or lay down
stake or gage, vide Apostar. a Bet stake or gage, v. Apuesta. to Betake or
commit, v. Meterse. to Bethink, v. to Think. a Beetle or fly so called, v.
Escaravajo. a wood cleauers Beetle, v. Maco. to Betoken, signify or
prognosticate, v. Significar, Prognosticar, Pronosticar. a Betokening, v.
Pronostico. Betonie an herb, vide Betonica, or Bretonica. to Betray, or work
treason against one, v. Hazer traycion. Betrayed, v. Vendido por traycion. a
Betraier or traitor, v. Traydor. a Betraying, v. Traycion. to Betroth, v.
Desposar. a woman Betrothed, v. Desposada, fiada. the Betrothed, v. Desposados.
a man Betrothed, v. Desposado. to make Better, v. Mejorar. Better, v. Mejor.
Between, v. E'ntre. Between themselves, v. Dentro de si. to Beuer or drink
between meals, v. Merendar. to Beuer or drinking between meals, vide
Colacion, Merienda. a Beuer or castor, v. Bivaro. Bevrage, v. Brevage. the
Beuer of an helmet, v. Bizera, or Vizera. to Bewail, weep or lament, v.
Llantear, Plan^ir, Lamentar. Bewailed, v. Plan^ido. to Beware or take heed, v.
Guardar. Beware the wolf, v. A'ba el lobo. to Bewet, v. Wet. to Bewitch or
inchaunt, v. Hechizar. to Bewitch with the eyes, v. Aojar. Bewitched or
inchaunted, v. Hechizado. Bewitched with the eyes, v. Aojado. a Bewitching or
enchaunting, vide Hechizeria. Bewitching with the eyes, v. Aojamiento.
Aojadura. to Bewray or disclose, v. Abrir, Descubrir. Bewraied, vide
Descubierto. a Bewraier, v. Descubridor. a Bewraying, v. Descubrimiento.
Beyond, v. Allende. Beyond the seas, v. Vltra de la mar.
B I
a Bib for a child, v. Babadero. to Bib, quaffe, or drink often, vide Bever
mucho. a Bibbing or quaffing, v. Borracheria. a Bib or muckedor set on a
childs breast, v. Bavadero. the Bible containing the old and new testament,
v. Biblia. to Bid or command, v. Mandar. to out Bid, v. Puxar. out Bidding, v.
Puxando. to Bid or inuit guests to feasts, v. Combidar. a Bidder or inuiter,
v. Combibador. Bidden ar invited, Combidado. a Bidding or inuiting, v. Combite.
Big or great, v. Grande. a Biggin, v. Coife. a Bile or botch, vide Carboncol,
Boya, Chichon, Macida. a Bill or scrowle, v. Cedula. a Bill of det, vide
Conoscimiento de paga. a Bill of receipt, or warrant to receive money, v.
Libranca. a Bill of complaint, v Querella. a Bill on a house showing the same
to be let, v. Cedula de alquiler. Bills of account, v. Cedulones. Bills on posts
or walls, v. Cedulones. a hedging Bill, v. Assegur. a Bill, beak or snout. v.
Pico. a Billet or ticket, v. Boleta, Polica. a Billet or shide of wood, v. Raja
de len^a. to Bind about the head, v. Entrapar. to Bind or tie up, v. Apretar,
Arremangar, Atacar, Atar, Engavillar, Tudir. a Binder, v. Atador. a Binding, v.
Atamiento. Bound in bundles or fagots, v. Engavillado. Bound, v. Atado. rough
Bindweede, v. carca parilla. a Binne or hutch to keep bread in, vide A'rca,
Panera. a Bird, v. A've, Paxaro. a little Bird, v. Avecica, Paxarilla. Birding,
v. Caca de aves. a Birder, v. Cacador de aves. to go a Birding or fowling,
vide Cacar aves. Birdlime, v. Liga, or Liria. a Birlet, v Hood or coife. a
Birth, v. Nacimiento, Natividad, Parto. untimely Birth, v. A bortadura,
Movediza. Birthwort, an herb so called, v. Aristologia. a Bishop or prelate,
v. Obispo. belonging to a Bishop, v. Obispal. a Bishopric, v. Obispado. a
Bishop at Chesse play, v. Arfil. Biscay in Spain, v. Biscaya. a Biscuit or
simnell made of honey and spice, v. Alexu. a biscuit maker, v. Biscochero,
Bizcochero. Biscuit bread, v. Biscocho, or Viscocho. a Bitch, v. Perra. to Bite,
v. Amordazar, Morder. a Biter, v. Adentillador, Amordazador, Mordedor. a Bitte
with the teeth, vide Abocadar, Dentillada. a Biting, v. Amordazamiento,
Dentillada. by little Bits or morsels, v. a Bocadillos. a Bit or morsel, v.
Bocado. Bitten with the teeth, v. Adentillado, Amordazado, Mordido. Bitten with
the mouth as horses snap one another, v. Abocadado. Bitingly, v. Adentilladas.
a Bit or snaffle, vide Mordaza. a Bittor or bird so called, vide Alcaravan, or
Bitor. to be Bitter or sower, vide Amargar, Helear. Bitterness, vide Amargura.
Bitterly, vide Agramente, Amargamente.
B L
a Blabbe or long tongue, vide Lenguaz. to make Black, vide Ennegrecer,
Negreguear. Black, vide Negro. Blackenes, vide Negrura. made Black, vide
Denegrido. Blacker, vide Mas negro. Blacked, vide Negregueado. Blackest, or
very black, vide Negrissimo, Muy negro. a Black bird, vide Merla. a Black
moore, vide A'rabe, Negro. any thing Black and blew, vide Cardena cosa. the
Blade of an herb, vide Hoja de yerva. leeke Blades, vide Poretas. a Blade, or
sword, vide Hoja. a Bladder, vide Bexiga. a little Bladder, vide Bexiguilla. a
Blaine, vide Blister. to Blame, or lay fault on, vide Culpar Blame, vide Culpa.
Blamed, vide Culpado. Blaming, vide Culpa. Blameless, vide Desculpado.
Blamefull, or culpable, vide Culpable. Blamelesly, vide Desculpadamente. to
Blanch or pull off the rind or pill, vide Descascarar. Blanched almonds, vide
Almendras descascaradas. to Blanch or make white, vide Blanquear. the Blanching
of masons work, vide Blanqueadura. Blankish or whitish, vide Blanquillo. a
Blanket or couerlet, vide Fracada, manta de cama. to Blaspheme, or speak evil
of, vide Blasfemar. a Blasphemer, vide Blasfemador. Blaspheming, vide
Blasfemia. Blasphemed, vide Blasfemado. Blasphemous, vide Blasfemoso.
Blasphemously, vide Blasfemosamente. to Blaste, sear, or sindge, vide
Chamuscar. Blasted or singed, vide Chamuscado. Blasting of corn, vide Anuble,
n^ublo. a Blast of wind, v. Soplo, Soplada. to Blaze abroad, vide Publicar.
Blazing abroad, vide Publicado. to Bleach or whiten clothes, vide Curar
liencos. a Bleaching, vide Curadura de liencos, Colada. a Bleaching place, vide
Curandero. to have Bleare eyes, vide Cegagear. Bleare eied, vide Cegageado,
Lagan^oso, Pitan^oso. Bleare eyes, vide Lagan^osos ojos. Blearenesse of the
eyes, vide Cegagez, Lagan^a. to Bleate like a sheep, vide Balar. to Bleate as
a fawn, vide Balitar. Bleating, vide Balando. a Bleating, vide Balito, a
substantive, or Balitado. to Bleed, vide Sangrar de narizes. a Bleeding, vide
Sangradura. to Blemish, vide Manchar. a Blemish or spot, vide Mancha. Blemished
or spotted, vide Manchado. to Bless, vide Bendezir, Santiguar. Blessedness,
vide Beatitud. Blessed, vide Beato, Bendito, Bendicho. most Blessed, vide
Beatissimo. Blessedly or happily, vide Benditamente. Blewe, vide Azul, Blao,
Ceruleo. bright Blewe, vide Azul claro. to Blind, or make stark blind, vide
Cegar. Blindfolde, vide a ciegas. sand Blind or pore blind, vide Purblinde.
Blindly, vide Ciegamente. Blindenes, vide Cegajez. Blind, vide Ciego. Blinded,
vide Cegado. Bliss, vide Bless. a Blister, blaine, or wheale, vide Empolla,
Chichon, Landrezilla. to rise in Blisters, vide Empollarse. full of Blisters,
vide Empollado. a Blistring, vide Empolladura. Blite an herb, vide Bledo.
Blobcheeked, vide Cheek. a Block, vide Legno, Len^o. a Blockhead, vide
Grossero. a Blockehouse, vide Fuerte, Fortaleza. to Blossom, bloome, or bear
flowers, vide Abotonar, Florecer, Echar flores. a Blossom or bloome,
Abotonadura, Florecimiento. to Blot out, wipe away, or deface, vide Aborrar,
Borrar. Blotted, vide Borrado. a Blot or blur, vide Borra, Borron, Borraza,
Macula. a Blotting book, v. Borrador. Blotting, vide Borradura. to defile with
Blood, vide Sangrentar. to let Blood, vide Sangrar. a tool to let blood
with, vide Sangradera. Blood, vide Sangre. a Blood letter, vide Sangrador.
letting of Blood, vide Sangria. corrupt Blood, vide Sangraza. the Bloudstone
that stops blood, vide Albin, Aluin. Bloody, vide Sangriento. a
Bloudhound, vide Ventor. a Blouding, vide a Pudding. to Blow or breath, vide
Sollar, Soplar. a Blow with an elbow, vide Codada, Codazo. Blowing with the
cheeks full of wind, vide Jovido de boca. Blown or puffed up, vide Soplido.
a Blow with the head against a wall, vide Calabacada. a Blow with the head,
vide Cabecada. a Blow with a fist, vide Bofetada. a Blow with a bladder, vide
Bexigazo. Blowing, vide Soplando. a Blow with the back of the hand, vide
Mandron. to give a Blow, vide Golpear. a Blow with the palm of the hand, vide
Guantada. a Blow or buffet, vide Golpe. a down right blow, vide Altabaxo. a
Blow with a cudgel, vide Palazo. Blud, vide Blood. to make Blunt, vide
Dispuntar, Embotar, Rebotar. Blunt or dull, vide Dispuntado, Embotado, Obtuso,
Rebotado. Bluntnes or dulnes, vide Dispuntamiento, Embotadura. Bluntly, v.
Botamente, Torpemente. to Blush, v. Envergoncarse, Roxear. a Blushing, vide
Roxura. to Blurre, vide Blot. a Blustering wind, vide Hostigo.
B O
to Boarde, or lay boardes, v. Entablar. a Board or planke, v. Entabladura.
Boarded, vide Entablado. Boarding, vide Entablamiento. a Boar, vide Berraco. a
wild Boar, vide Javali. a Boateswaine, vide Nocher, Contramaestro. to Boast
or vaunt, vide Jatar. a Boaster, v. Jatador, Vanaglorioso. Boasting and
bragging, vide Jatancia, Vanagloria. given to Boasting, vide Jatancioso. a
Boat, v. Bagel, or Bajel, or Vajel. Also Balsa, Barco, Barquilla, Navecilla. a
Boat hewed out of a tree being all one piece, vide Artesa. a Boat flat
bottomed, vide Chalupa. a Boatehooke, vide Cloque. a Bob or mock, vide Mofa. a
Bob on the nose, vide Mangonada, Moxicon. a Bobbin to wind silk upon, vide
Canillero. to Bob on the nose, vide Moxiconar. a Body, all manner of corporal
substance, vide Cuerpo. some Body, vide Alguno, Algun. no Body, vide Ningun,
Ninguno. a Bodkin, vide Puncon. a Bodkin or fine instrument wherewith women use
to curle hair, v. Prendedero. a Bogge, vide Cienagal, Pantano. Boiled, vide
Bollido, Cozedizo, Bullido. to Boil as a pot, vide Barbullar, Bollir.
Boisterous, vide Boisterous. to be Bold, vide Atreverse, Osar. to be or make
Bold, vide Atreverse. Bold, hardy, stout, vide Atrevido, Audaz, Audas,
Osado, Denodado. Boldly, vide Aosadas, Animosamente, Atrevidamente,
Denodadamente, Osodamente. Boldness of heart, vide A'nimo, Ardid, Atrevimiento,
Osadia. Bolearmoniake, vide Bolearmoniaco. a Boll to wash hands, vide Cuenca,
Albornia. a washing Boll, vide Candiota. a Bollyne or sheate cord of a ship,
vide Bolina. a Bolster of a bed, vide Alfamar, Cabecal, Traviesso, Travessero.
to Bolster up, support, and maintain, vide Sustentar, Mantener. a Bolstring,
vide Sustento, Mantenimiento. a Bolte to shoot at birds, vide Birote, Virote,
Sostrado. a shot with a Birdbolt, vide Biratazo, Viratazo. a Bolt of thunder,
or a thunderbolt, vide Rayo. a Bolt of a door, vide Cerrojo. the Boltspreet of
a ship, vide Baupres. Boltes, gives, shackles, and fetters, vide Grillos.
Bomming and humming, vide Zumbido. Bondage or servitude, vide Cativerio,
Esclavitud, Servidumbre. a Bondsman, vide Cativo, Esclavo. a Bond or
obligation, vide Obligacion. big Boned, vide Ossudo. the Bone of the arm,
vide Canilla de Braco. the Bone of the shanke, vide Canilla de Pierna. a Bone,
vide Huesso. the channel Bone, vide Huesso de la Garganta. a Bone in the knee,
vide Choquecuela. Bonelesse, or without bones, vide Desossado. a Bone setter,
vide Algebrista. Bonesetting, vide Algebra. the ridge Bone, vide Espinazo. the
shinne Bone, vide Espinilla. a Bonet, or under cappe, vide Bonete. a Bonefire,
vide Hoguera. a Bonegrace, vide Capelo. the Bonet of a sail, vide Boneta. a
Book, vide Libro. a library of Books, vide Libreria. a Book of accounts,
vide Libro de caxo, or de Raciones. a Bookebinder, vide Enquadernador, or
Encuadernador. to bind Books, vide Enquadernar. binding of Books,
Encuadernacion. a Book Printer, vide Printer. a note Book, vide Libro de
memoria. a little Book, vide Librillo. a Bookeseller, vide Librero. a Boorde,
vide Board. to lay a Board a ship, vide Abordar v'na nao, or Barloar. Boording
of a ship, vide Abordadura. Boots, vide Botas. a pair of Bootehose, vide
Calcetas. Booted, and wearing boots, vide Calcado de Botas. to go a
Bootehalling, vide Salir a correduras. Bootehalling, vide Correduria. by
Bootehalling, vide a Saco. Boothes, cabbins, or standings made in faires or
markets to sell wares, vide Tiendas. one that keeps a Booty, vide Botinero.
a Booty or pray, vide Botin. a Booy of an anchor, vide Boya. to Border upon,
vide Alindar. a Border of embroderie, vide Board. Borders or confines, vide
Comarca, Estremas, Alindes. a Borderer upon a coast, vide Comarcano. Bordering,
vide Alindando. to Bore or make an hole with an anger or other instrument, vide
Ataladrar, Horadar, Taladrar, Varrenar, Barrenar. a Borer, or he that boreth,
vide Barrenador, Taladrador. Bored or pierced, vide Ataladrado, Horadado,
Varrenado. to be Borne, vide Nacer. Borne or bred, vide Nacido. to be Borne or
carried, vide Ser Llevado. Borne or carried, vide Llevado. to be Borne down or
suppressed, vide Ser oprimido. Borne down, vide Oprimido. to be Borne withal
or suffered, vide Tolerarse, Sufrirse. to Borrowe, vide Emprestar, Prestado
tomar. Borrowed, vide Emprestado. to Borrowe money upon usury, vide Mohatrar,
Molatrar. Borrowing, vide Tomando en prestado. a Borrower, vide Hombre que toma
prestado. a Borough, vide Borough. a Bosom, vide Seno. to make Bosses, vide
Abollar. a Bosse or studde of a book, bridle, buckler, or girdle, vide
Bollones. Bossed, vide Abollado. a Bosse maker, vide Abollador. making of
Bosses, vide Abolladura. a Botch, vide Landre. to Botch, piece, mende, or
repair, vide Surzir. Botched, peeced, or mended, vide Surzido. a Botcher, vide
Remendon, Surzidor. a Botchers shop, vide Ropavejeria. Botching or mending,
vide Surzidura. Both, vide A'mbos, Entrambos. a Boteswaine, vide Comitre. a
little Bottle, or box, vide Botecica. a Bottle, vide Bota, Flarco, O'dre,
Zanges. a Bottle with hair on the inside, vide Borracha. a Bottle makers shop,
vide Odreria. a small Bottle, vide Cuerezico, Odrezillo. a great Bottle or
Flaggon, vide Flasco. the Bottom or foundation of a thing, vide Alhondon,
Fondon. Bottomless, or without bottom, vide Abismo. a Bottomless pit, idem.
a Bottom of thread or yarne, v. Ovillo. to wind on Bottoms, vide Ovillar. a
Boutcher, or butcher, vide Carnicero. a Bouget, bag, or male, vide Alforja
Costal, Maleta, Mochila. Bougets or bags, vide Arguenas. a water Bouget, vide
O'dre. a Bough or branch of a tree or herb, vide Rama, Ramo. a dead bough,
vide Ramon, Ramal. a little Bough, vide Ramilla. Bought, vide Buy. a Boule or
any thing that is round, vide Bola. Bowling, or playing at Bowls, vide Bolas.
a Boulster, vide Bolster. Boulted, vide Ahechado. a Boulter, vide Ahechador,
Cedaco. to Boult or sistcorne, vide Ahechar. to Bound or limite how far a
thing goes, v. Alindar, Amojonar, Deslindar, Lindar, Mojonar. the Bounds or
limits of a country, vide Alinde, Lindacos. a Boundstone, vide Mojon. Bounded,
bordered, or limited, vide Amojonado, Deslindado. Bounding or setting of
bounds, vide Deslindadura. Bownde, vide Coligado, Atado, Ligado. Bound in his
body, vide Estren^ido. Bound about the head, vide Entrapado. Bounty, vide
Bondad, Liberaldad. Bountifully, vide Liberalmente. to Bourde, vide Jest. a
Bourding or jesting word, vide Palabra de Mofa. a Bourder or iester, vide
Mofador, Burlador. to Bow or bend, vide Corcobar, Entortar, Torcer, Encorbar.
Bowed, vide Encorbado, Entortado, Torcido. Bowing, vide Encorbando, Entortando,
Torcendo. Bowingly, vide Encorbadamente. a Bow, vide A'rco. a raineBow, vide
A'rco del cielo. a crosseBow, vide Ballesta, Vallesta. a Bow wherewith they
play on a violl, vide Arquillo. a Bowman, or archer, vide Arquero. a Bowyer,
vide Arquero. a Bow case, vide Funda de A'rco. a Bowstring, vide Cuerda de
A'rco. a Bow net, vide Nasa, Nassa. the Bowels or entrals of man or beast, vide
Entran^as. a Bowl or footeball, vide Bola. to Boult, vide Cernir. Boulted,
vide Cernido. a Bough, vide Ramo. to cover with Boughs, vide Enramar. covered
with Boughs, vide Enramado. a Bounce, noise, or thumpe, vide Golpe, Porrazo.
to Bounce or thumpe, vide Porrear, or Dar Porrazo, Golpear. a Box tree, vide
Box arbol. to put in a Box, vide Encaxar. put in a Box, vide Encaxado. to
Box on the ears, vide Abofetear. Boxed, vide Abofeteado. a Box, vide Bote,
navecilla. a Box for a mariners compass, vide Bruxula, Buxula. a little
Box, vide Caxita, Caxilla, Buxeta. a Boy, vide Moco, Mochacho, Muchacho. to
become a Boy, vide Remocarse, Emmocecer. a little Boy, vide Mancebito, Mocito,
Mocuelo. a Booye of an anchor, vide Boya. to Boil or sees as cooks do, vide
Bullir. Boiled, vide Bullido. Boiling, vide Bullendo. a Boisterous fellow, vide
Terco. Boisterous weather, vide Tempestoso tiempo, Borrascoso.
B R
to Brabble, or braule, vide Renzillar, Varajar. a Brabble or skirmish, vide
Caramillo, or Baraja, Pun^as. Brabbling, v. Mote lastimero, Varaja, Renzilla. a
Brace coard in a ship, vide Braza. Bracelets at the hands, vide Ajorcas,
Axorcas, Braceletes. Bracelets to wear on the arms, vide Axorcas. a Bracelet,
v. Manilla, Manija, Mun^eca. to Brag, vide Desgarrar, Gloriarse, Jatarse. a
Bragger, vide Desgarron, Fanfarron, Glorioso. Bragging, vide Desgarro,
Fanfarroneria, Jatancia, Vana gloria. a Bragget, a stay cut out of stone or
timber to bear up the summer in mazonrie, called a Corbell: in timber work, a
Bragget, or shouldring piece, vide Canecillo. to Braye, bruise, pound, or
stamp, vide Desmenuzar. Brayed, pouned, or bruised small, vide Desmenuzado. a
Braying or brusing, vide Desmenuzadura. to Braye out, or cry out, vide
Rebosnar, Rebusnar, Rosnar. Braying, vide Rosnido, Rebusno. the Brain, vide
Celebro, Cerbelo, or Cervelo, Seso. the skin over the Brain, vide Pelicraneo.
the Brain pan, vide Craneo. to trouble the Brain, or make giddie, vide
Embarbascar. Braine-sicke, or wild brained, vide Fantastico. a Brake, vide
Fern. a Brake for flax or hemp, vide Agramador. a Bramble, or bryer, vide
carca. Brambles, vide Abrojos, Cambronera mata, Escambrones. a Branch, vide
Rejeton. a Branch cut off, vide Sarmiento. a Brande of fire, vide Tizon. a
Brand-iron, or treuet, vide Trevede. to Brandish, vide Blandear, or Blandir,
Vibrar. Brandished, vide Vibrado. a Brandishing or glistering, vide
Vibramiento. Branne, vide Afrecho, Cernidura, Farro, Salvados, Somas. Brased,
vide Acofarado. Brasill wood, vide Brasil. Brass, vide Bronze. Brass that may
be melted, vide Fussera. burnt Brass, vide Alhadida. Brass oar, vide Acofar.
a Brazen vessel, vide Caco de cobre. a Brasier, vide Calderero. a Brasiers
shop, vide Caldereria. Brast, vide Break. to be Brave, vide Galanear, or Hazer
de Galan. a Bravado, v. Brabada, Bravata, or Bravada. Bravery, or gallantnes,
vide Bizarria, Gala, Galanez. Brave and trim, vide Bizarro, or Bicarro, Galan.
Bravely, vide Galanemente. to Braule or chide with one, vide Altercar, Rifar,
Ren^ir. a Braule, vide Contienda, Rin^a. a Brawler or chider, vide Rifador,
Ren^idor. Brauling or chiding, vide Rifa, Rin^a. Braulingly, vide Rifadamente,
Ren^idamente. Brawne, vide Callo. to be Brawned like a boar, vide Encallecer.
hard as Brawne, vide Encallecido. Brawnie, vide Calloso. to Bray, vide Braie. a
Breach, vide Rotura. a Breach between men, vide Querella. a Breach in the
earth, vide Barranco. Bread, vide Pan. a cast of Bread, vide Mendrugo. Bread
corn, vide Civera. Bread made of bran, vide Pan de Afrecho. unleavened Bread,
vide Pan cenceno. vnranged Bread, vide Pan grancoso. store of Bread, vide
Panada. a hasty Bread in Spain, made as a hasty pudding in England, vide
Andada. simnell Bread, vide Pan de acemite. light Bread, vide Pan sponjoso.
soft Bread, vide Mollete. household Bread, vide Pan baco. spiced Bread, vide Pan
de especias. to Break, vide Aportillar, Cascar, Estallar, Quebrar, Quebrantar,
Romper, Tronchar. to Break vpground, vide Barbechar, or Barvechar. to Break
off, vide Romper. the day Breaks, vide Dispunta la man^ana. to Break the
reins of the back, vide Derrengar. a Breaker, vide Quebrador. Breaking, v.
Quebrantamiento, Rompimiento. Breaking of the back, vide Derrengadura. Broken
or burst, vide Aportillado, Quebrado, Quebrantado, Rompido, Tronchado. to
Break ones head, vide Descalabrar. Breaking of the head, vide Descalabradura.
he that has a Broken head, vide Descalabrado. a Breakefast, vide Almuerzo. a
Breame of the sea, vide Bezugo, or Besugo, cargo. a Breast, vide Pecho. to
resist with the Breast, vide Pechugar. to lean on the Breast, vide Repechar. a
Breast bone, vide Peco. a Breast Plate, vide Peto. to Breath, vide Acezar. to
be out of Breath, vide Desalentarse. to Breath or fetch wind, vide Espirar,
Resollar. to Breath after, vide Anelar, Resolgar, Respirar. the Breath or air,
vide Aliento, Espiritu, Lena. Breathed, vide Alientado. a Breathing place, vide
Espiradero. a Breathing, vide Acezo, Respiracion, Resuello. Breathles, vide
Desalentado. that Breaths, vide Acezoso. Breeches or slops, v. Calcones,
Bragas, cahones. one wearing Breeches, vide Bragado. to Breed or wax with
young, vide Empren^ar. to Breed or bring up, vide Criar. a Breeder, vide
Criador. Breeding, vide Crianca. Bred, vide Criado. Breadth, vide Broad. Brent,
vide Burn. Breuiatures, vide Breviaturas. a Breuiarie, vide Breviario. to
Bribe or corrupt with gifts, vide Cohecar. a Bribe, vide Cohecho, Hoque.
Bribed, vide Cohechado. a Briber, vide Cohechador. Briberie, vide Cohecho. a
Brick, or tile, vide Ladrillo. to paue with Brick, vide Ladrillar. paued with
Brick, vide Ladrillado. a little Brick, vide Ladrilejo. a Bricklayer, vide
Albani, or Albanil, Alvani, or Alvanil. a Brick-maker, vide Tejero. a
Brickewall, vide Pared de ladrillos. a Bride, vide Esposa, Novia. a Bridal, or
marriage, vide Boda, or Bodas. a Bridegroom, vide Esposo, Novio. a Bridge,
vide Puente. to make a Bridge, vide Puente hazer. a little Bridge of one board
or plancke, vide Ponton. a little small Bridge, vide Pontezuela. a Drawbridge,
vide Levadiza puente. Bridwell, vide Atahona, Tahona. a Bridle, vide Brida,
Freno. Bridled, vide Arrendado, Enfrenado. to Bridle, vide Arrendar, Enfrenar,
Frenar. a Bridle with a sharp bit, vide Coscoja. a Brideler, vide Enfrenador.
a Bridle-maker, vide Frenero. a Bridling, vide Enfrenadura. a Bries, a kind of
fly which makes beasts to gad, vide Moscarda. a Brief, vide Sumario. to be
Brief, vide Abreviar. Briefenes or brevity, v. Brevedad. Brief or short,
vide Breve. Briefly, vide Brevemente, Sumariamente. a Brier or bramble, vide
carca, Maleza. dog Brier, vide Eglantine. putting in the Briers, vide
Encarcamiento. a sweet Brier, vide Eglantine. a place full of Briers, vide
carcal. to put among Briers, vide Encarcar. a Brigandine or coat of maile or
fence, vide Cota de malla. a Brigantine, pinnase or small ship, v. Bergantine,
Fusta. to be Bright or to shine, vide Luzir, Resplandecer. Bright, shining,
vide Luzido, Luziente, Resplandeciente. Bright or clear, vide Claro, Eluzero.
to wax Bright, vide Clarescer. most Bright, vide Luzidissimo. Brightness, vide
Claridad, Resplandor. Bright shining or glistering, vide Esplendor. Bright,
vide Splendido. Brightly, vide Claramente. to make Bright, vide Clarificar,
Hazer luzido. the Brim of a chest, vide Orilla de caxa. Brimstone, vide Acufre,
or cufre. to smoke or to do with Brimstone, vide Acufrar, Azufrar. smoaked or
done with Brimstone, vide Acufrado. Brine, vide Salmuera. to Bring, vide
Acarrear. to Bring back, vide Reduzir. to Bring up, v. Criar, Nin^osacar,
Tutar. to Bring in, vide Entroduzir, Introduzir. to Bring forth young before
due time, v. Abortar. Bringing up of youth, vide Tutela. a Bringer, vide
Acarreador. to Bring forth young, vide Parir. Bringing forth before the time,
vide Movedura, Aborto. Bringing, vide Acarreadura. Bringing forth young, vide
Parto. Brought, vide Acarreadizo, Careado. Brought in, vide Introduzido. to be
ready to be brought to bed, v. Estar de parto. ill Brought up, vide Mal
criado. a young creature Brought into the world, or borne before due time, vide
Aborton. Brinke, vide Orilla. Brionie, vide Nueza. a Bristle, vide Cerda, Seda.
to Bristle or set up the bristles, vide Erizar. Bristly, or full of bristles,
vide Cerdoso. Bristled, or that has bristles on his back, vide Cerdoso.
Britanie in France, vide Bretan^a. Broad, vide A'ncho. to make Broad, vide
Hazer ancho. Breadth, vide Anchura. very Broad, vide Muy ancho. Broad
shouldered, vide Espaldido. Broadly, vide Anchamente. to Broach or tap, vide
Encentar. Broaching, vide Encentadura. Broached, vide Encentado. a Broach or
spit, vide Assador, Assadero. a Brocke or Badger beast, v. Castor, Bivaro. a
Broderer, vide Embroderer. to Broile, vide Hazer vna Carbonada. a Broile,
tumult, or let, vide Baraca, Alborote. Broken, vide Break. Broken backed, vide
Derrengado. a Broker, he that is a mean of a bargain betwixt two parties,
vide Tercero, Medianero, Corredor. a Broker that sells old apparel, vide
Ropavejero. a Bronde, vide Mark. a Brooch or ouch, vide Broncha. to sit on
Brood, vide Echar aves. a Brook or little river, vide Arroyo, Arroyuelo,
Corriente. a small Brook, vide Arroyuelo. Broom, vide Inhiesta. a Broom or
beesome, vide Escoba, Genista. a Broome-man, or seller of beesoms, vide
Escobadero, Escobero. Spanish Broom, vide Esparto. one that makes baskets of
such Broom, vide Espartero. Broth, vide Galloria, Menestra. a Brothell house,
or stews, vide Burdel, Puteria. Brothelry, vide Whooredome. a Brother, vide
Ermano, Hermano. to join in Brotherhood, vide Hermanar. Brotherhood, vide
Ermandad, Hermandad, Fraternidad. Brotherly, vide Ermanable, Ermanablemente,
Hermanablemente. Brought, vide Bring. Brought back, vide Reduzido. a Browe,
vide Frente. the eie-Browes, vide Cejas. the space between the eie-Browes,
vide Entrecejos. to make Brown, vide Embacar. made Brown, vide Embacado.
making Brown vide Embacadura. Brown colored, v. Baco, Prieto, Bruneto,
Bruno, Moreno, Morillo. Brown bread, vide Bread. to Browse, vide Roer. a
Browser, vide Roedor. a Browsing, vide Roedura. Browse or meat for beasts in
snow time, vide Roedura. to Bruise, or break small, vide Majar, Moler. Bruised,
brayed, or made small, vide Majado, Molido. Bruised or beaten together, v.
Abollado. a Brusing, vide Magulladura. a Brush, vide Escobetas, Escobillas,
Limpiaderas. to Brush, vide Limpiar. Brushed, Limpiado. Brutish, vide Brutal,
Bruto. to be Brutish, vide Embrutescer. to wax Brutish, vide Embrutescer. a
Brute or report, v. Fama. Bruted or reported, vide Divulgado.
B V
a Bubble of water, vide Ampolla de agua, Babuja, or Bexiga, Borbollon. to
Bubble up as water does in seething, v. Barbullar, Barbolear, Burbujar. a small
Bubble, vide Ampolleta. a swelling Bubble, vide Ampolla, Burbuja. a Bucke or
do, vide Ciervo, Cierva. a Buck-weell, vide We Will. a Bucket, vide Balde,
Messoria, Payla, Zaque. a Buckle or claspe, v. Hevilla. to Buckle, vide
Hevillar, Abrochar. Buckled or clasped, vide Abrochado, Hevillado. to Bucke
clothes, vide Wash. a Buckler, vide Clipeo, Rodela. a short and light Buckler
which the Affricanes and Spaniards do use, vide Adarga. one that uses such a
Buckler, vide Adargado. Buckram, vide Bocaci. a Budde, vide Renuevo. to Budde,
burgen or bloome, vide Abotonar los arboles, Brotar. the Buds of Roses or
flowers, vide Capulla de Rosa. Budded, v. Brotado, Abotonado. a Budding, vide
Renuevo, Abotonadura, Brotadura. a Budget, vide Bouget. a Buffet or blow,
Bofetada. to Buffet, vide Abofetear, Apun^ar, Apun^ear, Golpear. Buffeted, vide
Abofeteado, Golpeado. a Buffeter, vide Abofeteador. a Buffle, vide Bufalo. a
Bugge, or thing that fears children, Paparesolla, Trasgo. a Buggerer, vide
Bujarron. Buglosse, vide Buglosa yerva. to Build, edify or set up, vide
Edificar. Builded, vide Edificado. a Builder, vide Edificador. a chief
Builder, vide Architecto, or Architeto. Building, v. Edificio. skill to direct
men in Building, v. Architectura. to Build again, v. Reedificar. Builded
again, v. Reedificado. the Bulk of a man, v. Bulto. Bulked out, v. Abultado.
a Bulking out or huge bigness, v. Abulto. a Bull, v. Toro. a Bull baited, vide
Toro cossado, or Lidiado. a Bullbaiting, v. Cosso. the Popes Bull, v. Bula. a
little Bullet, v. Bollilla. a Bullet or pellet, v. Bala, Pelota, Pelotilla. a
Bullock, v. Bezerro grande. a Bulwark or strong hold or defense, v. Balvarte,
Bestion, or Reparo, Parapeto. Bullion to make money of, vide Billon, or Vellon.
a Bulrush, v. Junco. Bumbast or cotton, v. Algodon. to Bumpe out, v. Abultar. a
Bunch on the back, v. Corcoba, giba. one that has a Bunch on his back, vide
Corcobado, Gibado, Giboso. a Bunch of any thing, as garlic, onions, etc.
Riestra de ajos, cebollas. a Bunch or cluster of grapes, v. Razimo. a Bundle or
handful, v. Hace. a small Bundle, v. Hacecillo. a Bundle of papers, v. Legajo.
a Bundle or pack, v. Liaca. tied up in Bundles, v. Amanojada. a Bunghole of a
barrel, v. Can^illero, Agujero. a Bung or stopple, v. Tapon, Tapadero. a Bunne
or little manchet, v. Bun^uelo. a maker or seller of Buns, v. Bun^uelero.
Burage an herb, v. Borraja. to Burden or load, v. Cargar. to Burden or lay to
ones charge, or accuse, vide Acusar. a Burden, v. Carga, Peso. Burdened, v.
Cargado. Burdening, v. Cargando. Burdenously, or heavily, vide Pesadamente.
Burdenous, v. Pesado. a Burden of wood, v. Carga de len^a. to Burgen, or bud,
v. Abotonar los arboles. a Burges or a free man, v. Civdadano. a Burgonet, v.
Casco. a Burgonian or Wallon, v. Valon, or Borgon^on. to Bury, interre, or
entombe, v. Enterrar, Sepultar. a burial or funeral, v. Entierro, mortuorio,
Sepultura. Buried or enterred, v. Enterrado, Sepultado. a burier of dead
bodies, v. Enterrador. Burying or laying into the earth, v. Enterramiento.
Burly, v. Gross. to Burn, v. Arder, Quemar. to Burn brakes, v. Hornaguear.
to Burn the forehead, v. Bular la frente. Burned, burnt, or brent, vide
Abrasado, Ardido, Quemado. a Burner, v. Quemador. Burning, v. Ardiente. a
Burning coal, v. Brasa. Burning to coals, v. Abrasamiento. one that Burns
to coals, v. Abrasador. to Burnish or polish, vide Acicalar, Brun^ir.
Burnished, v. Acicalado, Brun^ido. a Burnisher, v, Brun^idor, Acicalador.
Burnishing, vide Acicaladura, Brun^idura. a Burre docke or clot burre, v.
Bardana, Lampaza. a Borough or town incorporate, vide Villa. a Borough
master, v. Regidor. a man that is Burst, v. Potroso. Burstnes, v. Potra. a Bush
of brambles or briers, v. carca. a Bush, v. Mata, Bren^a, Maleza. Bushes, v.
Matorales. a Bush of hair, v. Hair. a Bushel or strike, v. Hanega. a
Bushel, or two strikes, v. Hanega. to deal in Business, v. Negociar. a dealer
in Business, v. Negociador. Busied or occupied about a thing, v. Empleado.
Business or affairs, v. Negocio, Negociacion. a Buskin coming up to the calfe
of the leg, v. Coturno. a Buskin makers shop, v. Borzegumeria. a Buskin, v.
Borcegui, Boszegui. a Buskin maker, v. Borzeguinero. to Busse, v. Kiss. a
Bustard, v. Abutarda. But, v. Pero, Mas. a Butcher, v. Carnicero. Butchers
broom, v. Brusca. a Butler, v. Despensero, Botiller, or Botillero. a Buttrie,
vide Despensa, Botelleria, or Botilleria. a Butte or any great vessel for
wine, v. Bote, Ton^elado. a Butte or mark to shoot at, v. Terrero. Butting
together, v. Choque: to Butte one at another as rams do, vide Chocar. Butter,
v. Manteca. Butter milk, v. Leche de manteca. a Butterfly, vide Mariposa,
Mariposo, Pavelion. a Buttocke or hanch, v. Nalga. to beat the Buttocks, v.
Nalgar. a blow on the Buttocks, v. Nalgar. to Button, v. Abotonar, Hevillar.
Buttoned, v. Abotonado. Buttoning, v. Abotonadura. a Button, v. Abotonadura,
Boton. a Button hole, v. Ojal. a Button or a pair of foiles, v. Capatillo. a
Buttresse, prop or pillar whereby buildings are stayed up, v. Canecillo,
Canezillo. a smithes Buttresse wherewith he pareth horses hooues, v. Pujavante.
to Buy, v. Comprar, Mercar. Buying, v. Compra. a Buyer, v. Comprador. Bought,
v. Compradizo, Comprado. to Buzze, v. Zumbar. Buzzing, v. Zumbido, Zumbas.
Buzzing or humming, v. Azumbido. By, A par. By and by, v. Luego, Incontinente.
By it self, v. Por si. By turn, v. A vezes. By some manner of means or
reason, vide Por alguna via, Por alguna manera, Por alguna razon. By chance, v.
Porventura. By my faye, or in good sooth, v. A fe, Por cierto.
C
a CAbage, v. Colina, Colino, Repollo. a Cabanet or little cofer, v. Arquilla.
a Caberne or cabin in a ship, v. Aposento de nao. a Cabin used in faires or
markets, vide Boothes. a Cabin or cottage, v. Choca. a Cabin in a ship or else
where, vide Camarote. a Cable rope, v. Amarra, Cable, Gumera, Gumena, Maroma.
to Cackle as a hen does, v. Cacarear. a Cage to keep birds in, v Jaula. a
Cake, v. Bon^uelo, Torta. a fine Cake, v. Tortilla. Calamity, v. Calamidad. to
Calculate, v. Calcular. a Calendar or almanacke, v. Calendario, Almenac,
Almenaque. the Calends or first day of every month, v. Calenda, Calendas. a
great Calfe, v. Bezerro. a little Calfe, v. Bezerrillo, Ternero. the Calfe of
the leg, v. Pantorilla de pierna. Calfes snout an herb, v. Bezerra. to Call or
cry, v. Llamar. to Call back, v. Reclamar. Called, v. Llamado. Calling back,
v. Reclamacion. a Caller, v. Llamador. a Call for birds, v. Reclamo. a Calling
or crying out, v. Llamamiento. to be Calm, v. Calmar, Bonancar. Calmed, v.
Calmado. to Calm or quiet, v. Calmar, Bonancar Calm or quiet, v. Tranquillo.
a calm, v. Calma, Bonanca, Tranquilidad. Calmness, v. Abonanca, Bonanca.
Calmely, v. Tranquilamente. Caltraps made with four iron pricks so joined,
that being thrown down, one of them stands upright, vide Abrojos. Calves
foot, v. Aaron. a Cameleon, v. Cameleon. a Camel, v. Camelo. he that keeps
Camels, v. Camelero. a company of Camels, v. Camellada. a gray Camel, v.
Camelo pardal. a Camisado, v. Encamisada. a Cammocke or rest-harrow, v. Detiene
buey catillo. Camoise, v. Crooked. Camomill, v. Manginilla. to Camp or pitch
the camp, vide Acampar. a Camp, v. Campo. Camphire, the name of a gum, v.
Alcanfor, canfora. done or dressed with Camphire, vide Alcanforado. I Can, v.
Puedo. a Canapie such as hangs about beds, v. Paleo. a Canarie bird, v.
Canario. to Cancel, cut, or raze out, v. Anular, Anullar, Cancellar, Cassar,
Chancelar. Cancelled, v. Cassado, Borrado. a Cancelling, v. Cassacion. to make
Candles of tallow, v. Hazer velas. a Candle of wax, v. Candela. a Candle of
tallow, v. Vela. a little Candle, v. Candelica. a wax Candle, v. Candela. a
wax Candlestick, v. Cirial. a watch Candle, v. Vela. a Candlestick, v.
Candelero. a Candlestick of brass with many sockets, v. Almenara. to snuff a
Candle, v. Despavesar, Despavelar. Candle snuffers, v. Despaviladeras. the
snuffing of a Ca^dle, v. Despaviladura. Candlemas day, v. Candelaria, La
purificacion de nuestra Sen^ora. a Cane or reed, v. Can^a. a place or plot of
ground bearing Canes, v. Can^averal. one that pearceth with Canes, v.
Acan^avereador. a Cane or reed to fish with, v. Can^a de pescar. sweet Cane,
vide Acoro, Can^a dulce. pearsed or wounded with Canes or great reeds, v.
Acan^avereado. a Canker or worm so called, v. caraton, Cancer. a Canker or
sore, v. Cancer. a Canker called a pocke eating to the bone, v. Cancer. to be
Canker fretted, v. Enrranciarse. a Can or pot, v. Jarro. a Cannell, gutter or
channel, v. Reguero. Cannions of breeches, v. Can^on. to shoot off a Cannon,
v. Acanonear. a Canonier, v. Can^onero. a Cannon or piece of ordinance so
called, v. Can^on de batir. a Canon resident in cathedral churches, v.
Canonigo. a Canonship, v. Calongia. to Canonize or make a saint, v. Conanizar.
a Canonization, v. Canonizacion. Canonized, v. Canonizado. Cantharis a fly, v.
Abadejo. a Cantle or piece, v. Pedaco. Canuas, v. Can^amo. course Canuas, v.
Can^amazo. to Canuase or beat, v. Batir. to Canuase in a blanket, v. Mantear.
a Canuaser, v. Manteador. Canuased in a blanket, v. Manteado. Canuasing, v.
Manteadura. one that uses to Canuase in a blanket, v. Manteador. a Cap, v.
Bonete, Gorra. a Capper, v. Bonetero, Gorrero. Capable or fit to receive, v.
Capaz. Capacity or fitnes to take or receive, v. Capacidad. a Cape of a
garment, vide Cabecon, Cuello. a Spanish Cape, v. Capilla. to Caper, v. Hazer
cabriolas. a Caper or lofty trick in dancing, vide Capriola. Capers, a fruit
made in sallets, v. Alcaparras. a small or little bed of Capers, vide
Alcaparilla. like unto Capers, v. Alcaparrado. a bed where Capers grow, v.
Alcaparal. the stalk or tree whereon the Capers grow, v. Alcaparro. the
Capitol, a place in Rome, vide Capitolio. to Capitulate, vide Capitular.
Capitulated, vide Capitulado. Capitulation, vide Capitulacion. a Capon, vide
Capon. a Caponet, vide Caponcillo, Caponzillo. a Capuch, vide Caparuca. a
Capper, or capping, vide Cap. a Cappe, vide Gorra. a little Cappe, vide
Gorrilla. Capricorn, a sign, vide Capricornia. a Capston in a ship, v.
Cabrestante. a Captain, v. Capitan. to rule and govern as a Captain, v.
Capitanear. a Captainship, v. Capitania. a Captain among the Moors, vide
Aluchali. a Captain general, vide Capitan general. an Indian Captain, v.
A'pe, a Captain of horsemen, v. Capitan de cavallos. a Captainship over a
hundred, vide Centuriadgo. a Captain over a hundred, v. Centurio. the Captain
of the princes guard, v. Capitan de la guarda. the Captain of a galley, vide
Capitan de galera. Captiousnes, v. Reprocha, Reproach. a captious fellow. v.
Reprochador. Captious, v. Reprochador. Captiously, v. Reprochadamente. to
Captiuate, v. Captivar. a Captive, v. Captivo, Cativo. Captive, v. Cautivo.
Captivity, v. Captiverio, Cativerio, Catividad. a Carauell or swift bark,
vide Caravela. Carawaies, v. Grageas. the small seed or grain within
Carawaies, v. Alcarabea or Alcaravea. a Carbonado or meat broyled on the
coals, v. Carbonada. a Carbuncle or precious stone so called, v. Carbonco,
Carboncol. a Carbuncle or plague sore, v. Carboncol or Carbonco. a Carcanet or
tablet, v. Joyel. a Carcass, v. Carnacha, Mortesino. Cards to card wool or
such like withal, v. Cardas. a pair of Cards to play withal, v. Naypes,
Naipes. coat Cards, v. Figuras. a heart, v. Copa. a diamond, v. O'ro. a club,
v. Baston. a spade, v. Spada. the king, v. Rey. the queen, which is a
different Card from the English fashion, and is painted like a man on
horseback, and is called in Spanish Cavallo. the knave, v. Sota. the ace, v.
As, or Punto. the trumpe or turned up Card, vide Triumfo. the stock, v.
Barrajas. the dealer, v. Partidor or El que part. to Card wool, v. Cardar,
Carducar, Espadar. a pair of Cards to card or comb wool, vide Carcaderas,
Cardas. Carded, v. Cardado. a Carder, v. Cardador. Carding, vide Cardadura. a
sea Card, vide Carta de Marear. a Cardinal, vide Cardenal. a Cardinalship,
vide Cardinaladgo. to Care for, or have regard unto, vide Curar. Care or
regard, vide Congoxa, Cura. Care or diligence, vide Cura. carefulnes or
diligence, vide Solicitud. Careful, vide Cuytado, Congoxoso, Solicito.
Carefully, Congoxosamente, Solicitamente, Cuydadosamente. an herb called
Carawaies, vide Caravea. Carelesnes, vide Harragania, Negligencia. Careless or
negligent, vide Negligente. Carelessly or negligently, vide Negligentemente. to
Carry or bear, vide Acarrear. Carriage, vide Acarreo, Port. Carriage or
behavior, vide Crianca. Carried, vide Acarreadizo, Careado. a Carrier, vide
Acarreador, Requero, or Recuero. Carrying, vide Acarreadura. a friar Carmelite,
vide Carmelita. one of the order of Carmelites, vide Carmen. Carke or care,
vide Tomar, Cuydado. a Carle or churl, vide Mesquino, Avaro, Avariento.
Carnal, vide Carnal. Carnal copulation, vide Coito, or Coyto. Carnally, or
fleshly, vide Carnalmente. Carnation gilliflowers, vide Clavellinas. Carnation
color, vide Encarnada. Carobes, or Saint John's bread, vide Algarrova. a Carpe
fish, vide Carpa. to play the Carpenter, vide Carpentar. a Carpenter, vide
Carpintero. a Carpenters craft, vide Carpenteria. a Carpenters rule, vide
Cartabon de Carpintero. a Carpenters axe, vide Acuela de Carpintero. a
Carpenters squire, vide Esquadra de Carpintero. a Carpet, vide Alfombra,
Alhombra, Carpeta, Sobre mesa. a Carrake, or great ship, vide Carraca. a
Carre or carte, vide Carro. Carret roots, vide canahorias. a Carrire, ring, or
round circle, where they run with great horses, vide Carrera. to Carrouse in
drinking, vide Adautan bever, Tacear. a Carte, carre, wagon, or chariot, vide
Carreta. a Cart-loade, vide Carretada. a Carter or waineman, vide Carretero.
Cartership, vide Carreteria. Carting, vide Carretadura. the axe tree of a
Carte, vide E'xe de carro. a Cart tracke, or roat where the wheel makes a
sign in the ground where it has gone, vide Carril. a Cartwright, vide
Carretero, Carrero. a Carthusian or friar of that order, vide Cartuxano. to
Carue or grave, vide Esculpir. Carved, or graued, vide, Esculpido, Entallado.
Carved or engraven work, vide Entalladura, Escultura. a Caruer or grauer, vide
Entallador, Esculpidor. to Carue or grave, vide Entallar, Esculpir. Caruing,
Entalladura, Escultura. to Carue meat, vide Trinchar. a Caruer of meat, vide
Trinchante. a caruing knife, vide Cuchillo de Trinchante. to Carue as cockrels
are carved, vide Capar. a Case or matter, vide Caso. a Case in law, properly
that which rises in contention, vide Pleyto. putting in a Case, vide
Enfundadura. a Case to put in any thing, vide Funda. to put in a Case, vide
Enfundar. a Case of a Noune, v. Caso de nombre. in good Case, vide En buena
condition, En buena suerte. in no Case, in no wise, vide Por ninguna manera,
Por ningun modo, Por ninguna via. a Casement, vide Ventanilla, Bentanilla. to
Casheere or break up a company of soldiers, vide Cassar. a Casheerd
soldier, vide Cassado. a Casheerer, vide Cassador. Casheering, vide Cassacion.
a Caske or wine vessel, vide Vaso de Vino. put in a Casket, vide Encaxado. a
Casket or little cofer, vide Caxa. a soldiers Cassocke, vide Ropilla de
soldado. a Cassocke, vide Ropilla, Sayete. a Cassocke furred, vide Chamorra. to
Cast in a mould, vide Amoldar. put or Cast into a mould, vide Amoldado. to
Cast, hurl, throw, or fling, vide Alancar, Arrojar, Echar. one that Casts,
vide Arrojador. to Cast off, vide Abandonar. Cast off, vide Abandonado. Cast
out, vide Echadizo. to Cast out, vide Echar fuera. to Cast off, as to cast off
a garment, vide Desnudar. to Cast down, vide Aviltar. to Cast in ones teeth or
vpbraid one, vide Reprochar. Cast down, vide Abatido. to Cast account, vide
Account. Cast, hurled, thrown, and flung, v. Alancado. Cast off, vide
Abandonado, Desechado. a Cast or draught of a net, vide Echadura de red. to
Cast lots, vide Echar suertes. a Caster, vide Echador. Casting, vide Echadura.
a Caster down, or one that keeps under, vide Abatidor. a Casting down, vide
Abaxamiento. a Castle or fortress, vide Castillo. a little Castle, vide
Castillete. to shut in a Castle, vide Encastellar. shut in a Castle, vide
Castellado. Castigation, vide Castigo. Casual, vide Casual. a Catarract in the
eye, vide Catarrata de O'jos. a Catarre or rheum, vide Catarro. to Catch or
snatch, v. Arrebatar. Catching, v. Arrebatamiento. Catched, v. Arrebatado,
Rebatado. a Catcher, v. Arrebatador. to Catch hold on, v. Asir. to Catch in a
net, v. Enrredar. Catched or caught, v. Asido, Tomado. Catched or snatched, v.
Arrebatado. Catched or entangled among the briers, v. carcado, Encarcado. to
Catch or get unawares, vide Entresacar. Catching unawares, v. Entresacadura.
Catchpoles, v. Alguaziles. a Cater, v. Catiquero, Despensero. a Caterpiller, v.
Reboldon. a Catharre or rheum vide Catharro, Catarro, Rheuma. a Cathedral
church, vide Yglesia Catredal. Cathedral, vide Catredal. a Catholic, or he
which holds the true faith, vide Catolico, Catholico. Catholic or
universal, vide Catolico. a Catalogue, vide Catalogo. a Catife, vide
Miserable. a Cat, vide Gato. a wild Cat, vide Gato montez. pertaining to
Cattle, vide Boyuno, Cattle that draw or bear burdens, vide Bestias de Carga.
Cats-taile herb, vide Behordo. a Cave or den, vide Caverna, Caberna,
Espelunca, Gruta. full of Caves, vide Cavernoso. to put in a Cave, vide
Encobar. put in a Cave, vide Encobado. Caught or catched, vide Tomado, Asido.
to Cavil or wrangle, vide Calumniar, cauilar. a Cavil, v. Calumnia. a
Cauillation, v. Cavilacion. a Cauiller, v. Calumniador. a Cauilling, v.
Calumnia. a Cauldron, v. Caldera. a great Cauldron, vide Calderon, Caldero. any
thing that is sodden in a Cauldron, v. Calderada. the Caul or sewet, v.
Redan^o. a Caul for women's heads, v. Capileja de muger, Albanega. Caulme, or
Calm, v. Calma. to Cauke a ship, v. Brear, Calafetear. Cauked, Breado,
Calafeteado. to Cause, move or provoke, v. Causar. a Cause or occasion, v.
Causa, Ocacion. Caused, v. Causado. a Causer, v. Causador. Causing, v. Causa,
Ocasion. without Cause, v. Sin causa, Sin razon. not without Cause, v. Con
razon, No sin causa. a Causey or paued place, vide Calcada, Camino pisoneado. a
Cautell or crafty way to deceive, vide Cautela. a Caution, v. Caution, or
Caucion.
C E
to Cease or leave, vide Cessar, Dexar. Ceased, vide Cessado, Dexado. Ceasing,
vide Cessacion. Cedar, a tree, vide Alerze, Cedro. Celandine, vide Chelidonia.
to Celebrate, vide Celebrar. a Celebration, vide Celebracion. Celebrated, vide
Celebrado. Celidonie, vide Scrofularia. Celestial, v. Celestial. a Cell, v.
Celda. a Cellar, v. Cueva, Cantino, Bodega. a wine Cellar, v. Cueva de vino,
Cantina. to Cement or join together with lime, v. Cimentar. a Cement wherewith
stones are joined together, v. Cimiento. a Censer, v. Encensario. a Censour or
reformer of manners, vide Corrector. a Center, v. Centro. Centaurie an herb,
vide Centaurea, Centoria. a Centurion or captain, vide Centurion. a Ceremony,
v. Ceremonia. given to Ceremonies, v. Ceremonioso. to be Certain or manifest,
vide Manifestarse. Certain, v. Cierto. Certainly, vide Ciertamente.
Certainty, vide Certeza, Certinidad, Certidumbre. to Certify, vide
Certificar. Certified, vide Certificado. a Certificate, v. Carta para
certificar. white Ceruse or painting for women's faces, vide Aluayalde. painted
with Ceruse, vide Aluayaldado. to Cesse, tax, or levy, vide Taxar. Cessed,
vide Taxado. a Cesser, he that valueth how much a man is worth, vide Taxador.
a Cesterne to put water in, vide Algibe, or Algive, Cisterna. a Cesterne cock,
or the teate of a cesterne by which the water runs, v. Can^o.
C H
a Chase at tennis, v. Chaca. to Chafe, fret or fume, v. Enojar, Ayrar,
Amohinar. Chafed, v. Amohinado, Ayrado. Chafing, v. Mohino, Enojo. a Chafer or
chafing dish, v. Braserillo. Chafe, vide Tamo, Grancas, Paja, Grancones.
Chaffie or unclean, v. Grancoso, Tamoso, Pajoso. to Chaffer, or buy and sell,
v. Contratar, Comprar, Vender. Chaffer, or merchandise, v. Contratacion,
Compra, y Venta. to Chain, or to tie with chains, vide Aherrojar, Encadenar.
Chaining, vide Encadenadura. a Chain, vide Cadena. a little Chain, vide
Cadenilla. Chained, vide Aherrojado, Encadenado. a Chain of gold, vide Collar
de hombros. a Chair, vide Catedra, Silla. a Chair maker, vide Sillero. to
Challenge, as when one chalengeth another into the fields, vide Acampar,
Bravear, Desafiar. a Challenge, v. Cartel, Bravada, Bravata, or Brabada,
Desafio, Repto. Challenged, v. Desafiado. Challenged into the fields, v.
Acampado. a Chalenger, v. Desafiador. a Chalice, v. Caliz. Chalk, v. Call.
Chalkie or full of Chalk, vide Lleno de Call. a Chamber, v. Camara. a little
Chamber or study, v. Camareta, Camarilla. a groom of the Chamber, vide Cama-
a Chamber fellow, vide Compan^ero de Camara. a Chamberlain, vide Camarero. a
Chamber maid, Camarera. a Chamber pot, vide Vrinal. Chamblet, vide Chamelote.
rero. Chamelion, an herb so called, vide Cameleon. a Chamfering, chancelling,
or making hollow, vide Ahuecadura. to Champe, vide to Chewe. a Champion, vide
Campion. Champion or plain ground, vide Campan^a. to Chance by hap, v.
Entrevenir. a Chancellor of the Exchequer, v. Contador mayor. the Chancell of a
church, v. Capilla de yglesia. a Chancellor, v. Chanciller. the Chancerie, v.
Chancilleria. a Channel, cannell or gutter, v. Canal. made with gutters or
Channels, vide Acanalado. the Channel of a river, v. La Madre del rio. to Change
one thing for another, or to exchange, v. Demudar, Recambiar, Contratar,
Trocar. to Change or exchange, v. Cambiar, Permudar, Permutar, Trocar. a
Change, v. Cambio, Permudacion, Trueco. Change, v. Alteracion, Encambio,
Mudanca, Recambio. Changed, v. Alterado, Cambiado, Demudado, Mudado, Trocado. a
Changer, v. Cambiador, Trocador. Changing, v. Mudamiento, Cambiadura, Trueco.
Changeable in words or deeds, v. Variable, Mudable. Changeable or inconstant,
v. Alterable, Mudable, Variable. Changeable of color, v. Color vario.
Changeably, v. Mudablemente, Alterablemente, Variablemente. a Change of money,
or bank, v. Cambio, Vanco. a Chanon of a church, v. Canonigo. Chanonship, v.
Calongia. a Chanter in a church, v. Chantre. a Chantership, v. Chantria. to
Chap, chinke or gape, v. Resquebrajar, Hender, Quebrar, Abrir. a Chap or
chinke, v. Resquebrajo, Hendedura, Quebradura, Rotura, Abertura. a Chap of the
ground, vide Resquebrajadura, Resquebrajo, Hendidura, Abertura, Quebradura.
Chaps or cliftes in the hands or other parts of the body made by cold, v.
Grietas. Chapped or chinked, v. Resquebrajado, Hendido, Quebrado, Abierto. a
Chape, as the chape of a scabberd, vide Contera. a Chaplain, v. Capellan. a
Chaplains place or office, vide Capellania. a Chapman, vide Comprador,
Mercader. Chapmanship, v. Mercancia, Contratacion. a Chapel, v. Capilla,
Zimborio. a little Chapel, v. Capellina. to distinguish by Chapters, vide
Destinguir por capitulos, or Parafos. a Chapter, vide Capitulo, Obelo. a
Chapterhouse, vide Capitulo. a Character, vide Carater. Charcoale, vide Carbon.
Seacoale, v. Turba. to Charge or command, vide Cargar, Encargar, Dar en cargo,
Mandar. a Charge or commandment, v. Cargo. Charged or commanded, v. Encargado,
Encomendado. to Charge or burden, v. Cargar. a Charge, v. Carga or Cargo.
Charged or laden with, v. Cargado. a Charger, v. Cargador. Chargeably, v.
Cargadamente. to take Charge over any thing, v. Tomar cargo, Encargarse.
Charged or accused, v. Reo, Cargado, Acusado. to lay to ones Charge, v. Acusar,
Imponer. laid to ones Charge, vide Acusado, Impuesto. Charge, cost or
expenses, v. Costa, or Expensa. a Charger or great platter, vide Plato grande
or Platon. Charie or wary, v. Vigilante, Cuidadoso. a Chariot, v. Carro. he
that drives a Chariot, v. Carretero. a Chariot maker, vide Carrero, Carretero.
Charity, v. Caridad, Charidad, Misericordia, Piedad. Charitable, v.
Caritativo, Piadoso. to Charm or enchant, v. Encantar, Ensalmar. a Charm or
enchantment, v. Encantamiento, Ensalmo. a Charmer he or she, v. Encantador,
Ensalmador, Saludador. a Charming or enchanting, v. Encantamiento, Ensalmadura.
a Charnell house, v. Hossario, Honsario, Osario. a Chase at tennis, v. Chaca. a
Chase or forest, v. Floresta. to Chase or hunt, v. Cacar. a Chaser or hunter,
v. Cacador. Chasing or hunting, v. Caca. to Chase or drive away, vide Abentar,
Echar fuera, Aventar, Ahuyentar. Chased out, vide Ahuyentado, Echado fuera,
Abentado, Aventado. Chaste, v. Casto, Continente. Chastity, v. Castidad,
Continencia. Chastely, v. Castamente, Continentemente. to Chastise, v.
Castigar, Punir, Hostigar, Corregir. Chasticed, v. Castigado, Punido,
Hostigado, Corregido. a Chasticer, vide Castigador, Punidor, Hostigador,
Corrector. Chasticement, v. Castigo, Correcion, Punicion, Hostigadura. to
Chatte or talk many words, vide Prate. to Chatter, v. Gorgear. to Chatter
like a crow, v. Grasnar. a Chatterer, v. Gorgeador. Chattering, v.
Gorgeamiento. a Chauldron, v. Cauldron. to Chance or happen, v. Acaecer,
Acontecer, Succeder, Avenir. that happens by Chance, v. Contingible,
Acontecido, Acaecido, Avenido, Succedido. it Chances, v. Acaece, Acontece,
Aviene. a Chance, v. Acaecimiento, Caso, Acontecimiento, Successo. Chance, v.
Fortuna, Suerte, Hado. a good Chance, v. Dicha, Buena fortuna, Buena estrella,
Buen hado, Felicidad. an ill Chance, v. Desdicha, Infelicidad, Infortunio,
Desgracia, Desventura. Chauncing or coming by chance, v. Acidental, A caso,
Inopinadamente. by Chance, v. a Caso, Acidental, Inopinadamente. Chanced, v.
Acaecido, Acontecido, Acontescido, Succedido, Avenido. a Chauncell of a church
where none but priests come, v. cimborio, Capilla de yglesia. a Chancellor,
vide Cancellario, Chanciller. a Chauncellourship, v. Cancilleria. the
Chauncerie, v. Cancilleria. the Chauncerie office, v. Cancilleria. a Chaundler,
v. Velero. a wax Chaundler, v. Cerero. a Chaunter or chief singer, v.
Chantre. to Chawe or chew, v. Mascar. to make good Cheap, v. Abaratar. good
Cheap, v. Barato. one that sells good Cheap, v. Baraton. Cheapenesse, v.
Barato. Cheapely, v. Barato. to Cheer or make cheerful, v. Avivar, Abivar,
Regalar. Cheer, v. Xira, buena Xira. Cheared, v. Avivado, Abivado, Regalado.
let us make good Cheer, v. A'nde la loca, Hagamos buena Xira. Cheerful or
pleasant, v. Jocondo, Alegre, Contento, Regozijado, Gososo, Risuen^o.
Chearefulnes, v. Alegria, Contento, Regozijo, Goco Gozo, Risuen^o. Chearefully
or lively, v. Alegramente, Regozijadamente, Gozozamente, Risuen^amente. to make
good Cheer, v. Hazer buena Xira, Festijar, Banquetear, Vanquetear. to Check
or taunt, v. Ren^ir, Increpar, Reprehender, Reprochar. a Check or taunt, v.
Oprobrio, Renzilla, Increpacion, Reprehencion, Reproach. Checked or taunted, v.
Ren^ido, Increpado, Reprehendido. the Check at chesse, v. Xaque. a Checker, v.
Escaques. to make Checker work, vide Escaques hazer. Checker work, v.
Escaques. made Checker wise, v. Hecho en Escaques. a Cheek, v. Carillo,
Bouchette, Mexilla. the Cheeks, v. Mexillas, Carillos. Cheek teeth, v.
Muelas. Cheese, v. Queso. Cheese rennet or the renning which turns milk into
curdes, v. Quajo. a Cheese press, v. Prensa de queso. a Cheese fat, v. Cincho.
a Cheese monger, v. Quesero. Chief, v. Principal, Summo, Mayor, El mas
Preheminente. the Chief of any authority, v. Principal. Chiefly, principally,
vide Mayormente, Principalmente. a Cherie, v. Ambrunesa, Cereza. a sower
Cherie, v. Guinda. a Cherie tree, v. Cerezo. a Cherrie stone, v. Cuexco de
cereza. to Cherish, v. Regalar, Abrigar. Cherished, v. Abrigado, Regalado,
Apascentado, Fomentado. a Cherisher, v. Fomentador, Abrigador, Regalador. a
Cherishing, v. Caricia, Fomentacion, Abrigo, Regalo. to play at Chesse, v.
Escaquear, or Jugar al axedrez. Chesse play, v. Algedrez, Axedrez, Escaque. a
Chesse board, v. Tablero. Chesse men, v. Trebejos. a Chesse man, v. Trebejo. to
Chest dead bodies with spice and sweet ointments, v. Embalsamar. he that
Chesteth dead bodies with spice and sweet ointments, v. Embalsamador. a
Chesting dead bodies with spice and sweet ointments, v. Embalsamadura. a Chest
wherein dead bodies are carried, v. Ataud. a great Chest with drawing boxes in
it, v. Caxon, Arcaz. the till of a Chest, v. Caxon de arca. a Chest or cofer,
v. A'rca, Arcas, Arcaz, Caxa. one that puts in a Chest, vide Encaxador. to
put in a Chest, v. Ahuchar, Encaxar. put into a Chest, vide Encaxado, Ahuchado.
a Chest or cofer maker, v. Caxero. a little Chest, v. Arquilla, Caxuela. a man's
Chest or breast, v. Las arcas. one that is hollow Chested, v. Hueco en las
arcas. a Chestin or chest nut, v. Castan^a, Marone. a kind of great Chest nut
called a marron, v. Marrone. a Chest nut tree, v. Castan^o. a grove of Chest
nut trees, v. Castan^al. made of Chestnut trees, v. Hecho de Castan^os. a bay
Chestnut color, vide Castan^a color. Cheuerill, v. Byrsa. to Chew meat, v.
Mascar, Mastigar. Chewed or chawed, v. Mascado, Mastigado. Chewing or chawing,
v. Mascadura, Mastigadura. to Chew the cud, v. Rumear. a Chibboll, vide
Cebollino, Cevollino. the blade of a Chibboll, vide La hoja de Cebollino.
Chiche pease, v. Galgana. a Chicke or chicken, v. Pollo. to breed Chicken, v.
Empollar. hatching of Chickens, vide Empollamiento. a brood of young Chickens,
v. Nidada de Pollos. Chickweede, v. Alsine. to Chide or rebuke, v. Ren^ir,
Reprehender, Reprovar. Chidden, v. Ren^ido, Reprehendido, Reprovado. a Chider,
v. Ren^idor, Reprehensor, Reprovador. a Chiding, vide Ren^adura, Reprehencion,
Reprovadura. Chidingly, v. Ren^idamente, Reprehendidamente. a Chilblaine, vide
Friera, Saban^on. a Child, vide Nin^o. to be with Child, vide Estar pren^ada.
to wax a Child again, or play the child vide Nin^escer. to play the Child,
vide Nin^ear. a little Child, vide Ninhito. a Childish toy, vide Nin^eta.
Children, vide Nin^os. a Child borne before his time, vide Abortivo. a
fatherles Child, vide Huerfano. a Child newborn, vide Nin^o rezien nacido.
Child bearing, or the deliverance of a child, vide Parto. a woman lying in
Childebed, vide Parida. to get with child, vide Empren^ar. great with Child,
vide Pren^ada. Childehood, vide Nin^ez. Childishnes, vide Anin^amiento.
Childishly, vide Anin^adamente. to Chill or shake with cold, vide Temblar de
frio. Chilnes with cold, vide Frio. a Chimney, vide Chimenea. a Chimney
sweeper, vide Desollinador. the Chine of a man or beast, vide Espinazo. the
Chine of a fish, vide Espina de piece. to Chinke as the ground does, vide to
chappe, Hender, Resquebrajar, Abrir. to stop Chinkes, vide Estopar costuras, or
Aberturas. a Chinke or breach, vide Abertura, Costura. a Chinke, crannie, or
cleft, vide Abertura, Costura, Juntura. a Chinne, vide Barba, or Barva,
Barbilla, Barvilla. great Chinned, vide Barbudo, Barvudo, Barbilludo,
Barvilludo. a Chip, vide Raja. Chipped work, vide Engaste. to make Chipped
work, vide Engastonar. to Chip with an axe, vide Dolar. Chippes to kindle
fire, vide Astillas. a Chip or that which is hewn, vide Brezna, Astilla. to
Chirpe as a sparrowe or other birds, vide Cantar, Cherriar, Chirriar. to
Chirpe as a cricket, vide Grillar. a Chirping or singing of small birds, vide
Canto, Cherriadura, Grasnido. one that Chirpeth, vide Cherriador. a Surgeon,
vide Cirugiano, Cirurjano. Chirurgerie, vide Cirugia. a Chisell, vide Gurbias.
a Chitterling, vide Tripas, Pancha. Chivalry, v. Proeza, Hecho de armas. a
Choice, vide Elecion, Escojencia. to Choke or strangle, vide Ahogar. Choked or
strangled, vide Ahogado. a Choker, vide Ahogador. a Choking, vide Ahogamiento.
Choler, vide Colera. Choleric, vide Colerico. a Choleric man, vide
Colerico. without Choler, vide Flematico, Sin colera. to Choose, elect, or make
choice of, vide Elegir, Escoger. Chosen, vide Eleto, Electo, Elegido, Escogido.
Choice or election, vide Elecion, or Election, Escogimiento. to Choppe or cut
off, vide Cortar. to Chop or change, vide Cambiar, Trocar, Debolver. a Chopping
knife, vide Machete. a Chough or dawe, vide Graja, Grajo, Corneja. a Cough,
vide Toss, or Tos. Chrisme, or holy anointing oil, vide Crisma. Crystal,
vide Cristal. of Crystal, vide Cristalino. a glass of Crystal, or a
cristall looking glass, vide Espejo de cristal. Christ our only anointed
Lord and Savior, vide Cristo. Christendom, or christianity, vide
Cristiandad. a Christian, vide Cristiano, Christiano. Christendom, vide
Christiandad. to Christen or baptize, vide Baptizar, Bautizar. Christmas day,
vide Navidad, Pascua de navidad, Nascimiento. Chronicles, vide Cronicas,
Chronicas, Coronicas. a Chronicle, vide Coronica, Chronica, Historia. one that
writes Chronicles, vide Coronista, Historiador. Chrisocolla, wherewith
goldsmiths solder their gold, vide Chrisocolla. a Church or temple, vide
Templo, Yglesia. the Church or congregation of people in the faith of Christ,
vide Congregation, Yglesia. a Church porch, vide Portal de Yglesia. a
Churchyard, vide Cementerio, Cimenterio. Churlish, vide Mohino. Churlishnes,
vide Mohina, Mohinas. Churlishly, vide Mohinamente. a Churl or carle of the
country, vide Rustico, cafio. Churlishnes or rudenes of country carles, vide
Rusticidad. Churlishly or clownishly, vide Rusticamente, cafiamente. to Choose
or to choose, vide Elegir, Escoger.
C I
a Cickle or hook used to reap corn with all, vide Hoce. Cider a kind of
drink made of apples, vide Cidra. Cilerie work or the heads of pillars or
posts, and made as cloth or leaves turning diverse ways, vide obra de
Silleria. a Cimball, vide Chapas. Cinnamon, vide Canela. a Cinnamon tree, vide
Canelon. to Cipher or use ciphers or abreuiations in writing, vide Cifrar. a
Cipher used in numbering, vide Cifra, Zero. Ciphred, vide Cifrado. Cipres, or
any fine linen, vide Toquilla. white Cipres, vide Espumilla. a grove of Cypres
trees, vide Cipresal. Cipres the wood or tree, vide Cipres. to make a Circle,
vide Hazer circulo. a Circle or round compass, vide Circulo, Cerco. a Circle
about the moon, vide Cerco de luna. the antarticke Circle, vide Antartico
polo. a circle of iron, vide A'ro. a Circle of iron about a buckler, vide A'ro
de Broquel. a Circle which is called the Horizon, vide Orizon. Circle wise,
vide Circularmente. to Circuit or compass about, vide Circuyr, Cercar,
Rodear. a Circuit or compassing about, vide Cerco, Circuito. Circularly, vide
Circularmente. to Circumcise, vide Circuncidar. Circumcised, vide Circuncidado.
Circumcision, vide Circuncision. a Circumference, or round compass about a
center, vide Circumferencia. a Circumlocution, as when one word is expressed
by many, v. Circumlocucion. to be circumspect or wary, vide Cauto ser.
Circumspect, vide Cauto, Circumspeto, Recatado, Prevenido, Remirado.
Circumspection, vide Recato, Remiramiento, Prevencion. Circumspectly, vide
Recatadamente, Remiradamente, Prevenidamente. a Circumstance or quality that
accompanies any thing, as time, place, and such like, vide Circunstancia,
Dependencia. to Circumuent, vide Circunvenir. a pair of Cisers, vide Tigeras,
Tijeras. to Cite, call, or summon, vide Citar. Cited, vide Citado. a Citation,
vide Citacion. a City or town walled, vide Cibdad, or Civdad. a little City,
vide Civadadeta, Civdad pequen^a. a City or town incorporate, v. Civdad,
Villa. a populous city, vide Civdad poblada. dwelling in a City, v. Vezino de
Civdad, Civdadano. a Citizen, vide Ciudadano. Citizen-like, v. Como ciudadano,
Semejante a ciudadano, Ciudadanamente. a Cittadell, v. Castillo, Ciudadela. a
Citterne, vide Citola, Citara. a player on a Citterne, v. Tan^edor de citara. a
Citterne-maker, v. Citolero. a Citron, or Limon, v. Limon. Ciuet, a sweet
powder so called, vide Algalia. Civil, or belonging to a city, v. Civil.
Civil or gentle, v. Civil, or Cibil. very Civil, vide Muy civil. Civility,
vide Civilidad. Ciuilly, v. Civilmente.
C L
a mill Clacke, or such like, v. Citola de molino. Clad or clothed in cloth,
v. Vestido. Claie or mortar, vide Barro, Cenagal. potters Claie, v. Arzilla.
fullers Clay, vide Greda. Claie ground, vide Cenagoso. Clamor, v. Clamor,
Bozeria. Clamorous, vide Clamoroso. to Clap hands, v. Palmear. Clapping of
hands, v. Aplauzo. Clapping or striking with the hand, v. Palmada. Clapping of
the wings, vide Herida de las alas. a Clapper, or he that clappeth the hands
for joy, v. Palmeador. the Clapper of a bell, v. Badajo. the Clapper of a
mill, v. Citola. Claret wine, v. Vino clarete. Clarie, vide Clarea. to
Clarify, or make clear, v. Clarificar, Aclarar, Purificar. Clarified or made
clear, v. Clarificado, Purificado, Aclarado. Clarifying, v, Clarificacion,
Purificacion, Aclaramiento. Claricordes, or instruments so called, v.
Clavicordia. a Clarke of the church, v. Sacristan. a writing Clarke, vide
Escriviente. a Clarke of the market, v. Regidor. the Clarke of a kitchen, vide
Catiquero, Despensero. a Claspe, v. Abotonadura, Corchete de vestidura, Brocha,
Broche, Hevilla. to Claspe together, v. Abotonar, Abracar, Hevillar. to Claspe
with the arms, vide Abarcar, Abracar. a little Claspe, vide Hevilla. Clasped,
vide Abotonado, Atado. Clasped in the arms, v. Abracado. Clasping, vide
Abracadura, Abracamiento. one that Claspeth in his arms, vide Abracador.
Clasping in the arms, v. Abracada, Abracamiento, Abracadura. to Clatter, to
chat or babble, v. Repicar. Clattring, v. Repiquete. a Clause, vide Clausula. a
Clause or article, vide Clausula, or Articula. a Claw, vide Branca. to Claw,
rub or scratch, v. Aran^ar, Escoplear. Clawed, vide Aran^ado. a Clawer, vide
Aran^ador. Clawing, v. Aran^adura. the Claws of a fish bending in like hooks,
as in a crab, v. Bracos, Tenazas. a Clawebacke, vide Adulador. a Clayish place,
v. Barrial. full of Clay, v. Barriento, or Barroso. Clean, v. Limpio, Mundo,
Barrido, Escombrado. to make Clean, v. Alimpiar, Descocar, Escombrar,
Clarificar, Mundar. to Cleanse or purge by sacrifice or prayer, vide Immolar.
made Clean, v. Alimpiado, Clarificado, Escombrado, Mundado. a Cleanser, vide
Alimpiador, Clarificador, Escombrador, Mundador. a making Clean, purging or
cleansing, v. Alimpiadura, Mundadura, Escombradura, Limpieza. a maker Clean or
purger of priuies, vide Limpion. Cleanely, v. Limpiamente, Escombradamente.
Cleanlines, or cleanenes, vide Limpieza, Mundadura, Escombradura. Clean or
neat, vide Limpio, Polido, Mundo. Cleanely or neately, v. Limpiadamente, or
Limpiamente, Lindamente. to Clear, vide Aclarar, Hazer limpio. to Clear
himself, v. Descargarse, Purificarse, Disculparse. Cleared, v. Aclarado, Hecho
limpio. Cleared from, vide Descargado, Disculpado. Clearing, vide Aclaracion.
Cleerenes from any fault, Descargo, Purificacion, Disculpa. Clear or bright,
vide Claro, Limpio, Puro. to make Clear, fair, or bright, vide Clarificar,
Aclarar, Purificar. to wax Clear, v. Clarescer. Cleerenes or brightness, vide
Claridad, Clareza. Cleernes of the day, air, or weather, vide Claridad del
dia. Clear firmament without clouds, vide Firmamento claro, or Sereno. Clear
that one may see and look through, vide Diafano. very Clear, v. muy Claro,
muy Limpio, muy Puro. very Clearly, v. muy Claramente, muy Limpiamente, Con
mucha, Pureza. Clear or manifest, vide Claro, manifesto, Patente, Abierto. to
make Clear or apparent, vide Aclarar, Sacar en Limpio. it is Clear or
apparent, v. Claro es, Manifiesto es, Patente esta. Clear weather, vide
Abonanca, Bonanca. Clearly, plainly, or manifestly, v. Claramente,
manifestamente, Abiertamente. Clear of sight, v. Claro de ojos. to Cleave,
cut, or divide, vide Hender, Rajar, Partir, Revanar, Dividir. to Cleave with
wedges, v. Acun^ar. Cleaving or sticking to, v. Asido. a Cleaving or cleft, v.
Hendido, Hendiendo, Partiendo, Dividiendo. the Cleft of a pen, v. Hendidura de
pluma. Cleft or cloven, vide Hendido, Rajado, Partido, Dividido. to Cleave as a
tree shaken with the wind, or as the ground cleaves, v. Hender, Resquebrajar,
Abrir. a Cleft in a tree, or in the ground, v. Hendidura, Resquebrajo,
Abertura. to Cleave asunder, vide Abrir, Hender, Resquebrajar. to Cleave or
stick fast to, v. Pegar. to Cleave together, vide Pegar uno con otro. Cleaving
hard to, vide Pegadura. a Cleaving to, v. Pegadura. Clemency or gentleness, v.
Clemencia, Piedad, Misericordia. the Clergy, vide Clerezia. a Clerkeship, v.
Clericato. a Clewe of thread, v. Obillo, Ovillo. a Client, vide Pleyteante. a
Clift, or cliffe, or rock, vide Ribera alta, Pen^a, Pen^asco. a Clift or
cleft, vide Hendidura, Abertura, Resquebrajo. a Climate or portion of the
world, vide Clima. to Climb or get up, v. Escalar, Subir. a Climber, vide
Escalador, Subidor. Climbed, vide Escalado, Subido. a Climbing, vide Escalada,
Subida. to Clinch, vide Enclavijar. Clinched, vide Enclavijado. to Clippe
about, as to clippe about the neck, or to coll, vide Abracar. Clipped or
colled, vide Abracado. a Clipping or colling, vide Abraco. to Clip or sheare,
vide Tresquilar. Clipped or shorn, vide Tresquilado. a place where they use to
clippe or sheare, vide Tresquiladero. that may be Clipped or shorn, vide
Tresquiladizo. a Clister or washing purgation, vide Cristel, Ayuda. a Cliuer,
or butchers axe, or chopping knife, vide Cuchilla, Pun^al. that may be Cliuen,
vide Hendible. Cliuen in sunder, v. Dehendido, Hendido. to Cliue in pieces,
vide Cachear, or Cachar, Dehender, Hender. Cliuing in sunder, vide
Dehendimiento, Hendidura. to Clock like a hen, vide Cloquear. a Clocke-hen, or
any brooding bird, vide Clueca. the Clocking of a hen with chickens, vide
Cloquido. a Clock, vide Relox. a Clock maker, vide Reloxero. a Clock keeper,
vide Reloxero. a Clod or clot, vide Terron. Cloddie, or full of clods, vide
Terronoso. a Clogge hanged about a dogs neck, or about a boys leg that
runs away, vide Corma. Clogged, or that wears a clogge, vide Quitiene,
Lleva, or Trae corma. to Cloie or glut, vide Fastidiar. Cloied or glutted, vide
Fastidiado. a Cloister, vide Claustra, Claustrio. a little Cloister, vide
Claustro pequen^o. to Cloak, cover, dissemble, or conceal, v. Cubrir, Callar,
Dissimular, Encubrir. Cloked, covered, or concealed, vide Cubierto, Encubierto,
Dissimulado, Callado. a Cloking, covering, or concealing, vide Encubridura,
Cubertura. to Cloak or put on a cloak, vide Poner la capa, Cubrir la capa. to
hide under the Cloak, vide Acapar, Palear. hid under the cloak, vide Acapado,
Paleado. Cloked or clad in a cloak, vide Encapado. a Cloak, vide Capa,
Herreruelo. a Cloak which has a hoode, vide Capa Castellana. a spanish Cloak,
vide Capa Castellana. a short dutch Cloak, vide Capotillo. a thread bare Cloak,
vide Capa rayda. to take out of a Clokebagge, vide, Desvalijar. taken out of a
clokebagge, vide Desvalijado. a Clokebagge, or bag, vide Balija, Valija,
Mochila, Portamanteo, Maleta, Manga. Cloked or covered with a cloak, vide
Encapado. to Close or shut, vide Cerrar. to Close in, vide Cerrar dentro. to
Close or stop in, v. Afirmarse, Juntarse. to close up a letter, vide Cerrar
v'na carta, Sellar v'na carta. Close by, vide Cerca, Junto, Apar. to Close
together, vide Apin^ar. Close together, vide Apin^ado. to keep Close in, vide
Encerrar. Closed in round about, vide Cercado, Rodeado. Closed in or about as
being besieged, vide Rodeado, Cercado. Close or hidden, vide Escondido,
Secreto, Oculto. a close stool, vide Servicio. Closely or covertly, vide
Disfracadamente, Secretamente. Closed, vide Cerrado. Close, secret or unknown,
vide Secreto, Cubierto. a Closet, vide Camareta. to Clot like cold blood, vide
Engrumecer, Quajar. to Cloth, apparel, arraie, or attire, vide Arropar,
Vestir. Clothed or clad, vide Arropado, Vestido. Clothed in black mourning
apparel, vide Vestido de Luto. Cloth, vide Pan^o. Cloth died in grain, vide
Entrapado pan^o. a linen Cloth, vide Lienco. Clothed with a furred cassocke,
vide Enchamarrado. to Cloth in a furred cassocke, vide Enchamarrar. a sear
Cloth, which being anointed over with some salve is laid to a sore, vide
Bilma. Cloth of arras or tapistrie, vide Pan^os, Franceses, Tapiceria, course
cloth, Pan^o baxo, or gruesso. Cloth of gold or of silver, v. Brocado.
counterfaite Cloth of gold, vide Brocatel. rich cloth of gold, vide Brocado
rico. smooth Cloth of gold, vide Brocado, Raso. a table Cloth, vide, Mantele.
a horse Cloth, vide Manta de cavallo. Clothing, or apparelling, v. Vestidos,
Vestimiento. a Clothier, vide Lanero. a Clothworker, vide Perayle. Clottered
together as blood will be when it is cold, or hairs with blood, vide
Quajado. a Clowdie day, vide Dia Anublado. Cloven, or cleft, v. Hendido,
Rajado, Partido. Cloves, a spice so called, vide Clavos de Especia, or Clavos
de girofle. a Cloue of garlike, vide Diente de ajo, Dientillo de ajo, Espigon
de cabeca de ajo. a Clout or ragge of linen, vide Andrajo, or Handrajo. a
shoe Clout, vide Trapajo. a dish Clout, vide Rodilla. to make Cloudie or dark
with clouds, v. n^ublarse. a Cloud, vide Nube, n^uve. Cloudie, v. Nublado,
Nubloso. a Cloven cane or reed, vide Can^aheja. a Clown or clumperton, vide
Capataz, Villano. Clownish, vide Rustico. Clownishnes, vide Rusticidad,
Rustiqueza, Villania. Clownishly, vide Rusticamente. a Clubbe, vide Porra. a
little Clubbe, vide Porrilla. a blow with a Clubbe, vide Porrada. a Clue, vide
Rosquilla. a Cluster of grapes, vide Gajo, Racimo, Grumo.
C O
a Coape, or long robe, vide Casulla. a Coard in a ship, v. Boca. to Coast
along the sea, vide Costear. at the sea Coast, vide A costa, Costa. a Coat, or
cottage, vide Choca, Caban^a, Cavan^a, Barraca. a Coat, vide Sayo. a
wastcoate, vide Almilla. a soldiers Coat, vide Albornoz. a sea Cob, vide
Gaviota. a Cobiron, whereon the spitt does turn, vide Morilla, Morillo. a
Cobbler, vide Remendon de capatos. to Coble, vide Remendar capatos. Cobled, vide
Remendado. a cobblers shop, vide Tienda de Remendon. a Cobloafe, v. Bun^uelo. a
Cobweb, v. Telaran^a. full of Cobwebs, v. Telaran^oso. a Coche, v. Carro de
damas, Coche, a Coche man, v. Cochero. Cockall, a kind of play, v. Carnicol. a
Cockatrice, v. Basilisco. a Cock, v. Gallo. to crow as a Cock, v. Cantar el
Gallo. the Cock of a conduite, v. Atanor. a Cocks beard, or the wallets that
hang down by his bill, v. Barvas de gallo. a Cocks comb, v. Cresta de gallo.
a Cocks spur, v. Espolon. a Cock of hay, v. Monton de heno. a Cock or
spoute in a conduit, v. Aguatocho, Llave defuente. a weather Cock, v. Beleta.
a Cock of a gun or piece, v. Serpentina. a Cock boat, v. Esquife. to Cocker,
v. Acariciar, Halagar, Regalar. Cockered, vide Acariciado, Regalado, Halagado.
Cockering, v. Halagos, Caricias. Cockeringly, v. Halaguen^amente,
Regaladamente, Acariciadamente. a Cockle, v. Almeja, Concha, Caracol. a place
where Cockles breed, v. Almejal. one that gathers or sells Cockles, vide
Almejero. Cockle weed, v. Cizan^a, Zizan^a. to sow Cockle, v. Cizan^ar. the
Cod of a man or beast, vide Cojon, Cojones, Turmas. the Cod of pease or such
like, v. Cascara. a Codicill, v. Codicillo. a Codpeece, v. Bragueta. a Cofer or
chest, v. Cofre, A'rca. a little Cofer, v. Caxita, Arquilla. a Coffin, v.
Ataud. to Cog or prate, v. Baladronear. Cogging or lying, v. Baladroneria. a
Cogger or prating shifter, v. Baladron. Cogitation, v. Cogitacion,
Piensamiento. a Coife, v. Cofa, Cofia, Escofia, Escofion. a little Coife, v.
Escofieta. a kind of Coife, v. Aluanega. to Coin or make money, v. Acun^ar
moneda. Coined, v. Acun^ado. Coined money, v. Cun^o. Coin, v. Moneda. a Coiner
of money, v. Acun^ador, Monedero. the mark which the Coin bears, vide
Stampa. Coie or nice, v. caharen^o. a Coite, v. Herron. to play at Coites, v.
Jugar al herron. a Colander or strainer, v. Coladero. to make Cold or to
cool, v. Enfriar. to set in the Cold, v. Desabrigar. set in the Cold, v.
Desabrigado. to wax Cold, v. Refriarse. to be Cold, v. Hazer frio. Cold, v.
Frialdad, Frio. Cold, v. Frio, Frigido. very Cold, v. Friollego. made Cold
or cooled, v. Enfriado, Entibiado. Cold meat, v. Fiambre. Coldness, v. Frio.
Coldly, v. Friamente. a Cole, v. Carbon or Carvon. a little Cole, vide
Carboncillo, or Carbonzillo. a burning Cole, v. A'scua. a sea-Cole, stone or
mint-Cole, v. Turba. a Cole house or place for cole, v. Carbonera, or Casa de
Carbones. to draw with a Colerake, v. Hurgar. a Colerake, v. Hurganero,
Rodavillo. one that uses a Colerake, v. Hurgador. a Colier, v. Carbonero,
Carvonero. a Colewort, v. Col, Berca, Verca. Colewort, v. Berca, Colho, Verca.
little Coleworts, v. Bercetas, Cohollitos to Coll or clip, v. Abracar. a
Collar, v. Cuello, Cabecon, Collar. the Collar of a garment, v. Collar de
vestido. a Collar of gold, v. Collar de hombros. a dogs Collar, v. Collar de
perro, Carlancas. a Collar for a beast, v. Collera. a mastiues Collar made with
leather and nails, v. Carlancas. a Collar of silver or gold to wear about
ones neck, v. Collar de plata, or de oro. a Collation, v. Colacion. a
Collection of things or words, vide Colecion. a Collector for the poor, v.
Cogedor, or Pedidor por los pobres. a College or College, v. Colegio. the
Collicke, v. Colica. one troubled with the Collicke, v. Colico. a Collonell
over a regiment, vide Coronel. a Collonelship, v. Coronelia. a Collop of bacon,
v. Torresno. Collusion, v. Colusion. a Colonie of men, v. Colonia. bright
Colors, v. Claramentos. to Color, v. Colorar. Color, v. Color. counterfeit
Color, v. Color falso. Color black and blew, v. Color carden^o, or de Plomo.
deep Color, v. Color lleno. fading or dead Color, v. Color muerto. bright
Color, v. Color florecido. waterish Color, v. Color en agua. waterish Color,
v. Color de paja. swart Color or brown, v. Color baco o pardo. durable
Color, v. Color porfiado. Colored, v. Colorado. to Color or cloak, v.
Colorar. to die in Color, v. Colorar, Colorir. that has lost his Color, vide
Descolorido. of sundry Colors, v. De muchas colores, De diversas colores. high
Colored, v. Subido de color. a Colme or coape, v. Casulla. a Colt, v. Potro,
Poledro, Potranco, Potranca. a horse Colt, v. Potranco. a mare Colt, v.
Potranca. a foaling of a Colt, v. Parto de la yegua. a Column or pillar, vide
Colomna, Columna, Coluna. a Column as in a book, v. Columna de libro. to
Combat or fight, v. Combatir, Pelear. one that fights a Combat, v.
Combatidor, Desafiador. a Combat between two men only, vide Combat, Duello.
a place where a Combat is fought, vide Estacada, Palicada, Campo. to Comb or
kembe, vide Peynar. to Comb an horse mane, vide Peynar las crines. Combed,
vide Peynado. a Comber or Carder, v. Peynador. a Comb, vide Pain. a Comb for
flax, vide Rastilla, Rastillo. to Comb flax, v. Rastillar. an horse Comb,
or currie comb, vide Almohaca. a honey Comb, v. Panal. a Combe-maker, v.
Peynero. to Combine, or join together two in one, v. Combinar. a Combinacion,
or conjunction, vide Convinacion, Combinacion. to Comber or encomber, vide
Molestar, Vexar. Combred, v. Molestado, Vexado. a Combrance, or encombrance,
vide Molestia, Vexacion, Pesadumbre. to Come, v. Venir. to Come or repair
unto, vide Acudir. that which is to Come, v. Avenidero. to Come to nothing, v.
Deshazerse, Aniquilarse, Arruinarse, Destruirse. to Come to pass, or chance,
vide Acaecer, Acontecer. to Come between, or in the mean time, v. Intervenir.
to Come to mind, v. Acordarse, Traer a la memoria, Remembrar. Coming in the
mean time, vide Intervencion. to Come out, or issue forth, v. Salir. to Come
upon one suddenly as he is doing any thing, v. Venir inopinado. to Come and
go, v. Venir, y Y'r. Coming and going, vide Viniendo, y yendo. Coming in
sight, v. Aparescimiento. Come to, v. Acudido, Venido. a Coming unto, vide
Acudimiento. a Coming upon one suddenly, vide Subita venida, Repentina venida,
Inopinada venida, Impensada venida. Coming of honest or gentle stock, v.
Viniendo de buena Decendencia, de buena Generation, de buen Lineage, de buenos
Padres. Coming from beyond the sea, v. Viniendo de allende el mar, Viniendo
vltra mar. a Comedy, vide Comedia. a writer of a Comedy, vide Author de
Comedias. an act in a Comedy, v. A'uto. a player of Comedies, vide Comediante,
Farsante, Farandulero, Recitante, Representante. Comely, vide Apuesto, Decente,
Gentil. it is Comely, v. Cumple, Conviene. a Comely man, v. Gentilhombre. to
make Comely, v. Decorar. Comelines, v. Apostura, Gentileza. very Comely, v.
muy Gentil, muy Apuesto. Coomely, vide Gentilmente, Decentemente. a Comete, or
blasing star, v. Cometa. Comfits, vide Confites. Comfits made of Cinamom and
Sugar, v. Canelon. a Comfit maker, vide Confacionador, Confitero. Comfort, vide
Consuelo. to Comfort, v. Consolar, Confortar. to give Comfort, vide Confortar,
Consolar. Comfortable, vide Consoladora cosa y Confortable. a Comforter, v.
Consolador, Confortador. Comforted, v. Confortado, Consolado. Comforting, vide
Consuelo, Comfort. Comfortless, v. Desconsolado. Comfrie herb, vide
Consuelda mayor. to Command, or bid, vide Mandar, Ordenar. to Command,
ordain, or appoint, v. Ordenar, Mandar. to be at Commandment, vide Estar a
servicio. to be Commanded, v. Ser mandado. Commanded, v. Mandado. a
Commandment, vide Mandamiento, Mandato, Mandado. a Commander, or leader of
soldiers, vide Acaudillador. he to whom Command or charge is given, vide
Mandado. a Commandment over men, v. Mando, Cargo, Oficio. to Commence an
action against one, v. Comencar pleyto. to Commend, set forth, or praise, vide
Comendar, Alabar. to Commend or commit unto, vide Encomendar. to send
Commendations, vide Embiar Encomiendas. Commendations, vide Encomiendas,
Saludes. Commended or saluted, vide Saludado. a Commemoration, vide
Comemoracion. to Comment, or make commentaries of, vide Comentar. a
Commentary, or gloss, or exposition, v. Comentario. a Commentator, glosser,
or maker of comments, or commentaries, vide Comentador. Commerce, v. Comercio.
Comin seed, vide Comino. a Commisarie, v. Comissario. Commiseration, vide
Compadescimiento, Comiseracion, Piedad. to give Commission, v. dar Comision,
dar Poder. a high Commissioner, vide Alcalde de Alcaldes. a Commission, v.
Commission. a Commissioner appointed to enquire of faults committed against the
law, vide Comisario. a Commissioner or arbitrator, v. A'rbitro, Componedor. to
Commit or do, vide Cometer, Hazer. to Commit an offense, v. Cometer delicto,
or Delito, Delinquir. to Commit, or do a thing newly, vide Cometer en
fragante. a Committer, v. Cometidor. Committed or done, v. Cometido, Hecho.
Committing, vide Cometimiento, Hecho. to Commit unto, v. Dar, Cometer. to
Commit any thing to keep, vide dar en Custodia, poner en Custodia. Commodity,
v. Provecho, Interes, Interesse, Ganancia. Commodious or fit for, vide Comodo,
a Proposito, Conveniente, Accomodado. very Commodious, vide muy Comodo, muy a
Proposito, muy Conveniente. Commodiously, v. Comodamente, Convenientemente, a
Proposito. to make Common, or to publish, v. Publicar, Divulgar, Dezir,
Comunicar. Common, v. Comun, Concegil, De todos. to be Common, or wax common,
vide Ser comun. the Common people, or comminaltie, vide el Vulgo, el Comun del
pueblo. a Common wealth, vide Republica. the estate of a Common wealth where
the people themselves have the authority, v. Democracia. Common to all, or
many, vide Comun a todos. Common or vulgar, v. Vulgar, Comun. pertaining to the
Common people, v. Plebeyo. the Comminaltie, v. Vulgo. one of the Comminaltie,
v. Plebeyo. Commonly, vide Ordinario, Comunemente. Commonly or for the most
part, vide Por la mayor part. a Commotion, or vproare, v. Alboroto, Alboroco,
Murmullo. to Commune or talk, v. Comunicar, Platicar, Negociar, Conferir,
Contratar, Hablar. Communed or conferred of, v. Comunicado, Negociado,
Conferido, Platicado, Contratado. a Communication, vide Platica, Conferencia,
Comunicacion. to Communicate, v. Comunicar, Conferir, Negociar. the Communion,
or Lords supper, vide Comunion. Communion or mutual participation, vide
Communion, Participacion, Comunidad. Community or mutual participation, vide
Comunidad, Comunion, Participacion. to keep Company, v. Acompan^ar, Hazer
compania. to Company with a woman carnally, vide Tener cuenta con muger,
Conocer a la muger carnalmente. to divide into Companies, vide Dividir en
compan^ias. to break Company, vide Desconversar, Apartar compania, Deshazer
compan^ia. a Company, vide Compan^ia. a great Company, v. Caterva, Compania.
Companies assembled, v. Junta de Compan^ias, Congregation de compan^ias. a
separating of Company, v. Apartamiento de compan^ia, Partimiento de compan^ia,
Seperacion de compan^ia. from Company to company, vide De corillo en corillo.
a Company incorporate of any craft, vide Cofradias, Comunidades. a Company of
men of war, v. Compania de soldados. a Company of ten soldiers together in
a pauillion, v. Esquadra. a company of horsemen in war containing 40.
soldiers, v. Esquadra de cavallos. a Companion or fellow, v. Compan^ero,
Consorte, Camarado. a Companion or fellow in an office, vide Collega. a
Companion by the way, v. Compan^ero de camino. a Companion in service, v
Compan^ero. Companions dwelling together in one house v. Compan^eros.
Companions in war, v. Camaradas. to Compare, or make comparison, vide
Comparar, Ygualar, Hazer comparacion. to Compare or set together, to see the
likeness or distance, vide Conferir, Emparejar, Equiparar. to be Compared, vide
Ser conferido, Ser comparado, Ser ygualado. Compared, vide Comparado,
Conferido, Emparejado, Ygualado. Comparing, vide Comparacion, Emparejadura. a
maker of Comparisons, vide Comparador, Ygualador. Comparison, vide Comparacion.
the Comparatiue degree, vide el grado comparativo. Comparable, vide Comparable.
in Comparison of, vide en respeto, En comparacion. to Compass, or enuiron,
vide Rodear, Cercar, Cercuir. to Compass round by going about, vide Bojar,
Girar. to Compass as iuie about a tree, v. Atar. to Compass or go about a
matter, vide molir. to Compass with a circle, vide Cercar, Circundar,
Compassar, Circuir, Rodear. Compassed, vide Cercado, Circundado, Rodeado,
Compassado, Circuido. Compassing or going round about, vide Boja, Giro, Cerco,
Rodeo, Cercuito, Circulo. a Compasser about, vide Cercador, Bojador,
Circundador. a Compass or circle, v. Cerco, Circulo. an instrument called a
Compass, vide Compass. the Compass of the moon, vide Compass de la luna. a Compass
for mariners to sail by, vide Aguja de marear, Bruxula, Agujon. a round
Compass, vide Circumferencia. the Compass or limits of any thing, bounds,
vide Limits, Lindes. to have Compassion of, vide Comiserar compadecer. full of
Compassion, vide Misericordioso, Piadoso, Compassivo. Compassion, vide
Compassion, Misericordia, Piedad, Comiseracion. to Compel, or constrain, vide
Compeler, Constren^ir, Forcar. Compelled, vide Compelido, Constren^ido,
Forcado. Compendiousnes, vide Abreviatura, Compendio, Brevedad. a Compendious
or short form of writing or speaking, vide Compendio. a Compendious or brief
speaker, v. Breve, Compendioso. Compendiously or briefly, vide Brevemente.
Competent, or sufficient to satisfy necessity, vide Suficiente, Competente.
Competently v. Suficientemente. a Competitour, v. Competidor. to Compile, to
compose, and compact, vide Copilar, Recopilar. a Compiler, vide Recopilador.
Compiled, v. Recopilado. Compiling, v. Recopilacion. to Complain of any thing
that greeueth him, vide Quexar, Querellar, Lamentar. to complain of, or make
complaint, vide Querellar, Quexar, Acusar. Complaining, vide Quexoso,
Querelloso. a Complainer of wrong done him, vide Quexoso, Querelloso. a
Complaint or moan making, v. Quexa, Querela. a bill of Complaint, vide
Querella, Demanda, Quexa. one that complains or makes moan, v. Quexoso,
Querelloso. Complete or fully ended, v. Complido, Acabado, Dado fin. a
Complexion, v. Complession. a good Complexion, v. Buena Complession. a Complice
or partaker, vide Ayuda, Ayudador. Complotted, v. Cohechado. to Compose, make,
or compile, v. Componer, Hazer, Recopilar. to Compose or set together, vide
Componer. to Compose, compound, or make a composition or agreement, vide
Componer, Concettar, Convenir, Acordar. Composed or made, v. Compuesto, Hecho.
Composed and set together, v. Compuesto, Recopilado. a Composer or maker, vide
Componedor, Hazedor. Composition, v. Avenencia, Composicion, Convenencia. a
Composition or agreement, vide Compusicion, Concierto, Concordancia, Acuerdo,
Concordia, Convenencia. by Composition, v. Por concierto, Por Composicion. to
Compound, v. Componer. Compounded, v. Compuesto. a Compounded matter, v.
Compostura. to Comprehend or contain, v. Comprehender, Contener, Abarcar. to
be comprehended, contained, or comprised, vide ser Comprehendido, ser
Contenido. Comprehended or comprised, v. Comprehendido, Contenido. a
Comprehending or comprising, v. Comprehencion. to put in Compromise, or stand
to the arbitrament of any indifferent judge, v. Comprometer. an vmper, or
Compromiser, v. Compromissor. a Compromise, which is the authority granted to
the arbiter by the consent of the parties, v. Compromisso. to Comprise or
comprehend, v. Comprehender, Contener. to Count, v. Count. Compunction or
pricking at the heart, v. Compuncion. a Comerade or cabin mate, vide Camarada.
a Computation, v. Computacion. Concauitie or hollownes, v. Concavidad. to
Conceal, v. Callar, Celar, Asconder, Encubrir. Concealed, vide Celado,
encubierto, Ascondido, Callado. a Concealer, vide Celador, Encubridor,
Ascondidor. a Concealing, v. Celamiento, Encubrimiento, Ascondidura. to
Conceive a child, vide Concebir, Concevir, Empren^ar. Conceived, v. Concebido.
a Conceauing or conception, v. Concebimiento, Concepcion. to Conceive or
imagine in his mind, vide Concebir, Concevir, Ymaginar, Pensar. quicknes of
Conceit, v. Agudeza. quick Conceited, v. Agudo. a Conceit or imagination, v.
Ymaginacion, Concepto, Conceto. to Consent, v. Consentir, Darsu consentimiento,
Permitir. a Consent of many voices in one, v. Acorde, Concierto. Conception, or
conceauing, vide Concebimiento, Concepcion. to Concern, v. Atan^ir, Tocar,
Concernir. it Concerns, v. Toca, Atan^e. Concerning, vide Tocante,
Concerniente. to Conclude, v. Concluyr, Acabar. Concluded or determined of, v.
Convenido, Concluso, Determinado, Acabado. a Conclusion or ending of any
matter, vide Conclusion, Fin, Acabamiento. to Concoct or digest, vide Digerir,
Digestir. to be at Concord, vide Concordar, Acordar, Convenir. to Concord or
agree together in music, v. Concordar, Acordar, Convenir. Concord or
agreement, v. Concordancia, Convenencia, Acuerdo. Concordance, v. Concordancia.
a Concourse or coming of people from place to place, v. Concurso, Trulla. a
Concubine, v. Concubina, Abarraganada. one that keeps Concubines, v.
Concubinario, Abarraganado. Concupiscence or lust, v. Concupicencia. to
Concur, v. Concurrir. to Condemn, v. Condenar, Sentenciar. to Condemn to
the galleies, v. Echar en Galera. Condemned, v. Condenado, Sentenciado. a
Condemnation, vide Condenacion, Sentencia. Condign or worthy of, v.
Condigno. to Condescend or yield unto, v. Conceder, Condescender. Condiscended
unto, vide Concedido. Condite, vide Conserve. a Condition or state, v.
Condition, Estado, Bivienda. to Condition or covenant, v. Articular. a
Condition or covenant, v. Pato, Concierto. Conditions, v. Faciones. a
Condition, manner or behavior, vide Ademan, Comedimiento. an evil Condition,
v. Mala condition. Conditional, v. Condicional. Conditionally, v.
Condicionalmente. on this Condition, v. Con esta condition. a Conduct or
guiding, vide Conduta, Conducta. Conducted or guided, v. Conduto, Conduzido. to
Conduct, v. Conduzir. a safe Conduct, v. Salvo conduto. a Conduite, v.
Aguaducho, Can^a de agua, Acequia. a Conduite head from whence the water first
rises, v. Almazen de Aguaducho. great Conduites or large pipes of water
brought from Conduites to men's houses, and drawn at cocks and serving for
every office, v. Atanor. a Confection or mingling diverse things together, v.
Confection, Mescla, Mixtura. Confected, v. Confitado. to Confederate, v.
Confederar, Collegar, Counir, Aliar. Confederate or joined together by oath or
promise, v. Collegado, Confederado, Counido. a Confederate, v. Confederado.
Confederacy, v. Alianca, Confederacion. to Confer and talk, v. Platicar,
Conferrir, Hablar. to Confer, set together, or to compare, v. Comparar.
Conference, vide Dialogo, Coloquio, Platica. to Confess, v. Confessar.
Confessed, v. Confessado. a Confessor, v. Confessor. Confessing, v.
Confession. to have sure Confidence or trust, vide Confiar. Confident, v.
Confiado. Confidently, v. Confiadamente. Confidence or trust, v. Confianca,
Fusia, Fiducia. trusting Confidently, v. Confiando. Confines, v. Comarca,
Confines. to Confirm, establish or strengthen, v. Averiguar, Confirmar,
Establecer, Firmar, Afirmar. Confirmed, v. Averiguado, Confirmado, Establecido,
Firmado. a Confirmation, vide Averiguamiento, Confirmacion, Establecimiento. to
Confiscate or make ones goods forfaite or escheated, v. Confiscar, Secrestar.
Confiscated or escheated, v. Confiscado, Secrestado. Confiscation or the goods
which are confiscated, v. Confiscacion, Secrestacion. Confits, confects or
comfects, and all kind of dry dainties made of sugar, etc. vide Confites. a
Conflict or bickering, v. Conflito or Conflicto. to Conform, v. Conformar,
Convenir, Concertar. Conforming or fashioning, v. Conformacion, Concierto,
Convenencia. to Conform himself to another will, vide Conformarse,
Convenirse, Concertarse. Conformity, v. Conformidad, Convenencia. Conformable,
v. Conform, Conformable. to Confound or mix together, v. Confundir, Confutar.
Confounded or convinced, v. Confundido, Confutado. Confounding, v.
Confundidura, Confutacion. Confusion or misorder, v. Confusion, Desorden.
Confused, v. Confuso. Confusedly, v. Confusamente. to Confute or disprooue, v.
Confutar, Refutar, Desmentir. a Confutation, v. Confutacion, Refutacion,
Desmentida. to Congeale or wax thicker, v. Congelar, Quajar. Congealed, v.
Congelado, Quajado. a Congealing, v. Quajamiento, Congelamiento. to
Congratulate, v. Congratular. Congratulation, v. Congratulacion. a Congregation
or assembly, v. Colegacion, Congregation. a Congregation of Jews, v. Aljama.
Congruence or congruitie, v. Concordancia, Conformidad, Convenencia,
Congruencia. Congruent, v. Congruo, Concord, Conform. a Conie, v. Conejo. a
rabbet, v. Gacapo, Gacapito. a Conie hole, v. Madriguera, Conigera. a Conigre
or conie warren, v. Bivar. to Conjecture or guess, v. Congeturar, Conjeturar,
Atinar. a Conjecture or guess, vide Congetura, Tino. Caniectured, v.
Conjecturado, Conjeturado. Conjoined, v. Conjunto. a Conjugation of words, vide
Conjugacion. a Conjunction, v. Conjuncion. to Conjure, v. Conjurar. a Coniurer,
v. Conjurador. Coniuration, v. Conjuracion. to Conquer or subdue, v. Aquistar,
Conquistar, Vencer, Desbaratar. Conquered, v. Aquistado, Conquistado, Vencido,
Desbaratado. a Conqueror, v. Conquistador, Vencedor. a Conquest, vide
Conquista, Victoria, Desbarato. Consanguinitie, vide Consanguinidad, Parentela,
Parentesco. the Conscience, v. Conciencia. Conscionable, v. Con conciencia.
Conscionably, v* Con conciencia. to Consecrate or appoint to a holy use, v.
Consagrar. Consecrated, v. Consagrado. Consecrated or hallowed. v. Consagrado.
a Consecrating or consecration, v. Consagracion. to Consent or agree, vide
Consentir, Permitir. to Consent in music, v. Concordar, Acordar, Concertar,
Convenir. a Consent or agreement, v. Concierto, Consentimiento. Consenting, v.
Consenciente. Consentingly, v. Accessoriamente. with one Consent, v. Accord. a
Consenter unto, v. Accessor. a Consequent or consequence. v. Consequiente,
Conseguimiento, Consequencia. Consequently, v. Conseguentemente. to Conserve,
v. Conservar, Guardar, Servar. Conserve of quinces, vide Brimbillada,
Membrillada. Conserues, v. Conserva. Conserved, v. Conservado. Conserve of any
thing, v. Conserva. a Conseruer, v. Conservador. to Consider or think upon, v.
Considerar, Pensar, Ymaginar. Consideration, v. Consideracion, Pensamiento.
Considerately, v. Consideradamente. Considered, v. Considerado. Considering, v.
Considerando. a Considerer, v. Considerador. without Consideration, v. Sin
pensar, sin Consideracion. to Consist, v. Consistir. a Consistory or council
house, v. Concistorio, Consistorio. Consolation or comfort, v. Consolacion,
Consuelo. the Consonants, v. Consonantes. to be Consonant or agreeable, v.
Consonar. Consonant, v. Consonante. Consonancie or conformity, v. Consonancia,
Conformidad. a Consort or companion, v. Consorte. a Consort or harmonicall
consent in music, v. Concento, Concierto, Acorde. to Conspire, v. Conjurar,
Conspirar. Conspiracy, vide Alevosia, Conjura, Conjuracion, Monipodio. a
Conspiratour, v. Conjurador. Conspired, v. Conjurado. Conspiring, v.
Conjuracion. a Constable, v. Condestable, Jurado. a Constableship, v.
Juraderia. Constancy or stablenesse, v. Constancia, Firmeza. Constant, v.
Constante, Firm. Constantly, v. Constantamente, Establemente, Firmamente. a
Constellation, v Constellacion. a Constellation of stars called the Orion, v.
Astilejo. to Constitute or appoint, vide Constituyr, Ordenar, Mandar. a
Constitution or appointment, v. Constitucion, O'rden, Mandato. Constitution of
the body, v. Constitucion de cuerpo. a Constituter or appointer, vide
Constituydor. to Constrain, compel or enforce, vide Constren^ir, Compeler,
Forcar, Apremiar. Constrained, v. Constren^ido, Compelido, Forcado, Apremiado.
a Constraining, v. Constren^imiento, Apremio, Fuerca, Compulsion. Constraint,
v. Constren^imiento, Compulsion, Apremio, Fuerca. by Constraint, against his
will, vide Por fuerca, Contra su voluntad. Construction, v. Construcion. a
Consul, v. Consul. a Consulship, v. Consulado. pertaining to the Consul, v. Que
toca al Consul. Consul-like, or pertaining to a Consul, v. Consular. to
Consult, ask or take counsel, vide Consultar, Aconsejar. Consulted of, v.
Consultado, Aconsejado. a Consulter, v. Consultador. Consultation, v. Consulta.
to Consume, spend, or waste, vide Consumir, Gastar, Destruyr, Deshazer. to
Consume or devour rauenously, vide Engullir, Tragar. to Consume away, vide
Consumir. Consumed, vide Consumido. to Consume, pine away, or be in a
consumption, v. Consumarse. to consume time, vide Embever tiempo, Gastar
tiempo. a Consumer, v. Consumidor, Gastador, Destruydor. a Co^suming, v.
Consumimiento, Gasto. a Consumption of the body, v. Consumpcion de cuerpo. to
Consummate, v. Consumar. a Consummation, v. Consumacion. a Consumption, or
consuming, vide Consumpcion. to Contaminate or defile, v. Contaminar, Empecer.
Contaminated, v. Contaminado. a Contagion or natural evil, vide Contagion.
Contagiousnes, vide Contagiosidad. Contagious, v. Contagioso. to Contain or
comprehend, v. Comprehender, Contener. to Contain or keep himself within
bounds, v. Contenerse. Contained, v. Contenido, Comprehendido. Containing, v.
Conteniendo, Comprehendendo. to Contemn or disdain, v. Desestimar,
Menospreciar, Aborrecer. contempt or Contemning, v. Desprecio, Menosprecio,
Aborrecimiento, Contempto. Contemptuous, v. Despreciador, Menospreciador. to
Contemplate, vide Contemplar, Especular, Mirar. one that Contemplateth, v.
Contemplador. Contemplation, vide Contemplacion, Especulacion. Contemplated, v.
Contemplado, Especulado. Contemplative, v. Especulativo, Contemplativo.
Contemplatiuely, v. Especulativamente, Contemplativamente. Contempt, v.
Contempto, Menosprecio, Desprecio. to Contend in law, v. Lidiar. Contention in
law, v. Lid. to Contend, v. Contender, Porfiar. one that contendeth, v.
Contendedor, Porfiado, Tematico. Contentiously, v. Porfiadamente,
Contenciosamente. Contention, vide Contencion, Barraja, Porfia, Tema. to
Content, v. Contentar. Content or pleasure, v. Contento, Vfania. Contentment,
v. Contentamiento. Contented, v. Contento, Vfano. not Content, v. Descontento.
Contentedly, v. Vfanamente, con gran Contento. Contentfully, v. Con gran
Contento, Vfanamente. a Contentation, v. Contenting. Contentious, v.
Bollicioso, Bullicioso, Contencioso, Porfiado, Tematico. Contention, v.
Bollicio, Brega. Continency, v. Continencia. Continent. v. Continente.
Continently, v. Continentemente. Continuance, v. Duracion, Continuacion. to
Continue or persist, v. Continuar, Durar, Turar, Perpetuar. Continued, v.
Continuado, Perpetuado, Turado. Continually, v. Contino, Perenal, Perpetuo.
Continuance, v. Continuacion, Perpetuidad, Tura. Continuing, v. Continuacion,
Perpetuidad, Tura. Continually, v. Continuadamente, Perenalmente, Siempre. to
Contract, v. Contraer. a Contract, v. Contracto. Contracted, v. Contraido. a
Contract or bargain, v. Bargain. to Contradict, v. Contradezir, Contrariar.
Contradiction or gainesaying, v. Contradezidora cosa, Contraditora cosa,
Contradicion. a Contradictor, vide Contradezidor, Contraditor. Contradicted, v.
Contradicho. a Contramure, or a wall set before, v. Contramuro. to be
Contrary, v. Contrariar. to the Contrary, v. Al contrario, Al reves, a
pospelo. Contrary, v. a otra part, al revez. clean Contrary, v. al reves.
Contrary, v. Contrario. Contrariety, v. Contrariedad. to Contribute, or give
some thing with another, v. Contribuyr. a Contributor, v. Contribuydor.
Contributarie, v. Contributario. Contribution, v. Contribucion. Contrition, v.
Atricion, Contricion Contrite, v. Contrito. to be in Controversy, v. Ser en
Contraversia. a Controversy, v. Repugnancia, Contraversia. Contumely, v.
Contumelia. Contumelious, v. Contumelioso. to Conueigh, vide Conduzir, Passar,
Llevar. to Conueigh from one place to another, v. Passar de un lugar a otro. to
Conueigh out of danger, vide Sacar de Peligro. to Conueigh in privily, v.
Conduzir secretamente. to Conueigh by cart, ship, or beast, vide Conduzir
encarro, Navio, or Bestia. Conueighed, vide Conduzido, Llevado. Conueighed
over, v. Passado. Conueighed away, v. Llevado via. a Conueigher, v. Conduzidor,
Llevador. a Conueigher of water from springes or conduits, v. Conduzidor de
agua de las fuentes. a Conueighing, vide Conduto, Passaje. to be Convenient or
meet, v. Convenir. Conueniencie, v. Conveniencia. to be Convenient or
agreeable, Conveniente ser. It is Convenient, vide Conviene, Cumple.
Convenient, vide Convenible, Conveniente. Conveniently, v. Conveniblemente. a
Conuenticle, vide Assembly. to Converse or be conversant. v. Conversar.
Conversant, v. Conversado. Conversation, v. Conversacion. to Convert or turn,
vide Convertir, Tornar. a Convert that is lately become a Christian, v.
Confesso. Converted, v. Convertido. Converting, v. Convertimiento. a
Conversion, v. Conversion, or Convercion. to Convict or convince, vide
Convencer. Convicted or convinced, vide Convencido. Conuincing, vide
Convencimiento. a Convocation, v. Convocacion. a Convocation house, v.
Consistorio. a Conuoy, v. Escolta. to play the Cook, v. Cozinar. a Cook,
vide Cozinero. a woman Cook, v. Cozinera. a Cookold, v. Cornudo. a Cookold
maker, vide Adultero, or Qui pone cuernos. a Cook room in a ship, v. Fogon. a
Cooling vessel, v. Enfriadera. to Cool, vide Desfogar, Enfriar, Resfriar.
Cooled, v. Enfriado, Resfriado. a Coope wherein poultrie is kept, vide
Caponera. a Coope wherein hens lay, vide Galinero. a Coope or sheep pen, v.
Corral, Redil, Majada. a Coope wherein beasts are, vide Corral. a Cooper, vide
Ton^elero. to Coore down, v. Cowre. a Coote, v. Nigretta. a Coosen, vide
Kindred. a Coosen german, vide Primo. to Coosen or deceive, v. Embayr, Embaucar,
Estafar, Moliatrar, Engan^ar. a Coosener, v. Embaydor, Embaucador, Mohatrero,
Engan^ador. a Coosening shift, v. Mohatra, Engan^o, Magan^a. Coosenage, vide
Calagarde, Magan^a, Embaymiento, Embancamiento, Embuste, Guadriman^a. a
Coparison for a horse, v. Arreo, Coparacon, Paramentos de cavallo. to Copy
out, or write out for another, v. Copiar, Trasladar. a Copy or example, v.
Copia, Traslado, Trasumo. Copied, v. Copiado, Trasladado. copy or store of, v.
Copia, Abundancia. Copious, v. Copioso, Abundante. Copiously, v. Abundosamente,
Copiosamente. a Copise or little wood, vide Arboleda, Bosque. a Cop on the
heads of birds or beasts, v. Tocado. Copper, v. Alambre, Arambre, Cobre. a
Copper smith, v. Calderero. Copperas to put in ink, v. Alcaparroso, Caparrosa.
green Copperas, v. Cardenillo, Verderame. a Coral, v. Coral. a Cord, v.
Amarra. Corded, bound with cords, vide Cordonado. a great Cord wherewith they
hoise up sail, v. Candaliza, Candeleta. a small Cord, v. Cordezuela. a Cord in
a ship called the maine tacke, v. Amura, Chafaldete. a Cord called the stay, v.
Estai, Estay. Cords in a ship called the listes, v. List. Cords in ships
called marklines, v. Aserrabelas, Aserravelas. a Cordiner or currior, v,
Curtidor. the Core where the kernel of any fruit lies, v. Cuexco. Coriander,
v. Culantro. Cork, v. Corcha, Boya. a Cormorant, v. Cuervo marinero. to gather
Corn, v. Pan coger, Grano coger. Corn, v. Pan, Grano. green Corn, v.
Alcacel. Corn new reaped, v. Pan segado. the stubble of Corn, v. Rastrojo.
the ear of Corn, v. Espiga. the beard of Corn, v. Arista. a Corn gatherer,
v. Segador. the Corn of salt, v. Grano de sal. Corns on the toes or fingers,
v. Adrianes, Callos. full of Corns, v. Calloso. a Corner, v. A'ngulo, Canton.
the Corner of any thing, v. Cantero. a Corner or lurking hole, v. Escondrijo. a
little Corner, v. Rinconcillo, Rinconzillo. a Corner or coin of an house, v.
Canto de la casa. that has four Corners, v. Cuaderno. with great large
Corners, v. Canterudo. that is full of Corners to hide or lurk in, v. Lleno de
Escondrijos. to set in a Corner, v. Meter en un Rincon. a Cornet to wind with,
v. Corneta, Bozina. a little Cornet to wind, v. Cornetica. a Cornet of
horsemen, v. Guyon. a Coronal, v. Maestro de campo, Colonel. a Coroner, v.
Crowner. a Corporal, v. Corporal, Cabo de esquadra. Corporal or belonging to
the body, vide Corporal. Corporal or having a body, v. Corporeo. a
Corporation, v. Cabildo. Corpulent, v. Corpulento. Corpulencie, v. Corpulencia.
done with Corrall, v. Acoralado. to Correct or amend, v. Corrigir, Emendar. to
Correct or punish, v. Castigar, Corregir. Corrected or punished, v. Castigado.
Corrected or amended, v. Corregido. a Correctour, v. Corregidor. a Correctour
or punisher, v. Castigador, Corrector. a Correctour of books in the press,
vide Corrector. Correction or punishment, v. Castigo, Correcion. a Correcting
or punishing, vide Castigo, Correcion. Corrected, v. Corregido. Correspondent,
vide Correspondiente. Corrigible, v, Corrected. to Corroborate or to confirm,
v. Corroborar. to Corrupt, v. Corrumper, Cohonder, Cohondir, Contaminar.
Corrupt, v. Corrupto, Corrumpido. Corrupted, v. Corrumpido, Contaminado. a
Corrupter, v. Corrumpidor. that may be Corrupted, v. Corruptible. Corruption,
v. Corrupcion, Cohondimiento. Corrupting, v. Corrompimiento. Corruptly, v.
Corruptamente. a Corslet, v. Cosselete. Corslets or pike men. v. Corceletes. a
Cosier or cobbler, v. Remendon. Cosmographie, or the description of the world,
Cosmografia. a Cosmographer, v. Cosmografo. to Cost, v. Costar. to Coaste
along the sea coast, v. Costear. it Costeth, v. Costa. Cost or expenses, vide
Acosta, Costa, Agasto, Amision. Costly or sumptuous, v. Costoso, Costosamente.
very Costly, v. Muy costoso. a Costardmonger, v. Frutero. a Cotage or cabin,
vide Caban^a, Choca. Cotages, v. Alcarias. a little Cotage, v. Caban^uela. a
shepherds Cotage, v. Choca. a thatched Cotage or house, vide Pajiza casa. to
Cotton or freeze cloth, vide Algodonar, Frisar. Cottoned, v. Algadonado,
Frizado. Cottoning, vide Algodonadura, Frizadura. Cotton or bumbast, v.
Algodon. Cotton of trees, v. Algodon de arboles. a tree having Cotton on it, v.
A'rbol de Algodon. a flower or herb called Cotton weed, vide Cantuesso. a
Couch or a bed, v. Cama. Couen, v. Collusion. to Covenant or bargain, vide
Articular, Contraer, Concertar, Contratar. a Covenant, vide Pato, Pacto. a
Covenant solemnly made, vide Estipulacion. Couenanted, vide Concertado,
Articulado. Couenanting, vide Conciertos, Articulos. Covenants of marriage, v.
Conciertos, Articulos de Casamiento. a Covent of Munkes, v. Convento de Monges.
to Cover, or hide, v. Cubrir, Cobijar, Encubrir. to Cover or ouercast, v.
Cobrir, Cobijar. to Cover an house with tiles or slates, vide Tejar, Techar. to
Cover or horse a mare, v. Tomar el cavallo a la yegua, Cubrir el cavallo a la
yegua. to Cover with silver, vide Cubrir con plata. to Cover with feathers, v,
Emplumar. to Cover, or stop as a pot, v. Atapar. covered, or stopped, vide
Atapado. Covered or hid, vide Encubierto. a Cover to cover a cup, or such like,
v. Copredera. Covered with a hood or capouch, vide Encaperucado. a Cover, vide
Cobertor, Cobertura, Cobertera. Covered with tiles or slate, v. Cubierto con
techados, or tejados. a Covering or any other thing that covers or hides, v.
Encubridor. a Covering or stopping, v. Atapadura. Covering or hiding of a
thing, v. Encubridura, Encubrimento. Covered, vide Cubierto. a Covering, vide
Cubertor. Covering or hiding, v. Encubrimiento, Encubridura. a Couerlet for a
bed, v. Alfamar, Cubertor de cama, Fracada. a course Couerlet, v. Fracada
tosca. to Cover with leather, v. Encorar. Covered with leather, v. Encorado. a
Couerer or hider, vide Encubridor. a Covering or cladding, v. Encubierta. the
Covering or roof of an house, v. Cubertizo. the Covering of a mare, v.
Cubrimiento de la yegua. a Covering of a well, vide Tapador de Pozo. a Cover of
a saddle, v. Mochila. Covertly or secretly, vide Encubertamente. to Covet, vide
Apetescer, Cudiciar, Cobdiciar, Codiciar. to Covet earnestly or fervently, v.
Codiciar mucho. Coueted or desired, v. Deseado, Apetescido. Covetous, v.
Avaricioso, Avaro, A'vido, Cobdicioso, Codicioso, Tenaz. Covetousness, vide
Auaricia, Cobdicia, Codicia. a Covetous wretch, v. Avariento, Codicioso, Tenaz,
Avaro. very Covetous, v. muy Avariento, muy Codicioso, muy Avaro. Couetously,
v. Avaramente, Codiciosamente. to Cough, vide Tosser. the Cough, vide Toss,
Tos. one troubled much with the Cough, vide Tossigioso. Couin or collusion,
vide Collusion. a Coule, such as Munkes and Friars use, vide Cugulla, Cogolla,
Cogollo. the Coulter of a plough, vide Reja. a Coulestaffe, vide Aguijada. to
ask Counsel or advise, vide Aconsejar. to Counsel or give counsel, v.
Consejar, Avisar. to take Council, v. Tomar consejo. Counsel, v. Concejo,
Concilio, Consejo. a general Counsel, vide Consejo general. an asking of
Counsel, vide Pedimiento de consejo. Counseled, vide Aconsejado. a
Counselling, vide Aconsejamiento, Aviso. keeping of Counsel, or silence, vide
Silencio. to plead as a Counselor at law, vide Avogar. a Counselor at law, v.
Abogado, or Avogado. a Counselor, or he that gives Counsel, v. Consejador.
the office of a Counsel or at law, v. Abogacia, or Avogacia. a Counselor, or
he that sits on the counsel bench, v. Consejero. the pleading of a
Counselor, vide Abogacion. the Counsel chamber, v. la sala de Conseio.
Counsel or policy in war, vide Consejo de guerra. of or belonging to
Counsel, v. Perteneciente al Concejo. to Count or count, vide Contar, Numerar.
to Count or esteem of, v. Estimar, Preciar, Tener en mucho. Counted or
esteemed, v. Estimado, Preciado. a caster of Counts, v. Account. a Countenance,
vide Cara, Continente, Gesto, Rostro. a grim or sour Countenance, vide Cara
An^ublada. the Countenance, vide Acatadura. a sad Countenance, vide Rostro
entristecido. a grave or severe Countenance, v. Rostro severo. a Counter, vide
Contador. to Counterfeit, or dissemble, v. Dissimular. to Counterfeit ones
image or likeness in painting or caruing, v. Retratar. a Counterfeit or picture,
v. Retrato. to Counterfeit or forge, v. Contrahazer, Falsar, Fingir.
Counterfeited, fained, or dissembled, vide Dissimulado, Fingido. Counterfeited
or forged, v. Adulterino, Falsado. Counterfeited, or made the likeness of any
thing, v. Retratado. Counterfeited or resembled, vide Contrahecho. a
Counterfeiter or resembler, v. Contrahazedor, Dissimulador, Falsario. a
Counterfeiter of men's doings, vide Fingidor. a Counterfeiter of money or coin,
vide Falsador de moneda. Counterfeit dealing, vide Falsidad. a Counterfeiting,
vide fingimiento. to Counterfeit ones hand, vide Contrahazer la firma de
alguno. the Counterfeiting of men's hands, vide Contrahechura de la firma de
algunos. Counterfeitly, vide Fingidamente, Dissimuladamente. to Countermine,
vide Contraminar. Countermined, v. Contraminado. a Countermine, vide
Contramina. to Counterpoise, vide Contrapesar. Counterpoised, vide
Contrapesado. a Counterpoising or ballancing, vide Contrapeso. a Counterround,
vide Contraronda. a Counterskarfe or defense for a wall, vide Antemuro,
Contramuro. a Countess, or an earls wife, vide Condessa. a County, or shire,
vide Condado. a Count or earl, vide Conde. a Country, v. Payz, Region, Tierra.
our Country or native soil, vide Patria. a Country man, or one that dwells
in the country, vide Payzano, Aldeano. a Country man or borne in the same
country, vide Conterraneo, Patrio. to Couple, associate or join, vide Ayuntar,
juntar. to Couple together, vide juntar. a Couple, vide Un par. a Couple of
oxen yoked, vide Un par de bueyes. a Couple of dogs, v. un Par de Perros. a
Coupling together, v. Ayuntamiento, Juntamiento. carnal Copulation, vide
Copulacion carnal. Coupled or joined together, v. Ayuntado. that Coupleth or
joins, v. Ayuntador. Coupling, vide Ayuntamiento. to give Courage, vide to
Encourage. Courage, or couragiousnes, v. Animo, Coracon. Courageous, vide
Animoso, Galan, Heroico. lack of Courage, v. Pusilanimidad. a Courageous man,
v. Hero, Heroico, Esforcoso. Courageously, v. Animosamente, Esforcadamente,
Galanemente. Courageous, vide Esforcado. Couring down, v. a Cluquillas. a
Course or order, v. O'rden. a Course, vide Curso. a Course or race, vide
Carrera. a Course or way, v. Derrote. the Course of the heaven, sun, moon,
stars, and planets, v. Curso del cielo, or Curso de las planetas. Course, or
gross, vide Basto, Tosco. by Course or order of nature, v. Por curso, o orden
de natura. the Course of water, vide Corriente del agua. a Course or turn, v.
A las vezes. by Course, vide a las vezes. a Courser, vide Corser. a Court or
yard, v. Patio. a princes Court, vide Corte. a Court wherein judges sit, v.
Curia, Fuero, Audiencia. the Court of requests, vide Audiencia de ruegas. a
Court or back yard, v. Corral. an inner Court, or a Court before an house,
vide Patio. in open Court, v. Foralmente. a Court in great men's houses, wherein
people use to walk, v. Patio. a little Court, v. Patio pequen^o. Courteous, v.
Cortes, bien Criado, Comedido. Courteously, vide Cortesmente, Comedidamente. a
Courtier, v. Cortesano, Palanciano, Palaciano. a woman Courtier, v. Cortesana.
Courtlines, vide Cortesania. a Courier, or currier, vide Curtidor. Courtesy,
or courtesy, v. Cortesia. to speak Courteously, v. Hablar Cortesmente.
Courteous, vide Cortes, Comedido. very Courteous, muy Comedido, muy Cortes.
Courteously, v. Cortesanamente, Cortesmente. very Courteously, v. muy
Cortesmente. a Cousener, vide Coosener. a Cow, vide Vaca. a young Cow, v.
Novilla. a little Cow or heifer, v. Baquilla, or Vaquilla. a Cow-herd, vide
Vaquero, or Baquero. Cowardice, cowardnes, or dastardlines, vide Covardia,
Cobardia, Coberdia. to play the Coward, v. Acobardar. made a Coward, vide
Acovardado. to make Cowardly, v. Acovardar. a Coward, dastard, or crauen, vide
Covarde, Cobarde. a Cowle, v. Cogulla, Cogollo. to Cowre, v. A cluclillas
assentar. Cowring, vide a Cuclillas. a Cowturd, vide Bon^iga. to be Coy, vide
Esquivar. Coy, vide Esquivo. Coyishnes, vide Esquiveza.
C R
a sea Crab, or crab fish, vide Cancer, Cangrejo. Crabbed or wayward, vide
Inquieto, Reboltoso. Crabbedly, vide Inquietamente. a Crablowse, vide Ladilla.
a Crabfish, vide Aranha, Centola, or Cangreja, Chabro. to Crack, vide
Estallar. to Crack his credit, v. Credit. the Crack or noise of a gunshot, v.
Estallido. a Cracking, vide Estallido. to Crackle, vide Cruzir. a Crackling,
vide Cruziendo. a Cradle, vide Cuna. Craft, deceit or cunning, vide Engan^o,
Cautela. Craft of a fox, subtlety, vide Zorreria. a Craft, or trade, v.
Oficio. a Crafty deceit, or working, v. Cautela, Engan^o. a Crafts man, vide
Artifice, Artesano. Crafty or subtle, v. Artero, Cauteloso. Craftily or
subtily, vide Cautelosamente. a Cragge, or rock, vide Ris;co, pen^asco, Pen^a.
Cragged, craggie or rough, v. A'spero, Intratable. Craggie rocks, v. Briscos or
Riscos. to Crake or brag, v. Jatar, Alabarse, Gloriarse. to Cram, v. Acevadar.
to be Crammed, v. Acevadarse. Crammed, v. Acevadado. a Cramming, v.
Acevadamiento. that which is Crammed, v. Acevadado. a Crampe fish, v. Hugia,
Tremielga. a Crane bird, v. Grulla, Gruz. a Crane or engine to draw up burdens
with, v. Cigon^al, Ciguen^al, Grua. to be Crasie, or to be Sick, vide
Enfermarse. to Crash with the teeth, vide Rechinar con los dientes, Cruxir con
los dientes. a Crash or cracking, v. Rechinamiento, Cruximiento. to Crave, v.
Pedir. to Crave importunately, v. Pedir con instancia, Importunar. to Crave
often, v. Pedir a menudo. Craved, v. Pedido. a Crauer, v. Pedidor. an
importunate Crauer, v. Importuno. a Craving, v. Peticion, Pedimiento. a Crauen,
v. Coward. to Craule, v. Andar a gatas. to Creake, v. Cherriar, Chillar. to
Creake as a door in opening, v. Cherriar, Chillar. Creaking, v. Chillon,
Chillido, Chirriadura. a Creake, v. Creek. Cream, v. Nata, Natas. to Create,
v. Criar. the Creation, v. Criacion. Created, vide Criado. Creating, v.
Criacion. a Creator, v. Criador. a living Creature, v. Animal. a Creature, v.
Criatura. a little Creature, v. Animalejo. Credible, v. Creyble. to give
Credit, v. Acreditar. to crack his Credit, v. Quebrar el credito Credit, v.
Credito, Franca. having good Credit, v. Acreditado. of no Credit, v.
Desacreditado. a man of good Credit, v. Acreditado varon. a Creditour, v.
Acreedor. Credulity or aptnes to believe, v. Credulidad. Credulous, v.
Credulo. the Creed, v. Credo. to Creep, v. Gatear. to Creep forth like a
serpent, vide Rastrear. to Creep on all four, v. Agatar. Creeping on all
four, v. Agatado. Creepled for age, v. Decrepito. water Cresses, v. Berracas,
or Berro, Malpica, Nasturcio. a Crest or cop, v. La cresta. the Crest of an
helmet or sallet, v. Cimera, Cresta. Crested, v. Encrestado. a Cricket, v.
Grillo. to Cry or weep, v. Llorar. to Cry out, v. Bozear, Llamar, Clamar. a
Crier out, v. Bozeador. given to Crying out, v. Llamoroso, Clamoroso. Crying
out, v. Bozeria, Clamor. to Cry out, v. Dar bozes. to Cry in the market as
the bell man does, vide Pregonar. a Cry or shoute, v. Grita. a Crier or
proclaimer, v. Andador, Pregonero. a common Crier, v. Pregonero. a Criket, v.
Cricket. a Crime, v. Culpa. Criminal, wherein is offense, v. Criminal. Crimson
color, v. Carmesi. a Criple or creeple, v. Coxo, Tullido. to Crispe, curle or
frizle, v. Crespar los cabellos. Crisped or curled, v. Crespado. a Crisping
iron, v. Bodkin. Crisped or curled hair, v. Encrespados cabellos. Cristall, v.
Crystal. to Christian or to baptize, v. Bautizar. Cronicles, v. Anales. a
Crocodile, v. Cayman, Cocodrillo. the Croaking or rumbling of the belly when it
is empty, v. Surrio de tripas. to Crook or make crooked, v. Encorbar,
Encorvar. Crook backed, v. Corcobado, Encorbado, Regibado. Crook legged, v.
Estevado. Crookedness, v. Encorbadura, Encorvadura. any Crooked thing made
like a hook, vide Ahocinado. to be Crooked, v. Ahocinarse. Crooked or made
crooked, v. Corvado, Encorvado, Tuerto. Crookednes, v. Corvadura. to Crookle
like a dove or pigeon, vide Arullar. to Cross, vide Cruzar atreuesar,
Trauesar. Crossed, vide Atreuesado, Cruzado. a Cross or misfortune, vide
cocobra, Des dicha, Disgracio. Crossely, vide A pospelo. a Cross or monument
set up in away, v. Cruz. a little Cross, v. Cruzezita. Cross, froward, or
contrary, v. Aviesso, Traviesso. a Cross way, v. Encruzijada. a Crossebowe,
v. Ballesta, or Vallesta. a Crossebow-maker, v. Ballestero. a shot with a
Crossebow, v. Ballestazo. a Croude or fiddle, v. Rabel. to Crow as a cock, v.
Cantar. a Crowing, v. Canto. a Crow, v. Cuervo, Corneja. a night Crow, v.
cumaya. a Crowfoote herb, v. Belida yerva, Guibella. to Crown, v. Coronar. a
Crown, vide Alguirnalda, Corona, Diadema. Crowned, v. Coronado. the Crown of
the head, v. Coronilla de la cabeca, Remolino de cabeca. a priest or friars
shaven Crown, v. Corona de religioso. a Crown of money, v. Escudo. a Crowning
or coronation, v. Coronacion. to Crucify, v. Crucificar. Crucified, v.
Crucifixo, Crucificado. a Crucifixe, v. Crucifixo. to Crud or curd, v. Quajar.
Crudding, v. Coagulacion, Quajamiento. Cruditie or lack of good digestion,
vide Crudeza. Cruditie or rawnes, v. Crudeza. to be Cruel, or exercise
cruelty, v. Encruelecerse. to wax Cruel, v. Encruelecer. waxed Cruel, v.
Encruelecido. Cruel, vide Atroz, Cruel, Duro, Foran^o. most Cruel, v.
Atrocissimo. Cruelly, v. Cruelmente. Cruelty, v. Crueldad, Crueza to Crum or
break small, vide Desmigajar. a Crum, v. Miga, Migaja. Crummed, v.
Desmigajado. Crumpfooted, or crooktfooted, v. Patituerto. a Crupper, or rumpe,
v. Grupera. a Crupper for an horse, v. Grupera. a Cruse, v. Cifo. to Crush in
together, v. Abollar. Crushed, v. Abollado. Crushing, v. Abolladura. a Crust,
v. Cortezon, Corteza. the Crust or shell of any thing, v. Corteza,
Encrostadura. Crustie, v. Cortezudo. to make Crustie, v. Encrostar. Crutches,
v. Muletas.
C V
a Cub, or little fox, vide Zorrilla. a Cubite from the elbow to the wrist, v.
Cobdo, Codo. a Cuckhold, cookehold, vide Cornudo. a Cuckowe, v. Cuclillo.
Cuckowe pintle, vide Aaron. a place of Cucumbers, v. Cohombral. a little
Cucumber, v. Cogombrillo, Cohombrillo. a Cucumber, v. Cogombro, Cohombro. made
like a Cucumber, v. Acohombrado. to chewe the Cud, vide Chewe. a little
Cudgel, v. Palillo. a Cudgel, v. Palo, Garrote. Cudgelled, v. Apaleado,
Aporreado. a Cudgeller, vide Apaleador, Aporreador. to Cudgel, v. Apalear,
Aporrear. Cudgelling, v. Aporreadura, Zurra. a Cuffe, vide Bofetada, Bofeton.
to Cuffe or buffet, v. Abofetear. Cuffed, v. Abofeteado. a Cuffer, v.
Abofeteador. Cuffes or foresleeues, v. Pun^os, Pun^etes. to Cull or to choose,
v. Escoger. Culled, v. Escogido. a Culler, v. Escogidor. Cullions, v. Cojones.
Culpable, v. Culpable. a piece of ordinance called a Caluerin, vide Culebrino,
Colobrina. a Cungar eele, v. Congrio. to Cunne without book, v. Tomar de coro.
a Cunney, v. Conie. Cunning, v. Fino. Cunning or skillful, v. Diestro,
Artificioso. Cunning or skilfulnes, vide A'rte, Diestreza. most Cunning, v.
Finissimo. Cunningly, vide Artificiosamente, Diestramente. a Cupboord, vide
Aparador, Alliazena, Ataifor. a little Cupboord, v. Almariete. a Cup or little
boll to drink in, v. Copa, Cifo, Taca, Tacon. a Cupbearer, vide Copero.
Cupshot or drunk, vide Borracho, Beodo. a Cupping glass which Physicians use
to draw out blood with, v. Ventosa. a Curate, v. Cura. to Curb, v. Arrendar.
to Curde or crud, vide Cuajar, Quajar. Curd, vide Cuajo. Curded, vide Cuajado,
Quajado. to Cure, v. Curar. a Cure, vide Cura. Cured, vide Curado. a Curet or
brestplate, v. Coraca. Curiosity, v. Curiosidad. Curious, vide Curioso.
Curiously, v. Curiosamente. to Curle or to crispe, v. Encrespar. Curled, vide
Encrespado. Curling, v. Encrespadura. a Curlew, or bird so called, vide
Arquilla. Current money, v. Forera. a Curre dog, vide Gusquejo, Gusque,
Gozque, Gozquejo. Currish, v. Canino. to Currie, vide Almohacar, Estregar. a
Currie vide Almohaca, Estregadura. Curried, vide Almohacado. to Currie or
dress leather, vide currar, Zurrar. a Currier, vide currador, Zurrador. to
Curse or banne, vide Maldezir. a Curse, v. Maldicion, Maldizimiento. Cursed,
vide Maldicho, Maldito. a Curser, v. Maldizidor. Cursedly, v. Malditamente.
Cursing, v. Maldiziento. a Curtain, vide Cortina, Delantera. a Curtain of a
wall, v. Lienco de muralla, Curtina de muralla. to Curtall, v. Derrabar,
Descolar. a Curtall, v. Derrabado, Rabon. Curtalling, vide Derrabadura,
Descoladura. Curtalled, vide Derrabado, Descolado. Courteous, v. Humano, Cortes.
a Cushen, v. Coxin. a Custard, v. Hojalde, Hojaldre. Custody, v. Custodia,
Guarda. to use or Custom, v. Vsar, Acostumbrar. to grow out of Custom, v.
Desabituar. grown out of Custom, v. Desabituado. growing out of Custom, vide
Desabituacion. to bring in use or Custom, vide Abituar. to bring out of use or
Custom, vide Desacostumbrar. grown to a Custom, v. Abituado. Custom,
fashion, or manners of people, v. Abito, Costumbre. Customable, vide
Acostumbrado. Customarie right, vide Derecho. Custom, tole, or tribute, vide
Alcabala, Peaje, Peage. a Customer or toll-gatherer, vide Aduanero, Alcabalero,
Peajero, Peagero. the Custom house or toll house, v. Duana, Aduana. a Customer
of a haven or port, v. Almoxarife, Gabelero, Gabellaro. a Cuttle fish, vide
Calamar. a Cutler, v. Espadero. a Cutpurse, vide Cicatero, Cortabollas. to cut
off the way, vide Atajar el Camino. to Cut off enemies by getting between
them, vide Atajar emmigos. to Cut off, vide Atajar, Cortar. to make Cuts, v.
Hatasajar, Tajar. Cut, v. Atajado, Cortado, Tajado. one that cutteth off, vide
Atajador. to Cut short, or cut off by the way, v. Entrecortar. to Cut round,
vide Cercenar. Cut round, vide Cercenado. a Cutting round, vide Cercena. a
Cutter, vide Cortador. Cuts or iagges, vide Claravoya. a Cut, v. Tajado. a Cut
in a journey, v. Atajo. Cutting the iagges or outsides of leaves, v. Cortadura.
a Cutting off of pleasure or mirth, v. Atajasolazes. a Cutting short of a
matter, v. Abreviadura. a Cutter, v. Cortador. a Cuttle fish, v. Pulpe.
C Y
Cypres, such as they make hatbandes, of vide Buratos. Cypres trees, v.
Acipres.
D
A Daffadill, vide Gamon, or Gamonito. a place of Daffadils, vide Gamonital,
Gamonera. a Dagge, v. Pistolete. a Dagger, v. Daga, Pugnal, Pun^al. a stabbe
with a Dagger, v. Pun^alada. a Day, vide Dia. to defer from Day to day, v.
Diferir, Alargar. it waxes Day, v. Amanesce. the dawning of the Day, vide
Alvor, or Albor. clear Day, v. Dia claro. noone Day, vide Medio dia sunDay, v.
Domingo. Monday, v. Lunez. tuesDay, v. Martes. wednesDay, v. Miercoles.
thursDay, v. Jueves. Friday, v. Viernes. satterDay, v. Sabado. a holy Day, v.
Dia ferial. christmas day, vide Pascua de navidad, Navidad, Nacimiento,
Nascimiento. new years Day, v. An^o nuevo, la circumcision. twelfe Day, v.
Dia de los Reyes, Fiesta de los Reyes, Epifania. candlemas Day, v. El dia de la
Candelaria, La purificacion de nuestra Sen^ora, Nuestra Sen^ora de Febrero.
ashwednesday, v. Miercoles de ceniza. good friday, v. Viernes santo.
annunciation Day, v. La anunciacion, nuestra Sen^ora de Marco. dog Days, v.
Caniculares. to Day, v. Oy, Hoy. now a Days, v. Oy dia. Day time, v. Entredia.
the other Day, v. Ante air. Daily, v. Cotidiano. to wax Day, v. Amanecer. Day
light, v. Dia claro. Daintines, v. Delicadeza. Dainty, v. Delicado. a Dale, v.
Vallado. to Dally or trifle, v. Florear, Popar. a Dallier, v. Floreador,
Popador. Dalliance, v. Popamiento. a Dame or mistres, v. A'ma. a Dam or mother,
v. Madre. Damage or loss, v. Perdida, Dan^o. Damask, v. Damasco. attired in
Damask, v. Damascado. a Damask garment, v. Vestido de Damasco. Damasking of
any thing, v. Atauxia. Damned or condemned, v. Condenado, Sentenciado.
Damnable, v. Damnable. to Damnifie or hurt, vide Empescer, Dan^ar. a Damsel,
v. Donzella. a Damson, v. Endrina. a Damson tree, v. Endrino. a Dandiprat or
dwarf, v. Enano. to Dandle, v. Acaricia^r, Brincar, Trevejar, Trebejar.
Dandled, vide Acariciado, Brincado, Trebejado. Dandraffe or scurfe in the head,
vide Caspa. full of Dandraffe, v. Casposo. Danewort herb, vide Sabuco
pequen^o. to Danger or put in danger, v. Ariscar, Peligrar. Danger, v. Arisco,
Peligro, Riesgo. Dangerous, v. Peligroso. put in Danger, v. Ariscado.
Dangerously, v. Peligrosamente. to Dangle down, v. Colgar. Dangling down, v.
Colgadero, Colgado, Colgadizo. Dapple gray, v. Rucio rodado. to Dare, v.
Desafiar. that Dares, v. Desafiador. to Darken, v. Escurecer. Darkness, v.
Tinieblas, Escuridad. Darkening, v. Escurecimiento. Dark, vide Escuro,
Obscuro, Tenebroso. Darkly, vide Escuramente, Obscuramente. Darkened, v.
Escurecido. Darnell, v. Cizan^a. a sower of Darnell, v. Cizan^ador. wild
Darnell, v. Joyo silvestre. to sow Darnell, v. Cizan^ar. to Dart or cast a
dart, v. Tirar dardo. a Dart, v. Dardo. a little Dart, v. Dardillo. to Dash
against, v. Abarrar. to Dash against the walls, v. Acibarrar en la pared,
Estrellar. to Dash with water, v. Salpicar. to Dash with dirt, v. Salpicar.
Dashing with dirt, v. Salpicadura. Dashed, v. Abarrado. a Daisie flower, v.
Catasol. to Dasle, v. Dazzle. a Dastard or coward, vide Cobarde or Covarde. a
Date of writing, v. Data. a Date fruit, v. Datil. the Dative case, v. Dativo
caso. a Daughter, v. Hija. a Daughter in law, a sons wife, vide Nuera. a
step Daughter, v. Andada. to Dance, v. Dancar, Baylar. to Dance in a round,
v. And ar en coro. to Dance on ropes, v. Trepar. a Dance, v. Danca, Fulia.
Daunced, v. Dancado, Baylado. a Dauncer, vide Dancadodor, Fuliador, Bailador. a
Dauncer on ropes, v. Trepador. to Daunt or abate ones courage, v. Abaxar la
presuncion. to Dawbe, v. Embarrar. Dawbed, v. Embarrado. Dawbing, v.
Embarradura. a Dawber, v. Embarrador. a Dawe, v. Corneja. a Dawnce, v. Bail,
or Bail, Danca. to Dawnce, v. Bailar, or Baylar, Dancar. a Dawncer, vide
Baylador, or Bayladora. the Dawne or dawning of the day, vide A'lba, A'lva,
Albor, Alvor. to Dazzle the eyes, v. Encandilar. Dazzling the eyes, v. Encandila.
a Dazler of sight, v. Encandilador. Dazzled, v. Encandilado.
D E
a Deacon, v. Diacono. a Deaconship, v. Diaconadgo. to be Dead, v. to Die. to
draw toward Death, vide Amortajar. Death, v. Muerte. Dead, v. Defunto,
Difunto, Muerto. sudden Death, v. Muerta subita. a Dead body, corpse or corse,
vide Cuerpo muerto, El muerto. almost Dead, v. Casi muerto. Deadly or causing
death, v. Mortal. to be Deaf, v. Sordecer. to wax Deaf, v. Ensordescer. to
make Deaf, v. Ensordar. making Deaf, v. Ensordamiento. Deaf, v. Sordo.
Deafenes, v. Sordez. Deafely, v. Sordamente. to Deal or distribute, v.
Distribuyr, Repartir, Dar. to Deal in business, v. Negociar, Tratar. a Dealer,
v. Hazedor, Tratante, Negociador. Dealing in business, vide Negociacion. false
or wicked Dealing, vide Trato doble, Trato falso. a Dealing, vide Negociacion,
Trato. a Deane, vide Dean. a Deanery, vide Deanadgo. to make Dear, vide
Encarescer, Hazer caro. Dear, vide Charo, Caro. Dearly, vide Caramente. a
Dearth, vide Carestia. Dear or costly, vide Caro. Death, v. Dead. to Debase or
abase, v. Abatir, Aviltar. Debased or abased, v. Abaxado, Aviltado, Abatido. a
Debasing, v. Abatimiento, Aviltamiento, Abaxamiento. a Debaser, v. Abatidor. to
Debate, discourse, discuss or reason, v. Debatir, Discurrir. Debated, v.
Debatido, Discurrido. Debating, v. Debatimiento, Discurso. Debate or strife, v.
Contienda, Debate, Porfia. to Debilitate or weaken, or to make feeble, v.
Debilitar, Enflaquecer. Debonaire or courteous, vide Cortes, Humano. Debt, v.
Deuda. to be indebted, v. Adeudarse. indebted, v. Adeudado. a Debtour, v.
Deudor. to run in Debt, v. Amohatrar. a Decade, v. Decada. to Decay, v.
empeorar. Decayed, v. empeorado. Decaying, v. empeoramiento. to Decease or die,
v. Morir, Acabar, Finar. Deceased, v. Defunto, Muerto, Finado. a Decease, v.
Finamiento, Muerte. to Deceive or beguile, v. Cantonada dar, Cantuzar, Embayr,
Engan^ar. to perceive a Deceit, or not to be deceived, v. Desengan^ar.
Deceived, v. Embaydo, Engan^ado. not Deceived, v. Desengan^ado. a Deceiuer, v.
Echacuervo, Embaydor, Engan^ador. Deceiving, v. Engan^o, Embaymiento. Deceit,
vide Artiman^a, Dolo, Embaymiento, Engan^o. Deceitful, v. Artero, Engan^oso.
Deceitfulnes, v. Engan^o. Deceitfully, v. Engan^osamente. December the month,
v. Deziembre. Decent, v. Decente. to Decerne, v. Dicernir. to Decide, v.
Decidir. Decided, v. Decidido, Deciso. Deciding, v. Decison. to Decifer or
describe, v. Descrivir. a Deck of a ship, v. Quartel. to Deck or garnish, v.
Adornar, Ataviar, Componer, Aderecar. Decked, v. Ornado. a Decker, v.
Adornador. Decking, v. Adorno, Adornato. to Declaime, v. Declamar. Declaimed,
v. Declamado. Declaiming, v. Declamacion. to Declare, tell or utter, v.
Anunciar, Declarar, Publicar, Dezir. Declared, v. Declarado, Anunciado.
Declaring, v. Declaracion, Anunciacion. a Declaration, v. Declaracion. to
Decline, v. Declinar. Declined, v. Declinado. a Decliner, v. Declinador. to
Decrease, vide Descrecer. Decreasing, v. Descrecimiento. to Decree, or
determine, vide Determinar. a Decree, v. Acuerdo, Decreto. Decreed, vide
Determinado. to Dedicate, vide Dedicar. Dedicated, v. Dedicado. Dedication,
vide Dedicacion. to Deduct, or substract, v. Deduzir. a Deed, v. Accion,
Facto, Hecho. a famous Deed, vide Sonada, Hecho famoso. a good Deed, v. O'bra
buena. an ill Deed, v. O'bra mala. in Deed, v. de Veras, En verdad. to Deem,
judge, or think of, v. Juzgar, Pensar. Deemed, vide Juzgado. the Deep, v.
Hondo, Hondura, Fondo, Fondon. Depth, vide Altura, Fondon, Hondon, Hondura,
Fondo. Deep, vide Hondo. a Deep gulf, v. Abismo. Deeply, vide Hondamente. a
Dear, vide Gama, Gamo. a Bucke, vide Ciervo. a Heart, vide Ciervo. Dear, vide
Caro. to Deface, v. Arruynar, Deshazer, Destruyr, Gastar. Defaced, v.
Arruynado, Gastado, Deshecho, Destruydo. Defacing, v. Ruyna, Deshazimiento,
Gasto. a Defacer, v. Gastador, Deshazedor. to Defame, vide Disfamar. Defamed,
v. Disfamado. a Defamatorie bill, v. Perque. a Default, vide Falta, Defeto. a
Defect, vide Defecto, Defeto, Falta. Defective, or failing, v. Defetuoso. to
Defend, or preserve, vide Amparar, Defender. Defended, v. Amparado, Defendido.
a Defender, v. Amparador, Defendedor, Defensor. a Defendresse, vide Defensora.
Defense, vide Amparo, Defencion, Defensa. Defensive, v. Denfensivo. to Defer
or delay, v. Dilatar, Diferir, Alongar. Deferred, v. Dilatado, Diferido. that
may be deferred, v. Dilatable. to Defy, vide Desafiar. Defiance, vide Desafio.
Defied, vide Desafiado. Defyings, vide Desafios. one that Defieth, vide
Desafiador. to Defile, v. Contaminar, Afear. Defiled, v. Afeado, Contaminado. a
Defiler, vide Afeador, Contaminador. Defiling, vide Afeamiento, Contaminacion.
to Define, vide Difinir. Definition, vide Difinicion. Defined, vide Difinido.
to Deflower, or ravish, v. Desflorar, Desvirgar, Estrupar v'na virgen.
Deflowred, v. Desvirgado, Desflorado, Estrupado. Deflowring, v. Desvirgamiento,
Estrupo, Desfloradura. to Deforme, vide Desfigurar. Deformed, vide Disforme.
Deformity, v. Disformidad. to Defraude, or deceive, vide Defraudar. to
Degenerate, vide Degenerar. Degenerated, v. Degenerado. Degenerating, vide
Degeneracion. to Degrade, or disgrade, v. Degradar, Desgradar. Degraded, vide
Degradado, Desgradado. Disgrading, v. Degradamiento, Desgradamiento. a Degree,
vide Grado. to prefer to a Degree v. Graduar. to Dehort, or dissuade, vide
Disuadir. Deintie, or dainty, v. Regalado. to Delay, defer or prolong, v.
Retardar, Diferir, Prolongar, Tardar. Delayed, v. Retardado, Tardado,
Prolongado, Diferido. a Delayer, v. Tardo, Espacioso. Delaying, v. Tardanca,
Prolongacion, Diferimiento. Delay, vide Tardanca. without Delay, v. sin
Tardanca. Delectation, vide Complazimiento, Complacencia, Delectacion, Deleyte.
Delectable, v. Deleytoso, Delectable. Delectablenes, vide Deleyte, Delectacion.
Delectably, v. Deleytosamente. to Deliberate, vide Deliberar. to consult or
take advise, v. Consultar, Tomar aviso. Deliberation, v. Deliberacion.
Deliberated, v. Deliberado. Deliberately, vide Deliberadamente. to make
Delicate, v. Hazer delicado, Regalar. Delicates, vide Gulleria, Gullonias.
Delicate or dainty, v. Delicado. Delicatenes, vide Delicadeza, Delicadura.
Delicately, vide Delicadamente. to Delight or please, v. Aplazer, Delectar,
Deleytar, Complazer. Delight, or delectation, v. Deleyte, Delectacion.
Delighted, vide Complazido. Delightful, v. Aplazible, ameno, Deleytoso.
Delightfulnes, v. Amenidad, Deleyte. Delightfully, v. Deleytosamente. most
Delightful, v. Amenissimo, muy Deleytoso. to Deliver, or save from, vide
Librar, Salvar. to Deliver or give to one, v. Deliberar. a Delivery up, v.
Entrega. to Deliver up or yield, vide Entregar. Delivered from or freed, v.
Delibrado, Librado. Delivered up or yielded, v. Entregado. a Deliverer up, v.
Entregador. Deliverance, v. Delibramiento. to be Delivered of child, vide
Desempren^ar. to Delude, vide Engan^ar. Deluded, vide Engan^ado. Delusion, vide
Engan^o. to Delue, vide Cavar. a Deluer, vide Acadonero, Cavador. Delued, vide
Cavado. a Deluge, or inundation of water, vide Diluvio. to Demand, v.
Demandar, Preguntar. a Demand, v. Demanda, Demandadora cosa, Pregunta.
Demanded, v. Demandado, Preguntado. a Demaunder, v. Demandador, Preguntador.
Demanding, v. Pregunta. Demeanor, v. Ademan, Ademanes, Acometimiento. to
Demonstrate, or declare, v. Demostrar. a Demonstration, v. Demostracion.
Demonstratiue, v. Demostrativo. Demure, v. Sobrio, Reposado. very Demure, v.
muy Sobrio. to Demurre or drive off, vide Engorrar. a Demurre or delay, vide
Engorra, Espera. full of Demurs, v. Engorroso. to Deny, v. Denegar, Negar. to
Deny the faith, v. Renegar. one that Denies the faith, v. Reniego. a Denier,
vide Negador. Denied, vide Denegado, Negado. a Denial, vide Denegamiento,
Negacion. a Den or cave, v. Caverna, Espelunca, Cueva. full of caves or Dens,
v. Cavernoso. to Denominate, vide Denominar. to Denounce, v Denunciar.
Denounced, vide Denunciado. Denouncing, v. Denunciacion. to Dent, vide Abollar.
Dented in with blows, vide Abollado. to Depart, vide Despedir, Partir. to
Depart or divide, v. Repartir, Dividir. Departed, v. Partido, Despedido. a
Departure, v. Despedida, Partimiento to Depend or stay upon, v. Depender. to
Depopulate, or spoil, vide Despoplar. to Depose or put down, v. Deponer,
Privar. to Depose or swear, vide Jurar. Deposed, v. Depuesto, Privado.
Deposing, v. Privacion, Deposicion. to Deprave, v. Infamar, Desacreditar,
Deshonrar. Depraved, vide Depravado, Infamado, Desacreditado, Deshonrado. a
Deprauer, vide Infamador, Defamador. Deprauation, v. Infamacion, Defamacion. to
Deprive or bereave, vide Privar, Quitar. Deprived, v. Privado, Quitado.
Depriving, vide Privacion, Quitamiento. that Depriueth, v. Priva, Quita. Depth,
vide Deep. to Depute, v. Deputar, Sostituyr. Deputed for another, v. Deputado,
Diputado, Sostituydo. to make a Deputy, vide Deputar, Diputar, Sostituyr. a
Deputy or lieutenant, vide Sostitudo, Diputado, Sen^alado. a Deputy or L.
president of a country, v. Adelantado. the lord Deputies office, vide
Adelantamiento. to Deride, v. Mofar, Burlar, Reyr. a Derider, vide Mofador,
Burlador. a Deriding, vide Burla, Mofa. to Derive, v. Derivar. a Deriuation,
vide Derivacion, Decendencia. Derived, vide Derivado. a Deriuing, vide
Derivacion. to Derogate, vide Quitar la honra a alguno, Desacreditar. a Desert,
vide Desierto, Yermo. Desert, vide Merescimiento. to Descend or come down, v.
Abaxar, Descender. Descended, vide Abaxado, Descendido. a Descent or pedigree,
vide Abolengo. to Describe, v. Descrevir. Describing, v. Descripcion. a
Description, v. Descripcion. to Descrie, v. Descubrir. Descried, v.
Descubierto. a Descrier, vide Descubridor. Descrying, vide Descubrimiento. to
Deserve, v. Merecer. to Deserve ill, vide Desmerecer. Deserved, v. Merecido. a
Deseruer, vide Merecedor, Merescedor. a Desert, v. Merecimiento. Deserving ill,
vide Desmerecimiento. to Deserve well, v. Merescer bien. a Design or purpose,
vide Desin^o. Designs, vide Desin^os. to Desire or covet, vide Apetescer,
Antojar, Desear, Dessear. a Desire, vide Apetito, Antojo, or Antoxo, Desseo,
Gana. Desired, v. Desseado, Antojado. Desiring, v. Antojo, Desseo. Desirous,
Antojadizo, Desseoso, Ganoso. very Desirous, vide Muy Desseoso, Antojodizo.
Desirously, v. Desseablamente, Desseosamente. to Desist, v. Desistir. a Deske,
vide A'rca, Armario, Caxa, Porta-cartas. to make Desolate, vide Assolar,
Deshazer, Destruyr. Desolate, v. Assolado, Deshecho, Destruydo. Desolation,
vide Assolacion, Destrucion. to Despair, v. Aburrir, Desafuziar, Desesperar.
Despair, v. Aburrimiento, Desesperacion. Desperate, v. Aburrido, Desesperado.
Desperation, v. Aburrimiento, Desesperacion. Despairing, v. Desafuziado.
Desperately, v. Abatidamente, Desesperadamente. to Despise, v. Despreciar,
Menospreciar, Desestimar, Aborrir. Despised, vide Aborrecido, Despreciado,
Menospreciado. a Despiser, vide Despreciador, Menospreciador, Aborrescedor,
Aborrecedor. Despising, v. Desprecio, Menosprecio, Aborrescimiento. Despite,
vide Despecho, Desprecio. in Despite, vide Adespecho. Despitefull, vide
Despechado. Despitefully, v. a Despecho, Despreciadamente. to Despoile, vide
Spoil. Desteny, vide Destino, Hado. the Destenies, vide Hadas, Hados.
Destinated, vide Destinado. Destitute, or forsaken, vide Destituydo, Dexado. to
Destroy, or spoil, vide Destruir, Deshazer, Gastar, Ruinar. Destroyed, v.
Abarrajado, Destruido perdido. a Destroyer, vide Destruidor. Destruction, v.
Destrucion, Destrozo, Perdicion. to Detain, vide Detener. Detained, vide
Detenido. Detaining, vide Detenimiento. to Detect, vide Reuelar, Descubrir.
Detected, v. Descubierto, Revelado. to Determine or purpose, v. Destinar,
Determinar. Determined or purposed, v. Determinado, Destinado. Determined or
resolved, vide Determinado, Resuelto. Determined by judgment, vide
Sentenciado. a Determination, vide Determinacion, Acuerdo. Determinately, v.
Determinadamente. to Detest, v. Abominar, Aborrecer, Detestar. Detested, vide
Abominado, Aborrecido. a Detester, v. Aborrecedor. Detestation, vide
Abominacion, Detestacion. Detestable, v. Abominable, Aborrecible, Detestable.
Detestably, v. Aborreciblemente, Detestablemente. Detesting, v. Aborrecimiento,
Detestacion, Abominacion. to Detract or slander, vide Detractar, Detratar,
Maldezir, Murmurar. Detriment or damage, vide Dan^o, Detrimento. to Divide or
part, v. Dividir, Partir, Repartir. Divided, v. Repartido, Dividido. a Deuider,
v. Repartidor, Divididor. a Division, v. Division, Particion. to cast out
Devils, vide Desendemoniar. one that has a Devil cast out off him, v.
Desendemoniado. the Devil, v. Demonio, Diablo. Deuilish, v. Diabolico.
Diuelishly, v. Diabolicamente. to Devise or invent, v. Divisar, Inventar,
Hallar. a Devise, v. Divisa, Devisa. Devised, v. Divisado. a Deviser, v.
Divisador. Devising, v. Divisamiento. Deuoire, v. Debito. Devotion or
deuoutnes, vide Devocion. to Devour or eat up, vide Engullir, Tragar,
Devorar. Devoured, v. Engullido, Tragado, Devorado. a Deuourer, vide
Engullidor, Tragador, Devorador. Devouring, vide Engullimiento, Tragamiento,
Deuoramiento. Deuouringly, vide Engullidamente, Devoradamente, Tragadamente.
Deuoutnes, or devotion, vide Devocion. Devout, vide Devoto. Devoutly, vide
Devotamente. the Dewce, or number of two, v. Dos. to Dew, or bedewe, vide
Rociar. Bedewed or wet with dew, vide Rociado. Dew, vide Rocio. Dewye, vide
Rocioso. the Dewlap of a beast, vide Papada de buey. Dexterity, vide
Desemboltura, Destreza.
D I
a Diadem, vide Diadema. a Dial, vide Cilindro, Horario, Relox. a sun
Dial, v. Relox de agua. a Dial maker, v. Reloxero. a Dialogue, v. Dialogo,
Coloquio. the Diameter, vide Calibre, Diametro. a Diamond, vide Diamante. a
Dibble to set herbs in a garden, vide Almocafre. to play at Dice, vide Jugar a
dados. a Die, vide Dado. Dice, vide Dados. a Dicer, vide Tahur. a Dicing house,
vide Tablaje, Tablajeria. to Dich, v. Fossar, Ahoyar. a Dich, vide Acequia,
Foso, Fosso, or Fossa, Hoyo. a little Dich, vide Fossillo. Diched, vide
Ahoyado, Fossado. a Dicher, v. Ahoyador, Cavador. Diching, v. Ahoyadura. a
Dicker of leather, v. Corambre, Colambre. a Dictator, vide Ditador. a
Dictatorship, vide Ditadura. a Didapper, vide Somergujo. to Die, vide Morir,
Acabar, Finar. D^yng, vide Difuncion. Diyng, v. Moriendo, Muriendo, Finando,
Acabando. to Die, as to die colors, v. Ten^ir. a Diet, vide Dieta. to Diffame,
vide Difamar. a Diffamer, vide Difamador. Diffamed, v. Difamado. to Differ,
vide Diferenciar. Difference, vide Diferencia. Different, v. Diferente.
Differing, idem. Differingly, vide Diferentemente. Differred or put off, v.
Diferido, Alargado. to Differ or put off, v. Deferir. Difficulty, vide
Dificuldad. Difficult, vide A'rduo, Dificil, Dificultoso. Difficultly, v.
Dificilmente, Dificultosamente. to make Difficult, v. Dificultar. Diffusedly,
vide Difusamente. Diffused, vide Difuso. to Digest, or set in order, v.
Digerir. ill Digestion, v. Ahito. Digested, or set in order, v. Digerido. to
Dig, or delue, vide Cavar. to Dig under ground, v. Minar. Digging under ground,
v. Minadura. Dug under ground, v. Minado. to Dig out of the earth, v.
Desenterrar. to Dig about the roots, v. Escavar. Dug, vide Cavado. Dug
about the roots, v. Escavado. Dug out of the earth, v. Desenterrado. a
Digger, v. Acadonero, Cavador. Digging out of the earth, vide Desenterramiento.
a Digging, v. Cavadura. Dignity, v. Dignidad, Honra. a Digression, v.
Digression. a Dike, vide Dich. to Dilate, spread abroad, or make large, vide
Dilatar. a Dilating of a matter, v. Dilacion, Diferimiento. to be Diligent, v.
Ser diligente. Diligence, vide Diligencia. Diligent, v. Diligente. Diligently,
vide Diligentemente. Dill, an herb, v. Eneldo. a Dimilance, vide Hombre de
armas, or Cavallo ligero. to Diminish, or abate, vide Amenguar, Diminuyr.
Diminished, vide Amenguado, Diminuydo. Diminishing, v. Achicadura,
Amenguamiento, Diminucion. a Diminutiue, v. Diminutivo. to Dim or make dim
the eyes, vide Ceguejar, Encandilar. Dimnes of sight, v. Ceguera. to Dine, v.
Ayantar, Comer. Dined, v. Ayantado, Comido. a Dinner, v. Ayantar, Comida. a
Dining place, vide Refectorio, Refetorio. Dint, or Dent, v. Abolladura. a
Diocese, v. Diocesis. a Diphthong or two vowels contracted into one syllable,
v. Dipthongo. to Dip meats in sauce, v. Adobar manjares. to Direct or rule, v.
Aderecar, Dirigir, Enderecar, Guiar. to Direct on the way, v. Encaminar.
Direction on the way, v. Encaminadura, Encamino. Directed on the way, v.
Encaminado. Directed, vide Aderecado, Dirigido, Guiado. Directing, v.
Direccion. Direction, v. Direccion. one that directs, v. Guiador. Dirt or
mire, v. Lodo, Cieno. a Dirtie or mirie place, vide Cenadal, Lodoso.
Disadvantage, v. Desventaja. to Disagree, v. Discordar, Discrepar, Desacordar,
Dissonar, Disavenir, Disconvenir. Disagreeing, v. Discord, Discrepante,
Desacordado, Dissonante. Disagreeing, disagreement or discord, v. Discordia,
Discrepancia, Desacuerdo, Dissonancia. Discord in music, vide Disacorde,
Dissonancia. to Disallow or reprove, v. Reprovar, No admitir. Disallowed, v.
Reprovado. Disallowing, v. Reprovacion. to Disanker or weigh up the anchor and
take the sea, vide carpar la ancora, Llevar la ancora. Disankered, v. Llevada
la ancora, carpada la ancora. to Disanull, v. Abrogar, Anular, or Anullar,
Cancellar. Disanulled, v. Abrogado. a Disanulling, v. Abrogacion. to
Disappoint, v. Desconcertar. Disappointed, v. Desconcertado. Disappointing, v.
Desconcierto. a Disard in whom there is no wit or reason, v. Bobo, Bovo, Loco.
to Disarme, v. Desarmar. Disarmed, v. Desarmado. to Disburden, v. Descargar.
Disburdened, v. Descargado. Disburdening, v. Descarga. to Disburse, v.
Desembolsar. Disbursed, v. Desembolsado. to Discarde, v. Descartar. Discarded,
v. Descarrado. to Descend or descend, vide Decendir, Abaxar. Descended, or
descended, v. Abaxado, Decendido. Descent of kindred, v. Abolengo,
Decendimiento, Decendencia. to Discern or perceive, v. Dicernir, Percebir.
Discerned, v. Percebido, Descernido. to Discharge, v. Absolver, Disculpar,
Descargar. Discharged, v. Absuelto, Disculpado, Finiquito, Quitado, Descargado.
a Discharge, v. Disculpa, Libramiento, Quitanca, Quitamiento. a Discharger,
vide Librador, Discargador. a Discharging, vide Absolucion, Disculpa, Descargo.
a Disciple or scholar, vide Dicipulo, Discipulo. Discipline, v. Disciplina. to
Disclose or discover, vide Abrir, Descubrir. Disclosed, v. Discubierto,
Abierto. a Discloser, v. Descubridor. Disclosing, v. Descubrimiento. to
Discomfite, v. Desbaratar. Discomfited, vide Desbaratado, Roto, Rumpido.
Discomfiting, Desbarate, Rotura. Discomfiture, v. Desbarate, Rotura. to
Discomfort, vide Desconfortar, Desconsolar. Discomforted, v. Desconsolado.
Discomfort, v. Desconsuelo. to Discommend or dispraise, v. Dezir mal, Murmurar.
Discommoditie, v. Incomodidad. Discontent, v. Descontento. Discontented, v.
Descontento. Discontentedly, v. Descontentamente. to Discontinue, v. No
continuar. Discord in music, v. Desentonado, Desacuerde. Discord, v.
Discordia, Discrepancia. Discordance, idem. Discordant, v. Discord,
Discrepante. to Discover or disclose, v. Abrir, Descubrir. a Discovered, v.
Descubierto. a Discouerer, v. Descubridor. Discovering, v. Descubrimiento.
Discovery, vide Abrimiento, Descubrimiento. to Discourage or discomfort, v.
Abatir, Desanimar. Discouraged, vide Abatido, Desanimado. a Discourager, v.
Abatidor. a Discouraging or driving out of conceit, v. Abatimiento. to
Discourse, v. Discourir. Discoursed, v. Discourido. a Discourse, v. Discurso.
Discoursiue, v. Discursivo. to Discredit, v. Desacreditar. one that
Discrediteth, vide Desacreditador. a Discredit, v. Descredito. Discrediting,
v. Discredito. Discreetenes or discretion, vide Discrecion. Discreet, v.
Cuerdo, Discreto. Discreetly, vide Cuerdamente, Discretamente. Discurtesie, v.
Descortezaa. to Disdain, v. Desden^ar, Enfastidiar, Esquivar. Disdain, v.
Esquiveza, Desden. Disdained, v. Desden^ado. Disdaining, vide Enfastidiando,
Desden^ando. Disdainfulnes or disdain, v. Desden. Disdainful, v. Altivo,
Desden^oso, Esquivo, Fastidioso. Disdainfully, vide Esquivamente,
Desden^osamente. a Disease, v. Dolencia, Malatia, Enfermedad. Diseased, vide
Enfermo. to Disfigure, vide Desfigurar. Disfigured, vide Desfigurado.
Disfiguring, vide Desfiguramiento. to Disgorge, or vomit, vide Vomitar,
Gomitar. to Disgrace, vide Desgraciar, Desacreditar. a Disgrace, vide Desfavor,
Desgracia. Disgraced, v. Afrentado, Disfavorecido, Desgraciado, Desacreditado.
a Disgracer, v. Afrentador. to Disgrade, or degrade, vide Degradar, Desgraduar.
Disgraded, v. Desgraduado. to Disguise, v. Disfracar, Dissimular. a Disguise,
v. Disfraz. Disguised, v. Disfrazado, Dissimulado. a Disguiser, v. Disfracado.
Disguising, v. Disfraz. a Dish, or platter, v. Plato. a Dishclout, v. Rodilla.
to Disinherite, or disherite, v. Deseredar. Disinherited, v. Deseredado.
Disinheriting, v. Deserencia. Dishonestie, v. Desonestidad. Dishonest or
ungodly, v. Desonesto. Dishonestly, v. Desonestamente. to Dishonor, v.
Deshonrar. Dishonor, v. Deshonra. Dishonorable, v. Deshonrado. Dishonored,
v. Deshonrado. to Dislike, v. Desfavorecer. to Dislodge, v Desalojar.
Dislodged, v. Dosalojado. Disloialtie, v. Deslealdad. Disloyal. v. Desleal.
Disloyally, v. Deslealmente. to Dismay or astonish, v. Desmayar. Dismayed, v.
Desmayado. Dismal, vide Infelice, Aziago. to Dismember, v. Desmembrar.
Dismembered, v. Desmembrado. Dismembring, v. Desmembradura. to Dismiss, v.
Despedir. Dismissed, v. Despedido. Dismissing, v. Despedimiento. Dismounting,
v. Apeamient^. to Dismount, v. Desencavalgar. to Disobey, v. Desobedecer.
Disobeied, v. Desobedecido. Disobedience, v. Desobediencia, Inobediencia.
Disobedient, v. Desobediente. to Disorder, v. Descomponer, Desordenar. to be
Disordred, v. Desmandarse. Disorder, v. Descompostura, Desorden. Disordered,
vide Descompuesto, Desmandado, Enorme, Desordenado. Disordering, v.
Descompostura, Desorden. Disorderly, v. Desordenamente. to Despair, or
Despair, vide Desesperar. to Dispatch, v. Despachar, Acabar. Dispatch, v.
Despacho. Dispatched, v. Acobado, Despachado. a Dispatcher, vide Acabador,
Despidiente. Dispatching, v. Acabamiento, Despacho. to Dispend, or waste, vide
Despender, Gastar. Dispending, v. Gastando. to Dispense, v. Dispensar. a
Dispensation, v. Dispensacion. Dispensed with, v. Dispensado. to Disperse or
s^atter, v. Dissipar. Dispersed, v. Dissipado. a Dispersing, v. Dissipacion. to
Displaie, v. Desplegar. Displaied, v. Desplegado. a Displaying, v.
Desplegadu^a. to Displease, or discontent, v. Despagar, Desplazer, Desagradar,
Descontentar. Displeasant, v. Desplazido, Descontento, Despagado.
Displeasantly, v. Desagradablemente. Displeased, v. Deservido, Despagado.
Displeasing, v. Desplazible. a Displeasure, v. Deservicio, Despagamiento,
Desplazer. to Dispoile, v. Despoile. to Dispose or set in order, vide Disponer.
Disposed, v. Dispuesto. Disposing, v. Disposicion. Disposition, v. Dispusicion.
to Dispossess, v. Desposseer. Dispossessed, v. Desposseydo. Dispraise, v.
Desloor. to Dispraise or discommend, vide Desalabar, Desloar. Dispraised, v.
Desalabado. Dispraising, v. Desloor. to Disprofite, v. Desaprovechar.
Disprofited, v. Desaprovechado. to Disprooue, confute, or convict, v. Confutar,
Confundir. a Disproouing, v. Confutacion. to Dispute, v. Argumentar, Arguir,
Disputar. a Disputation, v. Disputacion. Disputed, v. Disputado. a Disputer, v.
Argumentador, Disputador. Disputing, v. Disputacion. to Disquiet, vex, or
trouble, v. Desasossiegar, inquietar, Rebolver. Disquieted, v. Inquietado.
Disquietnes, v. Reboltura. a Disquieter, v. Reboltoso. a Disquieting, v.
Desasossiego, Inquietud, Reboltura. to Dissemble or counterfaite, v.
Dissimular, Fingir. Dissembled, v. Dissimulado, Fingido. a Dissembler, vide
Dissimulador, Fingidor, Hipocrita. a Dissembling or dissimulation, v.
Dissimulacion, Fingimiento. Dissemblingly, v. Dissimuladamente, Fingidamente.
Dissension, v. Dissencion. Dissimulation, v. Dissembling. to Dissolve, v.
Ensolver. Dissolved, v. Ensolvido. Dissolute, careless, or unruly, v.
Dissoluto. to Dissuade, v. Disuadir. Dissuaded, v. Disuadido. a Distaffe, v.
Rueca. Distant, v. Distante. a Distance, v. Distancia, Intervalo. to
Distermper, v. Destemplor. Distempred, vide Destemplado. Distempreture, v.
Distemplanca. to Distill, v. Distillar, Destillar, Destilar. a Distillation, v.
Distillacion. Distilled, v. Distillado. a maker or seller of things Distilled,
vide Destilador. to Distinguish, v. Distinguir. Distinguished, v. Destinto,
Distincto. Distinctly, or severally, v. Apartadamente. Distress, v. Aprieto.
Distressed, v. Aprietado. a Distressing, v. Aprietamiento. to Distribute, v.
Compartir, Distribuyr. Distributed, v. Distribuydo. a Distribution, v.
Distribucion. to Distrust, v. Desaconfiar, Deshuziar. Distrusted, v.
Desaconfiado. to Disturb or trouble, vide Disturbar, Turbar. Disturbance, v.
Pesadumbre. to Diswade, v. Desaconsejar. Diswaded, v. Desaconsejado. a Ditch
vide, Dich. Dittanie, or garden ginger, vide Ditamo. to Diue under water, vide
capuzar, cabullir, Somergujar, Zabullir. Diued under water, vide cabullido,
cahondado, Zabullido. Diuing, v. cabullimiento, Zabullimiento, Somergujo.
Diverse, sundry, or unlike, vide Diverso. Diversity, v. Diversidad. Diversely,
v. Diversamente. a Diuider, v. Apartador. Divided, v. Apartado, Dividido.
Dividing, v. Apartamiento. to Divide, or Divide, v. Apartar, Compartir,
Dividir. to Divide in half, v. Demediar. Divided in half, v. Demediado.
Division, v. Division. to Divine or prophecy, v. Agorar, Divinar. a Diuiner of
soothsayer, vide Agorero, Sage. Divination, vide Agoreria, Divinacion.
Divination by the sacrificing of beasts, v. Aruspicina. a Divine, v. Divino,
Teologo. Divinity, vide Divinidad, Teologia. Divinely, v. Divinamente. to
Divorce, vide Apartar, Descasarse, Repudiar. Divorced, v. Apartado, Descasado,
Repudiado. Diuorcement, v. Apartamiento, Divorcio, Repudio. a Diuorcer, vide
Apartador. a Diuorcing, v. Apartamiento. to Diuulgate or publish, v. Divulgar,
Publicar. Diuulgated or published, v. Divulgado, Publicado. a Dizzard or
natural fool, vide Bamba, Tonto.
D O
a Doa, vide Bucke. to Doat, v. Delirar. a Doater, vide Delirante. a Docke
where a ship is made, v. Astilero, Ataracana. a Doctor, v. Dotor, Doctor. a
Doctor of divinity, vide Dotor en Teologia. a Doctor of physic, vide Dotor
en medecina. a Doctor of the chair, v. Cathedratico. a D^ctor of law, v.
Dotor en leyes. Doctrine, v. Dotrina. a Docume^t, v. Documento. Dodgingly, v.
Cavilosamente. to Do, vide Hazer. to Do well, v. Bien hazer. Doing well, v.
Bien hecho. to Do violence, v. Abarrajar. a Doing, v. Hecho. a Doer, v.
Hazedor. a thine Done, or deed, v. Hecho. a Dog, vide Can, Perro. Dogs in
Barbary which in the night do bark continually, v. Adiues. a little dog, v.
Gosque, Gozque, Perrillo Dogged or churlish, v. Canino. become like a dog, v.
Emperrado. Doggedly, v. Emperradamente. a curre Dog, v. Perrazo. Dog days,
v. Dias caniculares. a little Dog, v. Perrillo, Perrico. Dog brier, v.
carca peruna, Gavanco. Doleful or lamentable, v. Lamentable, Lastimoso.
Dolefully, v. Lastimosamente. a Dolphin, v. Dalphin, Delfin, Golfin, Gorfin. a
Dolt, v. Bovo, or Bobo. Doltish, vide Torpe. Doltishnes, v. Boveria, Torpedad,
Torpeza. Doltishly, v. Torpemente. Domestical, v. Domestico. Dominion, vide
Dominio. Dommage, v. Damage. a Doom, v. Judgment. Doomes day, v. Dia de
Juyzio. a Doreflie, v. Escaravajo. a Door, v. Puerta. a little Door, v.
Puerta pequen^a, Portezuela. a back Door, v. Postigo, Puerta falsa. a Door
sill or threshold, v. Vmbral. a Door keeper, v. Portero. a Dormouse, v. Liron.
a Dorre or drone, v. Zangano. a Dorter or dormitorie, vide Dormitorio. a Dosen,
v. Dozena. a Dosser, v. Canastro. to Dote, v. Desvariar. a Doter, v.
Desvariador. Doting or dotage, v. Desvario. Dotingly, v. Desvariadamente. to
Double, vide Doblar, Duplicar, Redoblar. Doubled, vide Doblado, Doblegado,
Duplicado. Doubling, v. Doblegadura. Double, v. Doble. Doubly, v. Dobladamente.
Double formed, v. Biforme. Double faced, v. Bifronte. a Doublet, v. Jubon. to
Doubt or be in doubt, vide Dudar, Dubdar. a Doubt, v. Dubda or Duda. Doubtful,
v. Dudoso. Doubtfulnes or ambiguitie, vide Duda, Dubda. Doubtfully, v.
Dudosamente. without Doubt or doubtless, v. Sin duda. a Dove, v. Paloma, Palomo.
to cry or mourn as a Dove, v. Arrullarse la Paloma. a stock Dove, v. curana,
Paloma. a young stock Dove, v. corita. a turtle Dove, v. Tortola. Douelike, or
pertaining to a dove, v. Columbino. a Dove house, v. Palomar, Palomera. Dough,
v. Massa. to Douke, v. Ducke and diue. a Down or plain, v. un Llano. a going
Down or bending of an hill, vide Cuesta abaxo. a steep Downfall from a hill
or rock, vide Abarrancadero, Derrumbadero, Despen^adero. to give a Dowry, v.
Dotar. a Dowry, v. Dote. a Drab, queen or contemptible woman, v. Puta.
Dragagant, v. Alquitira. to Drag, v. Arrastrar. Dragged, v. Arrastrado.
Dragging, v. Arrastradura. a Drag net, tramell or sweep net, vide Barredera. a
Dragon, v. Drago or Dragon. an herb called Dragon, vide Cumillo, Draguncia. a
Drayman, v. Carreteros. to Draine or train water by furrows, brooks or
conduites, v. Esguazar. a Draining or turning of water another way, v. Esguazo.
a Drake or ducke, v. A'nade. a Dram in weight, v. Adarme, Drama, Ochava. a
Draper, v. Trapero. Draperie, v. Traperia. a woollen Draper, v. Trapero. a
linen Draper, v. Lencero. a kind of caruers work called Draperie or
cillerie, v. Silleria. the Draught, shape or feature of the body, v. Retrato.
a Draught with a net, v. Cardume. a Draught in drinking, v. Trago. a Draught or
iakes, v. Privada. to Draw together, v. Encoger. Drawing together, v.
Encogimiento. Drawn together, v. Encogido. to Draw forth or out, v. Deduzir.
to Draw out, v. Sacar. to Dra^e out of the scabberd or sheath, v. Desembaynar.
to Draw near or approach, vide Llegar, Acercar. a Draw bridge, vide Levadiza
puente. to Draw in, vide Entroduzir. to Draw up cloth, vide Frunzir. to Draw
in breathe, vide Sorber. to Draw a bow, vide Tirar arco. to Draw aside, vide
Distraer. Drawing aside, vide Destraymiento. Drawn aside, vide Destraydo.
Drawn to, vide Atraydo. Drawn out at length, vide Adelgazado. Drawn out,
vide Sacado. to Draw pictures, vide Dibuxar. a Drawer, vide Dibuxador. Drawn
in pictures, v. Dibuxado. one that Draws out at length, v. Adelgazador.
Drawing out at length, vide Adelgazamiento. Dread, v. Temor, Miedo. to Dream,
v. Son^ar. a Dream, v. Suen^o. a Dreamer, v. Son^edor. Dreaming, v. Suen^os.
Dregs, grounds or leez of any thing, v. Borras, Hez, Orruras. full of Dregs,
v. Heziento. to Dress or trim, v. Aparar, Polir. to Dress meat, vide Guisar,
Aderecar, Aparejar. Dressed for meat, v. Guisado, Aparejado, Cozido,
Aderecado. a Dresser of meat, vide Guisador, Cozinero. a Dresser or board, v.
Aparador, Tajon. to Dry or make dry, v. Enxugar, Hazer enxuto, Orear, Secar.
to Dry in the sun, vide Enxugar al sol. Dry, v. Enxuto, Seco. very Dry or
thirsty, v. Boquisecos. Dryness, v. Secura, Sequedad. a Drift or policy,
vide Policia. to Drink, v. Bever. to Drink avie, v. Bever a porfia. to Drink
whole pots, v. Bever al cabo. to Drink quaffing, v. Bever mucho. to drink to
one, vide Brindar, Hazer brindes. to Drink in or sup up, v. Embever. Drink,
v. Bevida. a Drinker, v. Bevedor. Drinking, v. Bevida. a Drinking pot, v. Cifo,
Jarro. a Dronkard, v. Borracho, Beodo. to Drip or drop, v. Pringar, Correr el
gordo, or Correr la pringa. the Dripping of meat, v. La pringa. to Drive away,
v. Oxear. to drive beasts as carters do, vide Harrear. to Drive out of heart,
v. Abatir. to Drive in with a hammer, vide Martillar. a Driuer away, v.
Oxeador. Driven out of heart, v. Abatido. to Drive off, v. Deferir. Driving
away, v. Oxeo. a Driving back, v. Rechaca. to Drive back, v. Rechacar. to
Driuell, vide Bavear. a Droane, vide Zangano. a Dromedarie, v. Dromedario. to
Drop, vide Gotear. to Drop upon, v. Gotear. a Drop, vide Gota. a little Drop,
vide Gotilla. Dropped, vide Goteado. Dropping, vide Gotadura. Droppings of
taps, v. Escurriduras. the Dropsy, vide Entrecuero y carne, Hidropesia, y
dropesia. troubled with the Dropsy, v. y Dropico. Dross, vide Borra. Dross
of coals, v. Cisco. a Drove, or heard of beasts, v. Hato, Harria. a Drouer,
vide Harriero. Drowsy, or sleepie, vide a Dormido. to Drown or plunge, v.
Anegar, campuzar. to be Drowned, vide Anegarse. Drowned, v. Anegado, Ahogado.
Drowning, vide Anegamiento, Ahogamiento. an apothecarie Drug, v. Droga. one
that sells Drugs, v. Droguero. a Drum, vide Atambor, Caxa. to play on the
Drum, v. Tocar el Atambor, Tocar la Caxa. a little Drum, vide Atamborzillo. a
Drummer, v. Atambor. Drumming, v. Tocar la caxa, Tocar el Atambor. to be
Drunk, vide Emborracharse, Embeodarse, Embriagarse. to make Drunken, v.
Embeodar, Embriagar, Emborrachar. Drunk up, v. Embevido, Embriagado, Borracho,
Beodo. a Drunkard, v. Borracho, Beodo. Drunken, v. Beodo, Embriago, Borracho. a
Drunken woman, v. Borracha. Drunkenly, v. Beodamente, Borrachamente.
Drunkenness, vide Beodez, Borracheria, Borrachera, Borrachez, Briaguez. a
Drunken match, v. Bevida, Borracheria, Embeodez, Embriaguez.
D V
a Dublet, or doublet, vide Jubon. a Duchy, vide Duquesa. a Duchman, or
German, v. Alman. the high Duch people, the Germans, vide Gente Alemana.
Duchland, or Germany, v. Aleman^a. a Ducke, or drake, v. A'nade. a tame Ducke,
v. A'nade de call. a wild Ducke, v. A'nade silvestre. a Duckling, vide
An^adina, Anadina. to Ducke or diue, vide campuzar, Somergujar, Somergir,
cabullir. a Ducket, vide Ducado. Due, vide Devido. Duly, vide Devidamente. a
Dug, vide Teta, V'bre. to suck a Dug, vide Mamar. a little Dug, vide
Vbrezilla. the nipple of the Dug, vide Pezon de la teta. a Duke, vide Duque. a
Duches, vide Duquesa. a Dukedom or duchy, v. Ducado. a Duchy, vide Dukedom.
to Dull or make dull, v. Aturdir, Botar, or Votar, Embotar. Dulnes, v.
Embotamiento, Entorpecimiento. Dull of edge, vide Voto, or Boto, Embotado. a
Dull-head or dullard, vide Entorpecido, Torpe, Rudo. to wax Dull spirited,
vide Entorpecer. Dulnes or slownes, vide Torpeza, Torpedad. Dulled, v.
Aturdido. Dully, vide Aturdidamente. to be Dum, vide Mudecer. Dum, vide Mudo.
Dumly, vide Mudecido. to Dung, or manure, vide Estercolar. Dunged, vide
Estercolado. Dung of hogs or sheep, v. Freca. Dung, v. Hienda. Dunging, v.
Estercolamiento. one that carries or spreads Dung, vide Estercolero. a
Dunghill, v. Almuladar, Estercolino, Esterquero, muladar. a Dungeon, or dark
prison under ground, v. Calaboco, Cima. Dun, vide Colors. a Dunse, vide
As^azo. to Dure, vide Endure. Durable, vide Durable. Dirt, or dirt, v. Cieno,
Lodo. a Durtie place, v. Tremedal. Durtinesse, v. Encenagamiento, or
Enlodadura. to make Durtie, vide Encenagar, Enlodar. Durtie, or full of dirt,
v. Cienoso, Encenagado, Enlodado. Duskish, vide Moreno color. Dust, vide Polvo.
Dustie, vide Polvoroso. to beat out Dust, v. Desempolvar, Despolvorear. to
beat to Dust, v. Polvorear. to cast Dust on writing, vide Empolvar. a
Dust-boxe, vide Salvadera. Dusted over, v. Empolvorado. be Dusting, v.
Empolvoramiento. to be Dust, v. Empolvorar. Duty, v. Debito, Devido.
D W
a he Dwarffe, vide Enano, Hombrecillo. a she Dwarffe, vide Enana. to Dwell,
v. Abitar, Habitar. to Dwell near unto, v. Avezinar. Dwelled, vide Abitado.
Dwelled near unto, vide Avezinado. a Dweller, v. Abitador, Habitador.
Dwelling, vide Abitacion. a Dwelling place, v. Abitacion.
D Y
to Dye colors, v. Ten^ir. Dyed, vide Ten^ido. a Dyer, vide Tintorero. a Dye
house, vide Tinte.
E
EAch, vide Each. to be Eager, tart, or sour, vide Azedo, A'gro. to wax Eager,
vide Azedar. Eager, vide Hazedo. Eagernes in taste, vide Azedura, Hazedura. an
Eagle, vide A'guila. to Eane, or bring forth as ewes, vide Parir. Eaned, vide
Parido. Eaning, vide Parida. an Ear, vide Oreja. to wag the Ears, vide
Orejear. to cut off the Ears, v. Desorejar. to Ear or till ground, v. to
Plough. the Ear or handle of a pitcher, v. A'sa. lap-Eared, vide Orejon. great
Eared, vide Orejudo. an Eare-ring, v. Cercillo. to Ear as corn does, v.
Espigar. an Ear of corn, vide Espiga, Espigon. grown to Ear, vide Espigado.
an Earl, vide Conde. an Earls wife, or countess, vide Condessa. an
Earldom, v. Condado. Early, vide Temprano de man^ana. Early in the morning,
v. de Man^ana. to Earne or get, vide Travajar por su jornal. to be Earnest,
vide Ahincar, Importunar. to be Earnest in suit, vide Importunar. Earnest that
one gives or takes in making any bargain, v. Arras, Sen^al. Earnest in
suite, v. Importuno. Earnestnes, v. Ahinco, Importunidad, Earnestnes in suit,
vide Importunidad, Quexura. Earnestly, v. Ahincadamente, A pechos, Importuno.
Earnestly, v. Mas a pechos. to lay in the Earth, v. Poner in tierra. an
Earthquake, v. Temblor de tierra. Earthen, or of earth, v. Terreno. Earthly, v.
Terreno. to Ease, lighten, or disburden, vide Descargar, Aliviar. to ease or
mittigate ones grief, v. Mitigar, Aplacar. to make easy, v. Facilitar. to
live at Ease, v. Bivir a su alvedrio. Ease, v. Alivio, Descanso. Eased, v.
Despin^ado, Aliviado, Descansado. Easines, v. Facilidad. Easy, v. Facil. most
Easy, v. Facilissimo. Easily, v. Facilmente. very Easy, vide Muy facil. to do
ones Easement, v. Hazer camara, yt al servicio, Purgar el vientre. the East
part where the sun rises, v. Levante, Orient. East southeast, v. Levecho.
the East wind, v. Lest, Levante. Easterly, vide Oriental. the feast of
Easter, vide Pascua, Florida. belonging to Easter, v. Pascual. an Eastrich, a
bird so called, v. Avestruz. to Eat, v. Comer, Manjar. to Eat a snatch and
away, v. Comer un bocado. an Eater or glutton, v. Comedor, Comilon. Eaten, v.
Comido. that which is to be Eaten, v. Comedero, Comedera. Eaten up, v. Todo
comido. Eating afternoon, v. Merienda. the Eaues of an house, v. Alero. an
Eawe, v. Oveja.
E B
to Ebb as the sea does, vide Baxar la mar, Menguar la mar, Descrescer la mar.
the Ebb of the sea, v. Refluxo de mar, Decreciente de mar, Menguante de mar.
an Ebbing, vide Decreciente de mar, Menguante de mar, Refluxo de mar. Ebrietie,
vide Drunkenness.
E C
Ecclesiastical, v. Eclesiastical. the Ecclesiastical state, v. Jerarchia. to
make an Echo, v. E'co Hazer. an Echo, v. E'co, E'cho. Each one, v. Cada v'no.
an Eclipse, vide Eclipse. to Eclipse, v. Eclipsar. the Eclipse of the sun, v.
Eclipsado sol, Eclipse del sol. Eclipsed, v. Eclipsado. Eclipsing, v. Eclipse.
E E
an Eele, v. Anguilla. an Eele spear, v. Arrexaque.
E D
to set on Edge, v. Afilar. the edge of a weapon or tool, vide Filo, el Corte.
the Edge or brinke of any thing, v. Orilla, Cabos, Fines. the Edge, hemme, or
skirt of a garment, v. Orilla. an Edict, v. Edito, Edicto. to Edify or build,
v. Edificar, Fabricar. to Educate or bring up, v. Educar.
E F
to Effect, or bring to pass, v. Efectuar, Efetuar. an Effect or bringing to
pass, v. Efeto, Efecto. Effectuousnes, or efficacy, v. Eficacia. Effectual,
v. Efectuoso, Eficaz. Effectually, vide A pechos, Efectuosamente, Eficazmente.
more Effectually, v. Mas a pechos. to be Effeminate, v. Efeminar. Effeminate or
womanlike, v. Efeminado, Afeminado. Effeminately, v. Afeminadamente. Efficacy,
or great force, v. Eficacia. Effusion or pouring out, v. Efusion. Eftsoons or
often, v. Often.
E G
Eger, or Eager, v. A'gro, Cruel. to Egg or provoke, v. Incitar, Acucar,
Provocar. Egged or provoked, v. Acucado, Incitado. an Egging or provoking on,
v. Zuzon, Acucon, Incitamiento. to sit on Eggs or brood, v. Echar sobre
huevos, Yazer sobre huevos. to lay Eggs, v. Desovar, Poner huevos, ovar. an
Egg, v. Huevo. to sit brooding of Eggs, v. Yazer sobre huevos. a laying of
Eggs, v. Ovando. a new laid Egg, v. Huevo fresco. a rotten Egg, v. Huevo
guero. an addle Egg, v. Huevo guero. the white of an Egg, vide Clara de
huevo. the yolke of an Egg, vide Yema de huevo. an Eggeshell, v. Cascara de
huevo. an hard Egg, v. Huevo duro. a soft Egg, v. Huevo blando. an Egg that
has a chicken in it, v. Huevo empollado. an Egg with two yolks, vide Huevo
de dos Yemas, or Amarillas. an Egiptian, v. Gitano. an Eglogue or sheepherds
song, vide E'gloga. a counterfeit Egyptian, or runnagate Gypsy, vide Gitano.
Eglantine, or sweet brier, vide Escaramujo. Egregious, vide Excellent. an
Egresse, or going forth, vide Salida.
E I
an Eye, vide Eye. Eigh, or well, vide Bien. Eight, vide O'cho. the eight part,
vide Ochavario. Eighty, vide Ochenta. Eisell, vide Vinegar. Either, vide Or.
E L
to lean on his Elbowe, vide Acodar. leaned on the Elbowes, vide Acodado.
leaning on the Elbowes, vide Acodadura, Acodamiento. an Elbowe, vide Cobdo,
Codo. an Elder, vide Anciano. Eldershipp, vide Anciania. Eldest, vide de mas
edad. an Elder tree, vide Sabuco, Sauco, Sambuco. to Elect, vide to Chose. an
Electuarie, vide Letuario. Elegancy, or finenes in speech, v. Elegancia.
Elegant, vide Elegante, Eloquente. Elegantly, vide Elegantemente. an Elemente,
vide Elemento. pertaining to Elements, vide Elemental. an Elephant, or
oliphant, vide Elefante. to Eleuate, or lift up, vide Alcar, Llevar. an Elfe,
vide Dwarf. an Elm, vid O'lmo. a grove of Elmes, vide Olmeda. an Elle, vide
A'lna. Eloquence, v. Elegancia, Eloquencia, Facundia. Eloquent, vide Elegante,
Eloquente. Eloquently, vide Elegantemente, Eloquentemente. most Eloquent, vide
Elegantissimo, Eloquentissimo. Elsewhere, vide A otra part.
E M
an Ambassador, or ambassador, vide Embaxador. an Embassage, vide Embaxada.
hot Embers, vide A'scuas. to Embosse, vide Imbosse. to Embolden, vide
Atreuerse, Auenturarse. to Embowel, or bowel, vide Destripar. to Embrace, vide
Abracar. Embraced, vide Abracado. one that Embraces, vide Abracador. Embracing
vide Abracada, Abracamiento, Abraco. to Embrewe, vide Ensangrentar. Embrewed,
vide Ensangrentado. an Embrewing, vide Ensangrentamiento. Embring days, vide
Vigilias. to Embroder, vide Bohordar, Boslar, Bordar. Embrodered, vide Bordado,
Boslado. an Embroderer, vide Bordador, Boslador, Recamador. Embrodery, vide
Bordadura, Bosladura, Recama. an Emerald, a precious stone, vide Esmeralde.
Eminent, or appearing, vide Eminente. Eminency, or excellency, v. Eminencia.
Emerrhoides, or a disease in the fundament, called the piles, vide Moroides. an
Emmet, vide Hormigo. a place of Emmets, vide Hormiguero. to Empaire, or
diminish, v. Diminuyr, Menguar, Empeorar. Empaired or diminished, v. Diminuydo,
Menguado, Empeorado. an Empairing, v. Diminucion, Mengua, Empeoramiento. to
Empeach, vide Acusar. an Empeaching, v. Acusacion. an Emperor, vide Emperador,
Augusto. an Empress, vide Augusta, Emperatriz. belonging to the Empire, v.
Emperial. an Emperors palace, vide Palacio Emperial. an Empire, vide Imperio.
an Emplaister, vide Plasma. one that uses Emplaisters, vide Plasmador. to
Emploie, or bestow, vide Emplear. Employed, vide Empleado. an Employing, v.
Empleo. to Empouerish, or make poor, v. Empobrecer. to Empty, vide Agotar,
Evacuar, Vazear. Emptied, vide Agotado, Vazeado. an Emptier, v, Agotador,
Vazeador. an Emptying, v. Agotadura, Vazeamiento. Empty, vide Vazio. Emptines,
vide Vaziedad. Emptily, vide Vaziamente. to Emulate, v. Embidiar, Emular.
Emulation, vide Embidia, Emulacion. an Emulatour, v. E'mulo.
E N
to Enable, vide Abilitar, Habilitar. Enabled, vide Abilitado, Habilitado. to
Enamell, or work with fire, vide Esmaltar. Enameled, vide Esmaltado. an
Enameler, v. Esmaltador. an Enameling, v. Esmalte. Enamoured, or in love with,
v. Enamorado, Enamoriscado. to Embawme, vide Embalsamar. Enbawmed, vide
Embalsamado. Enbawming, v. Embalsamadura. to Encampe, v. Campan^ear, Acampar.
Encamped, vide Acampado. to Enchant, or bewitch, v. Encantar, Ensalmar,
Hechizar. an Enchanter, vide Encantador, Ensalmador, Hechizero. an
Enchantresse, v. Encantadora, Hechizera. an Enchanting, v. Encantamiento,
Hechizeria, Hechizo. Enchanted, vide Encantado, Hechizado. an Enchantment, vide
Encantamiento, Ensalmo, Hechizo, Hechizeria. to Incline, or incline, vide
Inclinar. to Enclose, compass, or shut in, vide Encerrar. Enclosed, vide
Encerrado. an Enclosure, vide Encerramiento. to Encomber, vide Molestar,
Enfastidiar. an Encombrance, vide Fastidio. Encombred, vide Molestado,
Enfastidiado. to Encounter, vide Encontrar, Rencontrar. an Encountering, v.
Encontron, Rencuentro, Encuentro. Encountered, vide Rencontrado, Encontrado. to
Encourage, or animate, vide Animar, Incitar. Encouraged, v. Animado, Incitado.
Encouraging, vide Incitamiento, A'nimo. an Encouragement, v. A'nimo. to
Increase or augment, v. Acrecentar, Aumentar, recrecer. Increase, v. Aumento.
Increased, vide Acrecentado, Aumentado. an Encreaser, vide Acrecentador,
Aumentador. an Increasing, v. Acrecentamiento, Aumento. to Encroach, v.
Abarcar. to Endammage, v. Dan^ ar, Empecer, Hazermal. Endammageable, v.
Empecible. to End or finish, v. Acabar. Ended, v. Acabado. Ending, vide
Acabamiento, Finamiento. an End, v. Cabo, Fin. Endless, v. Sin Fin. at the
End, vide A cabo, A cavo, Al Fin. to the End that, v. Al Fin. to Endeavor, v.
Forcejar, Meter la voluntad. Endeavor, v. Voluntad. to Endite, v. Notar cartas.
Endited, vide Cartas notadas. Endive an herb, vide Endibia. Endowed, vide
Dotado. to Endow, vide Dotar. to Endure or sustain, vide Padecer, Padescer,
Sufrir, Sustener, Comportar, Sobrellevar, Tener paciencia. to Endure or
continue, vide Durar, Turar, Continuar. Endured, vide Padecido, Padescido,
Sufrido, Comportado. Enduring, vide Durante, Padecimiento, Padescimiento,
Padesciendo. to make Enemies, vide Enemigar, hazer Enemistades. an Enemy, v.
Enemigo. Enimitie, vide Enemicicia, Enemistad. to Enfeeble or weaken, vide
Enflaquecer. to Enforce or strain himself earnestly, vide Forcar, Apremiar,
Constren^ir. Enforced, vide Forcado, Apremiado. an Enforcement or constraint,
v. Fuerca, Apremio, Constren^^miento. to Enfranchise or make free, v.
Franquear, Libertar. to Engender, vide Engendrar. Engendered, vide Engendrado.
Engendring, vide Engendramiento. an Engine, vide Engen^o. an Engine maker, vide
Engen^ero, Ingen^ero. to Engraffe or graffe, vide Enxerir. to Engraue, grave or
entaile, vide Entallar. Engrauing in wood or stone, v. Atauxia. an Engrauer in
stone, v. Entallador. an Engrauer or entailer, v. Entallador. Engraued, v.
Entallado. Engraven, idem. an Engrauing, vide Entalladura. to Enhaunce the
price of any thing, v. Encarecer or Encarescer. an Enhauncer or he that reareth
the price, vide Encarescedor. an Enhauncing the price of any thing, vide
Encarecimiento, or Encarescimiento. to Enjoy, vide Gocar, Gozar. to Enioine or
to command, vide Mandar. to Enlarge or amplify, v. Ensanchar, Estender,
Amplear, Amplificar. Enlarged, vide Alargado, Ensanchado, Estendido, Extenso.
an Enlarger, vide Ensanchador. Enlarging, vide Ensanchamiento, Extendimiento.
Enlargement, vide Alargamiento, Ensanchamiento. to have Enough, vide Hartarse,
Satisfazerse. Enough, vide A bastanca. it is Enough, vide Basta. Enormitie,
vide Desorden. Enormious, vide Inorme. to Enquire, vide Inquirir, Investigar.
Inquiry, vide Inquisicion. to Enrich or make rich, vide Enrriquecer. Enriched,
vide Enriquecido. to Enroll or register, vide Registrar. an Ensample or
example, v. Exemplo. an Ensign, banner, ancient or standard, vide Bandera,
Insigne, Vandera. an Ensigns servant, v. Abanderado. Ensigns displaied, vide
Banderas, Desplegadas. the Ensigns office in war, v. Alferadgo. Ensigns
folded up, vide Banderas plegadas. an Ensign or standard bearer, vide Alferes.
to Enstall or enthrone, vide Entronizar. to Ensue or follow, vide Seguir. to
Entaile or engraue, v. Entallar. to Entangle or snare, v. Enlacar, Enlazar,
Entrampar. Entangled or snared, vide Entrampado, Enlazado. an Entangler, vide
Entrampador, Enlazador. Entangling, vide Entrampadura, Enlazadura. to Enter or
come in, vide Entrar. to Enter into ones thought, vide Passar por el
piensamiento, Passar por la Ymaginacion. an Entrance, vide Entrada, Cabida.
Entered, vide Entrado. an Entry, vide Entrada. to Enterfier, v. Rocar. to
Enterline, vide Poner enter renglones, Escrevir enter renglones. Enterlined,
vide Puesto enter renglones, Escrito enter renglones. an Enterlining, vide El
escrivir enter renglones. an Interlude, vide Farca or Farsa, comedia.
Enterludes, vide Farcas, Farsas, Comedias. a plaier of Enterludes, vide
Farcante, Comediante, Recitante, Farandulero. a writer or maker of Enterludes,
v. Author de farcas, o comedias. to Enterprise or take in hand, v. Emprender. an
Enterprise, vide Empresa. Enterprised, vide Emprendido. an Enterpriser, vide
Emprendedor. an Enterprising, vide Empresa. to Enterre or bury, vide Enterrar,
Sepultar. to Entertain, vide Acoger, Entretener. Entertained, vide Acogido,
Entretenido. one that Entertaineth, v. Acogedor. an Entertainment, vide
Acogimiento, Entretenimiento. Entire or vncorrupt, vide Entero. Entire or
hearty, vide Entran^able. Entirely, or incorruptly, vide Enteramente. Entirely,
or dearly, vide Entran^ablemente. to Entise, onto allure, vide Enlabiar,
Sonsacar. Entised vide Enlabiado, Sonsacado. an Entiser, vide Enlab^ador, el
que sonsaca. an Entising, or entisement, vide Enlabiadura. to Entombe, or
bury, vide Tombar, Sepultar. an Entrall, or inward part, vide Entran^a. an
Entrance into a matter, vide Cabida, Entrada. to Entrappe, vide Entrampar.
Entrapped, vide Entrampado. an Entrapper, vide Entrampador. Entrapping, vide
Entrampadura. to Entreat, or beseech, vide Rogar, Suplicar. to Entreat or
handle, vide Tratar. Entreated of or handled, vide Tratado. Entreated or
besought, vide Rogado, Suplicado. an Entreating, v. Ruego, Suplicacion. an
Entreaty, vide Suplicacion, Ruego. an Entry or entrance, vide Entrada. to
Envy, vide Embidiar. Envy, vide Embidia. Envied, vide Embidiado. Envious,
vide Embidioso. Enuiously, vide Embidiosamente. to Enuiron, compass about,
enclose, or beset, vide Cercar, Circuir, Circuncidar, Rodear, Circundar. to
Enuiron or compass about with water, vide Aysalar. Environed with waters, vide
Aysalado. Environed, enclosed, compassed or besieged, vide Circuncidado,
Circuido, Rodeado, Cercado. an Enuironing, vide Circundamiento, Circuito,
Cerco. to Enuite or inuit, v. Combidar. to Enure or accustom, v. Acostumbrar,
Abezar. Enured, v. Avezado, Acostumbrado.
E P
an Epicure, v. Epicuro. an Epigram, v. Epigrama. an Epilogue or conclusion, v.
Epilogo, Conclusion. an Epistle vide Epistola, Carta. an Epitaph or
superscription of a tomb v. Epitafio. an Epitome or abridgement, v. Breviario.
E Q
to make Equal or to make like, vide Ygualar. Equal with, v. Apar, par,
Pardel, Parejo, Ygual. made Equal, v. Apareado, Ygualado. Equals or matches,
v. Yguales. Equality or likeness, v. Ygualdad, Paridad. Equally, vide
Ygualmente, Parejamente. the Equinoctial time, v. Equinocial. the Equinoctial
line, v. Equinocio, linea Equinocial. Equity or Justice, vide Equidad,
Iusticia. Equivocation, or of like signification, v. Equivocacion.
E R
Ere it be long or, anon, v. Luego, Aora, Agora. Erewhile, of late, v. Poco
ha. to Erect or set up, v. Erigir, Levantar, Empinar. Erected or set up, v.
Erigido, Empinado, Levantado. an Earl or earl, v. Conde. an Ermine or field
mouse, vide Armelina. to Erne v. Earne. Ernest, or earnest, v. de Veras. an
Errand, or message, vide Mensaje, Mensage, Embaxada. to Err or to be deceived,
v. Faltar, Errar. Erroneous, v. Erratico. Error, v. Errada, Falta, Error,
Yerro. Erudition, v. Erudicion.
E S
to Escape, Escapar, Librarse. an Escape, v. Escapamiento. Escaped, v.
Escapado, Librado. an Escaping, v. Escapando. to be Escheated or confiscated,
v. Ser Confiscado, Confisado. to Eschew, v. Evitar, Huyr. Eschewed, v.
Evitado, Huydo. Especially, or cheefely, vide Especialmente, Principalmente. to
Epsy, v. Especular, Espiar. an Espiall, v. Espia. an Espier, v. Espia.
Espying, v. Espiando. to Espouse, v. Casar. an Espousall, v. Casamiento. an
Esquire, v. Escudero. the Essence or nature of any thing, v. Essencia.
Essential, v. Essencial. to Establish, v. Confirmar, Establecer, Firmar.
Established, v. Confirmado, Establecida, Firmado. an Establishment, vide
Confirmacion, Establecimiento. an Establishing, idem. an Estate of life, vide
Estado, Condition. not to Esteem, v. Desestimar. to Esteem vide Avaliar,
Estimar, Preciar. to Estimate, v. Apreciar. Esteemed, v. Avaliado, Estimado,
Preciado. Estimated, v. Apreciado. Estimation or account, v. Estima,
Estimacion. worthy Estimation, v. Estimable. one that Esteems, v.
Avaliador, Estimador, Apreciador. to Estrange or alienate, v. Enagenar, or
Enajenar, Estran^ar. Estranged, vide Enagenado, or Enajenado. Estranging, v.
Enagenamiento, Enajenamiento.
E T
Eternal, everlasting, or endless, vide Eternal. Eternally, or for ever, v.
Eternalmente. Eternity, v. Eternidad. to Eternize, v. Eternizar. an Ethnike or
heathen, v. Gentil, Pagano. the Etimologie, v. Ethimologia.
E V
an Euacuation, v. Evacuacion. an Evangelist, v. Evangelista. Evangelical, v.
Evangelico. an Euaporation, v. Evaporacion. Even now, v. Aora, poco ha, Agora.
to make Even, vide Ygualar, Hazer ygual. Even so much, v. Hasta tanto. Even, v.
Apar, Arrayz. Euennes, v. Ygualdad. an holy days Even, vide Vispera, or
Bispera. an Evening, vide Vispera. Euensong, vide Visperas, or Bisperas. at or
in the Evening, v. a la Tarde. an Event, v. Acontecimiento, Acaecimiento,
Sucesso. Ever, or always, v. Siempre. Every one, vide Cada. Every day, vide
Cada dia. Every year, vide Cadan^era. in at or by Every one, v. a Cada.
Every thing, v. Cada cosa. in or at Every ward, v, a Cada varrio. at Every
house, v. a Cada casa. at Every space, time or place, v. a Cada trecho. at
Every step, v a Cada passo. Every one, vide Cada v'no. Every where, v. en
Cada part, en Cada lugar. Everlasting, vide Eternal, Imortal. to make
Everlasting, v. Eternizar. Everlastingly, v. Eternamente, imortalmente. an
Euet, or eft, vide Lagarto, Lagartija. an Evidence, vide Evidencia. Evident,
vide Abierto, Evidente, manifiesto. to make Evident, vide Manifest. Evidently,
v. Abiertamente, Evidentemente. Euilnes, vide Wickedness. Evil or bad, v. Malo,
Ruyn, Iniquo. Euilly, vide Malamente, Ruynmente, Iniquemente. the kings Evil,
a disease so called, vide Lamparones. an Eunuch, v, Capado, Eunuco. an Ewe,
vide Oveja. an Ewe tree, vide Texo. an Ewer, v. Aguamanil, Fuente, Fuentezica,
Fuentezilla. an Ewer of glass, v. Almarraxa.
E X
to Exact or demand, vide Exegir. Exacted, vide Exigido. to Exalt, vide Alcar,
Ensalcar, Exaltar. Exaltation, v. Ensalcamiento, Exaltacion. Exalted, vide
Ensalcado, Alcado. to Examine, vide Examinar. an Examination, vide Examen,
Examinacion. Examined, vide Examinado. an Examiner, v. Examinador. to give an
Example, vide dar Exemplo. an Example, vide Exemplo. to Exanimate, vide to
Discourage and Astonish. to Exasperate, or make angry, vide Enojar. to Exceed,
pass, or surmount, vide Exceder, Sobrepujar, Aventajar. Exceedingly or
singularly, v. Excellently. Exceedingly or very much, vide Abundosamente. to
Excel, pass or surmount, vide Adelantar, Aventajar, Sobrepujar, Exceder.
Excellency, v. Excelencia. Excellent, vide Acendrado, Aventajado, Excelente.
most Excellent, v. Ecelentissimo. Excellently, vide Ecelentemente. Excelling,
vide Antecedente. to Except, vide Eceptuar. Excepted, v. Eceptuado. an
Exception, vide Ecepcion. Excepting, vide Ecepto. Except or unless, v. Ecepto.
Except or saving, vide Ecepto. Excess, vide Demasia, Ecesso, Sobrepujamiento.
Excessive, v. Demasiado, Ecessivo. Excessiuenes, vide Ecesso. Excessiuely, v.
Demasiadamente, Ecessivamente. to Exchange, v. Abaratar, Cambiar, Trocar.
Exchanged, v. Cambiado, Trocado. an Exchanger, or money changer, v. Banquero.
an Exchange, vide Cambio, Trueque. the royal Exchange, v. Lonja de mercaderes,
Casa de contratacion. the Exchequer, vide Fisco. to Exclaim, vide Exclamar,
Bozear, Gritar. Exclamations, v. Alharacas, Exclamaciones. Exclaiming, vide
Exclamando, Gritando. to Ecclude, or shut out, v. Excluyr. Excluded, vide
Excluydo. to Excommunicate, vide Descomulgar. an Excommunication, v.
Descomunion, Excomunion. Excommunicated, vide Descomulgado. an Excrement, v.
Excremento. Excrements, v. Escrementos. an Excursion, or digression, vide
Digression. to Excuse, v Disculpar, Desculpar, Escusar, Descargar. one that
finds Excuses, v. Achacoso, Escusador, Desculpador, Descargador. an Excuse,
vide Achaque, Disculpa, Escusa. Excused, vide Disculpado, Escusado. Excusing,
v. Escusacion, Escusa. an Execration, v. Curse. Execrable, vide Abominable. to
Execute, vide Esecutar. Executed, vide Esecutado. to put in Execution, v.
Executar. a writ of Execution, vide Executorial. an Execution, vide Execucion.
an Executioner, vide Verdugo. an Executor of a dead man's will, vide Cabecelero,
Esecutor. an Executor or administrator, vide Albacea. to Exemplify, v.
Exemplificar. an Exemplification, vide Exemplificacion. to Exempt, v. Esentar,
Libertar. Exempted, v. Esento, Libre. an Exemption, v. Esencion. to Exercise,
vide Exercer, Exercitar. an Exercise, vide Exercicio. Exercised, vide
Exercitado. E^ an Exercising, vide Exercicio. an Exhalation or fume rising,
vide Esalacion. to Exheredate or disherite, vide Deseredar. to Exhibit or give
unto, vide Exhibir. Exhibited, vide Exhibido. Exhibiting, vide Exhibimiento. to
Exhort, vide Exortar, Advertir, Aconsejar, Avisar. an Exhortation, vide
Conortacion, Exortacion, Aviso, Consejo. Exhorted, vide Conortado, Exortado,
Avisado, Aconsejado. Exhorting, vide Exortacion, Aviso, Consejo. to bring to an
Exigent or narrow strait, v. Apretar. Exigencie, v. Apretamiento. to Exile or
to banish, v. Desterrar. an Exornation or decking, v. Adorno, Compostura. to
Expect, vide Esperar, Aguardar, Tardar. an Expectation, vide Esperanca,
Expectacion. Expected, vide Aguardado, Esperado. Expecting, vide Esperando,
Aguardando. to be Expedient, v. Convenir. Expedient, vide Convenible. an
Expedition or dispatching, v. Desembaraco, Espedicion. to Expel, vide Espeler,
Echar fuera. Expelled, vide Espelido. an Expelling, vide Espulsion. Expense, v.
Espensa, Gasto, Costa. to make Experience or to prove, vide Esperimentar,
Provar. an Experiment, vide Esperiencia, Esperimento, Pruevo. by Experience, v.
A prueva. Expert, skillful, or of great experience, vide Esperto, Experto.
Expertly, wisely and skilfully, v. Espertamente. Expired, v. Cumplido,
Consumido, Gastado, Acabado. an Expiring or ending, v. Acabamiento,
Cumplimiento. to Explain or expound, vide Esponer, Exponer, Declarar, Sacar en
limpio. to Explicate or expound, v. Declarar, Esponer, Exponer, Sacar en
limpio. to Exploite or do any business or service, v. Administrar, Hazer. an
Exploite, v. Hazan^a. to Expound, declare, explain or interpret, vide Glosar,
Esponer, Exponer, Declarar. Expounded, v. Declarado, Expuesto, Sacado en
limpio, Glosado. an Expounder, v. Glosador, Expositor, Sacador en limpio,
Declarador. an Expounding, v. Exposicion, Glosa, Declaracion. Exposition, v.
Glosa, Exposicion, Declaracion. to Express or declare, v. Exprimir. Expressed,
v. Exprimido. an Expressing, v. Exprimidura. Expressly or plainly, vide
Expressamente. Expulsion or expelling, vide Expulcion. Exquisite, v. Esquisito.
Exquisitely, v Esquisitamente. Extemporarie, vide De repent, Repentinamente,
Subito, Incontinente. to Extend, vide Estender, Extender, Alargar. Extended,
vide Alargado, Extenso, Estenso. Extending, vide Alargando, Estendiendo. to
Extenuate or make little, v. Achicar, Apocar. an Extenuation, vide
Achicamiento, Apocamiento. External or outward, v. External. to Extinguish,
vide Apagar, Amortiguar, Extinguir. an Extinguishing, vide Apagamiento,
Extincion. an Extinguisher, vide Apagador, Extinguidor. to Extol or lift up,
v. Elevar. to Extol or praise, vide Elevar, Alabar, Loar. Extolled, vide
Elevado, Loado, Alabado. an Extolling, v. Elevacion, Alabanca, Loa, Loor. to
Extort, vide Extorcer. Extorted, vide Extorcido. an Extortioner, vide El que
haze Extorcion. an Extract or draught, v. Extrato. Extraordinary, v.
Extraordinario. an Extree or axletree, v. E'xe. Extremity, vide Extremidad,
Estremidad. Extreme, v. Estremo, Estremado. Extremely, v. Estremadamente. to
Exulcerate or make sore, vide Vlcerar. an Exulceration, v. Vlceracion.
E Y
an Eye, vide O'jo. an Eye brow, v. Ceja. Eyes sunk in the head, v. Ojeras
hundidas. the Eye lids, v. Parpados. the seat or hollownesse in which the Eye
is settled or placed, or stands in, vide Cuenca del ojo. the space between
the Eyes, vide Entrecejo. the white of the Eye, vide Lo blanco del ojo. the Eye
brows, or Brows, v. Cejas. bleare Eyed, v. O'jos lagan^osos.
F
TO tell Fables, vide Fabular, Dezir fabulas. a Fable, vide Conseja, Fabula,
Cuento. a Fable wherein beasts are feigned to speak, v. Fabula, Cuento. a
teller of Fables, v. Fabulador. Fabulously, vide Fabulosamente. a Face, vide
Cara, Faz, Rostro. to Face or come face to face, v. Arrostrar, Encarar. Face to
face, vide Cara a Cara. to fall on the Face, vide Dar de buces. Facility, or
Easines, v. Facilidad. a Fact or deed, vide Hecho, Fecho, A'cto. a heinous
Fact or deed, vide Hecho facinoroso. a Faction or division among people, vide
Bando, Chisma, Cisma, Vando. Factious fellows, v. Bandoleros, Vandoleros.
Factiousnes, v. Chismeria, Bando, Vando. Factious, vide Bandolero, Vandolero,
Chismero, Cismatico. Factiously, v. Alborotadamente. a Factour, v. Fator. a
Faculty, vide Facultad. a Fadome or fathom, v. v'na Braca, Bracada. a Faggot
or bauin, v. Hace, Manojo. to Fail or disappoint, v. Deflatar, Fallecer. to
Fail or faint, v. Desmedrar. Failed, v. Falido. a Failing, v Fallecimiento,
Falta. without Fail, v. Sin falta. to Feign or imagine, v. Fingir, Dissimular.
Fained, v. Fingido, Dissimulado. a Fained matter, vide Ficion, Cosa fingida. a
Fainer, v. Fingidor, Dissimulador. a Faining, v. Fingimiento, Dissimulacion,
Ficion. Fainedly, v. Fingidamente, Dissimuladamente. to make Faint, v. Cansar,
Desfallecer. to wax faint, v. Amarillear, Enflaquecer. Faint, v. Flaco. Faint
or weary, v. Cansado, Floxo. Faintnes, v. Floxedad, Cansancia, Flaqueza.
Faintnes of heart, vide Flaqueza, Covardia. Faintly or feebly, vide
Abatidamente, Floxamente. to be or wax Fair or bright, v. Serenar, Bonancar.
to make Fair, v. Hermosear. made Fair, v. Hermoseado. to wax Fair and dry,
v. Bonancar. Fair weather, v. Bonanca, Serenidad. Fair speech, or Flattery,
v. Blandas palabras, Lisonjas. Fair, v. Bello, Hermoso, Ermoso. Fair in
sight, v. Belveder. very Fair, v. muy hermoso. Fair and softly, v. Passo
ante Passo, de Espacio. Fairenes, v. Belleza, or Beldad, Hermosura. most Fair,
v. Hermosissimo. Fairly, vide Bellamente, Hermosamente. a Fair or mart, v.
Feria. to buy and sell in a Fair or market, vide Feriar. Faith, v. Fe, Fee. a
Faith breaker, v. Fementido. by the Faith, v. A fe, a la fe, a la he.
Faithful, v. Fiel, Leal, Legal. Faithfulness, v. Fe, or Fee, Fieldad. a false
Faith, v. Fe mentida. Faithfully, v. Fielmente. Faithles, v. Sin fe, Fe
mentida. of my Faith, v. a Fe, a Fe de veras. to Fall, v. Caer. to fall back
as a ship does when she lets go her cable, v. Arriar. to Fall by chance, v.
Fracassar. to Fall out or happen, v. Acaecer, Acontecer, Avenir, Suceder. a
Fall, v. Baque, Cayda, Caida. to give a Fall, v. Dar el baque. to fall down
tumbling, v. Bolcar. Fallen, v. Caydo. to fall on the Face, v. Caer de buces.
to fall away, v. Descaecer. Falling away, v. Discaecimiento. Fallen on the
face, v. Caydo de buces. Falling, v. Caymiento. a Father, v. Padre. a Falchion
or sword, v. Cuchillazo. a Fallacy, v. Falacia, Engan^o. to Fallowe ground,
v. Barbechar, or Barvechar. a Fallowe field, v. Barvecho. Fallowing time for
land, v. Barvechazon. Fallowe dear, v. Gamo. to Falsify, v. Falcificar.
False, untrue, v. Falso. Falsified, v. Falcificado. a Falsifier, v. Falcante.
Falsehood, v. Falsedad. Falsely, v. Falsamente. Fame, v. Esclarecimiento, Fama.
made Famous, v. Illustrado, Afamado. Famous, v. Famoso, Illustre. Famouslie, v.
Famosamente. to make Famous, vide Afamar, Esclarecer, Illustrar. a Family or
household, v. Familia. a Family, v. Lineage and Stock. to be Familiar, v.
Privar. Familiar, v. Cabido, Familiar. Familiarity, v. Familiaridad, Privanca.
a Familiar friend, v. Privado. Familiar spirit, v. Familiar. Familiarly, v.
Familiarmente. to Famish, v. Hazer morir de hambre, matar de hambre. Famine or
great hunger, v. Hambre. Famished, v. Muerto de hambre. to Fan corn, v.
Ablentar, Alimpiar. a Fan to fan corn With, v. Ablentador. Fanned, v.
Ablentado, Alimpiado. Fannes for women to carry in their hands, v. Avanicos,
Avanillos. to Fancy, v. Agradar. Fancy, v. Fantasia. Fantasy, v. Fantasy.
to make a Fardell, v. Enfardelar, Liar. a Fardell, vide Emboltorio, Fardel, or
Fardo, Lio. a Fardingall, v. Verdugado. to Fare curiously, v. Regalarse. Fare
you well, v. A Dios, Queda con Dios, A la buena ventura. Farnesse, or Distance,
v. Lexos, Distancia. Far off, v. Lexos. very Far hence, vide Muy Lexos de
aqui. how Far, v. Quanto de aqui. Farther, v. Mas Lexos. a Farmer, vide
Grangero, Grangeador. a country Farm, v. Casaria, Alqueria. a Farrier, v.
Albeytar, Alveytar. a Farriers forge, v. Albeyteria, or Alveyteria. the
Farriers art, idem. to Farrowe, v. Parir. to Farte, v. Pear. a Farte, v. Pedo,
Viento de culo. one that Farteth, v. Pedorro. a Farthing, v. Cornado, Quadrin.
to Fashion or form, vide Faycionar, Formar. a Fashion or form, v. A'bito,
Costumbre, Forma, Faycion. Fashioned, v. Abituado, Formado, Faycionado. to
Fasten, v. Apegar, Amarrar, Hincar, Afixar, Fixar. Fastened, vide Apegado,
Amarrado, Enclavado, Fixado, Hincado. Fastening, vide Apegamiento, Fixamiento,
Amarradura. to Fast, v. Ayunar. to break ones Fast, vide Almorzar. a Fasting,
v. Ayuna. Fasting or which has not dined, vide En ayunas. Fate or destiny,
vide Hado, Hadas, Suerte. Fatal, vide Fatal, Hadado. a Father, v. Padre. a
Father or mother, v. Padre o madre. a god Father, vide Padrino. a fore Father,
vide Antepassado. a Father in law, vide Padrasto, Padrastro. Fatherly, vide
Paterno. a Fatherless child, vide Huerfano, Huerfana. a Fathom, v. Braca, or
Bracada. to Fatigate or weary, vide Cansar, Fatigar. to feed Fat or cram, v.
Cevar, Engordar, Saynar. Fatted or fed fat, vide Cevado, Engordado, Saynado.
Fat or grease, v. Sayn, Gordura. Fat, v. Cebo, Cevo, Cevon, Gordo. grown Fat,
vide Cebon. Fatnes or grossenes, vide Gordura, Sayn. somewhat Fat, v. Gordillo.
a Faucet wherein they put the spigot, v. Canilla de cuba. a Fauchion or Turkey
sword, vide Cimitarra. a Faulcon, vide Altanero, Halcon. Faulconrie or skill to
keep hawks well, v. Cetreria. a Faulconer, vide Cetrero, Falconero,
Halconero. a Fauknet or piece of ordinance so called, vide Falconete. to commit
a Fault, vide Cometer un delito, Impetrar, Delinquir. to find Fault, vide
Tachar. a Fault or offense, vide Crimen, Culpa, Delito. a Fault or error, vide
Tacha, Error, Yerro, Culpa. Faults escaped, vide Erratas. full of faults, vide
Criminoso. Faulty, vide Criminal. Faultily, v. Culpadamente. to Faulter or
stumble, v. Tropecar. to currie Favor, v. Amigar. to Favor, v. Favorecer.
Favor, v. Favor. Favorable, v. Favorable. Favorably, v. Favorablemente. a
Favorer, v. Favorecedor. Favored, vide Favorecido. well Favored, v. De buen
rostro, De buena cara, Hermoso de rostro. ill Favored, v. Feo. ill Fauouredly,
vide Malamente. to Fawn or flatter, vide Cisongear. a Fawn, v. Corca. a Fawn
of a red dear, v. Cervatillo.
F E
Fealty or fee, vide Lealtad. to Fear, terrify or make afraid, vide
Espantar, Assombrar, Escarmentar. to be afraid, v. Despaverir, Temer, Recelar,
Tener miedo. afraid, v. Temeroso, Medroso. Fear, vide Espanto, Recelo, Temor,
Miedo. Feared, v. Temido. Fearful or dreadful, vide Despaverido, Espantoso,
Receloso, Temeroso, Medroso. Fearfully or dreadfully, vide Espantosamente,
Medrosamente, Temerosamente. Fearne, vide Helecho. to Feast together, vide
Festijar. Feasted, vide Festijado. a Feast or banquet, v. Combite, Fiesta. a
Feaster or banketer, vide Festijador, Combidador. Feasting or banketting, v.
Fiesta, Combite. Festival days, v. Festividad, dia Festival. Feate or fine,
vide Neat. Featly, or cunningly, vide Arteficiosamente. a Feather, vide Pluma.
a Featherbed, v. Colcedra de Pluma. Feathered, vide Emplumado. to feather, vide
Emplumar. to begin to have Feathers, vide Emplumescer. to pluck off the
Feathers, vide Desplumar. plucking off of Feathers, vide Desplumadura. the
Feathers being plucked off, vide Desplumado. February, vide Febrero. a Fee or
reward, vide Galardon. to be Feeble, v. Flaquecer. Feeble or weak, v. Endeble,
Feeble, Flaco, Floxo, Fragil. Feeblenes of courage, v. Cowardice. Feeblenes, v.
Febledad, Flaqueza, Floxedad, Fragildad. Feebly, v. Feblemente, Floxamente. to
Feed, v. Apascentar, Apacentar, Arrepastar, Pacer. Fed or nourished, vide
Apascentado, Apacentado. a Feeder, v. Apascentador, Apacentador. Feeding, vide
Apacentamiento, Pacedura. to Feel, vide Tentar. a Feeling, vide Tacto, Tiento.
without Feeling, vide sin Tiento. Felt, vide Tentado. a Feend, vide Furia
infernal. a Feeld, or field, vide Campo. a Felfare, vide Zorzal. Felicity,
vide Felicidad, buena Dicha. a Fell or skin, vide Pellejo. a Fell-monger, vide
Pellejero. to be Fell or cruel, v. Cruel. to Fell down, vide Achocar,
Aterrar. Felled, vide Achocado, Aterrado. one that Felleth, v. Achocador.
Felling, vide Achocadura. a Fellon, or sore in the body, vide Panarizo. a
Fellon, or thief, v. Robador. a Fellow or companion, vide Compan^ero. a Fellow
helper, vide Coadiutor. to help as a Fellow, v. Coadiuvar. a Fellow in office,
v. Compan^ero en oficio. a chamber Fellow, vide Compan^ero de Camara. a bed
Fellow, vide Compan^ero de Cama. a Fellow servant, v. Compan^ero. Fellowship,
v. Compania, Amistad. Fellowlike, vide Amigablemente. a Felt, or hat, v.
Fieltro, Hieltro. Fenell, v. Hinojo. Fenell giant, v. Can^aheja. the Female, v.
Hembra. to Fence or fortify, v. Fortificar. Fenced, v. Fortificado. a master
of Fence, vide Esgrimidor, Maestro de Esgrima. Fence play, v. Esgrima. the
art or deed of Fencing, vide Esgrimidura. Fenced with any kind of fence,
buckler, shield, or targuet, v. Escudado. to play at Fence, v. Esgremir. a
Fencing school, v. Escuela de Esgrima. Fenegreeke, v. Alfornas, Alholvas
fasol. a Fenne, v. Pantano. Fennish, vide Pantanoso. Fennel, v. Hinojo. a
Feodarie, v. Feudotario. a Feofer, v. Fide-comissario. a Fernie ground, vide
Tierra llena de Helecho. Fern, v. Helecho. a Ferret, vide Huron. a Ferrie, v.
Passage, Passaje. a Ferrie man, v. Barquero. a Ferrie boat, v. Barca. a
Ferrying, v. Passaje. to make Fertile, v. Fruitful. Fertile, v Fertile. to be
Fervent, v. Ser fervente. Feruencie, v. Fervor, Hervor. Fervently, v.
Ardientemente, Ferventemente. a Ferula, v. Palmatoria. to Fester or putrify,
v. Podrir, Putrificar. a Festure, v. Podridura, Corrucion. to Fetch, v. Traer.
Fetched, v. Traydo, Traido. a Fetcher, v. V'no que trae. a Fetching, v. Traer.
a Fetherbed, vide Colcedra de plumas. to Fetter or give, v. Echar un par de
grillos, Echar grillos, Poner grillos. Fetters or gives, v. Grillos. Fettered
or giued, v. Aprisionado con grillos. Fettering, vide Prision de grillos. to be
sick of the Fever, v. Tener callentura. a Fever or ague, v. Fiebre,
Callentura. a Few, vide Pocos. very Few, vide muy Pocos.
F I
Fickle, vide Variable, Inconstante, Vario. a Fiction, vide Ficion. a Fiddle,
vide Rabel. a Fiddler, vide Ministril. a Fiddle stick, vide Arquillo.
Fidelity, vide Fidelidad. a Field or pasture, v. A'gro, Campo. of or
pertaining to the Field, v. Campestre, Campesino. to be Fierce, cruel, or
terrible, vide Brabear, or Bravear, Embravecer. to wax Fierce, or wild, v.
Acorarse. Fierce or wild, v. Acorado, Brabo, or Bravo, Embravecido. Fierce,
cruel, or terrible, v. Apitonado, Atroz, Feroz. most Fierce, v. Atrocissimo,
Bravissimo. Fiercenes, v. Apitonamiento, Brabeza, or Braveza, Ferocidad.
Fiercely, v. Bravamente, Embravecidamente, Ferozmente, Apitonadamente. to
Fiest, vide Festijar. a Fife, or a player on a fife, v. Pifano, Pifaro. Fifty,
vide Cinquenta. Fifteen, vide Quinze. the Fifteenth, v. Quinzeno. a Fig, vide
Higo. Fig trees, vide Higueras. a Fig garden, v. Figueral, Higueral. a Fig
soon ripe, v. Breba, or Breva. a frail of Figs, v. Cofin de Higos. to Fight,
v. Pelear, Pugnar, Combatir. to Fight with the fists, as boys do, vide
Abofetear. Fighting, vide Pelea. Fights in a galley or ship, v. Batallolas.
Fought, vide Combatido, Peleado. to Figure, vide Figurar. a Figure, form, or
fashion of any thing, v. Figura. a Figure or ornament in speech, vide Figura. a
Figure or character, v. Carater. Figured, vide Figurado. Figurative, vide
Figurativo. Figuratively, vide Figuradamente. to File, vide Limar. a File or
rank, vide Hilera, Li^na. a File, vide Afilada, Fila. Filed, vide Limado.
Filing, vide Limadura. to Fill, vide Allenar. to Fill full, vide Enllenar,
Henchir, Rellenar. Filled, vide Allenado, Rellenado, Henchido. Filling, vide
Henchamiento. Filling full, vide Henchimiento. a Fillet or hair lace, v.
Filete. to Fillip, vide Dar Papirotes. a Fillip, vide Papirote. to Filch or
steal, vide Robar, Hurtar. Filth, filthy, filthiness, vide Suzio, Suziedad.
somewhat Filthy, vide Suzuelo. Filthiness, vide Suziedad. Filthily, vide
Suziamente. Final, vide Final. a Final sentence, vide Difinitiva sentencia.
Finally, vide Acabadamente, Finalmente. to Find, vide Hallar. a reward for
Finding, vide Hallasgo. to Find or maintain, vide Mantener. Found, vide
Hallado. to Fine or punish by the purse, vide Multar. Fined, vide Multado. a
Fine, vide Multa. to Fine, settle or clarify as wine does, vide Cendrar. most
Fine, clear or pure, vide Cendradissimo. a Fine matter, vide Apuesta cosa.
Fined silver, vide Cendrada plata. Fined, clarified or cleansed, vide Cendrado.
Fine, vide Apuesto, Fino, Lindo, Sotil. Finenesse or neatenesse, vide Fineza,
Lindeza. Finely, vide Lindamente. a Finer of metal, vide Cendrador. Fine or
smoothe, vide Lizo. Fine or neat, vide Elegante. Finely, vide Elegantemente.
most fine, vide Elegantissimo. Fine, vide Bonito, or Bonico. very Fine, v.
Esmerado, muy Bueno. a Finger, vide Dedo. the fore Finger, vide Dedo indice.
the middle Finger, vide Dedo de en medio. the ring Finger, vide Dedo del
coracon. the ear Finger or little finger, vide Dedo men^ique, Merguerite. to
Finish, vide Acabar, Fenecer, Finar. Finished, vide Acabado, Fenecido, Finado.
a Finisher, vide Acabador, Fenecidor. Finishing, vide Acabamiento, Cabo,
Finicimento. Finned, or that has finnes, v. Alado. a Finne of a fish, vide
A'la de pescado, Aletas. Fire, vide Fuego. to Fire, or set on fire, vide
Abrasar, Arder. a setter on Fire, v. Abrasador. Fired, vide Abrasado. a Fire
spark, vide Centella de Fuego. a flame of Fire, v. Llama. a Fire brand, vide
Tizon. wild Fire, vide Fuegos artificiales. Fiery, vide Fogoso. bals of Fire,
vide Bombas, Alcanzias de Fuego. a Fire shouell, vide Badil. the Firmament,
vide Firmamento. to make Firm or strong, vide Afirmar, Hazer firm. Firm,
steadfast and sure, v. Afirmado, or Hecho firm. Firmness, vide Firmeza.
Firm, vide Firm. Firmly, vide Firmamente. a Fur tree, vide Abeto. the
First, vide Primero. First of all, vide Primero de todo. at the First sight,
vide A la prima vista. to Fish, vide Pescar. a Fish, vide Piece, Pescado. a
little Fish, vide Pecezico, Pescadillo. Fish in pickle, vide Pieces en
escabeche. a Fisher, vide Pescador. a Fisher boat, vide Barca de Pescador. a
Fishmonger, vide Pescadero, Peciguerol. a kind of newland Fish, vide Abadejo.
a Fish pond, vide Pesquera, Pesqueria. Fishing, vide La pesca. a Fish market,
vide Pescaderia. a fishing hook, vide Anzuelo. to strike with the Fist, vide
Pun^ar, Pujetear. a Fist, vide Pun^o, Pugno. a blow with the Fist, vide
Pun^ete. a Fisticke not, vide Alhocigo. the Fisticke tree, vide Alhostigo. a
Fistula, vide Fistula. having a Fistula, vide Afistolado. to Fit or match, vide
Ataviar. a Fit of an ague, vide Cicion de Callentura. Fit, vide Abil, A'pto.
made Fit, vide Abilitado, Alin^ado, Ataviado. to be made Fit, vide Acomodarse.
a Fitter or one that makes fit, vide Alin^ador. Fitted, vide Acomodado.
Fitness or fitting, vide Acomodamiento. Fitly, vide Ataviadamente,
Comodamente. by Fits, vide A ratos, A vezes. Five, vide Cinco. Five leafed
grass, vide Cinco en rama. to Fix, vide Fixar. Fixed, vide Fixado.
F L
a Flag, banner, ensign or streamer, vide Bandera, Vandera. a Flake of snow,
vide Copo de nieve. Flaine, vide Flea. to Flame, vide Arder. a Flame of fire,
vide Llama. Flaming or burning, vide Llamarada. to pant in the Flanks, vide
Hijadear. the Flank, vide Costado. the Flanks, vide Hijadas, Yjadas. Flanders,
vide Flandes. a Flap to kill flies, vide Moscador. a Flash of lightening, v.
Relampago. to Flash with lightening, vide Relampagar. a Flaske, vide Frasco or
Flasco. to make Flat, vide Remachar. Flat, vide Remachado. Flat or prostrate,
vide Prostrado. Flat nosed, vide Romo. to Flatter, vide Halagar, Lisongear.
Flattered, vide Halagado, Lisongeado. a Flatterer, v. Adulador, Halagador,
Halaguero, Lisongero. Flattering, vide Halaguen^o. Flattery, vide Blandura,
Halago, Lisonja. Flattering speeches, v. Aduladoras palabras. Flax, vide Lino.
a bundle of Flax, vide Copo de lino. a Flax bed, vide Linar. a Flea, vide
Pulga. to rid from Fleas, vide Espulgado. rid from Fleas, vide Espulgado. full
of Fleas, vide Pulgoso. Fleabitings, vide Ronchas. Fleabane herb so called, v.
Atadegna, Zargatona. to Flea or take off the skin, v. Deshollejar. Fleaed, vide
Deshollejado. Phlegm, v. Flema. to purge Phlegm, v. Desflemar. full of Phlegm,
v. Flemoso. Flegmatike, v. Flematico. Fled, v. Bolado, or Volado. a Fleece of
wool, v. Vellocino. a Fleet of ships, v. Flota. a Fleet of ships furnished
for fight, v. Armada. a Fleming, v. Flamenco. Flesh, v. Carne. a Flesh hook,
vide Hook. Fleshie, v. Carnoso. Fleshines, v. Carnosidad. Fleshly or
lustful, vide Carnal, Luxurioso. Fleshily, v. Carnalmente. a Fletcher, v.
Flechero. a Flicke on the cheek, v. Chirlo. to Fly, v Bolar, or Volar. a
Flier, v. Volador. Flight, v. Boleo, Huyda. to put to Flight, v. Ahuyentar,
Desbaratar. a putter to flight, v. Desbaratador. put to flight, v. Ahuyentado,
Desbaratado. putting to Flight, v. Desbarato. Flying, v. Boladero, or Voladero.
Fled or escaped, v. Huydo. Flickering or flittering, v. Bolapie. a Fly, v.
Mosca. a little Fly, v. Mosquitillo. a Fly that flies about the candle, vide
Mata-candil, Mareposa. a horse Fly, v. Moscarda. a kind of green and blewe
Fly called Cantharis, v. Abadejo. a Fly flappe, v. Moscador. to Fling, v.
Arrojar. Flung, v. A^rojado. one that Flingeth, v. Arrojador. Flung away, v.
Arrojado. Flung against the wall, v. Abarrado. a Flintstone, v. Pedernal.
Flitting or uncertain, vide Variable, Incierto. the Flixe or laske, v. Fluxo
de Vientre, Camaras, Desenteria. the Flux of the belly, v. Fluxo de Vientre.
the bloody Flixe, v. Camaras, Desenteria. the monthly Flux of women's
flowers, v. la Regla de mugeres, Costumbre de mugeres. to Flock together, v.
Reban^ar. a Flock, v. Ganado, Reban^o, Hato. a Flockebed, v. Colcedra. a
Flock or multitude of people, v. Caterva, Multitud de gente. a Flock or drove
of cattle, v. Manada. a Flock of sheep, v. Atajo de ganado, Reban^o. a
Flock or herd of cattle, v. Atajo. a Flockebed, v. Colchon. Floored, v.
Solado. Flooring, v. Suelo. a Floor, v. Soladura, Suelo. a Florin or piece of
two shillings, vide Florin. to Flote or fleet upon the water, vide Flotar,
Sobreaguar. Floting hither and thither, vide Flotamiento. a great Flood, v.
Diluvio. a land Flood, v. Chorro. to run as a land Flood, v. Chorrear. to
Flourish or prosper, v. Prosperar. to wax green, or begin to Flourish, vide
Reverdescer. Flourishing, v. Reverdecimiento. a Flower, v. Suelo. the Flower of
grapes, v. Cierne. to Flourish as they do with weapons, vide Florear. to
Flourish, v. Florecer. Flourishing, or the play that is used at the beginning
of games, v. Floreo. Flourishing, v. Florido. to Floute, vide Matracas dar,
Mofar, Burlar. a Floute, v. Matraca, Mofa, Burla. a Flouter, v. Mofador,
Burlador. Flouting, v. Mofa, Burla. to Flow, v. Manar. Flowing water, v.
Manada agua. a Flood, v. Diluvio. a land Floude, v. Arrojo, Avenida. a
Floudgate, v. Esclusa. a Flower, v. Flor. a Flower-de-luce, v. Cardeno lirio,
Flor de lis. Flowers of Orenges, v. Azaar. an herb called Saint Katherines
Flower, v. Axenuz. Flowerpots v. Jarros de Flores. made of Flowers, v. Hecho de
flores. to be in the Flower or prime of his age, v. Ser en Flor de edad. Flower
of meal, v. Acemite, Flor de la harina. Flush at cards, v. Flux. a Flute, v.
Abogue, Flauta. a plaier on the Flute, v. Aboguero, Flautador. Flux, v. Flixe.
F O
a Fo, vide Enemy. to Fodder, v. Dar verde. Fodder, v. Erbage, Verde. Foggie,
v. Gruesso. Foggines or fatnes, v. Grossedad, Grosseria. Foggilie, vide
Grossamente. to Foil, v. Disgraciar. to give the Foil, v. Disgraciar. to take
the Foil, v. Tener disgracia. a Foil, vide Disgracia. Foiled, vide
Disgraciado. Foiling, vide Disgracia. to Foine, vide dar Estocada. a Foine,
vide Estocada. Foining, idem. Foison, or abundance, vide Abundancia. a Foist,
or little pinnase, vide Fusta. to Fold, vide Plegar. a Fold, vide Pliego.
Folded, vide Plegado. a Folder, vide Plegador. Folding, vide Plegadura. Folded
or pleited, vide Plegado. a Fold in a garment, vide Pliego. a Fool, vide Potro.
a Fool of an ass, Borriquillo. Folly, vide Necedad, Stulticia, Insipiencia.
to Follow, vide Conseguir, Seguir. to Follow or pursue, vide Seguir, Perseguir.
to Follow the examples of other men, vide Seguir las pisadas de otros. it
Follows, vide Siguese. Followed, vide Seguido. a Follower, vide Seguidor.
Followers, vide Secaces. Following, vide Seguimiento. Foam, vide Espuma. to
Foam or froth, vide Espumar. Foam of the sea, vide Espuma de la mar. full of
Foam, vide Espumoso, Espumajoso. Fomie, vide Espumoso. Foming, vide Espumante.
Fomentation, vide Fomentacion. Fondness, or foolishnes, vide Necedad, Boveria.
a Font in a church, vide Pila, Bautisterio. a little Font, vide Pilica.
Food, vide Nutrimiento, Comida, Vianda. a Fool, v. Albardan, Atrochado, Bobo,
Duendo, Tonto, Loco. to play the Fool, vide Necear. to become foolish, v.
Abovar, Embobescer, Embovescer, Entontecer. becoming Foolish, vide
Embobecimiento, Embovescimiento. a little Fool, v. Bobillo, Bovillo,
Necezuelo. Foolerie, vide Necedad, Pachochada. become Foolish, vide Abovado. a
Fools bolt, or fond jest, vide Dislate. Foolishnes, vide Bobedad, or Bovedad,
Desparate, Locura, Necedad, Simplicidad. Foolishly, vide Simplemente,
Neciamente. a Foord, or shallow place, vide Vado. full of Foordes, vide Vadoso.
to go on Foot, vide Andar a pie, Caminar a pie. a Foot, vide Pie. a Foot by
the rule, vide Cubico pie. the Foot of a pillar, vide Basa de Colun^a. a Foot
man, vide Moco d'espuelas. a Foot boy, or lackie, vide Lacayo, Moco de
Espuelas. a Foote-cloath, vide Gualdrapa. the sole of the Foot, vide Planta
del Pie club-Footed, vide Patituerto. a Foot step, vide Pisada. a Foot stool
to lift a woman to horse, v. Andilla, or Banquillo. a Foot by measure, vide
Pie. a half foot, vide Medio pie. at the Foot, vide al Pie. For, vide Por,
Para. For that, or for as much, vide Por tanto. For ever, vide Por siempre,
Para siempre. to Forbear, vide Detener, Sufrir. Forbearance, vide
Detenimiento, Sufrimiento. to Forbid, v. Defender, Vedar, Contradezir.
Forbidden, vide Defendido, Vedado, Contradicho. a Forbidder, vide Contraditor,
Defendidor. Forbidding, v. Defendamiento, Contradicion, Vedamiento. to Force,
vide Forcar, Compeler, Apremiar. Force, vide Bigor, or Vigor, Fuerca, Impetu,
Apremio. Forced, v. Forcado, Apremiado, Compelido. Forcing, vide Fuerca,
Compulsion, Apremio. Forcible, vide Briento, Forcoso, Fuerte, Impetuoso.
Forcibly, v. Forcosamente, Impetuosamente. to Forecast, v. Proveer, Prevenir.
Forecasted, vide Proveydo, Prevenido. Forecasting, v. Prevencion. the
Fore-castle of a ship, vide Castil de Proa. Forefathers, v. Antepassados,
Passados. a Foregoer, vide Precursor. a Forehead, vide Frente. the Forepart, v.
Part adelante. a Forerunner, vide Precursor. to Foresee, vide Antever.
Foreseen, vide Antevisto. a Foresight, vide Antevista. to Foreslow or linger,
v. Tardar, Detenerse. to Forespeake, vide Bewitch, Charm or Enchant. to
Forespie, vide Ouersee. the Fore-teeth, vide Dientes delanteros. to Foretell,
vide Prophecy. to Forethinke, vide Foresee. the Fore-warde, vide Vanguarda. to
Forefeite, vide Confiscar. Forfeited or taken as forfeite, vide Confiscado.
Forfeite of ones goods, vide Confiscacion. a Forfeit, fine or penalty, vide
Mulcta, Pena. to Forge as smithes do, vide Forjar. a Forge, vide Forja,
Fragua. Forged, vide Forjado. a Forger, vide Forjador. Forging, vide Forjadura.
to Forget, vide Desacordar, Olvidar. Forgetting, vide Olvidando, Desacordando.
Forgotten, vide Olvidado. Forgetfulness, v. Olvido, Desacuerdo. Forgetful, vide
Desacordado, Desmemoriado, Olvidadizo. to Forgive, vide Perdonar. Forgiven,
vide Absuelto, Perdonado. a Forke, vide Horcajo, Horcaso. a little Forke, vide
Forqueta. a pitch Forke, vide Forca. a dung Forke with three prongs, vide
Arrexaque. to be Forlorn, vide Aburrir. Forlorn, vide Aburrido. to Form,
vide Fashion. a Form or fashion, vide Forma, Faycion. Formed, vide Formado.
the Foreman in rowing, vide Bogavante. Formally, vide Formal. Formally, vide
Formalmente. a Fore mast, vide A'rbol de proa. the Former, vide Anterior. to
commit Fornication, v. Fornicar. Fornication, vide Fornicacion. a Fornicator,
vide Fornicario. a Forrester, vide Florestero. a Forest, vide Arcabuco,
Alcabuco, Floresta. to Forsake, vide Abandonar, Dexar, Dejar, Desamparar.
Forsaken, vide Abandonado, Desamparado, Desierto, Dexado. a Forsaker, vide
Desamparador, Abandonador. Forsaking, vide Defamparo, Dexamiento. to Forswear,
vide Perjurar. a Forswearer, vide Perjuro. Forswearing, vide Perjuro.
Forsworn, vide Perjura. Forty, vide Quarenta. the Fortieth, vide Quarenteno.
to Fortify or fence, vide Abastecer, Fortificar, Fortalecer. Fortified, vide
Arreziado, Fortalecido, Fortificado. Fortifying, vide Bastimiento,
Fortificacion. a Forte, vide Castro, Bastida, Fuerte, Fortaleza. Fortification,
v. Fortalecimiento, Fornecimiento, Fortificacion. a Fortress, vide Fortaleza,
Fortezuela. Forth, vide Fuera. Forth abroad, vide Fuera. Forthwith, vide Luego,
Incontinente, Presto, Aora. Fortitude, vide Fortaleza. to be Fortunate, vide
ser Afortunado. Fortune, vide Caso, Fortuna. by Fortune or chance, vide
Fortuito. Fortunate, vide Afortunado, Auenturado, Bienaventurado, Dichoso.
Fortunately, v. Bienauenturadamente, Dichosamente. a Fortune teller, vide
Hadador. to tell Fortunes, vide Hadar. Fortunately, vide Afortunadamente. to
put Forward, vide Adelantar, Poner adelante, Passar adelante. set Forward, vide
Adelantado, Puesto adelante. a Fosset or little chest, vide Arquilla. to
Foster, vide Abrigar. a Fostering, vide Abrigo. a Foster father, vide A'lmo
padre. a Foster brother, vide Collaco, Collazo. to make Foul or filthy, vide
Afear. Fouled, vide Afeado. Foully or filthily, vide Feamente, Suziamente.
Foulness or filthiness, vide Fealdad, Suziedad. Filth, vide Fealdad,
Suziedad. Filthy or foul, vide Feo. Filthily, vide Fealmente. Foul mouthed,
vide Boquiroto. Foul weather, vide Mal tiempo. a Foul with long legs called a
Bittor, vide Alcaravan. Found, vide Find. to Found or cause to be built, v.
Fundar. Founded, vide Fundado. a Founder, vide Fundador. Founding, vide
Fundacion. to lay a Foundation, vide Cementar, Fundar. a Foundation, vide
Fondo, Fundacion, Fundamiento. he that lays a Foundation, v. Cementador. a
Fountain, vide Fuente. a little Fountain, vide Fuentezilla. a Fourde or
shallow place, vide Vado. Four, vide Quatro. Four times as much, v. Quatro
tanto. Four squared, vide Quadrado. Four millions of thousands, vide Quatro
quentos. the Fourth, vide Quarto. to Form, v. Fashion. a Form or bench to
sit on, v. Banco. Fourteen, vide Catorze. Fourteen times, v. Catorze vezes.
the Fourteenth, vide Catorzeno. to play the Fox, v. Zorrear. a Fox, vide
Raposa, Raposo, Zorra, Zorro. Fox tails, vide Alpiste. Fox holes, vide
Raposeras.
F R
a Fragment, vide Escamocho, Relieve. Fragments of meat, vide Escamochos,
Relieves. Fragilitie, v. Fragilidad. Fragrant, v. Fragrante. to Fraie or make
afraid, vide to Fear. to begin a Fraie, v. Comencar a ren^ir, Comencar
Quistion, or Question. a Fraie, v. Quistion, or Question, Cuchilladas. to wax
Frail, vide Comencara ser Fragil. Frail, v. Fragil. Frailty, v. Fragilidad.
a Frail of figs, v. Cofin de higos. a Frail wherein they put figs, or
resins and such like, v. Capacho, Cofin. the Freight paid for passage on the
water, v. Flete, Fletamiento. to Freight, vide Cargar, Fletar, Fretar nave.
Freight money, v. Flete. one that paieth Freight, or fraighteth a ship, v.
Fletador. Fraighted, v. Cargado. to Frame, v. Fabricar. the Frame of any thing,
v. Argadijo. Framed, v. Fabricado. a Framer, v. Fabricador. Framing, v.
Fabrica. to Franchise or make free, v. Libertar, Ahorrar esclavo. a Franchising
or making of a bondsman free, vide Libertad, Alforria, Alhorria. Franchesse or
liberty, v. Libertad. Frank, v. Libre, Franco. a Frank giver, v. Franco.
Frankely, v. Francamente. Frankensence, v. Encienso. to perfume with
Frankincense, v. Enciensar. Frantic, v. Alocado, Frenetico, Santochado. a
Frantic fool, v. Atreguado loco. Fraternity or brotherhood, v. Cofradia.
brothers of a Fraternity, vide Confrades. Fraud, or guile, v. Engan^o,
Fraud. Fraudulently, v. Engan^osamente, Fraudulentamente. Fraudulent, vide
Engan^oso, Fraudulento. to Free or enfranchise, v. Ahorrar, Esclavo libertar,
Dar carta de horro. to Free from bondage, v. Emancipar. making Free, vide
Horro. Freed from, or exempt, v. Esento. Freeing from bondage, vide
Emancipacion. Freed from ordinary tax and subsidy, v. Enfonsado. Freed, vide
Ahorrado, Emancipado, Franqueado. Free, v. Franco. a Free mason, v. Pedrero.
Freely, v. Francamente. Freedom, v. Alforria, Alhorria, Emancipacion.
Freewill, v. Alvedrio. to Freese, v. Yelar, Elar. a Freckle in the face, v.
Peca. Free, v. Libero, Libre, Franco. Freedom, v. Libertad. Freely, v.
Liberamente. of Free cost, v. Baldado. to Freese, v. Congelar, Elar. a Frost, v
Yelo. Frosen, v. Elado, Congelado. to speak French, v. Hablar Frances. a
French man, v. Frances. the French pockes, v. Bubas, Buvas. to make his Friend,
or to get Friendship, v. Amigar, Aquistar amistad. a Friend, v. Amigo. a she
Friend, v. Amiga. Friendship, v. Amistad. Friendly, v. Amigablemente.
Friendlines, v. Amistad. the Frenzy, v. Frenesia. Frentike, vide Frenetico. to
Frequent, v. Frequentar. Frequented, v. Frequentado. Frequently, v.
Frequentemente. to make Fresh, v. Rezentar. a Fresh color, v. Flor en la
color. Fresh, v. Fresco, Reziente. Fresh, unsalted, v. Fresco. Freshly, v.
Frescamente. Freshnes, v. Frescura. to Fret, v. Amohinar. Fretted, v.
Amohinado. Fretting, v. Rixa. bent to Fretting, v. Rixoso. Fridaie, v. Viernes.
a Friar, v. Frail. a Frierie, v. Monasterio. to Fry, v. Freyr. Fried, v.
Frito. Frying, v. Freydura. Fringe, v. Flocadura, Franjas. Fringing, v.
Bordadura. round Fringe, v. Borla. a maker of Fringe, v. Borlador. Frying, v.
Friendo. a Frying pan, v. Sarten, Freydera. a Friar, v. Frail, Frail. a Friar
carmelite, v. Carmelita. Frighted or feared, v. Atemorizado, Espantado.
Frighting, v. Espanto, Temor. a Frigot or small Bark, v. Fragata. to Frisle,
v. Crespar, Enrizar. Frisled, v. Crespado, Enrizado. Frisling, v. Crespadura,
Enrizadura. a Fritter, v. Fruta de Sarten. Frivolous, v. Frivolo. Friuolously,
v. Frivolosamente. Fro, or from, v. De. From henceforth, v. De aca. From this
day foreward, v. De ay Adelante. From door to door, v. Depuerta en Puerta. From
one place to another, v. De un lugar a otro. to croke like a Frog, v. Cantar
como Rana. a Frog, v. Rana. a little Frog, v. Ranquajo. belonging to Frogs, v.
Ranudo. Frolic, v. Locano. Frolickely, v. Locanamente. From, or fro, v. De.
the Front of an army, v. La frente de v'na batalla. a Frontier, v. Frontera.
Frosen, v Elado. Frost, v. Elada, Yelo. Froth, v. Espuma. to Froth, v. Espumar.
Frothie, v. Espumoso. Frowardnes, v. Protervia, Travessura. Froward, v.
Protervo, Traviesso. Frowardly, v. Protervamente. to Frown, v. Encapotar.
Frowning, v. Capote. to Fructify or bear bread corn, vide Panificar. to
gather or take the Fruit of any thing, v. Desfrutar. Fruit, v. Cosecha,
Fruto. Fruit or profit of a vineyard, of cattle, etc. v. Esquilmo. to gather
in Fruit or profit of his cattle or corn, vide Esquilmar. a Fruiterer, vide
Frutero. a woman Fruiterer, v. Frutera. the Fruit of cattle or corn gathered
in, v. Esquilmado. a place where Fruit grows, v. Frutal. to bear Fruit,
vide Frutificar. to make Fruitful or fertile, vide Hazer fertile, Hazer
frutifero, or Frutuoso. Fruitfulnes, vide Fertilidad. Fruitful or fertile,
vide Fecundo, Fertile, Frutifero, Frutuoso. to Frumpe or mock, vide Mofar,
Burlar. a Frumpe or mock, vide Mofa, Burla. a Frumper, vide Mofador, Burlador.
to Frustrate or make void, vide Anular or Anullar, Cancellar, Aniquilar. to be
Frustrate, vide Salir en blanco, Quedar en blanco. Frustrate, vide En vano.
F V
a Fugitive, vide Fugitivo. to be Full, v. Estar lleno. Full, vide Lleno.
Fullness, vide Abundamiento. Full fed, vide Repleto. Fully, vide Complidamente.
to Full cloth, vide Batanar. a Fulling mill, vide Batan. a Fuller of cloth,
vide Batanero. Fulled or thicked woollen cloth, vide Batanado. a Fulling, vide
Batanadura. Fully, v. De lleno. to Fulfill, accomplish or perform, vide
Complir. that which is to be fulfilled, vide Compledero. Fulfilled, vide
Cumplido. Fulfilling, vide Cumplimiento. to Fume or fret, vide Amohinar,
Atufar. to let the Fuming or smoking of any thing get out, v. Desabahar.
cleared from Fuming or smoking, v. Desabahado. a Fume or breath rising up, vide
Baho. to stop in the Fume, v. Abahar. a Fumigation, v. Perfume. Fumitorie
herb, vide Palomia. the Fundament, vide Culo. a Function, vide Oficio. a
Funnell through which liquor is powered into a vessel, vide Embasador,
Emvasador, Embudo. a Funeral, v. Esequias, Mortuorio. a Funeral song, vide
Responso. to Furre, vide Aforrar. Furred, v. Aforrado. Furre, vide Aforro. the
Furre or lining about the skirts of a garment, v. Cortapiza. a Furrier, v.
Pelejero. to be Furious, v. Embravecer. Fury, v. Furia, Rabia, Apitonamiento.
Furious, v. Apitonado, Embravecido, Furibundo, Furioso, Rabioso. Furiousnes, v.
Apitonamiento, Furor, Rabia, Furia. Furiously, v. Furiosamente. a Furnace, vide
Hornaza. to play the Furner, vide Hornear. a Furners trade, vide Horneria. a
Furner that sets bread into the oven, v. Hornero. a woman Furner, vide Hornera.
to Furnish, vide Abastecer, Aparejar, or Bastecer, Complir, Fornecer, Fornir.
Furnished with trappings like a horse, vide Enjezado. Furnished, vide
Aparejado, Fornecido, Fornido. Furnished sufficiently, vide Bastecido.
Furnished with store, vide Abundoso. Furnishing, v. Aparejo, Aparato,
Complimiento. Furniture, v. Fornicimiento. Furniture for a house, vide Adrecos
de casa, Aparejos de casa. Furred, v. Enforrado. to Furre, v. Enforrar. Furre,
v. Enforro. to make Furrows, v. Assulcar, Sulcar a Furrier or prouider of
lodgings, vide Furriel. divided by Furrows, v. Assulcado, Sulcado. a Furrow,
v. Sulco. Further or farther, v. V'ltra, de mas. Furthermore, vide Mas
adelante, Aliende de esso. to Further, v. Favorecer, Ayudar. Furtherance, v.
Ayuda, Favor. a Furtherer, v. Ayudador, Favorecedor. Fustian, v. Fustan.
G
a GAberdine, vide Capote. a Gable or cable, vide Cable, Amarra. to Gad up and
down, vide Vaguear. a Gadder abroad, v. Vagamundo, Callejero. a Gadding
gossip, vide Callejera. a Gad of steel, v. Barreta de Azero. a Gad be, v.
Moscarda. a Gage, vide Pledge. a Gage or wager, v. Apuesta. to Gage the
bottom, v. Hondear. to Gaggle like a goose, vide Grasnar, Graznar. Gaggling
geese, v. Grasnadores. Gaggling of geese, v. Grasnido. to make Gaie or gallant,
v. Engalanar. to Gain, v. Ganar, Adquerir. Gain, v. Ganancia. Gained, v.
Adquirido, Ganado. Gaining, vide Ganancia. Gainful, v. Ganancioso. to Gainsaie
or resist with words, vide Contradezir. Gainesaied, v. Contradicho. a
Gainesaier, v. Contraditor. a Gainesaying, v. Contraditora cosa. to Gainestand,
vide to Resist. a Gale or blast of wind, vide Colla de viento. Galigascoines
or wide breeches, vide Greguescos, Calcones. Galingale, v. Acoro, Juncia,
Avellanada, Junco odoroso. the Gall, v. Hiel. a Gall nut, vide Agalla, Galha,
Bugallas. a Gallamaufrie or hotchpotch, v. O'lla podrida. Gallantnes or
gayness, v. Galanteria, Bizarria. Gallantly or gayly, v. Galantemente,
Galanamente, Bizarramente. a Gallerie, v. Galleria, Corredor. a Gallie or
little ship, v. Galera. a Galliasse, v. Galiaca. the master of a Gallie, vide
Patron de la galera. a Galley slave, vide Remero, Forcado, Galleote. a
Galley-pot, vide Botezillo. a Gallon, vide Measure. to Gallop, vide Gallopear.
a Gallop, vide Gallope. a Gallows or gibbet, v. Horca. a Game, vide Juego. a
Gamester, vide Jugador, Tahur. Gaming, vide Juego. a Gamon of bacon, v. Jamon
de Tocino, Pernil de Tocino. a Gander, vide Ganso, Pato. a Gantlet, or
gauntlet, vide Manopla, Guante de Malla. a Jail or iayle, vide Carcel,
Prision. to Gape, yaune, or gasp, v. Bostezar. to Gape or open as a tree, or
the ground does, vide Resquebrajar, Abrir, Hendir. to Gape after, vide Anelar,
Anhelar. Gaping, vide Bostezo. a Gap, as of an hedge or wall, vide Portillo.
the Garbage, vide Suziedad de las tripas. Garboile, vide Trouble. to Guard or
Defend, v. Guardar, Defender. Guarded or defended, vide Guardado, Defendido. a
Guard, vide Guardia. a Guard, hemme, or welt of a garment, v. Guarnicion de ropa,
Canto de ropa. a Garden, vide Jardin, Vergel. a Gardener, v. Hortelano,
Ortelano, Jardinero. the feate of Gardining, v. Jardineria. a Guardian, or
tutor, vide Tutor, Curador. to Gargle, or gullet with the throat, vide
Gargajear, Gargarizar. Gargled, vide Gargarizado. Gargling, vide Gargarismo. a
Garland, Corona, Guirnalda. a Garland of flowers, vide Guirnalda de flores.
Garlic, vide A'jo. sauce made of Garlic, v. Ajada. a bunch of Garlike, v.
Horca de A'jo. a Garment, v. Ropa, Vestido. a Garner for corn, vide Alhondiga,
Granera. to put in a Garner, v. Ensilar. put in a Garner, v. Ensilado. to
Garnish, vide Guarnecer. Garnished, vide Guarnecido. Garnishing, v. Adorno.
Garnishing in masons, or ioyners art, v. Corniza. a Garret in the top of an
house, vide Sobrado. a Garrison, vide Guarnicion de Gente. to Garter, vide
Ligar, Atar con ligas. Garters of silk v. Ligas. Garters of cruel, v.
Cenogiles. Garters to garter the legs withal, vide Faxas de piernas. the
knights of the honorable order of the Garter, v. Cavalleros de la orden de la
Jarretera. Gartered, v. Atadas las ligas. Gascoigne breeches, or Venetian
hosen, vide Balones, Calcones, Greguescos. a Gashe, vide Cuchillada. to Gasp,
vide to Gape. to Gasp for breath, vide Acezar, Anhelar. a Gate, vide Puerta. a
Gate or going, v. Andadura. a posterne Gate, or back door, v. Postigo, Puerta
falsa. a Gate keeper, or porter, v. Portero. to Gather together, v. Coger,
Congregar, Colegir. to Gather or pluck fruit, v. Desfrutar. Gathered together,
v. Allegadizo, Cogido, Cogedizo. a Gatherer together, v. Cogedor. a Gathering
of fruits, v. Desfrutamiento. Gathering together, v. Cogimiento. a Gauling in a
man or beast, by long going, or such like, vide Desolladura. a Gaul, v.
Desolladura. a Gauld back of a horse, v. Mataduras de Cavallo, Cavallo matado.
a Gauntlet, vide Guante de Hierro, Manopla.
G E
Gest, or guest, vide Huesped. Geese, vide Goose. to Geld, vide Capar, Castrar.
Gelded, v. Capado, Castrado. a Gelder, v. Capador, Castrador. a Gelding of any
creature, v. Capadura, Castradura. a Gelding knife, v. Castradera. Gellie, vide
Eladura. Gelouer, vide Gilliflower. Gelousie, vide Gelosia. Gelous, vide
Geloso. a Gem, or precious stone, vide Gemma. a Genealogy, v. Genealogia,
Abolorio, Abolengo. Generality, v. Generalidad. General, or universal, v.
General. Generally, or universally, vide Generalmente. Generated, v.
Engendrado. Generation, or lineage, v. Generation. the Genitals, or privy
members, vide Genitivos. a Genitor or begetter, vide Engendrador. to make
Gentle, v. Amansar, Facilitar. Gentle, vide Facil. made Gentle or tame, v.
Amansado, Hecho blando. one that makes Gentle or tame, vide Amansador.
Gentleness, vide Blandura, or Clemencia, Facilidad. Gentle, vide Clemente.
Gently, vide Clementemente. Gentility, vide Hidalguia. a Gentileman, vide
Cauallero, Hidalgo, Hijo de algo. a Gentlewoman, vide Hijadalga. Gentlemen or
Gentlewomen, v. Hidalgos, Hidalgas. Gentlemanlike, vide Ahidalgamente.
Geographie or the description of the earth, vide Geografia. Geometry, vide
Geometria. a Geometrician, vide Geometra. a Gerfaulcon, vide Girifalte. a
German, or high dutch man, vide Aleman. Germaunder or english treacle, vide
Camedreos, Chamedreos. to Guess, v. Atinar, Conjeturar, Adiuinar. Gessed, v.
Atinado, Conjeturado, Adivinado. Gessing, vide Tino, Conjetura. to Gest or
Jest, vide Burlar. to Get, vide Adquirir, Alcancar, Aquistar, Gan^ar. a Getter,
v. Alcancador, Aquistador. a Getting, vide Adquirimiento, Alcancamiento,
Ganancia. Gotten, vide Alcancado, Adquirido, Aquistado, Ganado. to Give, vide
Give.
G H
a Ghost, vide Spirit. giving up the Ghost, vide Agonizando.
G H
a Ghost, vide Spirit. giving up the Ghost, vide Agonizando.
G I
a Giant, vide Gigante. a Gibbet, vide Gallows. to Gibe or jest, vide Triscar,
Burlar. a Gibe, vide Burla, Trisca, Mofa. Giddie, vide Aturdido. a new-yeares
Gift, vide Aguinaldo, Aguilando. a Gift or present, vide Dadiva, Don. Gifts,
vide Dadivas, Dones. a Gig or top, vide Trompa. to Gilde, vide Dorar. Gilded or
gilt, v. Dorado. a Gilder, vide Dorador. Gilding, vide Doradura. Gile or Guile,
vide Engan^o, Dolo. Gilles of fish, vide Agallas de pescado. Gilliflowers, vide
Clavellinas. full of Gilliflowers, v. Enclavellinado. a cloue Gilliflower, vide
Clavellinas. to be Guilty, vide Ser reo or Culpado. Gilt or leaf gold, vide
Doradera. a fish called a Gilthead, v. Dorade, Dorada. Guilty, vide Reo,
Culpado. Giltines, vide Culpa. Giltlesse, vide Culpa. a Gimlet or pearser, vide
Taladro, Respiradero. Ginger, vide Gingibre. to set Ginnes for birds or
conies, vide Armar paxaros or Gacapos. a Ginne or grinne, vide Trampa. a Ginnet
horseman, vide Ginete. a Ginnie or Turkey hen, vide Pava, Guanaja. a Gipson or
counterfeite rogue, vide Gitano. to Girde, vide Cen^ir, Cinchar. Girded, vide
Cen^ido. Girding, vide Cen^idura, Cinchadura. a Girdler or girdlemaker, vide
Talabartero. a Girdle, vide Pretina, Cinto. a Girke or yerke of a rod or whip,
vide Acotazo. a Girl or wench, vide Moca. to Girne or to grin, vide Regan^ar.
a Girth, vide Cincha. a Gise or guise, vide Costumbre, Manera, Guisa. to play
on the Gitterne, vide Tan^er guitarra, Tocar guitarra. a Gitterne, vide
Guitarra. Gives or fetters, vide Grillos. to Give, vide Donar, Dar. to give up
or over, v. Abandonar. to Give alms, vide Dar limosna. to Give ear, vide Ser
atento, Escuchar. a Gift, vide Dadiva. Given, vide Dado. Given over, vide
Abandonado. a Giver, v. El que da. Giving, vide Dando.
G L
to be Glad, vide Alegrarse, Ser alegre. Glad, vide Alegre, Gozoso. Gladness,
vide Gozo, Alegria. Gladly, vide Alegremente, de buena gana. an herb called
Gladen, vide Estoque yerva. to Glass or glaze, vide Poner vidrieras. a
Glasier, vide Vedrioso. Glassie, vide Vedrioso. Glassed, vide Vedriado. Glass,
vide Vidreo, Vidro. a looking Glass, vide Espejo. a drinking Glass, vide Copa
de vidreo, Taca de vidreo. a Glass or vial, vide Redoma. the Glass or
vernish of a color, v. Verniz, or Berniz. the Glaunders, vide Muermo. troubled
with the Glaunders, vide Muermoso. to Gleane or lease corn, v. Espigar. a
Gleaner of corn, vide Espigador. Gleaning corn, v. El espigar. a Glimmering
of the sun or other light, vide Reluzimiento, Resplandor. a Glister to purge
with, vide Cristel, Ayuda. to Glister, vide Relucir, Reluzir, Lustrar,
Relumbrar. full of Glistering, v. Lustroso. a Glistering of the sun, v.
Resplandor del sol. a Glistering show, vide Luster. to Glitter or to shine, v.
Resplandecer. a Globerd or gloworme, vide Luciernaga. a Globe, vide Globa,
Globo. to Glory or brag, v. Gloriarse. Glory, v. Gloria. a Glorying, v.
Gloriondo. Glorious, v. Glorioso. vain Glorious, vide Vanaglorioso,
Jatancioso. Gloriously, v. Gloriosamente. to Glorify, vide Glorificar.
Glorification, vide Glorificacion. to Gloss or lie, vide to Lie. a Gloser or
flatterer, vide Lisongero, Lisonjero, Lisongeador. Glosing or flattering, vide
Lisonja. to give a Gloss, or to expound, v. Glosar. a Gloss or exposition of
a text, v. Glosa. a Glove, v. Guante. a little Glove, v. Guantezillo. a Glouer,
v. Guantero. the finger of a Glove, v. Dedo de guante. Gloued, or having
gloves, vide Enguantado. a Gloworme, v. Luziernaga, Luciernaga. to Glue, vide
Pegar, Encolar, Engrudar. Glue, v. Cola. Glued, v. Pegado, Encolado. a Gluer, v
El que Encola, or Pega. Gluing, v. Pegadura, Encoladura. Glumie weather, v.
Cerrado el cielo, Cerrazon. a Glutton, v. Gloton. Gluttony, v. Glotonia,
Golosina. to eat like a Glutton, v. Glotonear, Golosear, Golosinar.
Gluttonous, v. Goloso. Gluttonously, v. Como goloso, Como gloton.
G N
to Gnash as with the teeth, vide Batir los dientes, Desgan^ar, Regan^ar.
Gnashing, v. Batimiento de dientes. a Gnat, v. Mosquito. a little Gnat, v.
Mosquilla. to Gnawe or bite, v. Roer. Gnawed or gnawen, v. Roydo. a Gnawing, v.
Roedura. he that gnaweth, v. Roedor. to Gnible or gnawe a little, vide
Mordiscar.
G O
a Goade, v. Agujada, Aguijon. a Goast, or ghost, v. Espiritu. to cry like a
Goat, v. Balar, Berrar. a she Goat, v. Cabra. a he Goat, vide Cabron,
Chibato, Chibo. a little Goat, v. Cabrillo, Cabrilla. a wild Goat, v.
Cabrito montes. belonging to a Goat, v. Cabrituno, Cabruno. a Goats skin, v.
Cabruna. a Goateherde, or keeper of Goats, vide Cabrero, Cabrerizo. a place
for Goats, a goatehouse, v. Chibital. a Goats beard, vide Barva de Chibo,
Barva de Cabra. Goats dung, v. Cagarrutas. a Goats hair, v. Pelos de Cabra.
Goatish or stinking like a Goat, v. Cabruno, Cabrituno. a Goblet, or little
boll to drink in, vide Copa, Taca. Goblines, or Hobgoblines, vide Trasgos. God
the creator and governor of all things, v. Dios. the Godhead, v. Deidad, or
Deydad. fained Gods of the fields and woods, vide Faunos. Godless, vide
I'mpio, Sin Dios. Godly, v. Pio. most Godly, v. Piissimo. Godliness, v. Piedad.
Godlily, v. Piadosamente. a Godfather, v. Padrino. a Godmother, v. Madrina. a
Gods penie, v. Donadios. to Go, v. Andar, yr. to Go naked, v. Andar en puras
carnes. to Go away, or part, v. Apartar. Going away, v. Apartamiento. to Go up,
vide Subir. to Go side by side, v. Emparejar. to Go without a cloak, vide
Andar en cuerpo. to Go in readiness, v. Andar a la mano. to Go before, v.
Anteceder, Preceder. to Go creeping, v. Andar a gatas. to Go with, v.
Acompan^ar. a Goer before, v. Antecessor. Going before, v. Antecedente. Gone
before, v. Precedido. let it Go, v. A'nde, Pass. a Going up, v. Subida. a
Going down, v. Baxada. Going forward, or proceeding, vide Andanca. Gone, v.
Andado. Goggle eied, or he that looks a squint, v. Bisco, Turnio. Gold, v.
O'ro. Gold thread, v. O'ro Hilado, O'ro tirado. a Gold mine, v. Mina de oro. a
Goldsmith, or goldfiner, vide Platero, Vrive. Golden, that is of Gold, v.
Aureo. to do Good, v. Hazer bien. Goodness, v. Bondad. somewhat Good, v. Bonito,
or Bonico. most Good, v. Bonissimo. Good, v. Bueno. Goodlucke or fortune, vide
Bien aventuranca, Dicha, Buena fortuna. Good will, vide Bienquerencia, Buena
voluntad, Benevolencia. the Goodman of the house, v. Duen^o de casa. the
Goodwife of the house, vide Duen^a de casa. Goods or substance, vide Hazienda,
Bienes, Substancia. Goome or gum, v. Goma. the Goomes or jaws wherein the
teeth are set, v. Quixadas. to cry like a Goose, v. Grasnar, Graznar a Gosling,
vide Patico, Patilla, Ansaroncillo, Ganzillo. a Goose, vide A'ncar, or A'nsar,
Pata, Gansa. a great Goose, v. Ancaron. Goose berries, v. Crespinas, V'vas
crispas, V'vas de olla. Gore or corrupt blood, v. Sangre corrupta. Gorebellied,
vide Barrigudo, Pancudo, Tripon. to Gorge or fill the gorge, v. Papar. the
Gorge of a bird, v. Papo. a Gorget for a soldier, v. Gola. a Gorget of maile,
v. Gorjal. Gorgeous, v. Sumptuoso. Gorgeousnes, v. Sumptuosidad. Gorgeously, v.
Sumptuosamente. to Gormandise or ouercharge ones stomach, v. Golosinear,
Golosear, Glotonear. a Gormandiser or great eater, v. Gloton, Comilon, Goloso.
the Gospel or glad tidings, vide Evangelio. a he Gossip, v. Compadre. a she
Gossip, v. Comadre. a gadding Gossip, vide Andariega, Comadrera. a Gossehauke,
vide Gauilan. a Ghost, ghost, spirit, vide Espiritu. the Goths, vide Godos.
Got or gotten, vide Get. Gotten to, vide Adquirido, Aquistado. to Govern or
rule, v. Governar, Regir, Mandar. Government or rule, vide Govierno,
Regimiento, Mando. that may be ordered by government, vide Administradora cosa.
Governed, vide Governado, Regido, Mandado. a Governor, vide Governador,
Regidor. a Gouernesse, v. Governadora. Governing, v. Govierno, Governacion,
Regimiento. Governance, vide Governacion, Govierno, Regimiento. a Gourd, v.
Calabaca, Calabaza. the Gout, vide Gota, Puagre. Goutie, vide Gotoso. a Gown,
vide Toga. a frise Gown, or seamans gown, v. Camarra. Gowned, vide Togado.
G R
Grace, vide Gracia. Gracious or favorable, vide Gracioso, Favorable.
Gratiousnes, vide Gracia, Favor. Graciously, vide Graciosamente. a Graduate, or
one that has taken any degree in an university, vide Graduado. to Graffe,
vide Engerir, Enxerir. a Graffe, vide Pua. Graffed, vide Engerido, Enxerido. a
Graffer, vide Enxeridor. to wax Graie, or to have graie hairs, as men in old
age, vide Encanecer, or Encanescer. a Graie color, vide Parda, Pardo. Grayish,
vide Pardisco, Pardillo. a Graie, badger, or brocke, vide Castor, or Bivaro. a
Graiehound, v. Galgo, Lebrel. a Grain or corn, v. Grano. Grain wherewith
cloth is grained, or skarlet is died, v. Grana en Grano. a Grain, vide Weight.
a Grainer, or garner, vide Cilla, Silo. the art of Grammar, v. Gramatica. a
Grammarian, or teacher of gramar, v. Gramatico. Gramercie, vide Agradesco. a
Grandfather, vide Abuelo, or, Aguelo. a great Grandfather, v. Bisabuelo. a
Grandmother, vide Aguela, or Abuela. a great Grandmother, v. Bisabuela. to
gather Grapes, v. Vendimiar, Coger uvas. a kind of hard graie Grapes, vide
Alvillo. a Grape, vide U'va. Grape gathering, vide Vendimia. a Grape stone, a
kernel in grapes, v. Granillo. to Grapple, v. Afferrar, Garfiar, Garrafar. to
catch with a Grapple, vide Engarrafar. Grappled, vide Aferrado, Garrafado. a
Grapple or grappling iron of a ship, vide Gaifio. to Grase, vide Apascentar. a
Grasier, vide Apascentador. Grasing, vide Apacentamiento. Grass, vide Yerva.
three leased Grass, or cleuers grass, vide Alfalfa. Grassie, or full of
grass, v. Yervacal. swines Grass, vide Correhuela. a Grasshopper, vide
Chicharra, Cigarra, Grillo. to Grate bread, vide Rallar. Grated, vide Rallado.
a Grater, vide Ralladura, Ralla. Grating, v. Rallamiento. a Grate of iron or
wood, vide Reja. to Gratify, or do any thing thankefully, vide Gratificar.
Gratified, vide Gratificado. Gratifieng, or pleasuring, vide Gratificacion.
Gratitude, vide Agradecimiento. Grateful, vide Agradable. Gratefulnes, v.
Agradamiento, Agradecimiento. Gratefully, vide Gratuitamente. to Grave, or to
engraue, vide Sincelar. a Grauer, vide Sincelador. a Grauing tool, v. Buril.
Grave, vide Grave. Gravely, vide Gravemente. Gravity, vide Cordura, Gravedad.
a Grave, vide Sepultura. a Grauer, v. Esculpidor. to Grave, v. Esculpir.
Graued, vide Esculpido. Gravel, or sand, vide Arena. a Gravel pit, v.
Cascajal. a Gravel stone, vide Guijuelo. Grauelly, vide Casgajoso. to Grant,
vide Otorgar, Conceder. a Grant, v. Otorgamiento, Concession. Granted, v.
Otorgado, Concedido. a Graunter, vide Otorgante. Granting, vide Ortogamiento.
to Grease, vide Engrassar. Grease, vide Enxundia, U'nto. Greased, vide
Engrassado. Greasy, v. Mugroso, Vntoso. Greasines, vide V'ntosidad. made
Great, vide Engrandecido. to make Great, vide Engrandecer. making Great, v.
Engrandecimiento. one that makes Great, v. Engrandecedor. Greatness, vide
Grandeza. Greatness of personage, v. Grandeza. Greatness of honor, v. Alteza,
Mayorasgo, mayoria, Grandeza. Great, vide Gran, Grande. very Great, Grandazo.
somewhat Great, vide Grandezillo. Greater, vide Mayor, mas Grande. Greatly,
vide Grandemente. Greaues, or armours for the thighs, v. Greva. a Grecian, v.
Griego. a Grediron, vide Parilla, Parrilla. Grief, vide Dolencia, Molestia. to
wax Green, vide Verdecer. a Green place, vide Lugar verde, Verdura. a dark
Green, vide Verde negro. Green, vide Verde. Greennes, vide Verdura. Green or
fresh, v. Verde, Fresco. a Greese or staire made with greeses, v. Gradas,
Escalones. to Greet, vide Saludar. a Greeting, vide Salutacion. to Grieve,
vide Agraviar, Apassionar, Apesarar, Angustiar, Atribular, Lastimar, Molestar.
Grieved, vide Agraviado, Apassionado, Apesarado, Angustiado, Atribulado,
Doliente. full of Grief, v. Lastimoso. Grief, v. Agravio, Dolencia, Lastima,
Pesadumbre, Pesar. a heart Grief, v. Cordojo. Greefes, v. Coxixos. Grievous,
vide Angustioso, Doloroso, Molesto, Lastimoso. Grievously, vide Agraviadamente,
Apassionadamente, Dolorosamente. Gray eied, v. Garco de ojo. to Griffe, vide to
Graffe. a Griffin, v. Grifo. Grim or austere in countenance, vide Austero.
Grimly or austerely, v. Austeramente. to Grind or sharpen, vide Amolar, Moler.
Grinded, v. Amolado. a Grinder, v. Amolador, Moledor. Grinding, v. Molimiento.
a Grind stone, v. Piedra de molina. to Grin or wrie the mouth, v. Regan^ar. a
Grinning or scornful opening of the mouth, v. Regan^o. a Grinning fellow, v.
Regan^on. a Grinne or ginne, v. Aran^uelo. to Gripe, v. Amanojar. to Gripe in
the fist, v. Empun^ar, Tomar pun^ado. a Gripe or handful, v. Pun^ado. the
Griping of the belly, v. Puxo. a Gristle, v. Ternilla. Gristly or full of
gristles, vide Ternilloso. a Grist, v. Molienda. a Grocer, v. Especiero. a
Grocers shop, v. Especeria. Grograine, vide Gorvaran or Gorvoran. the Groine,
vide Y'ngle. to Groan, v. Gemir. Groaning, v. Gemido. one that Groneth, v.
Gemidor. a Groom or household servant, vide Casero. to Grope or feel softly,
vide Palpar, Tentar. a Groper, v. Palpador, Tentador. Groping, v. Palpamiento,
Tiento. to make Gross or fat, vide Engordar, Engrossar. become Gross, vide
Engordado, Engrossado. Gross, v. Basto, Gordo, Gruesso. somewhat Gross, v.
Gordillo. Grossenes, v. Gordura, Grosseza. Grossly, v. Grossamente. a Grove,
v. Arboleda. a Grove of high trees, v. Arcabuco. a Grove of box trees, v.
Boxedal. Groueling or lying upon the face, vide Boca abaxo, Bruces. to Ground
upon, v. Fundar. Grounded or settled, v. Fundado. the Ground, vide El suelo. the
Ground work or foundation of any thing, v. Fundamiento, Principio, Comienco. a
general Ground or rule in any art, vide Regla general. Ground pine, vide
Chamepiteos. Groundswell an herb, v. Berro, Bonvaron. to Grow, vide Acrescer,
Crescer. to Grow to a tree, vide Arbolecer. Grown, vide Crescido. Growing,
vide Acrescimiento. to Grow out of kind, vide Dejenerar, Degenerar. to Grubbe
up by the roots, vide Desmontar, Rocar. Grubbed, vide Desmontado, Rocado. a
Grubbing tool, vide Rocador. Grubbing, vide Desmontadura, Rocadura. to Grudge,
vide Enfadar. a Grudge, vide Enfado. Grudging, vide Enfadoso. Grudgingly, vide
Enfadosamente. Gruell or pottage, vide Potage, Potaje. to Grunt like a swine,
vide Grun^ir. a Grunter, vide Grun^idor. Grunting, vide Grun^ido.
G V
Guarded or guarded, vide Guardado, Puesto a recaudo. Gubbins or fragments, vide
Escamochos. a Gudgeon fish, vide Gobio. a Guerdon or reward, v. Galardon. a
Guest, vide Huesped. to Guess at, vide Conjeturar, Atinar, Adevinar. to Guide
or conduct, vide Conduzir, Guiar. a Guide, vide Guia. Guided or conducted, vide
Conduzido, Guiado. a Guider, guide or conductor, vide Adalid, Guia. Guiding or
conducting, v. Conducion. a Guidon or cornet of horsemen, vide Guyon. Guile or
fraud, vide Fraud, Engan^o, Dolo. Guilefully, vide Engan^osamente,
Fraudelentamente. Guilty or guilty, vide Reo, Culpado. a Guise, vide Guisa,
Manera. a Gulf, vide Golfo, Voragine. a Gullie or gulpe in drinking, v. Golpe.
the Gullet or wezand, vide Ervera. a Gullie gut or glutton, vide Gloton,
Comilon, Goloso. the Gum of trees, vide Goma. Gummes of the mouth, vide
Enzias. Gummie or full of gum, v. Gomoso. Gum of Arabia, vide Gomarabiga. a
Gun or fowling piece, vide Escopeta. to shoot off Gunnes, vide Escopetear.
Gunne shot or the stroke of a gunne, vide Escopetazo. a Gunne stick, vide
Vaqueta. Gunne powder, vide Polvora. a Gunner, vide Artillero. a shooter in a
Gunne or fowling piece, vide Escopetero. a musquetier, vide Mosquetero. a
harquebussier, vide Arcabuzero. Gurgians of meal, vide Afreche. a Gurnard
fish, vide Cabra piece. to Gush out, v. Salir de golpe. a Gushing out, vide
Salida de golpe. the Guts, vide Tripas. the Gut of the fundament, vide Cular. a
Gutter, vide Canal. by Gutters, vide A canales. a Gutter made of tiles, vide
Canal de tejado. Gut-tide, vide Shrouetide.
G Y
to Gybe, v. Mofar, Burlar. a Gybe, v. Mofa, Burla. Gyues, v. Grillos.
H
a HAberdasher of small wares, vide Mercero. a Haberdasher of hats and caps, v.
Sombrerero. armed with an Habergion, vide Lorigado. an Habergion, or harbergen,
v. Loriga. Ability, or ability, v. Abilidad, Habilidad. an Habitation, or
dwelling, v. Habitacion, Morada, Bivienda. Habitable, v. Habitable. an Habit,
v. A'bito, Habito. a little Habit, v. Abitillo. grown to a Habit, v.
Abituado. a Hackester, v. Acuchillador. a Hackney man, or he that lets horse
to hire, v. Alquilador de cavallos. a Hackney, v. Haca, Hacanea. Hackneying, v.
Cavalgadura. Had, v. Avido. a Hafte or handle, v. Cabo, Pun^o. the Hafte of a
knife, v. Cachas de cuchillo, Mango de cuchillo, Cabo de cuchillo. the Hafte or
handle of a rapier, v. Puno de espada. a Hagge or fiend, v. Bruja, Bruxa. Haie,
v. Heno. a Haie loft, v. Almear de feno. a reeke of Haie, or a stacke, v.
Almiar. a Haie or net to take conies with, vide Atargar, Red de conejos. a
Haifer, v. Bezerra, Vaquilla. to Hail, v. Granizar. Hail, v. Granizo. a Hail
stone, v. Granizo. Hair, v. Cabellos, Crines, Pelos. Hair of the head, v.
Cabellos. Hair of man's body, v. Vello. Hair of horse or beast, v. Crines.
Hair of the beard, v. Pelos. to pull off the Hair, v. Desgren^ar. one that
plucketh away hair, vide Desgren^ador. the hair being plucked away, vide
Desgren^ado. to dress the Hair, v. Crinar. Hair dressed or set, v. Crinado.
a lock of Hair curled, v. Guedeja enherrada. an instrument to pull Hairs
from the Head or eiebrowes, vide Acordelejo. long Haired, v. Guedejudo. full of
Hair, v. Cabelloso, Cabelludo. hoarie Hairs, v. Canas. a false Hair, v.
Cabelladura agena. by a Hair, v. A Pelo. a lock of Hair, vide Capellina,
Guedeja. to set up the Hair like bristles, vide Erizar. Hairte cloth, v.
Cilicio. up the Hair, v. A pelo arriba. down the hair, v. A pelo ayuso. a
bush of Hair before, v. Copete. staring up of the hair, vide Espeluzamiento.
against the Hair, v. A pospelo. the locks of women tuffed out before, vide
Copete de los Cabellos. the partition of the Hair, v. Crencha. young mossie
Hair on the chinne, vide Flucco. to Hale or dragge, v. Arrastrar. Haled, v.
Arrastrado. Haling, v. Arrastradura. an Halbert, v. Alabarda, or Hacha de
armas. a Halberdier, v. Alabardero. the Half or moitie, v. Mitad. a Hall, v.
Sala. a great square Hall, v. Quadra. the Guild Hall, v. Cabildo, or Casa de
ayuntamiento. a little Hall, v. Saleta. Halme, the stem or stalk of corn from
the root to the ear, v. Paja. to Hallowe, vide Sagrar. Hallowed, v. Sagrado.
to Halte, v. Coxear. Halting, v. Coxeando. to Halter, v. Encabestrar.
Haltering, v. Cabestrage. an Halter, v. Cabestro, Xaquima. a little Halter, v.
Cabestrillo, Xaquimilla. Haltred, v. Encabestrado. a maker of Halters or ropes,
vide Cabestrero. the Ham or part against the knee, vide Corva de la pierna. to
work with the Hammer, v. Maconear, Martillar. a Hammer, v. Maco, Martillo. a
little Hammer, v. Martilejo. Hammered, v. Martillado. one that works with
Hammers, v. Martillador. a Hamper, v. Cesta, Canasta. to tie the Hands, v.
Maneatar. to be nigh at Hand, v. Estar cerca, Junto, a Par. a Hand, v. Mano. a
Handful, v. Manojo. the right hand, v. Mano derecha. the left Hand, v. Mano
ysquierda. on the right hand, v. A man derecha. on the left hand, v. A man
ysquierda. a Handgun, v. Escopeta. a Handle, or hafte, v. Cabo, Cachas. a
Handkerchiefe, v. Panezuelo. a Handbasket, v. Canastilla. a Handmaide, v.
Criada, Moca. a Handie crafts man, v. Artifice, Artesano, Oficial. a Handie
craft, v. Oficio. at Hand or ready, v. Ala mano. at Hand, or hard by, vide
Junto, Cerca, a Par. right Handed, v. Derecho. left Handed, v. curdo. at no
Hand, v. En ninguna manera, De ninguna forma, Por ninguna via. a Handle of any
thing, v. A'sa. to Handle or feel, v. Palpar. to Handle or manage, v. Manejar.
to Handle or treat of, v. Tratar. to Handle briefly, vide Tratar brevemente.
Handling of a matter like a cunning lawyer, v. Abogacion. Handling or managing,
v. Manejo. the Handle of a buckler, vide Mango de Broquel. the ear or Handle
of a pitcher, v. A'sa. to make Handsome, vide Acomodar, Componer, Ataviar. made
Handsome, v. Acomodado, Ataviado, Compuesto. Handsome, vide Apuesto, Ataviado,
Acomodado. making Handsome, vide Atavio, Apostura. Handsomnes, v. Apostura,
Atavio. to Hang upon the gallows, v. Ahorcar, Colgar. Hanged, v. Ahorcado,
Colgado. Hanging dangling down, v. Colgadero, Colgadizo, Colgado. to Hang
dangling, v. Colgar. an Hangman, v. Sayon, Verdugo. Hangings of houses, v.
Paramentos, Tapices. sword Hangers, v. Talabartes, Tiros. a Hanger or short
sword, vide Alfange. pot Hangers, v. Llares. to give Hansell, vide Estrenar.
Hansell, vide Estrena. to Happen, v. Acaecer, Acontecer, Suceder. to Happen by
the way, or in the mean while, v. Entervenir. Hap or chance, vide
Acaecimiento, Acontecimiento, Sucesso. Happened, v. Acaecido, Acontecido,
Sucedido. Happening, v. Acaeciendo, Aconteciendo, Sucediendo. Happily, or by
hap, v. Porventura, Por caso, Por dicha. to make Happy, v. Hazer felice, or
Dichoso. Happy or blessed, v. Felice, Bienaventurado. Happy or luckie, v.
Venturoso, Dichoso, Felice. Happiness, v. Bienaventuranca, Dicha, Felicidad.
Happily, v. Bienaventuradamente, Dichosamente, venturosamente. an Harbinger
that goes before and provides lodgings, v. Furriel. to Harbor, vide Acoger,
Hospedar. an Harbor for ships, vide Muelle, Puerto. an Harbourer, v. Acogedor.
Harbourles, vide Acogimiento. to come to Harborough, v. Arribar. come to
Harborough, v. Arribado. a coming to Harborough, v. Arribada. to make Hard,
v. Dificultar, Endurecer. Hard to be done, v. A'rduo, Dificil, Dificultoso,
Duro. to wax Hard skinned, vide Hazer callos, Endurecer el cuero, Endurescer
la pelleja. Hardened, v. Endurecido. Hardening, v. Endurecimiento. Hardness, v.
Dificultad, Dureza. Hardness of hearing, vide Sordez. Hard by, v. Cerca,
junto, a Par, No lexos. Hard to compass, vide A'rduo de hazer. Hardly, or with
much ado, v. A penas, Dificultosamente, Dificilmente. to be Hardy, v.
Atreverse. Hardy, vide Osado, Arriscado, Audaz. Hardines, v. Ardid, Osadia.
Hardily, vide Atrevidamente, Osadamente. a Hare, vide Liebre. a young Hare, or
leueret, v. Lebrastilla. a Harier, or small graiehound, v. Galgo. Hare broth,
vide Lebrada. a Hargabus, v. Arcabuz. a Hargabusier, vide Arcabuzero. to
Harken, v. Escuchar. a Harkening, v. Escucha. a Harlot, v. Whore. to become a
Harlot, v. Emputecer. Harm, vide Hurt. Harmony, or melody, vide Armonia,
Melodia. Harness, v. A'rma, arnes. Harnessed, v. Armado. Harnessing, v.
Armadura. a Harold, or herold, v. Rey de A'rmas. to Harp, vide Tan^ir harpa,
Tocar harpa. a Harp, vide Harpa, Lira. a Harper, v. Tan^edor de harpa. a
Harquebuse, v. Arcabuz. a Harquebuse de crocke, v. Arcabuz de posta. a blow or
stroke with a Harquebuse, vide Arcabuzazo. a Harquebusier, v. Arcabuzero.
Harsh, or sour, vide Tarte. the Heart, vide Coracon. of great Heart and courage,
vide Animoso. without Heart, vide Abatidamente. Hartlesse, vide Descorazonado.
grief of the Heart, v. Cordojo. Hearty, v. Entran^able. Heartily, v.
Entran^ablemente. by Heart, or without book, v. De coro. a Heart or stagge, v.
Ciervo. a Harth, v. Fogon, Hogar. Hearts thorn, v. Cambronera, mata.
Hartechoke, or Artechoke, vide Alcorchofa, Alcauci. Hartwoort, an herb so
called, v. Aristologia, Aristolochia. the Harvest, v. Miesse, Mies, Segazon,
Segada. a Harvest man, vide Segador. Hasard, vide Hazard. Haslenuts, vide
Avellanas. Haste, vide Aquexamiento, Priessa, Aceleramiento. to make Haste, v.
Acelerar, Aquexar, Darpriessa. Hastening, v. Aceleramiento. Hasty, vide
Apitonado, Presuroso, Aquexoso, Fervoroso, Hervoroso. Hastened, v. Acelerado,
Aquexado. Hastines, v. Aceleramiento, Fervor. Hastily, v. Apriessa,
Aquexadamente, Cedo. to Hatch, vide Sacar pollos. Hatched, v. Pollos sacados. a
Hatching, v. Sacadura de pollos. Hatches of a ship, v. Quarteles. a Hatchet, v.
A'cha, or Hacha, Destraleja, Hachuela. a Hatchets helue, v. Astil de hacha. to
Hate, vide Aborrecer, Desamar, Odiar. Hated, vide Aborrecido, Desamado, Odiado.
Hatred, vide Desamor, Enemistad, O'dio, Aborrecimiento. Hateful, v.
Aborrecible, Enemigable, Enojoso, Enojadizo, Odioso. Hatefully, v.
Enemigablemente, Enojosamente, Odiosamente. to bear Hatred, v. Enemistar. a
Hat, vide Sombrero. to put off the Hat often, vide Gorrear. a Hatband, vide
Toquilla. a cardinals Hat, vide Capelo de Cardinal. a Hat-maker, v Sombrerero.
a Hatter or seller of hats and caps, vide Sombrerero. to Have, v. Aver, Tener,
Posseer. Having, v. Aviendo, Teniendo. a Haven, v. Puerto. to Haunt, v. Seguir.
an Haunter, v. Seguidor. an Haunting, vide Seguimiento. a Hawk, vide Halcon. a
gosse-Hauke, vide Acor. a Hawks hood, v. Capirote. a Hawks gesses, v.
Piguelas, Pihuelas. a Hawks bell, v. Cascabel. Hauking, vide Cetreria. to be
Hawtie, vide Ensobervecerse, Seraltivo, or Arrogante. Hawtie, vide Altivo,
Arrogante, Superbo. Hawtily, vide Con altivez, Con superbia, Con arrogancia.
Haughtiness of stomach, vide Arrogancia, Altivez, Superbia. to Hazard, vide
Arriscar, Aventurar, Arriesgar. a Hazard, vide Riesgo, Peligro. one that
puts to hazard, vide Aventurero. a Hazard in a tennis court, vide Azar. a
Hazell nut, vide Avellana. a Hazell tree, vide Avellano. a grove of Hazels,
vide Avellanedo.
H E
He, vide Aquel, el, esse, este, aqueste. to cut off ones Head, vide
Descabecar, Cortar la cabeca. a Head, vide Cabeca. a great Headed man, vide
Cabecon. a little Head, vide Cabecuela. at the Head or end, v. A cabo, A cavo.
Head strong or great headed, v. Cabecudo. the temples of the Head, vide Sienes.
a Head of garlic, vide Espigon de ajo. an arrow Head, v. Casquillo de saeta,
Caxquillo de saeta. to Head with iron, vide Enastar, Enhastar. Heading with
iron, vide Enastadura, Enhastadura. Headed with iron, vide Enastado, Enhastado.
Headie, vide Cabecudo, Pertinaz. Headily, vide Con pertinacia. a Head land,
vide Cabo de tierra. to cast down Headlong, v. Despen^ar, Precipitar. cast or
thrown down Headlong, v. Despen^ado, Precipitado. Headlong, v. Precipitoso. a
Headpeece or helmet, vide Yelmo, Capacete, the Headstall of a bridle, v.
Cabecada or Cabecado. a kind of Headstall trimmed, gilt and imbrodered, vide
Almartaga. to Heal or cure, vide Guarecer, Sanar. Healed, vide Guarecido,
Sanado. Healing, vide Guarecimiento. to be in Health, vide Convalecer. Health,
vide Salud, Sanidad. Healthful, vide Convalecido, bien dispuesto, Sano.
Healthie, idem. Healthfully, vide Sanamente, Con sanidad, Con salud. to Heap
up or gather in heaps, v. Acumular, Amontonar. a Heap, vide Monton. Heaped,
vide Acumulado, Amontonado. a Heaper or one that heapeth together, v.
Amassador, Amontonador. Heaping, vide Amontonamiento. by Heaps, vide
Amontones. Hear, vide Hair. to Hear, vide Oyr. a Hearer, vide El que oye.
Hearing, vide Oydo. to be or that may be Heard, v. Auditivo. Heard, vide Oydo.
hardness of Hearing, v. Sordez. an Herb, vide Yerva. Herbs used to be eaten,
vide Ortaliza. a Heard or flock of cattle, vide Ganado, Reban^o, Hato. a
Heard man, vide Ganadero, Pastor. a cow Heard, v. Vaquero. a swine Herd, v.
Porquerizo, Porquero. a sheep Heard, v. Pastor. a Hearon, v. Garca. a Hearth,
v. Fogon, Hogar. to Heat or make hot, v. Calentar, Hazer caliente. that
Heateth, v. Calentador. to Heat a ship with burning reeds, vide Bruscar. Heat
or hotnesse, vide Calor, Ardor, Hardor, Hervor. burning Hot, vide Ardiente. Hot
weather, v. Caluroso. Hot, v. Calido, Caloroso, Caluroso, Heruiente, Herueroso.
Heating, v. Calentamiento. to be Hot, v. Ser caliente. made very Hot, vide
Acalorado. Hotly, v. Ardientemente. Heaven, v. Cielo. Heavenly, v. Celestial.
after a Heavenly manner, vide Celestialmente. from Heaven, v. De Cielo. to make
Heavy or pensive, vide Entristecer. Heaviness of the head, v. Arromadizo.
Heavy or drowsy, v. Aplomado. Heavily or sorrowfully, v. Triste. to make
Heavy in weight, vide Aplomar. Heavy or weighty, v. Pesado. Hebene tree, the
wood whereof is black as ieat, and it bears neither fruit nor leaves, v.
Abenus. to Hedge, v. Cercar. a Hedge, v. Soto, Seto. Hedged or enclosed, v.
Cercado. a Hedgehog, v. Erizo. to take Heed, v. Guardarse, Recarse. Heed, v.
Recato. Heedefull, v. Atento, Recatado. Heedinesse, v. Recato, Atencion.
Heedefulnesse, v. Atencion, Recato. Heedily or heedefully, vide Advertidamente.
a Heel, v. Calcan^ar, Calcan^al. Here, v. Aqui. a Heifer or haifer, vide
Vaquilla, Bezerra. Height, v. Altura. Heinous, v. Nefando, Horrendo. to make an
Heir, vide Instituyr heredero. an Heir, v. Eredero, Heredero. an Heritage or
inheritance, vide Eredad. to put to Hell, v. Infernar. Hell, v. Huerco,
Infierno. Hellish, v. Infiernal. to put on a Helmet, vide Enlacar el yelmo. a
Helmet, v. Yelmo, Celada. to Help, vide Acorrer, Ayudar, Socorrer. Help or
aid, vide Acorro, Ayuda. Helped, v. Ayudado, Socorrido, Acorido. a Helper,
vide El que ayuda, El que socorre. Helping, v. Ayudando, Socorriendo. as god
Help me, vide Assi Dios me ayuda. the Helue of an axe, v. Manga or astil de
Hacha. Hemlocke, vide Cicuta. a Hemisphere, or half circle, vide Emisferio.
Hemp, v. Can^amo. a Hempen coard, vide Cuerda de Can^amo. Hempseed, vide
Can^amon. a Hen, v. Gallina. a clock Hen, vide Gallina clueca. a Hen that
lays eggs, vide Gallina ponedera. a pea Hen, vide Pava. a Hen-market, vide
Gallineria. a Hen roost, vide Gallinero. a seller of Hens, vide Gallinero. a
Guinny or turkey Hen, v. Gallina Morisca. a moore Hen, vide Gallina del rio. a
Hens nest, vide Overa. a young Hen or pullet, vide Polla. a little Hen, v.
Gallina enana. a brood Hen, v. Gallina assentadera. a Hen that has laid all
her eggs, v. Desovada gallina. Hen-dung, vide Gallinaca. from Hence, vide de
Aqui. Henceforth, v. de Aqui adelante. Henry, a proper name, v. Enrrique. a
Herald, or messenger, vide Rey de A'rmas, Mensajero. a Herald at arms, vide
Rey de A'rmas. one that gathered Herbage, v. Ervero. to grow to an Herb, v.
Erbolecer, Ervescer. Here, vide Aqui. Here and there, vide Aqui, y alla.
Hereby, v. Cerca, Junto, a Par. Hereafter, v. Despues. Here-hence, or hereof,
v. de Aqui. an Heritage, vide Eredad. an Hermit, vide Eremitano. an Hermitage,
v. Eremita. an Heresy, v. Eregia, Heregia. an Heretic, v. Ereje, Erege, or
Hereje. to become an Heretic, vide Ereticar. Heroical, vide Eroico, Heroico.
a Herring, v. Arenque. to Hew, vide Cortar. Hewed, vide Cortado. a Hewer, vide
El que corta. Hewing, vide Corte. Hey, vide Feno, or Heno.
H I
a Hichell to kembe flax or hemp, vide Rastillo. the Hicket, vide Hipo,
Hippa. to Hide, vide Asconder, Celar, Esconder, Ocultar, Solapar. Hidden, v.
Celado, Escondido, Oculto, Solapado. a Hider, v. Celador, Escondidor. Hiding,
v. Celamiento, Escondimiento. Hidden or unknown, v. Oculto, Escondido. a Hide,
or skin of a leather, v. Cuero, Pellejo, Pelleja. a raw Hide of a beast, vide
Pelleja para curtir. Hideous, vide Espantoso, Espantable. Hideously, vide Con
espanto. to Hie or make speed, v. Apresurar, Dar priessa. Highness or height, v.
Altura. Highenes of estate, v. Alteza, Celsitud. a High way, v. Camino real.
High minded, v. Altivo, Arrogante, Superbo. Highly, v. Alta, or Altamente. a
Hill, v. Cerro, Cabeco, Monte. a Hillocke or little hill, v. Cerro, Collado,
Montezillo, Montesillo. a place full of Hillockes, v. Berrocal, Berrugoso. up
the Hill, v. Cuesta arriba. down the Hill, v. Cuesta abaxo. the side of a
Hill, v. Cuesta. an Ante-Hill, v. Hormiguero. Hilly or full of hills, v.
Montoso. the Hilt, or handle of any tool, v. Cachas, Cabo. to Him, or them, v.
A el, A ellos. to Himself, vide a El mismo. a Hind, vide Cierva. a young
Hind, v. Corca. to Hinder, v. Atajar, Embargar, Embaracar, Embazar, Empachar,
Impedir, Estorvar. Hindered, vide Atajado, Embargado, Embaracado, Empachado,
Impedido, Estorvado. a Hinderer, v. El que Impide, Estorva, Empacha, or
Embaraca. a Hindering, vide Embaraco, Estorvo, Impidimiento, Embargo. a
Hinderance, v. Empacho, Embargo, Impedimiento, Estorvo. the Hinder feet, v.
Pies de Bestia. the Hinder part of the head, v. Colodrillo, Cogote. the Hinge
of a door, v. Gonce, Gonze, Gozne, Quicio, Quicial. to take the door off the
Hinges, v. Desquiciar. taken off the Hinges, v. Desquiciado. an Hipocrite, v.
Hipocrita. Hypocrisy, v. Hipocrisia. a Hip, or huckle bone, v. Cadera,
Quadril. the Hips, v. Caderas, Quadriles. to let to Hire, v. Alquilar,
Arrendar. let out to Hire, vide Alquilado, Arrendado. he that lets out to
Hire, vide Alquilador. Hiring, v. Alquiler, Arrendamiento. to Hire. Also to
take hire, idem. Hired, v. Alquilado, Arrendado. an Hire or wages, v. Salario,
Soldada. His, or his own, v. Su, or Suyo. Hisope, v. Hisopo, Isopo. to Hiss,
vide Silvar. a Hiss, vide Silvo. Hissing, vide Silvo. a History, v. Historia,
Istoria. a Historiographer, v. Historiador, Istoriador. belonging to a
History, v. Istorial. to Hit, or strike, v. Dar. a Hitter, v. El que da.
Hither and thither, v. Aca, Aculla. Hither, vide Aca. come Hither, vide
Acercate me, Vien aca. Hitherto, vide Aun. a Hiue, vide Colmena.
H O
Ho, ho, in calling one, vide Ahao, O'la. a Hoale boared, vide Barreno. to wax
Hoarie as men do in age, vide Encanecer. waxed Hoarie, v. Encanecido. Hoarie
headed, v. Cano. Hoarie hairs, v. Canas. to be Hoarse, v. Enrronquecer.
Hoarse, v. Ronco. Hoarsenesse, vide Enrronquecimiento, Ronquedad. Hoarsely, v.
Con ronquedad. Hot, v. Fervoroso, Hervoroso, Caliente, Calido. Hobgoblins or
bugs, v. Paparesollas, Trasgos. a Hodgepodge of garlic and cheese, v.
Almodrote. a Hog, v. Puerco. a Hogs stie, v. cahurda, Pocilga. a fat Hog, v.
Puerco cevado. Hoggishnes, v. Porqueria. Hoggishly, v. Puercamente. a Hogshead
or vessel so called, v. Pipa. a Hogshaslet, vide Obispuelo de puerco. a
Hogheard, vide Porquero, Puerquero. to Hoise, v. Levantar, Hicar. to Hoise
sail, v. Hicar las velas. Hoise, v. Hica. to Hold on one side, v. Vandear. to
take Hold on, v. Asir. take Hold on him, v. A'sele. Holden, v. Asido, Tenido. a
Holding, v. Tenida, Asida. a Hold or place of defense, vide Castro, Fuerte,
Fortaleza. to make full of Holes, v. Agujerar. full of Holes, v. Agujerado. a
Hole or hollow place, vide Agujero, Horado. a great Hole in a wall or such
like, vide Boqueron. a Hole or lurking place, vide Escondrijo, Escondijo. a
fox Hole, v. Raposera or Madriguera de zorra. a touch Hole, v. Fogon. the arm
Hole, v. Sobaco. to make Holy, v. Santificar. Holy, v. Sacro, Santo, Sagrado.
Holiness, v. Santidad. Holily, v. Santamente. to keep Holydaies, v. Guardar las
Fiestas or Disantos. a Holydaie, v. Disanto, Fiesta. Holydaie eues, v. Vigilias
or Visperas. Holywater, v. A'gua bendita. a Holywater stick or sprinkle, v.
Ysopo. a Hollander, v. Holandez. Hollocke wine, v. Holoque. to make Hollow, v.
Aocar. Hollow, v. Hueco. Hollownes, v Cavidad, Hueco. the Holme or Huluer tree,
v. Azebo. a grove of Holmes, v. Carrascal. Helped, v Helped. Wholesome, v.
Saludable. Holsomely, v. Con salud, Con sanidad. to do Homage, v. Hazer feudo.
Homage, v. Feudo. Home, v. A casa. Homeliness, v. Grosseza. a Homily, v.
Homilia. Honest, v. Honesto. Honesty, v. Honestidad. Honestly, v.
Honestamente. Honey, v. Miel. a Honey comb, v. Panal. to Honor or worship,
vide Acatar, Honrar, Reverenciar. Honor, v. Honor, Honra, O'nra, Acatamiento.
Honored, v. Acatado, Honrado, Reverenciado. Honorable, vide Honroso, Onroso,
Illustre. most Honorable, v. Illustrissimo. Honorably, v. Honradamente,
Honrosamente. to Hood any thing, vide Poner el capirote. a Hood, v. Capilla,
Cogolla, Cogulla, Capirote, Capuz. Hooded, v. Cogollado, Cogullado. a Hood such
as mourners wear on their heads, v. Capirote, Capuz. a Hood to ride in, vide
Capilla de fieltro. a hawks Hood, v. Capirote de halcon. a kind of miniuer
Hood which doctors are wont to wear in sign of honor, vide Capirote deropa.
to Hoodwinke or blind one, v. Cegar. the Hoof of a horse or other beast, vide
U'n^a, Baso. a Hook or bill to lop trees with, v. Hocina, Hocino. a Hook to
hang any thing thereon, vide Escarpia. pot Hooks, vide Llares. a Hoope bird,
vide Abubilla. a Hoope or ring of gold silver or any other metal, vide
Sortija. a Hoope of a barrel, vide A'rco. a Hooper or cooper, vide Tonelero.
to Hope, vide Esperar. Hope, vide Esperanca. Hoped for, vide Esperado. Hoping,
vide Esperando. to Hop, vide Andar a Coscojitas or Coscogitas. a Hop, vide
Coscojita, Coscogita or Coscoxita. a Hoppe, or hoppes to brew withal, vide
Hombrecillos, Ombrezillos, Hombrezillos. a mill Hopper, vide Tolva de molino.
Horehound, v. Marubio, Marrubio. to Horde, v. Ahuchar, Achocar, Ahorrar,
Atezorar. a Horder, vide Ahuchador, Achocador, Ahorrador. to push with the
Horns, v. Cornear. a pusher with the Horns, v. Corneador. to wind or blow a
Horn, vide Tocar un cuerno. one that windeth a Horn, vide El que toca cuerno.
a Horn, vide Cuerno. a Horn pipe, vide Cornamusa. a little bugle Horn, v.
Cornezuela. a Horn to drench beasts with, vide Colodra. an ink Horn, v.
Tintero. a shooing Horn, v. Calcador. that bears Horns, v. Cornigero.
Horned, v. Cornudo. a Hornefish, v. Enxarraco, Xarraco. a Hornet or great
waspe, v. Abispon, or Tavarro. Horrible, or heinous, vide Espantoso, Horrido,
Horrible. an Horror or trembling for fear, vide Espanto, Temor. to Horse as
the stalion does leap or horse the mare, v. Cubrir la yegua, Tomar la yegua.
to leap on Horse back, or to get on horse, v. Subir a cavallo, Cavalgar. on
Horseback, v. A cavallo. a Horse, v. Cavallo. a Horse rider, or breaker, vide
Cavallerizo. a Horseman, v Cavalgador. Horsemen in war, v. Cavalleria. a
Horsemans ward, v. Cavalleriza. a light Horseman, v. Cavallo ligero.
Horsemanship, v. Cavalleria. a light Horse, v. Cavallo ligero. a post Horse, v.
Cavallo de posta. a Horse keeper, vide Moco de cavallos. a Horse courser, v.
Corredor de cavallos. a Horse-litter, v. Litera. a Horse-cloth, vide Manta de
cavallo. a Horse comb, v. Almohaca. a Horsemill, v. Atahona. Horse tail
herb, vide Cola de cavallo. Hose or nether stocks, v. Medias, Medias calcas.
to put on Hosen, v. Calcar. great spanish Hose, v. Calcones, caraguelles,
carahuelles. Hosed, v. Calcado. Hosing or shooing, v. Calciamiento. a Hosier,
v. Calcetero. an Hospital, v. Enfermeria, Hospedal, Hospital, Ospital. a
master of an Hospital, vide Hospitalero. to keep Hospitality, v. Hazer
plato. one that keeps no Hospitality, v. El que Haze plato. an Hostage, v.
Rehen. an Host that receives strangers, vide Huesped. an Hostess, or the
goodwife of an Inn or such like place, v. Huespeda. an Hostrie or Inn, v.
Meson. an Host of soldiers, v. Hueste. Hostility, v. Enimistad. Hot, v.
Heat. Hotly, v. Encendidamente. a Hotehouse or stewe, v. Estufa. an Houell or
covering for beasts made abroad, v. Cobre de bestias. a houell or stacke of
corn, vide Gavila or Gavilla. a Houkster, v. Regaton. How, v. Como. to Howl
or yell, v. Aullar. one that Howleth, v. Aullador. a Howling, v. Aullido. a
Howlet, v. Lechuza. a Hound, vide Perro sabueso, Perro ventor. a blood Hound,
v. Perro de rastro. an Hour, v. Hora. in a good Hour or happily, v. En hora
buena. an Houreglasse, vide Relox de arena. a House, v. Casa. a little House,
v. Casilla. to House or lodge, v. Alvergar. Housed, or lodged, v. Alvergado.
Housing, v. Casaria. the kings house or palace, vide Palacio, Alcacar. a
storehouse, v. Almazen. a Household, v. Familia. one of the Household, v.
Domestico. Household folks, v. Paniaguados. Household stuff, v. Alhajas, Axuar
de casa. Housleeke of the sea, v. Azevar. Howsoever it be, v. Enqualquier
manera. Howsoever, v. Como quier. Howbeit, v. Como quiera. How much, v. Hasta
quanto. How small or how little, vide Quan poco. How many, v. Quantos. How
often, v. Quantas vezes. How many soever, v. Quantos se quiera. Howsoever, v.
Como quiera que. a bird called a Hoop, vide Abubilla, Abuvilla, Habubilla. a
Huckster or houkster, v. Regaton. to Huffe or puff, v. Buffar. Huffing or
puffing, v. Bufido. Huge or big, v. Grande. to be Huge or big, v. Abultar.
to Hug. v. Abracar. Hugged, v. Abracado. Hugging or embracing, v. Abracada. a
Hulke or greatship, v. Nao, Nave. Humanity, v. Humanidad. Humane, v. Humano.
Humanely, v. Humanamente. to Humble or submit himself, v. Humillar, Vmillar.
Humble, v. Humilde, Vmilde. Humbled or brought down, v. Abaxado, Humillado.
Humblenes, v. Vmildad. an Humbling, v. Abaxamiento. Humbly, v. Humilmente.
Humiditie or moistnes, v. Vmidad. to Humme as Bees do, v. currear. a Humming,
v. currio. an Humor, v. Humor. to be Humorous, v. Antojarse. Humorous, v.
Apassionado, Antojado, Antojadizo. a Hundred weight, v. Quintal. the company
of an Hundred, v. Centenar, Cento. a Hundred times, v. Cien vezes. the Hundredth
speech, v. Centilo quio. to be an Hungered, or to hunger, vide Hambrear, Tener
hambre. Hunger, v. Hambre. Hungerbitten, v. Famelico. Hungry, v. Hambriento.
to Hunt, v. Cacar, Montear. Hunted, v. Cacado. a Hunter, v. Cacador, Montero. a
Huntresse, v. Cacadora. Hunting, v. Caca, Monteria. a Hunters hat, v. Montera.
Hurdes of flax, v. Estopa. to Hurl or cast, vide Arrojar. Hurled, vide
Arrojado. Hurling, vide Arrojo. a Hurlieburlie, v. Contienda, Ruydo. to Hurt,
v. Empescer, Ofender, Dan^ar, Hazer mal. that may be Hurt, vide Empecible. Hurt
or marred, vide Ofendido, Dan^ado. Hurt or damage, vide Dan^o, Empecimiento. to
hurt with hail or with casting stones, vide Apedrear. Hurting, vide
Ofendiendo. Hurtful, vide Empeciente, nocible, Ofensivo. Hurtfully, vide Con
dan^o. Hurtlesse, vide Sin ofensa, Sin mal hazer. a Husband, vide Marido. an
ill Husband, or an unthrift, v. Dissipador de sus bienes, Gastador. to play the
good Husband, vide Grangear. a good Husband, vide Grangeador, Grangero. good
Husbandry, vide Grangeria. to practice Husbandry, vide Labrar la tierra. to
Husband as men do husband their ground, vide Labrar la tierra. a Husbandman,
vide Agricultor, Labrador. Husbandry, vide Agricultura, Labranca. to Hush or
keep silence, vide Callar, Guardar silencio. the Husk of a chestnut, vide
Erizo de Castan^a. a Husk, vide Granca. Husks, vide Grancas. the Husk of a
grape, vide Orujo, Borujo. Huskie, vide Grancoso. a Huswife, vide Muger de su
casa. a good Huswife, idem. a Hutch or binne to put in bread, vide A'rca de
pan. to put in a Hutch, vide Ahuchar. to Huzze as bees do, vide currear,
Zurrear.
H Y
to Hye, vide Hie. to sing Hymns, vide Cantar hymnos. a Hymn, vide Hymno.
I
I, vide Yo. a Jack, a coat used in war, v. Jaco, Cota de malla. a Jacke or
Jagge of leather, vide Copon de cuero. a saucy Jacke, vide Presumptuoso. a
Jade, vide Rocin malo. a foggie Jade, vide Hobachon. a Iaile, vide Carcel. a
Jailer, vide Carcelero. James, vide Diego. to Iangle, vide Repicar, Dar
badajadas. a Jangler, vide U'no que da badajadas. Jangling, v. Badajadas.
January a month, vide Enero. to Jar or disagree, vide Desacordar,
Desconcertar. Jarring, vide Desacuerdo, Desconcierto. a Jasper stone, vide
Diaspero, Jaspe. trimmed with Jasper, vide Jaspeado. a Iaueline or Moors
weapon, v. Azagaya, Venablo. Iaumes of a door, vide Batiente de puerta. the
Iaundice, which is an ouerflowing of the gall over the whole body, v.
Itericia, Atericia. one sick of the Jaundice, vide Iterico, Aterico. the
yellow Jaundice, vide Itericia, Atericia. the Iawe or gum wherein the teeth
be set, vide Quixada. the Jaws, vide Quixadas. the Jawe bone, vide Mexilla.
I C
a stake of Ice, vide Carambano.
I D
the Ides of every month, vide Los I'dus. an Idiot, vide Idiota. to be Idle,
vide Ser ocioso, Hazer nada. Idle, vide Ocioso. an Idle fellow, vide Holgacan,
Holgazan. Idleness, vide O'cio, Ociosidad. Idly, vide Ociosamente. an Idol,
vide I'dolo. to worship Idols, vide Idolatrar. an Idolater, vide Idolatra.
Idolatry, vide Idolatria.
I E
Ieate, vide Azabache. a Iegget, vide Sausage. to be Ielous, vide ser Celoso.
Ielous, vide Celoso. Jealousy, vide Celo, Celocia. a Iennet horse, vide Cauallo
ginete. to be in Ieoperdie, vide Peligrar, Estar en peligro. being in Ieopardy,
vide Peligrando, Estando en peligro. a Ieoperdy, vide Peligro, Riesgo. to
Ierke, vide gerke. a Ierkin or iacket, vide Sayuelo. Iesses for a hawk, vide
Pihuelas. to Jest, v. Burlar, Chocarrear, Truhanear. a Jest, vide Burla,
Chiste, Trufa, Mofa. a pretty Jest, vide Burlilla. a fond Jest, vide
Chocarreria. a Jester, vide Bufon, Burlador, Burlon, Chocarrero, Truhan. a
cunning Jester, vide Pantamimo. Jesting, vide Burlando, Truhaneria. a Jewel,
vide Joya. a Jeweller, vide Joyero. a Jew, vide Judio. a Jewish woman, vide
Judia. Jewish religion, vide Juderia. belonging to a Jew, vide Judiego.
I F
If, vide Si. If not, vide Si no.
I G
Ignominy, vide Ignominia. Ignominious, vide Ignominioso. to be Ignorant, v.
Ignorar, No saber. Jgnorant, or unskillful, v. Ignorante. Ignorance, v.
Ignorancia. ^gnorantly, v. Ignorantemente.
I L
an Island, or island, vide Y'sla. Ill, or evil, v. Malo. Illegitimate, v.
Illegitimo. to Illuminate, v. Iluminar. an Illusion, or mocking, v. Ilusion.
Illustrious, vide Illustre.
I M
an Image, v. Estatua, Imagen, Ymagen. an Image-maker, v. Estatuario. to make
Images, v. Hazer Ymagines. to Imagine, or conceive in ones mind, v. Fantasear,
Imaginar, Ymaginar. Imagination, vide Fantasia, Imaginacion. full of
Imaginations, v. Fantastico. Imagined, vide Imaginado. Imagining, v.
Imaginando. to Imbarke, or lay on shipboord, vide Embarcar. Imbarking, or
putting into ship, v. Embarcadura. Imbecilitie, v. Flaqueza. hot Imbers, vide
A'scuas. Imbossed, vide Relevado. Imbossed work, v. Relieve. to Imbosse, vide
Relevar. Imbossing, v. Relieves. to Embrace, vide Embrace. to Imbroder, or
embroder, v. Bordar, Boslar. Imbroderie, v. Bordadura. Imbrodered, v. Bordado.
an Imbroderer, vide Bordador. an Imbrodered border, v. Board. Imbrodering gold,
v. O'ro can^utillo. to Imbrue, or embrue with blood, vide Ensangrentar. Imbrued
with blood, vide Ensangrentado. Imbruing with blood, v. Ensangrentamiento. to
Imitate, or follow, v. Imitar. Imitation, vide Imitacion. an Imitator, vide
Imitador. Imitated, vide Imitado. Immaculate, v. Immaculado. Immediately, v.
Luego, Presto, Incontinente. to be Imminent, vide Eminente ser. Immoderate, v.
Sin moderacion. Immoderately, v. Sin moderacion. Immodest, v. Sin modestia.
Immodestly, idem. Immortality, v. Imortalidad. Immortal, or everlasting, v.
Imortal. Immutable, v. Inmutable, Imutable. to Impair, or empaire, v.
Empeorar. Impaired, vide Empeorado. Impairing, v. Empeoramiento. to Impart,
vide Contribuyr. Imparted, v. Contribuydo. an Imparting, vide Contribucion.
Impatience, v. Impaciencia. Impatient, v. Impaciente. Impatiently, v.
Impacientemente. an Impediment, or let, vide Impedimento. Impenitent, v.
Impenitente. Impenetrable, v. Impenetrable. Imperfect, v. Imperfeto.
Imperfected, idem. Imperial, v. Imperial. Impertinent, v. Impertinente.
Impiety, vide Impiedad. Implements within a house, vide Alhaja. to Employ, or
employ, v. Emplear. Employed, v. Empleado. to Import, vide Importar. an
Importance of a thing, vide Importancia. of most great Importance, v.
Importantissimo. Importunity, v. Importunidad. Importunate, v. Importuno.
Importunately, v. Importunamente. to Impose, or set upon, v. Imponer. Imposed
or enjoined, v. Impuesto. Imposing, v. Impusicion. it is Impossible, v. es
Impossible. Impossible, vide Impossible. Impossibility, v. Imposibilidad. an
Impost, v. Alcabala, Alcavala. to breed an Impostume, vide Apostemar. an
Impostume, vide Apostema. Impotencie, or want of strength, vide Impotencia,
Flaqueza. Impotent, v. Impotente. to Impouerish, or empouerish, v. Empobrecer,
Empobrescer. Impouerished, v. Empobrescido. Impregnable, vide Inexpugnable. an
Impression, v. Impression. to Imprint, v. Impremir. Imprinted, v. Impresso. to
Imprison, v. Encarcelar. Imprisoned, v. Encarcelado. Imprisonment, vide
Encarcelamiento, Enprisionamiento. Improper, vide Improprio. Improperly, v.
Impropriamente. Imprudencie, v. Imprudencia. Imprudent, v. Inprudente.
Imprudently, vide Imprudentamente. Impudent, or shameless, v. Desvergoncado. to
Impugn, vide Impugnar. Impulsion, v. Impulcion. Impure, or unclean, v,
Impuro. Impuritie, v. Impuridad. to Impute, attribute, or ascribe, vide
Atribuyr, Imputar. Imputed, v. Imputado.
I N
In, vide En. Into, vide En. to Inamell, or enamell, v. Esmaltar. to Incarnate,
v. Encarnar. Incarnated, v. Encarnado. Incarnation, v. Encarnacion. to Incense
or chafe much, v. Instigar, Irritar, Provocar, Amohinar. Incensed, vide
Provocado, Irritado, Amohinado, instigado. Incensing, v. Instigacion,
Provocacion, Mohino. to burn Incense, vide Quemar incienso. Incest, v.
Aiuntamiento con parienta, Incesto. Incestuous, v. Incestuoso. an Inche, v.
Pulgada. to Inchant, or Enchant, v. Encantar. to Incite or provoke, v. Incitar,
Provocar. Incited, v. Incitado, Provocado. Incitement, v. Incitamiento,
Provocacion. to Incline, v. Inclinar. Inclination, v. Inclinacion, Instinto.
Inclined, v. Inclinado. Inclining, v. Inclinacion. to Enclose, v. Incluyr.
Enclosed, v. Incluso. an Enclosure, v. Clausura. to Include or shut in, v.
Incerrar. Incommoditie, v. Incomodidad. Incommodious, v. Incomodo.
Incommodiously, v. Con inconveniente Incomparable, v. Incomparable.
Incomprehensible, vide Incomprehensible. Incongruitie, v. Incongruencia.
Inconsiderancie, v. Inadvertencia, Inconsideracion. Inconstant or unconstant,
v. Inconstante, Mudable. Incontinencie, v. Incontinencia. Incontinent, v.
Incontinente. Incontinently, v. Incontinentemente. Incontinently, or out of
hand, v. Incontinente, Luego. Inconueniencie, v. Desconveniencia. Inconvenient,
v. Desconveniente, Inconveniente. to Incorporate, v. Incorporar. Incorporated,
v. Incorporado. to Encounter, or encounter, vide Encontrar, Topar. to Encourage
or encourage, vide Animar. to Increase, v. Increase. Incredible, v. Encreyble.
Incrediblie, v. Encreyblemente. Incredulity, v. Incredulidad. Incredulous, v.
Incredulo. Incurable, or incurable, vide Incurable. to Incur, v. Incurrir.
Incurred, v. Incurrido. to Indamage, v. Endamage. to Endanger, v. Arriscar.
Endangered, v. Arriscado. to Endeavor, v. Ensayar, Provar, Emponer. Endeavor,
v. Prueva, Ensayo, Empostura. Endeavored, vide Provado, Ensayado, Empuesto. to
be Indebted, v. Debt. Indeed, v. Cierto, de Veras, en Verdad. that Indenteth
with blows, v. Abollador. Indifferent, v. Indiferente. Indifferency, v. Sin
diferencia. Indignation, v. Indignacion. Indignity, v. Indignidad. to Indite
or pen a letter, etc. v. Notar cartas. Invisible, v. Invisible. Invisible, v.
Invisiblemente. to Indowe or give a dowry, vide Dotar. Endowed, v. Dotado. to
Induce, draw, or lead, vide Induzir. Induced, v. Induzido. an Inducement, v.
Induzimiento. an Inducer, v. Induzidor. Indulgence or pardon, vide Indulgencia.
Industry, or diligence, v. Industria. Industrious or diligent, v. Industrioso.
Inequality or inequality, v. Desygualdad. Inevitable, vide Inevitable. to
Infame, v. Infamar. Infamy, vide Infamia. Infamous, v. Infame. Infamously, v.
Con infamia. an Infant, v. Infant. Infancy, v. Infancia. to Infect, stain or
corrupt, v. Enconar, Inficionar. Infected, vide Enconado, Inficionado.
Infection, vide Enconamiento, Inficion. Infectious, v. Enconoso, Inficionado.
Infelicitie, v. Infelicidad, Desventura. an Inferior, vide Inferior.
Inferioritie, vide Inferioridad. Infernal, vide Infernal. to Infer, vide
Inferir. Inferred, vide Inferido. an Infidel, vide Infiel. Infidelity, v.
Infieldad. Infinite or endless, v. Infinito. Infinitenes, vide Infinidad.
Infinitely, v. Infinitamente. Infinitive mood, vide Infinitivo modo.
Infirmity, v. Enfermidad, Dolencia, Malatia. to Inflame with desire, etc. vide
Inflamar. Inflammation, vide Inflamacion. Inflamed, v. Inflamado. Inflaming, v.
Inflamacion. an Influence, v. Influencia. to Enforce or enforce, v. Forcar,
Apremiar, Constren^ir. to Inform or teach, v. Informar. Informed. v.
Informado. an Informer which inquireth of trespasses or faults done against
the law, vide Delator. an Information, vide Informacion. Unfortunate or
unlucky, vide Infortunado, Desdichado, Desventurado, Desgraciado. to Infuse,
v. Infundir. Infused, v. Infundido. to Engender or engender, vide Engendrar.
Ingenious, v. Ingenioso. Ingeniously, v. Ingeniosamente. Ingratitude, vide
Ingratitud. to Ingraue, vide Engraue. Ingresse or entrance, v. Entrada. to
Inhabit or dwell in, vide Abitar, Morar, Bivir. an Inhabitant, v. Abitador,
Morador. Inhabited, vide Abitado. Inhabiting, vide Morando, Abitando, Biviendo.
to Inherit, vide Eredar. Inheritance, vide Heredad, Herencia. to Inhibite or
forbid, vide Inhibir, Prohibir, Vedar. Inhibited, vide Inhibido, Prohibido,
Vedado. Inhibition, vide Inhibicion, Prohibicion, Veda. Inhumanitie or
vncurtesie, vide Inhumanidad. to Enjoy or enjoy, vide Gozar. Iniquity, vide
Iniquitad. to Injury one, vide Injuriar, Agraviar. an Injury, vide Injuria,
Sinrazon, Sinjusticia, Agravio. Injured, vide Desaforado, Injuriado, Agraviado.
Injurious, vide Injurioso. Injuriously, vide Injuriosamente. Ink, vide Tinta.
an Ink horn, vide Tintero. to Enlarge or enlarge, vide Alargar, Ensanchar. to
Inn or lodge, vide Alvergar. an Inn, vide Alvergo, Meson. an Inn keeper,
vide Mesonero. Inner or more within, v. Mas a dentro. Innocence, vide
Inocencia. Innocent, vide Inocente. Innocently, v. Inocentemente. to Innouate,
v. Inovar. Innouated, vide Inovado. an Innouater, vide Inovador. to Invoke,
vide Invocar. Inuocated, vide Invocado. an Invocation, vide Invocacion.
Innumerable, vide Sin numero, Sin cuento, Innumerable. Inordinate, vide
Inordinado. Inordinately, vide Inordinadamente. Enough, vide Harto. to Inquire,
ask or demand, vide Preguntar, Inquirir. Inquired, vide Inquirido,
Preguntado. an Inquiry, vide Pregunta, Inquisicion. an Inquisitour, v.
Inquisidor. to Enrich or enrich, v. Enriquecer. to Inroll or register, v.
Registrar, Alistar. Enrolled or registered, v. Alistado, Registrado. Insatiable,
or insatiable, vide Insaciable. Insatiablie, v. Insaciablemente. an
Inscription, v. Inscripcion. Insensiblenes, v. Insensiblidad. Insensible, v.
Insensible. Inseparable, v. Inseparable. Inseparably, v. Inseperablemente. the
Inside, v. Enves. to Insinuate, v. Insinuar. Insolent, v. Insolente, Arrogante,
Superbo. Insolency, v. Fasto or Fausto, Insolencia, Superbia. Insolently, v.
Insolentemente. Insomuch, v. En quanto. to Inspire, v. Inspirar. an
Inspiration, v. Inspiracion. Inspired, v. Inspirado. Instable, or unstable, v.
Instable. to give an Instance, or exemplify, vide Exemplificar. an Instance or
particular example, vide Exemplo. to be Instant or earnest, v. Instar. Instant,
v. Instante. Instantnes, v. Instancia. Instantly, or earnestly, vide Con
instancia. to Instill or drop in by little and little, v. Destilar. an
Instillation, v. Destilacion. an Instinct, v. Instinto. to Institute or
ordain, vide Instituyr. Instituted, v. Instituydo. an Institution, v.
Institucion. to Instruct or teach, vide Avezar, Amaestrar, Disciplinar,
Dotrinar, Ensen^ar, Instruyr. Instructed, v. Avezado, Amaestrado, Disciplinado,
Dotrinado, Ensen^ado, Instruydo. Instruction, v. Disciplina, Institucion,
Instrucion, Dotrina, Ensen^anca. an Instructour, v. Maestro, Ensen^ador,
Instructor. an Instrument, v. Instrumento. an Instrument of music, vide
Instrumento de musica. an Instrument of war, v. Instrumento de guerra. to
Insult, v. Insultar. an Insurrection, v. Insurecion, Levantamiento, Rebeldia.
to Entangle or entangle, v. Enhetrar, Enlacar, Entrampar, Entricar, Maran^ar.
Entangled, v. Enlacado, Entricado, Intricado, Maran^ado. Intangling, v.
Entricamiento, Enhetradura, Maran^a. an Intangler, v. Maran^ador. Integrity,
v. Integridad, Entereza. Intelligence, v. Intelligencia. Intemperance, vide
Intemperancia. Intemperately, v. Destempladamente. to Intend or purpose, v.
Proponer. Intended, v. Propuesto. an Intent, v. Proposito, Intento. to
Intercept, v. Interceptar. to make Intercession, v. Intercession hazer.
Intercession, v. Intercession. an Intercessour, v. Intercessor. Intrest or
usury, vide Interes, Interesse. to have Intrest in a thing, vide Tener
Interes. to Interlace, or enterlace, v. Entrelacar. to Interline or enterline,
vide Entrelinar. to Intermedle, or intermingle, vide Entremeter. Intermedled,
v. Entremetido. Intermedling, v. Entremetimiento, Entremixtura. Intermission,
v. Intermission. to Interpose or put between, v. Entreponer. Interposed, v.
Entrepuesto. an Interposition, v. Entrepostura. to Interpret or translate,
vide Interpretar, Trujamanear. an Interpretation, v. Interpretacion. an
Interpretour, vide Faraute, Interpret, Trujaman, Truchaman. to Interre or to
bury, vide Enterrar, Sepultar. an Interrogation, vide Interrogacion. to
Interrupt, v. Interrumper. Interrupted, v Interrumpido. to Intertaine or
entertayne, vide Entretener. to Intimate or signify, vide Intimar. Intimated,
vide Intimado. to Entitle, vide Intitular. Entitled, vide Intitulado.
Intolerable, vide Insufrible, Intolerable. to Intoxicate, vide Entosicar.
Intralles or entralles, vide Entran^as. to Intrappe or entrappe, v. Entrampar,
Enlacar, Enlazar, Enrredar. to Entreat or entreat, vide Suplicar, Rogar.
Intricate, or that can hardly be unfolded, v. Entricado. to make Intricate, v.
Entricar. Intricately, v. Entricadamente. an Introduction to a matter, vide
Introducion. to Intrude, v. Entremeterse. Intruded, v. Entremetido. an
Intruder, idem. to Inueigle, or entise with fair words, vide Atraer a si con
blandas palabras. to Invent, or find out, v. Inventar. Invented, vide
Inventado. an Inuentor, v. Inventor. an Invention, v. Invencion. an Inventory,
v. Inventario. to Inuest, v. Envestir, Investir. Invested, v. Envestido.
Inuesting, vide Investidura. Inuestigation, or searching out of diverse things,
v. Investigacion. Invincible, that cannot be overcome, v. Invencible.
Inviolable, v. Inviolable. to Inuiron, v. Cercar, Rodear. Invisible, vide
Invisible. to Inuit, vide Combidar. Invited, v. Combidado. Inuiting, v.
Combite. to Invoke, or call upon, v. Invocar. an Invocation, v. Invocacion.
an Inundation, v. Inundacion. Inward, vide Interior, Intrinseco. Inwardnes,
vide Interioridad. Inwardly, v. Adentro, Interiormente.
I O
to be Iocund, vide Alegrar. Iocund, or merry, v. Alegre, Jocundo. Iocundly,
v. Alegremente. to Iog, v. Dar embion, or Empuxon. a logging, v. Embion, or
Empuxon. to lay Ioices of timber on a wall, vide Bardar. to be Ioifull, v. Ser
alegre. Ioifull, vide muy Alegre, Regozijado, muy Contento. Joyfulness, v.
Alegria, Contento, Regozijo. Ioifully, v. Alegramente, Regozijadamente. Jolly,
vide Locano. Iollitie, vide Locania. to Join together, v. Juntar, Vn^ir. to
Join in one, v. Apin^ar. Joined together, vide Apretado, Junto, Juntado,
Vn^ido. Joined in one, v. Apin^ado. Joined, v. Juntado. a Ioining together, v.
Conjunta. a Ioiner, v. Caxero, Ensamblador. to use Ioiners trade, vide
Ensamblar. Ioining, v. Coyuntura, Conjuntura, Juntura. a Joint, vide Artejo. to
put bones out of Joint, vide Desencasar huessos. putting out of Joint, v.
Desencasadura. one that has a bone out of Joint, vide Desencasado. the Joint
of reeds, or cane, vide Can^uto. Jointly, v. Juntamente. a Jot, vide Jota. a
Journey, vide I'da, Jornada, Camino.
I R
Ire, vide Anger. an Irish rugge, vide Bernia. Irksome, vide Fastidioso. Iron,
vide Hierro. Iron work, vide Herreria. bound with Iron, v. Herrado.
Irregularitie, v. Irregularidad. Irregular, vide Irregular. Irregularly, vide
Irregularmente. Irreligious, v. sin religion. Irreprehensible, vide
Irreprehensible. Irreuocable, v. Irrevocable. to Irritate, or to provoke, vide
Irritar, Provocar, Instigar.
I S
Is it not so? No es assi. Ise, vide Yelo. an Isle, vide I'sla, Y'sla.
compassed with water, or made an Isle, v. Yslado, Islado. an Island, or Isle,
vide I'sla, Y'sla. a little Isle, vide Isleta. an Issue, vide Botana. Issue or
posterity, vide Decendencia, Decendimiento, Prole.
I T
the Itch, vide Comecon. full of Itche, vide Lleno de comecon. to Iterate, vide
Reiterar.
I V
Iubile or time of mirth and rest from labor, vide Jubileo. to rest from
labors or keep Jubilee, vide Jubilar. to Judge or deem, vide Juzgar, Pensar,
Estimar. a Judge, vide Juez. Judged, vide Juzgado. Judgment, vide Juizio.
Judicial, vide Judicial. a Judge to drink in, v. Cantara. a Judge maker, vide
Cantarero. to Iuggle, vide Jugar de manos. a Iuggler, vide Jugador de manos,
Juglar. Juice or moisture, v. cumo, Xugo. full of juice, v. cumoso, Xugoso.
Iuie, v. Yedra. a fruit called of the apothecaries Iuiuba, vide Acofeifa, or
Azofeifa. Iulep or gelly, vide Eladura, Julepe. to Iumpe or leap, vide Saltar.
Iumpe or just, v. A pelo. June the month, vide Junio. a Iunket of wicker
wherewith eeles are taken, vide Bueytron. Juniper, v. Enebro. Iuorie or the
Elephants tooth, vide Marfil. a Jurisdiction, v. Juridicion. made Just, even or
plain, v. Ajustado, Apelo, Ygualado. to Just, v. Iustle. to Just or run
together, v. Justar. Just by, v. Apar, Cerca. to Justify, v. Justificar. a
Justifying, v. Justificacion. Justification, v. Justificacion. to do Justice,
v. Justiciar. Just or right, v. Cabal, Justo. a Justice, v. Justiciero. Justice
or equity, v. Justicia. the L. chief Justice, v. Alcalde mayor de Justicia.
to Iustle as ships do, v. Barloar. to Iustle, ioust or make tournament, vide
Justar. a Iustler or tilter, v. Justador. Iusting or tilting, v. Justa. Justly,
vide Cabalmente, Justamente. Iutties in a house, vide Aximezes, Salidizos.
K
KAiles play, v. Birlos, Bolos. to play at Kailes, v. Birlar. a Calendar or
Calender, vide Calendario. a Kanker or Canker, v. Cancer.
K E
the Keele of a ship, v. Quilla. to Keep or conserve, vide Guardar, Conservar.
to Keep in the smoke, v. Abahar. a Keeper, v. El que guarda. a Keeper of a
prison, v. Alcayde de carcel, Carcelero. Keeping, v. Guarda. Kept, vide
Guardado. a Key, v. Llave. a Key of virginals or peg of other instrument, vide
Clavija. a Key clog, v. Llavera. a Key bearer, vide Clavero, Llaverizo. to
Kembe or comb, vide Peynar. to Kendle, set on fire, or make burn, vide
Atizar, Encender. Kindling, vide Encendimiento. Kindled, vide Encendido. one
that Kindles fire, v. Atizador. a Kennell or channel, vide Canal. a Kerchiefe,
vide Cofia, Toca. a hand Kerchiefe, v. Pan^uezuelo, Pan^uelo. a Kernel under
the chinne, vide Papada. the Kernels in the neck, v. Agallas. the Kernels in
the throat, vide Agallas en la garganta. a Kertle, v. Saya. to Kerue or carue,
vide Trinchar, Cortar. a Kestrell, vide Cernicalo. a Kettle, vide Caldera. a
little Kettle, v. Caldereta. a copper Kettle to keep water in, vide Acetre.
K I
a Kibe on the heel, vide Friera, Sauan^on. to Kick, vide Acocear, Calcar,
Cocear. Kicking, vide Acoceamiento, Coceamiento. Kicked, vide Acoceado,
Coceado. a Kicker, vide Acoceador, Coceador. a Kid, vide Cabrito or Cabritico.
Kids leather, vide Cabritilla. a Kidney, vide Rin^on. to Kill or slay, vide
Matar. to Kill the desires, vide Amortiguar. Killed, vide Matado. a Killer,
vide Matador. Killing, vide Muerte, Matanca. a lime Kill, vide Calera. a brick
Kill, vide Horno de ladrillos. a Kind or sort, vide Genero, Suerte. a Kind or
sex, vide Sexo. Kind, loving or courteous, v. Benigno, or Benino, Cortes. most
Kind, vide Benignissimo, muy Cortes. Kind or grateful, vide Grato,
Agradescido. Kindly, vide Benignamente, Cortesmente. Kindness, vide Benignidad,
Cortesia. to Kindle or to kendle, vide Encender, Atizar. a King, v. Rey. a
Kingdom, vide Reyno. Kinglike, vide Como Rey. Kingly, idem. Kindred or kin,
vide Parentesco, Afinidad, Consanguinidad. to break off Kindred or friendship,
v. Descompadrar. a Kinsman, vide Deudo, Pariente. a Kinswoman, vide Deuda,
Parienta. near of Kin, v. Parientes cercanos. to become of Kin by
marriage, etc. vide Emparentar. of Kin, vide Emparentado. a Father, vide
Padre. a Father in law, vide Suegro. a Mother, vide Madre. a Mother in law,
vide Suegra. a Grandfather, vide Abuelo. a Grandmother, v. Abuela. a great
Grandfather, v. Bisabuelo, Abuelo segundo. a Grandfathers father, v. Abuelo
tercero. an Uncle, vide Tio. an Aunt, vide Tia. a Nephewe, v. Nieto. a Niece,
v. Nieta. a Cosengerman, vide Primo hermano. Cosen Germans once removed, vide
Primos segundos. a Kirtle, or kertle, vide Vasquin^a, or Basquin^a. to Kiss,
v. Besar, or Bezar. a Kiss, vide Beso. Kissed, v. Besado, or Bezado. a Kisser,
v. Elque beza. Kissing, v. Beco. a Kitchen, vide Cozina. a Kitling, vide
Gatillo. a Kiuering, vide Covering.
K N
to Knacke a nut, or to crack, v. Partir nuezes, Partir avellanas. to play
the Knave, v. Vellaquear, Hazer como vellaco. a Knave, v. Vellaco. Knauerie, v.
Vellaqueria. Knauish, v. De Vellaco. Knauishly, v. Vellacamente. to Knead, v.
Hin^ir, Sovajar. Kneaded, v. Amassado, Sovajado. a tub wherein they Knead
dowgh, v. Amassadera, Artesa. a Kneader or one that kneadeth, v. Amassador,
Sovajador. Kneading, vide Sovajadura, Amassadura. a Kneading trough or tub,
vide Artesa, Amassadera. a Knee, v. Hinojo, Inojo, Rodilla. to bow the Knees,
v. Inclinar la Rodilla, Hazer reverencia. to Kneel, vide Ahinojar, Arrodillar,
Hincar de Rodillas. a Kneeler, v. El que Arrodilla, El que Hinca de Rodillas.
Kneeling, vide Arrodilladura, Arrodillado. Kneeholme, or butchers broom, vide
Jusbarba. a Knife, v. Cuchillo. a Knife maker, v. Cuchillero. a Penknife, vide
Cuchillo de cortar Plumas. a great Knife, v. Cuchillon. a wood-Knife, v.
Cuchillo de monte. to dubbe a Knight, v. Armar cavallero, Hazer cavallero. a
Knight of the order, v. Cavallero de espuelas doradas. a Knight, v. Cavallero.
a Knight of the garter, v. Cavallero de la jarretera. Knighthood or chivalry,
v. Cavalleria. to Knit or tie, v. An^udar. Knit or tied, v. An^udado. one that
Knitteth, v. An^udador. a Knitting, v. An^udadura. a Knob or bunch, v.
Chinchon, Tolondron, Bollo. Knobbie, v. Lleno de chinchones, Tolondrones, or
Bollos. to Knock, v. Golpear. to Knock or buffet one, v. Abofetear. a Knock
or buffet, v. Golpe, Bofetada, Bofeton. Knocked or buffeted, v. Abofeteado.
Knocking, v. Golpeando, Abofeteando. to take out Knops of cloth with pincers,
v. Despinsar. the Knops of cloth taken out with pincers, v. Despinsado. the
taking away the Knops of cloth with pincers, vide Despince. to make Knots, v.
An^udar. Knotgrasse, v. Cien-n^udillos. a Knot, v. n^udo. a sliding Knot, v.
Corrediza. to grow in Knots, v. En^udecer. Knottie, v. Lleno de n^udos. to
Know, v. Saber. Known, v. Sabido. Knowing of it, v. Asabiendas. a knower of
many things, v. El que Sabe, Sabidor. Knowing, v. Sabiendo. to Knowledge or
acknowledge, v. Reconocer. Knowledge or notice, v. Noticia. Knowledge or skill,
v. Sabiduria. Knowledge in learning, vide Sabiduria, Sciencia. a Knuckle, v.
Articulo, n^udo de la mano.
L
to Labor, travail, or take pains, vide Tabajar, Travajar. to Labor with
child, v. Estar de parto. Labor, vide Afan, Labor, Trabajo, Travajo. Labor
with arms, v. Braceaje. Labored, v. Trabajado, Travajado. a Labourer, v.
Trabajador. Laboring, v. Trabajando. Laborious, vide Trabajoso, Laborioso.
Laboriouslie, v. Trabajosamente, Laboriosamente. a Laberinth, v. Laberinto. to
Lace, v. Abrochar, Atacar. a Lace, v. Cordon, Atacador. Laced, v. Abrochado,
Atacado. Lacing, vide Abrochadura, Atacamiento. a Lace-maker, v. Cordonero. to
Lack, v. Carecer, or Carescer, Faltar, Menguar, Notener. Lack or want, v.
Falta, Mengua, Carecimiento. Lacked, v. Faltado, Menguado. Lacking, v.
Faltando, Menguando. a Lackey, v. Lacayo. a Ladde or young stripling, v. Moco.
a Ladder, v. Escala. scaling by a Ladder, v. Escalada. to Lade, or to lode, v.
Cargar. a Lady, v. Sen^ora. a Ladle, v. Hataca. Lagge or last, v. Postrero,
v'ltimo. to Lay as one lays a foundation, vide Echar cimiento, or
Fundamento. to Lay waste, v. Waste. to Lay a side or leave, v. Poner a part.
to Lay down, v. Poner a part. to lay a wager, vide Apostar, Hazer apuesta.
to Lay up safe, vide Poner en Cobro, Guardar. to Late wait, v. Acechar,
Assechar. to Lay eggs, v. Poner huevos. Laid down, v. Puesto a part. a
Laie-man, vide Lego. a Lake, vide Lago, Laguna. a Lamb, v. Cordera, Cordero,
Borrega, Borrego. a young Lamb, vide Corderico, Corderillo. a Lamb of a year
old, vide Borrego. to Lame, vide Coxear. Lame, vide Coxo. Lamenes, vide
Coxera. to Lamente, wail, or moorne, vide Lamentar, Plan^ir, Llorar.
Lamentable, vide Lamentable. Lamentably, vide Lamentablemente. Lamented, vide
Lamentado, Plan^ido, Llorado. Lamenting, vide Lamentando, Plan^iendo, Llorando.
a Lamentor, v. El que lamenta, Plan^e, or Llora. Also Lloron. Lamentation, v.
Lamentacion, Plan^imiento, Lloro. Lampasse in the mouth of a beast, vide Hava
de bestias. a Lamp, vide Lampara. a little Lamp, v. Lamparilla. a Lamprey, v.
Lamprea, Morena. a Lancelote, vide Lance. to Land or arrive, v. Arribar,
Arrivar, Aportar. Land, v. Tierra. a Landresse, v. Lavandera. a Lane. v.
Calleja. a narrow Lane, v. Calleja estrecha. a little Lane, v. Calejuela. a
Language, v. Lenguage, Lenguaje, Lengua. to Languish, consume, or pine away, v.
Consumir, Enflaquecerse, Deshazerse. Languishing, vide Consumiendo,
Enflaqueciendo. Lanke, slender, or thin in body, v. Cencen^o. a Lantern, vide
Lanterna. the Lantern in the admirallship, v. Fanal, Farol. a Lapidarie, v.
Lapidario. a Lap or skirt, v. Falda. a Lap, v. Gremio, Regaco. Lapping or
folding, v. Plegando. to Lap or lick, v. Lamer. a Lapwing, vide Habubilla.
Larbord, or the right side of a ship, vide Estriborda. to Larde, v. Enlardar,
Pringar. Larde, vide Pringa, Lardo. Larded, v. Enlardado, Pringado. a Larderie,
or lard-house, v. Despensa. to make Large, v. Ensanchar. Large, v. A'ncho,
Largo, Prolixo. somewhat Large, v. Larguillo. Largenes, v. Anchura, Largura,
Largor, Prolixidad. Largely, v. Anchamente, Largamente, Prolixamente. most
Large, v. Anchissimo, Larguissimo. at Large, v. Por estenso. Larges, or
liberality, vide Liberalidad. a Larke-bird, v. Cogujada. Lasciuiousnes, vide
Lascivia, Luxuria. Lascivious, vide Lascivo. Lasciuiously, v. Lascivamente. to
Lash out, or lavish, v. Gastar, Spender. a Lash or stripe, v. Acote, Acotazo.
the Laske, v. Camara. a Last for shoomakers, vide Horma de capateros. to Last,
v. Durar, Turar. the Last, vide Cabero, Postremero, Postrero, U'ltimo. Last of
all, v. U'ltimo. Last save one, v. Penultimo. Lastly or finally, v. Finalmente,
Ultimamente. at the Last, v. Al cabo, A la postre, Al fin. to Lastage, or
balasse, v. Lastrar. a Latchet of a shoe, vide Oreja de capato. to wax Late,
vide Andar haziendo tarde. Late-ward, v. Tarde. Late, idem. very Late, v. muy
Tarde. a Lath, v. Astilla, Raja. to speak Latin, v. Hablar latin. the Latin
tongue, v. Lengua latina. Latin, vide Latin. Latitude or breadth, v. Latitud.
Lattin, metal, v. Alaton. to Lattise, v. Enrrexar. Lattised, v. Enrrexado. a
Lattise made of twigs, v. Rejas, celosia. Lauender, vide Alhuzema. a Lauer, or
ewer, v. Aguamanil. to Laugh, v. Reyr. Laughed, vide Reydo. a Laugher, v. Risa,
Risada. Laughing, v. Reyndo. to Laugh extremely, v. Carcajadas dar. extreme
Laughter, vide Carcajado de risa. Laughter, vide Risa. to Lavish or lash out,
v. Gastar, Spender. Lavish, v. Gastador, Prodigo. Lauishly, v. Prodigalmente.
to Lance, or open a soar, vide Abrir herida. a Launcelet to cut wounds, v.
Navaja. a Lance or spear, v. A'sta, Lanca. the staff of a Lance or spear,
v. A'sta. to hurt or wound with a Lance, vide Alancear. a small Lance, v.
Lancuela. hurt or wounded with a Lance, vide Alanceado. a Lance man, or
launcier, v. Hombre de armas. the rest of a Lance, v. Ristre. to couch a
Lance to the rest, vide Enristrar. to Launch into the deep, vide Engolfar.
Launched into the deep, vide Engolfado. Laund or laune, vide Cambray. a
Laundresse, v. Lavandera. a Laurel tree, v. Laurel. a place of Laurel trees,
v. Lauredal. a poet Laureat, v. Laureado. Laud, vide Praise. Laudable, vide
Loable. Laudably, vide Loablemente. to make Lawful, v. Legitimar. Lawful,
vide Licito. Lawfulnes, vide Legalidad. made Lawful, vide Legalizado,
Legitimado. Lawfully borne, v. Legitimo. Lawfully, v. Licitamente. Law, vide
Ley. to go to Law, v. Lidiar. a counselor at Law, v. Jurisconsulto, Letrado,
Abogado. a man skillful in Law, v. Jurisperito. a Lawyer, v. Jurista, Legista,
Letrado, Abogado. a Lawmakers, vide Legislator. Lawne, or fine linen, v.
Cambray. a Laxe, vide Laske. a Lazer, v. Leproso. the disease of a Lazer, v.
Lepra. to be Lazy, v. Haraganear, Emperezar. Lazines, v. Pereza, Ronceria,
Haragania. a Lazy fellow, vide Haragan, Lerdo, Perezoso. Lazy, v. Lerdo,
Roncero, Perezoso. Lazilie, v. Con Pereza, con Haragania, con Ronceria.
L E
to Lead or solder together, v. Soldar. Lead, v. Plomo. red Lead or red oker,
v. Almagra. a bruers Lead, v. Caldera. Leaded over, v. Cubierto de plomo. to
Lead over, v. Cubrir con plomo. to Lead or guide soldiers, vide Acaudillar.
to Lead the way to others, vide Adelantar. a Leader of soldiers, vide
Acaudillador. a Leading of soldiers, vide Acaudillamiento. a Leaf, v. Hoja.
to pluck off the Leafes, v. Deshojar. a plucking off of the Leafes, v.
Deshojamiento. to bear Leafes, v. Echar hojas. to turn over Leafes, v.
Hojear. a ragged Leaf, v. Hoja rayada. full of Leases, v. Hojoso. Leafed or
having leaves, v. Con hojas. to enter into League, v. Conciertar, Convenir,
Acordar. a League, v. Liga, Acuerdo, Concierto, Convenencia. to Leake or run,
v. Recumar. a Leame for dogs or leash, v. Traylla. to be Lean, v. Ser Flaco.
to wax Lean, v. Ahilar, Enflaquecer, Emmagrecer. Lean, v. Emmagrecido,
Magro, Flaco. Leanenes, v. Magreza, Flaqueza. to Lean, lie, or stay against,
vide Arrimar. to Lean on one side, v. Acostar, Ladear. Leaned, v. Arrimado.
Leaning, v. Arrimadura. Leaning on one side, v. Acostamiento. one that Leans,
v. Arrimador. a place to lean the breast on, vide Antepecho. to Leap, v.
Brincar, Saltar. a Leap, v. Brinco, Salto. a little Leap, v. Brinquilla.
Leaped, v. Brincado, Saltado. a Leaper, v. Saltador, Brincador. Leaping, v.
Salto, Brinco. a Leaping in such sort as the heart pants or leapeth, vide
Latiente. a Leap or we will to take fish in, vide Buytron. the Leap year, v.
Bisiesto. to Learn, v. Deprender, Aprender. Learned, vide Deprendido,
Aprendido. a Learner, v. Discipulo, Aprendiz. Learning, vide Deprendiendo,
Aprendiendo. to Lease after reapers, v. Espigar. Leasing after reapers, vide
Espigamiento. Leasing or lying, v. Lisonja. to draw in a Leash, v. Atrayllar.
drawn in a Leash, v. Atrayllado. a Leash, v. Trailla, Traylla. the Least, v.
Minimo. at the Least, v. Alomenos. Leisure, vide Espacio. Leasurely, v. De
Espacio. to take Leisure, v. Tener Espacio, Tiempo, or Lugar. Leather, v.
Cuero. a little Leather ierkin, v. Coletico. sheep Leather dressed or tanned,
v. Badana. kids Leather, v. Gamuca. a spanish Leather ierkin, vide Cuera,
Coleto. a Leather ierkin, v. Coleto, Cuera. spanish Leather shoes, vide
capatos de cordovan. a Leather strap, v. Latigo. to Leave, v. Dexar,
Desemparar. to Leave the use of the lawful husband or wife, and to follow
whoredom, vide Abarraganar. to Leave work, v. Alcar de obra. Left, vide
Dexado, Desemparado. a Leaving, vide Desemparo, Dexamiento. to give Leave to do
a thing, v. Darlicencia, Licenciar. Leave or license, v. Licencia. to Leauell
by line, v. Nivelar. a Leauelling line, v. Nivel. one that Leauelleth by line,
v. Nivelador. to Leauell or make even, v. Nivelar. to Leauell or aim at, v.
Asestar. Leauelled or aimed at, v. Asestado. to Leaven, v. Fermentar, Lleudar.
a Leaven, v. Levadura. Leauened, v. Leudo, a Leauer or bar to lift timber,
vide Espeque, Palanca, Palanco. a Leaueret or young hare, vide Lebrastillo. to
play the Lecherer, v. Luxuriar. Lechery, v. Luxuria. Lecherous, v. Luxurioso.
Lecherously, v. Luxuriosamente. a Lecterne, or deske, v. Escrivania. a Lecture,
v. Lecion, Lectura. Legier-demaine, v. Embaucamiento to play Legier-demaine,
v. Embaucar. a Leeke or scallion, v. Puerro. a Leeke blade, v. Porreta. Lees,
vide Lies. to Leese or loose, v. Perder. the Left hand, v. Ysquierda mano. the
Left, v. Ysquierdo. Left handed, v. Zurdo, curdo. Left, vide Leave. Left in
trust, v. Deposito, Depositario. a Legacy, v. Legacia. a Legate or
ambassador, vide Embaxador. a Legend, v. Legenda. a Leg, v. Pierna. Legible,
v. Legible. a Legion, v. Legion. a League of three miles space, vide Legua.
Leisure, or leisure, v. Espacio, tiempo, Lugar. a Leman or concubine, v.
Concubina, Amiga, Manceba, Puta. a Leman or concubine that lies with a married
man, v. Abarraganada. Lemons, v. Lymons. to Lend, v. Prestar. a Lender, v. El
que presta. a Lending, v Emprestido. Lent, v. Prestado. to Lengthen or make
long, v. Prolixar, Alargar, Estender. Lengthened, v. Alargado, Estendido.
Length, v. Largueza, Longura. Long, v. Largo, Luengo, Estendido. drawn at
length, v. Prolongado. Lent season, v. Quaresma. Lentils, v. Lenteja. a
Leopard, or libbard, vide Leopardo. to Lepe, vide Leap. the Leprosy, vide
Lepra. one that has the Leprosy, v. Leproso. to Lessen or make less, vide
Achicar, Diminuyr, Apocar, Amenguar. Less, vide Menos. a Lessener, vide
Amenguador, Achicador. Lessened, vide Diminuydo, Apocado, Amenguado, Achicado.
Lessening, vide Diminucion, Achicadura, Mengua. a Lesson or lecture, vide
Lection. a Lesson or instruction, vide Licion. the Letanie, vide Letania. the
Lethargy or drowsy sickness, vide Lethargia, Modorra. sick of the
Lethargy, v. Amodorrido, Modorro. to Let or hinder, vide Embaracar, Embargar,
Estorvar, Impedir. a Let or stop, vide Embaraco, Embargo, Estorvo. Let, vide
Embaracado, Embargado, Estorvado. a Letter or hinderer, v. El que embaraca, El
que estorva, El que embarga. Letting, vide Embaraco, Embargo. full of Lets,
vide Embaracoso. a Letter, as A B C, vide Letra, Caracter. a Letter missiue or
epistle, vide Carta, Epistola. a Lettise window, vide Lattise. a Lettise bonnet
or cap for gentlewomen, vide Albanega. Lettise an herb, vide Lechuga. small
Lettise, vide Lechuguino. a curled Lettise, vide Lechuga crespa. a cabage
Lettise, vide Lechuga parada. to Level or leauell, vide Apuntar, Asestar. a
Leueret, vide Lebrastilla, Lebrastillo. to Levy, tax or sesse, vide Taxar,
Empadronar. Levied, vide Empadronado, Taxado. Leuying, vide Empadronamiento,
Taxamiento. a Leuite, vide Levita. to live Lewdly, vide Bivir mal. a Lewd
person, vide Mal hombre. Lewd, vide Malo. Lewdnes, vide Maldad. Lewdly, vide
Malamente. to Lewse or undo, vide Desatar. Lewsed, vide Desatado. a Lewser,
vide El que desata. I had Leyfer, vide Mas querria.
L I
to Lib or geld, vide Capar, Castrar. a Libberd or leopard, vide Leopardo. a
Libell, vide Libelo. to give Liberally, vide Dar con liberalidad, or
Confranqueza. Liberality, vide Largueza, Franqueza, Liberalidad. Liberal, vide
Liberal. Liberally, vide Con liberalidad, Francamente. to set one at Liberty,
vide Libertar, Librar, Hazer libre. a setting at Liberty, vide Alforria,
Libertad. set at Liberty, vide Libertado, Librado, Hecho libre. Liberty, vide
Libertad. a Library, vide Libraria. to License, vide Licenciar. a License, vide
Licencia. Licenced, vide Licenciado. Licencious, vide Licencioso. Licenciously,
vide Licenciosamente. to Lick, vide Lamer. Licked, vide Lamido. a Licker, vide
El que lame. Licking, vide Lamedura, Lamiendo. Licouris, vide Orosuz. Licour or
liquour, vide Licor. a horse Licter, vide Litera. a Lid or cover, vide Tapador.
to Lie round like an adder, vide Enrroscar. Lying round like an adder, vide
Enrroscadura. a Lier or lurker in corners, vide El que se Esconde. to Lie,
feign or counterfeit, vide Mentir. a Lie, vide Mentira. a Lier, vide Mentiroso.
full of Lying, vide Mentiroso. Lyingly, vide Con mentiras. Lie ashes or bucke
ashes, vide Cernada. Lie made of ashes, vide Lexia. a Liege man or subject,
vide Subjeto. a Lieutenant or graund captain of an army, vide Lugarteniente,
or Lugartiniente. the Lieutenantship, v. Oficio de lugarteniente. to give Life
unto, vide Animar. Life, vide Vida. long Life, vide Vida larga. a dainty Life,
vide Vida regalada. to Lift up, vide Alcar, Elevar, Empinar, Levar, Levantar,
Enhestar. Lifted up, vide Alcado, Elevado, Empinado, Enhiestado. a Lifter up,
vide El que alca, El que empina, Levanta, Leva, or Enhiesta. Lifting, vide
Elevacion, Empinadura, Enhiesto, Levantamiento. to Light or settle as birds
do, vide Assentarse. to Light or happen, vide Acaecer, Acontecer. to Light
from his horse or alight, vide Apear. to Light, tind or kindle, v. Encender. a
Light, vide Luz, Lumbre. Lighted, vide Alumbrado. Lights in the night, vide
Luminaria. to Lighten or give light, vide Alumbrar, Illuminar, Dar luz.
Lightened, vide Alumbrado, Illuminado. to Lighten as lightening from heaven,
vide Relampaguear. it Lighteneth, vide Relampaguea. a flash of Lightening, vide
Relampago. Lightening, vide Relampago. to make Light, vide Aligerar. made
Light, vide Aligerado. to Lighten or ease of a burden, vide Aliviar. one that
lighteneth, vide El que Alivia. Lightened or eased, vide Aliviado. Light or
easy, vide Leve. Light or nimble, vide Legero, Ligero. Lightness or
nimblenesse, vide Ligereza. Lightly, vide Legeremente. Lightness of heart, vide
Alivio. Lightness or inconstancy, vide Livianidad. Light or inconstant, vide
Liviano, Inconstante. Lightly, vide Con liviandad. to make Light headed,
foolish or fantastical, vide Alivianar. a Lighter or boat, vide Batel. a
Light horseman, vide Cavallo ligero. the Lights, vide Livianos, Bofes. to make
Like or equal, vide Ygualar. Like or equal, vide Ygual. Likeness or equality,
vide Ygualdad. Likely, vide Ygualmente. Like for like, vide Talportal. to Like
or please, vide Aplazer, Agradar, Contentar, Dar gusto. it Likes, vide Agrada,
Plaze, Contenta, Da gusto. Liking, vide Gusto, Contento, Plazer, Agrado. to the
good Liking, v. Agusto, Al contento, Aplazer. a Lilly, vide Lirio. to beset
with Lillies, vide Enliriar. a Limbecke, vide Alquitara. bird Lime, vide Liga.
Lime twigs, vide Varillas de Liga. Limed, vide Ligado. Lime to make mortar,
vide Call. unslaked Lime, vide Call por regar. a Lime kille, vide Calera. a Lime
maker, vide Calero. washed over with Lime, vide Enluzido con Call. Limber, vide
Debil, Deleznable. very Limber, vide Muy deleznable, Muy debil. to Limit,
bound, prescribe or appoint, v. Alindar, Limitar. a Limite or bound, vide
Limite, Linde. Limited, vide Limitado. Limitation, vide Limite. a Limme, vide
Miembro. large Limmed, vide Membrudo. a Limmer, a dog engendered between a
hound and a mastife, a mungrell, vide Mestizo. to Limne, vide Illuminar,
Luminar. Limned, vide Illuminado, Luminado. Limning, vide Illuminacion,
Luminacion. a Limner or painter, vide Illuminador, Luminador. a Limon, vide
Limon. a great Limon, vide Cidron. a Limon tree, vide Limera, Limon. a place
where Limons grow, vide Limonar. to Limpe or halt, vide Coxear. a Lineage or
stock, vide Alcun^a, Linaje, Lineage. a Line or race, vide Casta, Raca. a Line
which masons or carpenters use, v. Linea, Hilo. a Line or rule, vide Linea. a
Line in writing, vide Renglon. Lines in the palms of the hands, vide Lineas or
Rayos de la mano. an angline Line, vide Cuerda. Line or flax, vide Lino. a
Lineall descent, vide Decendencia porlinea recta. to Line, vide Doblar. Lined,
vide Doblado. to Linger or delay, vide Diferir, Prolongar, Alargar. a Lingerer,
vide El que difiere, El que prolonga. Lingering, vide Prolongando, Diferiendo.
Lingeringly, v. Con diferir, Con prolongar. the Lining of a garment, vide
Dobladura, Doblez. to Link or tie together, vide Vnzir, Atar juntos. Lincked,
vide Vnzido. to Link or join together in band of amity, vide Juntar en
amistad. a Link of a chain, vide Eslabon de cadena. a Link or torch, vide
Antorcha, Hacha. Linen, vide Lienco. fine Linen, vide Lienco sutil. course
Linen, vide Lenzon. a place where Linen is sold, vide Lenzeria. a Linen
draper, vide Lenzero, Lencero. a Linen weauer, vide Texedor de Lienco.
Linseede, vide Linaza. Linsey woolsey, vide Estamenea. a garment of Linsie
woolsey, vide Vestidura de estamenea. a Lion, vide Leon. a Lions whelpe, vide
Leoncillo. a Lioness, vide Leona. a Lip, vide Beco, Labio. a great Lip,
vide Geta. great Lipped, vide Becudo, Geton. the Lips, vide Labios, Becos.
Liquerise, vide Licorise. to be Liquid or become liquid or soft, vide
Enliquecer. Liquor, vide Licor. to Lispe, vide Cecear. a Lisper, vide El que
cecea. Lisping, vide Ceceoso, the List of cloathe, vide Lista. certain cords
in a ship called the Listes, vide Amantillos. Listes to fight in, vide
Estacada. put into the Lists to fight, vide Estacado. Lither, vide Perezoso. a
horse Litter, vide Litera. Litter laid under beasts, v. Paja. Little, v.
Chico, Pequen^o. very Little, v. Pequen^ico. to make little, or less, v.
Achicar. a Little, v. Poco. Little worth, v. Apocado. to Live, v. Bivir. a
Live, v. Bivo. Living or food, v. Bivienda. Living or alive, v. Biviente.
Liuelines, v. Biveza. Lively or with life, v. Brioso, Gallardo. Liuelines or
Iustines, v. Brio, Gala, Gallardia, Ligereza. the Liver, v. Higado. a little
Liver, v. Higadillo. a Lieutenant or liefetenant, Lugarteniente, Lugartiniente.
a Lizarde, v. Lagarto.
L O
a Loach or thing to lick up, vide Lamedal. a Loadestone, v. Iman, Yman. to
Load or lode, v. Cargar. a Loaf of bread, v. Hogaca. a little Loaf, v.
Panezillo. to Loath, v. Empalagar, Enfastidiar, Fastidiar. Loathed, v.
Fastidiado. Loathing, v. Enfado, Fastidio. Loathing of the stomach, v. Hastio.
one that has a loathing or queasie stomach, v. Hastioso. a Lob or clown, v.
Rustico. to Lock, v. Cerrar. to Lock in, v. Encerrar. Locked in, v.
Encerrado. Locking in, v. Encerramiento. to Lock up, v. Encerrarse. Locked, v.
Cerrado. a Lock smith, vide Cerragero, or Cerrajero. a Lock, v. Cerradura. a
Lock of hair, vide Guedeja de cabellos. a Lock of wool, vide Guedeja de
lana. a Locust, v. Lagosta. to Lode a beast, v. Alastrar el animal. to Lode, v.
Cargar. a Lode, v. Carga. Laden, v. Cargado. a Loder, v. El que Carga. a
Loding, v. Carga. a Lodesman, or guide, v. Guia. to Lodge, v. Albergar, Alojar,
Alvergar, Aposentar. Lodged, v. Alvergado, Alojado, Aposentado. a Lodging, vide
Albergo, or Alvergo, Alojamiento, Aposento. a Lofte, v. Algorfa, or Soberado. a
Lofte or room in the top of a house, vide Camaranchon, Soberado. to wax
Lofty, v. Ensobervecerse. Lofty or hie, vide Altivo, Arrogante, Superbo.
Loftines, v. Altivez, Superbia, Arrogancia. Loftily, vide con Superbia, con
Arrogancia. a Logge, v. Len^o. Logic or the art of reasoning, vide
Dialectica, Logica. a Logician, v. Dialectico, Logico. Loialtie, v. Lealtad.
Loiall, v. Leal. Loially, v. Lealmente. to break the Loins, v. Deslomar. the
Loins, v. Lomos. a Loine, v. Lomo. to Loiter, v. Haraganear, Estar perezoso,
Floxear. a Loiterer, v. Haragan, Perezoso. Loitering, v. Haragania, Pereza.
Lone or usury, v. Vsura. to make Long, or lengthen, vide Prolixar. Long, vide
Prolixo. to Long after a thing earnestly, vide Antojarse. Longed, v. Antojado.
a Longer, vide Antojadizo. Longing, v. Antojo, Antoxo. Longing of a woman with
child, v. Antojos. a Loaf, v. Un pan, or Hogaca. to Look, v. Mirar. to Look
on, v. Mirar. Looked on, vide Mirado. a Looker on, v. Mirador. to Look for,
vide Esperar, Aguardar. to look askewe, or awrie, vide Mirar visco. Looked
for, vide Esperado, Aguardado. a Looking, v. Miramiento. a Looking glass, v.
Espejo. to Look in a glass, v. Espejar. a Loope for a button or such like, v.
Lacada. a Loope hole to shoot out at, v. Miradero, Sactera, Tronera. to Loose,
loosen, or undo, vide Soltar, Desatar. Loosenes of life, v. Abarraganamiento.
a Loosener, v. El que desata. Loosening, v. Soltura, Desatamiento. a Lord or
master, v. Sen^or. a Lordship, v. Sen^orio. Lordly, v. Sen^orilmente. Lordlike,
v. Sen^oril, or Como sen^or. Lordlines, v. Como Senor. to Lose, vide Perder.
Loss, vide Perdida, Perdimiento. Lost, vide Perdido. a Lote tree, v. Almez
arbol. to Loathe or detest, v. Aborrecer, Enhastiar. Lothed, vide Aborrecido,
Enhastiado. a Lother, vide El que aborrece, El que Enhastia. Lothing, vide
Aborrecimiento, Enhastio, Hastio. Loathsome, vide Aborrecible. Lothsomnes, vide
Hastio, Aborrecimiento. to cast Lots, vide Echar suertes. Lot or chance, vide
Caso, Suerte, Fortuna. a Lot, vide Suerte. to Love, vide Amar, Bienquerer.
Love, vide Amor, Bienquerencia. Loved, vide Amado, Bienquerido. to be in Love
with, v. Enamorar. a Lover, v. Amador, Amante, Enamorado, Amoroso. ashee Lover,
v. Amiga, Amorosa, Enamorada. a Loving thing, v. Amadora cosa. Lovingly, v.
Amablemente, Amigablemente, Amarosamente. Lovely, vide Amable, Amigable. Low,
vide Baxo. Low in stature, idem. Lowlines, or humblenes, vide Humildad. Lowly
or humbly, v. Humilmente. to Low, or bellow like a cow, v. Mugir. Lowing of
beasts, v. Mugido. to Lowre, v. Encapotar. one that looks Lowering, vide
Cen^udo, Encapotado de ojos. a Lowering, vide Cen^o, Encapotadura. a Lowse, vide
Piojo. Lousy, vide Piojento, Piojoso. to take away Lice, v. Despiojar.
Lowsebane or stauesacre, an herb so called, v. Abarraz.
L V
Luck or chance, vide Fortuna, Caso, Suerte. to make Luckie, v. Hazer dichoso.
Luckie, v. Dichoso, Fortunado, Bienaventurado. Luckily, v. Dichosamente,
Bienaventuradamente. Luck, v. Dicha, Bienaventuranca. Lucre, vide Logro.
Lukewarm, vide Tibio. to Lull, as the nurse does her child, vide Arullar el
nin^o. Lulled asleep, v. Adormecido, Arrullado. Lumber, or old baggage
implements of household stuff worth nothing, v. Baratija. Lumpish, or heavy,
vide Pesado. to be Lunaticke, v. Estar Lunatico, or Frenatico. Lunaticke, v.
Frenatico, Lunatico. a Lunch, or great piece, v. Lonja. the Lungs, or lights,
v. Bofes, Butagos, Pulmones, Livianos. a Lurcher, or glutton, v. Garganton,
Gluton, Comilon, Goloso. to Lurk, or lie hid, vide Esconder, Ocultar. a
Lurker, v. Escondido, Ocultado. a Lurking corner, v. Escondedijo, Escondrijo.
to Lust, or long, v. Antojar. Lust, concupiscence, desire, or carnal affection,
vide Concupicencia, Luxuria, Carnalidad. Lusty, v. Desembuelto, Galan. most
Lusty, v. Desemboltisimo. Lustines, v. Desemboltura. Lustily, v. Galanamente,
Con desemboltura. a Lute, vide Laud. Luxurious, v. Luxurioso.
M
a MAce, vide Maca. a Mace or club of iron, idem. a Mace bearer, vide Macero.
Maces, or spice so called, v. Macas. a Mackerell fish, v. Cavalla. Madame, vide
Don^a. to be Mad, v. Serloco, ser Alunado. Mad in love, v. Muerto de amores.
Mad or frantic, vide Alunado, Enfurecido, Furibundo, Furioso, Rabioso.
Madness, v. Furor, Furia, Rabia. Madly, v. Furiosamente. Madder, vide Ruvia.
Made, vide Make. to Maffle, or stammer, vide Tartaxear, Tartamudar. a Maffler,
v. Tartaxoso, Tartamudo. a Magician, vide Magico, Encantador. Magic, vide
Magica art. a Magistrate, v. Regidor. Magnanimity, v. Animosidad,
Magnanimidad. to Magnify, vide Magnificar, Engrandescer. Magnified, vide
Engrandecido, Magnificado. Magnifying, vide Engrandescimiento. Magnificent,
vide Esplendido, Magnifico. Magnificently, vide Esplendidamente,
Magnificamente. Magnificence, vide Esplendideza, Magnificencia,
Engrandescimiento. to May or can, vide Poder. a Maid, vide Donzella, Moca. a
Maid marriageable, vide Donzella casadera. Maidenhead, vide Virginidad. a
little Maid, vide Mochacha or Muchacha. a mer-Maide, vide Serena. Majesty,
vide Majestad, Magestad. a coat of Maile, vide Cora de Malla. to Maime, vide
Mancar, Destroncar. Maimed, vide Manco, Destroncado. a Maiming, vide Manquedad,
Destroncamiento. a Maine of an horse, vide Crines de cavallo. to Maintain or
support, vide Mantener, Sustentar. Maintained, vide Mantenido, Sustentado.
Maintaining, v. Mantenimiento, Sustento. Maintenance, idem. a Mayor, vide
Corregidor. a Master or teacher, vide Maestro. a Master of arts, vide
Maestro en arts. a Master, vide A'mo, Sen^or, Duen^o. a camp Master, v.
Maestre de campo. a Maistership, vide Maestrasga, Maestria. a Master of a
galliote, vide Arraez. to Make, vide Hazer. to Make good, vide Abonar. a maker,
vide Hazedor. Malepert or saucie, vide Presuntuoso. Malepertly, vide
Presuntuosamente. the Male kind, vide Macho. a Male or budget, vide Valija. a
Malecontent, vide Malcontento. a Malefactor, vide Malhechor. to bear Malice
or hatred, vide Concebir malicia a uno. Malice, vide Malicia. Malicious, vide
Malicioso. Maliciously, vide Maliciosamente. Malignitie or malice, vide
Malignidad. a Malkin or slouen vide Barredero. a Mallard or wild ducke, vide
A'nade silvestre. a Mallet, vide Macere, Maceta. Mallows, vide Malua. a place
of Mallows, vide Maluar. Malmesie, vide Malvasia. by Mammocks, v. a Pedacos. a
Man, vide Hombre, O'mbre or Varon. a little man, vide Hombrecillo. a Manslear,
vide Homicida. Manly, vide Varonilmente. Manlike, v. Varonil or Baronil.
Manfull, vide Como hombre. Manfully, vide Como hombre. to Manage affairs, vide
Administrar la hazienda, Manejar. Managing, vide Manejo. a Mandilion, vide
Sayo. Mandrake, vide Mandragora. a Mane of an horse, vide Crines de cavallo. a
Manger, vide Pesebre. Many, vide Muchos. Many times, vide Muchas vezes.
Manicles, vide Esposas. to make Manifest, evident or apparent, vide Manifestar,
Descubrir, Aclarar. Manifest, vide Abierto, Claro, Manifesto. Manifested, vide
Aclarado, Manifestado. Manifesting, vide Aclaracion, Manifestacion. Manifestly,
vide Abiertamente, Manifestamente. to be Manifest, v. Constar. a Manner or
fashion, vide Manera, Faycion. Manners, vide Crianca. good Manners, vide buena
Crianca, Comedimiento. ill Manners, vide mala Crianca, Descomedimiento.
Mannered, v. Comedido. in Manner, v. A manera. a Manor or lordship, v.
Sen^orio. a Man servant, vide Criado Moco. a Mansion, v. Abitacion.
Manslaughter, vide Homicidio, Omicidio. a Manslear, vide Homecida, Omecida. a
Mantell, or Irish rugge, vide Manta. a childs mantle, vide Mantillo de nin^o.
Manual, or of the hand, vide Manual. to Manumisse, manumit, or franchise,
vide Ahorrar esclavo, Emancipar. Manumissed, or manumitted, v. Ahorrado,
Emancipado. to Manure or till, v. Labrar. Manured, vide Labrado. a Manurer,
vide Labrador, Agricultor. a Manuring, vide Labranca. a Maple tree, vide A'zre.
a Map, v. Carta, Derrotero, Mapa. Marble, vide Marmol piedra. a pillar of
Marble, vide Marmolejo. of Marble, vide Marmoreo. a Mare, v. Yegua. a breed of
Mares, v. Yeguada. to March as soldiers do, vide Marchar. a March, vide
Marcha. Marching, vide Marchando. March the month, vide Marco. belonging to
March, v. Marcal. to use Merchandise, or play the Merchant, vide Mercadear. a
Merchant, vide Merchante, Mercader. Merchandise, vide Mercaderia, Mercaduria. a
March-paine, v. Macapan. a Margent of a book, vide Margen. to Marie, vide
Casar, Maridar. a Marriage, vide Casamiento, Boda, or Bodas, Matrimonio.
Mariageable, vide Maridable. belonging to Marriage, vide Matrimonial. Married,
vide Maridado, Casado. a Married man that keeps aleman for his concubine, vide
Abarraganado. a Marigolde, vide Caltha, Eliotropio. a Mariner, vide Mareante,
Marinero, Navigante. a Mariners trade, vide Marineria. Marioram, vide
Almoradux, Majorana. to Mark or note, vide Advertir, Demarcar, Notar, Parar
mientes, Sen^alar. to Mark out, vide Entracar. to Mark out by line, vide
Rayar. a Mark, vide Marca, Nota. diligent Marking, vide Observancia,
Observacion. Marked, vide Advertido, Demarcado, Marcado, Notado. a Marker, vide
Marcador. Marking, vide Advertencia. coardes in a ship called Marklines, vide
Aserrabelas. Marking out by line, vide Rayadura. a Market, vide Mercado, Placa.
a Marmaide, v. Serena. Marmalet, v. Brimbillada, Mermelada, Membrillada. a
Marmoset, or monkie, vide Mica, Mico. a Marquess, vide Marquis, Marquesa. the
dignity of a Marquess, vide Marquezado. to Mar, vide Gastar, destruyr,
Consumir, Acabar, Estragar. Marred, v. Gastado, Destruydo, Consumido, Acabado,
Estragado. a Marring, vide Gasto, Destrucion, Acabamiento, Consuncion,
Estragamiento. Marrowe, v. Medula, Medulla, Meollo, Tuetano, Tutano. Mars the
god of battle, v. Mart. a Marshall, v. Mariscal. a provost Marshall, vide
Provoste. a salt Marsh, v. Estero. Marsh ground, v. Palude. a Marten, vide
Marta. Marternes furre, vide Cevellinas. a Martyr, vide Martyr. to make a
Martyr, vide Martirizar. Martired, vide Martirizado. Martyrdom, v. Martirio. a
Martlet or bird without feet, vide Arrexaque. to Marvel, vide Maravillar. a
Marvel, vide Maravilla. Marvelous, vide Maravilloso. to Mask, vide
Arrebocarse, Rebocar. a Mask, vide Antefaz, Caratula, Caranton^a, Mascara,
Reboco. a Masker, vide Emmascarado. to cover with a Mask, v. Emmascarar.
Masked, vide Arrebocado, Disfracado, Emmascarado, Mascarado, Rebocado. a
Masking, v. Mascara, Disfraz. a Mason, vide or Alban^i, or Alban^il,
Cimentador. a free Mason, vide Cantero de Escoda. a Masons trade, vide
Canteria. a Massacre, vide Estrago. the Mass, vide Missa. a Mass or lump,
vide Massa. a Mass book, vide Missal. the Mast of a ship, vide Mastil,
Mastel. before Mast, vide A'rbol de proa. the maine Mast, vide Mastil de gavia
mayor. a Master or Master, v. A'mo, Sen^or. a school Master, vide Maestro de
Escuela. Masticke or sweet gum, vide Almaciga, Almastiga. to make or do any
thing with Masticke, vide Almacigar. the Masticke tree, vide Lentisco. a
Mastiue dog, vide Alano, Mastin. a Match of coarde for a soldier, vide Cuerda.
a Match of brimstone, vide Alguaquida, Pajuela de cufre. to Match or make
equal, v. Ygualar. a Mathematician, vide Mathematico. a Mate, vide Compan^ero.
a Mate at chesse, vide Mate. the Matrice, vide La madre. Matrimony or
marriage, vide Matrimonio, Casamiento. a Matron, v. Matrona. belonging to a
Matron, vide Matronal. a Matte, vide Empleyta, Estera. Matter, vide Materia. a
Mattering of a sore, vide Materia. a Matter, v. Materia. a matter good enough,
vide Abastada cosa. Material, v. Material. Mattins or morning prayer, v.
Maytines. a Mattocke, v. Acada, Acadon. he that labors with the Mattocke,
vide Acadonero. a Mattresse or flock bed, vide Cocedra, Cocedron, Colcedra,
Colchado, Matelaz. a Mattresse maker, vide Matelazero. a Mattrice or mould,
vide Molde. Maturitie, vide Madureza. to Maule like a cat, v. Maullar. a
Mauling cat, vide Maullador. a Maulkin, v. Barredero de horno. a Maund or
basket, v. Canasta. to put into a Maund, v. Encapachar. a Mawe, vide Buche.
Maugre, in spite or against ones will, v. Venirse a las barvas. a Mawkin for an
oven, v. Barredero. a Maunger, v. Pesebre. a Maxim or axiom, v. Maxim. to
May, v. May. you May, v. Podeys. May the month, v. Mayo.
M E
a Meade or medowe, v. Prado. Meal, v. Harina. a Meal trough, v. Harinal. a
Meal or repast, v. Comida. to find the Mean, v. Hallar el medio. a mean or
measure v. Medio. the Mean or middle, vide Mediania, Medio. Mean or poor, v.
Baxo, Pobre. Mean or indifferent, v. Mediano. in the Mean time, vide
Demientras. by some Means, v. Por algun medio. by Means of, v. Mediante. the
Mean space, v. Entrevalo. a Mean or mediator, vide Tercero, Medianero. a
Meaning, v. Sentido. to Measure or meat, v. Medir. Measured, v. Medida. a
Measure, v. Medida. a Measurer, v. Medidor. a Measurer of the earth, v.
Geometra. Measuring of ground, v. Geometria. to bring into Measure, v.
Modificar. Measurable, v. Moderado. Measurably, v. Con moderacion. Meat, v.
Comida, Manjar. Meat which the poets feign the gods did eat, vide Ambrosia.
Mechanical, vide Mecanico. a Mediator, v. Medianero. a Mediation, v.
Medianeria. to Medicine, cure, or heal a sick body, vide Medicinar, Curar. a
Medicine, vide Medicina, Medicamento, Cura. Medicinable, vide Medicinable. to
Meditate, or muse, v. Meditar, Contemplar. a Meditation, v. Meditacion.
Meditating, v. Meditando, Contemplando. a Medly color, v. Entremixtura de
colores. a Medlar, vide Niespola. a Medlar tree, v. Niespolo. a Meadow, vide
Pradera, Prado. a little Meadow, v. Pradillo, Pradezico. Meadow ground, v.
Praderia. Me, vide Mi, Me. Meede, or merit, v. Merecimiento, Merito. to make
Meek or gentle, v. Ablandar, Emmollescer, Amansar. Meek or mild, v. Manso,
Blando. Meekely, v. Con mansedumbre, Con blandura. Meekenes, v. Mansedumbre,
Blandura. a Mere, or mark, v. Mojon. a Meere-stone, idem. Mere, vide Mero.
Merely, vide Meramente. to Meet, vide Encontrar, Topar. a Meeting, v.
Encuentro. to make Meet or fit, v. Acomodar, Apropriar. Meet or convenient,
v. A'pto, Comodo, Conveniente, proprio. Meetly well, v. Assi, Razonable. Meeter
or rhyme, v. Metro. to make Meeter, vide, v. Metrificar. made in Meeter, v.
Metrificado. the Meinie, or baser multitude, vide Chusma. the Meish of a net,
v. Malla de red. Melancholy, v. Colera negra, Melanconia, Melancolia.
Melancholic, v. Melancolico, Melanconico. Melancholines, v. Melanconia,
Melancolia. an herb called Melilot, v. Corona de Rey. Melody, or sweet
consent in music, vide Melodia, Harmonia, Musica. a Melon, or pompion, v.
Calabaca. to Melt, vide Derretir. Melted, vide Derretido. to put into a
goldsmithes Melting pan or pot, vide Acrisolar. taken out of a goldsmithes
Melting pot, v. Acrisolado. to Melt metal, v. Fundir. Melting of metal, v.
Fundicion. a Melter, vide Fundidor. Melting, v. Derretimiento, Regalamiento,
Fundicion. a Melting house, v. Fundicion. a Member, v. Miembro. a Memorial,
vide Memorial. to have in Memory, v. Tener en la memoria. full of Memory, v.
Memorioso. Memorable, v. Memorable. Memorably, v. Con memoria. to Menace, or to
manace, v. Amenazar. to Mende, or amend, v. Emendar, Remendar. a Mender, v.
Adobador, Remendon. to Mende clothes, vide to Botch. Mended, vide Adobado. to
Mention a thing, v. Mentar. Mentioned, vide Mentado. a Mentioning, v. Mention.
a Mercer, vide Mercero. Mercerie, vide Merceria. a Mercement, or amercement,
vide Mulcta. to have Mercy, or pity, v. tener Misericordia, or Piedad.
Mercy, v. Manzilla, Misericordia, Piedad. Merciful, v. Misericordioso,
Piadoso. Mercifully, v. Misericordiosamente. Merciless, v. sin Misericordia,
sin Piedad. Mercilesly, v. sin Piedad, sin Misericordia. a Merlin hawk, v.
Esmerejon. to make Merry, vide Alegrar, Regozijar. a Merry meeting of friends,
v. Chacota. Merrily, v. Alegremente, Ledamente, Regozijadamente. Merines, v.
Alegria, Regozijo. Merry, vide Alegre, Regozijado. a Merry countenance, v. Leda
faz. very Merry, vide muy Alegre. the Meridian, vide Meridiano. to Merit, v.
Deserve. Messelin corn, v. Herren. a Mess of pottage, v. Escudilla de caldo,
or Potaje. a Message, vide Recaudo. sent on a Message, vide Mensagero. a
Messenger, vide Mensagero. a Metaphor, vide Metaforo. skill in Meteors, v.
Meteorologica. Metheglin, v. Aloxa, or Aloja, Meloxa. a Method, vide Methodo.
Methridate, or mithridate, v. Triaca. Met with, vide Encontrado. Metropolitan,
vide Metropolitano. to cast Metal, vide Fundir. to do or make any thing with
metal, vide Ametalar. Metal, vide Metal. a worker in Metal, v. Fundidor.
wrought or done with metal, v. Ametalado.
M I
the Middle, vide Mediado. the Midlande, v. Mediterraneo. the Midriffe
separating the heart and lights from the stomach, v. Diafragma, Entresijo. a
Midwife, vide Partera. Mier or dirt, v. Lodo, Cienago. Mierie, vide Encenegado,
Lodoso. a Mierie place, v. Cenedal, Cienagal. Mierines, vide Encenagamiento. to
make Mierie, vide Encenagar. to be Mighty, vide Ser potente, Ser poderoso.
Might, vide Poder. Mighty, v. Poderoso, Potente. Mightily, vide Poderosamente.
to make Mild or gentle, v. Amansar, Ablandar. Mild, vide Blando, Manso,
Benigno. Mildnes, v. Blandura, Mansedumbre. Mildly, vide Con mansedumbre, Con
blandura. a Mile, vide Milla. Milfoile, vide Milhoja. to Milk, vide Orden^ar.
Milk, vide Leche. thick Milk of a cow that has new calued, vide Colostro.
made of Milk, v. Lechal. a Mill, vide Molino. a Windmill, vide Molino de
viento. a water Mill, v. Acen^a, Hacen^a, Hazen^a. a horse Mill, vide Atahona.
the wheel of a Mill, vide Can^ilero. a Miller, vide Acen^ero, Molinero. a Mill
house, vide Molino. a Mill stone, vide Alfarge de Molino, Muela. Mill dust,
vide Harija. a small grain called Millet or hirse, v. Mijo. a Million, vide
Millon. a Million, or ten hundred thousand, vide Cuento. a Million of
thousands, vide Millon. the Milte, v. Baco, Bazo, or Milza. to come in Mind,
v. Acordarse, Venir a la memoria. a Mind, v. Mente. the Mind, vide A'nimo. to
be Mindful of, v. Acordarse. to Mine, vide Minar. a Mine, vide Mina. Mined,
vide Minado. a Miner, vide, Cavador, Minador. Mining, vide Minadura. Mine, vide
Mio. to Mingle or mix together, vide Mesclar, Mesturar. a stick to Mingle
with, vide Mecedera. Mingled, vide Mesclado, Mesturado. a Mingler, vide
Mecedor. a Mingling, vide Mestura, Mescla. to Minish or make little, v.
Deminuyr, Apocar. Minished, vide Deminuydo, Apocado. a Minishing, vide
Diminucion, Apocamiento. to Minister, v. Administrar. Ministered, v.
Aministrado. Ministering, vide Administracion. a Minister, v. Ministro. a
Minster, or monastery, vide Monasterio. a Minstrell, v. Menestril. a Minte
where they make money, vide Casa de la moneda. a Minute, as of time, v. Minuto.
a Miracle, vide Milagro. Miraculous, vide Milagroso. Miraculously, vide
Milagrosamente. Mirobalane, vide Avellada de la India. Mirrhe, v. Mirra. of
Mirrhe, vide de Mirra. a Mirror, vide Espejo. Mirth, vide Gallardia, Alegria.
Myrtle, v. Araian. a grove of Myrtle trees, vide Arrayhanal. a Myrtle tree,
vide Arrayhan, Mirto. a Mischaunce, vide Desdicha, Desventura. a Miscreant or
infidel, vide Infiel. a Misdeede or misdoing, vide Malhecho. a Misdoer, vide
Malhechor. Misdone, vide Malhecho. to Misdoubt or mistrust, v. Dudar,
Desconfiar. Miserable, v. Lazerado, Mesquino, Miserable. a Miser or wretch,
vide Misero, Mesquin. Misery, vide Calamidad, Miseria. Miserablenes, vide
Lazeria, Miseria. Miserably, v. Mesquinamente. Misfortune, vide Desdicha,
Desastre. to Misgouerne, vide Desgovernar. Misgouerned, vide Desgovernado.
Mishap, v. Desventura. Misshapen, or misfashioned, v. Mal tallado, Mal
faycionado. it Misleth, vide Haze molina. Misleto, v. Liga, Liria. to Mislike
or offend, v. Disgustar, Enhastiar. utterly to Mislike, vide Aborrecer,
Enhastiar. a Misliker, v. El que Enhastia, El que Disgusta. utterly Misliked,
v. Aborrecido. Misliking, vide Disgusto, Enhastio. utter Misliking, vide
Aborrecimiento. the Misne sail of a ship, vide Messana vela. Misproportioned,
vide Mal tallado, Mal proporcionado. to Miss the mark, v. Errar el blanco. to
cast a Mist before the eyes, v. Escurecer la vista. a Mist, v. Neblina, Niebla.
a Mystery, v. Misterio. Mysteries hidden in words or ceremonies, v.
Misterios. Mystical, v. Mistico. Mistically, v. Misticamente. a Mistress or
maistresse, v. Sen^ora. to Mistrust, v. Desconfiar. Mistrust or distrust, v.
Desconfianca. Mistrusted, v. Desconfianca. Mistrusting, v. Desconfianca.
Mistrustfull, v. Celoso, Desconfiado. Mistrustfully, v. Desconfiadamente. to
Misuse or abuse, v. Abusar. Misused, v. Abusado. Misusage, v. Abuso. Misusing,
v. Abusion. a Miter, vide Mitra. to Mitigate, vide Mitigar. Mitigated, vide
Mitigado. a Mitigator, vide Mitigador. Mithridate, vide Mitridatico. Mittens,
vide Guadafiones. to Mix, vide Misturar. Mixed, vide Misturado, Mixto. a
Mixture, vide Mistion. a Mixen or dunghill, vide Muladar.
M O
Mobilitie, or inconstancy, vide Inconstancia. to Mock or deceive, v.
Engan^ar. to Mock, scorn, scoff or laugh at, vide Mofar, Chocarrar. Mocked,
vide Mofado. a Mocker, v. Mofador. Mocking, v. Mofadura. Mockery, v. Mofa,
Mofo. a Modder, wench or girl, vide Moca, Criada. to Moderate or govern, vide
Moderar, Templar. a Moderation, vide Moderacion, Templa. Moderate, v. Moderado.
Moderately, v. Moderatamente, Templadamente. to be Modest, v. Ser modesto.
Modest, v. Mesurado, Modesto. Modesty, v. Mesura, Modestia. Modestly, vide
Mesuradamente, Modestamente. a Modicum or pittance, v. Pitanca. a Module, vide
Modelo, Modello. a Moile or mule, v. Mula, Mulo. to make Moist, v. Humedecer.
Moist, v. Humido. Moistened, v. Humedecido. Moistie, v. Humido. a Moitie or
half part, v. Mitad. a Mole or want, v. Topo, to Molest or vex, vide
Agraviar, Molestar, Enfastidiar. Molested, vide Agraviado, Enfastidiado,
Molestado. one that Molesteth, vide El que molesta, El que agravia, El que
enfastidia. a Molesting, vide Molestia, Agravio, Fastidio Molestfully, vide Con
agravio, Con molestia, Con fastidio. to Mollify, vide Ablandar, Hazer muelle.
Mollified, vide Ablandado. Mollifying, v. Ablandura. to Molt or melt, v.
Derretir. a Moment or instant, v. Momento. during but a Moment, vide
Momentaneo. every moment, vide Momentaneamente, Cada momento. a Monarch or
prince ruling alone, vide Monarca. a Monarchy, vide Monarchia. a Monastery,
vide Monasterio. a Moncke, vide Monaco, Monje, Monge. Monckery, vide Mongia. to
Moan or make moan, vide Lamentar, Plan^ir. Money, vide Dinero. ready Money,
vide Dinero contado. clipped Money, vide Dinero cercenado. a Month, vide Mes.
January, vide Enero. February, vide Ebrero. March, vide Marco. April, vide
Abril. May, vide Mayo. June, vide Junio. Iulie, vide Julio. August, vide
Agosto, Aosto. September, vide Septiembre. October, vide Otubre. November, vide
Nouiembre. December, vide Deziembre. a Tweluemoneth, vide Un an^o. Monthly, at
every month, vide Cadames. a Mongrell, vide Mestizo. to coin Money, vide
Acun^ar moneda. Money, vide Moneda. earnest Money, vide A'rras. a Money bag,
vide Talegon demoneda. Monylesse, vide Sin dinero. a Monition or warning, vide
Amonistacion, Advertimiento. a Monk, vide Monge, Monje. a Monkie, vide Mica,
Mico. a Monster, vide Monstro, Prodigio. Monstrous, v. Monstruoso, Prodigioso.
a Monstrous man, vide Gigante, Monstro. Monstruously, vide Monstrosamente. a
Monument or remembrance, vide Monumento. the Moon, vide Luna. a Moonefish,
vide Bout. a new Moon, v. Luna nueva. the change of the Moon, v. Enter Luna
y Luna. full Moon, v. Luna llena. the Moon at the prime, vide Luna con
cuernos. the eclipse of the Moon, vide Eclipse de Luna. Moon light, v. Lunar.
a Moore or marrish ground, vide Cenagal. Moorish wet ground, v. Cenagal,
Pantano. the Moors country, vide Morea. a Moore, v. Moro. Moorish fashion,
vide Moreria. a Moore that is become a christian, vide Morisco. the Moors
religion, vide Morisma. Moreover, vide V'ltra de esto. to Moozle, vide Poner el
Bocal. a Moozle, vide Bocal. Moral philosophy, vide Filosofia moral. Morally,
vide Moralmente. Moralnes, vide Moralidad. More, vide De mas. More and more, v.
Mas y mas. More or less, vide Mas o menos. Moreover, vide Vltra de esto. the
Morning, v. La man^ana. the Morning watch, vide A'lva. the Morning star, vide
Luzero. a Morphewe, vide Alvarazos. a Morris pike, vide Pica. to Morrow, vide
De man^ana, Man^ana. Morsel by morsel, vide A pedacos, a Bocados. a Morsel,
vide Bocado. by Morsels or bits, vide A bocados. by little Morsels, A
bocadillos. Mortality, or great destruction, vide Mortalidad. Mortal, vide
Mortal. a Mortal man, vide Hombre mortal. a Mortal enemy, vide Enimigo
mortal. Mortal hate, v. O'dio mortal. Mortally, v. Mortalmente. Mortar, vide
Adobe de barro, Mescla. Mortar very tough and clammie, v. Betun, or Betumen. a
Mortar, vide Almirez, Mortero, Pilon. to Mortify, vide Amortiguar, Mortificar.
Mortified, vide Amortiguado, Mortificado. a Mosell, or moosell, vide Bocal.
Moss that grows on trees, v. Moho. Moss of the bearde, vide Boco de Barva.
a Mossie place, v. Mohoso, Lugar. to become Mossie, v. Mohecer. Mossines, vide
Vello. Mossie, vide Velloso, Mohoso the Most part, vide La mayor part. Motife,
vide Motivo. a Motion, vide Movimiento. full of Motion, vide Motorio. a Moth,
vide Pollilla, Tin^a. Moth-eaten, vide Apollillado, Pollillado. to spoil with
Mothes, vide Apollillar. full of Mothes, vide Lleno de pollillas. a Mother,
vide Madre. belonging to the Mother, v. Materno. a step Mother, vide Madrastra.
a god-Mother, vide Madrina. killing of the Mother, vide Matricidio.
Motherlesse, v. Huerfano de Madre. a Motherlesse child, vide Huerfano de
madre. the Mother city, vide Metropolis. the Mother tongue or language, v.
Lengua vulgar. Motherwoort or Fetherfewe, vide Margarca. to Move or stir,
vide Mover. to Move or provoke, v. Comover, Provocar, Incitar. Moved or
stirred, v. Comovido, Movido. Moved or provoked, vide Provocado, Incitado.
Moved or displeased, vide Enojado. a Moving or motion, vide Movimiento.
Mooueable, vide Moble, Movible. Mooueable goods, vide Mubles. to Moulde, or
wax mouldie, vide Amohecer. a Moulde or form, v. Molde. to put into a Moulde
or cast into a mould, vide Amoldar. put into a Mould, or cast in a mould, vide
Amoldado. Moulding of dough, vide Amassadura. to Moulde bread, v. Amassar,
Hen^ir. Molded, vide Amassado, Hen^ido. a Moulding boarde, vide Amassadura. to
wax Mouldie, vide Ahilar, Amohecer. Moldy, vide Ahilado, Mohoso. Mouldines,
vide Moho. to Mount ordinance, vide Encavalgar artilleria. to Mount up, vide
Subir. Mounting, vide Subida. Mounted, vide Subido. to get up on the
Mountains, vide Amontar. full of Mountains, vide Montuoso. a Mountain, vide
Monte, Montan^a. the Mountains, v. Montan^as, Montes. to Mourn, vide
Lamentar, Plan^ir. to Mourn at funeralles, vide Endechar. to Mourn or cry as
a stock or turtle dove, vide Arrullarse la paloma. a Mourning, vide Luto. a
Mourning hoode, vide Hoode. a Mourning garment, vide Mogilon, Mongil, Mongilon.
a Mourner, vide Endechadero, Enlutado, Lloron. clad like a Mourner, v. Lutado.
Mournful, vide Lloroso Lutoso. a Mournful song, v. Elegia. a Mouse, v.
Rata, Raton. a field Mouse, vide Musgan^o. a dor-Mouse, v. Liron. a little
Mouse, vide Ratoncillo. Mouse eaten, vide Ratonado. a Mouse trap, vide
Ratonera. a Mouchatoes, vide Mostachos, Bigote. a Mouth, vide Boca. the Mouth
of a well, v. Bocal de pozo. the Mouth of a haven, v. Boca de rio. a Mouthfull,
vide Bocado. by Mouthfuls or bits, vide A bocados. to put into the mouth, vide
Embocar. wide Mouthed, vide Bocudo. foul Mouthed, v. Boquirrote. to Mow or
mock with the mouth, vide Hazer momios. to Mow, vide Segar. Mowed, vide
Segado. a Mower, vide Guadan^ador, Segador.
M V
Much, vide Mucho. very Much, vide muy Mucho. to make Much of, vide Acariciar,
Regalar, Halagar. how Much, vide Quanto. so Much, vide Tanto. too Much, vide
Demasiado. in so Much, vide en Tanto. a Mucke-hill, v. Muladar. a Muckerchiefe,
handkerchiefe, or napkin, v. Pan^izuelo. Mud or slime, vide Cieno, Limo.
Muddie, or full of mud, v. Cienoso. a Mudwall, vide Tapia. to make a Mud wall,
v. Tapiar. Muddie, vide Cienoso, Limoso. a Mue for hawks, v. Halconera. to
Muffle, vide Arrebocarse. Muffling, vide Arreboco. a Muffler, vide Antifaz.
Muffled, vide Arrebocado. Mugwort, an herb so called, v. Artemisia. a Mule,
vide Mula, Mulo. a great Mule, vide Azemila. a Mule or high soaled shoe, v.
Chapin. a Muletor, vide Azemilero. belonging to a Mule, v. Azemilar. a Mullet
fish, v. Barbo, Albur, Salmonete. Mulse, or water honey, v. Meloja. a Mulberie,
vide Mora. a Mulberie tree, v. Moral. syrup of Mulberies, v. Arropa de moras.
to Multiply, or increase, v. Multiplicar. Multiplied, v. Multiplicado. a
Multiplier, v. Multiplicador. Multiplying, v. Multiplicacion. a Multitude, v.
Muchedumbre, Multitud, Poblazo. to Mumble with the mouth, v. Refunfun^ar.
Mumbling, vide Refunfun^ando. a Mummerie, v. Momeria. Mummie, vide Momia, Cera
de minera. a disease called the Mumpes, vide Esipula. Mumpsicke, vide
Esipulado. to Mundifie, v. Mundificar. a Mungrell, or Mongrell, vide Mestizo.
Munition, vide Municion. a Munkie, v. Mica, Mico. a little Munkie, v. Miquillo.
to Murder, vide Matar. Murder, vide Matanca. Murdered, vide Matado. a Murderer,
vide Estragador, Matador. Murdering, v. Estrago, Matanca. a Murion, or steel
piece for the head, vide Morrion, Capacete. to Murmur, or mutter, v. Murmurar,
Recongar. a Murmurer, v. Murmurador, Recongador. Murmuring, v. Mormollo,
Murmuracion. Muscadell, or sweet wine, vide Moscatel. the Muscle, or fleshie
part of the body, vide Morezillo. Mussles, vide Mosillones. a Muse, vide Musa.
a Mushrome or toadstoole, vide Hongo. full of Mushromes, vide Hongoso. a great
Mushrome, vide Geton. Music, or the art of music, v. Musica. Music
plaide to one at the break of the day, v. Alborada, or Alvorada. Musk, vide
Algalia, Almisque. a Musk ball, v. Trochisco. a Musk cat, v. Gato de algalia.
a Musket, v. Mosquete. a Musketier, v. Mosquetero. a Musket shot, v.
Mosquetazo. a Muskle, vide Muscle. the Mustache, or that part of the beard
which is on the upper lip, vide Bigote, Mostachos. Mustarde, vide Mustaza.
Mustarde seed, v. Mostaza, Mostazo. to Muster, vide Hazer, Alarde. a Muster, v.
Muestra, Alarde, Resen^a. a Muster master, v. Veedor. a Mustering, v. Alarde,
Resen^a, Muestra. Mustie, v. Mohoso, Emmohescido. to be Mutable, v. Ser
mudable. Mutable, v. Alterable, Mudable, Movible. Mutabilitie, vide
Mutabilidad. Mutation, vide Mutacion. Mute, or dumb, vide Enmudecido, Mudo. to
wax Mute, or dumb, vide Enmudecer. to make or stir up a Mutiny, vide
Amotinar. a Mutiny, vide Motin. a Mutinous fellow, v. Amotinador. made
Mutinous, v. Amotinado. to Mutter, v. Recongar, Refunfun^ar. a Mutterer, v.
Reconguero, Recongador, Refunfun^ador. a Muttering, v. Refunfun^o. Mutton, vide
Carnero. Mutual, vide Mutual. a Muzell, or moosell, vide Bocal.
N
a NAg, vide Cavallejo, Hacanea. to Nail, v. Clavar, Enclavar. Nailed fast, v.
Enclavado. Nailing, vide Enclavadura. a Nail, vide Clavo. Nails of the
fingers, or toes, v. V'n^as. Nails in dogs collers, vide Carlancas. Nailing,
v. Clavadura, Clavazon. to strip Naked, v. Desnudar. to go Naked, v. Andar en
puras carnes. Naked, vide en Carnes, Desnudo. Nakedness, vide Desnudeza. to
Name, or call by name, vide Nombrar. a Name, vide Nombre. a sir Name, vide
Sobrenombre. a good Name or report, v. buen Nombre, buena Fama, buena Opinion.
Named, vide Nombrado. Naming by name, vide Nombradia. the Nape of the neck, v.
Cogote, Cerviz, Cerviguillo. a Napkin, vide Servilleta, Pan^izuelo de mesa. to
Nappe or slumber, vide Dormitar. Naptha, vide Alquitran. smeared with Naptha,
vide Alquitranado. to smeare with Naptha, vide Alquitranar. Narre or nearer,
vide Mas cerca, Mas junto. to make Narrow or straight, vide Angostar,
Estrechar. made Narrow, vide Angostado, Estrechado. a Narrow place, vide
Estrecho, Angostura. Narrow, v. Angosto, Estrecho. Narrowly, v. Estrechamente,
Angostamente. Narrownes or streightnes, v. Angostura, Estrecho. a Narration,
vide Narracion. a Nation, or country, v. Gente. Nativity, v. Natividad.
Native, v. Nativo. Native soil, v. Patria tierra. Nature, vide Natura.
Natural, vide Natural. Natural disposition, v. Naturaleza. Naturally, vide
Naturalmente. the Naue of a cart wheel, vide Maca de rueda. the Navel, vide
Ombligo. to set at Naught, or to despise, v. Despreciar, Menospreciar, Tener en
poco. Naughty or filthy, vide Malo, Malino. Naught or ill, v. Ruyn, Mal.
Naughty or lewd, vide Malo. Naughtilie, vide Ruynmente, Malamente.
Naughtines, v. Ruyndad, Maldad, Malignidad. a Navy, v. Armada. Navigations, v.
Navigacion. Nauigable, v. Navigable.
N E
to draw Near, vide Acercar, Allegar. be Near me, v. Acercate me. drawing
Near, v. Acercamiento. Nearenes, v. Cercania. Near to, v. Acerca, Allado, De
cerca, Cabe, Cercano, Junto, Propinquo. well-Neare, or almost, v. Casi, cerca.
Neatenes, v. Garrideza, Lindeza, Polideza. to be Neat and trim, vide,
Esmerarse. Neat or trim, v. Esmerado, Garrido, Polido, Lindo. Neately, v.
Garridamente, Lipiamente, Polidamente. Nether stocks, v. Medias. a Nebbe,
beak or bill, v. Beco. Necessary, v. Necessario. Necessarily, v.
Necessariamente. driven by Necessity, vide Necessitado. Necessity or want,
vide Necessidad. to strike off the Neck, v. Descervigar. the neck being
stricken off, vide Descervigado. a Neck, v. Cuello, Pesqueco. great necked, or
thick necked, vide Cervigudo. a Neck band or collar, v. Cabecon. a blow on
the Neck, v. Pescocado. a Neckerchiefe or partlet, v. Cuello de muger.
Necromancie, v. Negromancia. a Necromancer, vide Negromantico. a Niece, vide
Nieta. to Need, v. Tener necessidad, Faltar, Tener falta, Aver menester.
Need, vide Menester, Falta, Necessidad. Needful, vide Menesteroso,
Necessario. Needless, v. Sin necessidad, Sin menester. Needy, vide
Menesteroso, Necessitado. a Needle, vide Aguja. to Neeze vide Estornudar.
Neezing, vide Estornudo. Negative, vide Negativo. to Neglect, vide Descuydar.
Neglected, vide Descuydado. Negligence, v. Descuydo. Negligent, vide
Descuydado. Negligently, vide Descuydadamente. to Neigh, vide Relinchar. a
Neighing, vide Relincho. a Neighbor, v. Propinquo, Proximo, Vezino. to be
near Neighbor unto, vide Avezinar. Neighborhood, v. Vezindad. Neither, or
neither of both, vide Neutro. Nep or cats mint, vide Lamedada. a Nephewe, vide
Nieto. to build a Nest, vide Anidar. a Nest, vide Nido. a Nest full, vide
Nidada. to Nestle, v. Alvergar, Anidar. to take with a Net, vide Enrre dar.
taking in a Net, vide Enrredo. taken in a Net, vide Enrredado. one that
catches with Nets, vide Enrredador. catching with a Net, vide Enrredamiento. a
Net, v. Atarraya, Red. a Net to catch fish with, v. Chinchorro. Networke, v.
Randa. small Networke, v. Randilla. a casting net to fish with, vide Hataraya.
Nethermost, vide El Mas baxo de todo. a Nettle, vide Hortiga. Never, vide
Nunca. Nevertheless, vide Todavia. a Neuter, or one that holds on neither of
both sides, vide Neutral. to make New, vide Hazer nuevo. to bring news, vide
Traer nuevas. a carrier of News, vide Novelero. News, vide Novela, Nuevas.
New, vide Nuevo. Newly, vide Nuevamente, Rezien. Next or immediate, vide Mas
cerca. Next after, vide Mas cerca, Despues.
N I
to Nible or bite a little and often, vide Mordiscar. Nice and dainty, vide
Curioso, Melindroso. very Nice or coy, vide Melindroso. Nicenes, vide Melindre.
a Niggard, vide Escasso, Duro, Miserable, Mesquino, Auaro, Auariento.
Niggardise, vide Escasseza, Lazeria, Dureza, Mesquindad. Niggardly, v.
Escassamente, Mesquinamente, Lazeradamente. to be Nigh, vide Estar cerca. to
come Nigh, vide Acercar, Allegar, Ajuntar. Nigh, vide Cerca, Junto, Allegado.
Nighnes, vide Cercania. Nighest, or next, v. Mas cerca que todos. a Night, vide
Noche. to wax Night, v. Anochecer. waxed Night, vide Nochecido. belonging to
Night, v. Noturno. a Night cap, vide Cofia, Bonete de noche. a Nightingale,
vide Ruysen^or. Nimble, vide Ligero, A'gil. Nimblenes, vide Ligereza, Agilidad.
most Nimble, vide Ligerissimo. Nimbly, v. con Ligereza, con Agilidad. Nine,
vide Nueve. the Ninth, v. Nono. to Nip, or pinch, v. Peliscar. a Nip, vide
Pelisco. Nipped, vide Peliscado. Nipping, v. Peliscando. the Nipple of a
breast, v. Pecon de la teta. Niter, a matter much like salt, v. Salitre. full
of Niter, v. Salitral. a Nit, vide Liendre. Nittie, or full of nits, v.
Lendroso. a place of Nits, v. Lendrera.
N O
No, or not, vide No. No where, vide En ninguna part. No body, v. Ninguno,
Ningun. to make Noble, v. Ennoblecer. Nobility, v. Nobleza. made Noble, v.
Ennoblecido. a Nobleman, v. Sen^or de Titulo. Noble, vide Noble. Noblenes, vide
Nobleza. Noblely, vide Noblemente. a Nocke of a bow or arrow, vide Empulguera.
to Nod, vide Cabecear. a Nod, vide Cabeceamiento. Nodding with the head, vide
Cabecamiento. the Noddle of the head, v. Colodrillo. a Noise, vide Ruydo.
Noisome, vide Nocivo. Noisomely, v. Nocivamente. Nonage, vide Menoria. for the
Nonce, vide de Industria, Adrede. None, v. Ningun, Ninguno. None otherwise,
vide No en otra manera. Noone, vide Medio dia. to eat at Noone, v. Comer.
before Noone, v. Por la Man^ana. after Noone, v. Por la tarde. at Noone, v. A
medio dia. Nor, or neither, vide Ni. the North part of the world, v. Aquilon,
Septentrion, la part del Norte. the Northern wind, v. Cierco. a Nose, vide
Nariz. a hook Nose, vide Aguilen^o nariz. long Nosed, vide Narigudo. a flat
Nose, vide Nariz cima. a Nose turned up, v. Nariz roma. a Nosegaie, or posie,
vide Ramillete. the Nostrils, vide Ventanas de nariz. Not, vide No. Not only,
v. No solo. Not as yet, vide No aun. Notable, vide Notable. Notably, v.
Notablemente. very Notably, v. muy Notablemente. a Notarie, vide Notario. a
Notaries office, v. Notaria. a Notch, v. Muesca. Notched, vide Lleno de
muescas. to Note, v, Apuntar, Notar. a Note, vide Nota. a short Note, v.
Abbreviatura. Noted, vide Notado. Noting, vide Notacion. Notorious, vide
Notorio. Notoriously, v. Notoriamente. Nothing, vide Nada. Nothing at all, v.
No nada. to Notify, or give notice, vide Notificar. Notified, vide Notificado.
Notice, vide Noticia. giving Notice, vide Notificacion. one that gives Notice,
vide El que notifica. to Notte or cut, v. Desmochar. Notted or clipped, v.
Desmochado, Mocho. Notting, v. Desmochadura. Novelty, vide News. November,
the month, vide Noviembre. a Nouice, or a new come soldier, v. Bison^o, or
Vison^o. a Nouice or one that has not been a year entered into religion, v.
Novicio. a Noune, vide Nombre. a Nource, or she that nourishes, vide A'ma. a
Nourcerie, v. Aposento de A'ma. to Nourish, v. Apascentar, Nutrit. any thing
that does Nourish, v. A'lmo. Nourished, v. Abrigado, Nutrido. Nourishment, v.
Nutrimiento. Now, vide Agora. Now and then, vide Alguna vez. to Number, vide
Benum. a Nun, vide Monja. a Nunrie, v. Monasterio de Monjas. to Number, v.
Numerar. Numbered, v. Numerado, Numerato. a Nurse fellow, v. Collaco, Collazo.
Nurtured, v. Comedido. ill Nurtured, v. mal Comedido. a Nut, vide Nuez. a Nut
tree, vide, Nogal. a hasell Nut, vide Avellana. a wall-Nut, v. Nuez. a place
where hasell Nuts grow, vide Avellanal. a Nut shell, vide Shell. a chest-Nut,
vide Castan^a. a phisticke Nut, vide Alfocigo. a Nut kernel, v. Tuetano de
Nuez. a Nutmeg, vide Moscada.
N Y
a Nymphe, vide Nimfa.
O
O Alas, vide Ay. an Oak, vide Roble. a grove of Oaks, vide Robledal. the
skarlet Oak or holme oak, vide Enzina. a grove of such Oaks, vide Enzinal.
an Oar of a boat, vide Xemo. Oats, vide Avena. wild Oats, vide Avena vana,
Avena montesina. sodden with Oats, vide Avenado. an Oaten field, vide Avenal.
an Oaten pipe, vide campon^a.
O B
to Obeie, vide Obedecer. Obeyed, vide Obedecido. Obeying, vide Obedeciendo.
Obedience, vide Obediencia. Obedient, vide Obediente. Obediently, vide
Obedientemente. to Object, vide Poner objeto. an Object, vide Objeto.
Obiecting, vide Objetura. an Objection, vide Objecion. an Oblation, vide
Oblacion. an Obligacion, vide Obligacion. Oblivion, vide Olvido. Obliuious,
vide Olvidadizo. Obsequies done for the dead, v. Obsequias. to Observe, mark
or note diligently, vide Observar. an Observation, vide Observancia. Observed,
vide Observado. an Obseruer, vide Observante. to Obscure, vide Escurecer.
Obscure, vide Escuro. Obscurity, vide Escuridad. Obscurely, vide Escuramente.
to be Obstinate, vide Estar ostinado. Obstinatenes, v. Obstinacion, Contumacia.
Obstinacy, v. Contumacia, Ostinacion Obstinate, vide Contumaz, Ostinado.
Obstinately, v. Con contumacia, Con ostinacion. Obstruction or stopping of the
pores, v. Opilacion. to Obtain, or get, v. Adquirir, Alcancar, Conseguir,
Impetrar, Recabar, Obtenir. Obtained, vide Adquirido, Alcancado, Obtenido,
Impetrado, Conseguido. an Obtainer, vide El que adquire, El que Obtiene, El que
alcanca, El que consigue. Obtaining, vide Alcancamiento, Conseguimiento,
Impetracion.
O C
to give Occasion, vide Ocasionar. to take Occasion, vide Tomar ocasion. to
Occasion, vide Causar. an Occasion, vide Causa, Ocasion. Occasioned, vide
Causado, Ocasionado. to Occupy or use, vide Ocupar. Occupied or busied, vide
Ocupado. an Occupation or occupying of a thing, vide Ocupacion, Oficio. a man
of Occupacion, vide Oficial, Artesano, Artifice. Ocean, the sea that compasses
the world, vide Oceano. October, the month, v, Otubre.
O D
to play at the game called even and Odd, vide Pares o nones. Odd not even,
vide Nones. Odious, or hated, vide Odioso. Odiously, vide Con odio, con Rencor.
Odoriferous, vide Odorifero.
O F
Of, vide De. to Offend or commit a fault, v. Estropecar, Ofender, Cometer
culpa. an Offense, v. Delito, Offensa, Culpa. Offended, v. Enhadado, Enojado,
Ofendido. an Offender, vide Delinquente, Delinquido, Culpado. Offending, vide
Ofendiendo. Offensive, vide Enojoso, Ofensivo. to Offer, v. Ofrecer. Offered, v.
Ofrecido. an Offering, v. Oblada, Oferta, Ofrecimiento. an Office, v. Oficio. to
bear an Office, v. Administrar oficio. an Officer, v. Oficial. he that bears
office, vide Administrador. the bearing of an office, vide Administracion. an
Offspring or progeny, vide Casta, Abolorio, Abolengo. Oftennes, vide Muchas
vezes, a menudo. to use Often, vide Frequentar. Often, vide A menudo, Muchas
vezes. Often used, v. Frequente, Frequentado. Oftentimes, vide Muchas vezes.
O I
Oil, vide Azeite. an Oil bottle, cruise, or other vessel of oil, vide
Azeitera, or Alcuza. a seller or maker of Oil, vide Azeytero. Oilie, or full
of Oil, vide Azeytoso. Oil of balm, vide Azeite de Balsamo. salet Oil, vide
Azeyte. Oiled, vide Oleado. Oilie, v. Azeytoso. Ointment, vide Vnguento.
Ointed, or anointed, vide Vntado. Oisters, vide Fish. an Oister, vide O'stra,
O'strea.
O K
to mark with red Oker, v. Almagrar, Enalmagrar. marked with red Oker, vide
Almagrado, Enalmagrado. Oker which painters use, v. Almagra. red Oker, vide
Almagra.
O L
to wax Old or aged, vide Embegescer, Envejescer. grown Old, vide
Embegecido, Envejecido. Old age, v. Vejez. Oldnes or agednes, v. Vejez. Old,
or ancient, v. Antiguo, Viejo. Oldnes or antiquity, vide Antiguidad, Anciania.
Old men of times past, v. Antiguos, vejos, Passados. Old or aged, v. Viejo,
Anciano. most Old, v. Antiguissimo. Oldly, v. Antiguamente. in Old time, v.
En tiempo antiguo, En otro tiempo, En tiempo passado. an Oliphant or elephant,
vide Elifante. to gather Olives, v. Coger olivas. an Olive, v. Azeytuna, Oliva.
an Olive in sirup, v. vide Azeytuna en adobo. a grove of Olive trees, v.
Azebuchal. a wild Olive tree, v. Azebuche. Olive color, v. Azeytunado color.
an Olive tree, v. Oliva. to Omit or let pass, v. Dexar. Omitted, v. Dexado. an
Omitting, v. Dexamiento. Omnipotent, vide Todo poderoso, Omnipotente.
Omnipotency, v. Omnipotencia, Poder de dios.
O N
Once, v. Vna vez. One, v. U'no. One only, v. Vnico. One thing, v. U'na cosa.
Only, v. Solamente. Only begotten, v. Unigenito. On that side, v. De l'otra
banda, del otro cabo, de l'otra part. one by one, vide V'no a v'no, V'no por
v'no. an Onyon, vide Cebolla, Cevolla. a sea Onyon, vide Cebolla albartana.
Onyon seed, vide Cebollino. to give the Onset, vide Arremeter, Acometer,
cerrar. an Onset, vide Acometida, Arremetida.
O P
to Open, vide Abrir. Open or evident, vide Abierto, Manifiesto. Openly, vide
Abiertamente, Manifestamente. Opened, vide Abierto. an Opening, vide Abertura.
Operation, vide Operacion. to be of Opinion, vide Estar de opinion, Tener
opinion. an Opinion or judgment, v. Opinion. an Opilation or stopping of the
liver, vide Opilacion. to seek Opportunity or occasion, vide Buscar ocasion.
Opportunity, vide Comodidad, Ocasion, Oportunidad. to Oppose, vide Contraponer,
Oponer. an Opposition, vide Contraposicion, Oposicion. Opposite, vide
Contrario, Opuesto. an Opposer, vide El que se opone, El que se contrapone.
Opposed, vide Contrapuesto, Opuesto, Contrario. to Oppress, vide Opremir.
Oppressed, vide Oprimido. an Oppresser, vide El que oprime. Oppression, vide
Opresion. Oppressing, vide Oprimiendo. Opprobrie, vide Oprobio.
O R
Or, vide O. Or else, vide O. an Oracle, vide Oraculo. to make an Oration, vide
Arengar. an Oration, vide Arenga. an Orator, vide Orador. an Orchard full of
trees, vide Huerta, Huerto. an Orchard keeper, vide Ortelano. to Ordain or
appoint, vide Ordenar, Apuntar. Ordained, vide Ordenado. an Ordainer, vide El
que ordena. an Ordaining or ordinance, vide Ordenanca. Ordinance, vide
Artilleria. a master of the Ordinance, vide Artillero. a piece of Ordinance to
shoot stones with, vide Can^on, Pedrero. an Ordinance or law, vide Ordenanca.
to Order, dispose or set in order, vide Poner en orden, Ordenar, Alin^ar,
Componer. an Order, vide O'rden. he that sets in Order, v. El que Alin^a, El
que compone, or ordena. Ordered or set in order, vide Alin^ado, Ordenado,
Compuesto. that may be Ordered by government, vide Government. Ordering or
setting in order, vide Alin^o, Ordenamiento, Compostura. Orderly, vide En
orden, Ordenadamente. Ordinary or usual, vide Ordinario. Ordinarily, vide
Ordinariamente. Ordure or dung of man or beast, vide Camera, Hienda, Cagado,
Mierda. an Orange, vide Naranja. spotted with Orenges, vide Naranjado. flowers
of Orenges, vide Azaar. Orange color, vide Naranjada. an Orange tree, vide
Naranjo. a place of Orange trees, vide Naranjal. to play on the Organs, vide
Tan^er los organos. a pair of Organs, vide O'rgano. an Organ plaier, vide
Organista. one that makes or sells Organs, vide Organero. Organ pipes, vide
Flautas de organos. Orient, vide East. Oriental, vide Oriental. Oriental
pearls, v. Orientales perlas. the Original or first pattern or example, vide
Original. Originally, vide Originalmente. an Ornament, v. Arreo, Ornamento,
Compostura, Ornato. an Orphant or fatherless child, vide Huerfano. Orpement,
vide Arsnico. Orthographie, or the manner of true writing, vide Ortografia.
O S
an Osiar tree or stock, vide Bimbrera, or Vimbrera. an Osiar twigge, vide
Vimbre. an Ostler, vide Moco de cavallos. Ostentation, or vain boasting or
bragging, vide Jatancia. an Ostrich, vide Avestruz, Abestruz.
O T
an Oath, vide Juramento. the Other, or the rest, vide Lo de mas. an Other,
vide Un otro. Otherwise, vide En otra manera. Otherwhile, now, and then, vide a
Ratos, a Vezes. an Otter, vide Nutria.
O V
an Oven, vide Horno. to bake in an Oven, vide Cozer. to Ouercharge, vide
Sobrecargar. Ouercharged, vide Sobrecargado. to Overcome, vide Vencer.
Overcome, vide Vencido. an Ouercommer, v. Vencedor, or Bencedor. Ouercomming,
vide Vencimiento, Victoria. to Ouerflowe, vide Anegar, Avenir, Sobrepujar el
agua. an Ouerflowing, vide Sobrepujamiento del agua, Anegamiento. to Ouergrowe,
vide Sobrecrescer. Ouergrowen, vide Sobrecrescido. Ouerhastilie, vide Con
demasiada priessa. to Ouerheare, vide Entreoyr. to Ouerpasse, or excel, vide
Exceder, Sobrepujar. an Ouerpassing, vide Sobrepujamiento. to Ouerpasse, or let
slip, v. Dexar. to Overtake, vide Alcancar. to Overtake in policy, vide
Alcancar de cuenta. Overtaken, vide Alcancado. an Ouertaker, vide El que
alcanca. Ouertaking, vide Alcance. to Overthrow, vide Desbaratar, Vencer.
Overthrown, vide Desbaratado, Vencido. Overthrowing, vide Desbarate,
Vencimiento. to Overthwart, vide Travessear. Overthwart, vide Traviesso.
Ouerthwartly, vide Con travessura. Ouerthwarting, vide Travessura.
Ouerthwartnes, vide Travessura. to Ouerreach, outreach, or prevent, v.
Prevenir, Anticipar. Ouerreached vide Anticipado, Prevenido. to Ouerturne, vide
Rebolver. Ouerturned, vide Rebuelto. Ouerturning, vide Rebuelto, Rebuelta. to
Ouerwaigh, vide Sobrepujar. Ouerwaight, vide Sobrepujo. to Ouerwhelme, vide
Anegar, Sumir. Ouerwhelming, vide Anegadura, Sumimiento. the Oufe of a web,
vide Trama, Lizos. I Ought, v. Yo Devia, a mi me convenia. an Ounce or weight
so called, v. Onca. an Ounce or beast so called, v. Onca. Our, vide Nuestro.
one Outbidding another, vide Aporfia. an Outcast, vide Perdido. Outcries, vide
Alaracas. Outlandish, vide Forastero. to Outlawe, vide Desnaturalizar,
proscrivir. Outlawed, vide Desnaturalizado, Proscrito. an Outlawe, vide
Proscrito. an Outlawrie, vide Proscripcion. Outpassing, vide Outgoing. to
Outrage, vide Vltrajar. Outrage, vide Vltrage. offered outrage unto, vide
Vltrajado. Outrageous, vide Vltrajoso. Outragiousnes, vide Vltrage.
Outragiously, vide Vltrajosamente. the Outside, vide Haz. Outward, vide de
Fuera.
O W
to Owe, vide Dever. an Owing, v. Debito. an Owl, vide Buho, Lechuza. a little
Owl, vide Mochuela. to be Owner, own, or possess, v. Posseer, Sen^orear.
Owned, or possessed, vide Posseydo, Sen^oreado.
O X
an Ox, vide Buey. an Ox house, vide Establo. an Oziar, vide Vimbre.
P
a PAce, vide Un Passo. to go with soft Pace, v. Andar de Espacio. to be
Pacient, or quiet, vide Tener paciencia. Patience, vide Paciencia. Pacient,
vide Paciente. Patiently, vide Con paciencia, con sufrimiento. to Pacify, or
appease, vide Ablandar, Apaziguar, Aplacar, Amansar, Aquietar, Pacificar.
Pacified, v. Ablandado, Apaziguado, Aplacado, Amansado, Aquietado, Pacificado.
a Pacifier, vide El que Ablanda, el que pacifica, el que Apazigua, el que
Aquieta. a Pacifying, vide Ablandura, Apatiguamiento, Quietud. a Pack made at
cards playing, vide Pandilla. a Pack or fardle, v. Emboltorio, Fardel, Fardo,
Lio. a Packe-saddle maker, vide Albardero, Alvardero. a Pack-saddle, vide
Albarda, or Alvarda. a little Pack-saddle, vide Albardilla, or Alvardillo.
sadled with a Pack-saddle, v. Enalbardado. to saddle with a Pack-saddle, v.
Albardar, Alvardar, Enalbardar. a Packe-horse, vide Albardon, or Alvardon. a
Pack of cards, vide Baraja. a Packer of cards, v. Barajador. to Pack or
shuffle cards, vide Barajar. to Pack or drive forward, vide Drive. a
Padlocke, vide Candado. a Pagan or heathen, vide Gentil, Pagano. Paganism,
vide Gentilidad. a Page, vide Paje. to Pay in ready money, vide Pitar. to
Pay or discharge, vide Pagar. to Pay a shot or reckoning, vide Escotar.
Paid, vide Pagado. Paid in ready money, vide Pitado. Pay for men, vide,
Paga, or Sueldo. a Paie-master, vide Pagador. Paieng, v. Pagamiento. Paieng a
shot, vide Escotadura. a Payment, vide Pagamiento. a Paile to carry water in,
vide Herrada, Cubo. a milking Paile, v. Tarro. Pain or grief, vide Pena,
Duelo. to free from Pain, vide Despenar. Pain of a wound, v. Marcio duelo.
Pained, vide Penado. Painful, vide Penoso. Painefully, vide Con pena. to take
Pains, vide Trabajar, Tomar trabajo. a Painim or heathen, vide Pagano, Gentil.
to Paint, vide Debujar, Dibuxar, Pintar. to Paint the face, vide Afeytar.
Painting for the face, vide Afeyte. Painted, vide Debujado, Dibuxado, Pintado.
the face Painted, vide El rostro Afeytado. a Painter, v. Debujador, Dibuxador,
Pintador. Painting, vide Dibuxo, Pintura. a Painters pensill, vide Pinzel. a
Pair or couple, vide Par. the Palate or roof of the mouth, vide Paladar. Pale
or wanne, vide Amarillo, Cetrino. Pale yellowe, vide Cetrino, Amarillo.
Palenes, vide Amarillez. a Palfraie, or horse, v. Palafren. a Palace or kings
court, vide Alcacar real, Palacio. a Pallet or bed carried up and down, vide
Cama. the Palm of the hand, vide Palma. a Palm tree, vide Palma datil. a
place where Palm trees grow, v. Palmar. Palm sunday, vide Domingo de Ramos.
a Palmer or feruler, vide Palmatoria. a Palmer or pilgrim, v. Romero, Palmero,
Peregrino. a Palmer or worm with many feet, vide Centopies. Palmestrie, or
the telling of fortunes by lines and marks in the hand, v. Chiromancia. the
Palsy, vide Perlecia. one sick of the Palsy, vide Paralitico, Perlatico. to
Pamper or cocker, vide Regalar. a Pancake, vide Bun^uelo, Hojuela. the Panch or
nethermost part of the belly, vide Carcavo del vientre, Barriga. the Pannell
of an horse, vide Xalma. Panges of death, vide Vascas. a Pan or vessel made of
brass, v. Payla. a Pan of earth to make fire in, v. Almofia, Barren^a, Bacin.
a frying Pan, vide Sarten. the brain Pan, v. Caxco. a melting Pan, vide
Melting. a Pannier, vide Seron, Capacho. to Pant, vide Acezar, Anelar. a
Panting, vide Acezo. he that Pants, vide Acezoso. a Panther, vide Pantera. a
Pantofles, or slippers, vide Pantufles. a Pantrer, vide Botiller. a Pantrie,
vide Despensa. Paper, vide Papel. real Paper, v. Papel grandazo. small Paper,
vide Papelico. a Paper to put comfits in, v. Papelon. a sheet of Paper, v.
Pliego de Papel. a reame of Paper, vide vna resma de Papel. a quire of Paper,
v. vna mano de Papel. sinking Paper, or brown paper, v. Papel de straca. to
eat Pap, such as nurses use to give to infants, vide Comer Papas, Poleas, or
Poleados. Pap made with flower, v. Papas, Polea, Poleada. a Pap or dug, vide
Teta. a Parable, or dark saying, vide Parabola. Paradise, vide Parayzo. a
Paragraffe, vide Parafo. a Paramoure, or sweet heart, v. Enamorada, Enamorado.
a Paraphrase, or plain exposition, or interpretation of a thing, vide
Parafrasis. a Parasite, vide Truhan. to play the Parasite, v. Truhanear. a she
Parasite, vide Truhana. to Parbrake, vide to Vomit. a Parcel, or small potion,
vide Partezilla. to Parch or dry, vide Secar. Parched, vide Secado. a
Parching, vide Secamiento. Parchment, vide Pargamino. Parciall, vide Parcial.
Parcialitie, vide Parcialidad. to Pardon, or forgive, vide Absolver, Perdonar,
Remitir. a Pardon, v. Endulgencia, Perdon. Pardoned, v. Absuelto, Perdonado.
Pardoning, vide Absolucion, Perdon. to Pare, vide Raspar. Pared, vide Raspado.
Paring, vide Raspadura. Parings, vide Limpiaduras, Rayduras. a Parent, father,
or mother, vide Padre, o Madre. to Parget, or plaster, vide Jaharrar. Pargeted
or plaistered, vide Jaharrado. a Pargeter or plaisterer, v. Alban^i. Pargeting,
vide Jaharradura. Parget or plaster, vide Mescla. a Parish, v. Feligresia,
Parochia. a Parish priest, vide Cura. a Parishoner, v. Feligrez, Parochiano. a
Park, vide Coto, Parco. a Parliament, vide Cortes. to call a Parliament, v.
hazer Cortes, juntar a Cortes. the Parliament house, vide la Sala, de las
Cortes. a Parrot, vide Papagayo. of the color of a Parrot, v. Papayado.
Parsley, v. Perejil, or Perexil. water Parsley, vide Quixones. Parsneps, vide
Chiribias. to Partake, vide Participar. a Partaker, vide Aparcero, Parcionero,
Participe. Partaking, vide Participacion. to Part, or separat, vide Despartir,
Repartir. a Partener, vide Aparcero. Parted, vide Apartado, Despartido,
Partido, Repartido. a Parter or deuider, v. Partidor. Part or some, vide Part.
a small Part or portion, v. Partezilla. a Part or duty, v. Debito. a Part or
portion, vide Part, Portion. Partly, vide en Part. by Parts, vide
Partidamente. a Parting, v. Apartamiento, Partimiento, Repartimiento.
Partiality, v. Parcialidad. Partial, vide Parcial. Partially, vide
Parcialmente. Particular, vide Apartado, Particular. Particularly, v.
Apartadamente, Particularmente. a Participle, vide Participio. a Partisan, or
iaueling to skirmish with, vide Venablo. a Partlet, or neckerchiefe, v. Cuello
de muger, Gorguera. a Partner, copartner, or complice, vide Aparcero. a
Partridge, vide Perdiz. a young Partridge, vide Perdigon. to Pass, excel, or
surmount, v. Exceder, Sobrepujar. to pass or go by, v. Passar Adelante. let it
pass, vide A'nde, Pass. Passed, vide Passado. Passage, vide Passage, Passaje,
Passadera. Passing, vide Passando. to Pass over the sea, v. Passar allende el
mar, Passar la mar. a Passenger, v. Passante, Passagero, Passajero. the
Passover, vide Pasqua florida. a Passion of the body or mind, vide Passion.
Passionate, vide Apassionado. a Passeport, vide Passaporte. the Pasternes of a
horse or beast, vide Quartilla. a horse that is white about his Pasternes, vide
Calcado. to Paste together, vide Engrudar. Paste, vide Engrudo. full of Paste,
vide Engrudoso. Pasted, vide Engrudado. to make in Paste or dough, vide
Amassar. Paste or fine dough, vide Massa. a Pastrie, vide Pasteleria. Past,
vide Passado. a Pastoral song, vide E'gloga. Pastime or sport, vide
Passa-tiempo. a Pastie or pie, vide Empanada. a maker of Pasties, vide
Pastelero, Pastelera. to put to Pasture, vide Arrepastar. Pasture, vide Dehesa,
Pastura. common Pasture, vide Dehesa, Concegil. private Pasture, vide Dehesa,
Privada. to Patch or to botch, vide Empezear, Remendar, Zurzir. a Patch or
piece of cloth, vide Handrajo, remiendo. Patched, vide Remendado. a Patcher,
vide Remendon. Patching, vide Cosa hecha de remiendos. a Patten or wooden
shoe, v. Abarca. wodden Pattens, v. cancos, Sandallas. a Pattent, vide
Patente. letters Pattents of a prince, v. Patentes. to make Paths, vide
Senderear. a Path, vide Senda, Sendero. a Path way, vide Sendero, Senda. a
little Path, vide Sendilla. to make a Pattern, vide Hazer dechado. a Pattern,
vide Dechado, Muestra, Padron. a Patriarche, vide Patriarca. a Patrimony, vide
Patrimonio. belonging to a Patrimony, vide Patrimonial. a Patron, protector or
defender, vide Patron, Defensor. a Patronship, vide Patronasgo, Patronadgo. a
Patroness, vide Defensora, Patrona. to Paue, or make pauements, vide Empedrar,
Enlosar, Enlozar. Paued, v. Empedrado, Enlosado, Enlozado. a Pauer, vide
Empedrador, Enlosador, Enlozador. a Pauement, vide Empedradura, Enlosadura,
Enlozadura. a Pauing tile, painted of diverse colors, v. Azulejo. a Pauilion or
tente, vide Toldo, Tienda, Pavellon. a Pauin, vide Pavana. the Paunche, vide
Barriga, Ervera, Panca. a Paune or pledge, vide Empen^o, Prenda. to Paune or
pledge, vide Empen^ar. a Paue of a beast, vide Garra, Pata. to Pause, vide
Pausar. a Pausing, vide Entrehuelgo, Pausada. by Pauses, vide Pausadamente.
P E
to make Peace, vide Paz hazer. Peace, vide Concordia, Paz. Peaceable, vide
Apazible. Peaceably, vide Apaziblemente. to hold ones peace, vide Callar. one
that holds his Peace, v. Callado. a Peacocke, vide Pavo. a Peache, vide
Persiga. a Pear, vide Pera. a Pear tree, vide Peral. a wild or choke Pear,
v. Guadapera. a choke Pear tree, vide Guadapero. to Pearce or boar, vide
Cadar, Horadar, Penetrar, Passar, Barenar. to Pearce through with diverse
hoales, vide Acrevillar. Pierced through with diverse holes, vide Acrevillado,
Calado. Pierced, vide Calado, Horadado, Passado. a Pearcer, vide Varena,
Barena. Pearcing, vide Horado, Penetracion, Passadura, Bareno. a Pearche for a
hawk, v. Alcandara. to set on a Pearche, vide Emperchar. a Perch fish, vide
Bizo. a Perch or measuring pole, v. Pertiga. a Pearl, vide Perla, Margarita.
a little Pearl, vide Perlica. small Pearl, vide Aljofar. a Pease, v. Arbeja,
Arveja, Garuanco great Pease, vide Alverjon. a Peble, vide Guijarra. a Pecke,
vide Celemin. Peculiar or proper, vide Peculiar. a Pedigree, vide Abolengo,
Abolorio, Decendimiento, Decendencia, Deligneacion. a Peddler, vide Caxero,
Buhonero, Bohonero. Pedlers french, vide Gerigonca, Jerigonca. Pedlers trade,
vide Buhoneria. Pedlarie ware, vide Buhoneria. a Piece, vide Pedaco, Pieca,
Puesta. a little Piece, vide Pedacico, Pedacuelo, Piecezuela. Piece meal, vide
A pedacos. a Piece to drink in, a cup or goblet, vide Taco. a Peele that
bakers use to set bread into the oven withal, vide Pala. Peerless, vide Sin
par. to Peer or peep, vide Acechar. a Peg or such like thing which stops,
vide Tapadero. to Peise, vide Weigh. a Peitrell, vide Poitral. Pellets of clay,
vide Bodoques. a Pellet of lead, vide Bala. sugar Pellets, vide Alfenique. a
dry Pelt with the wool on, vide camarra. Penalty, vide Pena, Mulcta. Penal,
vide Penal. Penance, vide Penitencia. Penitent, vide Penitente. Pendants or
streamers of a ship, vide Gallardetes. to Penetrate, vide Penetrar. Penetrable,
vide Penetrable. a Penie of English money, vide Seys maravedis. an earnest
Penie, vide Arraz. a Penyfather, vide Duro, Escasso, Avaro, Malaventurado. to
be Penitent, vide Penitenciar. a Penitent man, vide Penitente. Peniwort, vide
Capadella. to Pen or write, vide Escrevir. a Pen to write with, vide Pendola,
Pluma de escrivir. a Pen or coupe, vide Jaula. a Penknife, vide Cuchillo de
cortar plumas. Pennyroyall, vide Olejo. a Penner or pen case, vide Caxa de
escrivanias. a Penner and inkhorne, vide Escrivania: the inkhorne alone is
called Tintero. a Pensill, vide Pinzel. to be Pensive or sorrowful, vide
Pensativo estar. Pensiuenes, vide Cuidado, Tristeza. Pensive, vide Triste,
Cuidadoso. Pensiuely, vide Tristemente, Cuidadosamente. Pentecoste, vide Pascua
de espiritu santo, Pentecostes. a Penthouse to keep of rain, vide Gambine,
Babovine, Tablero. Penury or want, vide Penuria, Falta. People, vide Gente,
Pueblo. to People, vide Poblar. Peopled, vide Poblado. to leave without People,
vide Despoblar. common base People, v. Gentolla, Canalla. leaving without
People, vide Despoblacion. left without People, vide Despoblado. Pepper, vide
Pimienta. red Pepper, vide Axi, or Agi. an herb which grows in India that
bears fruit or seed long as ones finger, it bites in the mouth like Pepper,
and for that use the Indians, use it in sauces and other meats, it is a kind
of long Pepper, the Spaniard calls it Pimiento, id est, Pepper, vide Agi.
Peradventure, vide Relance, Porventura. to Perceive or see, vide Percevir.
Perceived, vide Percevido. a Percullise, vide Sarazinesca, Rastilla. Perdition,
vide Perdicion. Peremptory, vide Peremptorio. to Perfect or make perfect, vide
Afinar, Perficionar, Acendrar. Perfected, vide Afinado, Perficionado, Cendrado.
Perfection, vide Perficion, Afinadura. Perfect, vide Acendrado, Perfeto,
Afinado. Perfectly, vide Perfetamente, Cendradamente. Perfidiouslie, vide
Perfidamente. Perforce, vide Por fuerca. to Preforme, vide Cumplir. Performed,
v. Cumplido. a Performer, vide El que cumple. Performing, vide Cumpliendo.
Performance, vide Cumplimiento. Perfume, vide cahumerio, Perfume. to Perfume,
vide Perfumar, cahumar. a kind of Perfume to die withal, vide Anime.
Perfumed, vide Perfumado, cahumado. Perfumes, vide Perfumes. a Perfumer, vide
cahumador, Perfumador. Perfuming, vide cahumadura, Perfumadura. to be in
peril, v. Estar en Peligro, or Riezgo. Peril or danger, vide Peligro, Riesgo.
Perilous, vide Peligroso. Perilouslie, vide Peligrosamente. to Perish or come
to decay, v. Perecer. Perished, vide Perecido. a Perishing, vide Pericimiento.
a Periode, vide Periodo. to be Perjured, or to forswear himself, vide Averse
perjurado. a Perle vide Pearl. Permanent, vide Permanente, Durable. to Permit
or suffer, v. Permetir, Sufrir. Permitted, vide Permitido, Sufrido. Permission,
vide Permission, Sufrimiento. Permutation, vide Permutacion, Mudamiento.
Pernicious, or very hurtful, v. Dan^oso, Pernicioso. Perniciously, vide
Dan^osamente, Perniciosamente. to Perpetrate, do, or commit, v. Perpetrar,
Cometer. Perpetual, vide Perpetuo, Permanente, Stable. Perpetuity, vide
Perpetuidad, Stabilidad, Permanencia. Perpetually, vide Continuadamente,
Siempre, Perpetuamente, Para siempre, jamas. a Perplexity, v. Perplexidad,
Congoxa. one in a Perplexity, v. Perplexo, Congoxoso. to Persecute, v.
Perseguir. Persecuted, vide Perseguido. a Persecuter, vide Perseguidor.
Persecuting, vide Perseguimiento. Persecution, v. Persecucion. to Persevere,
persist, or continue to the end, vide Perseverar, Continuar, Persistir. a
Perseuering, v. Perseverancia. Perseuerant or constant, vide Perseverante. to
Persist vide Persevere. a Person or personage, vide Persona. Personal, vide
Personal. Personally, vide Personalmente. a Person such as is used amongst
grammarians, vide Persona. Perspicuitie, or plainnes in words or sentences,
vide Claridad, Perspicuidad. Perspicuous, vide Claro, Perspicuo. to Persuade,
vide Induzir, Persuadir. Persuaded, vide Persuadido, Induzido. a Perswader,
vide Induzidor, el que Persuade. a Persuasion, vide Persuasion, Induzimiento.
to Pertain, or appertain, vide Pertenescer, Tocar. Pertaining to cattle,
vide Boyuno. to Perturbe, v. Perturbar, Turbar. Perturbation, vide
Perturbacion. Perverse, vide Pertinaz. to Pervert or turn amiss, vide
Pervertir. a Perwicke, or counterfaite hair, vide Cabellera. a Pesant, vide
Patan, Pataco, Paparo, Rustico. to Pester or trouble, vide Enfadar,
Enfastidiar. Pestiferous, or pestilent, vide Pestifero, Pestilente. Pestilence,
plague, or universal sickness, v. Peste, Pestilencia. belonging to the
Pestilence, v. Pestilencial. Pestilent, plaguie, or pestiferous, v. Pestilente,
Pestifero. Pestilently, or plaguily, v. Pestilentemente, Pestiferamente. a
Pestle or pounder, v. Majadero. to beat with a Pestle, v. Majar. a Pestle of
porke, vide Pernil de puerco fresco. a Petigree, vide Pedigree. a Petticote for
a woman, v. Basquin^a, or Vasquin^a, Saboyana. Petty, or little, v. Chico,
Pequen^o. a Petition, vide Peticion. a Petronell, vide Pistolete, Pedren^al. a
Pettifogger, vide Abogado sin letras, Pica Pleytos. a Pewterer or dealer in
tin, vide Estan^ero. Pewter, vide Peltre, Estan^o. a Pewter pot, v. Jarro de
estan^o, Pichel a little Pewter pot; vide Pichelete. a Pewtrell, vide Poitrell.
P H
a Fantasy or vision, vide Fantasia, Vision. a Fancy, vide Fantasia.
Fantastical, vide Fantastico. a Pheasant, vide Faysan. a Phoenix, vide Feniz
or Avefeniz. to play the Philosopher, vide Philosofar. Philosophy, vide
Filosofia. a Philosopher, vide Filosofo. natural Philosophy, vide Filosofia
natural. moral Philosophy, vide Filosofia moral. Philosophical, vide
Filosofico. Philosopher like, vide Filosoficalmente. to cure by Physic, vide
Medicinar. a Phisician, vide Fisico, Medico. Physic, vide Fisica, Medicina. a
Phisiognomist, vide Chiromantico. Phisnomie or countenance, vide Filosomia. a
Phrase, vide Phrasis.
P I
a Pickaxe, vide Acada, Acadon. the half or handle of a Pickaxe, vide Astil de
Acadon. he that laboreth with a Pickaxe, vide Acadonero. Picked out, vide
Escogido, Elegido. Picked or curious, vide Curioso. Pickell for fish, vide
Escabeche. Pickers or thieves, vide Ladrones. an ear Picker, vide Monda
orejas. a tooth Picker, vide Monda dientes. a Picker of quarrels, vide
Quistionero, Espadachin. to Pickle fish or flesh, vide Echar pescado en
Escabeche. Pickle or brine, vide Escabeche, Salmorejo, Salmuera. to Picture or
make pictures, vide Pintar, Retratar. a Picture, vide Retrato, Pintura. a
Picture maker, vide Pintor. Pictured, vide Pintado, Retratado. Picturing, vide
Retrato, Pintura. a Piece of artillery, vide U'na pieca. a Pie or pastie, vide
Pastel. a Pie bird, vide Picaco. a Pie house, vide Pasteleria. to Piepe like a
chicken, vide Piar. Piety, vide Godliness. a Pigeon, vide Palomino, Pichon. a
Pigeon house, vide Palomar. a Pig, vide Cochino, Puerco. a little young Pig,
vide Cochinillo. a sucking Pig, vide Lechon. a Pike or spear, vide Pica. a
Pike man, vide Piquero. a Pike staff, vide A'sta de Pica. a Pilcher, vide
Sardina. Piled up, vide Empilado. to Pile up, vide Empilar. a Pile of wood,
vide Hacina de len^a. a Pile or post, vide Post. Piles or hemorrhoides in the
fundament of a man, vide Almoranas. to go on Pilgrimage, vide Peregrinar. a
Pilgrim, vide Perigrino romero. a little Pilgrim, vide Romerillo. a
Pilgrimage, vide Peregrinaje, Romeria. Pilfery, vide Hurtillo. to Pill, vide
Pelar. Pilled, vide Pelado. a Pillar, vide Pelador. Pilling, vide Peladura.
Pillage or spoils, vide Pillage, Pilaje. a Pill, vide Pildora. a Pillar, vide
Colomna, Pilar. to set on the Pillorie, vide Empicotar. set on the Pillorie,
vide Empicotado. a Pillorie, vide Picota. setting on the Pillorie, vide
Empicotadura. a Pillowe, vide Almohada, Cabecal. a Pillow beer, vide Funda de
Almohada. a Pilot, vide Piloto. a Pimple, vide Wheale. to pluck with Pincers,
vide Tenazar. a pull with a Pincer, vide Tenazada. a pair of Pincers, vide
Pincas, Tenazas. a little pair of Pincers to pluck off hair withal, vide
Tenazicas. to pull with Pincers, vide Pluck. to Pinch, vide Pecilgar,
Peliscar. a Pinch, vide Pecilgo, Pelisco. Pinched, vide Peliscado, Pecilgado. a
Pinchpenie, vide Avaro, Avariento, Duro, Lazerado, Malaventurado.
Pinchpenielike, vide Como avaro, como duro, como avariento. a Pineapple, vide
Pin^on. a Pine tree, vide Pino. a place of Pine trees, vide Pinal. to Pine,
wither or languish, vide Emmagrecer, Languir. Pined, vide Languido. a Pinke, a
little ship, v. Novechuela. a Pinnace or swift ship, vide Pinaca. a Pinnacle,
vide Chapitel, Pinaculo. a Pin, such as women use to pin withal, vide Alfiler,
Alfidel. Pinned, vide Prendido con alfiler. Pinning, vide Prendimiento con
alfiler. the Pinnions of any bird or foul, vide Alones. a Pinson, or pumpe,
vide Servillas. a Pioner, vide Gastador. to Pipe, vide Tocar vna flauta,
Chiflar. a Pipe, vide Flauta. a bag-Pipe, vide Gayta. a conduict Pipe, v.
Acaduz, Alcaduz, or Arcaduz, Aquatocho. a Pipe or wine vessel, v. Pipa. the
meat Pipe, v. Gaznate, Tragadero. a Pipkin, or little pot, vide Cacolilla,
Olleta. the Pip of a hen, v. Pepita. a Pippen, vide Camueca. a Pippen tree,
vide Camueco. a Pirate, vide Cossario, Pirata. a Pismire, emmet, or ante, vide
Hormiga. a Pismire hill, v. Hormiguero. to Piss, or make water, or urine, vide
Mear, Orinar. Piss, vide Orina. Pissed, vide Meado, Orinado. a Pisser, vide El
que mea, El que orina. Pissing, vide Meadura, Meada. a Pissing place, vide
Meadero. a Pispot, vide Orinal. a Pistol, vide Pistolete. to Pitch tents or
pauilions, vide Campan^ear. to Pitch a field, vide Poner campo. to Pitch, or
cover with pitch, v. Empegar, Pegar. Pitch, vide Pez. Pitched, or covered with
pitch, vide Empegado, Pegado. Pitching with pitch, vide Empegadura. a Pitcher,
or water pot, vide O'rca, V'rna. the handle or ear of a Pitcher, vide A'sa.
Pith or sap of a tree, vide Tuetano de arbol. to Pity, or have compassion on,
v. Tener Piedad, or Misericordia. to be without Pity, v. Despiadar. without
Pity, vide Despiadado. Pity, vide Misericordia, Piedad. to become Pitiful,
v. Apiadar. Pitiful, v. Apiadado, Misericordioso, Piadoso. to make Pitiful,
vide Amanzillar. Pitifully, v. Piadosamente. Pitilesse, v. sin Piedad, sin
Miserecordia. a Pittance, or modicum, v. Pitanca. a Pit, vide Hoyo, Cueva. a
saw Pit, vide Hoyuelo. a bottomless Pit, vide Abismo. the arm Pit, vide
Sobaco.
P L
a Place vide Lugar. to give Place, vide dar Lugar. to Place, vide Colocar. to
Place before, vide Anteponer. a Place to walk in, vide Anden. a Place of
descending, or a side of a hill down coming, vide Abaxadero. Placed, vide
Colocado. Placing, vide Colocacion. Plague, vide Pestilence. to infect with the
Plague, vide Apestar. a Plague soar, vide Carboncal. Plaguie, or infected with
the plague, vide Apestado. to Play, vide Jugar. to Play on an instrument, vide
Tan^er un instrumento. to Play the fool, vide Bovear. Play, vide Juego. table
Play, vide Juego de las tablas. a Play or interlude, vide Farsa, Farca,
Comedia. a Play when they cry buz, and so hit one another a box on the ear,
except quickly he pull away his head, vide Abejon. a Plaier or gamester, vide
Jugador, Tahur. a stage Plaier, vide Farsante. a Plaier or tumbler, v.
Bolteador. to Plaight, v Arrugar, Plegar. a Plaight or fold in a garment, vide
Alforza de vestido, Arruga, Pliegue. Plaighted or folded, vide Arrugado,
Pliegado. to make Plain, or manifest, vide Manifestar, Hazer claro. Plain,
clear, or manifest, v. Abierto, Llano, Manifesto. Plainenes, v. Llaneza,
Llanura. Plainly, vide Abiertamente, Claramente. to make Plain, even, or
smooth, v. Alisar, Esplanar. Plained, vide Alizado, Esplanado. a Plainer that
carpenters or ioyners use, vide cepillo. a Plain field, vide Campo raso. a
Plain tree, vide Platano. Plained or smoothed, v. Acepillado, Esplanado,
Alizado. Plaining or smoothing, v. Alisadura, Acepilladura. a Plaintiff in the
law, vide Querellante. Plaster, vide Encaladura. to Plaster or to parget, v.
Encalar. a Plaisterer or pargetter, vide Encalador. Plaistered, vide Encalado.
a Plaster for a soar, vide Emplasto. a Plaster to take away hair with, vide
Atanquia. Plaited, vide Plaighted. to Plancher, or lay plankes, vide Entablar.
Planchering, vide Entablamiento. to Plane, vide Cepillar. a Planer, vide
Cepillo. a Planet, vide Planeta. a Planke, vide Tabla. to Planke an house, v.
Entablar. Planked, vide Tablado. to Plant or set, vide Plantar. a Plant, vide
Planta. a little Plant, v. Plantilla. Planted, vide Plantado. a Planter, vide
Plantador. Planting, vide Plantadura. the Plant, or sole of the foot, v.
Planta de pie. Plantaine an herb, vide Llanten. Plate, vide Baxilla, Vaxilla.
a Plate of metal, v. Chapa, Lamina, Plancha. Plated, vide Chapado, Laminado,
Planchado. to Plate over, v. Chapar, Planchar. a Platform, or plat for any
thing, vide Plataforma. to Plat or wreath a thing one with another, vide
Torcer. Platted, vide Torcido. a Platting, vide Torcedura. a Platter, vide
Plato. a wooden Platter, v. Gaveta. to with draw his Plea, v. Atajar pleyto.
to Plead as a counselor, v. Abogar. a Pleader, v. Abogado, Procurador. the
Pleading of a counselor at law, vide Avogacion, Abogacion. a Pleading place,
vide Audiencia. a Pleasant conceited fellow, vide Placentero. Pleasant, vide
Jocundo, Alegre, Contento, Vfano. Pleasantnes, vide Alegria, Aplacencia,
Regozijo. Pleasant iestes or conceits, vide Donayres. Pleasantly jesting, vide
Donosamente. Pleasantly, vide Regozijadamente, Alegramente, Donosamente.
Pleasantly conceited, vide Donoso. to Please, vide Agradar, Aplazer, Complazer,
Contentar. Pleased, vide Complazido, Aplazido, Agradado, Contentado. Pleasing,
vide Agrado, Complacencia, Contento, Vfania. to lay to Pledge, vide Empen^ar. a
Pledge or pawn, vide Empen^o. Pledged or pawned, vide Empen^ado. a Pledging or
pawning, vide Empen^o. to be Plentiful, vide Abondar. to have great Plenty,
vide Abondar. Plentious, vide Copioso, Abundoso. having Plenty at will, vide
Abundoso. Plenteously, vide Copiosamente. Plenty, vide Abundancia, Copia.
Plentiful, vide Abondoso, Abundante, Copioso, Opulento. Plentifully, vide
Abondosamente, Copiosamente. most Plentifully, vide Con muchissima Copia, or
Abundancia. to Plough, vide Arar, Labrar. to Plough up ground, vide Alcar
barvecho. the Plough handle, or plough beam, vide Esteva. a Plough, vide
Arado, Aradro. the plough tail, vide Cola del aradro, Manzera. a Plough man,
vide Gan^an. a Plough ox, vide Buey. Ploughed, vide Arado. Ploughed ground, or
fallow, vide Barvecho. to Pluck, vide Pull. to Pluck up by the roots, vide
Arrancar, Desraygar. Plucked up by the roots, vide Arrancado, Desraygado.
Plucking up by the roots, vide Arrancadura. one that Plucketh up by the
roots, vide el que arranca. to Pluck down, vide Derribar. to Pluck off the
hairs, vide Pelechar. to Pluck up, vide Alcar. to Pluck with pincers, vide
Atenazar. Pluckes with pincers, vide Atenazadas. a Plume of feathers, vide
Penacho, Plumas, Plumajes. a Plumme, vide Ciruela. a Plumme tree, vide Ciruelo.
a Plumme line, vide Nivel. a Plummer or worker in lead, v. Fundidor. a Pummet,
vide Plomada, Sonda. to Plumpe or pumpe, vide Bomba. to Plunge, vide capuzar.
Plunged, vide capuzado. Plunging, vide capuzamiento. Plural, vide Plural.
P O
a Poale, vide Palo. to set on a poale, vide Empalar. Poares, or little hoales
of the body through which sweat and other excrements do issue, vide Poros.
Poastes turned, vide Balahustes, or Barahustes. the french Pockes, vide Bubas,
or Buvas. full of the french ill or Pockes, vide Abubado, Buboso. the small
Pockes, vide Viruelas, Biruelas. a Pocket, such as priests use to wear in the
bosoms of their frockes or cassockes, vide Falsopeto. a Pocket, vide
Faltriquera. a Poet, vide Poeta. Poetical, vide Poetico. Poetical grace, vide
Adorno poetico. Poetically, vide como Poeta. a Poem, vide Poema. a Poinado,
vide Pun^al. to Point at, vide Apuntar. to Point out, vide Apuntar. Pointed,
vide Apuntado. to Point or make sharp at the point, vide Sacarle la punta.
the Point of a weapon, vide la punta. Pointing or heading with iron, vide
Enastadura. Pointed with iron, vide Enastado. to Point out, vide Sen^alar,
Apuntar. a Point or title, vide Punto. from Point to point, vide
Puntualmente, de Punto a Punto. the principal Point wherein the controversy
consists, vide Punto. a Point in the tables, vide Casa. the Point of death,
vide Passamiento de muerte. to make Points to tie with, vide Hazer agujetas. a
Point, vide Agujeta. a Point maker, vide Agujetero. to Poise or weigh, vide
Pesar. Poised, vide Pesado. to Poison, vide Emponcon^ar, Entosicar, Rejalgar.
Poison, vide Poncon^a. Poisoned, vide Emponcon^ado. a Poisoner, vide
Emponcon^ador. Poisoning, vide Emponcon^adura. Poisonous, vide Poncon^oso. a
Poitrell, vide Peitrell. a Poke or bag, vide Barjuleta. a Pole to measure
land with, v. Pertiga. the Pole articke, vide Polo artico. the Poles of the
world, vide los Polos del mundo. Policy, vide Policia. a Policy or witty
shifte in war, vide ardid de guerra. to Polishe, v. Acicalar, Polir, Pulir.
Polished, vide Acicalado, Pulido. a Polishing tool, vide Polidera. Polishing,
vide Acicaladura, Polideza. a Politician, vide Politico. to Poll, notte, or
play the barber, vide Tresquilar, Cortar los Cabellos, Afeytar. Polled, vide
Tresquilado, Afeytado. the Poll of the head, vide Cogote, Colodrillo. to Poll,
pill or play the extortioner, v. Hazer extorcion. Poll money, vide
Encabecamiento. to levy Poll money, vide Encabecar. Polling or pilling, vide
Extorcion. to Pollute, vide Defile. Polluted, vide Contaminado. a Polluting,
vide Contaminacion. a Pomander, musk ball, or sweet perfume, vide Poma. a
Pomegranate, vide Granada. a Pomegranate tree, vide Granado. the Pommell of a
sword, v. Pomo. the Pommell of a saddle, vide Arcon. a Pomp, or solemn sight,
v. Pompa. Pompous, v. Pomposo, Esplendido. Pompously, v. Esplendidamente,
Pomposamente. a Pompion, or melon, v. Melon. a Ponde, or poole, v. Estanque,
Alverca. a fish Ponde, vide Estanque de pescado. to Ponder, weigh, or consider,
v. Ponderar, Considerar. a Ponderer, v. El que pondera, El que Considera.
Pondering, vide Ponderacion, Consideracion. Pontifical, vide Pontifical. a
Poole, vide Ponde. the Poope of a ship, vide Castillo de popa de nao. to make
Poor, vide Empobrescer. Poor, vide Pobre. very Poor, vide Pobreto. Poorly,
vide Pobremente. the Pope, vide Papa. the Popedom, vide Papadgo. belonging to
the Pope, vide Papal. a Poplar tree, vide A'lamo blanco. a Popiniay, vide
Papagayo. Poppie or sleepewoort, vide Dormidera. wild Poppie, v. Amapolas,
Hamapola. Populous, vide Populoso. Popular, vide Popular. a Popular state, vide
Democracia. to Populate, or spoil and waste, vide Gastar, Destruyr. a Porch,
vide Acaguan, Portal. a Porcupine, v. Puerco espin. Pore, vide Poare. Porke, or
swines flesh, vide Puerco fresco. a Porrenger, vide Escodilla. a Portall before
a door, vide Canzel. a Port or haven, vide Puerto. Portage, or carriage, v.
Port. a Portcullis, vide Rastillo. a Porter that carries stuff from place to
place, v. Ganapan. a Porter or door keeper, v. Portero. a Porters lodge, vide
la Porteria. a Port-hoale, vide Portan^ola. a Portmanteaw, vide Portamanteo,
Valija. Portingall, v. Lusitania, Portugual. a man of Portingall, v. Lusitano,
Portuguez. a Portion, vide Racion, Portion. to Portraie, or draw, v. Debuxar,
Retratar. a Portraier, vide Retratador. a Portraiture, vide Debujo, Retrato.
Portraied, v. Debuxado, Retratado. Portraying, v. Debuxo, Retrato. a Posie, or
tuttie, v. Ramillete. a Position, vide Bevida. Positive, vide Positivo. to
Possess, or to have in possession, vide Poseer. to get in possession, or to
give possession, v. Apoderar. Possessed of, vide Apoderado. Possessed with the
devil, vide Endemoniado. Possesson, vide Possession. Possessed, vide Posseydo.
a Possessor, vide Posseedor. a Posset, vide Quajada. Possibility, vide
Possibilidad. Possible, vide Possible. Possibly, vide Possiblemente. a Post,
pile, or stake, vide Post. a Post standing upright, about which the stairs
do wind, vide Antena de caracol. to make Postehaste, v. Andar muy a Priessa. a
Post, or messenger in haste, vide Corredor, Correo. a Posterne gate, or back
door, v. Puerta falsa. a Posterity, vide Decendencia, Descendientes. Potato
roots, vide Patata. one that uses Potatoes, vide Patatero. a place where
Potato roots grow, v. Patatal. to give a Potion, vide dar Bevida. Potentates,
vide Potentados. to make Pots, vide Hazer ollas. a Pot to sees meat in, vide
O'lla. a Pot to drink in, vide Jarrillo. a Pot or pitcher, v. Jarro. a little
Pot or pipkin, v. Ollaza. a melting Pot, vide Melting. a chamber Pot, or
pispot, v. Orinal. Pothangers, vide Llares. Pothearbers, vide Ortaliza. a
Potter, vide Alfaharero, Ollero. a place where they sell Pots, v. Olleria. a
Pot gunne, vide Gunne. Pottage, vide Potage. a Pottage pot, vide Puchero. a
Poticarie, or apothecarie, vide Boticario. a Pottinger, or Pottage dish, vide
Escudilla. a Pouch, or bag, vide Escarcela, Escarcelon. to Powder flesh, vide
Cecinar. Poudered, vide Cecinado. Poudering, vide Cecina. to beat to Powder,
or bring a thing to powder, v. Despolvorizar, Polvorear. beaten to Powder, vide
Despolvorizado. Powder, or gunne powder, v. Polvora. sweet Powder, vide Polvos
de olor. Poverty, vide Pobreza. Pouldrons, vide Espaldercetes, Bracales. to
Poule, vide Poll. Pouled, v. Tresquilado, Afeytado. a Poultrer, vide Gallinero.
Poultrie, vide Gallineria. to Poumpe out water, v. Esgotar. Poumped dry, vide
Esgotado. Poumping out water, vide Esgotamiento. a Poumpe, vide Bomba. to
Pour, vide Echar. to Pour in, vide Infundir. Poured, vide Echado. Poured in,
vide Infundido. a Pouring, v. Derramamiento, Vertidura. to Pounce, or prick
out samplers, etc. vide Poncar. Pouncing or pricking out, vide Puncadura. to be
of Power, v. Tener poder. to get into his Power, v. Empoderar. Power, v. Poder,
Poderio, Potencia, Potestad. Powerful in fire, vide Ignipotente. Powerful,
vide Poderoso, Potente. Powerfully, vide Poderosamente. to Pownd, to braie, or
stamp, vide Majar, Moler, Pisar. a Pownd weight, vide Libra. to Pownd or pin
in, vide Acorralar. Pownded, vide Acorralado. a Pownder or pinfold, vide el que
Acorrala. a Pownd or pinfold for cattle, vide Corral. Pownding, vide
Acorralamiento. a Pourueyor, vide Bastecedor.
P R
to Practice or exercise, vide Praticar, Exercer. Practiced, vide Praticado,
Exercido. a Practiser, vide El que pratica, Pratico, El que exerce. Practicing,
vide Pratica. Practice, vide Pratica, Exercicio. to Pray or make prayers, vide
Rezar. one that Prays, vide El quereza. Prayed, vide Rezado. a Prayer, vide
Oracion. morning Prayer, vide Maytines. evening Prayer, vide Visperas. to get a
Pray, vide Tomar presa. a Pray or booty, vide Presa. to Praise, vide Alabar,
Loar. Praise or commendations, vide Alabanca, Loa, Loor. Praised; vide Alabado,
Loado. a Praiser, vide El que loa, Alabancioso. Praising, vide Alabando,
Loando. Praisewoorthie, vide Loable, Digno de loor. to Praise or value, vide
Apreciar, Avaliar. to Prate or prattle, vide Baldronear, Charlar, Charlatar. a
Prater or babbler, vide Baldron, Charlatan, Hablador, Parlero. Prating or
babbling, v. Parla, Parleria. Pratingly, vide Como baldron, Como Charlatan. to
Prattle, vide Prate. to Preach, vide Predicar. a Preacher, vide Predicador.
Preached, vide Predicado. Preaching, vide Predicacion. a Preaching place, vide
Predicatorio. to make a Preamble, vide Hazer preambulo. a Preamble, vide
Preambulo, Corrolario. Preambles, vide Corrolarios. Preatie, vide Pretty. a
Prebend, vide Prebendado. a Prebendarie, vide Prebenda. a Precept, vide
Preceto. Precious, vide Precioso. a Precious stone, vide Piedra preciosa.
Preciously, vide Preciosamente. Precise, vide Curioso, Preciso. Precisely, vide
Precisamente, Curiosamente. a Predecessor, v. Antecessor, Predecessor,
Antepassado. to Predestinate, vide Predestinar. Predestined, vide
Predestinado. Predestination, vide Predestinacion. a Predicament, vide
Predicamento. Preeminence or prerogative, vide Preheminencia. a Priest or
priest, vide Clerigo. a Preface, vide Prohemio, Prefacio. to Prefer, vide
Anteponer, Preferrir. Preferred, vide Antepuesto, Preferrido. a Preferment,
vide Preferimiento. Pregnant, vide Pren^ado. a Pregnant or sharp wit, vide
Ingenio agudo y pren^ado. Pre-eminence, v. Preheminencia. bearing Pre-eminence,
vide Preheminente. a Preie or booty, vide Presa. to Prejudice, vide Amenguar,
Prejudicar. Preiudicing, vide Amenguamiento, Prejudicacion. a Prejudice, vide
Perjuizio. Prejudiced, vide Amenguado, Prejudicado. a Prelate, vide Perlado,
Prelado. Prelacie, vide Prelacia, Perlacia. to Premeditate, vide Premeditar.
Premeditated, vide Premeditado. Premeditation, vide Premeditacion. to
Premonish, vide Premunir. Premonished, vide Premunido. a Premonition, vide
Premunicion. a Prentiship, vide Tiempo del Aprendiz. a Prentise, vide Aprendiz.
a Preoccupation, v. Preocupacion. to Prepare, vide Aderecar, Aparejar,
Apercebir. Prepared, vide Aderecado, Aparejado, Apercebido. a place to Prepare
in, vide Preparatorio. Preparation, vide Aderecamiento, Aparato, Aparejo,
Apercebimiento, Preparacion. a Preparer, vide El que adereca, El que Apareja. a
Preposition, vide Preposicion. a Prerogative, vide U'na prerogativa. Prescience
or foreknowledge, vide Adevinanca. to Prescribe, vide Prescrivir. Prescribed,
vide Prescrito. a Prescriber, vide El que prescrive. Prescribing, vide
Prescriviendo. a Prescription, vide Prescripcion. to Present, vide Presentar.
to be Present, vide Estar present. Presence, vide Presencia. a Present, vide
Un present. Presented, vide Presentado. a Presenter, vide Presentador. Present
or at hand, vide Junto, A la mano. a Presentation to a benefice, etc. vide
Presentacion. Presently, vide Encontinente, Luego, Aora. to Preserve or keep,
vide Conservar, Guardar. to Preserve with sugar, vide Confacyonar, Hazer en
conserva. a Preservative, vide Preservativo. a Preservative against poison,
vide Antidoto. Preserved, vide Conservado. Preserved sweet meats, vide
Confites. a Preserver with sugar, vide Confacionador. Preserving with sugar,
vide Confacyon. to be President, vide Presidir. a President, vide Presidente. a
Presidentship, vide Presidencia. a President or example, vide Exemplar,
Exemplo. Pressed down, vide Apesgado. to Press down, vide Apesgar. Pressing
down, vide Apesgamiento. to Press out juice, vide Esprimir. to Press for a
soldier, vide Apercebir. Pressed, vide Esprimido. Pressed for a soldier, vide
Apercebido. Pressing of soldiers, vide Apercebimiento. Pressing, vide
Apretamiente. a Press to press withal, vide Prensa. a Press where apparel
is laid, v. Arcaz. a printers Press, vide Imprenta. to Press with a press,
vide Prensar. a Press, vide Prensa. to Presume, vide Presumir. Presumptious,
vide Presumptuoso, Presuntuoso. Presumptiousnes, vide Presuncion.
Presumptiously, vide Presumptuosamente. to Presuppose, vide Presuponer.
Presupposed, vide Presupuesto. to Pretend, vide Pretender. Pretended, vide
Pretendido. a Pretender, vide Pretensor. Pretending, vide Pretendiendo.
Pretense or color, vide Pretencion. to Pretermit or let pass, vide Dexar.
Pretty good, vide Bonito, or Bonico. to Prevail, v. Prevalecer. a Prevailing,
v. Prevalicimiento. to Prevent, v. Antever, Anticipar, Antuviar, Preocupar,
Prevenir. Prevented, vide Antevisto, Preocupado, Prevenido. Preventing, vide
Anticipacion, Antuvion, Prevencion. a Prevention, vide Anticipacion,
Prevencion. a Preuenter, vide El que anticipa, el que previene. to Price or
valewe, vide Apreciar, Avaliar. Price, vide Precio, Valor. Priced, vide
Apreciado, Avaliado. a Pricer, vide Apreciador. Pricing, vide Apreciando. to
Prick, v. Puncar, Pungir. to Prick like a thorn, vide Espinar. Prickly, vide
Espinoso. to prick forward, vide Agujar, Hostigar, Instigar. to prick with
nailing, v. Enclavar. a Prick, vide Aguijon, Estimulo, Picada, Puncada.
Pricked forward, vide Hostigado, Instigado. Pricked on, vide Acossado, Pungido.
Pricked with a nail, vide Enclavado. a Pricker, vide El que punge. Pricking,
vide Picadura, Pungimiento, Puncadura. Pricking with a nail, v. Enclavadura. a
Prick used in writing, v. Punto. a Prick or mark to shoot at, vide Fiel
Blanco. a Prickle or grissell of an hedgehogge or such like, vide Pua de erizo.
Prickly bindweed, vide Bigarda. Pride, or arrogancy, vide Arrogancia, Fasto,
Fausto, Insolencia, Orgullo. Proud, vide Arrogante, Orgulloso, Insolente. to
Pry, watch, or epsy, vide Espiar. a Prier or espier, vide Espia. a Priest,
vide Sacerdote, Clerigo, Presbitero. Priesthood, vide Sacerdocio, Clericato. a
Primate, vide Primado. Primero at cards, v. Primera. to Prigge or steal, v.
Hurtar. Primitive, or that has no beginning from others, v. Primitivo. a
Prince, or princess, vide Principe, Princesa. a Prince among the Indians, vide
Cazique. Princelike, vide Como principe. Princely, v. Como principe. a
Principal or chief, v. Principal. Principal, v. Principal. Principally, vide
Principalmente, Primeramente. to Print, vide Enprimir. Printed as in ones
mind, vide Imprimido. a Print of the foot, vide Pisada. Printing or marking,
v. Stampa. to Print as to print books, v. Enstampar, Imprimir. Printed, vide
Enstampado, Imprimido. a Print, vide Emprenta, Estampa. a Printer, v.
Estampador, Impressor. Printing, vide Impression. a Printers press, vide
Estampa, Emprenta. a Prior or prier, v. Prior. a Prioresse, vide Priora. a
Priorship, vide Priorato, Prioradgo. a Prison, vide Carcel. to take Prisoner,
vide Captivar. a keeper of a Prison, v. Carcellero. the fees of the Prison, v.
Carcelage. Prisoned, vide Encarcelado. a Prisoner, v. Captivo, Cativo, Preso,
Prisionero. to deliver out of Prison, vide Desaprisonar. a Private person, v.
Comun. Privately or in secret, vide Secretamente. Privation or bereauing, vide
Privacion. Priuet wherewith they make bowers in gardens, vide Alfena, or
Alhena. to do any thing Privily, v. Hazer secretamente. Privy or secret, vide
Escondido, Secreto. Privily, v. Secretamente. the Privy parts of a man, vide
Las parts secretas. a Privy or house of office, vide Letrina, Privada. a
clenser of Priuies, v. Limpion de privadas. to Privilege, vide Privilegiar. a
Privilege, vide Privilegio. Priuileged, vide Privilegiado. to Prize, vide
Apreciar, Avaliar. the Price, vide Estima, Prez. Prized, vide Apreciado,
Estimado. a Prizer, vide Aprecidor, Avaliador. Prizing, vide Apreciadura. a
Probation, vide Aprovacion. Probable, v. Probable. Probability, v.
Probabilidad. Probably, vide Probablemente. a Problem, v. Problema. to
Proceed or go forwards, vide Proceder. Proceeded, vide Procedido. Proceeding,
v. Progresso. to have Process against any one, vide Tener processo. a
Process, v. Processo. to Proclaim, or make proclamation, v. Apregonar,
Publicar edito, Pregonar, Promulgar. a Proclamation, v. Edito, Edicto, Pregon,
Promulgamento. Proclaimed, vide Pregonado, Promulgado. a Proclamer, vide
Pregonero. to Proclaim war, v. Pregonar guerra. a Proconsull, vide Proconsul.
to Procreate or to beget, vide Engendrar. a Proctor, vide Procurador. to
Procure or get, vide Procurar. Procured, vide Procurado. a Procurer, vide
Procurador. Procuring, vide Procuracion. to be Prodigal, vide Ser Prodigo.
Prodigal, vide Maniroto, Prodigo. Prodigality, vide Prodigalidad. Prodigious,
vide Prodigioso. Prodigiouslie, vide Progidiosamente. to Produce, vide
Produzir. to Proffer, or to offer, vide Ofrecer. Proof, or prove, vide Prueva.
to Profess, vide Professar. Professed, vide Professo. a Profession, vide
Profession. a Professor, vide Professor. to Profit, vide Provechar. Profit,
vide Cosecha, Comodidad, Provecho, Vtilidad. Profitable, vide Comodo,
Provechoso, Vtil. Profitably, vide Provechosamente. Profunditie, vide
Profundidad. Profound, vide Profundo. a Progenitour, vide Begetter. a Progeny,
vide Abolorio, Abolengo. to Prognosticate, vide Pronosticar. a Prognosticator,
vide Pronostigador. a Prognostication, vide Pronostico. a Progress, vide
Progresso. a Proheme, vide Prohemio. to Prohibit or forbid, vide Prohibir,
Vedar. a Prohibition, vide Prohibicion, Veda. Prolixe or large, vide Prolixo,
Largo. a Prologue, vide Prologo. Prolonging, vide Dilacion, Alongamiento,
Prolongamiento. to Prolong or delay, v. Alongar, Continuar, Dilatar, Prolongar.
Prolonged, vide Alongado, Continuado, Dilatado, Prolongado. to Promise, vide
Prometer. a Promise, vide Promessa. Promised, vide Prometido. a Promiser, vide
El que promete. Promising, vide Prometimiento. a Promontorie or hill lying out
into the sea, vide Promontorio. to Promote or advance, vide Promover.
Promoted, vide Promovido. a Promotion, vide Promocion. to play the Promoter,
vide Malsinar. a Promotour, vide Delator, Malcin, Malsin. Prompt or ready,
vide Prompto. very Prompt, vide Muy prompto. Promptly or readily, vide
Promptamente. a Prong or pitchforke, vide Horca. Pronenesse, vide Promptitud.
to Pronounce, vide Anunciar, Pronunciar. Pronounced, vide Anunciado,
Pronunciado. a Pronouncer, vide Pronunciador, Anunciador. Pronouncing, vide
Pronunciacion, Anunciacion. a Pronoune, vide Pronombre. to Prove or try, vide
Provar, Tentar. a Proof or example, vide Prueva. Proved, vide Probado,
Provado. to Prove or confirm, vide Aprovar, Confirmar. Proved by witness,
vide Provado por testigos. Proouing, vide Provacion. Proper or peculiar, vide
Proprio, Peculiar. Proper or personable, vide Gentil, bien dispuesto.
Propernes, vide Apostura, Gentileza. Properly, vide Gentilmente. a Property,
vide Propriedad. to Profane, vide Profanar. a Profane thing, vide Cosa
profana. Profaned, vide Profanado. to Prophecy, vide Adevinar, Adivinar,
Profetizar. a Prophecy, vide Profecia. a Prophesying, vide Adevinacion. a
Prophet, vide Profeta. a Prophetess, vide Profetiza. to lay out in Proportion,
vide Proporcionar. the Proportion, making or stature of the body, vide Talla,
Proporcion. a man of good Proportion or of good qualities, vide Gentil hombre.
Proportioned, vide Proporcionado, Tallado. ill Proportioned, vide Mal tallado.
Proportionally, vide Con proporcion. to Propose, vide Proponer. Proposed, vide
Propuesto. a Proposition, vide Proposicion. to Prop up or to stay, vide
Apuntalar. a Prop, vide Estantal, Puntal. Propped, vide Apuntalado. Propping,
vide Apuntalamiento. to Proroge, vide Prorogar, Dilatar, Alargar, Prolongar.
Proroged, vide Prorogado, Prolongado, Dilatado, Alargado. a Proroging, vide
Dilacion, Prorogacion. to Proscribe, vide Proscrevir. Proscribed or banished,
so that one may kill him, vide Proscrito. Proscription, vide Proscripcion.
Prose, vide Prosa. to Prosecute, v. Proseguir. Prosecuted, vide Proseguido.
Prosecuting, vide Prosecucion. a Proselyte, one that is newly turned to the
faith, vide Proselita. a Prospect, vide Propecto. to Prosper, vide Prosperar.
Prosperity, vide Prosperidad. Prosperous, vide Prospero. Prosperously, vide
Prosperamente. to Prostrate, or throw down, vide Postrarse. Prostrate, vide
Postrado. Prostrating, vide Abaxamiento, Prostradura. to Protect, vide Amparar,
Defender. to Protect himself under another man, v. Ampararse. a Protection,
vide Amparo. Protected, v. Amparado. a Protector, vide Protector, Defensor. to
Protest, v. Alegar, Protestar. Protested, vide Alegado. a Protestation, vide
Protesto. a Protonotarie, or chief secretary, v. Protonotario. to Protract,
v. Alargar, Dilatar. to Prove, vide Prove. Prouender for horse, v. Cevada. a
Proverb, v. Refran. Prouerbiall, vide Prouerbial. to Provide, v. Proveer,
Aparar, Aparejar, Apercebir. Provided, v. Aparejado. Apercebido, Proveido. a
Prouider, vide Aparejador, Proveedor. a Providing, v. Apercebimiento,
Provision. a Provision, v. Aparejo, Aparato, Provision. a Province, vide
Provincia. belonging to a Province, v. Provincial. to Provoke, or egg on, v.
Comover, Incitar, Provocar, Yrritar. Provoked, v. Comovido, Incitado, Procado,
Yrritado. a Prouoker, vide Provocador, Yrritador. a Provoking, v. Incitamiento,
Provocacion, Yrritamiento. a Provost, vide Provisor. a Provost marshall, v.
Barrachel, Prevoste. to Prouulgate, vide Promulgar. to be Proud, v. Ser
arrogante, Altivo, Orgulloso. Proud, v. Altivo, Orgulloso, Arrogante,
Presuntuoso. Proudly, v. Orgullosamente, Presuntuosamente. Prowes, or a noble
act, v. Proeza. the Prowe or forecastle of a ship, vide Proa. Prudence, vide
Prudencia. Prudent, vide Prudente. to Prune, vide Podar. to Prune vines, v.
Mogronar vides, Podar vides. a Pruner, vide Podador. Pruned, vide Podado. a
Pruning, vide la Poda. a Pruning hook, v. Podadera. Prunes, vide Andrinas.
P S
Psalms, vide Salmos. a Psalmist, vide Salmista. a Psalm, vide Salmo. a
Psalter, or book of psalms, vide Salterio.
P T
Ptisane barley husked, or sodden in water, vide Ordiate.
P V
a Publicane, vide Publicano. Public, or common, v. Publico, Placero.
Public controversies, vide Pendencias publicas. the Public weal, v.
Republica. Publickely, v. Placeramente, Publicamente. to Publish, v Divulgar,
Promulgar, Publicar. Published, v. Divulgado, Promulgado, Publicado. a
Publisher, v. Promulgador, Divulgador. Publishing, v. Promulgamiento,
Publicacion. a Pudding, vide Longaniza, Relleno. a kind of chopped meat round
like Puddings, vide Abondigas. a hogs Pudding, v. Morcilla. a Puddle, vide
Lamedal. to Puff, vide Bufar, Buffar. a Puff, vide Bufido. Puffed, vide
Bufado. a Puffing, vide Bufido. to be Puissant, v. Ser, Pujante. Puissance,
vide Pujanca. Puissant, vide Pujante. Puissantly, v. Pujantemente. to Pull; or
pluck, v. Tirar. to Pull up by the roots, v. Desraygar. Pulled, vide Tirado.
a Pulling, vide Tiron. a Pullet, or young hen, vide Polla. a Pulley, vide
Carillo, Rodojo, Rodezno, Polea. a Pulley of a ship, vide Polea. a Pulpit, vide
Pulpito. Pulse, as beans and pease, etc. vide Legumbre. the Pulse, vide Pulso.
a Pumis-stone, v. Esponja piedra. to rub with a Pumis stone, v. Esponjar. to
Pumpe, v. Sacar agua de Bomba. a Pumpe, vide Bomba. the Pumpe of a ship, vide
Sentina. Pumpes, v. capatillos, Servillas. to Punch, or prick, vide Pungir. a
Punchion, vide Puncon. to Punish, vide Castigar, Penar, Punir. Punished, v.
Castigado, Punido. a Punisher, vide Corrector. a Punishing, vide Castigo,
Punicion, Pena. Punishment, vide Castigo, Correcion, Punicion. a Pupil, vide
Pupilo. a Puppie, or whelpe, v. Cachorro. to be Purblinde, v Cegagear.
Purblindnes, vide Cegagez. Purblinde, vide Cegajoso. to Purchase or buy, vide
Comprar, adquirir. to Purchase or get, vide Adquirir, Alcancar. Purchased or
gotten, vide Adquirido, Alcancado. a Purchaser, vide Adquiridor, Alcancador.
Purchasing, vide Adquirimiento, Alcancamiento. to make Pure, v. Hazer puro.
Pure, vide Puro. Pureness, vide Pureza. Purely, vide Puramente. a Purfle or
guard about a woman's gown, vide Canto de ropa. a Purfle maker or embroderer,
v. Boslador, Bordador. to Purge or cleanse, vide Purgar. Purged, vide Purgado.
that Purges, vide Purgativo. a Purgation, vide Ayuda, Camara, Purga,
Purgacion. Purgatory, vide Purgatorio. to Purify, vide Apurar, Purificar.
Purified, vide Apurado, Purificado. a Purifying, vide Apuramiento,
Purificacion. Purificacion, v. Purificacion. Purely, vide Apuradamente. Purple,
vide Purpura. a Purple cloth, vide Purpura. of Purple, vide Purpureo. clothed
in Purple, vide Vestido con purpura. Purporte, or effect, vide Efeto. to
Purpose or entende, vide Determinar, Proponer. a Purpose, vide Determinacion,
Intento, Intencion, Proposito. Purposed; vide Determinado, Propuesto.
Purposely, vide Adrede, Aposta, Asabiendas. a Purse, vide Bolsa. a little
Purse, vide Bolsica, or Bolsico, or Bolsilla. a Purse-maker, vide Bolsero. a
great Purse or pouch, vide Bolson. a Purser in a ship, v. Despensero. a Pursie
man, vide Corpulento, Gordo, Gruesso. Pursiuenes, v. Corpulencia, Gordura,
Grossedad. Purslane, v. Baldrogas. a Purseuant, v. Alquazil de Corte. to
Pursue, vide Perseguir. Pursued, vide Perseguido. a Pursuer, vide Perseguidor.
Pursuit, vide Persecucion. Pursuing, vide Perseguimiento. to Purueigh, or
provide, v: Proveer. a Purueigher, vide Proveedor. to Push, vide Empuxar. to
Push with the head, vide Topetar. Pushed, vide Empuxado. Pushing, vide
Empuxamiento. a Push, vide Empuxon. a Push or bile, vide Postilla. full of
Pushes, vide Postilloso. Pusilanimitie, vide Pusilanimidad. to Putrify, vide
Enconar. Putrified, v. Enconado. Putrefying, v. Enconamiento. to Put, vide
Poner. to Put before, vide Preponer. Put before, vide Prepuesto. to Put on
garments, vide Poner un vestido. to Put into the bosom, vide Ensenar. a
Putting into the bosom, vide Ensenada. to Put off garments, vide Desnudar. to
Put in a chest, vide Chest. to put to death, vide Mandar matar. to Put to
flight, vide Poner en huida. to Put into vessels, vide Enbasar. to Put out
fire, vide Apagar. a Putter out, vide Apagador. Put or placed, vide Puesto. a
Putting away, vide Echamiento de si.
Q
QVadrangled, vide Quadrado. a Quadrangle having four corners, v. Quadrado,
Quadro, Quadrangulo. Quadrante or four square, vide Quadrado. Quadripartite,
or of four parts, vide De quatro parts. to Quaffe, vide Bever mucho. a
Quaffer, vide Bevedor grande. a Quaffing, vide Borrachera. a Quagmier, vide
Cienagal, Pantano. to put into Quagmires, vide Empantanar. full of Quagmires,
vide Empantanado, Pantanoso. to Quail, vide Amansar, Ablandar. a Quail, a
bird so called, vide Codorniz. to Quake or tremble, v. Estremecer, Temblar.
Quaking, vide Estremecido, Temblado. to Qualify or quiet, vide Aquietar,
Sossegar. Qualified, vide Aquietado, Sossegado. a Quality, vide Calidad. a
Quantity, vide Cantidad. to Quarrel, vide Buscar ocasion de ren^ir. a
Quarrel, vide Quistion, Pendencia. a Quarreller, vide Quistonero, Pendenciero.
a Quarrie of stones, v. Cantera, Canteria, Pedrera. a Quarte measure, vide
Quartillo. a Quartaine fever, vide Quartana. to Quarter, vide Quartear. a
Quarter, vide Quartal. Quartered, v. Quarteado. a Quarter master, vide Quartel
maestre. a Quarter or piece of timber four inches thick, vide Astilla. a
Quarter of a pound, vide Quarteron de libra. to Quauer, as in singing, vide
Hazer garganta, Gargantear. a Queen or drab, vide Puta, Ramera, Cantonera. a
Queen, vide Reyna. to Quench, vide Apagar, Amortiguar. Quenched, vide Apagado,
Amortiguado. a Quencher, vide Apagador. Quenching, vide Apagamiento,
Amortiguamiento. a Querister, vide Cantor tiple. a Querne or hand mill, vide
Muela de mano. to ask a Question, vide Preguntar question. a Question, vide
Question. Questionless, vide Sin duda. a demaunder of questions, vide
Questionero.
Qu I
to Quicken or rouse up, vide Abivar, Avivar. Quick conceited, vide Agudo.
Quick or lively, vide Bivace or Vivace. to the Quick, vide Al bivo. Quicknes
of wit, vide Acucia, Agudeza. Quicknes or agilitie, vide Agilidad. Quickened or
roused up, vide Abivado, Avivado. a Quick and witty saying, vide Apothegma,
Donayre. Quickly, v. Apriessa, Aquexadamente, Cedo, De presto, Prestamente.
Quicke-sands, vide Arenas bivas. Quicke-siluer, vide Azogue. to make still or
Quiet, vide Acallar, Aquietar, Apaziguar, Aplacar. Quiet, vide Apazible,
Callado, Quedo, Quedito. Quieted, vide Acallado, Apaziguado, Aplacado,
Aquietado, Reportado, Sossegado. Quietness, vide Apazibilidad, Quietud, Reposo,
Sossiego. Quietly, v. Apaziblemente, Quietamente, Sossegadamente. to Quiet,
vide Reportar, Sossegar. a Quill, vide Can^on. a Quilt for a bed, vide Cocedra,
Colcha. a Quilt-maker, vide Colchero. a Quince, vide Membrillo or Marmello. a
Quince. tree, vide Membrillo. Quintessence, vide Quinta essencia. the Quincie,
a disease in the throat, vide Adivas. a Quipper, vide Apodador, Motejador.
Quipped, vide Apodado, Motejado. to Quip, vide Apodar, Montejar. Quipping, vide
Apodamiento, Motejamiento. a Quip, vide Apodo, Mote, Motete. a Quire of paper,
v. Mano de papel. the Quire of a church, vide Coro. a Quittance, vide Quitanca.
Quite and clean, vide Abarrisco, Del todo. a Quiver of arrows, vide Aljava,
Carcax. to Quiver with the voice, vide Hazer garganta, Gargantear. put in a
Quiver, vide Puesto en carcax. Quiuering or shaking for cold, v. Tembladura. a
Quoit, vide Herron. to play at Quoites, v. Jugar al herron. Quotidian, vide
Cotidiano, Cada dia. to Quote, vide Acotar. Quoted, vide Acotado. Quoting, vide
Acotacion.
R
to RAbate, or rebate, vide Rebatir. a Rabbet, or young conie, v. Gacapito. a
Rabble, or flock, vide Multitude. to Race, or raze, vide Raer. a Race, or
course for horses to run, vide Corredera, or Carrera. a Race, or stock, v.
Raca, casta, Abolorio, Abolengo. to Rack with cords, vide Estropear,
Estropiar, Dar tormento. Racked with cords, v. Estropiado, Estropeado,
Atormentado. a Rack or manger, v. Pesebre. a Rack or cobborne, vide Cavallos
de Hierro. a Rack for a crosbow, v. Gafas. a Racket to play with at tennis,
v. Raqueta. a Radish root, vide Rabano, Ravano. to Rafter an house, v.
Cabriar. a Rafter, vide Astilla, Cabrio. to Rage, vide Embravecer, Rabiar,
Enfurecer, Apitonar. Rage, v. Embravecimiento, Furor, Rabia, Apitonadura.
Raging, vide Apitonado, Furioso, Rabioso. Ragingly, v. Furiosamente,
Rabiosamente. a Rag, vide Andrajo, or Handrajo. Ragged, v. Andrajoso,
Handrajoso. Raggednes, vide Lleno de Handrajos. Ragwort, vide Cojon de perro,
Satyrion. a Raie fish, or scate fish, vide Lamio. to Raie, vide Defile. a Raie,
as in battle, vide Hila. Raied, or made with rays or strikes like rods, vide
Rayado. to Rail or chide, v. Ren^ir de Berceras. Railing, vide Rin^a. Railing,
vide Ren^idamente. a Rail or stake to bear up a vine, vide Estaca, Rodrigon.
a Rail of fine linen that women use to wear, vide Amito. a Rail, or railes
to enclose any thing, vide Talanquera. Raiment, or apparel, v. Vestidos. to
Rain, vide Llover. to Rain in the mean while, v. Entrellover. the Rainebow,
v. A'rco del cielo. to Rain small, or drizle, v. Lloviznar. Rain, vide
Lluvia. Rain water, vide Llovediza agua. Rainie, vide Lluvioso. the Rain of a
bridle, v. Rienda. to Raise up, vide Enhestar, Erguir, Levantar. Raised up,
vide Enhiestado, Levantado. a Raiser, or stirrer, v. El que se Enhiesta, el que
Levanta. Raising up, vide Enhestamiento, Levantamiento. a Raison, vide Passa. a
Rank, vide Bila, Hila. to Rake, vide Arrastrar. Raked, vide Arrastrado. a
Rake, vide Rastro. a Raker, vide Rastrador. Raking, vide Rastradura. a
Rakehell, vide Desalmado. to Ram, or beat in stones, v. Pisonear. Rammed, vide
Pisoneado. a Rammer, vide Pisoneador. Ramming, vide Pisonamiento. to but like a
Ram, vide Topetar, Topar. a Ram, vide Carnero cojudo, Murueco. Rammishnes, or
ranknes of savor, v. Rancio. Rammish, vide Rancioso. Rammishly, vide Con
rancio. to Ramp as a lion does, v. Rapar. to Rampire a city round about, v.
Fortalecer, Reparar, Fortificar. Rampired, v. Fortalecido, Reparado. a Rampire,
vide Fortalecimiento, Reparo, Fortificacion. to be Rank, or grow ranckly,
vide Crescer con vicio. Rank, or rammish, vide Rancioso. to grow Rank,
vide Crescer convicio. a Rank of men, vide Hilera, Hilada, Hila. a going out
of Rank, vide Deshilada. a Rank of tents or cabbins, vide Rancheria. to
Ranckle, vide Enconar. to corrupt with Rancour and grudge, vide Deshazerse con
rancor. Rancour, vide Rancor. to Range or go about, vide Rodear. a Ranger of a
forest, vide Florestero. to Range as meal through a sieue is ranged, vide
carandar. to Ransacke or rifle, v. Arruinar, Destruyr, Assolar. to pay a
Ransom, vide Rescatar. a Ransom, vide Rescate. Ransomed, vide Rescatado. to
Rape or rauishe, vide Forcar. a Rapiar, vide E^pada. to Rap, vide to Strike.
Rapine, vide Rapin^a. Rare, vide Seldom. the Rascal or rude sort of men, v.
Canalla, Gentalla. to Race, cancel or cross out, vide Borrar, Raer. Rased or
put out, vide Borrado, Raydo. a Rasing or blotting out, vide Borradura,
Raedura. Rasing, destroing or casting down, v. Assolamiento, Ruyna. a Raze or
lineage, vide Casta, Raco. Rashness, vide Desatino, Inconsideracion. Rash,
foolish, or unadvised, vide Desatinado. Rashly, or unadvisedly, vide atroche y
much, Desatinadamente. a Rasour; such as barbers use, vide Navaja. to Rate or
rebuke, vide Reprehender, Reprochar. to Rate or to price, vide Tassar, Poner
precio. Rated, vide Tassado. a Rate or proportion, vide Tassa, Tassacion. a
Rat, vide Rata. to Ratify, vide Averiguar. Ratified, vide Averiguado.
Ratifiyng, vide Averiguamiento. a Ratification, idem. one that ratifieth or
confirms, vide Averiguador. a Rattle, vide Cascabel. to Rave, vide Devanear.
Rauing, vide Davaniamiento. to Raven, vide Devorar. a Raven, vide Cuervo. a
Rauenour, vide Devorador. Ravenous, vide Rapaz. Rauenously, vide Con capina. to
Rauishe, vide Forcar. Ravished, vide Forcada. a Rauisher, vide Forcador.
Rauishing, vide Estrupo. to be Raw stomacked, vide Ahitarse. Raw stomacked,
vide Ahitado. Rawnes of stomach, vide Ahito. Raw, vide Crudo. Rawnes, vide
Crudeza. Rawly, vide Crudamente.
R E
to Reach unto, v. Alcancar. Reached unto, v. Alcancado. one that reaches
unto, vide El que alcanca. a Reaching unto, vide Alcance. to Read, v. Leer.
Read, v. Leydo. a Reader, v. El que lee. a public Reader in the university,
vide Catredatito. a Reading, vide Lecion. to be Ready at hand, vide Ser
aparejado. Readiness, v. Promptitud, Presteza. Ready at hand; vide Apique,
Apunto, Prompto. Readily, v. De presto, promptamente. Real, or that is
indeed, vide Realmente. a Realm, vide Reyno. a Reame of paper, v. Rezma,
Resma. to Reap, v. Segar. Reaped, v. Segado. a Reaper, v. Segador. Reaping,
vide Segadura, Siega. to Reason or dispute, v. Arguir, Racionar. a Reason, vide
Raciocina, Razon. a Reasoner, v. El que disputa. Reasoning, vide Raciocination,
Razonamiento. Reasonable, vide Racional, Razonable. Reasonably, v.
Razonablemente. to Rebate, v. Rebatir. Rebated, v. Rebatido. Rebating, v.
Rebatimiento. a Rebatement in an account, v. Rebatimiento de la cuenta.
Rebatoes, v. Arandela. a Rebecke, v. Rabel. to Rebel or rise-vp in rebellion,
v. Alcar, Rebelar. a Rebel, v. Rebelde. Rebelled, v. Rebelado. a Rebeller, v.
Rebelde. Rebellion, vide Rebelion. to Rebound, v. Resurtir. Rebounded, vide
Resurtido. a Rebound, v. Salto de pelota, Resurtimiento. Rebounding, vide
Resurtimiento. to Rebuke, v. Reprovar. a Rebuke, vide Reprovacion. Rebuked,
vide Reprovado. a Rebuker, vide El que reprueva. Rebuking, vide Reprovando. to
Recant, vide Renegar. a Recantation, vide Reniego. Recanting, vide Renegando. a
Recanter, vide Renegado. to Receive, vide Recevir, Recebir. Received, vide
Recebido. a Receauer, vide Receptor. Receiving, vide Receta. to be Rechlesse or
careless, vide Descuydar. Rechlesnes or carelessness, vide Descuydo,
Inadvertencia. Rechlesse or careldsse, vide Descuydado. Rechlesly or carelessly,
vide Descuydadamente. to Recite or rehearse, vide Recitar. I Recke not, vide No
se me da nada. to Reckon or count, vide Contar. to make a final Reckoning,
vide Rematar. a Reckoning, vide Cuento. a Reckoning or shot, vide Escote. to
Reclaim, vide Reclamar. Reclaimed, vide Reclamado. a Reclaiming, vide
Reclamacion. to Recognize, vide Reconocer. Recognisance, vide Reconocimiento.
to Recommend, vide Encomiendar, Recomendar. Recommended, v. Encomendado,
Recomendado. Recommendations, vide Encomiendas. Recommending, vide
Recomendacion. to Recompense or requite, vide Recompensar. a Recompense, vide
Recompensa. Recompensed, vide Recompensado. a Recompenser, v. El que
recompensa. to Reconcile, vide Reconciliar. Reconciled, vide Reconciliado. a
Reconciler, vide Reconciliador. Reconciling, vide Reconciliacion. to take to
Record, vide Tomar por testigo. to Record or register, vide Registrar. a
Recorder, or he that keeps records, vide Registro. an old Record, vide
Registro viejo. Records, vide Anales, Registros. a Recorder or flute, vide
Flauta. to Recover by law, vide Cobrar por pleyto. to Recover, vide Cobrar,
Recaudar, Recobrar. to Recover ones health, vide Arreziar de dolencia.
Recovered, vide Recabado, Recaudado, Recobrado. a Recovery, vide Cobro,
Cobranca, Recaudamiento, Recuperacion. a Recouerer, vide Recaudador,
Recobrador. to have Recourse, v. Tener recurso. to Recoile as a gunne will do,
vide Dar coces, Como arcabuz, Musquete, etc. Cocear. a Recoiling, vide Coz de
arcabuz, musquete, etc. to Recount, vide Recontar. Recounted, vide Recontado. a
Recounting, vide Relacion. to Recreate, vide Recrear. Recreated, vide Recreado.
Recreation, vide Recreacion. a Recusant, vide El que recusa. to become Red,
vide Bermejescer, Enruviar. to wax Red, vide Embermejecer. waxed Red, vide
Embermejecido. Red colored, vide Bermejo, Roxo. Reddish colored, vide
Bermejito, Rubicundo. Rednes, vide Bermejura. to die or make Red, vide
Enrroxar. died Red, vide Enrroxado. to Redeem, vide Desempen^ar, Redemir,
Rescatar. Redeemed, vide Desempen^ado, Redemido, Rescatado. a Redeemer, vide
Redemptor. Redemption, vide Redemcion. a Redeeming of a gage, v. Desempen^o. to
Redouble, vide Redoblar. Redoubled, vide Redoblado. to Redound, vide Redundar.
to Redress or reform, vide Reformar. Redressed, vide Reformado. a Redresser,
vide Reformador. a Redressing, vide Reformacion. to Reduce, vide Reduzir.
Reduced, vide Reduzido. a Reed or cane, vide Can^a. to Reedifie, vide
Reedificar. Reedified, vide Reedificado. Reedifying, vide Reedificacion. a
Reeke of hay or such like, v. Monton de heno. to Reeke or smoke, v. Bahear.
Reeking or moisture issuing out of a thing, vide Baho. to Reele or stagger,
vide Bambalear. to Reele yarne, vide Aspar. a Reele to reele yarne on, vide
A'spa. Reeled, vide Aspado. a Reeling of thread, vide Aspadura. a Reeremouse,
vide Murcielago. a Refection or repast, vide Refection. a Refectorie, vide
Refitorio. to Refell, vide Refutar. to Refer, vide Referir. to Refine, vide
Refinar. Refined, vide Refinado. to Reflect, vide Reflectar. a Reflection, vide
Reflexo, Reflecion. to Reform, vide Reformar. Reformed, vide Reformado.
Reformation, vide Reformacion. a reformer, vide Reformador. to Refrain or
bridle, vide Refrenar, Sofrenar. Refrained, vide Sofrenado, Refrenado. a
Refraining, vide Abstinencia, Refrenamiento. to Refresh v. Recrear, Refrescar.
Refreshed, v. Refrescado, Recreado. a Refresher, v. Refrescador, Recreador.
Refreshing, v. Recreacion, Refresco. a Refuge, or place of succor, vide
Refugio. to Refuse, v. Recusar, Rehusar. a Refusal, v. Rehusamiento. Refused,
v. Recusado, Rehusado. a Refuser, v. Recusador. Refusing, v. Recusacion. the
Refuse or dross of any thing, v. Escoria, Hez. to Regard or respect, v.
Acatar, Respectar, Respetar. Regard, v. Acatamiento, Respeto. Regarded, v.
Acatado. Regarding, vide Respeto. to Regenerate, v. Regenerar. Regenerated, v.
Regenerado. Regeneration, v. Regeneracion. a Regent, v. Regente. a Regiment,
vide Regimiento. a Region, v. Region. to Register, or enroll, v. Alistar,
Registrar. a Register, vide Registro, Empadronador. Registered or enrolled, v.
Alistado, Empadronado, Registrado. a Registring, vide Empadronamiento,
Alistamiento, Registro. the Register of a book, or small stringes to put
between the leaves of a book, v. Registro del libro. a Regrater, or huckster,
vide Regaton. Regular, v. Regular. to Rehearse or recite, v. Repetir, Recitar. a
Rehersall or rehearsing, vide Repeticion. Rehearsed, v. Repetido. Rehearsing, v.
Repeticion. to Reject or cast off, vide Desechar. Rejected, v. Desechado.
Rejecting, v. Desecho. to Reign or reign, v. Reynar. the Reins of the back,
vide Los lomos. to Reinforce, v. Reinforcar. Reinforced, vide Reforcado. to
Rejoice or be glad, v. Alegrar, Regozijar. a Reioicing, v. Regozijo. to Reise,
vide Raise. to Reiterate, or rehearse, v. Reyterar. a Relapse into sickness, v.
Relapso. to Relate, v. Relatar. Related, v. Relatado. a Relation, v. Relacion.
to Release or set at liberty, v. Soltar, Alargar, Libertar, Librar. Released,
vide Suelto, Libre, Alargado. a Releasing, vide Alargamiento, Libertad. to
Relent or wax soft, vide Relentecer. Relented, v. Relentecido. a Relenting, v.
Relento. Religion, v. Religion. Religious, v. Devoto, Religioso. Religiously,
v. Religiosamente. to Relieve, vide Relevar, Socorrer. a Relief, v. Socorro,
Alivio. Relieved, v. Relevado, Socorrido. a releeuing, v. Relevacion, Socorro,
Alivio. Relickes, v. Reliquias. a box of Relics, v. Relicario. to Rely, v.
Arrimar. Relied on, v. Arrimado. one that relieth, vide Arrimador. Relying, v.
Arrimadua. to Relinquish or leave, v. Dexar. to Relish or taste, v. Gustar. to
Remain or abide, v. Remanecer, Restar, Quedar. to Remedy, v. Remediar,
Socorrer. a Remedy, v. Remedio. past Remedy, vide Sin remedio. to Remember,
v. Membrar, Recordar, Remembrar. a Remembrance, v. Memoria, Memorial,
Recordacion, Remembranca. a Remembrancer, v. Recordador. Remembered, vide
Acordado, Remembrado. worthy of Remembrance, v. Memorable. to Remit, v.
Remetir. Remitted, v. Remitido. a Remission, vide Absolucion, Remission.
Remiss, v. Remisso. a Remnant or remainder, v. El Resto. Remorse of
conscience, vide Remordimiento. to Remove, vide Remover, Mudar. to Remove
with pain or much ado, vide Aballar. Removed, v. Removido, Mudado. a
Remoouing, v. Removimiento. to Remove a ship that was run on ground, v.
Desencallar. Remoouing of a ship that was run on ground, v. Desencaladura.
a ship Removed that was run on ground, vide Desencalado. to Render or restore,
v. Restituyr, Bolver. Rendered, v. Restituydo, Buelto. Rendering, v.
Restituendo, Bolviendo. to Renew, v. Renovar. Renewed, v. Renovado. a
Renewing, v. Renovacion. a Renewer, v. El que renueve. Rennet or running which
curdeth the milk, vide Quajo. Renown, v. Fama, Renombre. Renowned, v. Famoso.
to Renounce, v. Renunciar. Renouncing, v. Renunciacion. to Rense or wash
within, v. Enxaguar, Lavar. Rensed, v. Enxaguado. a Rensing, vide
Enxaguamiento, Lavamiento. to Rent or tear, vide Destrocar, Desgarrar. Rent,
vide Desgarrado, Destrocado. a Renter or tearer, v. Destrocador. a Renting, v.
Destroco, Desgarradura. to let or set for Rent, vide Rentar. Rent, or revenue,
vide Renta. to Repaie, vide Repagar. Repaiment, vide Repago. to Repair, or
amend, v, Redificar, Reparar. to Repair, or make repair to, vide to Come
unto. Repaired, vide Reedificado. a Repairer, v. Reparador, Reedificador. a
Repairing, v. Reparo, Reedificacion. a Repast, vide Repasto. to Repe, vide
Reap. to Repeal or revoke, v. Revocar. to Repeat or rehearse, v. Repetir. to
Repel, repulse, or pull back, v. Repeler, Apartar. Repelled, vide Repelido. a
Repeller, vide el que Repele. to Repent, vide Arrepentir. Repented, v.
Arrepentido. Repentance, vide Arrepentimiento. Repentant, vide Arrepentido. to
Repine, vide Embidiar. a Repining, vide Embidia. to Replenish, vide to Fill. to
Reply, vide Replicar. a Replying, vide Replica. to Report, vide Referir. it is
Reported, v. esta Referido. Report, vide Rumor. to take Repose or rest, v.
Reposar. Repose or rest, vide Reposo. to Repose, or put trust in, vide Confiar.
a Repositorie, or storehouse, vide Alholi. to Reprehend, reprove, or find
fault with, vide Reprehender, Increpar. Reprehended, v. Reprehendido. a
Reprehender, vide Reprehensor. Reprehending, v. Reprehendiendo. Reprehension,
v. Reprehension. to Represent, present, or bring in presence, vide Representar.
Represented, v. Representado. a Representing, v. Representacion. to Repress,
vide Repremir. Repressed, vide Repremido. a Reprobate, vide Reprobado. to
Reproach, or hit in the teeth, vide Reprochar, Dar en cara, caherir. Reproach, v.
Contumelia, Improperio, Reprocha, Roproche. Reproched, v. Afrentado,
Reprochado. Reproachful, vide Afrentoso, Contumelioso. Reprochfully, v.
Afrentosamente, con Reproach. a Reprocher, v. el que Afrenta, el que Reprocha.
to Reprove, v. Redarguir, Reprovar, Vituperar. Reproved, v. Increpado,
Reprovado, Redarguido. Reproof, vide Redarguimiento, Vituperio. to Repugne,
vide Repugnar. Repugnancie, v. Repugnancia. Repugnant, v. Repugnante. to
Repulse, or repel, vide Repeler. a Repulse, vide Repulso. to be of no
Reputation, vide Acevilarse. of small Reputation, v. Acevilado. Reputation,
vide Reputacion. to Request or require, v. Requerir, Requestar, Rogar. a
Request, v. Peticion, Requerimiento, Requesta, Ruego. Requested, vide
Requirido, Requestado, Rogado. a Requester, vide Rogador, Requiridor. to
Require, vide Request. Requisite, or necessary, v. Necessario, Requisito. to
Requite, or recompense, v. Recompensar, Satisfazer. Requited, vide
Recompensado. a Requital, v. Recompensacion. to Rere, vide Raise. the Rereward
of an army, vide Retaguardia. to Resalute, vide Resaludar. a Resalutation,
vide Resalutacion. a Rescript, vide Rescrito. to Resemble, vide Semejar.
Resemblance, vide Semejanca. Resembling, idem. to Reserve, vide Reservar,
Guardar. a Reservation, v. Reservacion. Reserved, vide Reservado. Reserving,
vide Reservando. to be Resident, vide Residir. Residencie, vide Residencia. the
Residue, vide Residuo, Resto. to Resign, or surrender, v. Resignar. Resigned,
vide Resignado. Resigning, vide Resignacion. to Resist, or repugne, v.
Contravenyr, Resistir. Resisted, v. Contravenido, Resistido. Resistance, v.
Resistencia. a Resister, v. el que Resist. Resisting, vide Resistendo. to
Reskew, vide Socorrer. Reskew, vide Socorro, Auxilio. Reskewed, vide Socorrido.
to Resolve, vide Determinar, Resolver. Resolved, vide Determinado, Resuelto. a
Resolution, vide Determinacion, Resolucion. a Resolute gentleman, vide
Cavallero determinado. Reasonable, vide Razonable. to Resort, vide Frequentar. a
Resorting, vide Frequentamiento. to Resound, vide Resonar. Resounding, vide
Resonancia. to Respect, vide Respetar, Acatar. a Respect, vide Respeto, Acato.
in Respect, vide en Respeto. Respected, v. Acatado, Respetado. to Respire, vide
Respirar. Respiration, vide Respiracion. Respite, vide Espacio. to Rest, vide
Descansar, Reposar. Rest, v. Descanso, Holgura, Holganca Reposo. a Rest for a
lance, vide Cuxa. a Rest in a song, vide Pausa. Rested, vide Reposado. a
Resting, vide Descanso, Reposo. Restles, v. sin Reposo, sin Descanso.
Restlesly, idem. to be Restie, vide Haronear. a Restie jade, v. Harona bestia.
Restitution, or restore, vide Restitucion. to Restore, v. Bolver, Restituir.
Restored, vide Restituido. a Restoring, vide Restitucion. to Restrain, vide
Restringir, Refrenar. Restrained, vide Restringido, Refrenado. a Restrainer,
vide El que restringe, or Refrena. a Restraining, vide Refrenamiento,
Restringimiento. Restraint, idem. Resurrection, vide Resurecion. a Retailor or
seller of wares by retaile, vide El que vende por menudo. to Retain, vide
Retener. Retained, vide Retenido. a Retainer, vide El que retiene. Retaining,
vide Retencion. to Retch the body with laziness, vide Enaspar el cuerpo,
Espererarse. a Retching, vide Esperezo. Retchlesse, vide Descuydado.
Retchlesly, vide Con descuydo. to Retire, vide Acoger, Retirar. one that
Retireth, vide Acogedor. a Retire, vide Retirada. Retired, vide Retirado. to
sound a Retraite, vide Tocar a retirar. a Retraite, vide Retirada. a Retraict
where to cast out the filth of a city, vide Almazen de suziedad. a Return,
vide Buelta. to Return, vide Revenir, Retornar. Returned, vide Retornado,
Revenido. to Reveal, vide Revelar. a Revelation, vide Revelacion. Revealed,
vide Revelado. a Reuealer, vide El que revela. one that can Reveal strangely,
vide Adivinador. Revealing, vide Revelando. Revenue or rent, vide Renta. to
Revenge, vide Vengar. a Revenge, vide Venganca. Revenged, vide Vengado. a
Revenger, vide Vengador. Revenging, vide Vengando. to Reuerberate, vide
Reverberar. to Reverence or do reverence unto, v. Acatar, Reverenciar.
Reverence, vide Acatamiento, Reverencia. Reverenced, vide Acatado,
Reverenciado. Reverent, vide Reverendo. Reverently, vide Con acato. to Reuew,
vide Reveer. Reuewed, v. Revisto. a Reuewing, v. Revista. to Reuie as a man
does at cards, vide Rebidar. a Reuie, vide Rebite. to Revile or rail, vide
Afear, Avellacar, Denostar. Reviled, vide Afeado, Denostado. a Reuiler, vide El
que afea, El que denuesta. Reuiling, vide Afeamiento, Denuesto. to Reuine, vide
Revibir, Resuscitar. Revived, vide Resuscitado. to be troubled with Reuine,
vide Romadizar. grieved with the Reume, vide Arromadizado. Reume, vide
Aromadizo, Romadizo, Reuma. Reumatike, vide Acadarrado. to Revoke or repeal,
vide Revocar. Revoked or repealed, vide Revocado. to Reuolue, v. Revolver.
Reuoluing, v. Rebolviendo. a Revolution or turning about, vide Revolucion. to
Reward or pay wages, vide Galardonar, Premiar, Remunerar. to Reward with
stipend, salarie or wages, vide Asalariar. a Reward for work, vide Galardon.
Rewarded with stipend, salarie or wages, vide Asalariado. Rewarded, vide
Remunerado. Rewarded for his labor, vide Galardonado. a Rewarder, vide El que
galardona. Rewarding, vide Remuneracion. Rewme, or reume, vide Reuma.
R H
Rhenish wine, vide Vino del Rin. the Rhene a river in Germany so called, vide
Rin. a Rhetorician, vide Retorico. Rhetoric, vide Oratoria, Retorica.
Rhetorically, vide Retoricalmente.
R I
a Rib, vide Costilla. Rice, vide Arroz. Rice pottage, vide Pottage. to be Rich
or wealthy, vide Estar haziendado or rico. Rich or wealthy, vide Opulento,
Rico, Haziendado. Riches, wealth or substance, vide Opulencia, Riqueza. Richly,
vide Ricamente. a Ricke of corn, vide Monton de grano. to Rid or dispatch,
vide Desembaracar. a Riddle or dark sentence, v. Enigma. to Ride, vide
Cavalgar, Andar a cavallo. to Ride with the legs trussed up, vide Cavalgar a la
gineta. to Ride with the legs at large, vide Cavalgar a la brida. a Riding,
vide Cavalgadura. Ridiculous, vide Reyble. to make Ridges, vide Emelgar. making
of Ridges, vide Emelga. a Ridge, v. Sulca. Ridged or made into ridges, vide
Assulcado. the Ridge of an house, vide Cavallete de tejada. Rye corn, v.
Centeno. a Rye field, vide Centenal. Rifferaffe or confused, v. Confuso. to
Rigge a ship, vide Enxarciar. to make Right, or to make straight, vide
Enderecar. customarie Right, v. Juro. to be according to the customarie Right,
v. Ser de Juro. Right, v. Reto, Derecho. Right over against, v. Enfrente,
Frontero, de Cara. Rightly, v. Derechamente. Rightnes, vide Derechura.
Righteousness, v. Santidad. Righteous, Justa, Santo. Rightfully, v. Santamente.
to show Rigor, v. Mostrar rigor. Rigor, vide Rigor. Rigorous, vide Austero,
Rigoroso. Rigorous dealing, v. Fieros. Rigorously, v. Rigorosamente. a Rhyme or
falling miste, v. Llovizna. to make Rimes, vide Trobar. made in Rhyme, vide
Trobado. Rhyme or meeter, v, Rithmo, Troba. a Rimer, v. Trobador. the Rhyme of a
wheel, vide Rueda. the Rind or bark, vide Corteza de arbol. to Ring, v.
Tan^er las campanas. a Ringer, v. El que tan^e campanas. a Ringing, vide Doble
de campanas, Repique de Campanas. to put on a Ring, vide Meter anillo en dedo.
a Ring, v. Anillo. a sealing Ring, v. Anillo de Sello. a wedding Ring, v.
Anillo de casamiento. a Ring of a door, v. Aldava, or Aldaba, Anillo de la
puerta. eare-Rings, v. Arracadas. an ear Ring, v. carcillo. an iron ring, v.
Argolla. a little iron Ring, v. Agollica. the Ring finger, vide Dedo de
coracon. a Ring-worne, or tetter, v. Empeyne, Sarampion. full of Ringwormes, v.
Empeynoso. to Rinse, v. Enxaguar. Rinsed, v. Enxaguado. a Rinsing, v.
Enxaguadura. Riot, v. Prodigalidad. to be given to Riot, or live riotously,
vide Ser prodigo. Riotousnes, v. Prodigalidad. Riotously, vide Prodigalmente.
Ripe, v. Maduro. to make Ripe, v. Madurar. Ripely, v. Maduramente. Ripenes, v.
Madureza. to Rippe that is sown, v. Descoser. Ripped, v. Descosido. to Rise
up, vide Levantar. to Rise or come of any thing, vide Venir. to Rise up
against, vide Rebelar, Levantar. to Rise in rebellion, vide Alcar. to Rise or
get up before, or by day break, vide Madrugar. early Risen, v. Madrugado.
Risen, v. Levantado. a Rising, v. Levantamiento. a Rite or custom, vide Rito;
Ceremonia. a Rival or fellow lover, v. Combleco, Combleca, Competidor,
Competidora. a River, v. Rio. a maine River, vide Caudaloso rio. the mouth of a
River, v. Ria. the bank of a River, v. Ribera. a little River or running
brook, v. Arroyo, Arroyuelo.
R O
a Roabucke, vide Cabronzillo montes. a Roarer, v. Bramador. Roaring, vide
Bramido. to Roar or rore, vide Bramar, Rebramar. Roaring, v. Rebramiento. to
Rob or spoil, v. Robar. to Rob by the way, v. Saltear. Robbed, v. Robado.
a Robbing by the way, v. Salteada. a Robber by the way, v. Salteador. a Robber
or thief, v. Ladron. a Robber by sea, v. Cossario. a Robber by night, v.
Ladron. a Robbery, vide Ladronicio. Robin goodfellowe, v. Trasgo de casa,
Duende de casa. a Robin redbrest, v. Petiroxo. a Rochet or surplice, vide
Roquete. a Rock, v. Arracife, Piedra, Pen^asco, Pen^a, Escollo. to Rock the
cradle, v. Brisar la cuna. a little Rock, v. Pen^ascola. a Rockie place, v.
Pen^ascoso, Pen^ascal. a Rock or distaffe, v. Huso. Rocket an herb, vide
Eringio. a Rod, v. Acote. to Rod a wall, v. Ripar la pared. a Rode or
station for ships, v. Puerto. a Roebucke, v. Corza. Rogation or gange week, v.
Ledanias de Mayo. to Rogue or wander about, v. Vagar el mundo, or Andar
vagamundo. a Rogue, vide Vagamundo. a Roguing, v. Andando, Vagando. Royal
authority, vide Authoridad real. Royal, vide Real. Roially, vide Realmente.
to Roll vide Arrollar, Embolver. Rolled, vide Embuelto, Arrollado. a Roller, v.
Arrollador, Colun^a, Rolliza. Rolling or wrapping up, vide Embolvimiento. a
Roll or catalogue, vide Cathalago. a Roll for women's heads, vide Rodete. a Roll
that is wound up, vide Rolla, Rollon. to make a Roof, vide Hazer techo. the
top of a Roof, v. Cavallete. a Roof or covering of an house, vide Techo. a
flat Roof covered with lead or plaster, vide Acotea. the Roof of the mouth,
v. Paladar. the Rooke at chesse, v. Roque. to make Room, vide Hazer lugar.
Room, v. Lugar. a Rooke, vide Corneja. to take Root, v. Arraygar. to pull up
by the Roots, vide Arrancar, Desraigar. pulled up by the Roots, vide
Desraigado. pulling up by the Roots, vide Desraigamiento. taking Root, vide
Arragadura. a Root, v. Rayz. Rooted, v. Arraygado. to Root as a swine, vide
Hocar, Hocicar. a Rope or cord, v. Soga. a Rope maker, v. Soguero. a cable
Rope, v. Cabla, Amarra. a Rope to towe a boat, vide Serga. one that toweth a boat with a Rope, vide Siguero. a Rope of garlic, v. Cobre de ajos. a Rope of
onions, v. Cobre de cebollas, Horca de cebollas. to Rore, howl, or yell out,
vide Aullar, Bramar. Roaring, vide Bramido. a Rose, v. Rosa. a bank of Roses,
v. Rosal. Rose colored, v. Rosada. a damask Rose, vide Rosa de Alexandria. a
white Rose, v. Rosa blanca. a red Rose, v Rosa Castellana. a Rose bud, v. Boton
de Rosa. a Rose garland, v. Guirnalda de Rosas. Rose water, v. A'gua rosada.
Rosine, v. Resina. full of Rosine, v. Resinoso. to Rospe, v. Regoldar. Rosping,
v. Regueldo. to Roste, v. Assar. Roasted, v. Assado. a Rosting, v. Assando. a
Rotchet or rochet, v. Roquete. to Rot, putrify or wax rotten, v. Empodrecer.
Rotten, v. Podrido. Rottennes, v. Podre, Putrefaction. Rotten wood, v. Len^a
podrida. Rotting, v. Podrimiento. Rough or bristly, v. Erizado. to make Round
or bring round together, v. Redondear. to turn Round, v. Virar, Birar. Round,
v. Redondo, Rollizo. to go the Round, v. Rondar. the Round of a watch, v
Ronda. a gentleman of the Round, vide El que ronda. Roundnes, v. Redondez.
Roundly, v. Redundamente. Round about, v. Alrededor, Enderedor, Entorno. a
Round lay, v. Redondillo. a Rouste, v. Gallinero. to Route in the sleep, v.
Roncar. a Routing, v. Roncadura. a Rowte or company, v. Caterva. to Row, v.
Bogar, Remar. Rowed, v. Bogado, Remado. a Rower, v. Bogador. Rowing, v.
Remadura. a Rower, v. Remador. a Rowell of a spur, v. Rodaja. Royal or
royal, v. Real.
R V
Rubarbe, v. Ruypontico. to Rub, v. Fregar, Frotar. to Rub again, v.
Refregar. to Rub one against the other, v. Ludir. Rubbed, v. Fregado,
Frotado. Rubbing, v. Fregadura, Frotamiento. Rubble or rubbish, v. Ripia. a
Rubie or precious stone, v. Rubi. to wax Ruddie or somewhat red, vide Pararse
colorado. Ruddie, v. Poco colorado. a Rudder or helm of a ship, v. Governalle,
Timon. Ruddle to mark sheep, vide Almagra, or Almagre. to be Rude, v. Ser
tosco, Rudo, Rustico, cafio. Rude, v. Campestre, cafio, Rudo, Rustico. Rude of
speech, v. Torpe de lengua. somewhat Rude, v. Rudillo. Rudely, v. Con rudeza.
Rudenes, v. Rudeza. a Rudiment, v. Rudimiento. Rue or herbegrace, v. Ruda. to
Rue, repent or be sorry for, vide Arrepentir. Ruftes, v. Cuellos, Pun^os. a
Ruff band, vide Cuello de Lechuguilla. to play the Ruffian, v. Arrufianarse:
become a Ruffian, v. Arrufianado. a Ruffian, v. Gayon, Rufian. to Ruffle or
frizle, v. Enrrizar. Rugged or rough, v. Barrancoso, Escambroso. a Rugge or
mantell, v. Bernia. an Irish Rugge, v. Bernia. a Rugge gown, v. Ropon. to be
Ruinous or to bring to ruin, vide Arruynar. Ruinated, vide Arruynado. Ruinous,
vide Caedizo. Ruin, v. Ruina. Ruinously, vide Con ruyna. to Rule or govern,
v. Ensen^orear, Regir, Governar. to Rule by line or rule, vide Reglar. Ruled
so, vide Reglado. to Rule or keep under, vide Ensen^orear. Ruled out or
directed, vide Enivelado. to Rule out by line, vide Enivelar. Rule or dominion,
vide Sen^orio. a Ruler or governor, v. Regidor. a Rule or law, vide Canon, or
Regla. according to Rule, vide Regularmente. a carpenters or masons Rule, vide
Regla. to Rumble or make a noise, v. Hazer ruydo. a Rumbling, vide Ruydo. a
Rumor, vide Rumor, Ruydo. the Rumpe, vide Rabadilla, Colilla. a Rundle or
circle, vide Circulo. a Runnagate, v. Fugitivo, Huydizo. a Runnawaie, v.
Fugitivo, Huydor. to Run, vide Correr. to Run away as fast as one can, v.
Atodo correr huyr. to Run from, vide Huyr. to Run out, vide Escurrir. to
Run headlong, vide Auentar. to Run at the ringe, v. Correr sortija. to
Run up and down, hither and thither, Correr aca y alla. a Runner, vide
Corredor. a Running, vide Corrimiento. Running headlong, vide Aventamiento. a
Running sore or impostume, vide Postema, Carbonco. to Run on ground as a
ship, vide Encallar. Run on ground, vide Encallado. Running on ground, vide
Encalladura. a Running water, vide A'gua corriente. Rural or rusticall, vide
Rustico, Rudo, Tosco. a Rush, vide Junco. to Rush in or upon, vide Abarrajarse.
to strewe Rushes, vide Esparzir juncias. a place of Rushes, vide Juncal. full
of Rushes, vide Juncoso. a hard Rush, vide Junco marino. the Rush whereof the
weeks of watchng candles be made, vide Juncos de que hazen pavilas de vela. to
Rust, vide Orinecer, Amohecer. Rust, vide Orin, Moho. Rust of copper, vide
Cardenillo que se haze de cobre. Rust of brass, vide Cardenillo, Verderame.
Rustie, vide Oriniento. to be Rustie, vide Orinecerse, Amohecerse. Rusticitie,
vide Rusticidad. a Rusticall fellow, v. Paparo, Rustico, Tosco. Rusticall, v.
Campestre, cafio, Rustico, Paparo. Rustically, vide Rusticamente, Toscamente.
to Rustle, or make a noise or rustling, v. hazer ruydo. a Rustling, vide Ruydo.
a Ruther, vide Rudder.
R Y
Ryce, or Rice, vide Arroz. Rye, vide Centeno. Rye bread, v. Pan de centeno.
Ripe, or ripe, vide Maduro.
S
the Sabbath, vide Sabado. a Sabell, or Scythian marten, vide cebellinas
martas. a Sachell, vide Escarcela. Sacietie, vide Hartura. to Sack, or waste
countries, vide Saquear, Sacomanear. Sacked, vide Saqueado, Sacomaneado. a
Sacker, vide Saqueador, Sacomaneador. Sacking or spoiling, vide Saco, Sacomano.
a Sack, vide Costal, Saco, Quilma. a little Sack, vide Saquillo, Barjuleta.
the mouth of a Sack, vide la boca de saco. put in a Sack, vide Puesto en
saco, or Costal. Sack, a wine that comes out of Spain, v. Vino blanco. a
Sacke-but, vide Sacabuche. Sackloth, vide Xerga. a Sacrament, vide Sacramento.
the Sacrament, of the Lords supper, v. Sacramento del altar, or Eucaristia.
Sacred, vide Sagrado, Sacro. to Sacrifice, vide Sacrificar. a Sacrifice, vide
Mola, Sacrificio. a Sacrifice offered, vide Hostia. Sacrificed, vide
Sacrificado. a Sacrificer, vide Sacrificador. a Sacring bell, v. Esquila,
Esquilla, Esquilon. Sacrificing, v. Moladura, Sacrificio. a Sacrilegious
person, vide Sacrilego. Sacrilege, vide Sacrilegia. to be Sad and pensive, v.
Entristecer. become Sad, vide Entristecido. Sad or heavy, vide Triste. Sadly,
vide Tristemente. Sadness, v. Entristecimiento, Tristeza. to Saddle, vide
Ensillar. a Saddle, vide Silla. a Saddle tree, vide Acitara de silla, Fuste de
silla. the pummell of a Saddle, vide Arcon, Arzon. a packe-Saddle, v. Albarda,
or Alvarda. sadled with a packe-Saddle, vide Albardado, or Alvardado. Sadled,
vide Esillado. a Sadler, vide Sillero. Safeconduct, vide Salvo conducto. a
letter of Safeconduct, vide Salvo conducto. Safeguard, vide Salva guardia. to
make Safe, vide Segurar. whole and Safe, vide Seguro, Sano. Safely, v.
Salvamente, Seguramente. Saftie, vide Seguridad. a place of Safety, vide Lugar
seguro. Saffron, vide Acafran, flor de Acafran. dressed with Saffron, vide
Acafranado. to dress Saffron, vide Acafranar. wild bastard Saffron, v. Cardo
huso. to be Sage or wise, vide ser Sabio y Reposado. Sage, vide Sabio, Anciano.
Sagely, vide Sabiamente. to Say, vide Dezir. Say on, vide Di. Said, vide
Dicho. a Saying, vide Diccion, or Dicion, Dicho, Parola. to Say, or taste, v.
Gustar. a Say, or proof, vide Prueva. Say, or thin silk cloth, v. Sarga.
to Sail, vide Navegar. the Sail of a ship, v. Bela, or Vela. to Sail with a
side wind, vide Andar a orca. to Sail with a ready direct wind, vide Andar
en popa. to strike Sail, vide Amaynar. stricken Sail, vide Amaynado. the fore
Sail, v. Vela de trinquete. the maine Sail, vide Vela mayor, Vela maestra.
the misne Sail, v. Vela mezana. Sailed, vide Navegado. a Sailer, vide
Navegante, Marinero. Sailing, vide Navegacion. a Saint, vide un Santo. a Saints
bell, v. Esquileta. for my Sake, vide Por amor de mi. a Saker, or piece of
ordinance so called, vide Sacre. Also a hawke called a Sacre. a Saker, a hawke
so called, v. Aguila negra, Sacre. a Salade or headpiece, vide celada- a
Salamander, vide Salamanqueza, Salamandra. a Salarie or wages, vide Partido,
Salario. to set any thing to Sale, or sell, vide Almonedar. open Sale or
outcrie, vide Almoneda. a Sallet of herbs, vide Ensalada. a little Sallet, v.
Ensaladilla. to Sallie out, vide Salir. Sallying, vide Salida. a Salmon, vide
Salmon. to Salt, vide Cecinar, Salar. Salt, vide Sal. Salt liquor or brine,
vide Salmuera. a grain of Salt, v, Grano de sal. very Salt, vide muy Salado.
Salted, v. Cecinado, Salado. a Salter, vide Salinero. one that Salteth flesh,
v. Acecinador. Salting, v. Saladura, Cecinadura. a Salt-pit, vide Salina. a
Salt-maker, vide Salinero. a Salt-seller, vide Salero. Salt-peeter, vide
Alatron, Salitre. a place where Salt-peeter is dug or made, vide Salitral.
Salvation, vide Salvacion. a Salve, or plaster, v. Emplastro. Salve for the
lips, vide Cerillas, Mudas. to Salute, vide Saludar. Salutation, vide Salva,
Salutacion. Saluted, vide Saludado. a Saluter, vide el que Saluda. Saluting,
vide Salutacion, Salva. the Same, vide El mesmo, El mismo. the very Same, vide
El mesmo, or El mismo. Sampire, vide Hinojo marino, Perejil de la mar. to set a
Sample in writing, vide Dar materia. to Sanctify, vide Santificar.
Sanctification, vide Santificacion. Sanctified, vide Santifica^ a Sanctifier,
vide Santificador. Sanctity, v. Holiness, v. Sanctidad. a Sanctuary or place
of refuge, vide Asylo, Sagrario, Sanctuario. the privilege of the Sanctuary;
v. Privilegio de Segrario. to load with Sand or gravel or ballasse a ship,
vide Lastrar la nave. balassed with Sand or gravel, vide Lastre. Sand or
gravel, v. Arena. a Sand pit, v. Arenal. full of Sand, v. Arenoso. a Sand
box, v. Salvadera. a Sandy place, v. Arenal. Sanguine, v. Sanguin^o. made
Sanguine, or sanguined as a rapier, vide Pavoneado. to Sanguine a rapier, v.
Pavonear. Sap, of a tree, v. cumo. full of Sap, v. Lleno de cumo. without Sap,
v. Sin cumo. Sapphire stone, v. Zafiro. Sapience, vide Wisdom. Sarcenet, v.
Cendal. a Sarse vide Sieue. a Sargeant, vide Alguazil. to Sarse, vide Sift, v.
carandar. a Sachell, vide Sachell, vide Escarcela. Satterdaie, v. Sabado. to
Satiate, vide Satisfy, vide Saciar, Hartar. Satietie, v. Hartura. to make
Satisfaction, or to satisfy, v. Satisfazer, Pagar, Recompensar. to Satisfy,
idem. Satisfaction, vide Descuento, Satisfacion. to Satisfy or satiate, v.
Hartar, Saciar. Satisfied or filled, v. Saciado, Harto. Satisfying, v.
Saciamiento, Hartura. a Satin garment, vide Vestido de Raso. a Satyr or
nipping kind of poesy, vide Satyra. a Satyr or wild God of the wood, vide
Satyro. Savage or wild, v. Salvage Salvaje, or Silvestre. to make Savage, vide
Hazer, Salvaje, or Silvestre. Sauagely, v. Como Salvaje. Sauce, v. Sause, v.
Salsa. to Save or defend, vide Salvar, Defender. Saved, v. Defendido, Salvado.
god Save you, vide Dios os guarde. a Savior, v. Salvador. a Saving, v.
Salvacion. Saving that, v. Salvo aquel. Sauingly, vide Sparingly, vide
Escassamente. Sauine, v. Sabina, Savina. to Savor or smell, v. Saborear. a
Savor, vide Resavio, Sabor, Savor. Sauourie, v. Sabroso. Sauourily, v.
Sabrosamente. a Sausage or ising made of porke, vide Salchicha. to Sause, vide
Mojar en salsa. Sause, vide Salsa. Saused, v. Mojado en Salsa. a Sausing, vide
Mojadura en salsa. a Sauser, v. Platillo, Salsereta, Balsero. Sausines, v.
Presuncion. Sausie, v. Presuntuoso. Sausilie, v. Presuntuosamente. to Saw, v.
Aserrar. a Saw, vide Sierra. Sawed, vide Aserrado. a Sawyer, v. Aserrador.
Sawing, v. Aserradura. Sawen, v. Aserrado. to be Sawte as a bitch when she
desires the dog, vide Estar cachonda la perra. a Saying, v. Dicho.
S C
to be full of Scabs, vide Estar sarnoso. to heal of Scabs, vide Curar la
sarna. Scabbed or scauld, v. Sarnoso. a Scab, vide Sarna. a Scaberd, or sheath,
v. Vayna. to draw out of the Scaberd, vide Desvaynar. drawn out of the
Scaberd, vide Desvaynado. drawing out of the Scaberd, v. Desvaynadura. Scabiose
an herb, v. Escabiosa. a Scaffolde, vide Cadahalso, Andamio. to Scalde, v.
Escaldar. Scalded, v. Escaldado. Scalding, v. Escaldadura. Scaling by ladder,
v. Escalada. to Scale by a ladder, etc. v. Escalar. a Scaler, v. Escalador. to
Scale a fish, vide Escamar, Esquamar. Scaly, vide Escamoso. a Scale of a fish,
vide Escama, Esquama. a pair of Scales, vide Balance. a Scallion, or little
onyon, v. Ascalonia cebolla. Scant, vide Scarce. to Escape, or Escape, v.
Escapar. to be Scarce or scant, v. Ser escasso y falto. Scarcenes, scantnes, or
scarcity, v. Falta, Escasseza. Scarce or scant, v. Escasso, Falto. Scarcely,
v. Apenas. a Scarf, vide Toca de seda y Tafetan. a Scarlet gown, vide Ropa de
escarlata. Scarlet, vide Escarlatin. araied in Scarlet, vide Vestido en
escarlata. a Scarre, vide Cicatrizo. to Scarre the face, vide Harpar. a Scarred
face, vide Harpada cara. to heal to a Scarre, v. Cicatrizar. to Scarre or
fear away, vide Escarmentar. Scarred, v. Escarmentado. Scarring, v.
Escarmiento. a Scar-crowe set to scarre crows from corn, v. Espantajo. to
Scarifie, v. Jassar. a Scarifier, v. Jassador. Scarifying, v. Jassadura. a
Scate fish, v. Lixa. to Scatter and spread here and there, v. Derramar,
Dissipar, Esparzir. Scattered, v. Derramado, Dissipado. a Scattering, v.
Derramamiento, Dissipacion, Esparzimiento. Scatteringly, v. Derramadamente,
Esparzidamente. a Scatterer, v. Esparzidor, Dissipador. a Scedule, v. Cedula. a
Scepter, v. Cetro. a Schism, v. Cisma, Division. Schismatike, v. Cismatico.
Schismatic, v. Chismero, Cismero. a School, v. Escuela. a Schoolemaister,
v. Maestre-Escuela. a Schoolemistres, v. La Amiga, La maestra. a School
fellow, v. Condiscipulo. a Scholar, v. Discipulo. the Sciatica, v. ceatica.
Science, art and knowledge, vide Sciencia. Sciences, called the liberal
sciences, v, Las arts liberales. Grammar, v. Gramatica. Logic, v. Logica,
Dialectica. Rhetoric, v. Retorica. Music, v. Musica. Arithmeticke, v.
Arithmetica. Geometry, v. Geometria. Astronomy, v. Astronomia. to Sclaunder
or backbite, v. Calumniar, Maldezir. Sclaundered, v. Calumniado. a Sclaunderer,
v. Calumniador. a Sclaundering, v. Calumnia. a Sclaunder, v. Calumnia.
Sclaunderously, v. Con calumnia. to Scoff, v. Motejar, Mofar. a Scoff, v.
Mofa. a Scoffer, v. Mofador. Scoffing, v. Mofa. Scoffingly, v. Con mofa. to
Scolde, v. Ren^ir como berceras. Scolding, v. Rin^a. Scoldingly, v. Con rin^a.
a Scommer or skimmer, v. Cuchara. a Sconce or lantern, v. Lanterna. a Scoope
for corn, v. Pala. to Scorch, v. Aburar. to Scorch or sindge with fire, v.
Aburar. Scorched with fire, v. Aburado. a Score, v. Taja. to Scorn, v.
Escarnecer. a Scorn, v. Escarnio. Scorned, v. Escarnido, Escarnecido. a
Scorner, vide Escarnidor, Escarnescidor. Scorning, v. Escarnecimiento,
Escarnio. Scornful, vide Lleno de escarnio. Scornfully, v. Con escarnio. a
Scorpion, vide Alacran, Escorpion. that goes Scotfree, vide El que no escota.
a Scottish man, vide Escoces. a Scouell or maulkin, vide Barredera. the Scoupe
of a water wheel, v. Arcaduz. a Scouper hole, vide Escoperol. to Scour or
cleanse, vide Mondar, Limpiar. Scoured, vide Mondado. a Scourer, vide Mondador.
a Scouring, vide Mondadura. to Scourge, vide Acotar. a Scourge, vide Correa,
Acote. Scourging, vide Acotamiento. a Scoute, vide Escucha, Espia. to serve as
a Scoute, v. Espiar. a Scrat, or he which is both male and female, vide
Hermophrodita. to Scrape, vide Escarvar. Scraped, vide Escarvado. a Scraper,
vide Escarvador. Scraping, vide Escarvadura. Scraps of victuals, vide Relieves,
Escamoches. to Scratch, vide Aran^ar, Rascar, Rascun^ar. a Scrateh, vide
Aran^o, Rascun^o. Scratched, v. Aran^ado, Rascado, Rascun^ado. a Scratcher,
vide Aran^ador, Rascun^ador. Scratching, vide Aran^a, Aran^adura, Rascun^o.
that has the Scratches, v. Rascun^ado, Aran^ado. the Scratches in a horse,
vide Grieta. to Screake, vide Gritar, Bozear. a Screaking, vide Grita,
Gritaria, Bozeria, Barahunda. a Scribe, vide Scriba. to Scrible, vide
Escarvajear. a Scrip, vide curron, Mochila, Escarcela. the holy Scripture, vide
La sagrada Escritura. a Scriuener, vide Escrivano. Scriueners trade, vide
Escrivania. a Scroll or bill, vide Cedula. a Scruple or doubt, vide Escrupulo,
Duda. Scrupulous, vide Scrupuloso. Scrupulously, vide Con escrupulo. the Scull
of the head, vide Casco de la cabeca. a Scull or head piece, vide Casco. the
Scull of a dead body, v. Calavera, Calaverna. that wears a Scull, or head
piece, vide el que trae Casco. Scull of fishes, vide Cardume de pescado. a
Sculler, or boat so called, vide Barquillo. a Sculler, he that drives such a
boat, vide Barquero. a Scullion, v. Picaro de Cozina, Acacan. to Scum, vide
Espumar. Scum, vide Espuma. Scum of molten gold, vide Eschiuma de oro. Scum, or
froth, or foam of the sea, v. Espuma de la mar. full of Scum, v. Espumoso,
Espumajoso. Scummed, vide Espumado. a Scummer, vide Skimmer. the Scuppet of a
water wheel, vide Arcaduz. Scurffe in the head, vide Tin^a de cabeca. Scuruy,
which has the scurffe, or is full of scurffe, vide Tin^oso. Scurge, vide
Scourge. Scuruines, vide Tin^a. a Scutchion, or shield, v. Escudo.
S E
the Sea, vide Mar. to sail over the Sea, v. Navegar. the maine Sea, vide
Pielago. an arm of the Sea, v. Marina. belonging to the Sea, vide Marino,
Marisco. the Sea coast, v. la costa de la Mar. a Sea bank, vide Orilla de la
Mar, Marina. the Sea shore, idem. the flowing of the Sea, vide fluxo de Mar.
near the (...). Maritimo. the ebbing of the Sea, v. Refluxo. Seacoale, or
smithes coal, v. Turba. Seaholme, sea-holly, sea-huluer, vide Cardo, Corredor.
to Seal or sign, v. Asignar, Firmar, Rubricar. a Seal, vide Sello. a Seal
fish, vide Lobo marino. a Seal ring, v. Anillo de sello. Sealed, vide Sellado.
a Sealer, vide Sellador. a Sealing, vide Selladura. a Seame, vide Costura.
without Seame, v. sin Costura, Entero, Sano. to Seamerent, or rip, vide
Descoser. a Seamester, vide Labrandera. a Search or seeking, v. Busca. to
Search or seek, vide Ruscar, Inquirir. a diligent Search, v. Inquisicion. to
Search or sift out a matter, vide Pesquisar. Searched, vide Buscado. Searched
for, idem. a Searcher, vide Buscador, Inquisidor. a Searching tool, v.
Calador. Searching, vide Buscando. Searching or sifting out a matter, v.
Pesquisa. to Sear, or mark with an hot iron, v. Cauterizar. Seared, vide
Cauterizado. a Sear cloth, vide Encerado. a Searing iron, vide Boton. a Searce
or sieue, v. caranda. Searge, vide Sarga. to Season, as to season meat, vide
Sazonar. Seasoned, vide Sasonado. Seasoner, v. el que Sazone. Seasoning, vide
Sazonamiento. Season, or time convenient, vide Sazon. a Season day or time v.
Sazon. Seasoned, vide Sazonado. a Seasonable time, vide tiempo Sazonado. out of
Season, vide a Desoras. in good Season, vide en buen Tiempo. not in Season, v.
Fuera de Tiempo. in very good Season, v. a buen Tiempo. a Seat, vide Siento.
a Seat or bench, v. Banco. a judgment Seat, v. Estrados de juez. the Seat
of estate, for King, Prince, or Potentate, v. Estrado real, Dosel. to Second,
vide Segundar. the Second, vide Segundo. Secondly, vide Segundamente. Second,
or certain drink so called, made of Grapes after they be new pressed, vide
Aguapie. to keep Secret, or in secret, v. Guardar secreto. in Secret, vide
Privately. Secret, vide Secreto. kept in Secret, vide Callado, Guardado
secreto. a Secret, vide Secreto. Secret or unknown, v. Escondido, Secreto.
Secretly, or in secret, vide Calladamente, a Escondidas, Escondidamente,
Secretamente. a Secretary, vide Escrivano de camara, Secretario. a Sect, vide
Secta, Seta. Secular, vide Seglar. Security, v. Seguridad. Secure, vide
Seguro. Sedge, vide Carriza. to raise Sedition, vide Alborotar, Bolliciar.
Sedition, v. Alboroco, Alboroto, Bollicio. Seditious fellow, v. Alborotador,
Bollicioso. Seditiously, vide Alborotadamente. to Seduce, vide Sosacar,
Sossacar. Seduced, vide Sossacado. a Seducing, vide Sosacadura. to See, vide
Ver. to foresee, vide Verantes, Prevenir. Seen, vide Visto. a Seeing, vide
Miramiento. See, lo, behold, vide Mira. Seed, vide Simiente. a Seege about a
town, etc. v. Cerco. to Seek or seek for, vide Buscar. to Seek for
promotion, vide Procurar preheminencia. a Seeker, vide El que busca. Seeking,
vide Buscadura. Sought for, vide Requerido, Buscado. Seeing that, vide Viendo
que. to Seele a house, vide Enyessar. Seeled, vide Enyessado. Seeled work
about a house, vide caquicami. a Seeling, vide Enyessadura. to Seem, vide
Parecer. Seeming to be, vide Aparencia. it Seems, vide Parece. Seemed, vide
Parecido. it is Seemly, vide Es decente. it is not Seemly, vide No es
conveniente. Seemly, vide Conveniente, Decente. Seemelinesse, vide
Conveniencia, Decencia. to Seethe, vide Cozer. Seething, vide Cozedura. Sodden,
vide Cozido. to Seize upon, vide Apoderar. Seized or possessed of, vide
Apoderado. Seizing, Apoderamiento. Seldom, vide Pocas vezes, Ralas vezes.
Seldomnes, vide Raleza. I my Self, vide Yo mismo. to Sell or set to sale, vide
Vender, o poner en venta. to Sell for low price, vide Abaratar or Baratar. a
Seller, vide Vendedor. Selling, vide Venta. Sold, vide Vendido. Saleable, vide
Vendible. Saleably, vide Vendiblemente. the Semblance or likeness, vide
Semejanca. of an ill Semblance, vide Catadura fea. Semblable, vide Semejable.
Semblably, vide Semjamente. the Senate, vide Senado. a Senator, vide Senador.
a Senators son, vide Patricio. Senator like, vide Como Senador. to Sense,
vide Cense and Incense, vide Provocar, Irritar, Comover. Sense, vide Since.
Sendall, vide Cendal. to Send, vide Embiar. Sent, vide Embiado. one Sent on
messages, vide Embiadizo. Sent for, vide Embiar por el. a Sense, perceiving or
feeling, v. Sentimiento. Sensible, vide Sensato, Sensible. Senceles, v.
Insensato, Sin sentido. Sensuality, vide Sensualidad. Sensual or bent to
pleasure, vide Sensual. to Sent or savor, vide Smell. to give Sentence as a
judge does, vide Sentenciar. a Sentence, decree or judgment, v. Sentencia. a
Sentence given by an arbitratour, vide Alvedrio. a Sentence in any thing, vide
Dictado, Dictamen. a Sentinel that keeps watch, vide Centinela, Escucha.
Senuie seed whereof mustard is made, vide Mustaza. to Separate, vide Apartar,
Seperar, Desparzir. Separated, vide Seperado, Despartido, Desparzido.
Separating, vide Seperacion, Despartimiento, Desparzimiento. Separation, vide
Seperacion, Despartimiento, Desparzimiento. Separately, vide Seperadamente,
Despartidamente, Desparzidamente. September, vide Setiembre. Septer, vide
Setro. a Sepulcher, vide Sepulchro, Sepultura, Entierro, Luzillo. to Sequester,
vide Secrestar. Sequestration, vide Sercresto, Secrestacion. a Sergeant to
arrest, vide Alguazil. a Sergeant at arms, vide Macero. a Sergeant of a band,
vide Sergento. a Sergeant of a bands office, v. Sergentia. to make a Sermon,
vide Predicar. a Sermon, vide Sermon. a Serpent, vide Culebra, Sierpe,
Serpente. a water Serpent, vide Snake. to Serve or do service unto, v. Servir.
to Serve ill, vide Desservir. one that serves ill; vide Desservidor. ill
Served, vide Desservido. ill Service, vide Desservicio. to Serve or suffice,
vide Abastacer. a Servant, vide Serviente, Sierva, Siervo, Criado Served, vide
Servido. Service, vide Servicio. Serving, vide Serviendo. Servile, vide Servil.
Seruilely, vide Servilmente. a Service berrie, vide Serva. a Service tree, vide
Serval. to Set as a mast or tree, vide Arbolar. Set as a mast, vide Arbolado.
to Set banners on end, vide Arbolar vanderas. to Set a pike on end, vide
Arbolar una pica. to Set price upon any thing, vide Aballar. to Set at naught,
vide Aviltar. to Set upon on or invade, v. Acometer, Asaltar. to Set at
liberty, v. Poner en libertad, Librar, Libertrar. Set, vide Sentado. a Setter
to hire, vide El que arriende. a Setter upon, vide Acometedor. a Set or plant
of a tree or herbs, vide Plnta. a Setting on or invasion, v. Arremetimiento,
Cometimiento. a Setting forth or publishing, v. Publicacion. to Set on end,
v. Enarbolar. Set upright, v. Enarbolado. to Settle or place, v. Colocar.
Settled, vide Colocado. Settling, vide Colocacion. to settle as wine does or any
thin liquor, v. Asentar. Settled, vide Asentado. a Settling, v. Asiento. a
Settle, v. Poyo. a Settle about a bed, v. Roda piez. Set on the top, v.
Encombrado. to Set on the top, vide Encombrar. Seven, vide Siete. the Seventh,
v. Septimo. Seventy, v. Setenta. to Sever, or Separate, v. Apartar, Despegar,
Seperar, Dividir. Seueralnes, vide Particularidad. Severed, vide Apartado,
Despegado, Seperado. Severally, v. Apartadamente, Distinctamente,
Particularmente. Several, v. Distincto, Particular. Seuering, vide
Despegadura, Seperacion. Severity, vide Severidad, Austeridad. Severe, vide
Austero, Severo. very Severe, vide Muy austero, muy severo. Severely, vide
Conseveridad, con austeridad. to Sewer or taste before, vide Hazer salva. the
Sewer which tastes the meat, vide Gentilhombre de la boca. the gentleman
Sewer that goes before the meat to his Lord or masters table, v. Maestre
sala. Sewet or caul wherein the bowels are wrapped, v. Manteca, Gordura.
sweet Sewet, vide Manteca, Gordura. a Sewster or seamester, vide Labrandera. a
Sex, vide Sexo. a Sexten of a church, vide Campanero.
S H
a Shackle or fetter, vide Grillos. a Shadde, v. Alosa, celema, Sabalo, Saboga.
to Shadow in painting, v. Matizar. to Shadow, v. Alumbrar. Shadowed in
painting, v. Matizado. the Shadow of a picture, vide Matiz. Shadowed, vide
Alumbrado. a Shadowing, vide Alumbramiento. a Shadow, vide Sombra. a shadowie
place for extremity of heat, v. Sombraje, Sombrio. full of Shadows, vide
Sombroso. a Shafte or arrowe, v. Saeta, Flecha, Xara. Shagge hair, v. Peludo.
Shagged, idem. to Shake, v. Menear. to Shake off, vide Sacudir. Shaked off,
vide Sacudido. Shaking off, vide Sacududura. to Shake for fear, vide Tremblar
por miedo. to Shake the arms, vide Bracear. Shaken, vide Meneado. a Shaking,
v. Meneadura. Shakies, or Shackles, vide Grillos. a nut Shale, vide Cascara de
nuez. Shaled, v. Descascarado. a Shalowe water, or foorde, v. Vado. the
Shambles, or place where meat is sold, v. Carneceria. to Shame or dishonest,
vide Afrentar. Shame, vide Afrenta, Verguenca. Shamed, vide Afrentado,
Avergoncado. a Shamed, v. Avergoncado. Shamefastnes, vide Verguenca. Shamefast,
v. Verguencoso. Shamefastly, vide Con verguenca. Shameful, vide Vergoncoso. to
be Shameless, vide Desvergoncarse. Shameless, vide Descarado, Desvergoncado.
Shamelesnes, vide Desverguenca, Descaramiento. Shamelesly, v. Descaradamente,
Desvergoncadamente. Shamoise leather, v. Gamucas. the Shanke or leg from the
knee to the anckle, v. Pierna. small spindle Shankes, vide cancas. a Shape or
proportion, v. Bulto. a Sharde of an earthen pot or tile, vide Casco. a little
Sharde, v. Casco pequen^o. to Share or divide, vide Partir, Dividir. a Share or
portion, vide Partija, Division. a Share of a plough, vide Dental. Shared, vide
Partido, Dividido. a Sharer, vide Partidor. Sharewoort an herb, vide Bobas. a
man's Share or yard, vide Miembro viri. to Sharpen, or make sharp, vide
Afilar. Sharp, vide Agudo. Sharp witted, vide Agudo ingenio. Sharpened, vide
Afilado. Sharpenes of edge, vide Afiladura. Sharply, or wittily, vide
Agudamente. to wax Sharp or sower, vide Azedar. a Sharp or sower thing, vide
Azeda cosa. Sharpenes, vide Azedia. to speak Sharply, vide Hablar azedamente.
to be Sharp of wit, vide Ser agudo de ingenio. Sharp witted, v. Agudo.
Sharpenes of wit, v. Agudeza de ingenio. Sharply, or wittily, vide Agudamente.
Sharp or sower, vide Azedo, A'grio. Sharp or cruel, vide Cruel. Sharply or
severely, vide Con severidad. to Shave, vide Acepillar, Rapar. Shaued, vide
Acepillado rapado. Shaven, vide Rapado. one that Shaueth or smootheth, v.
Acepillador. a Shauing instrument, v. Escofina. Shauings, vide acepilladuras.
to Sheade v. Shed, vide Derramar, Verter. a Sheafe, vide Hace. a Sheafe of
wheat, vide Hace de trigo. a Sheafe of arrows, vide Hace de saetas. to Sheare
or clip, vide Tresquilar. a pair of Sheares, vide Tijeras, Tixeras. Sheared,
vide Tresquilado. Shorn, vide Tresquilado. a Shorn sheep, v. Oveja
tresquilada. a Shearer, v. Tresquilador. a Sheare man, vide Tondidor. to cut
very low with Sheares, vide Atusar. cut very low with Sheares, vide Atusado.
a pair of Sheares, v. Tigeras, Tijeras, Tixeras. a Sheate or coard in a ship
wherewith they hoise the sail, vide Escota. to Sheath or put into a sheath,
vide Envaynar. a Sheath, vide Vayna. a Sheath maker, vide Vaynero. Sheathed,
vide Envaynado. Sheathing, vide Envaynadura. to Shed or spill, vide Derramar,
Verter. Shed, vide Derramado, Vertido. Shedding, vide Derramamiento,
Vertimiento. a Shed or shelter, vide Tablero. She, vide Aquella, E'lla, E'ssa.
a Sheep, vide Oveja. a kind of wild Sheep in India shaped like a camel,
vide Camelote. a weather Sheep, v. Carnero capado. a Sheep or goats walk,
vide Can^ada. a flock of Sheep, vide Ganado, Ovejuno. a little Sheep, vide
Ovejuela. a Sheep skin, vide Pelleja de oveja. Sheep dung or turdles, v.
Cagarutas. pertaining to Sheep, vide Ovejuno. a Sheep cote, vide Majada. a
Sheepeherd, vide Ovejero, Pastor, Zagal. a Sheepeherds boy, vide Pastorcillo,
Pastorcico. a Sheeperend or head sheepeherd, v. Rabadan. a Sheeperdesse, vide
Pastora, Zagala. a Sheepeherds dog, vide Mastin. a Sheepeherds hook, vide
Cayado. a Sheepeherds cottage, vide Choca. a Sheet, vide Savana. to shrowde in
a Sheet, vide Mortajar. a little Sheet, vide Savanilla. a winding Sheet,
vide Mortaja. a Sheet of paper or parchment, vide Un Pliego de papel. a
Sheldrake, vide Catarran^a. a Shell, vide Cascara, Conchilla. to take out of
the Shell, vide Descaxar. taking out of the Shell, vide Descaxamiento. Shell
fish of any sort, vide Conchas de mar. a Shelfe in the sea, vide Arvacife.
Shelfes or heaps of sand in the sea, vide Baxas. a Shelter, vide Cavan^a. a
Sheriff, vide Alguazil mayor. a Sheriff of a city, vide Alguazil mayor de
ciudad. an under Sheriff, vide Lugarteniente del alguazil mayor. to Sheuer,
vide Shiuer. to make a Show, vide Hazer aparencia. to Show, vide Demonstrar,
Mostrar. a Show, vide Demonstracion. Showed, vide Demonstrado, Mostrado. a
Shewer, vide Demonstrador, Mostrador. Showing, v. Demonstracion, Muestra.
Shown, vide Mostrado. a Shide of wood, vide Raja de len^a. a Shield or target,
vide Adarga. a Shiere, vide Condado. to Shift or provide for, vide Proveer. to
Shift from place to place, vide Mudar y passar de lugar en lugar, Trocar
lugares. to Shift or change, vide Muda. Shift or slight, vide Artiman^a. to
Shift or get by crafty shift or other devises, vide Echar el cuervo. a Shift,
vide Artiman^a. a Shifter, vide Echacuervo. Shifting, vide Arteman^a. a
Shindle, vide Shingle. to Shine, glitter or glister bright, vide Reluzir,
Relumbrar, Refulgir. a Shining, vide Refulgencia, Reluzimiento, Relumbramiento.
Shiningly, vide Con refulgencia, Con relumbramiento. a Shingle or taley of
clefte wood, vide Raja de len^a. the Shinne, vide Espinilla. the Shinne bone,
vide Canilla. to take Ship, vide Embarcarse. a Ship, vide Nao, Nave, Navio.
the plat form of a Ship, vide Armozon de navios. Shipped, vide Embarcado. a
great Ship, or carricke, vide Carraca. a little Ship, bark, or pinnace, v.
Naveta Navichuelo, Navezilla. a light Ship, called a foiste, v. Fragata, Zabra,
Pataje. to ship, or lay on shipboord, vide Embarcar. Shipping, or putting into
ship, v. Embarcadura. a merchants ship, or ship for burden, vide Navio de
merchante. pertaining to a Ship, v. Naval. the master of a Ship, v. Maestre de
nao. a Ship boy, vide Grumete. a Ship-wracke, v. Naufragio. a Ship-boate, v.
Batel, or Vatel. the sides of a Ship, v. Quadernas. a Shire, or shier, v.
Condado. Shirle, vide Shrill. a Shirt, vide Camisa. a Shirt of hair, vide
Celicio. a little Shirt, vide Camiseta. a great Shirt, vide Camison. to Shite,
vide Cagar. Shitten, vide Cagado. a Shiter, vide Cagador. to be Shite, vide
Cagar. a weauers Shittle, or shuttle, vide Lancadera. a Shiue of bread, v.
Revanada de pan. to Shiuer or quake for cold or fear, v. Temblar, Tremer. a
Shiuering, v. Tembladura, Tremedura. a Shocke of wheat, vide Hacina de trigo.
to put on a Shoe, or shoes, vide Calcar los capatos. to pull off ones Shoes,
vide Descalcar los capatos. a high Shoo for the country, v. Abarca. a wooden
Shoe, idem. Shod, vide Calcado. Shod with high shoes, wooden shoes, or
startops, vide Abarcado. Shod as horses are, v. Herrado. to Shoe with iron, v.
Herrar. a Shoemaker, vide capatero. a Shoomakers last, v. Horna de capateros. a
Shooemakers tacknaile, v. Broca. the Shooemakers craft, or where they sell
shoes, vide capateria. a Shoe, vide capato. a horse Shoe, vide Herradura.
Shooing of a horse, vide Herramiento. a childs Shoe, v. capatilla. a Shoe
sole, v. Suela de capato. a corked Shoe or slipper, v. Chapino, Alcorque. a
high soaled Shoe, v. Chapin. a place where such Shoes or slippers be sold, v.
Chapineria. a blow with a Shoe or pantofle, v. Chapinazo. the upper leather of
a Shoe, v. Empen^a de capato. a Shooing horn, v. Calcador. a Shoale of fish,
vide Cardume. to Shoot, or cast forth, vide Echar fuera. a sure Shooter, or
good mark man, vide Certero. to Shoot an arrow out of a bow, v. Flechar,
Tirar vna flecha. to Shoot with a cross bow, vide Tirar con ballesta. the
shot of an arrow, v. Flechazo. to Shoot off ordinance, v. Disparar. to Shoot
through, vide Passar con saeta. a Shooter, v. Flechador, Flechero. to cut off
Shootes or young sprigs, vide Cortar tallos. a Shoot, sprig or young twig, v.
Tallo. a Shop, vide Tienda, Oficina. a Shop keeper, vide Tendero. a Shore, or
outward brinke, vide Orilla. a Shore or bank of the sea, v. Orilla de mar. to
come to Shore, v. Arribar. come to Shore, v. Arribado. a coming to Shore, vide
Arribada. to Shore or prop up, v. Apuntalar. a Shore or prop, vide Puntal.
Shored or propped up, v. Apuntalado. Shorn, vide Tresquilado. to Shorten, v.
Acortar, Abreviar. Short, vide Corte, Breve. Short witted, v. Corto de razones.
Shortened, vide Abreviado. Shortness, vide Cortedad, Brevedad. Shortly, v.
Brevemente. somewhat Short, v. Brevesito. very Shortly, vide muy en Breve, muy
Presto. to be Short, vide ser Breve. a Shot, or reckoning, vide Escote. a Shot
with a cross bow, v. Ballestazo. a Shouell or spade, vide Acada, Acadon. a
Shoulder, vide Hombro. upon the Shoulders, or back, vide A cuestas. to
Shoulder, vide Espaldar. a Shoulder blade, v. Espatula. to Shoute or make a
shoute and cry, v. Gritar, Bozear. a Shoute, vide Grita, Bozeria. Shouting,
vide Gritando, Bozeando. a great Shower of rain, vide Vna grande agua.
Showrie, rainie, or full of showers, v. Lluvioso. to Shred or to cut, vide
Revanar. a Shred, vide Revanada. a Shredding, v. Revanada. a Shred of cloth,
vide Chia, Nesga. to Shrike or squeake, v. Gritar. a Shriking, vide Grito,
Grita. to Shrink or pluck in, vide Encoger. Shrunk, vide Encogido. a
Shrinking, vide Encogimiento. to Shroude or to cover, vide Cubrir, Defender. to
Shroude himself under another man, vide Acaparrarse. a Shroude that a dead
body is wrapped in, vide Mortaja. Shrouded by another man, vide Acaparrado. one
that Shroudeth dead bodies, v. Mortajador. Shrouetide, vide Antruejo carnaval,
Carnastoliendas. Shrouetewsdaie, vide Carnastoliendas, Carnaval, Antruejo. a
Shrub, vide Mata, Bren^a, Maleza. a Shrubbie place, vide Bren^al, Maleza. to
Shuffle the Cards, vide Barrajar. to Shun or to avoid, vide Evitar,
Esquivar. Shunned, vide Evitado. Shunning, vide Evitamiento. to Shut, vide
Cerrar. to Shut up, vide Encerrar. to Shut in, vide Encerrar. Shut in, vide
Encerrado. Shutting in, vide Encerramiento. to shut out, vide Escluyr. Shut
out, vide Escluydo. a Shutting, vide Cerradura. a weauers Shuttle, vide
Lancadera.
S I
Sice on the dice, vide Seys en los dados. to be Sick, vide Estar malo, Estar
Enfermo, Estar doliente. to wax Sick, vide Adolecer, Enfermar. Sick, vide
Doliente, Enfermo, Malato. Sickness, vide Dolencia, Enfermedad. the falling
Sickness, vide Epilepsia. Sickly, vide Mal dispuesto, Malato. a Sickle wherewith
they reap, v. Hoce. a Side, vide Lado. the Side of a hill, vide Ladera,
Cuesta. one this Side, vide Aquende, a esta Banda, a esta Part. on the other
Side, vide de la otra part allende de la otra banda. Sidelong, vide Al Sesgo.
Side by side, vide Apar. on both Sides, vide de entrambas Parts. on every
Side, vide de cada Part. Sider, vide Cidra. to lay Siege to a town, vide
Cerc ar, Asediar. a Siege of a town, vide Asedio, Cerco. to raise a Siege,
vide Alcar campo, or Cerco, Descercar. the Siege raised, vide Descercado. one
that raises a Siege, vide el que Descerca. the raising of a Siege, vide
Descerco. to Sifte or searse meal, vide carandar, Cernir. Sifting of bran,
vide Cernidura. Sifted, vide Cernido. to Sighe, vide Sollocar, Sospirar. a
Sighe, vide Sospiro, Solloco. Sighing, vide Sospirando, Sollocando. Sight, vide
Vista. quick Sighted, v. Aguda vista. in the sight of the world, vide A vista
de todo el mundo. a Sign, v. Signo, Sen^al. to Signify, v. Significar.
Signification, v. Significacion. Signified, vide Significado. Signifying, vide
Significando. a Sign and seal, a wrighting, vide Firmar, Signar. a Sign or
token, vide Sen^a. a Sign in heaven, vide Signo. the twelve celestial signs,
v. Los doze signos del zodiaco. a Signed bill, vide Memorial, Firmado. a Signet
or seal in a ring, vide Sello de Anillo. to keep Silence, or to be silent,
vide Callar. kept Silent, vide Callado. Silence, vide Silencio. Silent, vide
Callado. Silently, v. Calladamente. Silk, vide Seda. a Silk weauer, vide
Texedor de seda. a Silkeman, v. Sedero. a Silk worm, vide Gusano de seda. a
Silken garment, vide Vestido de seda. Silken or of silk, vide De Seda. clothed
in Silk, vide Vestido de seda. a Syllable, vide Silaba. a Sillibub, vide
Quajada. a Silly poor wretch, v. Pobrezillo. a Sillogisme, vide Sillogismo.
to cover with Silver, or to silver over, v Argentar, Platear. Siluered or
covered with silver, v. Argentado, plateado. bals done over with silver, vide
Argentadas. Silver, vide Plata. a gilter with Silver, vide Argentador. a Silver
mine, vide Mina de plata. a Silver smith, vide Platero. a Similitude, vide
Similitud. a Simnell, bunne, or cracknell, vide Buen^ol. Simonie, vide Simonia.
a dealer with Simonie, v. Simoniaco. Simplicity, vide Senzilles, Simpleza,
Simplicidad. a poor Simple fellow, vide Simplezito. Simple, vide Cenzillo,
Senzillo. Simplenes, v. Simplicidad, Simpleza, Senzillez. Simply, v.
Simplemente. a Sinagogue, vide Sinagoga. a Sinagogue of the Jews, vide Aljama.
Since, vide Dende. Since that time, vide Dende entonces. Sincerity, vide
Pureza, Sinceridad. Sincere, vide Sincero. Sincerely, vide Puramente,
Sinceramente. to Sindge, vide Chamuscar. Sindged with fire, v. Chamusco,
Chamusquina. to Sing, vide Cantar. a Singer, vide Cantor. a Singing man, vide
Cantor. a Singing or song, vide Canto. a Song, v. Cancion, Canto. a Song well
sung together, vide Canto acordado. a Song book, v. Cancionero. a Singlenes,
v. Senziliez, Simplicidad. Single, vide Cenzillo, Senzillo. a Single man, vide
Soltero. a Single woman, vide Soltera. Singlely, v. Senzillamente. Singreene,
vide Sempreviva. Singularity, vide Singularidad. Singular, vide Singular.
Singularly, vide Singularmente. to Sink in the water, vide Hundirse. to Sink
to the bottom, vide Hundir. a Sink, vide Sentina. Sunk, vide Hundido.
Sinking to the bottom, vide Hundimiento. a Sink or gutter, v. Alban^ar,
Alvan^ar. to Sin, vide Pecar. Sin, vide Pecado. Sinned, vide Pecado. a
Sinner, vide Pecador. Sinning, vide Pecando. Sinful, vide Gran pecador, Lleno
de pecados. a Sinew, vide Nervio. a little Sinew, vide Nervezico. full of
Sinews, vide Nervoso. fullness of Sinews, vide Nervosidad. that has great
Sinews, vide Nervudo. Sir, vide Sen^or. a Sirrope, vide Xarave, Xarope.
Sirrope in olives, vide Alpechin de azeyte. Sisers, vide Tijeras, Tixeras. a
Sister, vide Ermana, Hermana. Sister like, vide Ermanable. Sisterhood, vide
Ermandad. to Sit, vide Sentar. to Sit on the ground, vide Arrellanar. to Sit on
his buttocks, vide Sentarse en cluclillas. a Sitting, vide Sentamiento. Sitten
on the ground, vide Arrellanado, a Sieth, vide Guadan^a. to Situate, vide
Situar. Situation, vide Sitio, Situacion. Situated, vide Situado. Situate, vide
Situado. a Sieue or scarce, vide caranda, Cedaco. a Sieue of hair to range
course meal, vide cedaco. a Sieue maker, vide cedacero. the Sixth, vide Sexto.
S K
a Skaffold, vide Barrera. a Skaine of thread, vide Madexa. a little Skaine,
vide Madexita. a Skallion, vide Escalona. a Skale, vide Scale. to Skarre away,
vide Amedrentar, Artemorizar, Espantar. Skarring or frighting, vide Espantajo,
Espanto, Temor. Skarred, vide Amedrentado, Artemorizado, Espantado. one that
Skarreth, vide El que espanta. a Skarre, vide Scarre. Skart, vide Scarce. a
Skatch or cratch, vide Muleta. the Sky, vide Firmamento. a Skiffe or small
boat, vide Bagel, Bajel or Vajel, Esquife. to be Skillful, vide Ser diestro.
Skillful, vide Diestro. Skilfully, vide Diestramente. a Skillet or posnet, vide
Cacolilla, Caldereta. to Skimme, vide Espumar. a Skimmer, vide Cuchara. Skumme,
vide Espuma. the Skin, vide Pellejo. the Skin over the skull, v. Paniculo. a
place where Skins are sold, vide Pellejeria. to wax hard Skinned, vide
Callecer. hard Skin, vide Callo. a Skin, vide Pellejo. the Skin or pill of a
thing, v. Holejo. hard Skinned, vide Calloso. to do over with Skin, v.
Empellejar. done over with Skin, v. Empellejado. a Skinner, v. Pellejero,
Pellizero. Skinking of drink, v. Escancia. to Skinke or fill drink, v.
Escanciar. a Skinker, v. Escanciador. to Skip or leap for joy, vide Saltar de
alegria. to Skip, v. Salto. a Skipper, v. El que salta. Skipping, v. Saltando.
to Skirmish, v. Escaramucar. a Skirmish, v. Escaramuca, Refriega. Skirmishing,
v. Escaramucando. Skirret roots, v. Chirivias. the Skirtes of a coat, v.
Faldamentos, Haldas. to draw the Skirtes of the clothes after him, v.
Haldear. one that wears clothes with long Skirts, v. Haldudo. to be Skittish
as beasts are, vide Ser Coxquilloso. Skittish, vide Coxquilloso. to Sklaunder,
vide to Sclaunder, Calumniar. to Sklise, v. Revanar. a Skoffe or taunt, v.
Baldon. to Skoffe, v. Baldonar. a Skoffer, v. Baldonador. Skoffed at, v.
Baldonado. to Skold, v. Scold. a Skonce, v. Lantern. a Skonce, a fortified
place, vide Fuerte. Skrewes or vices, v. Clavillas. a Skritchowie, vide Buho,
Lechuza. a Skull, v. Calavera or Calaverna. Skumme, v. Espuma.
S L
Slabbie, v. Bavososo. Slabbinesse of a way after the frost is thawed, v.
Bavaza. to Slack or loosen, v. Afloxar. Slack, vide Floxo. Slacked, v.
Afloxado. Slacking, v. Afloxando. Slacknes, v. Afloxadura. one that Slackeneth,
v. El que afloxa. Slackly, v. Floxamente. to Slaie or kill, v. Matar. Slain,
v. Muerto. a Slaier, v. Matador. a Slaying, v. Matanca. to Slake or quench, v.
Apagar. a Slatter, v. Tejador, Techador. a Slate, v. Teja, Tejado. to Slauer,
v. Bavear. Slauering much, v. Bavoso. Slauer or spittle, v. Bava. a Slave, v.
Esclavo. Slavery, vide Esclavitud, Servidumbre. Slauishly, v. Como esclavo. a
Slaughter, v. Matanca, Estrago. a Slaughter house, vide Matadero. Slander, v.
Calumnia. Slanderous, v. Calumnioso. Slay, v. Slaie. a smithes Sledge, vide
Macho de herrero. to Sleep, v. Dormir. a Sleeper, v. Dormillon. a Sleep, v.
Suen^o. Slept, v. Dormido. Sleepie, v. Adormido. a Sleeping place, v.
Dormitorio. Sleeping, v. Dormiendo. a Sleeue, v. Manga. Sleeued, v. Con mangas.
long Sleeued, v. Con mangas largas. Sleeuelesse, v. Sin mangas. a Slight,
shift, or deceit, v. Artiman^a. to wax Slender, v. Adelgazar. to make Slender
or small, v. Adelgazar. making slender or small, vide Adelgazamiento. Slender,
vide Delgado, Sutil. made Slender, v. Adelgazado. Slenderness, v. Delgadez,
Sotileza. Slenderly, v. Delgadamente. very Slenderly, v. Muy delgadamente. to
Slide, vide Deslizar. Sliding, vide Deslizando. a Sly or wily person, v.
Cauteloso. Slily, vide Cautelosamente. Slime, vide Cieno. Slimie, vide
Cienagoso. to Sling, or cast out of a sling, v. Tirar con honda. a Sling, vide
Honda. to Slip away, v. Descabullirse, Escabullir, Resbalar, Resualar.
Slipping, v. Escabullimiento. to draw in a Slip, vide Atraillar. drawn in a
Slip or fleash, vide Atraillado. a Slip or young branch, v. Tallo. a Slipper,
v. Pantuflo, Chinela. a pair of Slippers, v. un par de Pantuflos. that wears
Slippers, vide Calcado de Chinelas. Slippers to wear in the house, v.
Chinelas. to make Slipperie, vide Hazer lizo, or Desbaloso. a Slipperie place,
v. Deslizadero, Resbaladero. Slipperines, v. Deslizadura. Slipperie, v.
Lubrico, Resbaloso. to Slit, or cleave, v. Hender. to Slorie or make foul, v
Ensuziar. Sloth, or sloth, v. Pereza, Acidia. a Slouen, vide Suzio. Slouenly
apparalled, v. Suzio en el vestido. to be Slow, ser Lerdo. Slow or slack, v.
Lento, Lerdo. Slownes or slacknes, v. Pereza, Floxedad. Slowly, vide
Floxamente. to be Slothful, v. Emperezar, Haronear. to shake off Sloth, v.
Dezemperezar. shaking off Sloth, v. Desempereza. Sloth, v. Acidia, Haronia,
Pereza. Slothful, v. Floxo, Flozo, Perezoso. Slouthfully, vide Floxamente,
Perezosamente. Slouthfulnes, v. Floxedad, Pereza. to Slubber, vide Ensuziar. a
Sluice to let water in, v. Esclusa. a Sluggard, v. Dormilon, Perezoso. Sluggish,
v. Adormido, Peresozo. to Slumber, v. Dormitar. Slumbring, v. Dormitando. to be
Sluttish, v. ser Suzia. Sluttish, vide Suzia. Sluttishly, v. Suziamente. to
beray Sluttishly, v. Ensuziar. Sluttishnes, v. Ensuziamiento, Suziedad.
S M
to make Small, or little, v. Adelgazar. made Small, v. Achicado. making Small,
v. Achicadura. Small, vide Chico, Pequen^o. Smalnes, vide Pequen^ezo.
Smalledge, vide A'pio. to Smart, vide Escocer. Smarting, vide Escocimiento. to
Smell, vide Oler, dar olor. the sense of Smelling, v. Holfato, Olfato.
Smelling, vide Oliendo. a Smell, vide Olor. Smelled, vide Olido. a Smeller, v.
el que Huele. to Smile, v. Sonreir. a Smile, vide Sonriso. Smiling, vide
Sonreyendo. to Smite, vide to Strike. a Smith, vide Herrero. Smithes work, v.
Herreria. a gold Smith, v. Platero, Vrive. a silver Smith, v. Platero. an iron
Smith, v. Herrero. to Smoke, v. Ahumar, Humear. Smoke, v. Humo, Humareda.
Smoaked, v. Ahumado. Smoakings, v. Ahumadas. Smoakie, vide Ahumado, Humoso. a
funnell for Smoke, v. Humero. a Smock, vide Camisa de muger. to Smooth, vide
Acepillar, Alizar. Smoothed, v. Acepillado, Alizado. a Smoothing, vide
Alisadura, Acepilladura. to Smoother, vide Ahogar con humo. Smoothered, v.
Ahogado con humo. Smoothering, vide Ahogamiento con humo.
S N
a Snaffle, v. Bocado de freno. a Snaile, v. Caracol, or Bavosa. a young
Snaile, vide Caraconzillo. the shell of a Snaile, v. Carcolejo. a Snake, v.
Culebra. a little Snake, v. Culebrilla. to take in a Snare, v. Enlazar. to
deliver from a Snare, vide Desenhetrar. a Snare, vide Aran^uelo, Lazo. Snares
to catch birds in, v. Armandijas. Snared, vide Enlazado. Snaring, v.
Enlazadura. to Snarle, or gnarle like a dog, vide Gan^ir. Snarling like a
dog, vide Gan^ido. to Snatch, v. Apan^ar, Arrebatar. Snatched, v. Apan^ado,
Arrebatado. a Snatcher, vide Apan^ador, Arrebatador. Snatching, vide Apan^o,
Arrebatadura. Snatchingly, vide Arrebatadamente. Snat or sniuell, v. Moco. to
Sneese, vide Estornudar. Sneesing, v. Estornudo. Sneenell, or snat, v. Moco.
Snottie, or sneeuelly, vide Mocoso. to Snort, or route, vide Roncar. Snot, vide
Sneeuell, v. Moco. Snottie, v. Mocoso. to Snow v. Nievar. Snow driven small,
v. Escarcha. Snow, v. Nieve. a drifte of Snow, v. Nievada. Snowie, v.
Nievado. the Snowte of a ship, v. Espelon. a Snowte, v. Hocico. Snowted like a
hog, v. Hocudo. to Snuff of a candle, vide Espavillar. the Snuff of a
candle, vide Pavilo. Snuffers for a candle, v. Despaviladeras, or Tigeras de
espavilar. one that Snuffles in the nose, vide Gangoso.
S O
a Soale fish, vide Lenguado, Azedia. to Soale shoes, vide Echar suelas a los
capatos. So be it, v. Assisea, Amen. Soape, v. Xabon. to do with Soape, v.
Enxabonar. done with Soape, v. Enxabonado. to Sobbe, v. Sollocar. a Sobbing, v.
Solloco. Sobernes, or sobriety, v. Modestia. Sober, v. Modesto. Soberly, vide
Modestamente, Sobriamente. Society, or fellowship, v. Conversacion, Amistad.
Sociable, v. Conversable. a Socke, v. Escarpin. a woollen Socke, v. Peal.
Sodden, v. Cozido. Sodeine, vide Sudden. to make Soft, v. Ablandar,
Reblandecer. Softened, vide Ablandado. Soft, v. Blando. a Softner, vide
Ablandador. Softly or gently, v. Blandamente. to Soil or defile, v. Ensuziar,
Emporcar. Soiled, vide Ensuziado, Emporcado. Soil or land, vide Tierra.
Solace, v. Solaz, Holgura, Deleyte. to Solace, v. Solazar, Holgar. Sold, vide
sell. Soldier, v. Soldier. Sole or only, v. Solo. the Sole of the foot, vide
Planta de pie. the Sole of a shoe, v. Suela de capato. to Solemnize, v.
Celebrar, Solemnizar. Solemnized, v. Celebrado, Solemnizado. Solemnity, vide
Celebracion, Solenidad. Solemn, v. Solene. Solemnly, v. Solenemente. to
Solicit, v. Solicitar. Solicited, v. Solicitado. a Solicitour of law matters,
vide Pleytista. a Soliciting, v. Solicitacion. Solitarines, v. Soledad.
Solitary, v. Solitario. Solitarily, v. Consoledad. a Sollar or upper loft,
vide Entresuelo. Some, vide Alguno. Some body, v. Alguno. Some thing, v.
A'lgo. Some time, v. Alguna vez. Some what, v. Alguna cosa. Some whither, vide
En alguna part, en algun cabo. Summer, v. Estio, Verano. the post in a house
that the carpenters call the Summer, v. Can sobre que cargan vigas. to Sommon,
v. to Summon. Sondaie, v. Day. Sondrines or diversity, vide Diversidad.
Sondrie, v. Diverso. a Song or sonnet, v. Soneto, Canto. a Son, v. Hijo. a
Son in law, v. Antenado, Andado, Yerno. a Son in law of wife or husband
that is dead, v. Andado. the Son, or Sun, vide Sol. a Sonnet, v. Soneto.
Soote of a chimney, v. Hollin. to besmutch with Soote, vide Hollinar, Tizar.
besmutching with Soote, v. Hollinimiento. Sootie, v. Holliniento. Soothing, v.
Lisonja. to Sooth or flatter, v. Lisongear. a Soother, v. Lisongero. a
Soothsaier, vide Adevino. to Soothsay, v. Divine. Soothsaying, v. Adevinanca.
Soap, vide Xabon. sweet Soap, v. Xabon oleroso. to Soap, v. Xabonar. Soped, v.
Xabonado. a Soap maker, v. Xabonero. to Sop, v. Sopear. a Sop, v. Gaspacho,
Sopa. Sops made of honey, bread and water, vide Migas. Sorcerie, vide
Hechezeria, Encantamiento. a Sorcerer, vide Hechizero, Encantador. a
Sorceresse, vide Encantadora, Hechizera. Sore, v. Doloroso. a Sore, v. Dolor.
Sore or cruel, v. Cruel. to be Sorry or sorrowful, vide Ser triste, Ser
Apesarado. Sorowfully, v. Apesadaramente. Sorrow, v. Angustia, Pesar,
Pesadumbre, Congoxa, Dolor, Duelo, Entristecimento. Sorrowfully, vide
Dolorosamente. Sorrowful, v. Apesarado, Angustioso, Doloroso. to make
Sorrowful, vide Apesarar, Angustiar. a Sorrowing, vide Entristecimiento. made
sorrowful, vide Angustiado, Entristecido. Sorrel, an herb so called, v.
Agrelies, Azedera, Romaza, Acucia. in such Sort, v. De tal manera. a Sort or
kind, vide Suerte. Sothernewood, v. Lombriguera. a Sotte or hartles fool,
vide Albardon. Sottishly, vide Como Albardan. Sovereignty, v. Soberania.
Soueraignely, v. Soberanamente. Sovereign, v. Soberano. Sought, vide to Seek.
to Soulder, v. Soldar. Soulder, vide Sisa. Souldred, v. Soldado. a Soulderer,
vide Soldador. a Sold ring, vide Soldadura. to be a Soldier, vide ser
Soldado, Servir al Rey. to serve as a Soldier, idem. a Soldier, vide
Soldado. a young Soldier, vide Vison^o. an old Seuldiour, vide Soldado
viejo. a Soldiers coat, v. Sayo de soldado. Soldier like, vide como
Soldado. the Soul, vide A'lma, A'nima. the Souls of the dead, v. Las almas.
to Sound on any instrument, v. Tan^er qualquier instrumento. to Sound a
trumpet, v. Tocar trompeta. to make a Sound, v. Sonar. to Sound as bells, v.
Repicar. a Sound or noise, v. Son, Sonido, Ruydo. a Sounding plummet, or
Plummet, vide Sondalesa. Sounding hollow, v. Sonoro. to make Sound and whole,
vide Sanar or Curar. to wax Sound, v. Mejorar. Soundnes, v. Entereza. Sound,
v. Entero, Macico, Sano. made Sound and whole, v. Sanado. Soundly, v.
Sanamente. to Soupe up, v. Embever. Souped up, v. Embevido. to Souple, v.
Ablandar. to be Sour, v. Amargar. somewhat Sour, v. A'lgo, Amargo. to make
Sour, v. Agriar. to wax Sour, v. Azedarse. Sourenes or bitterness, v.
Hazedia. Sourenes of taste, v. A'grio. Sour, v. Hazedo, Azedo, A'grio. the
South, v. Medio dia, Sur. the South wind, v. A'brego, Vendaval, Bendabar, or
Bendabal. Southern, v. Meridional. Southern wood, v. Lombriguera. to Southsay
or tell a thing by divination, vide Adevinar, Pronosticar. a Southsayer, v.
Adevino. Southsaying, vide Adevinando, Pronosticando. a Sow, v. Puerca. a Sow
great with pigge, vide Puerca pren^ada. a Sow pig, v. Cochina. a Sowes going to
boar, vide Berriondez. to Sow, as to sow seeds, v. Sembrar, Sementar.
Sowed, v. Sembrado, Sementado. a Sower, v. Sembrador. Sowing season, v.
Sementera. Sowing, v. Sembradura. Sown, v. Sembrado. to Sow with a needle, v.
Coser. Sowed, v. Cosido. Sowing, v. Cosidura. to Sown, v. Amortecer, Cortarse,
or Desmayarse, Desfallecer, Pasmarse. Sowned, v. Amortecido, Desfallecido,
Desmayado. in a Sown, vide Desfallecido, Pasmado. he fell in a Sown, v.
Pasmose. Sowning, vide Amortecimiento, Pasmo. a Sowse seller, v. Tripero,
Mondonguero. Sowte, or Soote, vide Tisne. a Sowter or cobbler, v. Remendon. a
Sowthistle, v. Aljonjera. a Space, v. Espacio, Rato, Trecho. of Space, v.
Despacio. Spacious, v. Espacioso. a Spade or shouell, vide Acada, Acadon. the
have or handle of a Spade, vide Astil. a little Spade, vide Acadoncillo. he
that laboreth with a Spade, vide Acadonero. to Spaie, v. gelde, vide Capar. a
water Spaniel, vide Perro de agua. a land Spaniell, vide Perdiguero, Perro de
volateria. a Spangle, vide Tiembladera, Pinjante. Spangles, v. Pinjantes,
Tiembladeras. a Spaniarde, vide Castellano, Espan^ol. made Spanish, vide
Espan^olado. Spanish leather, vide Leather. Spanish, vide Romance, Espan^ol.
the Spanne from the thumbes end to the forefingers end stretched out, v.
Xeme. the Span from the thumbes end to the little fingars end stretched out,
vide Palmo. to Spare or save as in expenses, vide Ahorrar. Sparinge, vide
Ahorro, Escasseza. very Sparinge, vide Escasso. Sparingly, vide Escassamente.
to Sparkle, vide Centellear. a Sparkle or spark, vide Centella. the Sparkling
of the eyes, vide la lumbre de los ojos. a Sparre or bar of wood, vide Palo,
len^o. a Sparrowe, vide Gorrion, Pardal. a young Sparrowe, vide Gorrioncillo,
Gorrion nuevo. a Spatte or instrumente that surgeons use in spreading their
salues, vide Paletilla de boticario. to cast Spawne as fishes, v. Desovar. the
Spawne of fish, vide Huevos de pescado. to Speak, vide Dezir, Hablar. to
Speak well, vide Bien hablar. to Speak mystically, vide Hablarpor cifras. to
Speak ill or to sclaunder, v. Murmurar, Hablar mal. to Speak treatably, or
Treatable, v. Hablar claro y distinto. a Speaker, vide El que habla. Speaking
by contraries, v. Hablar una cosa por otra, Ironia. Speaking, v. Hablando. a
Speech, v. Dicho, Diccion, Dicion, Habla. Spoken, vide Hablado, Dicho. well
Spoken, v. Bien hablado. Special or particular, vide Especial, Particular.
Specially, vide Particularmente. to Specify, vide Specificar. a Specke or
pimple, vide Lunar. a Spectacle, vide Espectaculo. a pair of Spectacles, vide
Antojos, Espejuelos. Speculation, vide Especulacion. Speculatiue knowledge,
vide Teorica. Speech, vide Habla. to make Speed, vide Acclerar, Aquexar, Dar
priessa. god Speed you, v. Dios sea con vos. Speed, vide Aquexamiento,
Priessa. a making Speed, vide Aceleracion. Speedy, vide Apresurado. Speedily,
vide Aquexadamente, Cedo. to Spell, vide Deletrear. a Spence, vide Despensa. to
Spend, vide Despender, Espender, Gastar. to Spend unthriftily, v. Desperdiciar.
Spending unthriftily, v. Desperdicio. Spent unthriftily, vide Desperdiciado,
Espendido. a Spender, vide Despendedor, Gastador. Spending, vide Gastando.
Spent, vide Despendido, Gastado. Sperage an herb, vide Esparrago. to Spet,
vide Spit, Escupir. Sperit, vide Espiritu. to Spew or vomit, vide Revessar,
Vomitar. a Sphere, vide Esfera. Spice, vide Especia. Spicerie, vide Especeria.
Spiced, vide Aderecado con especia. a Spicer, vide Especiero. Spic^^, vide
Especias. Spicing, vide Especiando. a Spider, vide Aran^a. an house full of
Spiders, vide Aran^enta casa. a little Spider, vide Aran^eta. to Spy or lie in
wait for, vide Espiar, Otear, Acechar. a Spy or scowte, v. Espia, Espion.
Spieng place, v. Otero. a Spigot, v. Tornillo. to Spill as any liquid thing,
vide Verter, Derramar. to Spill, spoil, or mar, v. Echar a perder, Gastar.
Spilled or marred, v. Gastado, Echado a perder. Spinach an herb, vide
Espinaca. a Spindle, v. Huso. to Spinne, vide Hilar. a Spinner, vide Hiladera,
Hilandera. Spinning, v. Hilando. a Spire or steeple, v. Chapitel. a Spirit, v.
Espiritu. the Spirit of a man, vide A'nima, Espiritu. an evil Spirit, v.
Demonio, Diablo. Spiritual, v. Espiritual. Spiritually, vide Espiritualmente.
Spite or ill will, vide O'dio, Malquerencia, Malevolencia. Spiteful, vide
Odioso, Malevolo. Spitefully, vide Con odio, con malevolencia. a Spit, or
Broach, v. Asador, Asadero. to Spit meat, vide Espetar. to Spit, v. Escopir,
Escupir. Spittle or slauer, v. Bava, or Bavaza, Escopetina, Saliva. a Spittle
or sick house, vide Enfermeria, Ospital. a Spitting, v. Escupiendo. a Spitter,
v. Escupidor. to Splaie, v. Capar. Splaied, v Capado. to be Splaie footed, v.
Patituerto. a Spleen or milt, v. Baco, or Bazo. to Spleete a fish, vide Abrir
el Pescado. to Spoil, waste or destroy, v. Gastar, Estragar. Spoiled, vide
Gastado. a Spoiler, v. Estragador. a Spoke of a wheel, vide Rayo de rueda. a
Spoone, v. Cuchara. a Spoonefull, vide Cucharada. to Sport, vide Holgar,
Regozijar. Sport, vide Holganca, Solaz. Sporting, vide Holgando. to Spot, vide
Macular, Manchar, Mancillar, Manzillar. a Spot, v. Macula, Mancha, Manzilla,
Pinta, Peca. a little Spot, v Moncilla. Spotted, v. Maculado, Manchado. full of
Spots, v. Manzillado, Pecoso. Spotting, vide Manchando. to Spouse, vide Casar.
a Spouse, vide Esposo, Velado. a Spouse or wife, v. Esposa. a Spoute, vide
Aquatocho siringa, Xeringa. to Spread, v. Sparzir. Spread, v. Sparzido.
Spreading, vide Esparciendo. a Sprigge or impe, vide Rama. to Spring or
sproute, vide Nacer, Nascer. the Spring, v. Primavera. Spronge up, v. Nacido,
Nascido. to Spring as water does, vide Hemanar, Bullir. a little Spring, v.
Fontezica, Fontezuela. a place full of Springs, v. Fontanal. the Spring tide,
v. Primavera. a Spring or fountain, vide Manancial. the Spring of the day,
v. A'lva. to Sprinckle, vide Espanzir, Rociar. a Sprinckle or an instrument to
sprinckle withal, v. Rociadero. Sprinkled, vide Rociado. to Spue, v. Vomit.
to Sponge, v. Esponjar. a Sponge, vide Esponja. Spunged, vide Esponsado,
Esponjado. Spungie or full of holes, vide Sponjoso. Spunne, vide Hilado. to
Spurn, v. Acocear, Apuntillar, Tirar, Coces. Spurned, vide Acoceado, Coceado.
a Spurner, vide Acoceador, Coceador. Spurning, vide Acoceamiento, Punta pie,
Puntillazo. to Spur on, vide Instimular. to Spurgall, vide Espolear.
Spurgalled, vide Espoleado. a Spur, v. Espuela. a Spurgall or stroke with a
spur, vide Espoleado. Spurgalling v. Espoliando. Spurred, vide, Espoleado.
Spurred on, vide Instimulado. a cocks Spur, vide Espolon. a Spurrier, vide El
que haze espuelas.
S Q
to be Squamish, vide Esquivar. Squamishnes, v. Esquiveza. Squamish, v.
Esquivo. Squamishly, vide Esquivamente. to Square out, v. Dolar. Squared out,
vide, Dolado. a Squarer out, v. Dolador. to make Square, vide Quadrar. to
Square or plain stones, vide Escodar. a tool to square stones with, vide
Escoda. four Square, vide Quadrangula. Squared, Quadrado. a Square court, v.
Patio. a Squadron, v. Esquadra. to Squat or cast against the ground, v. Tirar
algo al suelo. to Squat as a hare does in hunting, vide Agachar. one that
Squatteth so, vide Egacapador, Agachador. Squatted, vide Agacopado, Agachado.
to Squeake, v. Gritar. Squibs, v. Coetes, Cohetas. the Squince or squinancie,
vide Esquinancia, or Esquilencia, Adivas, Bisco, Visco, Turna. he that looks
a Squint, or is goggle eied, vide Bisco, Visco, Turno. a Squire, vide Esquire.
an apple Squire, v. Mandil. a carpenters Squire, v. Esquadra de carpintero. a
Squirrell, v. Harda. the Qquirt, v. Flux and Laske, vide Camaras.
S T
to Stab, vide Dar pun^aladas. Stabbed, v. Herido de pun^alada. a Stable, vide
Establo, Cavallerica. Stable or steadfast, v. Firm, Estable. to Stablish, vide
Afirmar, Establecer. a Stacke of haie, vide Monton de heno. a Stacke of wood,
v. Hacina de len^a. a Staff, v. Baculo, or Bordon, Baston. a little Staff,
vide Bordoncillo, Baculillo. a leading Staff for a captain, vide Gineta. a
great leading staff, v. Gineton. a walking Staff, v. Bordon, Baculo. a pick
Staff, vide Chuco. a Stage, vide Tablado. a Stag, vide Ciervo. to Stagger, v.
Bacillar, or Bambavear, or Bambalear, Vacillar. Staggering, v. Bambaneando,
Bambaleando, Bacillando. to Stay, stop, or hold back, v. Estorvar, Tardar. a
Stay, vide Paradilla. a Staying place, v. Parada, Paradero. Stayed, v. Parado,
Quedado, Estorva^do. Staying at a place, v. Estada, Quedada, Tardanca. to
Stain, destaine, or spill the color, v. Manchar. a Stain, vide Mancha.
Stained, v. Manchado. a Stainer, v. el que Mancha. Staining, v. Manchando. a
Staire, or step, v. Escalon. a pair of Stairs, v. Escalera. a pair of
winding Stairs, v, Caracol. to Stake or lay a wager, v. Apostar. a Stake or
wager, v. Apuesta. a Stake, vide Hincon. a Stake to shoot at, v. Post. a
Stalant, or horse kept only to cover mares, or stallion, v. Garan^on. to be or
wax Stale, v. Envejecer. Stale or old, v. Anejo. a Stalking horse, v.
Boezuelo. a Stalk of any thing, v. Tallo, Bastago. a Stall, vide Establo. an
ox Stall, vide Establo de bueyes. a trade man's Stall, vide Tablero de tienda.
the head Stall of a bridle for an horse, vide Cabestro, Xaquima. a Stallion or
stalant, vide Cavallo Garan^on. to Stammer or stutter, v. Tardamudar. a
Stammerer, v. Tardamudo. Stammering, vide Tartajoso. Stammeringly, v. como
Tartamudo. to Stamp, or beat small, v. Machucar. to Stample with pestle, v.
Majar. to Stamp or print, v. Estampar. to Stamp or coin, vide Acun^ar la
moneda. a Stamp or print, vide Estampa de la emprenta. Stamped, v. Estampado,
Majado. Stamped in a mortar, v. Machucado. a Stamper or printer, v. Impressor.
a Stamper in a mortar, vide Machucador. Stamping, v. Majadura. to Stanch, vide
Detener la sangre Stanched, vide Detenido. a Standard, vide Estandarte,
Vandera. to Stand, vide Estar. to Stand bristling like a hair, v. Enrizar.
Standing up of the hair, v. Enrizamiento. to Stand as a poole of water does,
vide Estancar. to make a Stand as soldiers do, v. Alto hazer. a Standing
place, v. Estanca. a Standing table, v. Bufete. Standing up, v. Estar en pie.
Standing on a steep hill side, or on a rock side, v. Abarrancado. an ale or
beer Stand, v. Tinaja. Standing water, vide Represada agua, Estanque. Standing
over, vide Sobrestante. Starbord, vide Baborda. to Starch, vide Almidonar.
Starch, vide Almidon. Starched, v. Almidonado. to wax Stark, or stiff with
cold, v. Envarar, Aterir. Stark, v. Envarado, Aterido. Starkenes, v.
Envaramiento, Aterimiento. to Stare or look upon on, v. Mirar en hito. to
stand Staring, as hairs do of those that are frighted, v. Espeluzar, Erizar.
Staring, v. Mirando en hito. a Stare or starling, v. Estornino. to shine like
the Stars, v. Resplandecer. a Star, vide Estrella. beset with Stars, v.
Estrellado. to Starte, vide Asustar. a Starter, vide Asustado. Starting, v.
Susto. a Startop or high shoe, vide Abarca. to Starve, v. Morir de hambre.
Starued, v. Muerto de Hambre. a Starueling, vide Muriendo de Hambre. Starwort,
an herb so called, vide Estrellada. a State, condition or degree, v. Estado,
Condition. the State of a man, v. Estado. to be Stately or proud, vide Ser
altivo, or Grave. Stately, vide Altivo, Grave, Superbo. Statelines, v. Altivez,
Gravedad, Superbia. a Statue or image, v. Estatua. the Stature, or proportion
of the body, v. Estatura. a Statute, or act of Parliament, vide Estatuto. a
Statute law, vide Pregmatica, Prematica. a Statute for rogues, v. Ley para
Picaros. a book of Statutes, vide libro de prematicas. Stauesacre, an herb,
v. Abarraz, Avarraz, Favaraz, Havarraz, Paparraz. a Steake of flesh, v. Carne
sin huesso. to Steal, v. Estafar, Hurtar, Robar. to Steal on by creeping
privily, vide Acapar. a Stealer, vide Hurtador. Stealing, vide Hurto. Stolen,
v. Hurtado, Robado. Stolen on by creeping privily, vide Acapado. by Stealth,
vide Ahurtada, Hurtiblemente, Hurtadamente. a Stead, or room, v. Lugar. a
Steare, or bullock, vide Novillo. to make Steadfast, stable, sure, and strong,
vide Establecer. Steadfast, v. Constante, Estable, Firm, Fixo. making Steadfast,
v. Establecimiento. Stedfastnes, v. Constancia, Firmeza. Steadfastly, v.
Constantamente, Establemente, Firmamente, Fixamente. Steel, v. Acero, Azero. a
Steel to strike fire, v. Eslabon. Steeled, vide Azerado. to Steel or make
hard with steel, vide Azerar. Steel glass, vide Vericle, Espejo de Azero.
Steepenes, vide Risco. Steep up, vide Riscoso. to get up a Steep hill or
rock, vide Enrriscar. a Steeple, vide Campanario. a Steer, or steare, vide
Buey novillo. a Stem or stalk, vide Tallo de la yerva o planta. to Stenche, or
stanche, v. Estancar, Restren^ir. to Step, or go by steps, v. Andar, Passear.
a Step, vide Passo. a Stepmother, v. Madrastra. a Stepfather, vide Padrasto,
Padrastro. a Stepsonne, vide Entenado. a Stepdaughter, vide Entenada. Sterile
or barren, vide Sin fruto, Esteril. to look Stern, vide Mirar con cen^o.
Stern, vide Austero. Sternely, vide Austeramente. Sternenes, vide Austeridad.
to Steer at the helm, vide Timonear, Gobernar. the Stern of a ship, vide
Timon. a Steward of a house, vide Mayordomo. a Stewardship, vide Mayordomia. to
Stew or boil in pieces, vide Cozer en pedacos. Stewed in broth, vide Cozido en
caldo. a Stew or hot house, vide Van^o, Ban^o. the Stews, brothell house, or
house of bauderie, vide Burdel, Puteria, Mancebia. to Stich, vide Pespuntar.
Stiched, vide Pespuntado. a Stich, vide Pespunte. to Stick, vide Pegar. to
Stick in the mire, vide Mire. a sticking, vide Pegadura. a Stick, vide
Varilla. to Stick fast or be entangled, vide Enfrascar, Emmaranear. a Stickler
between two, v. Tercero. a Hoggestie, vide Pocilga, cahurda. to be Stiff with
cold, vide Aterecerse, Envarar. Stifnes with cold, vide Atericimiento,
Envaramiento. Stiff with cold, v. Atirido, Envarado. Stifnes of sinews, vide
Calambre, Envaramiento. Stifely, vide Fuerte, Fuertamente. to Stifle, vide
quitar el resuello. a Style, vide Portillo. a Style or form of writing, v.
Estilo. to be Still or calm, vide Estar quieto. Still, vide Quedo quedito.
Stilled or quieted, vide Acallado. a Stillatorie, vide Alambique, Alquitara. to
Still or distill, vide Estilar. a Stilte, vide canco, Zanco. to Stinche or
Stink, vide Heder, Oler mal. to Stinge, vide Picar. a Stinge, vide Pico.
Stinged, vide Picado. Stinging, vide Picadura. one that Stingeth, vide el que
pica. to Stink, vide Heder. a Stink, vide Hedor. Stink of the arm pits,
vide Sobaquina. Stinking, vide Hediundo. Stinkingly, vide Con Hediondez. to
Stinte, vide Atascar detener. Stinted, vide Estancado, Detenido, Atascado.
Stinting, vide Estancando, Detenido, Atascando. Stipend, vide Stipendio. to
Stir or raise up, vide Levantar, Alcar. Stirred up, vide Levantado, Alcado. a
Stirrope, v. Estribo. Stirrope leathers, vide Aciones. to Stitch, v. Pespuntar.
a Stitch in sowing, vide Punto, Puntado. a Stoale or robe, vide Estola. a
Stocada or thrust with a weapon, v. Estocado. the Stock of a tree, vide El pie
del arbol, El tronco del arbol. a Stockfish, vide Marcluz, Salema. a Stock or
race whereof one comes, vide Abolengo, Alcun^a, Estirpe. a Stocke-doue, v.
Dove. to set in Stocks, vide Poner^enel cepo a pair of Stocks, vide Cepo,
Ceppo. a little pair of Stocks, vide Corma. a Stock gilliflower, vide
Clavellina. Stockins, v. Calcas, Medias. a pair of linen Stockins, vide
Calcetas. Stolen, vide Steal, v. Hurtado, Robado. to Stomach a matter, vide
Estomagarse, Amohinarse. to have Stomach or courage, vide Tener buen animo, o
coraje. Stomach, heart, or courage, v. Pecho coracon, Estomago animo, Coraje.
the Stomach, vide Estomago. a Stoner to death, vide El que apedrea. to Stone,
vide Apedrear. Stoned to death, Apedreado. to wax hard as Stone, vide
Empedernecer. a mill stone, vide Alfarge de molino. Stoned, v. Pedrado. a
precious Stone, vide Piedra preciosa. a little Stone, vide Pedrizita, or
Pedrezuela. a peble Stone, vide Guija. full of stones, vide Pedregoso. Stony,
v. Empedernido. a Stony place, vide Pedregal. a Stone, v. Piedra. a Stoning,
vide Apedreamiento. a blow with a stone, vide Pedrada. the Stone or gravel in
the raines, vide Piedra. Stones in raisins, vide Granillas. a Stone of a grape,
vide Granillas. a cherrie Stone and such like, vide Cuesco. a Stone wall, vide
Albarrada. a Stool, vide Escabel, Escabelo. a foote-Stoole, vide Un banquete
de pie. to have lust to go to Stool, vide Tener gana de cagar, o de hazer
camara. to go to Stool, v. Hazer camara, yr al bacin, yr al servicio, Purgar
el vientre. to cause to go to Stool, vide Hazer yr al bacin. a close Stool,
vide Bacin, Servicio, Servidor. to Stoop, vide Abaxar al suelo, inclinar.
Stooping, vide Inclinando, Abaxando. to Stop, stay, or hinder, v. Estorvar,
Impedir. Stopped or hindered, vide Estorvado, Impedido. Stopped in the body,
vide Opilado. Stopping in the body, vide Opilacion. to Stop or cover, vide
Atapar, Tapar. to Stop or make retire, v. Ciar. a Stop or let, v. Represa. a
Stop or stay, v. Pausa. to Stop in the smoke or fume, v. Abahar. Stopped or
covered, vide Atapado, Tapado. full of Stops or lets, v. Embaracoso. Stopping,
vide Embaraco, Embargo. a Stopping up, v. Atapadura. a Stopple, vide Tapador,
Tapon. a red Storax, v. Azumbar, Estoraque. to Store or lay up in store,
vide Almazenar. well stored or furnished, v. Fornecido. a Storehouse, vide
Almazen. a Storehouse for munition, vide Almazen. Store, vide Abundancia. a
Story, vide Soberado. a Storke, vide Ciguen^a. a little Storke, vide
Cigon^ino. an herb called Storkesbill, v. Pico de ciguen^a. a Storm or
tempest, vide Burrasca, Tormenta. Stormy, Procelloso, Tormentoso. to wax
Stout or disdainful, vide Devenir altivo, or Grave. Stoutnes, vide Altivez,
Gravidad. Stout, v. Altivo, Grave, Arrogante. Stoutely, vide Animosamente,
Arrogantemente. a Stoue or hothouse, vide Estufa. to Straddle or go stradling,
v. yr desparrencado. to Straggle or wander, vide Errar el camino, yr fuera de
camino, estar mostrenco. a Straggler, vide Erradizo, Mostrenco. Straggling,
vide Yr fuera de camino. to Straie abroad or go astraie, vide Descariar. a
Straier, vide Descarriado. to make Straight or narrow, vide Ensangostar.
Straight or narrow, vide Angosto. a Straight, vide Estrecho. Straightnes or
narrownes, vide Angostura, Estrecheza, Estrechura. Straightly, vide
Estrechamente. Straightning, vide Apretura. Straight up, vide Derecho. to
Strain liquor, vide Apurar, Colar. Strained liquor, vide Apurado, Colado. a
Strainer, vide Coladero. to Strain or bind, vide Apretar. Strange, vide
Estran^o. Strangenes, vide Estran^eza. Strangely, vide Estran^amente. a
Stranger, vide Avenedizo, Estrangero, Forastero. to Strangle, vide Choke. the
Strangurie when one makes water by drops, and that with pain, vide Angurria,
Estranguria. a Strap, vide Correa de cuero. a Stratageme, vide Ardid,
Estratagema. a Strawberie, vide Fraga. to Straw, vide to Strew. to stuff with
Straw, vide Stuff. short Straw, vide Pajuela. Straw, vide Paja. a place
full of Straw, vide Pajiso lugar. a Strain, vide Strain. a Stream or river,
vide Manadero. a little Stream, vide Riachuelo. a Streamer or pendant in a
ship, vide Flamula, Gallardetes, Vanderola. a Street, v. Call or Barrio,
Placa. to go up and down the Streets much, v. Callejear. a narrow Street,
vide Calleja. a woman walker of Streets, vide Callejera. Straight or straight,
vide Derecho. to Streighten, vide Ensangostar. Streightening, vide
Ensangostamiento. to Streine or to Strain, v. Apretar. to Strengthen or make
strong, vide Arreziar, Corroborar, Hazer fuerte. Strengthened, vide Arreziado,
Corroborado. Strength, vide Fuerca, Fortaleca. Strengthening, vide
Fortaleciendo. to Stretch out, vide Estender, Tender. Stretching out, vide
Estendimiento. Stretching with sloth or for sleep, vide Esperezo. to Stretch
as they that gape for sleep, Esperezarse. Stretched out, vide Embarado,
Estenso or Extenso, Tendido. to Strew, vide Esparzir. Strewed, vide Esparzido.
Strictly, vide Apretadamente. to Stride, vide Atrancar. to Stride over a ditch
or such like, vide Atrancar. Strife, vide Brega Contienda. to Strike with a
spur, vide Spurgall. to Strike with a wand, vide Varear. to Strike or smite,
vide Golpear, Herir. to Strike on the cheeks, vide Abofetear. Stricken, vide
Golpeado, Herido. that Strikes on the cheeks, vide Abofeteador. Stricken
about the ears, v. Abofeteado. Striking, vide Golpeando. Stricken down, vide
Achocado. a Stroke, vide Golpe. a Stroke with a bowl, vide Bolazo. to Strike,
as a bushel or other measure, vide Arasar, Rasar. Striked as a bushel, vide
Arrasado, Rasado. such Striking, vide Arrasadura, Rasadura. to Strike sail,
vide Amaynar la vela. to Strike up hose smooth on the legs, vide Estirar. hosen
Stroked up smoothe, vide Estiradas calcas. a String, vide Cordel, Cuerda. a
String of an instrument of music, v. Cuerda. to tie with Strings, v.
Encordonar. the String of the tongue, vide Fremillo de la lengua. a Stripe, vide
Golpe, Acote. beaten with Stripes, vide Acotado. a Stripling, vide Mancebo. to
Strip, v. Desnudar. Stripped or stripped, v. Desnudo, Desnudado. to Strive or
contend, v. Contender, Bregar, Debatir, Repugnar, Porfiar. Strife, or
contention, v. Debate, Repugnancia, Porfia. a Striuer, v. Contendor, Porfiado.
Striving, v. Porfiando, contendiendo. Striuingly, v. Aporfia. to Stroke gently
with the hand, vide Halagar con la mano amorosamente. the Stroke of a bullet
shot, v. Balazo. a Stroke, vide Golpe, Porrazo. a Stroke with a staff, v.
Bastonazo. Strong, v. Forcoso, Fuerte, Robusto. Strong as an oak, v. Roblezo.
Strongly, vide Fuertemente. to Stroute out, vide hazer bulto. Strouting out of
the cheeks, v. Hinchado de carrillos. to Stroie, or destroy, vide Destruir.
to Struggle, vide Querer escabullir. a Strumpet, or whore, vide Puta ramera,
Cantonera. a common Strumpet, vide Cantonera puta. Stubble, vide Rastrojo.
Stubborn, vide Pertinaz, Contumaz. Stubbornenes, v. Contumacia, Pertinacia.
Stubbornely, v. con Contumacia, con Pertinacia. a Stud in girdles, and such
like, vide Chaton, Tachon. Studded, vide Tachonado, Chatonado. Studding, vide
Clavazon. to Study or apply the mind, v. Estudiar. Study, vide Estudio. a
Study, idem. a Student, v. Estudiante. Studying, vide Estudiando. Studious,
vide Estudioso. Studiously v. Estudiosamente. a Stue, vide Stew. a Stues or
brothelhouse, v. Burdel, Casa de putas, Puteria. to Stuff, v. Embutir,
Entupecer, Recalcar, Henchir, Atestar. to Stuff with straw, v. Estivar.
Stuffed, vide Embutido. Stuffed with straw, v. Estivado. straw to Stuff
withal, v. Estiva. to Stumble, v. Estropecar, Titubear, Tropecar. Stumbled,
vide Estropecado, Tropecado. a Stumbler, v. Tropecoso. a Stumbling, vide
Tropieco, Tropiecadura. a Stumbling block, v. Tropecadero. the Stumpe, or
stock of a tree, v. El pie del arbol. a Sturgion fish, v. Solho. to Stur, or
stir, v. Menear. a Stur, vide Bullicio. to Stut, or flutter, v. Tartamudar. a
Stutterer, v. Tartamudo. a Swinestie, v. Pocilga, cahurda.
S V
a Subdeacon, or subdeane, vide Subdiacono. to Subdew, vide Sojusgar. Subdewed,
vide Sojusgado. a Subdewer, vide Vitorioso. to make Subject, v. Sujetar. made
Subject, vide Avassalado, Sujetado. a Subject, v. Subdito, Sudito, Vassallo.
Subjected, vide Sujetado. to bring in Subjection, v. Sujetar. Subjection, vide
Sujecion. the Subiunctiue mood, vide Sujuntivo. to Submit, vide Someter.
Submitted, vide Sometido. Submisse, v. Sumisso, Vmilde. a Submission, or
submitting, v. Sumission, Obediencia. Submissiue, v. Obediente, Sumisso,
Humilde. Submissiuely, v. Humilmente, con Sumission, con Obediencia. to
Suborne, v. Sobornar. Suborned, vide Sobornado. a Suborner, v. el que Suborna.
a Suborning, v. Soborno. to Subscribe, v. sobre Escrebir. Subscribed, vide
Sobrescritto, Subscription, v. Subscripcion. to leauie a Subsidy, v.
Empadronar, Coger alcabalas. Subsidy, vide Alcabala. Substance, or goods, v.
Bienes, Hazienda. Substantial, v. Material, Substancial. Substantially, v.
Sustancialmente. to Substitute, vide Sostituir, Substituir. Substituted, v.
Sostituto, Subdelegado. a Substitutinge, vide Sostitucion, Subdelegamiento.
Substitution, vide Sustitusion. Subtlety, vide Sotileza, Subtileza. Subtle,
Sotil, Sutil. a Subtle devise, vide Sutileza. Subtily, vide Sutilmente.
Substance, Substancia, Hazienda. Substanciall, vide Substancial. to Substract
or take a less number out of a greater, vide Restar. Subtracted, vide
Restado. Substraction, vide Resto. to Subvert, vide Subvertir. Subverted, vide
Subvertido. a Subuerter, vide el que Subvierte. Subuertinge, vide
Subvertimiento. Subversion, vide Subvercion. the Suburbs of a city, vide
Arrabal, Arrabales. to Succeed, vide Suceder. Succeeded, vide Sucedido. a
Succeeder, vide Sucessor, Descendiente. a Succession, v. Decendencia,
Sucession. Successively, vide Sucessivamente. to give Success to, vide dar,
Sucesso. the Success or event of a thing, vide Sucesso. good Success, vide
buen Sucesso. Succory, vide Chicorea. to Succor, aid or help, vide Acorrer,
Socorrer, Ayudar. Succor, v. Acorro, Socorro, Ayuda. Succored, vide
Socorrido, Ayudado. a Succourer, v. Ayudador, Socorredor. Succouring, vide
Socorriendo. Succourles, v. Desayudado, sin Socorro Such, vide Tal. Such as,
vide Tal, qual. in Such sort, v. en tal suerte o manera. to Suck, vide Chupar,
Mamar. to Suck the teate as infants do, v. Mamar. to give Suck, vide
Amamantar. giving Suck, vide Amamantamiento. Sucked or sucked up, vide Chupado,
Mamado. a Suck spiggot or drunkard, vide Borracho. Sudden or suddeine, vide
Repentino. on a Sudden, vide Desubito. Suddenly, vide Repentinamente. to
Sue in law, vide Pleitear. Sued, vide Pleiteado. Suing, vide Pleiteando. a
Suit, vide Pleyto. a Suter in law, vide Pleyteante. to become Suertie, vide
Salir por fiador. a Suerty, vide Fiador. that has put in Suerties, v. Abonado.
a putting in of Suerties, vide Abonamiento. a putter in of Suerties, vide
Abonador. to Suffer, vide Permit. to Suffer or bear, vide Padecer, Padescer,
Sufrir. to Suffer with other, v. Compadecer. Sufferance, vide Sufrimiento.
Sufferable, vide Sufrible. Suffered, vide Padecido, Padescido. Suffering, vide
Padecimiento, Padescimiento. to Suffice or be sufficient enough, vide
Abastancar or Bastar, Abastar. Sufficient, vide Abastado or Bastante, Basto.
Sufficient matter, vide Abastada cosa. Sufficiently, vide Abastanca, or
Bastantemente. to Suffocate, vide Ahogar, Sufocar. Suffocation, vide
Sufocacion, Ahogamiento. Sugar, vide Acucar, or Azucar. dressed with Sugar,
vide Acucarado. Sugar candy, v. Acucar piedra or Acucar candy. Sugar made
liquid, vide Almivar. Suite or suit, vide Pleitear. Sullenness, vide
Pertinacia. Sullen, vide Pertinaz. Sulphur, vide cufre. a Summarie, vide
Sumario. Summarily, vide Sumamente, Sumariamente. to Sum up, vide Summar. a
Sum of money, vide Suma. Sums of money, vide Sumas de dineros, Contias. to
Summon, vide Citar, Emplazar. Summoned, vide Emplazado, Citado. Summons, vide
Placo, Plazo, Citacion. a Summoning, vide Citacion, Emplazamiento. Sumptuous,
vide Elplendido, Sontuoso. Sumptuousnes, Sumptiosidad. Sumptuously, vide
Sontuosamente. Sunday, vide Domingo. to Sunder, vide Apartar, Despartir,
Arredrar. to put a Sunder, v. Arredrar. put a Sunder, vide Arredrado. Sundry,
vide Diverso. to Sun or dry in the sun, vide Secar al Sol. the Sun, vide
Sol. to set or place in the Sun for warmth, vide Abrigar. Sunned, vide
Asolado. a warm Sun shining bank, vide Abrigan^o, Abrigo. Sunning, vide
Asolando. the warm Sun shine, vide Abrigo. a Sun beam, vide Rayo del Sol.
Sun burnt, vide Quemado del Sol. a Sunnie place, vide Abri, Abrigan^o. to be
Superfluous, vide Soperchar, Ser superfluo. Superfluous, vide Superfluo.
Superfluously, vide Soperchadamente. Superfluity, vide Superfluidad,
Sopercheria. Superiors, vide Superiores. a Superscription, vide Sobre scrito.
Superstition, vide Supersticion. Superstitious, vide Supersticioso.
Superstitiously, v. Supersticiosamente. Supernatural, vide Sobre natural. to
Suppe or soupe, vide Sorber. a Suppe, vide Sorbo. Supped, vide Sorbido.
Supping, vide Sorbiendo. to Sup or eat ones supper, vide Cenar. Supped, vide
Cenado. a Supper, vide Cena. Supping, vide Cenando. Supperlesse, vide Sin
cenar. to Supplant, vide Anticipar. a Supplanter, vide Anticipador.
Supplanting, vide Anticipacion. to make Supple or soft, v. Ablandar. a
Suppliant or petitioner, vide Suplicante. a Supplication, vide Suplicacion. to
Supply, vide Suplir. a Supply, vide Suplimiento. to Supporte or maintain,
vide Mantener, Soportar, Sustener, Sustentar. Supported, vide Soportado,
Sustenido, Sustentado. a Supporting, vide Sustento. a Supporter, vide el que
Sustenta, or Soporta. to Suppose, or to think, vide Congeturar. Supposed, vide
Conjeturado. a Supposition, vide Congetura. Supposing, vide Supuesto. a
Suppositorie, vide Cala, Calilla, Mecha. to Suppress, vide Sujetar, Abatir.
Suppressed, vide Sujetado, Abatido. a Suppresser, v. el que Sujeta, or Abate. a
Suppression, vide Abatimiento, Sujecion. the Supremacy, vide el Principado. to
Surbate on the feet with going, vide Despear. Surbated, vide Despeado.
Surbating, vide Despeadura. to Surcease, leave of or give over, vide Sobreseer,
Dexar. to Surcharge, vide Sobrecargar. a Surcharge, vide Sobrecarga. a
Surcingle or girth, vide Cincha. to make Sure, vide Afigurar. Surenes, vide
Seguridad. Sure, stable or steadfast, vide Seguro. Sure or assured, vide Seguro.
Surely, vide Seguramente. Surety, vide Seguridad. a Surety or suertie, vide
Fiador. to Surfeit, v. Glotoniar; Comer demasiado, Golosinar. Surfeted, vide
Comido demasiado, Golofinado. to Surge or rise up in waves, vide Levantar las
olas. a Surge or wave, vide O la, onda. a Surgeon, vide curujano. Surgerie,
vide curugia. to Surmise, vide Congeturar. a Surmise, vide Congetura. Surmised,
vide Congeturado. a Surmiser, vide Congeturador. Surmising, vide Congetura. to
Surmounte, vide Exceder, Passar, Sobrepujar. Surmounted, vide Le excedido,
Soprepujado, Passado. to Surname, vide Sobre nombre dar. Surnamed, vide Llamado
por sobre nombre. a Surname, v. Apellido, Sobrenombre. to Surpass, vide
Aventajar, Esceder, Exceder, hazer ventaja. Surpassing, vide Excediendo,
Aventajando. a Surplisse, v. Sobrepeliz. Surprised, v. Tomado sin pensar. to
Surrender, vide Entregar. Surrendered, vide Entregado. Surrendering, vide
Entregando. a Surueior, vide Alarife. to Survive, vide Bivir mas que otro. to
Suspect or mistrust, vide Barruntar, Recelar, Sospechar. Suspected, v.
Barruntado, Sospechado, Recelado. Suspecting, vide Sospechando, Burruntando.
Suspicion, vide Barrunte, celo, Recelo Sospecha. Suspicious, vide celoso,
Receloso, Sospechoso. Suspitiously, vide Con sospecha. to Suspend, vide
Suspender. Suspended, vide Suspendido. Suspending, vide Suspencion. Suspense,
v. Suspensa. to Sustain or suffer, v. Sostenir, Sustenir, Sufrir. Sustained,
vide Sostenido. Sustaining, v. Sostenimiento, Sustentamiento. Sustenance,
food, or nourishment, v. Sustento, Nutrimiento. Suitable, vide Concordable. a
Sure in law, v. Pleyto. to Sue, vide Pleitear.
S W
a Swabbe or thing to make clean a ship with, vide Barredero. to Swaddle or
swathe, vide Faxar. Swaddling, vide Faxamiento, Embolvedura. a Swaddling cloth,
vide Faxa. to Swage, vide Assuage, vide Mitigar. to bear Swaie, v. Gobernar.
to Swallowe, vide Tragar. Swallowing, vide, Tragando. Swallowed, vide Tragado.
a Swallower, v. Tragador. a Swallowe bird, v. Golondrina. the herb Swallowe
woorte, vide Celedonia. a Swanne, v. Cysne, Cisne. the Swarde of bacon, vide
Cortecon, de tocino. a Swarm of bees, vide Enxambre. to Swarm or assemble
together, v. Enxambrar. Swarte color, v. Alvarino. Swart rutters, vide Reytes,
Reytres. to Swathe, vide Faxar. a Swathing band, vide Faisa, Faxa. Swathed,
vide Faxado. Swaying or rolling from one side to another, vide Bayben, or
Bayven. to Swear, vide Jurar. a Swearer, vide, Jurador. Swearing, vide
Jurando. a Swearing, v. Juramento. Sworn, vide Jurado. to Sweat, vide Sudar.
to Sweat apace, vide Sudar hilo a hilo. Sweat, vide Mugre, Sudor. a Sweating
place, v. Sudadero. full of Sweat, vide Mugroso. having Sweat, vide Sudado. a
Sweater, vide el que Suda. to stink of Sweat, vide cahorno. stinking of Sweat,
v. cahornamiento. made filth with Sweat, v. cahornado. to Sweep, vide Barrer,
Varrer. the Sweepings of a house, v. Barreduras de casa. a Sweeper, vide el que
Bar. the Sweeping of a house, etc. vide Barredura. Sweept, vide Barrido. to
Sweeten, or make sweet, v. Adulcar, Endulcar, Enducar. Sweetning, v.
Endulcadura. a Sweeting apple, vide Mancana dulca. Sweet new wine, vide Mosto.
of Sweet wine, vide Mostoso. Sweet, vide Dulce, Su^ve. Sweetness, v* Dulcor,
Dulcura, Suavedad. Sweetly, vide Suavemente. to Swell, rise, or be puffed up,
vide Hinchar. a Swelling after a fall, v. Comba. a Swelling in the finger
called the fellon, v. Comba pequen^a. a Swelling in the flank, vide Encordio.
Swelling after a stroke, v. Bollo de golpe. Swelling of a wound, v. Diviesso. a
Swelling about the jaws, vide Lobadado. Swelling, vide Henchimiento,
Hinchadura, Hinchazon. Swelled, vide Hinchado. a Swelling called a carbuncle,
vide Lobanillo. Swelling in the flesh, called the fashions, v. Lobado. a Swible
of iron, v. Eslabon. Swiftnes, vide Ligereza. Swift, vide Ligero. a Swift ship,
v. Patache, Pataje. a Swift stream, v. Raudal. Swifter, v. Mas, Ligero.
Swiftest, vide Ligerissimo. Swift, vide Ligeramente. to Swill, vide Bevorear.
to Swim, vide Nadar. to Swim above, v, Sobre nadar. to Swim over a place, v.
Passar a nado. a Swimmer, v. Nadador. Swimming, vide Nadadura. a Swimming
place, v. Nadadero. a Swine, vide Puerco. a Swinestie, vide Pocilga. cahurda.
to Swindge, beat, or whip, vide Acotar, O castigar, O aporrear. to Swing by
the arms, etc. vide Columpiar. Swinging in a coard, or bough, or hanging to
stretch by the arms, vide Columpio. a Switzer, vide Suyco. a Swiuell of a
chain, v. Eslabon de cadena. Swollen, vide Hinchado. Sworn, v. Jurado. to
draw the Sword, vide Desenvaynar Ia espada. a Sword, vide Espada. girded with a
Sword, v. Cen^ido con espada. a Sword fish, vide Espadarte. hangers for a
Sword, v. Tiros, or Talabarte.
S Y
a Sycophant, v. Testigo falso. a Syllogism, or an argument of three parts,
vide Silogismo. a Synod, or meeting, vide Junta. a Synagogue, v. Sinagoga.
Synamom, vide Canela. dressed with Synamom, v. A canelado. Syrrope, vide
Almivar de conservas. a Sithe, vide Guadan^a.
T
a TAber, or tabret, vide Adufe, Pandero. to play on the Taber, v. Tan^er el
Pandero. a Taberer, vide Adufero, Panderatero. a she Taberer, v. Panderetera,
Adufera. a Tabernacle, v. Tabernaculo. to lay the Table, vide Poner la mesa. a
Table, vide Mesa. a round Table, v. Mesa redonda. a Table cloth, vide Manteles.
a Table napkin, v. Panezuelo de mesa, Servilleta. a Table or deske to write on,
vide Bufete. Tables to write in, v. Libro de memoria. to play at Tables, vide
Jugar a las tablas. a pair of Tables, v. Tablero. a Table man, vide Table del
tablero. a Table plaier, v. Jugador de tablas. a Tablet which hangs about the
neck, vide Collarico. a Tabret, vide Taber. to Tacke or nail to something, v.
Clavetear. a Tacket or nail, v. Clavo. the Tackling of a ship, v. Garruchas de
nave. Taffetie, or taffeta, v. Tafetan. a Tag, or aglet, v. Clavillo de
Agujeta, Herrete de agujeta. to wag the Tail, vide Menear la cola. a Tail,
vide Cola. a Tailer, vide Sastre, Ropero. to Take, v. Tomar, Prender. to Take
in good part, vide Tomar en buena part. to Take away the table, vide Alcar la
mesa. Taken, v. Tomado. to Take out of his house, v. Quitado fuera de su casa.
Taking, vide Toma. to tell Tales, or blase abroad reports, v. Dezir quentos, or
Fabulas. a Tale, v. Quento, Cuento, Fabula. trifling Tales, vide Hablillas.
full of Tales, v. Lleno de mentiras. a Talie or score, v. Taja. Talied, vide
Tajado. a Talent, vide Talento. to Talk or common together, v. Hablar,
Platicar, Comunicar. to Talk in ones ear, vide Jugar de oreja. Talk, vide
Coloquio, Habla. a Talker, vide Hablador, Palabrero, Parlero. Talking, vide
Hablando. Talkatiue, v. Palabrero, Parlero, Hablador. Talnes of person, vide
A'lto, O altura. not Tall, vide Pegueno, O chico. very Tall, v. muy A'lto.
Tallage, custom, or impost, vide Alcabala, Alcavala. to dip in Tallow, vide
Ensebar. to Tallow, idem. Tallow, vide Sebo, Sevo. Tallow melted, v. Sebo
derretido. Tallowie, full of tallow, v. Seboso. a Tallon, or claw, vide Garra.
the Tamariske tree, v. A'tarce. to Tame, make tame, subdue, or bring under, v.
Domar, Desbravar, Desembravecer. Tame, v. Domestico, Duendo. Tamenes, vide
Domestiqueza. Tamed, vide Domado. a Tamer, vide Domador. Taming, vide
Desembravecimiento. Tamely, vide Domesticamente. a Tankard, vide Cantara. a
Tankard maker, vide Cantarero. a water Tankard, vide Cantaro. a Tanner, vide
Curtidor. to Tanne leather, vide Curtir. Tanned, vide Curtido. a Tanne house,
vide Teneria. Tanning, vide Curtidura. a Tape to bind an aperne about, vide
cintas de hilo. a Taper or wax candle, v. Candela. Tapestrie, vide Tapices. to
hang with Tapestrie, vide Entapicar, Paramentar. hanged with Tapestrie, vide
Paramentado, Entapicado. to Tappe vessels, vide Poner tornillos en barriles. a
Tappe, vide Tornillo. a Tapster, vide Bodeguero. to take Tardie, v. Tomar de
repent. Tardie, vide Repent. Tares, vide Cizan^a. to sow Tares, vide
Cizan^ar. a sower of tares, vide Cizan^ador. Tartes, vide Tortas. a Target or
shield, vide Escudo, Pavez, Tarja. a Targettier, vide Broguellado,
Enrrodellado, Escudado. a Target or short and light buckler which the Africans
and Spaniards do use, vide Adarga. he that uses such a Target, vide Adargado.
to use such a Target, vide Adargar. a Target like a half moon, v. Adarga. to
Tarry, abide or remain, vide Parar, Quedar. a Tarrying, vide Estada, Parada.
to Tarry for one, vide Aguardar, Esperar. Tarte or sower, vide Acerbo, A'gro,
Azedo. to set ones Task, vide Dar tarea. Tasked, vide Destajado. to end his
Task, vide Complir su destajo. to do with Tassels, vide Emborlar. done with
Tassels, vide Emborlado. Tassels or knaps, vide Cordones de bellota. a maker of
Tassels, vide Emborlador. to Taste, vide Gustar, Provar. a Taste, vide Gusto,
Gustadura. Tasted, vide Gustado, Provado. a Taster, vide De la boca. Tasting,
vide Gusto, Gustadura. a Tatch or claspe, vide Corchetes. to Tattle, vide
Garlear, Hablar mucho. a Tattler, vid Charlatan, Hablador. a Tattling woman,
vide Palabrera muger. a Tavern, vide Taverna. to keep a Tavern, vide
Tavernear. a Tauerner, vide Tavernero. Taught, vide Avezado, Amaestrado,
Disciplinado, Ensen^ado. easy to be Taught, vide Docil. to Taunt or check
with reproachful words, vide Apodar, Amordazar, Motejar. a Taunt, vide Apodo,
Mote, Motete. Taunted, vide Apodado, Amordazado, Motejado. a Taunter, vide
Apodador, Fizgon, Motejador. Taunting, vide Apodamiento, Amordazamiento. a
Taunting verse, vide Satyra. merry Taunts, vide Burlas, Motes, Motetes. that
Taunteth, vide Burlador, Motejador. Tauntingly, vide Amordazando, Apodando. a
Tawer or tanner of thin leather, vide Curtidor. to Tax or task, vide Taxar.
Taxation or sessement, vide Censura. one that paieth Tax, vide Pechero.
Taxing, vide Censura. Tax or tallage, vide Dacio, Forera, Pecho, Alcabala.
T E
to Teach, vide Amaestrar, Disciplinar, Ensen^ar. a Teacher, vide Ensenador,
Maestr^. Teaching, vide Ensen^anca, Diciplina. to Teame horses together, vide
Atar cavallos juntos. to Tear the hair, vide Mesar* cabellos. Tearing or
renting, vide Mesadura. to Tear or rent in pieces, vide Despedecar, Destrocar.
Tearing in pieces, vide Despedacadura, Destroco. to shed Tears, or to weep
and lament, vide Llorar, Lagrimar, Lamentar. a Tear, vide Lagrima. Teastie or
teastie, vide Enojoso. to give the Teate to a child, vide Dar el pecho al
nin^o. the Teate or dugge, vide La teta. Tedious, vide Enfadoso. Tediousnes,
vide Enfado, Mohina. Teeth, or tooth, vide Dientes. to Tell, show or declare,
vide Anunciar, Narrar, Declarar. Told or declared, vide Declarado, Contado,
Dicho. Telling, vide Diziendo o contando. to Tell, count or number, vide
Contar. Telling, numbering or reckoning, v. Contando. Temeritie or rashness, v.
Temeridad. to Temper, rule or moderate, v. Templar. Temper, vide Temperamento.
Temperature, vide Temperamento, Templanca. Temperance, vide Abstenencia,
Templanca. Temperate, vide Modesto, Templado. Temperately, vide Templadamente.
Tempering, vide Templando. a Tempest, vide Borrasca, Tempestad. Tempestuous,
vide Borrascoso, Tempestuoso. a Temple or church, vide Yglesia, Templo. the
Temples of the head, vide Las sienes. Temporal or that lasts but a time,
vide Temporal. to Tempt or entise, vide Tentar o Provocar. Temptation, vide
Tentacion. Tempted, vide Tentado. a Tempter, vide Tentador. a Tenant, vide
Arrendador, Alquilador. to Tend or give attendance, vide Atender. to Tender or
favor, vide Favorecer. Tenderly, vide Favorecidamente. Tender hearted, vide
Apiadado. to wax Tender hearted, vide Apiadar. to make Tender or soft, vide
Ablandar. Tender, vide Tierno. Tenderness, vide Terneza or Ternura. made Tender,
vide Ablandado. Tenderly, vide Tiernamente. a Tendrell or young branch of a
tree, vide Fisereta. Ten, vide Diez. to play at Tennise, vide Jugar a la
Pelota. a Tenor, vide Tenor. the Tenor, effect or purport, v. lo Dispuesto, or
lo determinado. to make Tents, vide Hazer ramadas or barracas, or chocas. a
Tent of boughs, vide Ramada. a Tent or pauilion, vide Pavellon, Tabernaculo,
Toldo, Tienda. a Tent or shop, vide Tienda. a Tent for a wound, vide Mecha. the
Tenth, vide Decimo. the Tenth penny, vide El diezmo. the Tenth or tithes, vide
Tithes. a Term of the year, vide Part del an^o. in the same Terms or
words, vide en las propias palabras. Termination, vide Determinacion.
Terriblenes or fiercenes, v. Espanto. Terrible, fierce or cruel, vide
Terrible, Cruel. Terribly, vide Terriblemente, Cruelmente. to Terrify or
fear, vide Poner miedo, Meter terror, or Espanto. a Territory, vide
Territorio. a Tertian ague, vide Terciana. a Testament, vide Testamento. to
make a Testament or will, v. Testar. a Testator, vide Testador. Testines, vide
Enojo, Mohina. Testie, vide Enojoso. to Testify, vide Testificar. Testified,
vide Testificado. Testimonial, vide Testimonio. Tetterwoort, v. Celedonia.
T H
to Thank or give thanks, v. Agradecer, Dar gracias. Thankefulnes, v.
Agradecimiento. Thankful, vide Agadecido. Thankefully, vide Con
agradecimiento. That, vide Aquello. That way, vide Aquel camino. to Thatch,
vide Cubrir con paja, Tejar con paja. Thatched, v. Cubierto, or Tejado con
paja. a Thatched house, vide Casilla pagiza, or Bohio. Thatching, vide
Cobertura con paja. to Thawe, vide Derretir. Thawing, vide Derretimiento.
Thawed, vide Derretido. a Theater, vide Anfiteatro, Coliseo, Teatro. a Thief,
v. Ladron. a littie Thief, vide Ladroncillo. Theeuishly, vide Como ladron.
Theft, vide Hurto, Ladronicio. Then, v. Entonces, Pucs. Thence, vide Aculla,
Dende. Thencefoorth, v. De alli adelante. There, vide Alla. There is, vide Ay.
Therefore, vide Por esso, por tanto. Thereof, v. De aquello. They or them, v.
E'llos, E'llas. a Thicket, vide Arcabuco. to Thicken, vide Espessar. Thickenes,
vide Espessura. Thick, vide Espesso. Thickened, vide Espessado. Thick or
often, vide Amenudo. the Thigh, vide Muslo. a Thimble, vide Dedal, or Dedil.
Thime the herb, vide Tomillo. to make Thin, vide Ralear. Thinnes, vide Raleza.
Thin, vide Ralo. made Thin, v. Ralecido. to make Thin, Enralecer, Enrarecer.
Thine, vide Tuyo. a Thing, vide Cosa. to Think, vide Cuydar, Pensar. Thought,
vide Cuydado, Pensamiento. Third, vide Tercero. the Third time, v. La tercera
vez. Thirteen, vide Treze. the Thirteenth, vide Trezeno. Thirty, vide
Treynta. the Thirtieth, vide Treynteno. to be Thirsty, vide Tener sed.
Thirste, vide Sed. Thirsty, vide Boquisecos, Sediento. bloud-Thirstie, vide
Desseador de muerte agena. This, vide Aquesso, Aquesta, Aquesto. This thing,
vide Aquesto, Aquesso. These, vide Aquestos. a Thistle, vide Cardo. the great
white Thistle, vide Cardo pinto. a young Thistle, vide Cardillo. wild Thistle,
vide Cardo silvestre. Thither, vide Alla. a Thonge, vide Atadura. a Thorn,
vide Espina. to prick like a Thorn, vide Espinar. hurt with Thorns, v.
Espinado. a Thorn bush or a place where Thorns grow, vide Espinal. Thornie,
vide Espinoso. Those, vide Aquellos. Thou, vide Tu. Though, vide Aunque.
Thought, vide Think, v. Pensamiento. Thousand, vide Mil. a Thousand fold, v.
Mil vezes. Thraldom, vide Miseria, Servidumbre, Servitud, Esclavitud. Threade,
vide Hilo. a pack Thread, vide Hilo de Acareto. to Threade a needle, vide
Enhilar aguja, Enhebrar aguja. to Threaten or menace, vide Amenazar. a
Threatener, v. Amenazador. Threaned, v. Amenazado. a Threatening, vide
Amenazas. Threede, vide Threade, v. Hilo. Three, vide Tres. to Thresh, vide
Desgranar, Trillar. Threshed, vide Desgranado, Trillado. a Thresher, v.
Trillador. a flaile to Thresh with, vide Trilla, Trillo. Threshing, vide
Trilla, Trillacon, Trillazon. a Thresholde, vide Vmbral. to Thrifallow land,
vide Barvechar terciando. to Thrive, vide Medrar. Thrift, vide Medra. Thriftie,
vide Medrado. Thriftely, vide Con medra. a Throat, vide Throat, v. Gasnate,
Garganta. the Throate-boll, vide Ervera, Tragadero. a Throane, vide Trono real.
to Throbbe or pant, v. Resollar, Cansadamente. to cut ones Throat, vide Cortar
el puescuezo. the Throat, vide Garganta, Gasnate. to Throtle, or strangle, vide
Ahogar. Throtled, vide Ahogado. a Throtling, vide Ahogamiento. to Throw or
cast, v. Tirar. to Throw down hedlong, vide Abarrancar. a Throw, vide Tiro.
Thrown, vide Tirado. Throwing, vide Tirando. one that Throws, vide Tirador.
Thrown down, vide Derribado, Derrocado, Derrumbado. a Throwing down, vide
Derrocamiento, Derrumbamiento. a Thrush, vide Zorzal. to Thrust, vide Empuxar.
to Thrust into the midst of a company, v. Abalancar. a Thrust, vide Empuxon.
Thrusted or thronged, v. Empuxado. Thrusting, vide Empuxamiento. to Thrust into
a corner, v. Arrinconar. Thrust up into a corner, vide Arrinconado. one that
Thrusts, vide El que Empuxe. a Thumb, vide Pulgar. to Thumpe or knock, vide
Apun^ar. a Thumpe, vide Pun^ada. thumping, vide Pun^ando. to Thunder, vide
Atronar. Thunder, v. Trueno, Tronido. a Thunderbolt, v. Rayo. Thundering, vide
Tronando. Thursdaie, vide Jueves. Thwart, vide Travez. Thwarting, vide
Travesan^o.
T I
to Tickle, vide Hazer cosquillas, Retocar. Tickled, vide Retocado. Ticklish,
v. Cosquilloso, Retocon. Tickling, vide Cosquillas, Retoco. Ticket, vide
Polica, Boleta. the Tide, vide la Marea. Tidie, fattie, or tender, vide Gordo y
Blando. to bring Tidings, vide Atraer nuevas. to Tie or bind, vide Amarrar,
Atar, Ligar. to Tie up or fasten the yardes of a ship in battle, v. Abocar
vergas de nao. Tied up, vide An^udado, Atado. Tied, vide Amarrado, Atado,
Ligado. one that Tieth, vide el que Amarra, ata or liga. a Tieng, vide Atadura,
Ligadura, Ligamiento. a Tigre, vide Tigre. a Tike worm that sucketh blood,
vide Garrapata, Rezno. the Tike of a bed, vide Cobertor de cama. a Tile, vide
Teja, Tejado. to cover with Tile, vide Tejar. a Tiler, vide Alban^il or
Alban^i, Alvan^il or Alvani. pauing Tile painted, vide Azulejo. Tiled, vide
Techado. a Tiling, vide Techadura. to Till, vide Cultivar, Labrar, Arar.
Tillage, vide Labranca. Tilled, vide Cultivado, Labrado, Arado. a Tilling, vide
Labranca. Till or until, vide Hasta. a Till in a chest, vide Caxon. to run a
Tilt, vide Justar. Timber, vide Madera. made with timber, vide Maderado. Timber
work, vide Emmaderamiento, Maderamiento. to make of timber, vide Emmaderar. a
Timbrell, vide Adufe. to pass the Time, v. Passar el tiempo. to serve the
Time, vide Temporizar. Time, vide Tiempo. at that Time, vide A la sason. out of
Time, vide Season. the present Time, vide Al present. Timorous, vide Pavoroso,
Temeroso, Medroso. Timerously, vide Con pavor, Con temor. the Timpanie, vide
Hidropesia. Tinder, vide E'sca. to Tingle, vide Retin^ir. a Tingling, vide
Retincte. a Tinker, vide Remendon de calderas. to Tin or cover with tin,
vide Estan^ar. Tin, vide Estan^o. Tinned, vide Estan^ado. Tinsell, vide
Oropel. Tint or half part of a bushel, vide Almud. Tinture, vide Tenidura. a
Tipe or figure, vide Figura. a Tipstaffe, vide Baculo. to Tipple or quaffe,
vide Bever mucho, Emboracharse. a Tippling gossip, vide Bevedora. to play the
Tirant, vide Tiranizar. a Tirant, vide Tirano. Tirdles of sheep, vide
Cagarrutas de carnero. Tisan or ptisan, vide Agua de cevada. to Tire or weary,
vide Enfadar, Cansa, Moler. Tired, vide Enfadado, Cansado, Molido. Tishew made
of three threads of diverse colors, vide Terliz. to Tithe out or make away the
tenth part, vide Dezmar. Tithe, vide Diezmo. Tithed, vide Diezmado. a Tither,
vide Diezmero. to Title or entitle, vide Entitular. Titled, vide Entitulado.
Tittle tattle, vide Parlaria.
T O
To, vide Para, A. a Toade, vide capo, Escuerco, Zapo. Tobaco, vide Tabaco. a
Toadstoole or mushrom, vide Hongos. a Toe, vide Dedo de pie. Together, with
much help, vide De man comun. Together, v. De man comun, Juntos. a Toie for a
child to play with, vide Brinquin^o. to Toil or labor, vide Trabajar.
Toiling or traveling, vide Trabajando. Toiles, nets or haies, vide Tumbaderas.
a Token or sign, vide Sen^al. a privy Token between two, vide Contrasen^o.
Told, vide Dicho. a Toll or tax gatherer, vide Gavelero, Peajero, Portadguero.
Toll, vide Alcabala, Peaje, Portadgo. a Toll house, vide Fondaco dogana. to
Toll or entise, vide Sonsacar. ^o Tolerate, suffer and bear, v. Tolerar.
Tolerable, v. Tolerable. a Tomb or tumbe, v. Tumba. a Tomboy, v. Muchacha
Jugadora. a Tome, a part or one volume of a book, vide Tomo de libro. a pair
of Tongs, vide Tenazas para el fuego. a Tongue, vide Lengua. hearts Tongue, vide
Lengua cervina. a fine Tongued fellow, vide Ablandador. full of Tongue, vide
Lenguaz. a Tool, vide Herramenta. a Tool with three teeth, vide Arrexaque. a
Tooth, vide Diente. a great Tooth, vide Muela. a Tooth picker, vide Escarva
dientes, Fregadientes. Toothed, vide Dentado. sharp Toothed, vide Denton.
great Toothed, vide Dentudo. to fore Teeth, vide Dientes delanteros. Teeth,
vide Dientes. Teeth an edge, vide Dentera. thin Toothed, vide Emmelgado. to
make Toothlesse, vide Desdentar. Toothlesse, vide Desdentado. to begin to have
Teeth, vide Entendecer. to Top or strike off the top, v. Cortar el cabo. the
Top on the mast of a ship, vide Gabia or Gavia. a Top where with children
play, vide Trompico, Trompo. a Top sail, vide Bonete. the Top of a hill, vide
Altura. a Top of any thing, vide Cima, Colmo, Encima. to set on the Top, vide
Encimar. a Torch or taper, vide A^cha, Antorcha, Cirio, Hacha. to Torment, vex
or grieve, vide Atormentar. Torments, vide Tormentos. Tormented, vide
Atormentado. a Tormenter, vide El que da tormento. Tormenting, vide
Atormentado. Torn, vide Andrajoso, Despedecado, Destrocado. a Tortoise, vide
Caracol, Tortuga. a Torture, vide Tormento. a Tossepot, vide Borracho. to Toss
a pike, vide Jugar de pica. Tossed, vide Arrojado. Tossing, v. Arrojando. to
Toste, vide Retostar, Tostar. a Toste, v. Tostada. Tosted, v. Retostado,
Tostado. a Tosting iron, vide Tostador de hierro. to Tose or draw out, vide
Estirar. Total, or Whole, v. Total. to Totter, v. Colunpiar. to Touch, vide
Tocar. Touched, v. Tocado. a Touching, v. Tocamiento. a Touchstone, vide Piedra
de toque. to touch with a Touchstone, vide Quilatar. touched with a Touchstone,
vide Quilatado. the touch of a Touchstone, vide Quilate. Touchpowder, v.
Polvorin. the Touchpan of a piece, v. Cacoleta fogon. a Touchboxe for a piece,
vide Frasquillo. Toughnes, vide Dureca. Tough, v. Tiesso. a Tournaying on
horseback, v. Torneos a cavallo. Towe hirdes, v. Estopa. belonging to Towe, v.
Estopen^o. Towardnes, vide De buena esperanca. Toward, vide Hazia para. a
Towell, vide Acaleja, Azaleja, Toaja, Toalla. a Tower, v. Torre. to make
Towers, v. Torrear. a watch Tower, v. Atalaya. a Tower or turret, v. Torre. a
Town, v. Pueblo. a Townesman, vide Vezino del pueblo. to Towze or pull, v.
Cardar.
T R
to Trace, vide Tracar. to Trace out, vide Entracar. a Trace, vide Traca.
Traced, vide Tracado. a Tracer, v. El que traca. Tracing, vide Tracando. to
Tracte or prolonge the time, vide Dilatar el tiempo, Diferir, Prolongar,
Alongar. the Tract of a cart wheel made in the ground, vide Rodada. to make
Tractable, v. Hazer tratable. Tractable, vide Tratable. a Trade, vide Oficio,
Trato. Tradition, v. Tradicion. to Traffic, vide Trafagar, Trafegar.
Traffic, v. Trafago. a Tragedy, v. Tragedia. to act a Tragedy, v.
Tragediar. Tragical, vide Tragico. Tragically, v. Como tragedia. a Traie, vide
Ortera. a Train, v. Seguida, gran casa. to Train up, instruct, or bring up,
vide Ensen^ar, Imponer. a Traitor, v. Aleve, Traidor, Alevoso. Traitorous,
vide Traydor, Aleve. Traitorously, vide Como traydor. to Trample or to tread,
v. Patear, Pisar. Trampled under foot, vide Pateado, Pisado. Tranquillity,
vide Tranquilidad, Sossiego, Quietud. to Transcribe, or copy out of one thing
into another, vide Trasladar. to Transfer or conueigh, v. Transferir.
Transferred, vide Transferido. to Transfigure, vide Trasfigurar, Transformar.
to Transform, vide Transfigurar, Trasformar. Transformed, vide Trasformado,
Trasfigurado. to Transgress, v. Quebrar el mandamiento, Transgredir.
Transitory, v. Transitorio. to Translate, v. Traduzir. Translated, v.
Traduzido. a Translator, v. Traduzidor. a Translation, v. Translacion. a
Transome or beam going cross an house, vide Cabrio. Transparent, or that may
be seen through, vide Diafano, Trasparente. to Transporte, carry, or
conueigh away, vide Traginar, Trasportar. Transported, v. Traspuesto,
Trasportado. a Transporter, v. el que Trasporte, el que Traspone.
Transportation, vide Trasportamiento. to Transpose or set in another place,
vide Mudar, Trasponer. to Trap a horse with trappers, vide Enjaezar el cavallo.
Trapped, v. Enjaezado, Arrado. Trappers, vide Jaezes. Trappings for a horse, v.
Arreos, jaezes, Paramentos. to Trap or take in a trap, vide Armar trampa. a
Trap stick, v. Paletilla, Paleta. a Trap, snare, or gin, v. Trampa. to
Travail or take pains in any matter, v. Travajar. Travailed, vide Travajado.
to Travail or labor, v. Afanar. Travail, labor, vide Trabajo, Afan. to
Travail or go on a journey, vide Caminar. Travail or wearines, vide Afan. a
Trauailer, vide Caminante. to Travail or be with child, v. Estar de parto. to
Trauerse, vide Atravesar, carcear. to be in a Trance, vide a Ser en paracismo,
Pasmar. a Trance, vide Parasismo, Pasmo. to work Treachery, v. Hazer
traicion. Treacle, vide Atriaca, Triaca. a Treacle maker, vide Triaquero.
Treason, vide Alevosia, Traycion. to Tread, stamp, or trample under foot, v.
Atropellar, Calcar, Hollar, Pisar. to Tread as a cock does, vide Tomar el
gallo a la Gallina. Trodden under feet, vide Hollado, Pisado, Atropellado,
Calcado. Trodden as a path, vide Asendreado, Asendrado. Treading on, vide
Holladura, Calcamiento, Pisadura, Atropelladura. Treasure, vide Tesoro. to
gather Treasure, vide Atesorar. Treasury, v. Tesoreria. a Treasure house, vide
Erario. a Treasurer. v. Tesorero. to Treat of, v. Tratar. a Treatise, vide
Tratado. Treateablie, Claro y distincto. a Treaty, tract, or covenant, v.
Concierto, Trato, Convenencia. Treble, vide Trezdoble. a Treble, vide El tiple.
a Tree, vide A^rbol. a little Tree, v. Arbolillo. Trefoile, v. Trebol. the
Treiepoint, v. Tres puntos. to Tremble or shake, vide Estremecer, Temblar,
Tremer. one that Trembles, v. Temblador. Trembling, vide Tembladura,
Estremicimiento. to Trench about, vide Atrincherar. Trenched, vide
Atrincherado. a Trench, vide Trinchea, Cava. a Trencher, v. Tajador, Tablilla.
to Trespass or offend, v. Ofender. a Trespass or offense, v. Delito, Ofensa.
a Trestle, or three footed stool, vide Ataifor, Tripies. a Treuet, v. Trevede.
True or true, v. Verdadero. Trewant or truant, vide Estudiante negligente y
floxo. Triakle, v. Atriaca. a Trial, vide Esperiencia, Prueva. a Triangle, v.
Triangulo. Triangular, vide Cosa de tres esquinas, Triangular. a Tribe, vide
Generation, Tribu. Tribulation, vide Tribulacion. a Tribune, v, Tribuno. a
Tribunal or judgment seat, v. Tribunal. a Tribute, v. Portazgo, Portasgo,
Tributo, Pecho, Alcabala. a Tribute gatherer, v. Portasguero, Portazguero,
Alcabalero. a Tributarie, v. Tributario. to Trick, or trim, v. Afeitar. to
Try, v. Esperimentar, Provar. Tried, v. Esperimentado, Provado. Trying, v.
Aprobando, O esperimentando. to Try* or fine from dregs, v. Aclarar, Adobar,
Refinar. Tried or fined, v. Refinado, Aclarado. to Trifle, or ^oye, vide
Necear. Trifling business, vide Aferes. Trifles or toies, v. Juguetes, Bugerias.
to Trim, trick, or dress up, v. Acicalar, Esmerar, Ornar. Trim, vide Apuesto,
Esmerado. Trimmed, vide Acicalado, Esmerado. Trimming, vide Acicaladura. the
Trinity, v. la Trinidad. a Tripe, vide Tripa. a Tripe market, v. Triperia.
Triple, or, threefold, v. Tresdoblado. to make Triple, vide Tresdoblar. a
Triple mase, vide Tridente. Triple iawed, vide Trifauce. to Trip, or stumble,
v. Tropecar. to Trip, v. Armar cancadilla. Tripping, v. cancadilla. a Trivet,
or treuet, vide Trebede, or Trevede. to Triumph, or rejoice greatly, v.
Triumfar. a Triumpher, vide Triumfador. Triumphing, vide Triumfante.
Triumphantly, v. como Triumfante. to Trot or shake as a horse does, v. Trotar.
Trotting, vide Trote. to Trouble, molest, disturb, or disquiet, vide
Atribular, Conturbar, Comover, Congoxar, Perturbar, Turbar. Troublesome noise,
v. Estruendo. Trouble, v. Congoxa, Empacho, Perturbacion, Turbacion. Troubled,
v. Atribulado, Conturbado, Comovido, Enfastidiado, Perturbado, Turbado.
Troubled with obstructions, vide Opilado. Troublous, vide Congoxoso, Reboltoso,
Turbulento, Turbio. Troublously, vide Congoxosamente, Turbadamente. a Trough or
binne to keep corn in, v. Panera. a watring Trough, v. Bevedero. a Trough,
such as horses drink in, or hogs feed in, v. Dornajo. a Troop or multitude
of men together, vide Caterva, Tropa. a Troop or great company of soldiers,
v. Esquadron. a Troute, vide Trucha. to kill with a Trout spear, v. Fisgar. a
Trout spear, v. Arrexaque, Fisga. to play the Truant, vide Estar holgando. a
Truce, vide Tregua. to Trucke, v. Abaratar. a Truckle wherein the roape
runs, vide Carrucha, Carillo, Polea. True, v. Verdadero. Truly, vide
Verdaderamente. Truth, vide Verdad. to speak Truth, v. Dezir verdad.
Trumperie, or old baggage, v. Cosas viejas y quebradas. to sound a Trumpet, v.
Tocar trompeta, Trompetear. a Trumpet, vide Anafil, or Trompeta, Bozina,
Trompa. a Trumpeter, vide Trompetero. a Truncheon or stake, vide Baston, Palo.
a Trunk or chest, vide Almazen, or Baul, Tronco, Troncon. Trunk to shoot in,
v. Zebratana. to Trusse or tie up, v. Arremangar, Sobarcar. to Trusse up under
the arm, vide Abarcar. Trussed, v. Arremangado, Sobarcado. Trussing, v.
Arremango. to Trust or have sure confidence, vide Confiar. Trust or confidence,
vide Confianca, Esperanca. Trusted, vide Confiado. Trusty, vide Fiel, Leal. a
Trusting, v. Confianca. Trustines, v. Fieldad, Confianca. Trustily, v.
Seguramente, Con confianca.
T V
a Tub, vide Cuba. a Tub to receive wine from the press, v. Cuba en que hazen
vendimia. a Tub wherein they knead dough, vide Amassadera, Artesa. a Tucke, or
gather up in a gown or other garment, vide Alforza de vestido. Tucked or
trussed under the arm, vide Abarcado. to Tucke or trusse up. v. Arremangar.
Tucked* up, vide Arremangado, Regacado. Tucking up, v. Arremangamiento. to Tug,
or pull, v. Tirar, or Pujar. Tugged, or pulled, v. Tirado, O pujado. Tugging,
or pulling, vide Pusando, O tirando. Tuition, or safe keeping, v. Guarda. a
Tumbe, vide Ataud, Carcava de muerte, Luzillo, Tumba. a kings Tumbe, v.
Obelisco. to Tumble, or vault, v. Boltear, or Boltejar, Rebolcar, Tumbar. to
Tumble down dangerously, v. Abarrancar. Tumbled, vide Rebolcado, Buelto. a
Tumbler, v. Bolteador, Trepador. Tumbling, or vaulting, v. Bolteadura, Buelco.
a Tumbrell or dung cart, v. Carro. to make or raise a Tumult, v. Alborocar,
Bolliciar, Alborotar. a Tumult, stir, or hurley burley, v. Alboroto, or
Barahunda, Bollicio, Bullicio, Tumulto. stirred in Tumult, v. Alborotado.
Tumultuous, v. Bollicioso, Bullicioso. Tumultuously, vide Albortodamente,
Bulliciosamente. to Tune, or measure. Also to accent, vide Entonar. to be out
of Tune, v. Desentonar. out of Tune, vide Desentonamiento. a Tune, vide Tono.
Tuned, vide Entonado. Tuning, v. Entonamiento. a Tun or nut to drink in, v.
Cubilete, O coco. to Tune or pipe, v. Tonel. to Tun or power wine into
vessels, v. Poner vino en barriles. a fish called a Tunnie, v. Atun, Bonito. a
seller of Tunnies, v. Atunero. a Tunnell, v. Embudo. a Turd, vide Mierda. a
Turbut, vide Rodavallo. a Turfe, or clod of earth, vide Cesped. a Turk, vide
Turco. a Turkey or gunnie cock or hen, vide Gallipava, Gallipavo. a Turmoile,
v. Barahunda, Alboroto, Alboroco. to Turn, v. Convert^r, Tornar. to Turn
round, vide Remolinar. Turned, v. Convertido, Buelto. a Turn coat, v.
Tornadizo. to Turn vpside down, vide Trastornar. Turned vpside down, vide
Trastornado. Turn, or course, v. Vez, Suerte. a good Turn, v.
Agradescimiento. an ill or shrewd Turn, vide Desagradecimiento. to Turn and
wind like a snake, vide Entorcer. to Turn as turners do, v. Tornear. to Turn
the inside out, v. Envessar. Turned, vide Buelto. Turned aside, v. Diuertido.
Turning aside, v. Diversion. a Turnor, vide Tornero. Turnable, v. Bolvible. to
Turn back, v. Bolver al reves. a Turning, v. Bira, Bolvimiento. to Turn, v.
Birar, Bolver. to Turn his back, v. Bolver las espaldas. a Turnament or just,
v. Torneo. a Turn broach, vide Tornador de assadores. Turpentine, v.
Termentina, Trementina. a Turnep, vide Nabo. a long slender Turnep, v. Nabica.
a place where Turnips grow, v. Nabal. a Turret, or tower, v. Torreon. a Turret
on a wall, vide Albarrana. a Turtle dove, v. Tortora, Tortola. a Tuske, vide
Dentadura, Colmillo. Tuskes of a boar, v. Colmillos. a Tutor, v. Ayo, Curador,
Governador, Tutor. a Tutresse, vide Governadora. a Tutorship, vide Tutela. a
Tuttie, nosegaie, or poesy, vide Ramillete de flores.
T W
Twain, vide Dos. to Twang like the string of an instrument, v. A fornar como
cuerda de ystrumento. Twelve, vide Doze. of Twelve years old, vide Dozenal.
Twenty, v. Veynte. to Twifallow land, v. Barvechar vinando. a young Twig or
osiar, vide Verga varilla. Twigs limed, vide Enligadas. Twilight, either in the
evening or morning, vide Bislumbre, or Vislumbre, Entrelubricano. Twilight in
the morning, v. A'lva madrugada. a Twinne, vide Mellizo. to Twinkle with the
eye, vide Quin^ar, Mecer el ojo, Parpadear. the Twinkling of an eye, vide
Momento. Twice, vide Dos vezes. to Twist, vide Torcer. Twisted, vlde Torcido.
to Twit or vpbraid, vide Dar en cara. Two, vide Dos. of Two years, vide Dos
an^os. Two hundred, vide Dozientos.
V
to be VAcant or empty, vide Vacarse, Vaziarse, Estar vazio. a Vacation, vide
Vacacion. Vacant, vide Vacant. a Vagabond, vide Vagamundo. a Veil, vide
Antefaz. a Veil for the head, vide Cofia or Coffia. a Vain, vide Vena. Vainly
or in vain, vide En balde, En vano. Veins under the tongue, vide Agitides. a
Vain of gold or silver, vide Venero. a Vain or weathercocke, vide Veleta.
Vaineglorie, vide Vanagloria. Vaineglorious, vide Vanaglorioso. to do a thing
in Vain, vide Hazer algo en vano. Vainly, vide Vanamente. the Vallance of a
bed, vide Cenefa. Valiant, vide Eroyco, Heroico, Valiente, Esforcado, Fuerte,
Magnanimo, Valoroso. to adventure Valiantly, vide Esforcar. Valiantnes, vide
Esfuerco. Valiantly, vide Fuertamente, Valientemente. a Vallie, vide Valle.
Valor, vide Valor, Esfuerco, Animosidad. Valorous, vide Valeroso, Esforcado,
Animoso. Valorously, vide Valerosamente, Esforcadamente. to Value or prise,
vide Apreciar, Estimar, Avaliar. Value, vide Aprecio, Estima, Valor. Valued,
vide Apreciado, Avaliado, Estimado. a Valuer, vide Apreciador, Avaliador. of
Value alike, vide Equivalencia. of no Value, vide Que no vale nada, De ningun
valor. ta Vanish, vide Desparecer, Desvanecer. Vanished, vide Desvanecido.
Vanishing, vide Desvanecimiento. Vanity, vide Vanidad, Liviandad. to Vanne or
fan, vide Ablentar, Alimpiar. to Vanquish or overcome, vide Conquistar,
Aquistar, Ganar, Vencer. a Vanquisher, vide Conquistador, Vencidor. Vanquished,
vide Conquistado, Vencido. a Vantage or overplus, vide Ventaja. to get Vantage,
vide Ventajar. a Vapor, vide Vapor. to send out Vapors, vide Vaporear. to
Vary or be at variance, vide Desconvenir, Desconcertar, Enojar. Variable, vide
Variable. Variety, vide Variedad. a Varlet or slave, vide Endiablado, Vil,
Dan^ado. to Varnish, vide Pavonear. a Vassal, vide Vassallo. made a Vassal,
vide Avassallado. Vassallage, vide Vassallaje. a Vate or fat, vide Pipa. to
Vault or make hollow, vide Bovedar. a Vault, vide Arco de boveda, or Bobeda. a
little Vault, vide Bovedilla. a Vaulter or tumbler, vide Bolteador or
Boltejador. to Vault on a horse, vide Boltear or Boltejar. Vaulting, vide
Bolteando, Boltejeando, to Vaunt, boast or brag, v. Alabarse, Jatar. Vaunting,
vide Alabando, Jatando. a Vaunter, vide Alabancioso, Jatancioso. the Vaunt
guard, vide Avanguardia.
V D
an Vdder, vide U'bre.
V E
Veale, vide Ternera. Vehement, vide Vehemente. to be Vehement, vide Hemenciar.
Vehemency, vide Hemencia, Vehemencia. Vehemently, vide Con vehemencia. Velame,
vide Pergamino. Veldaueres a bird so called, vide corral, Zorral. Velvet, vide
Terciopelo. Velvet unshorn or shag, vide Felpa. Vendible or which may be
sold, vide Vendible. to Venime or poison, vide Enconar, Emponcon^ar. Venimed,
vide Enconado, Emponconado. Venomous, v. Venenoso, Poncon^oso. to Venge or
revenge, vide Vengar. Vengeance, vide Venganca. a Venie at fence, vide Levada.
Venison, vide Venaizon. young Venison, vide Corcillo. to Vent or wind as a
spaniell does, vide Rastrear, Sacar por el rastro. Venial or pardonable, vide
Perdonable, Venial. to Venture, hazard or adventure, vide Aventurar, Ariscar. a
Verdict, vide Sentencia. green Verdigreace, vide Cardenilla, Verderame. a
Verdingale, vide Verdugado. Verily or truly, vide En verdad. a Verger of a
church, vide Pertiguero de Yglesia. a pair of Virginals, vide Clavicordios.
Very, vide Muy. to Verify or prove a thing, vide Averguar, Verificar.
Verified, vide Averiguado. Verifying a thing to be so, vide Averiguacion.
Verily, vide Afe. Verity or truth, vide Verdad. Veriuice, vide Agras. a Verlet
or varlet, vide Endioblado. Vermilion, vide Bermellon, Mermellon. Vernish, vide
Barniz or Berniz. Vernishing, vide Embarnizadura. Vernished, vide Barnizado. to
Vernish, vide Barnizar, Embarnizar. to Versifie or make verses, vide Hazer
versos, Versificar. a staff of Verses, vide Copla. a Versifier, vide Poeta. a
Verse, vide Verso, Carmen. Virtue, vide Virtud. Virtuous, vide Virtuoso.
Virtuously, vide Virtuosamente. a Vessel, vide Vasija, Vaso. Vessels of earth,
vide Loca. to put into Vessels, vide Enbasar, Envasar. a little Vessel, vide
Vasillo. a Vestment, vesture or garment, vide Vestimiento, Vestido. a Vestrie,
vide Vistuario, Sacristia. to Vex, trouble or torment, vide Enojar,
Apassionar, Apesarar, Atribular, Fanar, Amohinar. a Vexation, vide Vexacion,
Molestia. Vexed, vide Atribulado, Apassionado, Apesarado, Amohinado, Enojado. a
Vexer, vide El que molesta, El que amohina or da passion.
V G
Vgglie, horrible or hideous, vide Espantoso, Espantable, Prodigioso.
V I
a Viage, vide Viage, Viaje. a Vial to play on, vide Vihuela. a Vial de
Gamba, vide Vihuela de arco. a Vial or little glass, vide Ampolleta, Ampolla.
a Vicar, vide Vicario. a Vicarage, vide Vicaria. a Vice or iester in a play,
vide Momo, Momio. a Vice or spindle in a press, vide Tornillo. a Vice or
wicked fault, vide Vicio. to become Vicious, vide Aviciarse. made Vicious, vide
Aviciado. Vicious, vide Vicioso. a Vice Admiral, vide Teniente del Almirante.
the Vice Admiral ship, vide Almiranta. a Viceroy, vide Virey, Visorey. a
Vice-count, vide Vizconde. a Vicegerent, vide Virey. to Viciate or defloure,
vide Deflorar, Desvirgar, Estrupar. a Victory, vide Bitoria or Vitoria.
Victorious, vide Victorioso. to Victual or furnish with victuals, vide
Avituallar. to sell Victuals, vide Vender de comer, Vender de vituallas. a
Victualler, vide Vituallero, Vivandero, Bivandero. Victuals, vide Bitualla,
Vianda, Vituallas. to Vie as at cards, vide Embidar. Vying at game, vide
Embite. by Vying or striving, vide Aporf^a. a Vie, vide Aprueva. to View,
behold or consider, vide Considerar, Mir^r. a View, vide Vista. to be Vigilant,
vide Vigilar. Vigilant, vide Vigilante. Vigilantly, vide Con vigilancia. Vile,
vide Vil. to be Vile, vide Ser vil, Baxo, or Ruyn. to make Vile, vide Aviltar.
Vileness, vide Avilteza, Vileza. Vildly esteemed, vide Apocado. Vilely, vide
Abiltadamente. a Village or country town, v. Aldea, Pueblo pequen^o.
Villainy, vide Villania, Vellacaria. Villanously, vide Villanamente,
Maliciosamente. a Villain, v. Malicioso. to wax vile, v. Envilecer. made
Vile, v. Envilecido. a Vine branch, v. Cepa. a little Vine branch, v. Cepilla.
a Vine, v. Parra. to cut leaves from a Vine, v. Despampanar. cutting of leaves
from Vines, vide Despanadura. Vinegar, v. Vinagre. a Vinegar bottle, v.
Vinagrero. made sharp with Vinegar, vide Avinagrado. a Vintage, v. Vendimia. a
Vintener, v. Tavernero. a Vinyarde, v. Vin^a, Vin^eda. a Vinyard keeper, v.
Vin^adero. to Violate or break, v. Violar, Quebrantar, Romper, Traspassar.
Violated, v. Violado, Quebrantado, Traspassado. Violating of women, v. Estrupo.
a Violator, vide Violador. to play on a Viole, vide Tan^er vihuela. a Viole to
play on, v. Vihuela. a Viole de Gamba, v. Vihuela de arco. a Viole glass,
vide Redoma. to take by Violence, vide Tomar por fuerca. Violence, vide Fuerca,
impetu, Violencia. Violent, vide Briento, Violento. Violently, v.
Fuercosamente, Forcosamente, Impetuosamente. white Violets, or the flower
deluce, vide Alhaili, or Alhayli. a Violet, v. Violeta. a Viper, v. Bicha,
Bivora. a young Viper, v. Bivorezno. Virginals, vide Clavicordia. a Virgin,
vide Virgen, Donzella. Virginity, v. Virginidad. Virginlike, vide Como Virgen,
como donzella. a Visage, v. Cara, Visage, Rostro. a Visarde, v. Mascara,
Caratula, Caranton^a. Visible, v. Visible. Visiblie, vide Visiblamente. a
Vision, v. Vision. to Visit, vide Visitar. a Visitation, v. Visita. the
Vitalles, v. Vitales.
V L
an Ulcer, vide Vlcerado, Cancerado.
V M
the Vmbrage or shadow of woods and trees, v. Sombra de arboles. an Vmpire or
arbiter, v. Apaziguador, A'rbitro.
V N
Unable, v. Inabil, Insuficiente. to make Unable, v. Inabilitar. Unableness, v.
Inabilidad, Insuficiencia. Unaccustomed, vide Desusado, Desacostumbrado.
Unacquainted, v. No conocido. Unadvised, v. Mal avisado, Inconsiderado. to do
any thing Unadvisedly, vide Desatentar. Unadvisedness, vide Inconsideracion.
Unadvisedly, vide Atroche y much Desapersabidamente. Vnallowed, vide No
permitido. Unapt, vide Inabil. to make Unapt, vide Inabilitar. Unaptness, vide
Inabilidad. to Unarm, vide Desarmar. Unarmed, vide Desarmado. Vnarming, vide
Desarmadura. Unawares, vide Ahurtadillos, de Improviso, Repentin^o, de Repent.
Vnasswaged, v. No apaziguado. Vnawaked, v. Dormiendo. to Vnbarre, v
Desembarrar. Unbegotten, v. No engendrado. Unbelief, vide Incredulidad. to
Vnbende a bow, v. Desempulgar arco. Vnbending, vide Desempulgadura. Unbent,
vide Desempulgado. Unbidden, vide No mandado, No Combidado. to Unbind books,
vide Desenquadernar libros. to Unbind, v. Desatar, Desligar, Desan^udar.
Unbinding, vide Desatando, Desligando, Desan^udando. Unbound, v. Desatado,
Desan^udado, Desligado. Unbloody, v. Sin sangre. Vnboiled, vide Crudo. to
Vnbolt, v. Descerrajar. Unbought, vide Por conprar, No comprado. Unborn, v.
Por nacer, No nacido. to Unbridle, v. Desenfrenar, Quitar el fteno. Unbridled,
vide Desenfrenado, Quitado el freno. Vnbridling, vide Desenfrenamiento.
Unbroken, v. Entero, no Quebrado, Sano. to Unbuckle, vide Deshevillar. Unbuilt,
v. Por edificar, No edificado. to Unburden, v. Descargar. Vnburdned, v.
Descargado. Unburied, vide Por enterrar, No enterrado. Unburned, v. Por quemar,
No quemado. to Vnbutton, vide Desabotonar. Vnbuttoned, vide Desabotonado.
Vnbuttoning, vide Desabotonadura. Incapable of learning, vide Incapaz.
Vncaught, vide Por tomar, No tomado. Uncertainty, v. Incertidumbre.
Uncertain, vide Incierto. Uncertainly, vide Inciertamiente, Sin certeza.
Incessantly, v. Sin cessar. to Vnchaine, v. Desencadenar. Unchangeable, v.
Imutable, Sin mudanca. Unchaste, vide Incontinente, Incasto. Vnchipt, vide Por
descortecar, No Descortezado. Uncircumspect, vide Inconsiderado, Inavisado.
Uncivil, vide Mal criado, Descortes. to Unclasp, v. Desabrochar. Unclasped,
v. Desabrochado. Vnclad, v. Desnudo. an Uncle, vide Tio. to be Unclean, vide
ser Suzio. Unclean, vide Immundo, Suzio. Uncleanness, vide Suziedad.
Uncleanly, vide Suziamente. Vnclensed, vide Suzio, No limpiado. Vncleft, vide
Entero, No hendido. to Unclose, vide Abrir, Desencerrar. an Vnclosing of that
which was shut, vide Abertura, Desencerradura. to Unclothe, vide Desnudar.
Unclothed, vide Desnudo. Vncomlines, vide Desdon, Desalin^o, Descompostura.
Uncomely, vide Desalin^ado, Descompuesto. Vncommodiously, vide Sin comodo.
Uncondemned, v. Por sentenciar, No sentenciado. Vnconsequently, vide No
consequente. Unconquered, vide Por vencer, No vencido, Invicto. Inconstantly,
vide Inconstantemente. Inconstancy, vide Inconstancia, Instabilidad.
Unconstant, vide Inconstante, Instable, Mudable. Unconsumed, v. Por gastar, No
gastado, Por consumir, No consumido. Inconvenient, vide No conveniente,
Inconveniente. Uncorrected, vide Por castigar, No castigado, Incorregido.
Uncorrupted, vide Entero, Incorrupto. Vncorrupt, vide idem. Incorruptly, vide
Sin corrupcion. Incorruptible, v. Incorruptible. to Uncover, v. Descobijar,
Desatapar, Descubrir. Uncovered, v. Descobijado, Descubierto, Desatapado. to
Uncouple, vide Desun^ir, Desunzir. Uncoupled, vide Desun^ido, Desunzido. an
Vncoupler, vide Desun^idor, Desunzidor. Incredible, v. Increyble. Discourteous,
vide Descortes, Inhumano. Discourteously, v. Descortesamente, Inhumanamente.
Uncouth, vide Inaudito. Uncunning, v. Sin sciencia, Sin arteficio. Incurable,
v. Sin remedio, Incurable. Uncut, v. Por cortar, No cortado. Vndecked, vide
Desardornado, Descompuesto. to Vndecke, vide Desadornar. Undefiled, v.
Imaculado, No manchado. to be Under, vide a Ser de Baxo. to Vnderlaie, vide
Poner de baxo. Vnderlaying, vide Poniendo de paxo. Vnderlaide, v. Puesto de
baxo. an Underling, vide Criadillo, Minor. to Undermine, v. Descimentar, Minar,
Socavar. Undermined, v. Descimentado, Minado, Socavado. Underneath, vide Abaxo,
Debajo. to Underprop, vide Apoyar, Apuntalar. Underpropped, vide Apoyado,
Apuntalado. Vndershorers, vide Puntales, Estantes. to Underset, v. Apuntalar,
Apoyar. Underset, vide Apuntalado, Apoyado. to Understand, vide Entender,
Saber. Understanding, v. Entendimiento, Intelligencia, Sabiduria. belonging to
Understanding, vide Intelectual. Understood, v. Entendido, Sabido. to
Undertake, vide Encargarse, Emprender, Tomar a su cargo. that Undertakes for
another, v. Abonador. Undertaken, v. Encargado, Tomado a su cargo, Emprendido.
Undertaking for another, vide Abonamiento. an Undertaking, v. Empresa, Encargo.
Undeservedly, v. Sin merecer, Sin merecimiento, Imerito, No merecido.
Vndeterminate, vide Por determinar, No determinado. Undigested, vide Indigesto.
Vndiscreetenes, vide Indescrecion. Indiscreet, vide Imprudente, Indescreto.
Undiscreetly, vide Imprudentemente, Indiscretamente. Vndistained, vide Sin
manchar, No manchado. Vndistinctly, v. No distinctamente. to Undo, vide
Deshazer. Undoing, vide Deshazemiento. Undone, v. Deshecho. Vndeuoutly, vide
Sin devocion. Undoubtedly, v. Sin duda. Undoubtedly, vide Atrebidamente.
Vndried, vide Mojado, No Enxuto. Vneasines, vide Dificultad. Uneasy, v.
Dificultoso. Uneasily, v. Dificultosamente. Unequal, v. Desigual, Impar. to
make Unequal, vide Desigualar. Inequality, vide Desparidad, Desigualdad.
Unequally, vide Desigualmente. Inestimable, vide Inestimable. Uneven, vide
Desygual, Desempar. to make Uneven, vide Desemparejar, Desygualar. Vneuennes,
vide Desparejo, Desygualdad. Unevenly, v. Desygualmente. Inevitable, vide
Inevitable. Inexcusable, vide Sin escusa, Inescusable. Inexpert, v. Inexperto.
Vnexpertly, vide Neciamente, Sin experiencia. Unfaithfulness, vide Deslealtad,
Infidelidad. Unfaithful, vide Infiel, Perfido, Desleal. Unfaithfully, vide
Perfidamente, Deslealmente. Infallible, vide Infallible, Sin falta ninguna.
Infallibly, v. Infalliblemente. Unfashioned, v. Sin Faycion. to Vnfasten, vide
Despegar. Vnfastened, vide Desapegado. Unfed, vide Sin dar de comer, No
saciado. Unfeigned, vide Verdadero, No fingido. Vnfensed, vide Sin defensa.
Unfeathered, vide Sin plumas, Desplumado. to Vnfetter, v. Quitar los grillos.
Vnfettered, vide Quitados los grillos. Unfinished, v. Por acabar, No acabado.
Unfitness, vide Sin conveniencia. Unfit, vide Desconvenible. Unfitly, vide Sin
conveniencia. to Unfold, vide Desembolver, Descoger, Desplegar. Unfolded, v.
Descogido, Desplegado, Desembuelto. Unfortunate, v. Desdichado, Infausto, mal
logrado, malhadado, Infortunado, Infelice. Unfortunate years, vide Climeterios
an^os. Unfortunately, vide Desdichadamente. Unfound, vide Por hallar, No
hallado. Unfruitful, or Barren, vide Sin fructo. Unfurnished, v. Desproveido,
Desfornecido. to Unfurnish, vide Desguarnecer, Desproveer. Vngainefull, vide
Sin ganancia, sin logra. Ungarnished, v. Desadornado, Desornado, Desguarnecido.
to Vngarnish, vide Desguarnecer, Desadornar, Desornar. Ungathered, v. Por
coger, No cogido. Vngilded, v. Desdorado. to Vngild, v. Desdorar. to Vngirde,
v. Descen^ir. Vngirded, vide Descn^ido. to Vnglue, v. Desengrudar. Vnglued,
vide Desengrudado. Vngluing, vide Desengrudamiento. Ungodliness, vide Maldad,
Impiedad. Ungodly, v. I'mpio, Malo. Ungratefulness, v. Desagradecimiento.
Ungrateful, vide Desagradecido. Ungratefully, v. Desagradesidamente.
Ungraciousness, vide Vellaqueria. Ungracious, vide Malvado, Vellaco.
Vngratiously, v. Malvadamente, Vellacamente. Vnhabilitie, vide Inabilidad. a
place Uninhabited, vide Inabitado. Uninhabitable, vide Inabitable. Unhallowed, vide
Por santear, No sanctificado. to Vnhalter, vide Descabestrar. Vnhandsomnes,
vide Desatavio, Desalin^a, Descompuestura. Vnhandsomly, vide Desataviadamente,
Desalin^adamente. Unhandsome, vide Desataviado, Inculto, Desalin^ado.
Unhappiness, vide Infelicidad, Infortunio, Desgracia. Unhappy, vide Infelice,
Infortunado, Desgraciado. Vnharmefull, vide Inocente. Unhealed, vide Por sanar,
No sano. Unwholesome, vide Insano. Dishonest, vide Dehonesto. Unhonestly, vide
Deshonestamente. to Unhorse, v. Derribar de cavallo. Unhurt, vide No dan^ado.
Unhusbanded, vide No labrado. a Unicorn, vide Vnicornio. an Uniformity, vide
Conformidad. to Vnioine, vide Desapegar. Vnioined, vide Desapegado. to Vnioint,
vide Descoyuntar. Vniointed, vide Descoyuntado. Union, vide Union. to Unite,
vide Apin^ar, Unir. United, vide Apin^ado, Unido. Unity, vide Unidad.
Universal, vide Universo, Universal. Universally, vide Universalmente. an
University, vide Academia. a student of the University, vide Academico.
Injustice, vide Injusticia, Sin razones. Unjust, vide Iniquo, Injusto.
Unjustly, vide Injustamente. Vniudged, vide Por jusgar, No juzgado, No
sentenciado. Vnkembed, vide Por peynar, No peynado. Unkindness, vide Desamor. to
Unknit, vide Desan^udar. Unknit, vide Desan^udado. Vnknitting, vide
Desan^udura. Unknown, vide Incognito, No conocido. to Unlace, vide
Desabrochar. Unlawful, vide Ilicito. Unlawfulness, vide Ilegalidad. Unlawfully,
vide Ilicitamente. Unlearned, vide Sin letras, Indocto, Idiota. Unleavened,
vide Sin levadura. Unless, vide Sino. Unless that, vide Sino que. Unlike,
vide Dessemejante. to be Unlike, vide Dessemejar. Unlikely, vide
Dessemejantemente. to Unlock, vide Descerrajar. Unlocked, vide Descerrajado.
to Unload, vide Descargar. Vnloded, vide Descargado. Unlooked for, vide
Unthought of. Unloving, vide Desanamorado. Unlucky, vide Infelice,
Infortunado, Deschichado, Desventurado. Vnluckines, vide Desdicha, Infortunio,
Desgracia, Desventura. Unluckily, v. Infortunadamente, Desdichadamente.
Unlusty, vide Entorpecido, Floxo. Vnlustines, vide Entorpecimiento,
Entornecimiento. to wax Unlusty, vide Entorpecer. to Vnmaile, vide Desmallar.
Vnmailed, vide Desmallado. Vnmailing, vide Desmalladura. to Unmake, vide
Deshazer. to be Unmannerly, vide Descomedir. Vnmanerlinesse, vide Desacato,
Descomedimiento. Unmannerly, vide Descomedidamente, Desacatadamente,
Desmedidamente. Unmanured, vide Por labrar, No labrado. Unmeasurable, v.
Demasiado, Desmesurado, Imenso, Imoderado. to be Unmeasurable, vide Desmezurar.
Unmeet, vide Inconveniente. Vnmeetenes, vide Inconveniencia. Unmerciful, vide
Inpiadoso, Cruel. Unmindful, vide Oluidado. Unmingled, vide Sin mescla.
Vnmodestie or immodestie, vide Inmodestia. Vnmoderate, vide Imoderado,
Desmoderado. Vnmotheaten, vide Desapollillado. Immovable, vide Immovible,
Immobil. to Vnnaile, vide Deshincar, Desclavar. Vnnailed, vide Deshincado,
Desclavado. Unnaturally, vide Sin naturaleza. Unnoble, vide Baxo, Vil, Apocado,
Cevil. Unoccupied, vide No vsado. to leave Unoccupied, vide Desocupar.
Unorderly, vide Difuso, Indevidamente, Sin orden. Unpaid, vide Por pagar, No
pagado. Unpainted, vide Por pintar, No pintado. Impatient, vide Impaciente.
Impatiently, vide Impacientemente. Vnpartable, vide No partible. Imperfect,
vide Imperfecto. to Vnpinne, vide Desenclavar, Desprender. Vnpinned, vide
Desenclavado, Desprendido. Unpleasant, vide Desplazible, Desgustoso. Unpleasant
in taste, vide Desgustoso. Unpleasantly, vide Desdonadamente, Desgustosamente.
Vnplowed, vide Por arar, Por labrar, No arado, No labrado. Unpolished, vide No
polido. Impossible, vide Impossible. Unprepared, vide Desaparejado.
Unprofitable, vide Inutil, Sin provecho. Improper, vide Improprio. Unprovided,
vide Desproveido. Improvident, vide Sin providencia, Mal proveydo.
Unprosperous, vide Infelice, Desdichado. Unpunished, vide Impunido. Vnpure,
vide Impuro. Vnquailed, vide Sin temor, Sin miedo. Unquenched, vide Por apagar.
Unquiet, vide Inquieto, Impaciente. Unquietly, vide Impacientemente.
Unquietness, vide Inquietud. Unread, vide Por leer, No leydo. Unready, vide
Desaparejado. Unreasonable, vide Sin razon. Unrecoverable, vide Irrecuperable.
Unregarded, vide Desden^ado. Vnreuerent, vide Mal criado, Desacatado.
Unreproved, vide Irreprensible. Unrevenged, vide Por bengar, No vengado.
Unrewarded, vide Por satisfazer, No golardonado. Unrighteousness, vide
Injusticia. Unrighteous, vide Injusto, Sin justicia. Unrighteously, vide
Injustamente. Vnripenes, vide Por madurar, O verde, or No maduro. to Vnroll,
vide, Desarrollar. Unruly, vide Desenfrenado. to Vnsaddle, vide Desensillar.
Vnsaddled, vide Desensillado. Unsalted, vide Por salar, No salado, Sin Sal.
Vnsaileable, v. Innavegable. to Vnsaie, vide Desdezir. Unsaluted, vide Por
Saludar, No saludado. Insatiable, v. Insaciable. Unsatiably, v.
Insaciablemente. Unsavory, vide Desabrido, Insipido. Vnsauorines, v.
Desabrimiento, Sin savor. to Unseal, v. Abrir cartas. Unsearchable, v.
Inescrutable. Unseasonable, v. Sin sazon. Unseemly, v. Indecente. Inseperable,
v. Inseparable. Unshamefastness, vide Desverguenca. Unshamefast, v. Desverg
oncado. Unshapen, v. Mal tallado, Mal hecho, Difforme. to Vnship, vide
Desembarcar. to Vnshoe, v. Descalcar. Unshod, vide Descalcado. Unskillfulness, v.
Ignorancia. Unskillful, vide Ignorante. Unskillfully, v. Ignorantemente.
Vnsodden, v. Crudo, no cozido. to Vnsolder, v. Desoldar. to Vnsow, vide
Descoser. Unsown, v. Descosido. Vnsowing, vide Descosidura. Unspeakable, v.
Inefable. Unspent, v. Por gastar, No gastado. Vnspited at, v. Sin odio.
Unspoken of, vide No hablado, No dicho. Unspotted, v. Imaculado. Unstable, v.
Incierto, Inconstante, Mudable. Unstained, v. Imaculado. Unsteadfastness, v.
Instabilidad, Inconstancia. Unsteadfast, v. Instable, Inconstante. Vnstedfastly,
v. Inconstantamente. to Unstop, v. Destapar. Unstopped, v. Destapado.
Vnstopping, v. Destapamiento. Vnstuffed, v. Vazio. Unsure, vide Incierto.
Insufferable, v. Incomportable, Insufrible. Vnsundred, vide Juntos, No
apartados. Vnswathe, vide Desfaxar, Desfaysar. Unsweet, v. Amargo. Unsworn,
v. Por jurar, No jurado. Untaken, vide Por tomar, No tomado. Untamed, vide
Indomito. an Untamed beast, vide Cerril, No domado, Indomito. Untameable, vide
Indomiable. Untasted, vide Por probar, O por gustar, No provado, No gustado.
Untaught, vide No ensen^ado. Intemperate, vide Destemplado, Desordinado.
Vntestate, vide Sin testar. to be Unthankful, vide Desagradecer. Unthankful,
vide Desagradecido, Ingrato. Unthankfulness, vide Desagredecimiento,
Ingratitud. Unthought of, vide No pensado. Unthriftiness, vide Progalidad. an
Unthrift, vide Prodigo. Unthrifty, idem. Unthriftily, v. Prodigalmente. to
Untie, vide Desatar, Desligar. Untied, v, Desligado, Desatado. to Until, v.
Desladrillar, Destejar. Vntiled, vide Destejado. Vntiling, vide Destejadura.
Until, vide A tanto, Hasta. Untilled, v. Por arar, Por labrar, No arado, No
labrado. Untimely, v. Sin tiempo. Unto, vide Al. Untold, v. Por dezir, No
dicho. Intolerable, vide Intolerable. Untouched, v. No tocado. Untoward, vide
Perverso, Traviesso. Untowardly, vide Apospelo, Perversamente. Intractable, v.
Intractable. Vntractablenes, v. Intractabilidad. Untrimmed, v. Por afeitar, No
afeytado. Untruth, v. Sin verdad, Mentira. Untrusty, v. Desconfiado.
Untunable, v. Insonoro. to Untwine, v. Desmaran^ar. Untwined, v. Desmaran^ado.
to Untwist, vide Deshilar. Untwisted, v. Deshilado. Vntwisting, v. Deshiladura.
Unvanquished, v. Invicto. Invincible, v. Invencible. Unviolable, v. Inviolable.
Unused, vide Inusado. Unwalled, v, Sin paredes. Unwary, v. Incauto, Improviso.
Unwashed, v. Por labar, No lavado. Vnwatred, v. Por regar, No regado. to
Unweave, vide Destexer. Vnweaued, v. Destexado. Vnweauing, v. Desteximiento.
Unwedded, v. Por casar, No casado. Unwieldy, v. Demasiado grande. Unwilling, v.
Sin gana, Sin voluntad. Unwillingly, v. Sin voluntad. to Unwind, v.
Desarrebolver. Unwise, vide Imprudente. Unwisely, v. Imprudentemente. Vnwished,
v. Sin Deseo, No desseado. to Vnwitch, vide Desencantar. Unwittingly, vide
Impensadamente. Unwonted, v. No acostumbrado. Vnworkemanlike, v. No como
oficial, No como diestro ensu oficio. Vnworne, vide Por traer, No traydos.
Unworthy, vide Indigno, Indino. to Unwrap, vide Desenrrollar. Vnwrapped, vide
Desenrrollado. to Vnwreathe, vide Destorcer. Unwritten, vide Por escrebir, No
escrito. Unwrought, vide Por labrar, No labrado. to Unyoke, vide Desunzir.
Vnyoked, vide Desunido, Desunzido. Vnyoking, v. Desunzimiento.
V O
a Vocation or calling, vide Oficio. the Vocative case, v. el Vocativo caso to
make Void, vide Evacuar, Vaziar. a Volume, vide Bolume or Bolumen, Volumen. a
Volley of shot, vide Ruciada, Rociada. Voluntary, vide Voluntario.
Voluntarily, vide Espontaneamente. Voluptuousnes, vide Plazeres, Deleytes.
Voluptuous, vide Voluptuoso. Voluptuously, vide Con plazer, Con deleyte. to
Vomit, vide Bossar, Gomitar, Vomitar. to Vomit at sea, vide Marear. Vomited,
v. Vomitado, Bossado, Gomitado. Vomiting, vide Gomito, Gomitadura, Vomito,
Bossadura. to Vow, vide Botar or Votar, Hazer voto. a Vow, vide Boto or Voto.
Vowed, vide Botado, Votado. a Vowell, vide Vocal. a Voice, vide Voz. a great or
big Voice, vide Boz abultada. Void, vide Baldio, Vazio. to make Void, vide
Anular or Anullar.
V P
Vplandish, vide Villano, Rustico. to Uphold, vide Sustentar, Mantener,
Sopotar. Vpholden, v. Sustentado, Mantenido. an Vpholster, vide Colchero. Upon,
vide Encima. to Vpbraid, vide caherir, Dar en cara. Vpbraiding, vide
caherimiento. Upper, vide Mas, Encima. Upright, vide Derecho. Uprightly, vide
Derechamente. an Uproar, vide Rumor, Tumulto, Ruydo. Upward, vide Hazia,
Arriba.
V R
Vrbanitie, vide Crianca, Vrbanidad. an Vrchin, vide Erizo. to come in Ure,
vide a Venir en uso. to Urge, vide Compeler, Impeler. Urged, vide Compelido.
Urgent, vide Necessario, Vrgente. Vrgently, vide Ocasionadamente. Urine, vide
Orina. a Vrinall, vide Orinal.
V S
Us, vide Nosotros. Usage, vide Tratamiento. to Use or occupy, vide Ocupar.
Use, vide Ocupacion. a gentleman Usher, vide Maestre sala. Usury, vide Logro,
Renuevo, Usura. to get by Usury, vide Lograr. a Usurer, vide Logrero,
Vsurario. to Usurp, vide Vsurpar. Usurped, vide Vsurpado. an Usurper, vide El
que vsurpa. Usurping, vide Vsurpando.
V T
Utility, vide Vtilidad, Comodidad. to Utter, vide Dezir, Esprimir. Utterance,
vide Espresiva. Uttered, vide Espresso. Uttering, vide Esprimiendo. Utterly,
vide Abarrisco. the Uttermost, vide Estremo.
V U
Vulgar or common, vide El comun, Vulgarly, vide Comunmente, Vulgarmente. a
Vulture, vide Bueytre. a place where Vultures use, vide Buytrera.
W
to WAde, vide Vadear. a Wafer, vide Obleas. to Wag, vide Menear. to Wag the
tail, vide Rabear, Colear. a Wagtaile, vide Rabirubio. a Wagging, vide Meneo.
a Wager, vide Apuesta. to lay a Wager, vide Apostar. Wages, vide Salario,
Sueldo. a Wagon, vide Carro para cargar gente. a Flemmish Wagon, vide Carro de
Flandes. a Wagoner, v, Carretero. a wagtaile, v. Abadejo, Aguzamieve. a Way,
vide Camino, Via. to go out of the Way, vide Desviar. gone out of the Way,
vide Desviado. going out of the Way, vide Desvio. a Waifaring man, vide
Viandante. the kings high Way, vide Camino real. a little narrow Way, vide
Caminillo. this Way and that way, vide Allende y aquende. uneasy Ways to
go in high and low, vide Altibaxos. a place in heaven called by Astronomers
Via lactea, the milk white Way, vide Camino de Sant Yago en el cielo. Weight
or weight, vide Peso. to Wail, yell or cry out, vide Guayar, Llorar. one that
Waileth, vide Guayador. Wailing, vide Duelo, Guayas, Lloro. a Waine or cart,
vide Carreta. the Waine of the moon, vide Menguante de luna. the Waiste,
middle or girdle sted, vide La cintura. to Wait for, vide Esperar, Aguardar.
to Wait upon, vide Servir. a lying in Wait, v. Acechanca. a Waiter, vide
Criado, or serbidor. any thing lying in Wait, v. Acechadora cosa. Waiting or
tarrying, vide Aguardando, Esperando. by lying in Wait, vide A cechando.
Waits, certain musical instruments so called, v. Chirimias. Waiwardnes, v.
Travessura, Contumacia. Waiwarde, vide Contumas, Traviesso. Waiwardly, v.
Contumazmente. to Wake or watch, v. Velar, Desvelar. Wakened, vide Despertado.
Waking, vide Dispertando. an herb called Wake-robin, vide Aaron. Wakes or
contrie feasts, vide Fiestas, or bayles. to Walk, vide Andar, Passear. the
Walk a shipboarde, vide Combs. the Walk in the gallie, vide Cruxia. one that
Walks, vide Passeador. to Walk abroad in the air, vide Espaciarse,
Passearse. Walking, vide Passeo. a place to Walk in, vide Anden, Passeo,
Passeadero. to Wall in or about, vide Cercar con muralla. a Wall about a city,
vide Muralla, Muro, Cerca. a Wall of an house, v. Pared. a Wall of stones
heaped together without mortar, v. Albarrada. to close within a wall, vide
Emparedar. Walled, vide Paredado. a Wall of hurdles, v. Pared de carco. a
Wallet, vide Balija, costal, quilma, Talega, curron. a little Wallet, v.
Barjuleta. a Walnut, v. Nuez. Walwoort, v. Sabuco pequen^o. to Wallowe, vide
Boltear, or Rebolcar. to Wallowe like a ducke, v. Anadear. Wallowed, vide
Rebolcado. Wallowing, vide Rebolcando. to Wamble or rise up as seething water,
v. Borbollear. Wambling, v. Barbolleando. a Wande, v. Vara. to Wander or go
astray, vide Errar, Vagar. Wandered, v. Errado. Wandering, vide Andadora cosa,
Erradura, Erramiento. a Wanderer, vide Andador, Erradizo. Wan or pale, v.
Amarillo. to be or wax Wan or pale, vide Amarillar. Wanness, v. Amarillez. to
Want, vide Carecer, Faltar, Marrar. Want, vide Defecto, Faltar, Marra,
Menester, Mengua. Wanting, v. Defectivo. in Want, v. Monguado. Want in measure,
v. Merma. a Want or mole, v. Topo. a Wanthill, v. Monton de Topo. to be Wanton,
vide Ser Regalon, Locano. Wanton, vide Locano, Regalon. Wantonness, v.
Locania, Regalo. Wantonly, vide Con locania. to Warble or quauer in singing,
vide Gargantear. Warbling, v. Garganteando. to Ward, keep, or defend, v.
Guardar, Defender. a Washing beetle, vide Batador. to Watch at a tower, at a
beacon, etc. or a shipboord, vide Atalayar. a Watchman that watches at a
beacon, etc. or a shipboord, vide Atalayador. to Watch and ward, vide Rondar.
a Watch tower, vide Atalaya, Miradero. a Watch a board a ship, vide Atalaya.
Watching a shipboord, vide Atalayamiento. a Ward, tribe, or hundred, vide
Barrio. a Ward in a city, vide Barrio. a Warden or guardian, vide Guardian. a
Warder in a tower, vide Portero. a Warder, vide Guardador. a Wardon, vide La
guardia. a Wardrobe, vide Recamara. a keeper of a Wardrobe, vide Guarda Ropa.
Ware that is bought and sold, v. Mercaderias. to put in a Warehouse to be
kept, vide Almezenar. put in a Warehouse to be kept, vide Almezenado. a
Warehouse, vide Almazen. to be Wary, vide Estar sobre se, Recatarse. Wary,
vide Cauto, Recatado, Receloso. Warines, vide Recatamiento, Recelo. Warily, v.
Advertidamente, Recatadamente. Warmth, v. Calor. to Warm or make warm, vide
Calentar, Escalentar. Warm, vide Abrigado, Caliente, Caloroso. Warmed, vide
Caliente. a Warm sunnie bank, vide Abrigan^o. luke Warm, vide Tibio.
Warming, vide Calentadura, Escalentamiento. a Warming pan, vide Calentador de
cama. to make luke Warm, vide Entibiar. Warmed, vide Entibiado. to Warn or
admonish before, v. Apercebir, Amonestar, Avisar, Escarmentar. Forewarned,
vide Apercebido, Amonestado, Avisado. a Warner, vide Apercebidor, Amonestador.
a Warning, v. Amonestacion, Aviso. to Warpe, vide Vrdir. Warped, v. Vrdido. the
Warpe of cloth, vide Vrdiembre. to Warrant, assure, or promise for a
certainty, v. Asigurar. Warfare, vide Milicia. to War, wage, or make war,
v. Guerrear. civil War, vide Intestina guerra. War, v. Guerra. Warlike,
vide Belico, or Belicoso. Warred, vide Guerreado. a Warrior, vide Guerrero. a
Warren, v. Bivar. a Warte, Berruga, Veruga. full of Wartes, vide Berrugoso. to
Wash off, v. Lavar. filth washed off, or suddes, v. Lavazas. Washed off, v.
Deslavado, Lavado. a Washer or laundres, vide Lavandera, Labandera. Washing
off, vide Deslavadura, Lavadura. a Washing place, vide Lavadero. a Waspe, v.
Abispa. to Waste, vide Despendar, Gastar. to lay Waste, v. Arruynar.
Wastefull, v. Prodigo. Waste, vide Gasto. laid Waste, vide Arruynado. Wasted,
v. Gastado. a Waster, v. Gastador. Wasting, vide Gasto. a Wasteband, vide
Faisa. a Wastecoate, v. Almilla. Waste paper, vide Estraca. to Watch, walk, or
not sleep, v. Trasnochar, Velar, Desvelar. a Watch tower, vide Garita. to
Watch or epsy, v. Acechar. a Watchman, vide Vela, Guardia. Watchful, v.
Vigilante. a Watch or guard, v. Velada. a Watchworde, vide Apellido de guerra.
Watched, vide Acechado. Water, v. A'gua. to compass about with Water, vide
Compass. to Water or moisten as a garden, vide Regar, Remojar. to cause to
drink Water, vide Abrevar. rose Water, vide A'gua rozado. Water parsley, v.
Apio. a Water lilly, v. Escudete. Watercresses, vide Berracas. a Watermill, v.
Acen^a, Hacen^a, or Hazen^a. a place full of water, vide Regadizo. a Water
shoot, vide Canal de agua, Can^o. a Watering place for cattle, vide
Abrevadero. a Watercourse, vide Acequia, Canal. Watered or made drink, v.
Abrevado. a Water paile, vide Cubo. a Watlewall, vide Tesbique, Taybique. to
Wave up and down, vide Olear, Ondear. a Wave of the sea, vide O'la, or O'nda.
to Waver or wagge too and fro, vide Menear. Wavering, v. Moble. to Wax or
grow, vide Crecer. to Wax fair weather, vide Abonarse el tiempo. Waxing,
vide Creciendo. to Wax toward day, v. Amanecer. to bewaxe with Wax, vide
Encerar. be-Waxed, vide Encerado. Wax, vide Cera. merchants Wax, v. Lacre. a
Wax chandler, vide Cerero. a Wax candlestick, v. Cirial. a Waxing kernel,
vide Nacidas.
W E
to Weaken, or make weak or feeble, v. Debilitar, Enflaquecer. to be Weak, v.
Enflaquecerse. Weak, v. Debil, Endeble, Flaco. to wax Weak, v. Lentecer.
Weakened, vide Debilitado, Enflaquecido. Weakness, vide Debilidad, Flaqueza.
Wealth, v. Hazienda. Wealthy, v. Rico, Hazendoso. a common Weal, or weal
public, vide Republica. to Weane, v. Destetar. a Weaning, v. Destetadura.
Weapons, v. A'rmas. a Weapon with two pikes, vide Bisarma. Weaponed, v. Armado.
to Wear or waste, vide Comsumir, Gastar. Worn, v. Gastado. to Wear as one
does a garment, vide Traer. Wears, dammes, or sluices, to stop the course of
water, vide Represa, Presa. Wearied with a matter, vide Enfastidiado, Fatigado,
Enfadado. to make Weary or tire, v. Fatigar, Cansar, Enfadar. Wearying, vide
Cansamiento, Fastidio. Weary or tired, v. Afanado, Cansado, Enfadado, Lasso.
Wearines, vide Afan, Cansancio, Enfado, Fatiga. a Weasand of the throat, v.
Garguero. Weather, vide Tiempo. a Weather-cocke, or vane, vide Veleta. fair
Weather, vide Abonanca, buen tiempo. foul Weather, v. Mal tiempo. a Weather or
gelded sheep, vide Carnero castrado. to Weaue, vide Texer. to Weaue in, vide
Entexer, Entretexer. to Weaue thick, vide Tupir. Wouen thick, v. Tupido. a
Weauer, vide Texedor. Weauing, v. Texedura. a Weauers shuttle, vide Lancadera.
a Weauers loome, vide Telar. a Weauers beam, vide Enxullo de tela. a Web of
cloth, v. Liso telo. a web of yarne, v. Estambre. to Wed, vide to Marry. a
Wedding, v. Boda, or Bodas. a Wedge, vide Cun^a. We, vide Nosotros. a
Weedehooke, v. Escardilla. to Weed, v. Escardar. Weeds, v. Escardas. a
Weeder, v. Escardador. Weeding, v. Escardadura. Weeded, v. Escardado. a Week,
the space of seven days, vide Semana. Weekly, v. Semanero. the Week in a
candle, vide Mecha. a We Will to take fishes, vide Buytron, Garlito^. to Ween,
suppose, or deem, v. Suponer, Presuponer. Weening, vide Suponiendo,
Presuponiendo. to Weep, vide Lacrimar, Lamentar, Lagrimar, Llorar. Wept, vide
Llorado, Lamentado. a Weeper, vide Llorador. one that weepeth much, vide
Lacrimoso, Lagrimoso. Weeping, vide Lloro, Lamento. Weepingly, v. Llorosamente.
a place where they Weep or mourn, vide Lloradero. as it Were, v. Como, si
fuera. a Weesle, vide Comadreja. to Weigh or balance, vide Pesar. to Weigh
ancor, v. carpar ancora. to Weigh down, v. Apesgar. Weighing down, vide
Apesgamiento. Weighed, vide Pesado. Weighing, vide Pesando. to Weigh in a
balance, v. Balancar. a Weigher in balance, vide Balancario. a Weight, vide
Peso. Weighty, vide Pesado. a Weire in a river, vide Represa, Presa. a Well,
vide Pozo. Well, vide Bien, Buenamente. very Well, v. Muy bien. Well enough,
vide Abastanca. Welcome, v. Aceptable. Welcomed, vide Bien venido. Well spoken,
vide Bien hablado. Well minded, or willing, vide Benevolo. a welke or
periwinkle, vide Caracol. a Welke fish, vide Cagarola de mar. a welte of a
garment, vide Canto de ropa, Nesga. wealth, or Wealth, vide Riqueza, or
hazienda. a wench, girl, or modder, vide Moca. a great ramping Wench, vide
Barragana. a wenne, vide Lamparon. wensday, vide Miercoles. werie, or Weary,
vide Cansado. werish, or unsavory, vide Desabrido. the wesand, or Weasand, v.
La nuez del pescueco. the west, vide Poniente. the West wind, vide Zephiro or
Cephiro, Gallego. to Wet or make wet, vide Mojar. Wet at sea, vide Marreado.
Wet, vide Mojado. Wetnes, vide Mojadura. a Weuill or weuell, vide Carcoma.
W H
a Whale fish, vide Valena, Balena. a Wharfe, vide Puerto. What, vide Que. a
Whaule eied horse, vide Cavallo visco. a Wheale, whelke, push or pimple, vide
Ampolleta, Chichon, Venino. Weate, vide Trigo. white Wheat, vide Trigo
candeal. red Wheat, vide Rubion, Truxillo. a Wheel, vide Rueda. to Wheel
about, vide Rodear. one that Wheeleth about, vide Rodeador. a Wheel wright,
vide El que haze ruedas. a Wheel barrow, vide Carreton. Wheie of milk, vide
Suero. a Whelke, vide Wheale. a Whelpe, vide Cachorro, Perico, Perito. a little
Whelpe, vide Chachorrico. When, vide Quando. Whence, vide Donde, De do. Where,
vide Ado, Do, Donde. Where soever, vide Donde quiera. a Wherie or ferrie, vide
Esquife. a Wherie man, vide Esquifero. Whether, vide Adonde. Whether soever,
vide Adonde quiera. to Whet, vide Aguzar. Whetting, vide Aguzamiento. a
Whetstone, vide Aguzadera piedra. a Whetstone whereon oil being put the
grauers and caruers do whet their instruments, vide Agazadera. Which, vide
Qual. Why, vide Porque. While, vide Mientras. a While agone, vide Denantes.
Whilst, vide Atanto, Mientras. to Whine, vide Gritar. to Whip or scourge, vide
Acotar. a Whip, vide Acote. a Whipper, vide Acotador. Whipped, vide Acotado.
Whipping, vide Acotamiento. to Whip up and down like a wagtaile, v. Saltar
como pespita. a Whipsawe, vide Sierra. a Whirling or turning round, v. Tornar
al rededor. a Whirlegig, vide Trompa. a Whirepoole, vide Abismo, Golfo. a
Whirlewinde, v. Remolino, Torbelino. to whirle about like a Whirlewinde, vide
Arremolinar. a Whirret, vide Cacheton. Whirretted, vide Cacheteado. to Whisper,
vide Dezir al oydo, Dezir en secreto. Whispering, vide Diziendo al oido or
Secreto. to make a Whisling noise, vide Rechinar. to Whistle, vide Silvar.
Whistling, vide Silvo. White, v. A'lbo, Blanco, Candido. Whited, vide
Blanqueado. to Whiten, vide Blanquear, Emblanquecer. a Whiter or bleacher, vide
Blanqueador. a white or mark to shoot at, v. Blanco. Whitish, v. Blanquezino,
Blanquisco. White lilly, vide Azucena. Whiting, vide Colada,
Emblanquecimiento. Whitenes, vide Blancor or Blancura. Whited with Ceruse, vide
Enalvayaldado. to Whiten a wall, vide Enluzar. Whitel thorn, vide Espina
blanca. a Whiting, vide Merluza. Whit leather, vide Baldres. Whither, vide
Whether. well Whittled or cupshot, v. Bien borracho. the feast of Whitsontide,
vide Pascua del Espiritu Santo, Fiesta de Pentecoste. a fish called a Whiting,
vide Gada or Merluza. Who, vide Quien. Who soever, vide Quien quiera. Whole,
vide Entero. Wholly, vide Abarrisco de todo, Enteramente. Wholesome, vide
Probechoso, Sano, Saludable. Whom, vide Quien to commit Whooredome, vide
Amancebar, Fornicar, Putear, Rofanear. a Whore, vide Puta. a Whoorson, vide
Hideputa. a Whooremonger or whooremaster, vide Abarraganado, Fornicador,
Patanero, Rufian, Rofian. Whooredome, vide Fornicacion, Rofianeria. Whooredome
where one party is married or both, vide Abarraganamiento, Amancabamiento.
Whose, vide Cuyo. Why, vide Porque. to White wash a house, vide Enxalvegar.
W I
Wicked, vide Facinoroso, Malo, Malino. to do Wickedly, vide Hazer mal.
Wickedness, vide Maldad, Malignidad. Wicker, vide Canastero. a Wicket, vide
Postigo. Wide, vide A'ncho. Widenes, vide Anchura. Wide mouthed, vide
Boquiabiertos. Wide open with the face upward, v. Boca arriba. a Widow, vide
Biuda. a Widower, vide Biudo. to become a Widow, vide Embiudarse. Widowhood,
vide Biudez. a Wife, vide Muger. a huswife, vide Mujer cuidadosa. a Wiffler,
vide Bastonero. Wild, vide Acorado, Bravo, Brabo, cahareno, Fiero. to be
Wild, vide Acorarse. a Wild beast, vide Fiera. a Wild onion, vide Bulbo.
Wildnes, vide Braveza er Brabeza, Fiereza. Wildly, vide Acoradamente. a Wild
fig tree, vide Cabrahigo. a Wilderness, vide Yermo. Wildefire, vide Bomba de
fuego. Wilful, vide Brioso. Wilfulnes, vide Brio. to be Wily, vide Ser
asturo, Recatar. to Will or command, vide Mandar. Will, vide Gana, Voluntad. a
Will, vide Boluntad. Willing, vide Voluntario, De buena gana. Willingly, vide
De buena gana. With good will, vide De buena gana. Wilful, vide Teso,
Pertinaz, Contumaz. Wilfulness, vide Teson, Tesoneria, Contumacia, Pertinacia.
Wilfully, vide Con teson, Con pertinacia. a willow or osiar, vide Bimbrera. a
Willow tree, vide Sauze. a wimble, vide Barrena, Taladra. a wimple or muffler,
vide Mascara. to wince or kick, vide Cocear. a winch, vide Torno, Tornillo.
the wind, vide El viento, Air. the east Wind, vide El viento Levante, Lest.
the west Wind, vide Zefiro, Zephiro, Oeste. the north Wind, vide El viento
del norte, Cierco. the south Wind, vide El viento sur. to take the Wind as a
ship does, vide Barloventear. Windy, vide Ventoso. Windines, vide Ventosidad.
to Wind, vide Ventear. to Wind a horn, vide Tocar cuerno. to Wind up or
roll, vide Emmaran^ar, Rebolver. Winded up, vide Emmaran^ado, Rebuelto. a
Winder up, vide Emmaran^ador, Rebolvedor. a pair of Winding stairs, vide
Stairs, vide Caracol. Wound or compassed about, vide Atado, Rebuelto,
Emmaran^ado. Wind or breath, vide Resuello. a windebeame of a house, vide
Viga. the windepipe, vide Gasnate. a winding sheet, vide Mortaja. a windlas or
pulley, vide Carillo. a window, v. Ventana, Fenestra. wine, v. Vino. Hollocke
Wine, vide Vino tinto. new Wine, v. Mosto. Wine new pressed, v. Mosto torcido.
new Wine sodden to the third part, vide Arrope. old Wine, vide Vino anejo. the
smaller or second Wine, v. Aguapie. a wing, vide A'la. a little Wing, vide
Aleta. Winged, v. Aludas. to wink, vide Ojear. to win, vide Aquistar,
Conquistar, Ganar. to Win by assault, vide Espugnar. Won by assault, v.
Espugnado. Won, v. Aquistado, Ganado, Conquistado. to winnow, vide carandar,
Despajar. Winnowing, v. Despajadura. to winter or pass the winter in some
place, v. Envernar. a Winter house, v. Envernero. Winter, v. Invierno.
Winterlike, v. Enverniego. Wintering, v. Invernando. Winter shoes or socks to
put in shoes, vide Gallochas. pertaining to Winter, v. Invernal. to Wipe or
make clean, v. Limpiar. to Wipe dry after washing, vide Enxugar. to be wise,
v. Ser sabio. Wise, vide Cauto, Cuerdo, Sabio, Savio. Wisely, vide Cuerdamente.
Wisdom, vide Sabiduria, Prudencia, Entendimiento. in no wise, v. De ninguna
suerte, to wish, v. Desear. a Wish, v. Deseo. Wished, v. Deseado. a Wisher, v.
El que desea. Wishing, v. Deseando. a wispe, waze or wreath, vide Rodilla, para
poner sobre la cabeca quando se carga algo. to witch or bewitch, vide Hechizar,
Encantar. a Witch or sorcerer, v. Echizero, Hechizero, Hechizera. Witchcraft,
v. Hechezeria, Hechizo. a Witch elm, v. O'lme silvestre. with, v. Con. With
you, v. Con vosotros. With us, v. Con nosotros. within, v. Adentro. without, v.
Afuera. to withdraw, v. Retirar. Withdrawn, vide Retirado. a Withdrawing, vide
Retirada. to wither, vide Marchitar, Bochornar. Withered, vide Bochornado,
Marchitado. that which may Wither, v. Marchitable. Withering, vide Marchidura.
within, vide Dentro. to withhold, vide Detener. Withholden, v. Detenido.
Withholding, vide Detenimiento. without, vide Fuera. Without reason, v.
Irracional. Without order or rule, vide Irregular. to withstand, vide
Contravenir, Resistir. Withstood, vide Contravenido, Resistido. to witness, vide
Testiguar. a Witness, vide Testigo. wit, vide Ingenio. a Witty jest, vide
Donayre. Witty, vide Acucioso, Ingenioso, Sagaz. Wittily, v. Acuciosamente,
Ingeniosamente, Zagazmente. a Witty speech, vide Chanconetta, Donayre.
witting, vide Con consentimiento, A sabiendas. Wittingly, vide Adrede, A
sabiendas. a witwall or woodwall, a bird, vide Abejeruco.
W O
woe or sorrow, vide Melancholia, Tristeza, Pesar, Duelo. Woeful, v. Triste,
Melancolico, Apesarado. a woolfe, v. Lobo. a she Woolfe, vide Loba. a little
Woolfe, v. Lobanillo. woolfesbane, v. Anapelo, Centella. a womb, v. Vientre. a
woman, or the female of any thing, v. Hembra, Mujer. a Womanlike man, vide
Mugeril hombre. Womanly, v Mugerilmente. belonging to Women, vide Mugeril. a
little Woman, vide Mugercilla. a discreet Woman, v. Cuerda muger. a Woman of
great account, vide Muger de punto. to wonder at, vide Admirar, Maravillar.
Woondered at, vide Admirado, Maravillado. Woondring, vide Admiracion.
Wonderful, v. Admirable, Maravilloso. one that Woondereth, vide Admirador.
Woonderfully, v. Admirablemente. a Wonder, vide Maravilla. wont, vide
Acostumbrado, Vezado. woodbinde or honisuckle, vide Madreselva. a woodcocke,
vide Gallina ciega. to be wood or mad, vide Ser furioso. a Wood, vide
Selva, Arcabuco, Bosque. a Wood lark, vide Calandra, Cobuijada. Wood, vide
Len^a, Madero. Wood piled up, vide Len^a hacinada. a Wooden patten, vide
Abarca. a Wodden pin, vide Hito de madera. a Woodmonger, vide Len^ador. Woody,
or thick of wood, v. Boscage, Selvatico. a Wood culuer, v. Torcaca, Torcaza.
a Woodhouse, vide Sarmentera. a Woodknife, vide Machete, Cuchillo de monte. a
Wood pile, vide Hacina. to woo or sue, vide Enamorar, Garconear. a Wooing,
vide Garconeando. Wooed, vide Enamorado, Garconado. a Wooer, vide Garcon,
Requebrado. Woolblade herb, v. Barvasco. Wool, vide Lana. a pack of Wool, v.
Goma de lana, Trespontine. a Wool weauer, v. Tejedor. a Wooll-man, vide
Lanero. linsey Woolsey, v. Estamenea. saint John's Woort, vide Caraconzillo. to
become like a Woman, v. Efiminar. a Woman that goes gossipping from place to
place, v. Comadrera, Callejera. a silly poor old Woman, v. Madrezilla,
Vejezuela. Womanlike, v. Efeminado, Feminco. a Word, vide Palabra. to carry
Word, vide Mensajear. a short Word, vide Palabrilla. to Work, vide Trabajar.
to leave Work, vide Alcar de obra. Work, v. Trabajo, O'bra, Obraje. a little
Work, vide Obrecita. small Work, v. Laborcica. a Workman, vide Artifice,
Labrador, Obrador, Obrero. Workmanship, v. Artificio. Workemanlike, v.
Artificiosamente. needle Work, v. Labor de aguja. the World, vide Mundo.
Worldly, vide Mundano. a Worldling, idem. a Worm, vide Gusano. a little Worm,
vide Gusanillo. a Worm that breeds in old timber, vide Carcoma. a Worm that
eats holes in ships, vide Broma. a Worm in the hand, vide Arador. an earth
Worm, or worm in the belly, v. Lombriz. a Worm breeding in a horse, vide
Canino. Wormeaten, vide Carcomido. the Worm in the teeth, v. Neguijon de
dientes. to gnaw as Worms in old timber, vide Carcomer. to breed Worms, v.
Gusanear. full of Worms, vide Gusaniento. Wormwood, v. Absynthio, Alozna,
Asentio, Ensensio. Wormwood wine, vide Vino de ensensio. Worn, or wear, vide
Traido, Viejo. Worse, vide Peor. to make Worse, v. Desmejorar. made Worse,
idem. making a thing Worse, v. Menoscabo. growing Worse, v. Peoria. to become
Worse, v. Peorar. the Worser, vide Peor. Worst, vide Muy malo. to Worship, v.
Adorar, Venerar. Worship, vide Veneracion. Worshipped, v. Adorado. Worshipping,
vide Adoracion. Worshipful, v. Magnifico, Venerable. Worshipfully, v.
Magnificamente. to be Worth, v. Mereser, ser Digno. Worth, v Merecimiento,
Valor. Worthy, vide Digno, Dino. Worthiness, vide Dignidad. Worthily, vide
Dignamente. a Wortwaile of a nail, vide Uero. Wosted yarne, v. Estambre. to
make with Wosted yarne, vide Estambrar. the Woufe of cloth, vide Trama. Would
to God, v. Pluguiesse a dios. to Wound, vide Acuchillar, Herir, Llagar. a
Wound, vide Herida, Llaga. Wounded, vide Achuchillado, Herido, Llagado. full of
Wounds, vide Llagado, Lleno de Llagas. a Wounding, vide Herimiento. Wound, or
wind, vide Rebuelto, Rebuxado.
W R
to Wrangle, vide Cavilar, Andar a malas, Reir. a Wrangler, v. Pendenciero,
Reidor. Wrangling, v. Brega, Renzilla. to Wrap, or entangle, v. Arrollar,
Embolver, Enlazar, Enmaraar. Wrapped, v. Embuelto, Arrolado. Wrapping, v.
Arrollando, Embolviendo. to wrestle, vide Luchar. a Wrastler, vide Luchador.
Wrestling, vide Lucha. Wrastler like, vide como Luchador. wrath, vide
Indignacion, I'ra, Y'ra Saa. Wrathful, v. Iracundo, Irado, Saudo. to wreath,
v. Estorcer, Retorcer. Wreathed, v. Retorcido. Wreathing, v. Retorcedura,
Retorcimiento. a wreake on the sea, v. Naufragio. to wreake, as to wreake ones
anger, vide Vengar. to wrest, wreath, or wrench, vide Estorcer, Torcer.
Wrested, vide Torcido. a Wrestler, vide Torcedor. Wresting, v. Torcedura. to be
wretched, vide Acevilarse, ser Mesquino. a Wretch, v. Mesquino, Miserable.
Wretched, vide Acevilado, Miserable, Misero, Mezquino. Wretchedness, vide
Miseria. Wretchedly, vide Miserablamente. wrie, or crooked, v. Tuerto, Torcido,
Corvo. Wrie-necked, v. Cabezcaydo. to wrinkle, vide Arrugar. a Wrinkle, vide
Arruga, Ruga. Wrinkled, vide Arrugado. Wrinkling, v. Ruga. full of Wrinkles,
vide Rugoso. to wring, vide Apretar. a Wringer, v. Apretador. Wringing, vide
Apretando. Wrung, vide Apretado. the wrist, v. la Mueca de la mano. to write,
vide Escrevir. a Writer, vide Escritor. Written, vide Escrito. Writing, vide
Escriviendo. to writhe, or wreath, vide Retorcer, Torcer. to wrong, or injury,
vide Injuriar. Wrong, vide Injuria. Wronged, v. Desaforado, Injuriado. a
Wronger, vide Agraviador, Enjuriador. Wrongs, v. Desafueras, Injurias.
Wronging, vide Agraviando, Enjuriando. Wrongful, vide Injurioso. Wrongfully,
v. Injuriosamente. wrought, vide Labrado. Wrought velvet, vide Alcarchofado,
Terciopelo.
Y
a Yard to measure, vide A'lna. a Yard or court, vide Patio. the maine Yard of
a ship, vide Entena de nao. a man's Yard, vide Carajo. Yarne, vide Hilo de lana.
Yarrow, vide Milhoja. to Yaune or gape, v. Bocezar, Bostezar, Desperezar. a
Yauning, vide Bocezo, Bostezo, Despereza.
Y E
Yea, vide Si. a Year, vide A'o. one Year old, vide de un A'o. the last
Year, v. Antao. Yearly, v. Cada ao. Yeast, or barme, vide Espuma, Deserveca.
to Yield to, v. Arendar, Entregar, Render. Yielding up, vide Entrega. Yielded
up, v. Entregado, Rendido. a Yeelder up, vide Entregador. Yielding, vide
Entrega, Entrego. to Yell or cry out, vide, Aullar. one that Yelleth, vide
Aullador. a Yelling, vide Aullido. the Yelke, or yolke of an egg, v. Yema del
huevo. Yellowe, vide Gualdo, Jaldo, Amarillo. to Yelpe as a dog does, vide
Aullar. a Yeoman of the guarde, vide Alabardero, Archero. Yesterday, vide Air.
Yester evening, vide Air tarde. Yet, vide Aun. Yet notwithstanding, vide
Empero. a Yewe sheep, vide Oveja. to Yexe or sobbe, vide Hipar. an Ynch, vide
Pulgada. an Ynckling, vide Dar entender.
Y O
to Yoke, vide Vnzir. a Yoke, vide Coynuda, Yugo. Yoked, vide Vnzido. Yoking,
vide Vnziendo. the Yolke of an egg, vide Yema. a Yoman, vide Hombre del campo.
Yonder, vide Alla de la otra banda, Del otro cabo. to be Young, vide a Sermoco.
to wax Young again, vide Remocar. Yoonge, vide Moco. a Yoonge man, vide
Joven, Mancebo. a pretty Yoonge girl, vide Jovencilla. Yoonger, vide Mas
moso. Yoongest, vide El menor. Yoongly, v. Como moco. a Youth or young man,
vide Joven, Mancebo. lusty Youth, vide Joventud. Youthfully, v. Como moco.
Your, vide Vuestro. You, vide Vuestra merced, Vos.
Y R
it Yrketh, vide Enoja, Enfada, Desgusta, Enfastidia. Yrkesomnes, vide
Fastidio, Hastio, Enojo, Enfado. Yrkesome, vide Fastidioso, Enfadoso, Enojoso.
Iron work, vide Ferreria. a worker in Iron, v. Ferrador. done with Iron, vide
Ferrado. Iron mined and not wrought with hammer, vide Hierro.
Z
Zeal, vide Zelo. to have Zeal, vide Zelar. Zealous, vide Zeloso. Zealously,
vide Zelosamente. very Zealously, v. Muy zelozamente.
Z O
the Zodiac or circle in heaven wherein are the twelve signs, vide Zodiaco.
FJNJS.
A brief Table of sundry Arabian and Moorish words usual in the Spanish
tongue: all which as they stand dispersed in their several places in the
Dictionarie, are marked with a long Cross, thus.
A
ABahar, to keep in the reeke. Acicalar, to burnish or make trim. Acitara, a
saddle tree, the railes on a wall. Acofar, brass as it mined. Acorarse, to
wax fierce or wild. Acor, a hawk. Acozado, wild fierce. Acufre, brimstone.
Acumbre, a measure holding three quarters. Acuncar, to polish, to trim up.
Acutea, the roof of a house, flat leads of a house. Adahala, that is given
more than bargain. Adalid, a leader of men. Adarga, a short target. Adehala,
vide Adahala. Adelgacar, to make fine or slender. Aduana, custom or toll.
Adufe, a timbrell. Adufero, a plaier on a timbrell. Afeytar, to barbe or trim.
Agacapar, to squat like a hare. Agachar, vide Agacapar. Agareno, a Moore.
Agujero, a hole. Agujeta, a point, a lace. Agujetero, a poyntmaker. Ajonge,
juice of an herb whereof they make birdlime. Ajonjoli, a medicinal herb in
India. Alacor, or Cartamo, m. an herb wherewith they die carnation color,
Bastard saffron. Alambique, or Alquitara, a limbecke, or stillitorie. Alambre,
m. copper. Alamin, m. a trusty man, a man in whom one may repose trust or
confidence. Alamud, m. an iron bolte or lock. Alamvique, v. Alambique.
Alanbique, v. Alambique. Alarabes, m. Moors, or Arabians. Alaracas, f.
outcries, noise, vociferation, exclayming, crying out. Alarifadgo, m. a
surueyorship, an ouerseership, a controllership. Alarife, m. a surueyor, a
master carpenter, a controller in building. Alasor, m. a kind of small herb
in Spain used to make painting for women's faces, and wherewith they die
carnation color: bastard saffron. Albacea, m. an executor or administrator of
a will or testament. Albahaca, or Albahacha, an herb called Basil. Albaida,
f. white color. Also a small piece of money in Spain called Vna blanca, being
half a Marauedie. Albala, f. a schedule or writing that is given when one
paieth custom or tribute to the king. Albanega, f. a kind of networke coife
worn on women's heads. Abaar, or Alvaar, a gutter or sink. Albanir, idem.
Albaquia, the residue, the remnant, the remainder. Albarazos, or Alvarazos,
morphewe. Albarada, a stone wall, a bulwark. Albarchiga, or Alberchiga, or
Alvarchiga, f. an Abricock. Albarcoque, or Alvarcoque, m. an Abricock.
Albarrada, or Alvarrada, a wall of stones heaped together without mortar, made
in steed of a defense or bulwark. Also a cawsey. Albarran, or Alvarran, a
bacheler, one that is unmarried, one that has land or pasture in occupying,
and dwells not on it. Albarrana, or Alvarrana, f. a turret on a wall.
Albarrana cebolla, a kind of sea Onion. Albarrania, f. single life, the
unmarried estate. Albayalde, or Alvayalde, m. white Ceruse, or painting for
women's faces. Alberca, or Estanque, a poole or pond. Alberchiga, or Alverchiga,
an Abricot. Albeytar, a ferrier, a horse smith, a horseleach. Albihares, a
certain flower called Narcissus. Albogue, a pipe, a flute. Alboguero, one that
plaieth on a pipe or flute. Alboroto, or Alboroco, a tumult, a hurliburly, a
sedition, a sudden fright or fear. Alborni, v. Borni. Albornia, f. an earthen
pan to put milk in or such like. Albornoz, a soldiers coat, a mandillion, a
iacket, a Moors cassocke. Alborocar, or Alborotar, to make a tumult or
hurliburly. Alboroco, Alborote, or Alboroto, a tumult, a stir, a hurliburly,
a sedition, fright, or amasement. Albricias, a reward for news brought.
Albur, m. a fish called a mullet. Alburejo, a little mullet fish. Alburquerque,
a town in Castile in Spain. Alcabala, or Alcavala, toll, custom, tallage,
imposition, subsidy. Alcabalero, or Alcavalero, a collector or gatherer of
subsidy, a customer. Alcacaba, a castle or strong tower in Granada so called.
Alcacar, fortress, a fortified place. Alcacar real, a kings palace. Alcacava,
or Alcacaba, a thick wood or forest. Alcacel, all manner of iron work.
Alcacer, or Alcacel, green barley. Alcaduz, or Arcaduz, the skowpe in a water
wheel, a pipe that carries water to a cunduit. Alcahueta, f. a she baude.
Alcahuete, a he baude, a ruffian, a pander. Alcahueteria, the trade or
practice of bauderie. Alcaiceria, a row of shoppes with wares. Alcaide, or
Alcayde, a captain of a castle or fort. Alcaidia, or Alcaydia, a captainship
of a castle or fort. Alcala, a town in Spain so called. Alcalde, a Justice, a
sheriff, a Conestable. Alcalde mayor de justicia, a Lord chief Justice.
Alcalde de Alcaldes, a high Commissioner. Alcama, or Aljama, an assembly of
Jews. Alcana, a row of many shoppes with wares. Alcancia, or Alcanzia, an
earthen pipkin or posnet. Also a money box so made as the money cannot well be
gotten out, until the box be broken. Also a ball of earth full of ashes.
Alcandara, a perch for a hawk. Alcandora, a shirt. Alcanfor, Camphire.
Alcantara, a bridge. Alcantarilla, a small bridge. Alcanziar, to throw bals of
earth one at another, a sport used in Spain on horseback. Alcanziazo, a blow
with an earthen ball, or a ball of ashes. Alcaparras, Capers. Alcaparrado, like
unto Capers. Alcaparilla, a little bed of Capers. Also the name of a place in
Spain. Alcaparronal, a place where great store of Capers grow. Alcaparrones,
great Capers. Alcaparro, the stalk or tree whereon Capers grow. Alcaravan, a
foul called a Bittour. Alcarchofa, f. an Artichoke. Alcarias, f. cottages.
Alcartas, or Alcartaz, a spice bag, a coffin of spices. Alcatara, or Alquitara,
a stillitorie, a limbecke. Alcatifa, f. a rug for a bed. Alcatraz, m. a foul
like a seamew, that deuoureth much fish. Alcauci, or Alcaucil, a small
Artichoke, a thistle like an Artichoke. Alcayata, a crooked hook or nail to
hang cloaks or hats on, etc. Alcayde, m. a Justice, a Sheriff, a chief keeper
of a prison, a captain of a castle, a Conestable. Alcaydia, a Iusticeship, a
Sherifaltie, a keeping of a castle, a chief charge of keeping a prison.
Alcayta, a hook. Alcazaba, vide Alcacaba. Alcazar, vide Alcacar. Alcoba, f. a
closet, a close room for a bed. Alcohela, f. Endive water, water of Endive.
Alcohol, a drugge called Antimonie, which is a kind of white stone found in
silver mines. Alcoholado, dawbed, smeared, painted. Alcoholar, to smeare, to
dawbe, to paint. Alcoran, m. a gathering together, or summarie of the laws of
Mahomet. Alcorca, f. a conserve. Alcorque, a cork shoe, a pantofle.
Alcolcucu, m. a kind of meat or paste made of flower and honey. Alcotan, m. a
hawke called a Hobbie. Alcrebite, m. Brimstone. Alcritute, m. idem. Alcun^a, a
stock, a lineage. Alcuca, or Azeytera, an oil pot. Alcuzazo, a great oil pot,
a blow with an oil pot. Alcuzilla, a little oil pot. Aldava, or Aldaba, a
ring or hammer of a door. Aldavada, the blow or knock with the hammer, or
ring of a door. Aldavon, a great hammer or ring at a door. Aldea, a village,
or little town. Aldeguela, a little village. Aleju, vide Alexu. Alerze, Cedar.
Alexia, a paste made of flower and water, a pudding pan. Alexixa, a pudding
made of wheat. Alexu, or Aleju, a kind of biscuit or symnell made of honey and
spice. Alfabega, or Albahaca, Basil. Alfahar, m. a place where earthen pots
are made. Alfaharero, m. a potter, a maker of earthen vessels. Alfaiata, a
woman tailor. Alfajor, vide Alexu. Alfalfa, three leafed grass, Clouer grass.
Alfamar, a couerlet, a bolster. Alfaneque, a kind of hawk. Alfanje or
Alfange, a sword, a Turkey sword, a cimitarie. Alfaqui, a chief priest among
the Moors. Alfarda, a tribute, subsidy or duty to a prince. Alfarge or
Alfarje de molino, a millstone, a grinding stone. Alfargia, a planke or board
sawed in two, a thin planke or board. Alfaxor, vide Alexu. Alfayata, a woman
tailor. Alfeique, sugar pellets. Alferadgo, the office of an ensign bearer in
war. Alferes, an ensign bearer, a standard bearer, the bishop at chesse.
Alfiler, a pin. Alfocigo, Alhocigo, or Alhostigo, a phisticke nut. Alfombra,
a carpet. Alforja or Alforxa, a wallet, clokebag, bugget, or scrip. Alfornas,
the herb Fengreeke. Alforria, setting at liberty, freeing. Alforza, a pleite
or tucke in a gown or garment. Algaida, a thicket or wooddie place. Algalia,
ciuet or sweet musk. Algarabia or Algaravia, the Moors speech. Algarada, a
sudden assailing with a great outcrie or noise, a tumult or uproar. Algarasita,
Pedlars french. Algarbe or Algarve, the west. Also a province betwixt Andaluzia
and Portingale. Algares, caves, dens, holes, pits. Algarve, a den, a hole,
a pit, a ditch. Algarrova or Algarroba, carobes or S. John's bread. Alagayda, a
thicket or wooddie place. Algebra, bone setting. Algebrista, a bone setter.
Algedrez, Chesse play. Algeriza or Algezira, a province in Spain so called.
Algibe or Algive, a cesterne, a dungeon in a prison. Algodon, bumbast, cotton.
Algodonar, to cotton or freeze cloth. Algorfa or Soberado, a loft, a soller, a
garret. Algorravas, vide Algarravas. Alguaziladgo or Alguazilazgo, a
sherifaltie, a bailywicke, a marshalship. Alguazil, a sheriff, a bailife, a
marshall or chief executioner, a provost marshall, a sergeant. Alguarismo or
Guarismo, arithmeticke. Alhadida, burned brass. Alhaja or Axuar de casa,
implements, all manner of household stuff. Alhajeme or Alhaxeme, a barber.
Alhaili or Alhayli, white violets, Flower deluce. Alhambra, a palace of
strength for a prince. Alhamel, a porter that carries burdens. Alhaqueque, a
herald at arms sent to entreat a peace. Alhaqui, vide Alfaqui. Alhoracas,
exclamations, outcries, noise. Alharaquiento, a crier, a proclaimer. Alhazena,
a small basket, a hole in a wall to set a thing in, an ambrey, a cupboord.
Alhelga, a staple of a lock or bolt. Also the space between the teeth.
Alheli, vide Alhaili. Alhea, priuet or primme. Alhilel or Alfidel, a pin.
Alholbas, Fengreeke. Alholi, a place to keep salt, a barn, a graner, a
garret, a maund. Alholvas, vide Alholbas. Alhombra, a carpet. Alhondiga, a
shop, a merchants warehouse, a barn, a warehouse, a graner. Alhondiguero, a
shopkeeper, a corn master. Alhori, vide Alholi. Alhorria, vide Alforria.
Alhoz, the borders, limits or bounds of any thing. Alhozego or Alhozigo, the
phisticke tree. Alhucema, Alhucena, or Alhuzema, Lauander. Alhurreca de la mar,
the salt foam that comes out of the roots of canes. Aljama or Alcama, a
Jews synagogue. Aljamia, barbarism, or a confusion of tongues. Aljamado, made
into the Spanish tongue. Aljava, a quiver. Alicates, small pincers to pluck
hairs with. Alicace or canca, a foundation. Aljedrez, or Axedrez, chesse play.
Aljofar, pearl, the seed of pearl. Aljofifar, pauing tile painted. Aljonge,
or Aljonje, the gum of a kind of thistle. Aljonjera, or Aljongera, a sow
thistle. Aljonjoli, or Ajonjoli, a white grain whereof oil is made. Aljuba, a
kind of long Moorish cassocke coming below the knee, such as the Polonians
use. Aljubon Morisco, a Moorish cassocke. Alizar, a kind of painted brick.
Allozo, the almond tree. Almaciga, or Almaziga, masticke. Almacigat, to make or
do with masticke. Almadana, or Marra, a mattocke, a shouell, a spade, a
pickaxe. Almaden, a mine of metal. Almadrava, fishing for tunies. Almagra, or
Almagre, red oker, red lead. Almagrado, marked with red oker. Almalafa,
Turkish attire. Alamanach, or Almanaque, an Almanacke or prognostication.
Almandarahe, a harbor or road for ships. Almarraxa, an ewer of glass.
Almartaga, a headstall for a horse, gilded and embrodered, etc. Almayzal, or
Almaizal, the ornaments of the head used of the Moorish women. Almayzar, a
wiping cloth, a hairie cloth. Almazen, an armory, a truncke, a cubboord, a
conduit head, a storehouse, a warehouse. Almear, a heyloft. Almeca, Almeja, or
Almeza, a cockle fish. Almejal, a place where cockles grow. Almejero, or
Almegero, one that gathers or sells cockles. Almedina, a great town or
city. Almena, the pinnacles of a tower or battlements of a wall. Almenara de
fuegos, fires made by night, beacons fired. Almenilla, a little battlement of a
wall. Amez arbol, a lote tree, or nettle tree. Almiar, a hey reeke, a hey
cock, a mass, a heap, a great stacke. Almibar, or Almivar, sugar made
liquid. Almidonar, to starch. Almiralle, a king in the Moorish tongue. Almirez,
a brazen mortar. Almiron, a dainty meat for sick folk. Almiscle, or
Almisque, musk. Almiscado, done with ciuet or musk. Almisque, musk.
Almizquera, a place where musk is laid up. Almocafre, a thing to set herbs
with. Almocrebe, a muletter, or driuer of mules. Almodrote, a hotchpotch of
garlike and cheese. Almofex, or Almofrez, a maile made like a pillowbeare.
Almofia, a pan of earth to make fire in. Almogavar, an aduenturer in war, a
light harnessed soldier. Almohaca, a currie comb. Almohacar, to currie a
horse. Almohada, a pillow. Almohadilla, a cushionet or little pillowe.
Almojavana, a cheesecake. Almoneda, an outcrie or open sale. Almorafes, armor
for the thighs. Almoradux, Marierom an herb. Almotacania, or Almote cenadgo,
the office of clarke of the market. Almotacen, the clarke of the market.
Almotalefe, one that seals silks. Almoxarifadgo, or Almoxarifazgo, the
customership. Almoxarife, m. a customer. Almud, or Celemin, a pecke measure.
Almuedano, a crier. Almun^ecar, the place where raisins be sold. Alnafe, a
paunch, a pan of earth. Aloja, or Aloxa, Metheglin. Alpechin, syrup in olives.
Alqueria, a farm or hired house. Alquerque, a kind of play somewhat like
table plate. Alquetiza, a carpet. Alquicel, or Alquicer, a mandillion or Moors
cassocke. Alquiladizo, that is let for hire, or rent. Alquilar, to hire, to let
out. Alquiler, letting for rent. Alquinal morisco, a Moorish handkerchiefe.
Alquitara, or Alcatara, a stillitorie or limbecke. Alquitira, Dragagant.
Alquitran, ointement for ships called Naphtha. Asquitranar, to smeare a ship
with such ointment. Altramuzes, vide Atramuzes. Alvala, a handwriting, a bill,
an acquittance, a schedule, a ticket. Alvanega, a kind of coife. Alvan^ar,
vide Alban^ar. Alvan^i, Alvan^ir, Alvan^il or Albani, a mason, a tiler, a
bricklayer. Alvan^eria or Alban^iria, tiling, masons craft. Alvarazos, morphew.
Alvarchiga, vide Albarchiga. Alvarcoque, vide Albarcoque. Alvarjon, great
pease. Alvarrada, vide Albarrada. Alvarrana, vide Albarrana. Alvarrania, vide
Albarrania. Alvatoca or Albatoca, a small bark or boat. Alvayaldado or
Albayaldado, painted with Ceruse. Alvayalde or Albayalde, Ceruse or white
color to paint women's faces with. Albuchali, a captain among the Turks.
Alverca, a poole or pond. Alverchiga, vide Alberchigo. Alverjana, or Alberjana,
a kind of weed in corn. Alverja, vide Arveja, a pease. Alveytar or Albeytar,
a farrier, a horseleach. Alveyteria, farriers trade. Alvoguero, vide Alboguero.
Amexca, vide Ciruelo, a plum. Amohatrar, to run in debt, to borrow of one for
to pay another. Amojonar, to set bounds, to limit out. Anafil, a trumpet.
An^agaca or An^agaza, a state or call to catch birds. Anazea, a matter of
delight or pleasure. Anduares, villages. Angurrios, pumpions. An^oria, vide
Anoria. Aprisco, a sheep-house, a sheepe-cote, a shed. A'rabe, a Moore, an
Arabian. Aragan, vide Haragan. Arambel, a tattered or torn cloth. Arambre,
Copper. Arancel, or Aranzel, a proclamation in paper for rating the price of
victuals. Arandela, a rebato, or supporter for women's ruffes. Aranha, a
crabfish. Arfil, the bishop at Chesse play. Ariscar, to hazard or put in
danger. Arisco, hazard or danger. Arrabal, or Arraval, the suburbs of a city.
Arracada, an earering. Arracife, a rock or shelfe in the sea. Arraez, a
master of a ship. A'rraz, an earnest penie. Arrayhan, a Myrtle tree.
Arrahanal, a grove of Mirtles. Arrayz, even against, just with. Arreban^ar, to
gather together. Arrebocar, to muffle or mask. Arrebuxar, vide Arrebocar.
Arrelde, a weight of four pounds. Arrexaque, a forke, a flesh-hooke, a
martlet. Arriate, a pot of flower. Arriscar, vide Ariscar. Arropa or Arrope,
new wine sodden to the third part. Arroz, rice. Asarabacar, an herb called
Polefoote. A'spa, a reele. Atabal, a drum. Atabalero, a drummer, a taberer.
Atahona, a horsemill or assemill. Atalaya, a beacon, a watchtower. Atalayar, to
watch at a beacon. Atambor, a drum. Atanor, a conduite pipe. Atanquia, a little
pair of pincers. Atarragar, to stick in the mire. Atarraya, a fishing net.
Ataud, a coffin or a beer to carry dead folk on. Atizar, to kindle fire.
Atocha, a shrub to make frailes of. Atramuzes, lupines. Atriaca, treacle. Atun,
a fish called a Tuny. Aulaga, a prickley herb. Alguaquida, a match of
brimstone. Axaqueca, a pain in the head. Axaquecoso, one that has the
headache. Axadrea, winter sauorie. Axarave, a purgation. Axedrez, chesse.
Axenxio, wormwood. Axenuz, an herb called Gith, or Nigella Romana. Axi, red
Pepper. Aximenez, a sunnie place. Aximezes, Iutties in a house. Axorcas,
bracelets. Axuar, household stuff. Azaar, flowers of Saffron. Azabache, Iet,
the Agat stone. Azagaya, a Iauelin. Azaleja, a towell. Azar, an evil token.
Azarcon, red led. Azavache, vide Azabache. Azcona, a dart. Azebo, holme, or
huluer. Azebuche, a wild Olive tree. Azebuchal, a grove of wild Olives.
Azeche, a kind of black mineral. Azedar, to wax sharp. Azedia, sharpnes,
sowrenes. Azedo, sharp, sour. Azedrilla, Sorrel. Azedura, vide Azedia.
Azeite, or Azeyre, oil. Azeytera, an oil cruse. Azemila, a great mule.
Azemilero, a muletter. Azerado, steeled. Azero, steel. Azerar, to steel.
Azeytero, an oil seller. Azeytoso, oily. Azeytuna, an olive berrie. Aziago,
unfortunate, or unhappy. Azial, the bit of a bridle. Azibar, or Acibar, aloes.
Azicates, long ginet spurs. Azige, earth whereof they make ink. Azofeifa,
Jujubes. Azogado, overcome with quickesiluer. Azogue, quickesiluer. A'zre, a
maple. Azucar, sugar. Azuela, a cowpers adds. Azulaque, Cement wherewith they
join canes.
B
BAbuja, a bubble, a bossed nail, a studde. Bacia, a barbers basin. Bacin, a
boll, a basin, a close stool. Badana, sheep leather dressed like to goats
leather. Badil, a fire shouell, a thing to beat mortar with. Baraja, a
brabble, a pack of cards. Barajar, to pack cards, to shuffle. Barrenar, to
boar through. Barrena, a wimble. Barro, clay, a wheale, a pimple in the face.
Barruntar, to wind out, to suspect. Barrunte, suspicion. Bava, spittle,
Slauer. Bavaza, spittle, slimines. Baxa, a commander among the Turkish
soldiers. Baxel, a vessel. Bellota, an acorne. Bellotero, one that gathers
acornes. Bermejescer, to wax red. Bermejo, red colored. Bermellon,
vermillion. Berraco, a barrowe hog, a boar. Berruga, a wart. Bodigo,
cakebread, or bunnes. Bodoques, pellets of claie. Bofes, the lungs or lights.
Brocegui, a buskin. Borne, the bending of a staff by beauing. Borrar, to blot.
Borron, a blot. Borzeguinero, a buskinmaker. Borzeguineria, a place where
buskins are sold. Box, a box tree. Bragas, breeches. Brega, strife, or
contention. Buffar, to huffe, puff, or snort. Bun^olero, a seller of buns or
pancakes. Bun^uelos, buns, pancakes, cobloaues. Burujo, the husks of grapes.
C
caborda, boarding of a ship, or coming to land. cabordar, to come near
land. cabullir, to diue under water. cafila, a company together. caga, the
end. caguan, a porch, a pond, a brook. caguero, the last. An Alder tree.
caharen^o, wild, coy, disdainful. caherimiento, vpbraiding. caherir, to
vpbraide. cahinas, sops of bread, honey, and water. cahiz, a measure about 18.
bushels. cahondar, to diue to the bottom. cahones, hosen or breeches. cahorda,
a hogs stie. Calabaca, a Gourd. Calabazada, a blow with the head against the
wall. Calaboco, a fetter: a dungeon. calema, a certain fish. calona, half an
Arroba. Camaranchon, a garret, a loft. camarra, a leaeher pelt, a short cloak.
camarro, a rug, of freese gown. Cambux, a mask, a covering for the face.
canca de pierna, a small leg. cancadilla, hopping, tripping. cancajoso, crook
legged. cancos, stilts. cancudos, gnats with long legs. canjado, compassed
about with hollow banks. Can^ada, or Can^ado, a crag or cliffe. Can^uto, a
reed to make a pipe. canquear, to go stalking. canqueador, a stalking fellow.
Cantuzar, to deceive, to crack credit. Canzel, a portall, a porch. Caparacon,
a coparison for a horse. caracas, crooked pins, venomous things. Caracol, a
snaile, a perwinkle. caragueles, or carahueles, gascoine breeches. carandar, to
sift meal. Carcajado, unmeasurable laughter. Carnacha, a Moorish garment.
Caxa, a chest, a deske. Celemin, a measure about a pecke. Chafaldete, a roape
in a ship called the maine tacke. Chafallos, patches, or old ragged clothes.
Chibo, a he goat. Chicharro, a grasshopper. Chico, little, small. Chichon, a
blister. Chiflar, to whistle. Chifle, a whistle, a piping. Chillar, to cry
shrill. Chillido, a shrill cry. Chinchorro, a fishing net. Chinelas, slippers.
Chiquillo, pretty, small. Chirimia, an instrument of music. Choca, a cottage
or cabin. Chocarrear, to jest, to scoff. Chocarrero, a iester, a scoffer.
Chorrear, to run as a brook does. Chorico, a pudding. Chorro, a land flood.
Chuco, a long pike. Ciabogar, to force a bark backward. Cimitarra, a fauchion,
a Turkey sword. Cincha, a girth. Cinchar, to girde. Citola, a citterne.
Citolero, a marker of citternes. Cocear, to kick, to spurn. Cocedra, a quilt.
Cocedron, a mattresse. cocobrar, to ouerturne. cocobras, ouerturnings. Coette,
or Cohete, a squib. Cogollo, or Cogulla, a Munkes hood. Cogujada, a lark.
Cohechar, to plowe together, to take bribes. Cohecho, a bribe. Cohombro, a
Cucumber. Cohombral, a place of Cucumbers. Cohonder, to confound, to corrupt.
Colodra, a horn to drench beasts with. Comadreja, a weasell. Comitre, the
boatswaine in a ship. Coral, a yard, a vaulte, a cellar. Corrallillo, a little
yard, a court. Correa, a stripe, a strap of leather. Cospauco, the paunche.
Cosquillas, tickling. Coto, a park. Cotral, cattle drawn from the heard.
Coxcorrones, knocks with knuckles. Coxear, to halte. Coxo, lame. Coxorrones,
vide Coxcorrones. Coxquear, vide Coxear. Cozinar, to play the cook. Cozinero,
a cook. Cristel, a clister to purge with. Crizuejas, high standing feathers in
a plume. Cueva, a cellar, a vault. Cuexco, a coare or stone of any fruit.
Cugujada, a lark. Cugulla, a cowle or hoode. Cuita, carefulnes, anguish.
Culantro, Coriander. Culantrillo, Maidenhaire. cumo, juice. cumoso, full of
juice. currador, a currier of leather. currana, a wild pigeon. currar, to
currie leather. curriago, a strap of leather. curriagon, a whipstocke. curron,
a leather budget. curroncillo, a little budget. Curtir, to steep, to tanne.
Curtidor, a tanner.
D
DEbalde, vile, for nothing. Debuxar, to draw out a picture. Debuxo, drawing
out, pourtraying. Dexado, left, forsaken. Dexamiento, a forsaking. Dexar, to
leave, to forsake. Dibuxar, v. Debuxar. Dibuxado, v. Debuxado. Diges, rattles
and toies for children. Disfraz, masking, or muffling. Dizfracado, masked, or
muffled. Dornajo, a hogs trough.
E
EMbrocar, to power on, to slip in. Embrocadura, pouring on, slipping in.
Enxabonar, to do with soape. Enxaguar, to wash. Enxalma, a charm, a pannell.
Enxalmar, to enchant. Enxalvegar, to white wash a wall. Enxambrar, to swarm.
Enxambre, a swarm. Enxerir, to graffe. Enxerto, or Enxerido, graffed. Enxugar,
to wipe to dry. Enxullo, a weauers beam. Enxundia, fat, sewet, grease.
Enxuto, dried. Enyessado, seeled, plaistered, Ervacal, a place of herbs.
Escofina, a shauing knife, a filing tool. Eslabon, or Eslavon, a steel to
strike fire with. Espinaca, spinach. Estambes, a web of yarne. Estoperal, a
skowper. Estornija, the triggar of a cart.
F
FUlano, a certain man, such an one.
G
GAcapo, or Gacapito, a rabbet. Gafo, one numme of his sinews. Gaita, or
Gayta, a bag pipe. Gaytero, one that plaieth one a bagpipe. Galgo, a greyhound.
Gallofero, or gallofo, a beggar. Gallofear, to beg. Garfiar, to catch with a
hook. Garfio, a grappling hook. Gargajo, phlegm, choler, melancholy.
Garrocha, a prick, a short dart. Garrochar, to throw such a dart. Garrova, a
kind of pulse growing on trees. Gasajo, mirth, delight. Gaspacho, Gazpacho, a
sop of vinegar, oil, salt and bread. Gatapata, a tike. Gatar, to creep on all
four. Gavelero, a customer, a toll gatherer. Gavilan, a gossehauke. Gaznar, to
gaggle like a goose. Gebeli, a wild hooge. Girifalte, a ierfaucon. Giron, a
lap. Gorgear, to chatter or chirpe. Gorgeamiento, chattering, chirping. Gorra,
a capp, a bonet. Gozne, the hindge of a door. Gozque, a whelpe, a little dog.
Gozquejo, idem. Graja, or Grajo, a chough, a jack daw. Grancas, chafe, bran,
husks. Grancones, ortes, or leauings. Grancoso, full of ortes. Grasnar, or
Graznar, to gaggle, to chatter or chirpe. Grasnido, or Graznido, chattering.
chirping, gaggling. Grillo, a cricket. Guadafiones, manicles, gantlets.
Guadamecies, hangings of gilt leather. Guadan^a, a sieth to mow with.
Guadan^ador, a mower. Guadapera, a choke pear. Guadapero, a choke pear
tree. Guadriman^a, deceit, cosenage. Gualda, an herb to die yellow with.
Gualdado, colored with yellow. Gualdo, yellow. Gualdrapa, a noble man's foot
cloth. Guante, a glove. Guantero, a glouer. Guay, woe, out alas. Guayador,
one that waileth. Guayar, to wail, to lament. Guayas, lamentions, wailing.
Guedeja, a lock of hair. Guedejudo, or Guedejoso, one that uses long locks
of hair. Guija, a needle, a peeble stone. Guijarra, a peeble stone. Gumena,
the cable of a ship. Gusano, a worm. Gusanear, to fill full of worms.
H
HAbubilla, a lay. Haca, or Hacanea, a nag. Haca, a field, a plot of ground.
Hacan^oso, a worthy man. Hacar, to keep ranks. Hace, a faggot, a bunch, a
bundle. Hacezillo, a bauen. Hacen^a, a water-mill. Hacha, a twibill, an axe, a
torch. Hachero, a hewer, a torchbearer. Hafiz, a keeper of silk. Halagar, to
cocker or make much of, to mollify or appease, to flatter. Halago, fair
speech, flattery. Hambre, hunger. Hambriento, hungry. Handrajo, a patch, a
rag. Handrajoso, ragged, tattered. Hanega, a measure containing a bushel and a
half. Haragan, a lazy fellow. Haragania, sloth, lazines. Harana, crafty
deceit. Haranero, a subtle deceiuer. Harda or Hardilla, a squirrell. Harija,
mill dust. Harnero, a sieue to sift with. Harona, a restie jade, a lazy beast.
Haronear, to be restie or lazy. Haronia, restines, lazines. Harrear, to play
the carter. Harriero, a driuer of the beasts. Harto, enough, full, satisfied.
Hartura, fulness, sufficiency. Haspa, vide A'spa. Hataca, a ladle, a pot
stick. Hato, a herd or flock of cattle. Hava, a bean, a disease called the
lampas. Haya, a beech. Hayal, a grove of beeches. Haz, a face, an host of men,
the forefront or outward show. Hazagaya, a iauelin of the Moors. Hazaar, vide
Azaar. Hazaleja, a cloak, a veil, a French hood. Hazcona, a glaiue. Hazedo,
vide Azedo. Hermandad, brotherhood. Hermano, a brother by father and mother.
Herrambre, rust of iron. Herren, mescelin, rye and wheat together. Hez, dregs,
wine lees. Heziento, full of dregs or leez. Hicar, to hoise or lift aloft.
Hin^ir, to kneade dough or paste. Hinojo, fennel, a knee. Hipo or Hippa, the
hicket. Hobacho, a foggie jade. Hocar, to root up as a hog does. Hocico, a
long snoute. Hocicudo, long snouted. Hocina, or Hocino, a hook or bill to lop
trees with. Hogaca, a loaf of bread. Hogar, a hearth. Hoguera, a great fire.
Hoguero, a wood pile. Hoja, a leaf, a sword blade. Hojear, to turn over
leaf. Hollar, to trample under foot. Hollin, soote. Hollinar, to besmut.
Honda, a sling, depth. Hondable, that may be sounded to the bottom. Horma, a
shoomakers last. Hornija, a bauen. Horno, an oven. Horro, a bond slave.
Hortera, a wooden dish. Hoz, a sickle to reap with. Huebra, an acre of
ground. Huego, fire. Hulano, some one. Huron, a firret. Hurraca, a pie.
I
IAezes, trappings for a horse Inogil, a garter. Juguetes, trifles to play
with.
L
LAdillas, crab lice. Lechuza, an owl. Legua, a league. Lexia, lie to wash
with. Loca, an earthen vessel. Lucha or Luchamiento, wrestling. Luchar, to
wrestle.
M
MA'ca or Maco, a mace, a club, a hammer. Macacote, lime and sand together.
Machorra, barren, childlesse. Madron^o, a strawberrie tree. Magazen, a
storehouse. Mahoma, Mahomet. Majada, a sheepefold, a lodging. Majadero, a
pestle, a blockhead. Majar, to stamp. Majadura, stamping. Mancana, an apple.
Mancanal, an orchyard. Mancano, an apple tree. Mandilete, a bawd, a pandore.
Matalahuga, anise seed. Maxcar, to chewe. Mazmorra, a dungeon in a prison.
Mecedor, a mingler. Mecer, to mingle. Mecha, a tent for a wound. Mechero, the
nose of a candlestick. Mecido, the week of a candle. Melon, a melon, a
badger. Mostaza, mustard seed. Moxama, salt fish. Mugroso, all in a sweat.
Mugre, sweat, grease. Mugron, the sprowt of a vine.
N
NAranja, an orange. Naranjal, an orchard of orenges. Naranjo, an orange tree.
O
ORacuz, liquorice. Orcuelo, a pitfolde, a trap, a pin and web in the eye.
Ordiembre, the warpe of a web. Orosuz, vide Oracuz. Oxala, would to God.
Oxaldre, or Hojaldre, a custard.
P
PEgujal, a stock of goods or cattle. Pelambre, pilling of the chin.
Pelambrera, a tanners or glouers lyme pit. Perexil, Parsley. Pestillo, a
pestle. Pielgo, a bottle of skin with the hair inward. Pinijantes, spangles.
Placa, a street, a market place. Poleada, pap for children. Potra, burstnes.
Potro, a colt, a piss pot. Poyal, a bench cloth. Poyo, a bench. Profacar, to
revile, to backbite. Profacador, a reuiler, a backbiter. Pucha, thick pap, or
pottage. Puja, setting to sale. Pujamiento, buying or selling by the great.
Pujanca, puissance or might. Pujante, puissant, mighty. Pujavante, or
Puxavante, a smithes buttrice. Pulgar, a thumb. Pulgarada, a bruise with the
thumb. Puncar, to prick. Puncon, a bodkin. Puxo, a desire to go to stool.
Q
QVadril, the hippe. Quajada, a posset. Quajamiento, curding, congealing.
Quajar, to curdle, to congeale. Quajo, rennet for cheese. Quema, burning.
Quemada, a blaste. Quemar, to burn. Quexa, a complaint. Quexar, to complain.
Quexigo, a wild ash tree. Quexura, haste, earnestnes. Quica, peradventure.
Quicial, or Quicio, the hinge of a door. Quixones, bastard parsley.
R
RAbel, a rebecke to play on. Raca, a raie or sunbeame. Raez, or Rahez, easy
to be done. Rambla, a grauelly place. Rampojos, pricks of briers. Ramplon,
cawkings in a horse shoe. Rampones, vide Ramplon. Rapacejos, fringe. Rasgar,
to scratch. Rasgo, or Rasgon, a scratch. Rebuznamiento, crying like an ass.
Rebuznar, to cry like an ass. Recuero, a carrier of packes by horse, etc.
Recumar, to leake as a pot, to lick the juice. Rejalgar, poison, intoxication.
Rejo, the prick of a goad. Relinchar, to neigh as a horse. Relinchido, or
Relincho, neighing of a horse. Relox, a clock. Reloxero, a cloak maker.
Resquebrajado, clift, chapped. Resquebrajar, to chap, to cliue. Resquicio, a
chap, a clift. Retama, broom. Retoco, tickling, wantonness. Retocon, wanton,
ticklish. Rexa, a lattise window. Rexado, lattised, grated. Rezagado, the last
of all. Ribaco, a high bank. Rifador, a chafer, a brauler. Rifar, to chafe, to
braule. Roca, ground new rubbed. Rocador, a grubbing tool. Rocar, to grub up,
to weed corn, to enfire. Rodajo, a pulley. Rodapies, a settle about a bed.
Roque, the rooke at chesse.
S
SAboga, a shad, a pilchard. Salma, a great sack. Sampon^a, a flute.
Saraguelles, great venetian breeches. Sarazinesca, a wooden percullis. Sarzo,
a hurdle, a grate, a drag. Serojas, sticks.
T
TA'bano, a hornet, a horse-flie. Tahur, a barretor, a gamester, a dicer.
Tahurazo, an unthrift, a gamester. Taniar, a city in Africa so called. Tarja,
a piece of money of nine Marauedies. Tarima, a Moors bed. Tarrugo, a swallow
tail to join timber. Tauxia, wood work, or iron work. Tazmia, casting of
accounts. Tempano, a bung or cork. Texon, a badger. Tixeras, sheeres.
Tixeruelas, sizars. Tizne, soote. Tiznar, to besmut. Tiznamiento, sullying with
soote. Tizon, a firebrand. Tomices, hempen coards. Tomiza, a coard of Sparte.
Torcuelo, a musket, or tassell of any hawk. Torangil, Balm. Trampa, a trap.
Trampales, mirie places. Tramposo, deceitful. Tresquilar, to clip, to sheare.
Tresquilador, a clipper, a shearer. Trevejos, chessemen, rattles. Truchaman, or
Truiaman, an interpreter. Trujamenear, to interpret.
V
VAgel, or Vaxel, a vessel. Vanda, a squadron of soldiers. Vara, a wand, or
yard, a stick. Varanda, a sieue to sift meal. Also a rail to lean the
breast on. Vasquin^a, a woman's petticoat. Vazio, empty. Vedegambre,
beare-foote. Vedija, a lock of wool. Vedijoso, shag haired. Vencejo, a
martlet. Verdegambre, neese powder. Verraco, a boar, a barrow hog. Virotazo, a
blow with a shaft. Virote, a bolt, a shaft.
X
XAbon, soape. Xabonado, soaped. Xabonar, to soape. Xabonero, a soape maker.
Xaharrar, to plaster a wall. Xaque, or Xaques, check at chesse. Xaqueca, the
megrim. Xaqueacon, v. Xaqueca. Xaquimas, halters. Xaquina, idem. Xara, a
shafte, a bramble. Xaral, a place full of brambles. Xaramago, wild rape.
Xarave, sirrup. Xarcias, tackling of a ship. Xarope, vide Xarave. Xaropado,
prepared with syrrup. Xeme, a span. Xenabe, mustard seed. Xenable, mustard.
Xeres, a town so called in Andaluzia. Xerga, searge, sackcloth. Xeringa, an
instrument to give a glister with. Xeringar, to spout forth. Xirimias, a pish
tricks. Xira, good cheer. Xiringa, vide Xeringa. Xiron, the lap of a skirt.
Xo, ho, stay. Xuarda, greasines.
Y
YAntar, to dine. Yares, the small guts. Yazija, condition, estate. yca, yca,
hoise sail. Yegua, a mare. Yeguarizo, a keeper of mares. Yjada, the small
guts, the collicke. Yjadear, to pant for breath. Yzquerdamente, aukely, the
left.
Z
ZAbublido, diued under water. Zabullir, to diue under water. Zagal, a
shepherd. Zagala, a shepherdess. Zagano, a drone Be. Zambra, a Moors dance.
Zanco, a stilt. Zangano, a drone Be. Zanges, a water bottle. Zanja, a hollow
bank. Zaquicami, the space between the tiles and the plaistring. Zargatona,
fleabane, or felwoort. Zarzaganillo, a cold wind. Zarzalian, moorish cloth.
Zimborio, a chapel. Zimbro, juniper. Zohori, one that sees well. Zorra, or
Zorro, a fox. Zorzal, a thrush. Zorrerias, craftines of a fox. Zuin, a
robin-redbrest. Zumbas, buzzing, humming. Zumbido, vide Zumbas. Zun^o, a beck,
a nodde. Zurra, beating, cudgelling. Zurrador, a curriar. Zurrapa, a toad
stool, a toad poll. Zurzir, to patch or mende. Zurano, vide Fulano. Zuzon,
egging on.
Arabicke or Moorish words usual in Murcia.
Alpicoces, vide Cohombros. Abacora, vide Brebas. Albahega, vide Albahaca.
Alhomad, vide Almohada. Abudeca, vide Badeha. Aguanafa, vide A'gua de azahar.
Mingrana, vide Granada. Nocros, vide Albercas.
Ararbick or Moorish words used in Portugal.
Alcofa, vide Espuerta. Almotoli, vide Azeytera. Acril, vide Romero yerva.
Atafar, vide Atahar. Ceifa, vide Ciega, or Cortadura. Maxarica, vide Albahaca
fina. Romana, vide Granada. Tamaras, vide Datiles.
FJNJS.

