A Golden Chain, OR THE DESCRIPTION of Theology, containing the order of the
causes of Salvation and Damnation, according to Gods word. A view of the order
whereof, is to be seen in the Table annexed.

Written in Latin by William Perkins, and Translated ^an other.

Hereunto is adjoined the Order which M. Theodore Beza used in comforting
troubled consciences.

AT LONDON Printed by Edward Alde, and are to be sold by Edward White, at the
little North door of S. Paul's Church at the sign of its Gunne. 1591.

CHristian Reader, there are at this day four several opinions of the order
of Gods divine Predestination.

The first, is of the old and new Pelagians; who place the cause of Gods
Predestination in man: in that they hold, that God did ordeine men either to
life or death, according as he did foresee, that they would by their natural
free will, either reject or receive grace offered.

The second of them, who (of some) are termed Lutherans; which teach, that God
foreseeing how all mankind being shut up under unbelief, would therefore
reject grace offered, did hereupon purpose to choose some to salvation of his
mere mercy with out any respect of their faith or good works, and the rest to
reject being moved to do this, because he did eternallye foresee that they
would reject his grace offered them in the Gospel.

The third, of Sempelagian Papists, which ascribe Gods Predestination, partlye
to mercy, and partly to men's foreseen preparations and meritorious works.

The fourth, of such as teach, that the cause of the execution of Gods
Predestination in his mercy in Christ, in them which are saved, and in them
which perish, the fall and corruption of man: yet so, as that the decree and
eternal counsel of God, concerning them both, has not any cause beside his
will and pleasure. Of these four opinions, the three former, I have labored
to oppugn as erroneous; and to maintain the last, as being a truth which will
bear weight in the balance of the Sanctuary.

A further discourse whereof, here I make bold to offer to thy godly
consideration: in reading whereof regard not so much the thing it self, penned
very slenderly, as mine intent and affection: who desire among the rest to
cast my myte into the treasury of the Church of England; and for want of gold,
pearl and precious stone, to bring a Rams Skin or twain, and a little
Goats hair, to the building of the Lords Tabernacle. Exodus 35.23.

The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ grant that according to the riches of
his glory, thou may be strengthened by his Spirit in the inner man, that
Christ may dwell in thy heart by faith, to the end that thou being rooted and
grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth and length and deapth, and height thereof: and to know the love of
Christ which passes knowledge, that thou may be filled with all fulness of
God. Amen. Farewell. April 18. the year of the last patience of Saints. 1591.

Thine in Christ Jesus. William Perkins.

CHAPTER. 1. Of the body of Scripture, and Theology.
THe body of Scripture, is a doctrine sufficient to live well.

It comprehends many holy sciences, whereof one is principal, others are
handmaids or retainers.

The principal science is Theology.

Theology is the science of living blessedly for ever. Blessed life consists
in the knowledge of God. Ioh. 17.3. This is life eternal, that they know thee
to be the only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Esaias. 53.11. By
his knowledge shall my righteous servant (viz. Christ) justify many. And
therefore it consists likewise in the knowledge of our selves, because we know
God by looking into our selves.

Chap. 2. Of God, and the nature of God.
GOd is Jehovah Elohim. Exodus 6.2. And Elohim spoke unto Moses and said unto
him, I am Jehovah. And I appeared unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Iaacob, by the
name of God Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was I not known unto them. Exodus
3.13. If they say unto me, what is his Name? what shall I says unto them? And
God answered Moses, I am that I am. Also he said, thus shall thou say unto the
children of Israel I am has sent me unto you. And God spoke further to Moses,
thus shall thou say unto the Children of Israel, Jehovah Elohim etc. has sent
me unto you

The first title of God, declares his Nature, the second his Persons.

The nature of God, is his lively and most perfect essence.

The perfection of the nature of God, is his absolute constitution, by the
which he is wholye complete within himself. Exodus 3.13. I am that I am, Act.
17.24. God that made the world, and all things that are therein, seeing that
he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands,
neither is worshipped with men's hands. As though he needed any thing, seeing
he gives to all life and breath and all things.

The perfection of his nature is either the Simplenes or the infinitenes
thereof.

The simplenes of his nature, is that by which he is void of all Logical
relation. He has not in him, subject or adiunct. Ioh. 5.26. As the Father has
life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in him self:
Conferred with Ioh. 14.6. I am the way, the truth, and the Life. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
But if we walk in light as he is in light, conferred with the 5. God is light
and in him is no darkness. Hence it is manifest, that to have Life, and to be
Life: to be in Light, and to be Light: in God are all one. Neither is God
subject to generality or specialitie: whole, or parts: matter, or that which
is made of matter: for so there should be in God diverse things, and one more
perfect then another: therefore whatsoever is in God, is his essence. and all
that he is, he is by his essence.

Hence it is manifest, that the Nature of God, is immutable and Spiritual.

Gods immutabilitie of nature, is that by which he is void of all composition,
division, and change. Iam. 1.17. With God there is no variablenes nor shadow of
changing. Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord and am not changed.

Gods nature is spiritual in that it is corporal, and therefore invisible. Ioh.
4.24. God is a spirit. 2. Cor. 3.17. The Lord is the spirit. 1. Tim. 1.17. To
the King eternal, immortal, invisible, only wise God be glory and honor for
ever and ever. Coloss. 1.15. Who is the Image of the invisible God.

The infinitenes of God is two fold: his Eternity, and exceeding greatness.

Gods eternity, is that by which he is without beginning and ending. Psalm.
90.2. Before the mountains were made, and before thou had formed the earth
and the round world, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art our God.
Revel. 1.8. I am Alpha and Omega, that is, the beginning and ending, says the
Lord, Which is, which was, and which is to come.

Gods exceeding greatness, is that by which his incomprehensible nature is
every where present, both within and without the world. Psalm. 145.3. Great is
the Lord and worthy to be praised, and his greatness is incomprehensible. 1.
King. 8.27. Is it true indeed that God will dwell on the earth? behold the
heavens, and the heavens of heavens are not able to contain thee: how much
less is this house that I have built? Iere. 23.23. Do not I fill the heaven
and earth says the Lord? Hence it is plain: first, that he is only one,
and indivisible, not many. Ephe. 4.5. One Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one
God and Father of all. Deuteronomy. 4.35. Unto thee it was showed, that thou might
know that the Lord he is God, and that there is none but he alone. 1. Cor. 8.4.
We know that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that there is none other
God but one. And there can be but one thing infinite in nature.

Secondly, that God is the knower of the heart. For nothing is hidden from that
nature, which is within al things and without all things, which is included in
nothing, nor excluded from any thing. Because 1. King. 28.9. The Lord
searches all hearts, and understands every woork of the mind. Psalm.
139.1.2. Thou know my sitting down and my rising up, thou understand my
cogitation a far off.

Chap. 3. Of the life of God.
HItherto have we spoken of the perfection of Gods nature. Now follows the
life of God, by which the Divine Nature is in perpetual action, living and
moving it self. Psalm. 42.2. My soul thirsts for God, even for the living
God: when shall I come and appear before the presence of God? Heb. 3.12. See
that there be not at any time in any of you an evil heart to depart from the
living God.

The divine nature is especially in perpetual operation by three attributes,
the which do manifest the operation of God toward his creatures. These are
his wisdom, will, and omnipotency.

The wisdom or knowledge of God, is that by the which God does not
successiuelye, and by discourse of reason, but by one eternal and immutable
act of understanding distinctlye, and perfectlye know himself, and al other
things, though infinite, whether they have been or not. Math. 11.27. No man
knows the Son but the Father, nor the Father but the Son, and he to whom
the Son, will reveal him. Heb. 4.13. There is nothing created which is not
manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and open to his eyes, with
whom we have to do. Psalm. 147.5. His wisdom is infinite.

Gods wisdom has these parts. His foreknowledge and his counsel.

The foreknowledge of God, is that by which he most assuredly foreseeth all
things that are to come. Act. 2.23. Him have ye taken by the hands of the
wicked, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God,
and have crucified and slain, Romans 8. Those which he knew before, he also
predestined to be made like to the image of his Son. This is not properly
spoken of God, but by reason of men to whom things are past, or to come.

The counsel of God, is that by which he does most straightlye perceive the
best reason of all things that are Pro. 8.14. I have counsel and wisdom: I
am understanding, and I have shrength.

The will of God, is that by the which he both most freely, and straightly with
one act wills all things. Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardens. Ephesians. 1.5. Who has predestinate us to be adopted
through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.
Iam. 4.15. For that which you should say, if the Lord will, we will live and
do this or that.

God wills that which is good, by approving it, that which is evil, in as
much as it is evil, by disalowing and not willing it. And yet he voluntarily
does permit evil: Because it is good that there should be evil. Act. 14.16.
Who in times past suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own ways. Psalm.
81.12. So I gave them up to the hardness of their heart, and they have walked in
their own counsels.

The will of God, by reason of diverse obiectes has diverse Names, and is either
called Love and Hatred, or Grace and Justice.

The love of God, is that, by the which God approves first, himself, and then
all his creatures without their desert, and in them does take delight. 1. Ioh.
4.16. God is love, and who so remains in love, remains in God, and God in
him. Ioh. 3.16. So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
etc. Romans 5.8. God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were
yet sinners, Christ died for us.

The hatred of God, is that by the which he disliketh, and detesteth his
creature offending, for his fault. 1. Cor. 10.5. But many of them the Lord
misliked, for they perished in the wilderness. Psalm. 5.5. Thou hate all the
workers of iniquity. Psalm. 44.8. Thou have loved justice and hated iniquity.

The grace of God, is that by which he freely declares his favor to his
creatures. Romans 11.6. If it be of Grace, it is no more of works: otherwise
Grace is not grace, but if it be of works, it is no more grace. Titus. 2.11.
The saving grace of God shined to all men teaching us to dente impiety, etc.

The grace of God, is either his Goodness, or his Mercy.

The goodness of God, is that by which he being in himself absolutely good,
does freely exercise his liberality upon his creatures Matthew. 19.17. Why
call thou me good, none is good but one, even God. Matthew. 5.45. He makes
his sun to shine upon the good and the bad, and he raineth upon the just and
unjust.

Gods mercy, is that by which he freely assisteth all his creatures in their
miseries. Esaias. 30.18. Yet will the Lord wait, that he may have mercy upon
you. Leuit. 3.22. It is the Lords mercies, that we are not consumed, because
his compassion fail not. Exodus 33.19. I take pity on whom I take pity, and
am merciful on whom I am merciful.

Gods Justice, is that by which he in all things wills that which is just.
Psalm. 10. The just Lord loves justice. Psalm. 3.4. For thou art not a God that
loves wickedness.

Gods justice, is in word, or deed.

Justice in word, is that truth by which he constantly, and indeed wills
that which he has said Romans 3.4. Let God be true, and every man a liar. Mat^
(...) up children to Abraham, Phil. 3.21. According to the working, whereby he
is able to subdue even all things unto himself.

Gods actual power, is that by which he causes all things to be, which he
freely will. Psalm. 135.6. All things which God will, those be does in heaven
and in earth, and in all depthes.

Chap. 4. Of Gods glory and blessedness.
OVt of the former attributes by which the true Jehovah is distinguished from a
fained God, and from idols, arise the glory of God and his blessedness.

Gods glory or majesty, is the infinite excellency of his most simple and
most holy divine Nature. Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness, of his glory, and
the ingraued form of his person etc. Dan. 3. Thou Lord art only God, and
glorious upon the earth,

By this we see, that God only can know him self perfectly. John. 6.46. Not
that any man has seen the Father, save he which is of God, he has seen the
Father. 1. Tim. 6.16. Who only has immortality, and dwells in the light,
that none can attain unto, whom never man saw, neither can see. Exodus 33.18.
Thou can not see my face.

Notwithstanding there is a certain manifestation of Gods glory: partlye more
obscure, partlye more apparent.

The more obscure manifestation, is the vision of Gods majesty in this life,
by the eyes of the mind, through the help of things perceived by the outward
senses.

Esai. 6.1. I saw the Lord sitting upon an high throne, and lifted up, and the
lower parts thereof filled the temple. Exodus 33.22. And while my glory
passes by, I will put thee in a cleft of the Rock, and will cover thee with
mine hands while J pass by: after J will take away mine hand, and thou shall
see my backeparts, but my face shall not be seen. 1. Cor. 13.12. Now we see as
through a glass, darkely.

The more apparent manifestation of God, is the contemplation of him in Heaven
face to face. 1. Cor. 13.12. But then shall we see face to face. Daniel.
7.9.10. I beheld till the thrones were set up, and the Ancient of days did
sit, whose garment was white as Snow, etc.

Gods blessedness, is that by which God is in himself, and of him self all
sufficient. Genesis 17.1. I am God all sufficient, walk before me and be thou
upright. Col. 2.4. For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. 1.
Tim. 6.5. Which in due time he shall show, that is blessed and prince only,
etc.

Chap. 5. Concerning the persons of the Godhead.
THe persons, are they, which subsisting in one Godhead, are distinguished by
incommunicable properties. 1. John. 5.7. There are three that bear record in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghoast, and these 3. are one. Genesis
19.24. Then Jehouah rained upon Sodom, and upon Gomorah, brimstone, and fire
from Jehouah in heaven. Ioh. 1.1. Jn the beginning was the word, and the word
was with God, and that word was God.

The constitution of a person is, when as a personal propriety, or the proper
manner of subsisting is adjoined to the Deity, or one divine nature.

Distinction of persons, is that, which albeit every person is one and the same
perfect God, yet the Father is not the Son or the holy Ghost, but the Father
alone; the Son is not the Father or the holy Ghost, but the Son alone; and
the holy Ghoast is not the Father or the Son, but the holy Ghoast alone: so
that in these there is diversity of persons, but unity of essence.

The communion of the persons, or rather union, is that by which each one is in
the rest, and with the rest, by reason of the unity of the Godhead: and
therefore every each one does possess love, and glorify another, and work
the same thing. Ioh. 14.10. Beleeuest thou not that J am in the Father, and the
Father is in me? the words that I speak unto you, J speak not of my self but
my Father that dwells in me, he does the works. Pro. 8.22. The Lord has
possessed me in the beginning of his way: J was before his works of old. And
verse. 30. Then was J with him as a nourisher, and J was daily his delight,
rejoicing always before him. Ioh. 1.1. Jn the beginning was the word, and the
word was with God, and that word was God. and Chap. 5.19. The Son can do
nothing of himself, save that he sees the Father do: for whatsoever things
he does, the same does the Son also.

There be three persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Math.
^.16.17. And Jesus when he was baptized, came straight out of the water, and
lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and John saw the Spirit of God,
discending like a Dove, and lighting upon him. And lo, a voice came from
heaven, saying. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.

The Father, is a person without beginning, who from all eternity begat the
Son. Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness of the glory, and the ingraued
form of his person. Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my Son this day have I begotten
thee.

The incommunicable property of the Father, is to be unbegotten. He is the
beginning of actions, because he begins every action of himself, effecting
it by the Son and the holy ghost. 1. Cor. 8.6. Yet unto us, there is but one
God, which is the Father of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. Romans 11.36. For of him,
and through him, and for him are all things.

The other two persons have the Godhead, or the whole divine essence, of the
Father by communication, namely the Son and the holy Ghost.

The Son is the second person, begotten of the Father, from all eternity.
Heb. 1.5. For unto which of the Angels said he at any time, thou art my Son
this day begat I thee? Col. 1.15. Who is the ^age of the invisible God, the
first borne of every creature. Ioh. 1.14. And we saw the glory thereof as the
glory of the only begotten Son of the Father. Romans 8.32. He who spared not
his own Son.

For this cause he is said to be sent from the Father. Ioh. 8.42. I proceeded
forth and came from God, neither came I of my self but he sent me. This
sending takes not away the equality of essence and power, but declares the
order of the persons. Ioh. 5.18. Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill
him, not only because he had broken the Sabbath, but said also that god was his
Father, and made himself equal with God. Phil. 2.6. Who being in the form of
God, thought is no robbery to be equal with God.

For this cause also he is the WORD of the father, not a vanishing but an
essential word, because as a word, is as it were begotten of the mind, so is
the Son begotten of the Father. And also, because he brings glad tidinges
from the bosom of his Father. Nazian in his oration of the Son, Basil in his
preface before John's gospel.

The property of the Son, is to be begotten.

His proper manner of working, is to execute actions from the father by the
holy ghost, 1. Cor. 8.6. Our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things and we
by him. Ioh. 5.19. Whatsoever things he does, the same does the son also.

The holy Ghost is the third person, proceeding from the Father and the Son.
Ioh. 15.26. But when the comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from
the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds of the Father, he
shall testify of me. Romans 8.9. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the
Spirit, seeing the Spirit of God dwells in you. But if there be any that
has not the Spirit of Christ, he is not his. Ioh. 16.13.14. But when that
Spirit of truth shall come, he shall conduct you into all truth: for he
shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he hears, he shall speak, and
shall declare unto you such things as are to come. He shall glorify me, for
he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you.

What may be the essential difference betwixt proceeding, and begetting;
neither the Scriptures determine, nor the Church knows.

The incommunicable property of the holy Ghost, is to proceed.

His proper manner of woorking, is to finish an action effecting it, as from
the Father and the Son.

Chap. 6. Of Gods works and his decree.
THus far concerning the first part of Theology: the second follows, of the
works of God.

The works of God, are all those; which he does out of himself, that is, out
of his divine essence.

These are common to the Trinity, always reserved the peculier manner of
working in every person.

The end of all these is the manifestation of the glory of God. Rom 11.36. For
him are all things, to him be all glory for ever.

The work of action of God, is either his decree or the execution of his
decree.

The decree of God, is that by which God in himself, has necessarily and yet
freelye, from all eternity determined all things. Ephe. 1.11. Jn whom also we
are chosen when we were predestinate, according to the purpose of him, which
woorketh all things after the counsel of his own will. and ver. 4, as he has
chosen us in him before the foundation of the world. Math. 10.29. Are not two
Sparrowes sold for a farthing, and not one of them falls on the ground,
without your father? Rom 9.21. Has not the potter power on the claie to make
of the same lump one vessel to dishonor, and another to ho^er.

Therefore the Lord according to his good pleasure, has most certainly decreed
every both thing and action whether past, present, or to come, together with
their circumstances of place, time, means, and end.

Y^, be has most iustlye decreede the wicked works of the wicked. For if it
had not so pleased him, they had never been at all. And albeit they of their
own nature, are and remain wicked; yet in respect of Gods decree, they are to
be accounted good. For there is not anyething absolutelye evil. 1. Pet. ^.17.
For it is better (if the will of God be so) that ye suffer for well doing, then
for evil doing.

The thing which in the one nature is evil, in Gods eternal counsel comes in
the place of a good thing; in that it is some occasion, and way to manifest the
glory of God in his justice, and in his mercy.

The execution of Gods decree, is that by which all things in their time are
accomplished, which were foreknowen, or decreed, and that even as they were
foreknowen and decreed.

The same decree of God, is the first and principal working cause of al
things, which is in order and time before all other causes. For with Gods
decree is always his will annexed, by the which he can willinglye effect that
he has decreede. And it were a sign of impotencie, to decree any thing which
he could not willingly compass. And with Gods will is co^ioyned an effectual
power, by which the Lord can bring to pass whatsoever he has freely decreed.

This first and principal cause, how be it in it self it be necessary, yet it
does not take away freedom of will in election, or the nature and property of
second causes, but only brings them into a certain order, that is, it directs
the^ to the determinate end: whereupon the effects and events of things are
contingent or necessary, as the nature of the second cause is. So Christ
according to his Fathers decree died necessarily. Act. 17.3. But yet
willinglye. Mat. 25.39. And if we respect the te^perature of Christ's body, he
might have prolonged his life; and therefore in this respect might be said to
have died co^tinge^tly.

The execution of Gods decree has two branches, his operation and his
operative permission.

Gods operation, is his effectual producing of al good things, which either
have being or moving, or which are done.

Gods operative permission, is that by which he only permits one and the
same work to be done of others, as it is evil; but as it is good, he
effectually works the same. Genesis 50.20. You indeed had purposed evil against
me, but God decreed that for good, that he might as he has done this day,
preserve his people alive. and Genesis 45.7. God has sent me before you to
preserve your posterity in this Land. Esaias. 10.5.6.7. Woe unto Asshur, the rod
of my wrath, and the staff in their hands is mine indignation. I will send
him to a dissembling nation, and I will give him a charge against the people of
^y wrath, to take the spoil, and to take the pray, and to tread them under
feet like the mire in the street. But he thinks not so, neither does his
heart esteem it so but he imagines to destroy, and to cut off not a few
nations.

God permits evil, by a certain voluntary permission, in that he forsakes
the second cause in working evil. And he forsakes his creature, either by
detracting the grace he had, or not bestowing that which he wants. Romans 1.26.
For this cause god gave them up unto vile affections. 2. Tim. 2.25.26.
instructing them with meeknes that are contrary minded, proving if God at any
time will give the^ repentance, that they may know the truth, and that they may
come to amendment out of the snare of the Devil, which are taken of him at his
will.

Neither must we think God unjust, who is indebted to none. Rom 9.15. I will
have mercy on him, to whom I will show mercy. Yea, it is in Gods pleasure to
bestow how much grace, and upon whom he will. Math. 20.15. Is it not lawful
for me to do as I will with mine own?

That which is evil has some respect of goodness with God.

First, in that it is the punishment of sin, and punishment is accounted a
morrall good; in that, it is the part of a just judge to punish sin.

Secondly, as it is a mere action oract.

Thirdlye, as it is a chastisement, a trial of ones faith, martyrdom,
propitiation for sin, as the death and passion of Christ. Act. 2.23. and
4.28. And if we observe these caueates, God is not only a bare permissiue
agent in an evil work, but a powerful effect or of the same, yet so, as he
neither instilleth an aberration into the action, nor yet supporteth, or
intends the same, but that he most freely suffers evil, and best disposes
of it to his own glory. The like we may see in this similitude. Let a man
spur forward a lame horse; In that he moves forward the rider is the cause,
but that he halteth, he himself is the cause. And again, we see the Sun
beams gathering themselves into a Sun glass, they burn such things as
they light upon: now, that they burn, the cause is not in the Sun, but in
the glass. The like may be said of Gods action in an evil subject.

Chap. 7. Of Predestination and creation.
GOds decree, in as much as it concerns man, is called predestination: which
is the decree of God, by the which he has ordained all men, to a certain and
everlasting estate; that is, either to salvation or condemnation, for his own
glory. 1. These. 5.9. For God has not appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain
salvation by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 9.13. As it is written,
I have loved Jacob and hated Esais. and ver. 12. What and if God would to show
his wrath and make his power known, suffer with long patience the vessels of
wrath prepared to destruction, and that he might declare the riches of his
glory upon the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory.

The means of accomplishing Gods predestination are two fold.

The creation, and the fall.

The creation, is that by which God made all things, very good, of nothing,
that is of no matter, which was before the creation. Genesis 1.1. In the beginning
God created the heaven, etc. to the end of the chap.

Gods manner of creating as also of governing, is such as that by his word
alone, he, without any instruments, means, assistance, or motion produced all
sorts of things. For to will any thing with God, is both to be able, and to
perform it. Heb. 11.3. By faith we understand, that the world was ordained by
the word of God, so that the things which we see, are not made of things which
did appear. Psalm. 148.5. Let them praise the name of the Lord, for he
commanded and they were created.

The goodness of the creature, is a kind of excellency, by which it was void
of all sin, that is, free from punishment and transgression.

The creation, is of the world, or inhabitants in the world.

The world, is a most beautiful palace, framed out of a deformed substance,
and fit to be inhabited.

The parts of the world, are the heavens, and earth.

The heavens are threefolde, the first is the air, the second the Sky, the
third an invisible and incorporall essence, created to be the seat of all the
blessed, both men and Angels. This third heaven is called Paradise. 2. Cor.
14.4.

The inhabitants of the world are reasonable creatures, made according to Gods
own image, they are either angels or men. Genesis 1.26. Furthermore God said,
let us make man in our own image, according to our likeness. Job. 1.16. When
the children of God came and stood before the Lord: Satan came also among
them.

The image of God is the integrity of the reasonable creature, resembling God
in holiness. Ephesians. 4.24. And put on the new man which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.

Chap. 8. Of Angels.
THe Angels each of them being created in the beginning, were settled in an
upright estate. In whom these things are to be noted. First their nature.
Angels are spiritual, and incorporall essences. Heb. 2.16. For be in no sort
took the Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham. Heb. 1.7. And of the
angels, he says, he makes the spirit his messengers, and his ministers a
flame of fire.

Secondly, their qualities. First they are wise 2. Sam. 14.18. My Lord the king
is eue^ at an ^ell of God in h^aring good and bad. 2. They are of great might.
2 Thessalonians. 1.7. When the Lord Jesus shall she himself from heaven with his
mighty angels. 2. Sam. ^4. David saw the Angel that smote the people. 2.
King. 19.35. The same night the Angel of the Lord want out and smote in the
camp of Asshur, an hundredth, fourscore, and five thousand. 3. They are swift
and of great agelitie. Esaias. 6.6. Then flew one of the Seraphius unto me with
an hot cole in his hand, Dan. 9.21. The man Gabriell whom I had seen before
in a vision, came flying and touched me. This is the reason why the cherubims
in the tabernacle were painted with wings.

Thirdly, they are innumerable. Genesis 3.2. Now Jacob went forth on his journey
and the Angels of God met him. Dan. 7.10. Thousand thousands ministered unto
him, and ten thousand thousands stood before him. Matthew. 26.53. Think thou
I cannot pray to my father and he will give me me then twelve legions of
Angels? Heb. 12.22. to the company of innumerable angels.

Fourthly, they are in the highest heaven, where they ever attend upon God, and
have society with him. Matthew. 18.10. In heaven their angels always behold the
face of my father which is in heaven. Psalm. 78.17. The charets of God are
twenty thousand thousand angels, and the Lord is among them. Mar. 12.25. But
are as angels in heaven.

Fifthly, their degree. That there are degrees of angels, it is most plain.
Coloss. 1.16. By him were all things created, which are in heaven, and in
earth, things visible and invisible: whether they be thrones or dominions, or
principalities, or powers. Romans 8.38. Neither Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. The Lord shall descend with the voice of the
archangel, and with the trumpet of God. But it is not for us to search, who, or
how many be of each order, neither ought we curiously to enquire how they are
distinguished, whether in essence, or qualities. Colos. 2.18. Let no man at his
pleasure bear rule over you by humbleness of mind, and worshipping of
Angels, aduauncing himself in those things which he never saw.

Sixthly, their office. Their office, is partly to magnify God, and partly to
perform his commandments to them. Psalm. 103.20, 21. Praise the Lord, ye his
Angels that excel in strength, that do his commandment in obeying the voice
of his word. Praise the Lord, all ye his hosts, ye his servants that do his
pleasure.

Seventhly: The establishing of some Angels in that integrity, in which they
were created.

Chap. 9. Of man, and the estate of innocence.
MAn, after he was created of God, was established in an excellent estate of
innocence. In this estate seven things are chiefly to be regarded.

I. The place. The garden of Heden, that most pleasant garden. Genesis 2.15. Then
the Lord took the man, and put him into the garden of Heden.

II. The integrity of man's nature. Which was Ephesians. 4.24. created in
righteousness and true holiness. This integrity has two parts.

The first is wisdom, which is a true and perfect knowledge of God, and of his
will, in as much as it is to be performed of man, yea, and of the counsel of
God in all his creatures. Col. 3.10. And have put on the new man, which is
renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him. Genesis 2.19. When
the Lord God had formed of the earth every beast of the field, and every foul
of the heaven, he brought them unto the man, to see how he would call the^: for
howsoever the man called the living creature, so was the name thereof.

To second, is Justice, which is a conformity of the will, affections, and
powers of the body to the will of God.

III. Man's dignity, consisting of four parts. First, his communion with God,
by which as God rejoiced in his own image, so likewise man was incensed to
love God: This is apparent by Gods familiar conference with Adam. Genesis 1 29.
And God said, Behold, I have given unto you every herb bearing seed, etc.
that shall be to you for meat. Secondly, his dominion over all the creatures
of the earth. Genesis 2.19. Ps. 8.6. Thou have made him Lord over the works of
thine hands, and have set all things under his feet, etc. Thirdly, the
decency, and dignity of the body, in which, though naked, nothing was
unseemly. Psalm. 8.5. Thou have made him little lower then God, and crowned him
with glory and worship. Genesis 2.25. They were both naked, and neither
ashamed. 1. Cor. 12.22. Upon those members of the body, which we think most
dishonest, put we more honesty (...), and our uncomely ^artes have more
comeliness on. Fourthly, labor of the body without pain or grief. Genesis
3.17.19. Because thou have obeyed the voice of thy wife, etc. cursed is the
earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life,
etc.

IIII. Subjection to God, whereby man was bound to perform obedience to the
commandments of God: which were two. The one was concerning the two trees:
the other, the observation of the Sabbath.

Gods commandment concerning the trees, was ordained to make examination, and
trial of man's obedience. It consists of two parts: the first, is the eating
of the tree of life, that as a sign, it might confirm to man, his perpetual
abode in the garden of Heden, if still he persisted in obedience. Revel. 2.7.
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in
the midst of the paradise of God. Prou. 3.18. She is a tree of life to them
which lay hold on her: and blessed is he that retains her. The second, is
the prohibition to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
together with a commination of temporal and eternal death, after the
transgression of this commandment. Genesis 2.17. Of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, thou shall not eat of it, for in the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall die the death. This was a sign of death, and had his name
of the event, because the observation thereof would have brought perpetual
happiness, as the violation gave experience of evil, that is, of all misery,
that is, of punishment and of guiltiness of sin.

Gods commandment concerning the observation of the Sabbath, is that, by
which God ordained the sanctification of the Sabbath. Genesis 2.3. God blessed the
seventh day, and sanctified it.

V. His calling, which is his service of God, in the observation of his
commandments, and the dressing of the garden of Heden. Prou. 16.4. God made
all things for him self. Genesis 2.15. He placed him in the garden of Heden, to
dress and keep it.

VI. His diet was the herbs of the earth, and fruit of every tree, except the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Genesis 1.29. And God said, Behold, I have
given unto you every herb bearing seed, which is upon all the earth, and
every tree, wherein is the fruit of a tree bearing seed, that shall be to you
for meat. and 3.17. But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall
not eat.

VII. His free choice, both to will, and perform the commandment concerning
the two trees, and also to neglect and violate the same. Whereby we see that our
first parents were indeed created perfect, but mutable: for so it pleased God
to prepare a way to the execution of his decree.

Chap. 10. Of the fall of Angels.
THe fall, is a reuolting of the reasonable creature from obedience to sin.

Sin is the corruption, or rather deprivation of the first integrity. More
plainly it is a falling or turning from God, binding the offender by the
course of Gods justice, to undergo the punishment.

The fall was effected on this manner. First, God created his reasonable
creatures good indeed, but withal changeable, as we have showed before. For
to be unchangeably good, is proper to God alone. Secondly, God tried their
obedience, in those things, about which they were conversant. Deuteronomy. 13.13. Thou
shall not hearken to the words of the Prophet, or unto that dreamer of
dreams: for the lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord
your God, with all your heart, and with all your soul. Thirdly, in this trial
God does not assist them with new grace to stand, but for just causes
forsakes them. Lastly, after God has forsaken them, and left them to
themselves, they fall quite from God: no otherwise, then when a man staying up
a staff from the ground, it stands upright, but if he never so little
withdraw his hand, it falls of it self.

The fall, is of men, and Angels.

The fall of Angels, that is, by which the understanding, pointing at a more
excellent estate, and of it own accord approouing the same, together with the
will making especial choice thereof: they, albeit they might freely by their
integrity, have chosen the contrary, were the sole instruments of their fall
from God. 2. Pet. 2.4. If God spared not the Angels which sinned, but cast them
down into hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be kept unto
damnation, etc. Jude 6. The Angels which kept not their first estate, but left
their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains, etc. Ioh. 8.44.
He was a murderer from the beginning, and continued not in the truth: for
there is no truth in him.

In the fall of Angels, consider: First, their corruption, arising from their
fall, which is the deprauation of their nature. And is either that fearful
malice and hatred, by which they set them selves against God, or their
insatiable desire to destroy mankind, to the effecting whereof, they neglect
neither force nor fraud. 1. Ioh. 3.8. He that commits sin is of the
devil, because the devil sinned from the beginning. For this cause was the
Son of God revealed, to dissolve the works of the devil. 1. Pet. 5.8. Your
adversary the devil goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may
devour. Ephesians. 6.12. You strive not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, and power, and worldly governors, the princes of darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickednesses, which are in supercelestiall
things.

II. Their degree, and diversity: for of these Angels, one is chief, and the
rest attendants. The chief, is Beelzebub, Prince of the rest of the devils,
and the world, far above them all in malice. Matthew. 25.41. Away from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels. 2. Cor.
4.4. Whose minds the god of this world has blinded. Revel. 12.7. And there
was war in heaven, Michael, and his Angels fought with the Dragon, and the
Dragon and his angels fought.

Ministering angels, are such as wait upon the devil, in accomplishing his
wickedness.

III. Their punishment. God, after their fall, gave them over to perpetual
torments, without any hope of pardon. Jude ver. 6.2. Pet. 2.4. God spared not
the Angels that had sinned, but cast them down into hell, and delivered them
into chains of darkness, to be kept unto damnation. This he did, first, to
admonish men, what great punishment they deserved. Secondly, to show, that
grievous sins must more grievously be punished.

The fall of Angels was the more grievous, because both their nature was more
able to resist, and the devil was the first founder of sin.

Their punishment is easier, or more grievous.

Their easier punishment is double. The first, is their deiection from heaven.
2. Pet. 2.4. God cast the Angels that sinned, into hell. The second, is the
abridging and limitation of their power. Job. 1.12. The Lord said unto Satan,
Behold, all that he has, i^ in thine hand, only upon him lay not thine hand.

The more grievous pain, is that torment in the deep, which is endless and
infinite, in time and measure. Luke 8.31. And they besought him, that he would
not command them to go down into the deep.

Chap. 11. Of man's fall, and disobedience.
ADams fall, was his willing reuolting to disobedience by eating the forbidden
^ate. In Adams fall we may note the manner greatness, and fruit of it.

I. The manner of Adams fall was on this sort. First, the death, having
immediately before, fallen him self, insinuates unto our first parents, that
both the punishment for eating the forbidden fruit was uncertain, and that God
was not true in his word unto them.

Secondly, by his legerdemaine he blinded the eyes of their understanding.
Thirdly, being thus blinded, they begin to distrust God, and to doubt of Gods
favor. Fourthly, they thus doubting are moved to be hold the forbidden fruit.
Fifthly, they no sooner so the beauty thereof, but they desire it. Sixthly, that
they may satisfy their desire, they eat of the fruit, which by the hands of
the woman was taken from the tree: by which act they become utterly disloyal
to God. Genesis 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Thus without constraint, they willingly fall from their integrity, God upon
just causes leaving them to themselves, and freely suffered them to fall. For
we must not think that man's fall was either by chance, or God not knowing
it, or barely winking at it, or by his bare permission, or against his will:
but rather miraculously, not without the will of God, but yet without all
approbation of it.

II. The greatness of this transgression must be esteemed, not by the external
object, or the baseness of an apple, but by the offense it contains against
Gods majesty. This offense appears, by many trespasses committed in that
action. 1. The first, is doubting of Gods word ^. Want of faith. For they
believe not Gods threatening. (In the day ye eat thereof, you shall die the
death.) But being bewitched with the devils promise, (ye shall be like gods) they
cease to fear Gods punishment, and are inflamed with a desire of greater
dignity. 3. Their curiosity, in forsaking Gods word, and seeking other
wisdom. 4. Their pride, in seeking to magnify themselves, and to become like
God. 5. Contempt of God, in transgressing his commandment against their own
conscience. 6. In that they prefer the devil before God. 7. Ingratitude,
who, in as much as in them lies, expel Gods spirit dwelling in them, and
despise that blessed union. 8. They murder both them selves and their progeny.

III. The fruit or effects. Out of this corrupt estate of our first parents,
arose the estate of unbelief, whereby God has included all men under sin,
that he might manifest his mercy in the salvation of some, and his justice in
condemnation of others. Romans 11.32. God has shut up all men in unbelief, that
he might have mercy on all. Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded all under
sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them
that believe.

In this estate, we must consider sin, and the punishment of sin. Sin is
threefolde.

The first, is the participatio^ of Adams both transgression and guiltiness:
whereby, in his sin, all his posterity sinned. Romans 5.12. As by one man
sin entered into the world, and by sin death, so death entered upon all men,
in that all man have sinned. The reason of this is ready. Adam was not then a
private man, but represented all mankind, and therefore look what good he
received from God, or evil elsewhere, both were common to others with him. 1.
Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all men die, so in Christ all men rise again.

Again, when Adam offended, his posterity was in his loins, from whom they
should, by the course of nature, issue: and therefore take part of the
guiltiness with him Heb. 7.9.10. And to say as the thing is, Leu^ etc. paid
tithes and Abraham, for he was yet in the loins of his father Abraham, when
Melchi sedec met him.

Chap. 12. Of original sin.
OVt of the former transgression arises another, namely, Original sin, which
is corruption engendered in our first conception, whereby every faculty of
soul and body is prone and disposed to evil. Ps. 51.5. I was borne in
iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me. Genesis 6.5. Tit. 3.3. We our
selves were in times past vnrise, disobedient, deceived, served the lusts, and
diverse pleasures, living in maliciousness, and envy, hateful, and hating one
another. Heb. 12.1. Let us cast away every thing that presses down, and the
sin that hangs so fast on.

By this, we see that sin is not a corruption of man's substance, but only of
faculties: otherwise neither could men's souls be immortal, nor Christ take
upon him man's nature.

The propagation of sin, from the parents to the children, is either because
the soul is infected by the contagion of the body, as a good ointment by a
fustie vessel: or because God, in the very moment of creation and infusion of
souls into infants, does utterly forsake them. For as Adam received the image
of God both for himself and others: so did he loose it from himself and
others.

That we may the better know original sin in the several faculties of man's
nature, three circumstances must be considered.

1. How much of Gods image we yet retain. 2. How much sin man received from
Adam. 3. The increase thereof afterward.
I. In the mind. The remnant of Gods image, is certain motions concerning
good and evil: as, that there is a God, and that the same God punishes
transgressions: that there is an everlasting life: that we must reverence our
superiors, and not harm our neighbor. But even these motions, they are both
several and corrupt, and have none other use, but to bereave man of all excuse
before Gods judgment seat. Romans 1.19.20. That which may be known concerning
God, is manifest in them: for God has showed it unto them. For the invisible
things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by the
creation of the world, being considered in his works, to the intent they
should be without excuse.

Men's minds received from Adam, 1. Ignorance, namely, a want, or rather a
deprivation of knowledge in the things of God, whether they concern his
sincere worship, or eternal happiness. 1. Cor. 2.14. The natural man perceives
not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnes unto him, nether
can he knew the^, because they are spiritually discerned. Romans 8.7. The
wisdom of the flesh is enimitie with God, for it is not subject to the law of
God, neither indeed can be.

II. Impotencie, whereby the mind of it self is unable to understand spiritual
things, though they be taught. Luke 24.45. Then opened he their understanding,
that they might understand the scriptures. 2. Cor. 3.5. Not that we are
sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves: but our
sufficiency is of God.

III. Vanity, in that the mind thinks falsehood truth, and truth falsehood.
Ephesians. 4.7. Walk no more as other Gentiles, in the vanity of your understanding.
1. Cor. 1.21. It pleased God by the foolishnes of preaching, to save those
which believe. 23. We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block,
but to the Grecians foolishnes. Prou. 14.12. There is a way which seems good
in the eyes of me^, but the end thereof is death.

IV. A natural inclination only to conceive, and devise the thing which is
evil. Genesis 6.5. The Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great upon
earth, and all the imaginations of the thoughts of the heart were only evil
continually. Ier. 4.22. They are wise to do evil, but to do well they have
no knowledge.

Hence it is apparent, that the original, and as I may say, the matter of all
heresies, is naturally engraffed in man's nature. This is worthy the observation
of students in Divinity.

The increase of sin in the understanding, is I^ reprobate sense, when God
withdraws the light of nature. Ioh. 12.40. He has blinded their eyes, and
hardened their hearts, least they should see with their eyes, and understand
with their hearts, and I should heal them, and they be converted. Romans 1.28. As
they regarded not to know God, so God delivered them up unto are probate mind,
to do those things which are not convenient. II. The spirit of slumber. Romans
11.8. God has given them the spirit of slumber, etc. III. A spiritual
drunkenness. Esaias. 29.9. They we drunken, but not with wine, they stagger, but
not by strong drink. IIII. Strong illusions. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. God shall send
them strong illusions, and they shall believe lies.

The remnant of Gods image in the conscience, is an observing and watchful
power, like the eye of a keeper, reserved in man, partly to reprove, and
partly to repress the unbridled course of his affections. Romans 2.15. Which
show the effect of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience also
bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one another or excusing.

That which the conscience has received of Adam, is the impurenesse thereof.
Tit. 1.15. To them that are defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure, but even
their minds and consciences are defiled. This impuritie has three effects,
the first is to excuse sin: as, if a man serve God outwardly, he will excuse
and cloak his inward impiety. Ma. 10.19.20. Thou know the commandment
thou shall not, etc. Then be answered and said, Master all these things have I
observed from my youth. Again it excuses intents not warranted in Gods word.
1. Chro. 13.9. When they came to the threshing floor of Chi^en, Vzza put
fo^rth his hand to hold the Arc, for the ox did shake i^.

The second is to accuse, and terrify for doing good. This we may see in
superstitious idolaters, who are grieved when they omit to perform
counterfaite, and idolatrous worship to their gods. Col. 2.21.22. Touch not,
taste not, handle not, which all perish with using, and are after the
commandments and doctrines of men. Esaias. 29.13. and their fear toward (...)
was taught them by the precept of men.

The third is to accuse and terrify for sin. Genesis 50.15. When Joseph's
brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, it may be that Joseph
will hate us, and well ^ay us again all the evil, which we did unto him. Ioh.
8.9. And when they heard it, being accused by their own consciences they went
out one by one. 1. Ioh. 3.20. Jf our heart condemn us, God is greater then our
heart. Though the conscience shall accuse a man truly: yet that will not argue
any holiness in it. Which appears, in that Adam in his innocence had a God,
yet no accusing conscience.

Impurenesse increased in the conscience, is first such a senseless numnesse,
as that it can hardly accuse a man of sin. Ephesians. 4.19. Who being past
feeling have given themselves to wantonness, to work all vnleannesse, even
with greedines. 1. Tim. 4.2. Having their consciences burned with an hot iron.
This sen^ (...) from a custom in sinning. 1. Sam. 25.37. Thou in the morning
when the wine was gone out of Nabal, his wife told him those words, and his
heart died within him, and he was like a Stone.

II. Some grievous horror, and terror of the conscience. Genesis 4.14. Behold
thou have cast me this day from the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid?
and verse. 13. My punishment is greater, then I can bear. The Symptoms of this
disease, are blasphemies, trembling of body, fearful dreams. Acts. 24.26.
And as he disputed of righteousness, and temperance, and the Judgment to come,
Felix trembled etc. Daniel. 5.6. Then the Kings countenance was changed and
his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and
his knees smot one against the other.

In the will, the remnant of Gods image, is a free choice. First, in every
natural action, belonging to each living creature, as to nourish, to engender,
to move, to perceive. Secondly, in every humane action, that is, such as
belong to all men. And therefore man has free will in outward actions, whether
they concern manners, a family, or the common wealth, albeit both in the
choice, and refusal of the^ it be very weak. Romans 2.14. The Gentiles which
have not the Law, by nature do those things which are of the Law.

The will received. I. An impotencie. whereby it cannot will, or so much as lust
after that, which is indeed good, that is, which may please and be acceptable
to God. 1. Cor. 2.14. The natural man perc^ueth not the things of the Spirit
of God, for they are foolishnes unto him: neither can he know them, be^ they
are spiritually discerned. Romans 5.6. Christ, when we were yet of no strength,
at his time dyed for the ungodly. 2. Tim. 2.26. Phil. 2.13. It is God which
woorketh in you both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure.

II. An inward rebellion, whereby it utterly abhors that which is good,
desiring and willing that alone which is evil.

By this it appears, that the will is no agent, but a mere patient in the
first act of conversion to God, and that by it self it can neither begin
that conversion, or any other inward and sound obedience due to Gods Law.

That which the affections receive, is a disorder, by which they therefore are
not well affected, because they eschew that which is good, and pursue that
which is evil. Galat. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh
with their affections, and lusts thereof. Romans 1.26. therefore God gave them
over to filthy lusts. 1. King. 22.9. The King of Israel said unto
Iehosophat, yet is there one of whom thou may take counsel, but him I hate,
etc. And 21.4. Therefore Achab came home to his house discontented, and angry,
for the word which Naboth spoke unto him, and he laid himself on his bed,
turning away his face least he should eat meat.

That which the body has received, is, I. Fitnes to begin sin, This does the
body in transporting all objects and occasions of sin to the soul, Genesis 3.6.
The woman seeing that the tree was good for meat, and pleasant to the eyes,
etc. took of the fruit thereof and did eat. II. A fitnes to execute sin, so
soon as the heart has begun it. Romans 6. Neither give your members as weapons
of injustice to sin and ver. 19. As you have given your members as servants
to uncleanness and iniquity, to commit iniquity, etc.

Chap. 13. Of actual sin.
AFter original sin in Adams posterity, actual transgression takes place.
It is either inward or outward. Inward, is of the mind, will, and affection.

The actual sin of the mind, is the evil thought or intent thereof, contrary
to Gods law. Examples of evil thoughts, God (the only knower of the heart) has
in diverse places set down in his word. I. That there is no God. Psalm. 10.4.
The wicked is so proud that he seeks not for God, he thinks always there
is no God. Psalm. 14.1. The fool says in his heart there is no God. II. That
there is neither providence nor presence of God in the world. Plal. 10.11. He
has said in his heart God has forgotten; he hides his face and will never
see. ver. 13. Wherefore does the wicked contemn God? he says in his heart
thou will not regard.

III. It imagines safegarde to it self from all perrils. Psalm. 10.6. He says
in his heart, I shall never be moved nor be in danger. Revel. 18.7. She says in
her heart, I sit being a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no mourning.

IIII. It esteems it self more excellent then others. Apoc. 18.7. J sit as a
Queen, Luke 18.11. The Pharisie standing thus prayed to himself, I thank thee
O God, that I am not as other men, extertioners, unjust, adulterers, nor yet as
this publican. ver. 12. I fast twice in the week, and give tithe of all my
possessions. ver. That the Gospel of Gods kingdom is mere foolishnes. 1.
Cor. 2.14. The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God,
for they are foolishnes unto him.

VI. To think uncharitably and maliciouslye of such as serve God sincerelye.
Mat. 12.24. When the Pharisees heard that, they said he casts not out Devils
but by the Prince of Devils. Psalm. 74.8. They said in their hearts let us
destroy them altogether.

VII. To think the day of death far off. Esaias. 28.15. Ye have said, we have
made a covenant with death, and with hell, we are at agreement; though a
scourge run over and pass through, it shall not come at us.

VIII. That the pains of hell may be eschewed, in the place before mentioned
they say, with hell have we made agreement.

IX. That God will defer his both particular and last general coming to
judgment. Luke. 12.19. I will say unto my soul, soul thou have much goods
laid up for many years: and ver. 45. If that servant say in his heart, my
master will defer his coming, etc.

Many carnal men pretend their good meaning: but when God opens their eyes,
they shall see these rebellious thoughts rising in their minds, as sparcles
out of a chimney.

The actual sin of both will; and affections is every wicked motion,
inclination, and desire. Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit.

An actual outward sin, is that, to the committing whereof, the members of the
body do, together with the faculties of the soul, concur. Such sins as
these are infinite. Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable troubles have compassed me, my
sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up, yea they
are ^oe in number then the hairs of mine head.

Actual sin, is of omission or commission; Again, both these are in words
or deeds.

In the sin of commission observe these two points. The degrees in
committing a sin, and the differences of sins committed.

The degrees are in number 4. Iam 1.14.15. Every man is tempted, when he is
drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is entised: Then when lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin when it is finished, brings
forth death.

The first degree is temptation, whereby man is allured to sin, this does
Satan by offering to the mind that which is evil. John. 13.2. The Dead had
now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot Simons Son, to betray him. Act. 5.3.
Peter said to Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart that thou should
(...) 1. Chro. 21.1. And Satan stood in against Israel, and provoked David to
number Israel. This also is effected upon occasion of some external object,
which the senses perceive. Job. 31.1. I have made a couenan^ with mine eyes,
why then should I look upon a maid?

Tentation has two parts, abstraction, and inescation.

Abstraction, is the first cogitation of committing sin, whereby the mind
is with-drawne from Gods service, to the which it should be always ready
pressed. Luke. 10.27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and all
thy soul, with all thy thought.

Inescation, is that whereby an evil thought conceived, and for a time retained
in the mind, by delighting the will, and affections, does as it were, lay a
bait for them to draw them to consent.

The second degree, is conception, which is nothing else, but a consent and
resolution to commit sin. Psalm. 7.14. He shall travail with wickedness, he
has conceived mischief, but he shall bring forth a lie.

The third degree, is the birth of sin, namelye the committing of sin, by
the assistance both of the faculties of the soul, and the power of the body.

The fourth degree, is perfection, when sin being by custom perfect, and as it
were ripe, the sinner reapeth death, that is damnation.

This appears in the example of Pharaoh, wherefore custom in any sin is
fearful.

Sin actually committed has five differences.

First, to consent with an offender, and not actually to commit sin. Ephe.
5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness but reprove
them rather. This is done three manner of ways.

I. When as a man in judgment somewhat allows the sin of another. Nomb.
29.6.10. Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock,
and Moses said unto them, hear now ye rebels: shall we bring you water out
of the rock? 12. The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, because ye believed me
not, to sanctify me in the presence of the children of Israel, into the land
which I have given them.

II. When the heart approves in affection and consent. Hitherto may we refer
both the ministers, and maiestrates concealing, and winking at offenses. 1.
Sam. 2.23. Ely said, why do ye such things? For of all this people J hear
evil of you. Do no more my Sons, etc. Now that Elyes will agrees with his
sons sins it is manifest. ver. 26. Thou honor thy Children above me.
III. Indeed, by counsel, presence, entisement. Romans 1.13. They not only do
the same, but also favor them that do them. Mark. 6.25.26. She said unto her
mother, what shall I ask, and she said John Baptists head. etc. Act. 22.20.
When the blood of thy Martyr Stephen was shed, J also stood by, and
consented unto his death, and kept the clothes of them that slew him.

The second essence, is to sin ignorantlye, as when a man does not
expresselye and distinctlye know, whether that which he does, be a sin or
not, or if he knew it, did not mark it. 1. Tim. 1.23. I before was a
blasphemer, a persecutor, and an oppressor; but I was received to mercy, for I
did it ignorauntlye through unbelief. Nom. 35.22.23.24. If he pushed him
unadvisedly and not of hatred, or cast upon him any thing without laying of
wait, or any Stone, (whereby he might be slain) and saw him not, or caused it
to fall upon him, and he dye, and was not his enemy, neither sought him any
harm. Then the congregation shall judge between the slayer and the auenger of
blood according to these laws. 1. Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my self, yet am
I not thereby justified. Psalm. 19.13. Cleanse me from my secret sins.

The third difference, is to sin upon knowledge, but of infirmity, as when a
man fearing some immine^t danger, or amazed at the horror of death, does
against his knowledge deny that truth, which otherwise he would acknowledge and
embrace. Such was Peter's fall, arising from the overmuch rashness of the mind
mingled with some fear.

Thus all men offend, when the flesh, and inordinate desires so over rule the
will, and every good endeavor, that they provoke man to that, which he from his
heart detesteth. Romans 7, 19. I do not the thing which I would, but the evil
which I would not, that do I.

The fourth difference, is presumptuous sinning upon knowledge. Psalm. 19.13.
Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins: let them not reign over me.
Hitherto belongs. I. Every sin committed with an high hand, that is in some
contempt of GOD. Nom. 15.30. The person that does presumptuously, etc. shall be
cut off from amongst his people: because he has despised the word of the
Lord, and has broken his commandment. II. Presumption of Gods mercy in
going evil. Eccles. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in
them to do e^ill. Romans ^.4. Despisest thou the riches of his b^fulness etc.
not knowing that the bountifulnes of God leads thee to repentance. etc.

The fifth difference, is to sin upon knowledge and set malice against God,
and to this is the sin against the holy Ghost referred.

Chap. 14. Of the punishment of sin.
HItherto we have entreated of sin, wherewith all mankind is infected: in
the next place succeeds the punishment of sin, which is threefolde.

The first is in this life, and that diverse ways. The first concerns the
body, either in the provision with trouble for the things of this life. Genesis
3.17. Or a pronnesse to disease. Math. 9.2. Son be of good comfort, thy
sins be forgiven thee. Ioh. 5.14. Behold thou art made whole, sin no more,
least a worse thing fall upon thee. Deuteronomy. 28.21.22. The Lord shall make the
pestilence cleave unto thee, until he has consumed thee from the land, etc.
Or shame of nakedness. Genesis 3.7. Or in women pains in childbirth. Genesis 3.16.
Unto the woman he said, J will greatly increase thy sorrows, and thy
conceptions: in sorrow shall thou bring fo^h Children.

II. The soul is punished with tre^bling of conscience, care, trouble, hardness
of heart, and madness. Deuteronomy. 28.28. The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and
with blindness, and with astonying of heart.

III. The whole man is punished, I. with fearful subjection to the regiment of
Satan. Coloss. 1.13. Which freede us from the power of darkness, and translated
us into the kingdom of his beloved Son. Heb. 2.14. He also himself took
part with them, that he might destroy, through death, him that had power of
death, that is, the devil. II. A separation from the fellowship of God, and
trembling at his presence. Ephesians. 4.18. Having their cogitation darkened, and
being strangers from the life of God. Genesis 3.10. I heard thy voice in the
Garden, and was afraid, because I was naked, therefore I hid myself. IV. Upon
a man's goods, diverse calamities and damages. Deuteronomy. 28.29. Thou shall ever be
oppressed with wrong, and be powled, and no man shall succor thee, etc. To the
end of the Chap. Also distinction of Lordships: and of this comes a care to
enlarge them, and bargaining, with all manner of evil seruitudes. V. The loss
of that lordly authority, which man had over all creatures: also their
vanity, which is not only a weakening, but also a corrupting of that
excellencye of the virtues and power, which God at the first put into them.
Romans 8.20.21. The creature is subject to vanity, not of it own will, but by
reason of him, which has subdued it under hope, etc. VI. In a man's name,
infamy and ignominy after his death. Iere. 24 9.

The second, is at the last gasp, namely, death, or a change like unto death.
Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death.

The third, is after this life, even eternal destruction from Gods presence,
and his exceeding glory. 2. These. 1.9. Who shall be punished with everlasting
perdition, from the presence of God and the glory of his power.

Chap. 15. Of Election, and of Jesus Christ the foundation thereof.
PRedestination has two parts; Election, and reprobation. 1. These. 5.9. God
has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by the means of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Election, is Gods decree, whereby on his own free will, he has ordained
certain men to salvation, to the praise of the glory of his grace. Ephesians.
1.4.5.6. He has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world,
according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his
grace.

This decree, is that book of life, wherein are written the names of the
Elect. Revel. 20.12. Another book was opened, which is the book of life, and
the dead were judged of those things, that were written in the books,
according to their works. 2. Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God remains sure,
and has this seal, the Lord knows who are his.

The execution of this decree, is an action, by which God, even as he purposed
with himself, works all those things, which he decreede for the salvation of
the elect. For they whom God elected to this end, that they should inherit
eternal life, were also elected to those subordinat means, whereby, as by
steps, they might attain this end, and without which it were impossible to
obtain it. Romans 8.29.30. Those which he knew before, he also predestinate to
be made like the image of his son, that he might be the first born amongst
many brethren: moreover whom he predestinate, them he called, whom he called,
the^ he justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified.

There appertain three things to the execution of this decree. First, the
foundation. Secondlye, the means. Thirdly, the degrees.

The foundation is Christ Jesus, called of his Father from all eternity, to
perform the office of the Mediator, that in him, all those which should be
saved, might be chosen. Heb. 5.5. Christ took not to himself this honor, to
be made the high Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son this day
begat I thee, gave it him, etc. Esaias. 42.1. Behold, my servant: I will stay
upon him: mine elect, in whom my soul delights: I have put my spirit upon
him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen
us in him, meaning Christ.

In Christ we must especially observe two things: his Incarnation and his
Office.

To the working of his Incarnation, concur: First, both his Natures.
Secondlye, their Union. Thirdly, their distinction.

Christ's first Nature, is the Godhead, in as much as it belongs to the Son,
whereby he is God, Phil. 2.6. Who being in the form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God. Ioh. 1.1. In the beginning was the word, and the
word was with God, and that word was God.

It was requisite for the Mediator to be GOD. I. That he might the better
sustain that great misery, wherewith mankind was overwhelmed; the greatness
whereof, these four things declare. I. The greeuousnes of sin, wherewith Gods
Majesty was infinitely offended, Gods infinite anger against this sin, the
fearful power of death, and the Devils tyranny, who is Prince of this world.
II. That he might make his human nature both of plentiful merit, and also
of sufficient efficacy, for the work of man's redemption. III. That he might
in still into the elect eternal life and holiness. Esaias. 43.12. I am the Lord,
and there is none besides me a Savior, I have declared, and I have saved, and
I have showed, when there was no strange God among you: therefore ye are my
witnesses, says the Lord, that I am God.

I say, the Godhead, in as much as it is the Godhead of the Son, is Christ's
divine nature: not as it is the Godhead of the Father, or the holy Ghost, for
it is the office of the Son, to have the administration of every outward
action of the Trinity, from the Father to the holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 6.8. And he
being by nature the Son of the Father, bestows this privilege on those
that believe, that they are the Sons of God by adoption. Ioh. 1.12. As many
as received him, to them he gave to be the Sons of God.

Christ's other nature, is his humanity, whereby he, the Mediator, is very
man. 1. Tim. 2.5. One God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ
Jesus.

It was necessary that Christ should be man. First that God might be pacified
in that nature, wherein he was offended.

II. That he might undergo punishment due to sin, the which the Godhead could
not, being void and free from all passion.

Furthermore, Christ as he is man, is like unto us in all things, sin only
excepted. Heb. 2.17. In all things it became him to be made like unto his
brethren. 1. Cor. 13.4.

Christ therefore is a perfect man, consisting of an essential and true soul
and body, whereunto are joined such faculties and properties, as are essential
unto both. In his soul, is understanding, memory, will, and such like: in his
body, length, breadth, and thicknes: yea, it is comprehended in one place,
visible, subject to feeling, neither is there any thing wanting in him, which
may either adorn, or make for the being of man's nature.

Again, Christ in his humanity, was subject to the infirmities of man's
nature, which are these. I. To be tempted. Mat. 9.1. Jesus was carried by the
spirit into the desert, to be tempted of the devil. II. To fear. Heb. 5.7.
Who in the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplications with
strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and
was also heard in that which he feared. III. To be angry. Mar. 3.5. Then he
looked round about on them angerly, mourning also for the hardness of their
hearts, and said to the man, Stretch forth thine hand. IV. Forgetfulness of
his office imposed upon him, by reason of the agony astonishing his senses.
Matthew. 26.39. He went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed,
saying: O Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: Nevertheless,
not as I will, but as thou will. These infirmities are not essential
qualities, but accidental to man's nature, and therefore may be left of Christ.

Chap. 16. Of the union of two natures in Christ.
NOw follows the union of the two Natures in Christ, which especially
concerns his mediation, for by it his humanity did suffer death upon the
cross in such sort, as he could neither be overcome, nor perpetuallye
overwhelmed by it. Three things belong to the uniting of Natures.

I. Conception, by which his humane nature was by the wonderful power and
opperation of God, both immediately, that is without man's help, and miraculously
framed of the virgin Mary. Luke. 1.35. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
the power of the most High, shall ouershadowe thee.

II. Sanctification, whereby the same humane nature was purified, that is,
altogether severed by the power of the Holy Ghost, from the least stain of
sin, to the end that it might be holy, and be made fit to dye for others.
Luke 1.35. That holy thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the
Son of God. 1. Pet. 3.18. Christ has once suffered for sins, the just, for
the unjust. 1. Pet. 2.22. Who did not sin, neither was there guile found in
his mouth.

III. Assumption, whereby the Word, namelye, the second person in trinity
took upon him flesh, and the seed of Abraham, namely, that his human nature,
to the end, that it being destitute of a proper and personal substance, might
in the person of the Word obtain it: subsisting, and as it were, being
supported of it for ever. Ioh. 1.14. That Word was made flesh. Heb. 2.16. He
took not upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham.

By this we may see, that Christ is one only Son of God, not two: yet in
two respects is he one. As he is the eternal Word, he is by nature the Son
of the Father. As he is man, the same Son also, yet not by nature or by
adoption, but only by personal union. Luke. 1.35. Mat. 3.17. This is my
beloved Son, etc.

The phrase in Scripture agreeing to this Union, is the communion of
proprieties, concerning which, observe two rules.

I. Of those things, which are spoken or attributed to Christ, some are only
understood of his divine nature. As that Ioh. 8.58. Before Abraham was, I am.
And that Colos. 1.15. Who is the image of the invisible God, the first borne
of every creature. Some again agree only to his humanity, as, borne,
suffered, dead, buried, etc. Luke. 2.52. And Jesus increased in wisdom and
stature, and in favor with God and men. Lastly, other things are understood,
only of both natures united together. As Matthew. 17.5. This is my beloved
Son, in whom only I am well pleased, hear him. Ephe. 1.22. He has made
subject all things under his feet, and has appointed him over all things to
be the head to the Church.

II. Some things are spoken of Christ, as he is God, which must be interpreted
according to his humane natures. Act. 20.28. To feed the Church of God. I.
Christ, which he (namely, according to his manhood) has purchased with his
own blood, 1. Cor. 2.8. If they had known this they would never have
crucified the Lord of glory. Contrarily, some things are mentioned of Christ,
as he is man, which only are understood of his divine Nature. No man ascended
up to heaven, but he that has descended from heaven, the Son of man which is
in heaven. This is spoken of his manhood, whereas we must understand, that only
his Deity came down from heaven. Ioh. 6.62. What if ye should see the Son
of man, (vz. Christ's humane nature) ascend up, where he (vz. his deity) was
before?

Lastly, by reason of this Union, Christ, as he is man, is exalted above every
name: yea, he is adored, and has such a great (though not infinite) measure of
gifts, as far surpass all Saints and Angels. Ephesians. 1.21. And set him at his
right hand in heavenly places, far above all principality and power, and
might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not in this world only, but
in that also that is to come. Heb. 1.6. When he brings his first begotten
Son into the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship him.
Colloss. 2.3. Jn whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden.
Philip. 2.9, 10. Therefore God exalted him on hie, and gave him a name above
all names, that at the name of Jesus, every knee should bow (namely, worship,
and be subject to him) both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the earth.

Chap. 17. Of the distinction of both natures.
THe distinction of both natures, is that, whereby they, with their properties
and effects, remain, without composition, mingling or conversion, distinct.
Ioh. 10.17, 18. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life,
that J might take it again. No man takes it from me, but J lay it down of my
self: I have power to lay it down, and have power to take it again. Ioh.
13.31, 32. Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. If
God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself. Here we may
observe, that there is one will in Christ, as God: another, as man. Matthew.
26.39. Not as I will, but as thou will. This also approoueth that sentence of
the Calcedon Creed. We confess, that one and the same Christ Jesus, both
Son, Lord, and only begotten, is known, and preached to be in two natures
without confusion, mutation, distinction, or separation.

Lastly, hereby it is manifest, that Christ, when he became that which he was
not, (namely man) continued still that which he was (very God.)

Chap. 18. Of Christ's Office.
THus much concerning Christ's incarnation. His Office follows, to the perfect
accomplishing whereof, he was anointed of his Father, that is, he was
sufficiently furnished both with gifts and authority. Hebr. 1.9. Therefore
God, even thy God anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
Esaias. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord was upon me, therefore he anointed me. Ioh.
3.33. God gives him not the spirit by measure.

This office is so appropriate to Christ, that neither in whole, or in part can
it be translated to any other. Heb. 7.24. This man because he endures for
ever, has an everlasting Priesthood, or a Priesthood, that can not pass from
one to an other.

Therefore Christ, as he is God, has under him, Emperors, Kings, Princes, to
be his Vicegerents: who therefore are called Gods. Psalm. 82.1. But as he is
Mediator, that is, a Priest, a Prophet, and King of the Church, he has no
Vicegerent, Vicar, or Lieutenant, who, in his either Kingly, or Priestly
office, in both, or but one, can be in his steed.

Christ's office, is threefold: Priestly, Prophetical, Regal. Psalm. 110.1, 2,
3, 4. Esaias. 42.1.

Christ's Priesthood, is an office of his, whereby he performed all those
things to God, whereby is obtained eternal life. Heb. 5.9. And being
consecrate, was made the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey
him: and is called of God an hie Priest, after the order of Melchisedec. chap.
7.24, 25. This man because he endures for ever, has an everlasting
Priesthood, wherefore he is able also perfectly to save all them that come
unto God by him.

His Priesthood consists of two parts: Satisfaction, and intercession.

Satisfaction, is that, whereby Christ is a full propitiation to his Father,
for the elect. Job. 33.23. If there be a messenger with him, or an interpreter,
one of a thousand to declare unto man his righteousness, then will he have
mercy upon him, and will say, deliver him, that he go not down into the pit,
for I have found a Reconciliation. Romans 3.24. And are justified freely by his
grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, 25. whom God has set
forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood. 1. Ioh. 2.2. He is a
propitiation for our sins.

Christ satisfied Gods anger for man's offense, according to his humanity, by
perfourming perfect obedience to the will of God: according to his Deity, by
ministering such especial dignity to his perfect obedience, as was both of
full merit and efficacy before God, for the salvation of the Elect. Ioh.
17.19. For their sakes sanctify I my self, that they also may be sanctified
through the truth. Act. 20.28. To seed the flock of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, and reconciled
the world to himself, not imputing their sins unto them.

Satisfaction comprehends his Passion, and fulfilling the Law.

His passion, is the first part of satisfaction, by which he, he having
undergone the punishment of sin, satisfied Gods justice, and appeased his
anger for the sins of the faithful. His passion was on this manner.

a Somewhat before his death, partly fear arising from a sense of Gods wrath
imminent upon him, partly grief possessing, as it were, each part of him, so
disturbed his sacred mind, b that inwardly for a while it stroke into him a
strange kind of astonishment, or rather oblivion of his duty imposed upon
him: and outwardly c made him pray unto his Father, (if he would) to remove
that cup from him, the which he did express with no small cry, many tears,
and a bloody sweat, d trickling from his body unto the ground. But when he
came again unto himself, e he freely yielded himself unto his Father, to
satisfy upon the cross for the transgression of man. After this his agony
was ouerpassed, f by Judas his treachery Christ is apprehended, and g first he
is brought to Annas, after to Caiphas, where Peter denies him: h from Caiphas
is he led bound to Pilate, i Pilate posteth him over to Herod, he k
tra^sposteth him again to Pilate, l who acknowledges his innocency, and yet
co^de^neth him as an offender. This innocent thus condemned, is m pitifully
scourged, crowned with thorns, scoffed, spitted at, spitefully adjudged to the
death of the cross n on which, his hands and feet are fastened with nails.
Here stayed not his passions, but after all these o he became accursed to God
the Father, that is, God powered upon him, being thus innocent, such a sea of
his wrath, as was equivalent to the sins of the whole world. He now being
under this curse, through the sense and feeling of this strange terror, p
complains to his Father, that he is forsaken: who notwithstanding
encountering then with Satan and his Angels, did utterly vanquish qand overcome
them. When this was ended, his heartr was pierced with a spear, till the blood
gushed out from his sides, and he gave svp the ghost: and t commended his
spirit to his fathers protection: the which immediately went into paradise. His
body,u whereof not one bone was broken, was buried. and three days was x
ignominiously captiuated of death. a Mar. 4.34. Mat. 26.38. b Ioh. 12.27. c
Mat. 14.35. Ioh. 12.29. Heb. 5.7. d Luke 22.44. e Heb. 9.5. 1. Cor. 5.5, 7.
Esaias. 53.10, 11. f Matt. 26.47. gIoh. 18.13, 14. hIoh. 18.29. i Luke 23.7,
8.kLuk. 23.15. l Mat. 27.24, 26. m the same place. nIoh. 19.18. o Gal. 3.13. p
Mat. 27.35, 46. q Coloss. 1.14, 15. rIoh. 19.34. sHeb. 9.15, 16. t Luke 23.43,
46.uIoh. 19.33, 42. x Act. 1.13.

In this description of Christ's passion, we may note five circumstances
especially.

I. His Agony, namely, a vehement anguish arising upon the conflict of two
contrary desires in him. The first, was to be obedient to his Father. The
second, to avoid the horror of death. Luke 22.44. Being in an agony he prayed
more earnestly, and his sweat was like drops of blood, trickling down to the
ground. Heb. 5.7. In the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears unto him, that was able to save him
from death, and was also heard in that which he feared.

II. His sacrifice, which is an action of Christ's offering himself to God the
Father, as a ransom for the sins of the elect. Heb. 9.26. Now in the end of
the world has he appeared once to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself.

In this sacrifice, the oblatio^ was Christ, as he was man, Heb. 10.10. By the
which will we are sanctified, eue^ by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ
once made.

The Altar also was Christ, as he was God. Heb. 13.10. We have an altar, whereof
they have no authority to eat which serve in the tabernacle. Heb. 9.14 How
much more shall the blood of Christ, which through the eternal spirit offered
himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to serve
the living God? Hence is it that Christ is said to sanctify him self, as he
is man. Ioh. 17.19. For their sakes sanctify I my self. Matthew. 23.17. As the
altar, the gift, and the temple, the gold. Matt. 23.17.

Christ is the Priest, as he is God and man. Heb. 5.6. Thou art a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedec. 1. Tim. 5.6. One Mediator between God and
man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all men, to be a
testimony in due time.

III. God the Fathers acceptance of that his sacrifice, in which he was well
pleased. For, had it bin that God had not allowed of it, Christ's suffering had
bin in vain. Matt. 3.17. This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.
Ephesians. 5.1. Even as Christ loved us and gave himself for us to be an offering
and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God.

IV. Imputation of man's sin to Christ, whereby his father accounted him as a
transgressor, having translated the burden of man's sins to his shoulders.
Esaias. 53.4. He (...) ^orne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows: yet we
did judge him as plagued, and smitten of God, and humbled: But he was wounded
for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, etc. and ver. 12. He
was counted with the transgressors, and he bore the sins of many. 2. Cor.
5.21. He has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we should
be made the righteousness of God in him.

V. His wonderful humiliation, consisting of two parts. I. In that he made
himself of small or no reputation in respect of his Deity. Philip. 2.7, 8. He
made him self of no reputation, etc. he humbled himself, and became obedient
unto the death, even to the death of the cross.

We may not think, that this debasing of Christ came, because his divine
nature was either wasted or weakened, but because his Deity did, as it were,
lay aside, and conceal his power and majesty for a season. And as Irenaeus
says, The Word rested, that the humane nature might be crucified, and dead.

II. In that he became execrable, which is, by the Law accursed for us. Gal.
3.10. Cursed is every one, that remains not in all things written in the
book of the Law, to do them.

This accursednes, is either inward, or outward.

Inward, is the sense of Gods fearful anger upon the cross. Revel. 19.15. He
it is that treads the winepresse of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty
God. Esaias. 53.5. He is grieved for our transgressions, the chastis^ent of our
p^ was upon him, and with hi^ stripes we were healed. This appeared by those
drops of blood, which issued from him, by his cryings to his Father upon the
cross, and by sending of Angels to comfort him. Hence was it, that he so much
feared death, which many Martyrs entertained most willingly.

His outward ^ednesse, stands in three degrees. I. Death upon the cross,
which was not imaginary, but true, because blood and water issued from his
heart. For seeing that water and blood gushed forth together, it is very like,
the cas^et or coat which muested the heart, called Peri^rdion, was pierced. As
Columbus observes in his Anotomy. 7. book. Ioh. 19.34.

His death was necessary, that he might confirm to us the Testament, or
covenant of grace promised for our sakes. Heb. 9.15, 16. For t^ cause is h^ the
Mediator of the now Testament, that through death, etc. they which were
called, might receive the promise of ever all inheritance: for where a
Testament i^ there must be the death of him that made the Testament, etc. ver.
17.

II. Burial, to raisie the certainty of his death.

III. Descension into hell, which we must not understand, that he went locally
into the place of the damned, but that for the time of his abode in the grave
he was under the ignominious dominion of death. Act. 2.24. Whom God has raised
up and loosed the sorrows of death because in (...) aposstole (...) he should
be holden of it. Ephesians. 4.9. In that ^e as^n^ what it is but that he had also
descended first into the lowest part of the earth?

It was necessary that Christ should be captiuated of death, that he might
abolish the sting, that is, the power thereof. 1. Cor. 15.55. O death where is
thy sting? O hell where is thy uictorie?

Thus we have heard of Christ's marvelous passion, the which (as we may further
observe) is a perfect ransom for the sins of all and every one of the elect.
1. Tim. 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom for all men. For it was more, that
Christ the only begotten son of God, yea, God himself for a small while
should bear the curse of the Law, then if the whole world should have
suffered eternal punishment.

This also is worthy our meditation, that then a man is well grounded in the
doctrine of Christ's passion, when his heart cease to sin, and is pricked
with the grief of those sins, whereby as with spears he pierced the sides
of the immaculate lamb of God. 1. Ioh. 3.6. Who so sins, neither has seen
him, nor known him. Zach. 12.10. And they shall look upon me, whom they have
pierced, and they shall lament for him, as one lamenteth for his only son,
and be sorry for him, as one is sorry for his first borne.

After Christ's passion follows the fulfilling of the Law, by which he
satisfied Gods justice in fulfilling the whole Law. Romans 8.3.4. God sent his
own son, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled by us.

He fulfilled the law, partly by the holiness of his humane nature, and
partly by obedience in the works of the law. Romans 8.2. The law of the spirit
of life, which is in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the law of sin and of
death. Matthew. 3.15. It becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, etc.

Now succeeds the second part of Christ's priesthood, namely intercession,
whereby Christ is an Advocate, and intreater of God the father for the
faithful. Romans 8.34. Christ at the right hand of God, and makes request for
us. Christ's intercession is directed to God the father. 1. Ioh. 2.1. If any man
sin we have an advocate with the father, even Jesus Christ, the just. Now as
the father is first of the Trinity in order, so if he be appeased, the Son
and the holy Ghost are appeased also. For there is one and the same agreement
and will of all the persons of the Trinity.

Christ makes intercession according to both natures. First according to his
humanity, partly by appearing before his father in heaven, partly by desiring
the salvation of the elect. Heb. 9.24. Christ is entered into very heaven to
appear now in the sight of God for us. and 7.25. He is able perfectly to save
them that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for
them. Secondly, according to his deity, partly by applying the merit of his
death, partly by making request by his holy spirit, in the hearts of the
elect, with sighs unspeakable. 1. Peter 1.2. Elect according to the
foreknowledge of the father to the sanctification of the spirit. Romans 8.26. The
spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray as we ought, but
the spirit it self makes request for us with sighs which cannot be
expressed.

We are not therefore to imagine or surmise, that Christ prostrateth himself
upon his knees before his fathers throne for us, neither is it necessary,
seeing his very presence before his father, has in it, the force of an humble
petition.

The end of Christ's intercession is, that such as are justified by his
merits, should by this means continue in the state of grace. Now Christ's
intercession preserves the elect in covering their continual slips,
infirmities, and imperfect actions, by an especial and continual application
of his merits. That by this means man's person may remain just, and man's
works acceptable to God. 1. Ioh. 2.2. He is a reconciliation for our sins,
and not for ours only but for the sins of the whole world. 1. Pet. 2.5. Ye
as lively stones, be made a spiritual house and holy priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Revel. 8.3.4. An other
Angel came and stood before the alter having a golden censer, and much odours
was given unto him that he should offer with the prayers of all saints upon
the golden alter, which is before the throne, and the smoke of the odours with
the prayers of the saints, went up before God out of the Angels hand.

Thus far concerning Christ's Priesthood, now follow his Prophetical and
Regal offices.

His Prophetical office is that, whereby he immediately from his father
reuealeth his word and all the means of salvation comprised in the same. Ioh.
1.18. The Son, which is in the bosom of his father, he has declared unto
you. Ioh. 8.26. Those things which I hear of my father J speak to the world.

The word was first revealed, partly by visions by dreams, by speech: partly
by the instinct and motion of the holy Ghost. Heb. 1.1.2. At sundry times, and
in diverse manners God spoke in old time to our fathers the Prophets: in these
last days he has spoken to us by his son. 2. Pet. 1.21. Prophecy came not
in old time, by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved
by the holy Ghost.

The like is done ordinarily by the preaching of the word, where the holy Ghost
does inwardly illuminate the understanding. Luke 24.45. Then opened he their
understanding, that they might understand the scriptures. 21.15. I will give
you a mouth and wisdom, where against all your adversaries shall not be able
to speak nor resist. Act. 16.14. Whose heart the Lord opened, that she
attended to the things that Paul spoke.

For this cause Christ is called the Doctor, Lawgiuer and Counselor of his
Church Mat. 23.10. Be ye not called Doctors, for one is your Doctor, Jesus
Christ, Iam. 4.12. There is one lawgiuer which is able to s^e and to destroy.
Esaias. 9.6. He shall call his name Counselor, etc. Yea, he is the Apostle of
our profession. Heb. 3.1. The Angel of the covenant. Mal. 3.1. And the
Mediator of the new covenant. Heb. 9.15. Therefore the sovereign authority of
expounding the Scripture, only belongs to Christ: and the Church has only the
ministry of judgment and interpretation committed unto her.

Christ's Regal office, is that whereby he distributeth his gifts, and
disposes all things for the benefit of the elect. Psalm. 2. and 110.31.2. The
Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footestoole.

The execution of Christ's Regal office comprehends his exaltation.

Christ's exaltation is that, by which he after his humiliation was by little and
little exalted to glory, and that in sundry respects according to both his
natures.

The exaltation of his divine nature, is an apparent declaration of his divine
properties in his humane nature, without the least alteration thereof. Romans
1.4. Declared mightily to be the son of God, touching the spirit of
sanctification by the resurrection from the dead. Act. 2.36. God has made him
both Lord and Christ, whom ye have crucified.

The exaltation of his humanity, is the putting off from him his servile
condition, and all infirmities, and the putting on of such habitual gifts,
which albeit they are created and finite, yet they have so great and so
marvelous perfection, as possibly can be ascribed to any creature. The gifts of
his mind, are wisdom, knowledge, joy, and other unspeakable virtues of his
body, immortality, strength, agilitie, uprightness. Phil. 3.21. Who shall
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.
Matthew. 17.2. He was transfigured before them, and his face did shine as the
sun, and his clothes were as white as the light. Heb. 1.9. God even thy God
has anointed thee with oil of gladness above thy fellows.

Christ's body, although it be thus glorified, yet is it still of a solid
substance compassed about, visible, palpable and shall perpetually remain in
some certain place. Luc. 24.39. Behold my hands, and my feet, it is even I,
touch me, and see: A spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

There be three degrees of Christ's exaltation.

I. His resurrection, wherein by his divine power he subdued death, and raised
up himself to eternal life. 2. Cor. 13 4. Though he was crucified concerning
his infirmity, yet lives he through the power of God. Mat. 38.6. He is not
here, for he is risen, as he said, come see the place where the Lord was laid.

The end of Christ's resurrection, was to show that his satisfaction, by his
passion and death, was fully absolute. For one only sin would have detained the
Mediator under the dominion of death, though he had fully satisfied for all the
rest. 1. Cor. 15.17. If Christ be not raised, your faith is in vain: ye are
yet in your sins. Romans 4.25. Who was delivered to death for our sins, and is
risen again for our justification.

II. His ascension into heaven, which is a true, local, and visible
translation of Christ's humane nature from earth into the highest heaven of the
Blessed by the virtue and power of his deity. Act. 1.9. When he had spoken
these things, while they beheld, he was taken up: for a cloud took him up out
of their sight: And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he went,
behold two men stood by the^ in white apparel, which also said, (...) men of
Galile, why stand ye gazing into heaven, this Jesus which is taken up from you
into heaven shall come, as ye have seen him come into heaven. Ephesians. 4.10. He
ascended far above all the heavens.

The end of Christ's ascension was, that he might prepare a place for the
faithful, give them the holy Ghost, and there eternal glory. Ioh. 14.^. In
my fathers house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you:
I go to prepare a place for you. chap. 16.7. If I go not away, the comforter
will live to me and you: but if I depart, I will send him unto you, etc.

III. His sitting at the right hand of God the father, which figuratively
signifies that Christ has in the highest heavens actually all glory, power,
and dominion. Heb. 1.3. By himself he has purged our sins, and sits at the
eight hand of the majesty in the highest places. Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said
unto my Lord sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy
footestoole. 1. Cor. 15.25. He must reign till he has put all his enemies
under his feet. Act. 7.55. He being full of the holy Ghost looked steadfastly
into heaven, and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at the right hand of
God.

His Regal office has two parts. The first is his rigiment of the Kingdom of
heaven, part whereof is in heaven, part upon the earth, namely the
congregation of the faithful.

In the government of his Church he exercises two prerogatives royal. The
first is to make laws. Ia. 4.12. There is one lawgiuer which is able to save
and to destroy. The second is to ordeine his ministers. Ephesians, 4.11. He gave some
to be Apostles, others prophets, others Evangelists, some pastors and teachers,
etc. 1. Cor. 12.28. God has ordained some in the Church, as first Apostles,
secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, then them that do miracles, after that the
gifts of healing, helpers, governors, diversity of tungs.

Christ's government of the Church, is either his collection of it out of the
world, or conservation being collected. Ephesians. 4.12. Psalm. 10.

The second part of his Regal office, is the destruction of the kingdom of
darkness. Colos. 1.13. Who has delivered us from the kingdom of darkness.
Psalm. 2.9. Thou shall crush them with a Scepter of Iron. and break them in
pieces like a potters vessel. Luke. 19.27. Those mine enemies, that would not,
I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me.

The kingdom of darkness, is the whole company of Christ's enemies.

The Prince of this kingdom, and of all the members thereof, is the devil.
Ephesians. 2.2. Ye walked once according to the course of the world, and after the
Prince that rules in the air, even the Prince that now works in the
children of disobedience. 2. Cor. 4.4. The God of this world has blinded the
eyes of the infidels, 2. Corinthians. 6.15. What concord has Christ with Belial,
or what part has the believer with the infidel.

The members of this kingdom, and Subjects to Satan, are his Angels, and
unbelievers, amongst whom, the principal members are Atheistes, who say in
their heart, there is no God. Psalm. 14.1. And Magitians, who bargain with the
devil, to accomplish their desires. 1. Sam. 28.7. Psalm. 58.5. Idolaters, who
either adore false Gods, or the true God in an idol. 1. Corinthians. 10.7.20.
Turks and Jews are of this bunch, so are Heretics, who are such as err with
pertinacie in the foundation of Religion. 2. Tim. 2.18. Apostates, or reuolts
from faith in Christ Jesus. Heb. 6.6. False Christ's, who bear men in hand,
they are true Christ's. Matthew. 24.26. There were many such, about the time of
our Savior Christ his first coming, as Josephus witnesses, book 20. of
Jewish antiquity, the 11, 12. and 14. Chapters. Lastly, That Antichrist, who,
as it is now apparent, can be none other but the Pope of Rome. 2. These. 2.3.
Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come, except there
come a departing first, and that that man of sin be disclosed, even the Son
of perdition, which is an adversary, and exalts himself against all that is
called God, or that is worshipped: so that he does sit as God in the Temple of
God, showing himself that he is God. Revel. 13.11. And I beheld another beast
coming out of the earth, which had two horns like the lamb, but he spoke
like the dragon. And he did all that the first beast could do before him, and
caused the earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship the first beast,
whose deadly wound was healed.

There were then, first, Antichrist at Rome, when the Bishops thereof would be
entitled Universal, or supreme governors of the whole world, but then were
they complete, when they, with ecclesiastical censure usurped civil
authority.

Chap. 19. Concerning the outward means of Executing the decree of election,
and of the Decalogue.
AFter the foundation of election, which has hitherto been delivered, it
follows, that we should entreat of the outward means of the same.

The means are Gods covenant, and the seal thereof.

Gods covenant, is his contract with man, concerning life eternal, upon
certain conditions.

This covenant consists of two parts: Gods promise to man, Man's promise to
God.

Gods promise to man, is that, whereby he binds himself to man to be his God,
if he break not the condition.

Man's promise to God, is that, whereby he voweth his allegiance unto his Lord,
and to perform the condition between them.

Again, there are two kinds of this covenant. The covenant of works, and the
covenant of grace. Iere. 31.31, 32, 33. Behold, the days come says the Lord,
that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house
of Judah, Not according to the covenant that I made with their Fathers, when I
took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt: the which my
covenant they brake although I was husband to them, says the Lord. But this
shall be the covenant, that I will make with the house of Israel: after those
days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it
in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

The covenant of works, is Gods covenant, made with condition of perfect
obedience, and is expressed in the morrall Law.

The Morrall Law, is that part of Gods word, which commands perfect
obedience unto man, as well in his nature, as in his actions, and forbids
the contrary. Romans 10.5. Moses thus describes the righteousness which is of
the Law, that the man which does these things, shall live thereby. 1. Tim. 1.5.
The end of the commandments, is love aut of a pure ba^t, and of a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned. Luke 16.27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God,
with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. Romans 7. We
know that the Law is spiritual.

The Law has two parts. The Edict, commanding obedience, and the condition
binding to obedience. The condition, is eternal life to such as fulfill the
Law: but to transgressors, everlasting death.

The Decalogue or ten commandments, is an abridgement of the whole Law, and
the covenant of works. Exo. 34.27. And the Lord said unto Moses, write thou
these words, for after the tenor of these words, I have made a covenant with
thee, and with Jsrael. And was there with the Lord forty days, and forty
nights, and did neither eat bread, nor drink water, and he wrote in the
Tables the words of the covenant, even the ten commandments. 1. King. 8.9.
Nothing was in the Arc, save the two Tables of Stone, which Moses had put
there at Horeb, where the Lord made a covenant with the Children of Israel,
when he brought them out of the Land of Egypt. Matthew. 22.40. On these two
Commandments hangs the whole Law and the Prophets.

The true interpretation of the Decalogue, must be according to these rules.

I. In the negative, the affirmative must be understood: and in the
affirmative, the negative.

II. The Negative, binds at all times, and to all times: but the affirmative
binds at all times, but not to all times: and therefore negatiues are of more
force.

III. Under one vice expressly forbidden, are comprehended all of that kind,
yea, the least cause occasion, or entisement thereto, is as well forbidden, as
that. 1. Ioh. 3.15. Whosoever hates his brother, is a manslayer. Mat. 5.21.
to the end. Evil thoughts are condemned, as well as evil actions.

IV. The smallest sins are entitled with the same names, that that sin is,
which is expresselye forbidden in that commandment, to which they appertain.
As in the former places, hatred is named murder, and to look after a woman
with a lusting eye, is adultery.

The Decalogue, is described in two Tables.

The sum of the first Table, is, that we love God with our mind, memory,
affections, and all our strength, Mat. 22.37. This is the first, (to wit, in
nature and order) and great commandment, (namely, in excellency, and
dignity.)

Chap. 20. Of the first Commandment.
THe first Table has four commandments.

The first, teaches us to have and choose the true God for our God. The words
are these.

I am Jehouah thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Aegipt, out of the
house of bondage. Thou shall have none other God but me.

The Resolution.
J am. If any man rather judge, that these words are a preface to all the
commandments, then a part of the first, I hinder him not: Nevertheless, it
is like, that they are a persuasion to the keeping of the first commandment:
and that they are set before it, to make way unto it: as being more hard to be
received, then the rest. And this may appear, in that the three commandments
next following, have their several reasons.

Jehovah. Namely, such one, as from all eternity, was of, and in himself,
causing all things to be, when they were not, partly by creating, partlye by
governing them. Here begins the first reason of the first commandment,
taken from the name of God: it is thus framed.

He that is Jehovah, must alone be thy God.
But I am Jehouah:
Therefore J alone must be thy God.
The proposition is wanting: the assumption is in these words (J am Jehouah)
the conclusion is the commandment.

Thy God. These are the words of the covenant of grace. Iere. 32.33. Whereby
the Lord promises to his people, remission of sins, and eternal life. These
words are as a second reason of the commandment, drawn from the equality
of that relation, which is between God and his people.

If J be thy God, thou again must be my people, and take me alone for thy God.

But J am thy God.

Therefore thou must be my people, and take me alone for thy God.

The assumption or second part of this reason, is confirmed by an argument
taken from Gods effects, when he delivered his people out of Egypt, as it were,
from the servitude of a most tirannous master. This delivery was not
appropriate only to the Israelites, but in some sort to the Church of God in
all ages: in that it was a tipe of a more surpassing delivery, from that
fearful kingdom of darkness, 1. Cor. 10.1, 2. J would not have you ignorant,
brethren, that all our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through
the red Sea, and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the Sea,
Colos. 1.13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated
us into the kingdom of his dear Son.

Other Gods, or strange Gods. They are so called, not that they by nature are
such, or can be, but because the corrupt, and more then devilish heart of
carnal man esteems so of them. Philip. 3.19. Whose God is their belly. 1.
Cor. 4.4. Whose minds the God of this world has bewitched.

Before my fate. That is, (figuratively) in my sight or presence to whom the
secret imaginations of the heart are known: and this is the third reason of the
first commandment as if he should say, If thou in my presence reject me, it
is a^hemous offense: see therefore thou do it not. After the same manner
reasons the Lord. Genesis 17.1. I am God almighty, therefore walk upright.

The Affirmative part.
Make choice of Jehouah to be thy God. The duties here commanded, are these.

I. To acknowledge God, that is, to know and confess him, to be such a God, as
he has reueiled himself to be in his word, and creatures. Col. 1.10.
Increasing in the knowledge of God. Iere. 24.7. And I will give them an ^rt to
know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will be their
God: for they shall return unto me with their whole heart. In this knowledge of
god must we glory. Ier. 9.24. Let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understands and knows me: for I am the Lord which show mercy, judgment, and
righteousness in the earth.

II. An union with God, whereby man is knit in heart to God. Josh. 23.8. Stick
fast unto the Lord your God, as ye have done unto this day. Act. 11.23. He
exhorted all, that with purpose of heart, they would cleave to the Lord. Man
cleaves unto God three manner of ^ayes: in affiance, in love, and fear of God.

Affiance, is that, whereby a man acknowledging the power and mercy of GOD, and
in him, against all assaults whatsoever, does stedfastlye rest himself. 2.
Chro. 20.20. Put your trust in the Lord your God, and ye shall be assured,
believe his Prophets, and ye shall prosper. Psalm. 27.1. God is my light, and my
salvation, whom should J fear? God is the strength of my life, of whom should
J be afraid? vet, 3, Though an host pitched against me, mine heart should not
be afraid: though war be raised against me, J will be secure.

Hence arises patience, and alacrity in present perils. Psalm. 39.19. J should
have been dumb, and not opened my mouth, because thou did it. 2. Sam.
16.10. The King said, what have J to do with you, ye Sons of Zeruiah? Jf he
cursed, because the Lord said curse David, what is he that dare say, why do
thou so? Genesis 45.5. Be not sad, neither grieved with your selves, that ye
sold me hither: for God did send me before you, for your preservation. ver. 8.
Now then, you sent me not, but God himself. 2. Kings. 6.16. Fear not, for
they that be with us, are more, then they, that be with them.

This affiance engenders hope, which is a patient exspectation of Gods
presence and assistance, in all things that are to come. Psalm. 37.5. Commit
thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass. verse.
7. Waeite patiently upon the Lord, and hope in him. Pro. 16.3. Commit thy
works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be directed.

The love of God, is that, whereby man, acknowledging Gods goodness and favor
toward him, does again love him above al things. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength.

The marks of the true love of God, are these.

I. To hear willinglye his word. II. To speak often of him. III. To think
often of him. IIII. To do his will without irkesomnes. V. To give body, and
all for his cause. VI. To desire his presence above all, and to bewail his
absence. VII. To embrace all such things as appertain to him. VIII. To love
and hate that, which he loves and hates. IX. In all things to seek to
please him. X. To draw others unto the love of him. XI. To esteem lightly of
such gifts and graces as he bestows. XII. To stay our selves upon his
counsels reueiled in his word. Lastly, to call upon his name with affiance.

The fear of God, is that whereby man, acknowledging Gods both mercy and
justice, does, as it were a capital crime, fear to displease God. Psalm.
130.3. With thee is mercy, that thou may be feared. Haba. 3.16. When I heard
it, my bellye trembled, my lyps shook at the voice: rottennes entered into my
bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble,
when he comes up against the people to destroy them. Psalm. 4.4. Tremble and
sin not.

Hence arises the godly man's desire, to approve himself in all things to his
God. Genesis 5.22. And Henoch walked with GOD, after that, etc. Genesis 17.1. God
said to him, I am all sufficient, walk before me and be thou perfect.

Out of these three former virtues, proceeds humilitye, where by a man
acknowledging Gods free bounty, and prostrating himself before him, does
ascribe unto him all praise and glory. 1. Cor. 1.13. Let him that glories,
glory in the Lord. 1. Pet. 15.5. Deck your selves inwardlye with lowlines of
mind, for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Verse. 6.
Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalte
you in due time. 1, Chron, 29.10.11. And David said, Blessed be thou O Lord
God of Israel our fathers for ever, and Thine, O Lord, is greatness, and power,
and glory, and victory, and praise: for all that is in heaven, and in earth
is thine, etc. And verse 14. But who am I, and what is my people, that we
should be able to offer willinglye on this sort, for all things come of thee,
and of thine own hand we have given thee, etc.

The negative part.
Account not that as God, which is by nature no God, In this place, are these
sins forbidden.

I. Ignorance of the true God, and his will, which is not only not to know, but
also to doubt of such things, as God has reueiled in his word. Iere. 4.22. My
people is foolish, they have not known me: they are foolish children, and have
none understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do well, they have no
knowledge. Iere. 9.3. They proceed from evil to worse, and have not known me,
says the Lord.

II. Atheism, when the heart denies either God, or his attributes: as his
Justice, Wisdom providence, presence. Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said (...)
his heart, there is no God. Ephe. 2.12. Ye had no hope, and were without God in
the world. Malach. 1.2. I love you says the Lord, and ye say, wherein love
thou us? Mala. 3.13. Your words have been stovt against me, says the Lord,
yet ye say, wherein have we spoken against thee? ver. 14. Ye have said, it is
in vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his
commavndements, and that we walked humbly before the Lord of hosts?

III. Errors concerning God, the persons of the Deity, or the attributes.
Here is to be reproved Hellenisme, which is the acknowledging and adoring of
a multitude of Gods. August. in his 6. book of the City of God, chap. 7.

Again, Iudaisme is here condemned, which worshippeth one God without Christ.

The like may be said of the heresies of the Maniches, and Marcia, who deny
God the Father: of Sabellius, denying the distinction of three persons: and
Arrius, who says, that Christ the son of God, is not very God.

IIII. To withdraw and remove the affections of the heart, from the Lord, and
set them upon other things. Esaias. 26.13. The Lord said, this people draws
near me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but their heart is
far from me. Iere. 12.2. Thou art near in their mouth, and far from their
reins. The heart is many ways withdrawn from God.

I. By distrust in God. Heb. 10.38. The just shall live by faith, but if any
withdraw himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. From this diffidence
arise: I. Impatience in suffering afflictions. Iere. 10.14. Cursed be the day
wherein I was borne, and let not the day wherein my mother bare me, be blessed.
Cursed be the man that showed my Father, saying, a man Child is borne unto
thee, and comforted him. Verse 18. How is it that I came forth of the womb, to
see labor and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame.

II. Tempting of God, when such as distrust, or rather contemn him, seek
signs of Gods truth and power. Matthew. 4.7. Thou shall not tempt the Load thy
God. 1. Corinthians. 10.6. Neither let us tempt God, as they tempted him, and were
destroyed by Serpents. verse. 10. Neither murmr as some of them murmured, and
were destroyed of the destroyer. III. Desperation. Genesis 4.13. Mine iniquity is
greater then can be pardoned. 1. These. 4.13. Sorrow ye not as they which have
no hope. IIII. Doubtfulnes concerning the truth of Gods benefits present, or
to come. Psalm. 116.11. I said in mine haste, all men are liars.

II. Confidence in creatures, whether it be in their strength as Jeremy 17.5.
Cursed is the man tha^ has his confidence in man, and makes flesh his arm,
but his heart slideth from the Lord. Or riches. Matthew. 6.24. Ye cannot serve
God, and riches. Ephesians. 5.5. No covetous person, which is an idolater, has
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. Or defenced places. Jeremy
49.16. Thy fear, and the pride of thine heart has deceived thee, thou that
dwell in the cleftes of the Rock, and keep the height of the hill:
though thou should make thy nest as high as the Eagle, I will bring thee
down from thence says the Lord. Or pleasure, and dainties: to such their
bollye is their God. Phil. 3.14. Or in Physicians. 2. Chron. 16.12. And Asa in
the nine and thirteth year of his reign, was diseased in his feet, and his
disease was extreme, yet he sought not the Lord in his disease, but to the
Physicians. Briefly, to this place principallye may be adjoined that devilish
confidence, which Magitians and all such as take advise at them, do put in the
devil, and his works, Leuit. 20.6. If any turn after such as work with
spirits, and after southsayers, to go a whoring after them, then will I set
my face against that person, and will cut him off from amongst his people. The
Devil is as it were Gods ape. For he has also his words, his sacraments, his
faith.

III. The love of the creature, above the love of God, Matthew. 10.37. He that
loves Father or Mother more then me, is not woorthye of me: and he that
loves Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me. John. 12.43. They
loved the praise of man, more then the praise of God. To this belongs self
love. 2. Tim. 3.2.

IV. Hatred and contempt of God, when men flies from God and his wrath, when
he punishes offenses. Romans 8.7. The wisdom of the flesh is enmytye with
God, Romans 1.30. Haters of God, doers of wrong.

V. Want of the fear of God, Psalm. 36.1. Wickedness says to the wicked man,
even in mine heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes.

VI. Fear of the Creatures, more then the Creator. Revelation 21.8. The
fearful and unbelieving, shall have their part in the lake which burns
with fire and brimstone. Matthew 10.28. Fear not them which kill the body, but
fear him that can cast both body and soul into hell fire. Iere 10.2. Be not
afraid of the signs of heaven, though the heathen be afraid of such.

VII. Hardness of heart or carnal security, when a man neither acknowledge Gods
judgment, nor his own sins, dreameth that he is safe from Gods vengeance,
and such perils, as arise from sin. Romans. 2.5. Thou after thine hardness, and
heart that cannot repent, heapest to thy self wrath against the day of wrath.
Luke. 21.34. Take heed to your selves, least at any time, your hearts be
oppressed with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and least
that day come on you at unawares.

These also do jointly engender pride, whereby man ascribes all he has that
is good, not to God, but to his own merit and industry, referring, and
disposing them wholly unto his own proper credit. 1. Corinthians. 4.6. That ye might
learn by us, that no man presume above that which is written, that one swell
not against another for any man's cause. Verse 7. For who seperateth thee? or
what have thou, that thou have not received? if thou have received it, why
reioycest thou, as though thou had not received it? Gene. 3.5. God does
know, that when ye shall eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be
as Gods, knowing good and evil. The highest staier of prides ladder, is that
fearful presumption, by which many clime rashelye into Gods seat of
majesty, as if they were Gods. Acts. 12.22, 23. The people gave a showte,
saying. The voice of God, and not of man: But immediatlye the Angel of the
Lord smote him, because he gave not glory unto God, so that he was eaten up of
woorms, and gave up the ghost. 2. Thessalonians. 2.4. Which is an adversary,
and ex^eth himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so
that he does sit in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God.

Chap. 21. Of the second Commandment.
HItherto have we entreated of the first Commandment, teaching us to
entertain into our hearts, and to make choice of one only God. The other
three of the first Table, concern that holy profession, which we must make
toward the same god. For first, it is necessary to make choice of the true
God. Secondly, to make profession of God.

In the profession of God, we are to consider the parts thereof, and the time
appointed for this profession.

The parts are two. The solemn worshipping of God, and the glorifying of him.

The second commandment describes such holy and solemn worship, as is due
unto God. The words of the commandment are these.

Thou shall make thee no gra^en Image, neither any similitude of any things
that are in heaven above, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor in the
water under the earth: thou shall not bow down to them, neither serve them,
for I am the Lord thy God, a beloue God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children, upon the third generation, and upon the fourth of them that
hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands, upon them that love me and keep
my commandments.

The resolution.
Thou shall not make. This is the first part of the commandment, forbidding to
make an idol: Now an idol is not only a certain representation, and image,
of some feigned God, but also of the true Iehoua. The which may be proved
against the papists by these arguments. The first is Deuteronomy. 4.15.16. Take
therefore good heeds unto your selves, for ye saw no image in the day that the
Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the mids of the fire, that ye corrupt
not your selves, and make you a graven image or representation of any figure:
whether it be the likeness of male of female. Out of the words uttered by
Moses, a reason may be framed thus.

If ye saw no image (namely of God) ye shall make none.

But ye saw no image, only ye heard a voice.

Therefore ye shall make no image of God.

The second reason: That idolatry which the Israelites committed, the very
same is prohibited in this commandment.

But the Israelites idolatry was the worship of God in an image. Hoseah. 2.16.
At that day, says the Lord, thou shall call me no more Baali, but shall call
me Ishe. Exodus 32.5. Aaron proclaimed, saying, to morrow shall be the holy day
to the Lord.

Therefore the worshipping of God is an image, is here prohibited.

Any graven image. Here the more special is put for the more general, namely,
a graven image for all counterfeit means of Gods worship.

The first part of the commandment is here illustrated, by a double
distribution. The first is drawn from the causes. Thou shall not make thee any
idol, whether it be engraven in wood, or stone: or whether it be painted in a
table. The second is taken from the place. Thou shall not make thee an idol of
things in heaven, as stars, and birds: or in the earth, as of man, woman,
beasts: or under the earth, as fishes.

This place is so expounded by Moses. Deuteronomy. 4.14. to the 20. verse.

Thou shall not bow down to them. This is the second part of the
commandment, forbidding all men to fall down before an idol. In this word,
bow down, is again the special put for the general: for in it is inhibited
all feigned worship of God.

For I. These words are a confirmation of this commandment, persuading to
obedience, by four reasons.

The Lord (which is strong.) The first reason, God is strong, and so able to
revenge idolatry. Heb. 10.31.

Aielous God. This speech is taken from the estate of wedlock, for God is
called the husband of his Church. Esaias. 54.5. Ephesians. 5.26, 27. and our
spiritual worship is, as it were a certain marriage of our souls,
consecrated unto the Lord. Ierm. 2.2. I remember thee with the kindness of
thy youth, and the love of thy marriage, when thou wentest after me in the
wilderness, in a land that was not sown. Here is an other argument drawn from
a comparison of things that be like. Gods people must alone worship him,
because they are linked to him as a wife is to her husband, unto whom alone
she is bound: therefore if his people forsake him, and betroth them selves unto
idols, he will undoubtedly give them a bill of diuorcement, and they shall be
no more espoused unto him.

Visuing. To visit, is not only to punish the Children for the fathers
offenses, but to take notice, and apprehend them in the same faults: by reason
they are given over to commit their fathers transgressions, that for them they
may be punished. And this is the third reason drawn from the effects of gods
anger.

Hate me. It may be, this is a secret answer, the objection whereof is not
here in express words set down, but may be thus framed. What if we use
idols to inflame, and exite in us a love and remembrance of thee. The answer
is this by the contrary: You may think that your use of idols kindles in you
a love of me, but it is so far from that, that all such as use them cannot
choose but hate me.

Show mercy. The fourth reason derived from the effects of Gods mercy to such
as observe this commandment. Here may we first observe that gods mercy
exceeds his justice. Psalm. 103.8. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy,
slow to anger and of great kindness. verse. 17. The loving kindness of the
Lord endures for ever. ver. 9. He will not always chide, neither keep his
anger for ever. Secondly we may not surmise, that this excellent promise is
made to every one particularly, who is borne of faithful parents. For godly
Isaak had godless Esau to his son, and godless Saul, had godly Jonathan.

The negative part.
Thou shall neither worship false Gods, nor the true God with a false
worship. Many things are here forbidden.

I. The representation of God, by an image. For it is a lie. Habak. 2.18. What
profits the image? for the maker thereof has made it an image and a teacher
of lies. Zach. 10.2. The idols have spoken vanity. Ier. 10.8. The stock is a
doctrine of vanity. The Eliber Council in the 39. canon has this edict. We
thought it not meet to have images in Churches, lest that which is worshipped
and adored, should be painted upon walls. Clement. book 5. ad Jacob. Do. That
serpent by others is wont to speak these words: we in honor of the invisible
God, are accustomed to adore visible images, the which out of all controversy,
is very false. August. in his treatise upon the 113. Psalm.

The image also of the cross and Christ crucified, ought to be abolished out
of churches, as the brazen serpent was. 2. King. 18.4. Hezekiah is commended
for breaking in pieces the brazen serpent, to which the children of Israel did
the^ burn incense. This did Hezekiah, albeit at the first this serpent was
made by the Lords appointment. Nomb. 21.8. and was a type of Christ's passion.
Ioh. 3.14. Origin in his 7. book against Celsus. We permit not any to adore
Jesus upon the alters, in images, or upon church walls: because it is written,
thou shall have none other gods but me.

Epiphanius, in that Epistle which he wrote to John Bishop of Jerusalem, says
it is against the custom of the Church to see any image hanging in the church,
whether it be of Christ, or any other saint, and therefore even with his own
hands rent he a sunder the veil, wherein such an image was painted.

Some object the figure or sign, which appeared to Constantine, wherein he
should overcome, but it was not the sign of the cross (as the Papists do
triflingly imagine) but of Christ's name: for the thing was made of these two
greek letters, (...) conjoined together. Eusebius. in the life of Constantine.
book 1. chap. 22.25.

Neither serve the cherubimes, which Solomon placed in the temple, for the
defense of images: for they were only in the holy of holiest, where the people
could not see them. And they were types of the glory of the Messiah, unto whom
the very Angels were subject: the which we have now verified in Christ.

If any man reply, that they worship not the image, but God in the image: let
him know that the creature can not comprehend the image of the creator, and if
it could, yet God would not be worshipped in it, because it is a dead thing:
yea the work of man's hands, not of Gods: and therefore is more base, then the
smallest living creature of the which we may lawfully say, it is the work of
God. This euinceth, that no kind of divine worship belongs to an image,
neither simply or by relation, whatsoever the sophistical schoolmen iangle
to the contrary.

If any man be yet desirous of images, he may have at hand the preaching of the
gospel, a lively image of Christ crucified. Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galatians, who
has bewitched you that ye should not obey the truth, to whom Jesus Christ
before was described in your sight, and among you crucified? The like may be
said of the two Sacraments. And that saying of Clemens is true, in his 5. book
of Recognit. If you will truly adore the Image of GOD, do good unto man, and
ye shall woorship his true image: for man is the image of GOD.

II. The least approbation of idolatry. Hos. 13.2. They say one to another
whilst they sacrifice a man, let them kiss the calves. Now a kis, is an
external sign of some allowance of a thing. Genesis 48.11.

Therefore it is unlawful to be present at Mass, or any idolatrous service,
though our minds be absent. 1. Cor. 6.20. Ye are bought with a price, therefore
glorify God in your body, and in your sperites, which are Gods. Romans 11.4.
What says the Scripture? I have reserved unto my self seven thousand men,
which have not bowed the knee to Baal. Eusebius. 3. book. The Martyrs, when they
were haled unto the Temples of idols, cried out, and with a loud voice in the
mids of their tortures testified, that they were not idolatros sacrificers
but professed and constant Christians, rejoicing greatly that they might make
such a confession.

That which may be objected of Naaman the Syrian, who woorshiped in the Temple
of Rimmon, is thus answered, that he did it not with purpose to commit
idolatry, but to perform that civil obeisance, which he was wont to exhibit
to the Kings Majesty. 2. King. 5.17, 18.

And for this cause are utterly forbidden all such.

Processions, plays, and such feasts, as are consecrated to the memorial and
honor of Idols. Exodus. 32.6. They rose up the next day in the morning, and
offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offering, also the people sat them
down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. 1. Cor. 10.7. Neither be ye
idolaters as some of them were, as it is written etc. And Paul 1. Cor. 8.4. to
the end. Earnestly dehorteth the Corinthians from sitting at table in the idols
temple; albeit they know that an idol is nothing in the world. Tripartite
history book. 6. Chap. 30. Certain soldiers refused to adore, as the custom
was, the banner of Julian, in which were painted the Images of Jupiter, Mercury
and Mars: others bring again the rewards which they, after they had burned
incense on an alter in the Emperoures presence, had received: Cryinge, that
they were Christians, and would live and dye in that profession: and as for
their former fact, it was of ignorance: yea though they had polluted hands
with idolatry of the Paynims, yet they kept their consciences clean.

III. All relics, and monuments of idols: for these, after the idols
themselves are once abolished, must be rased out of all memory. Exodus 23.13.
Ye shall make no mention of the name of other gods, neither shall it be heard
out of thy mouth. Esaias. 30.22. And ye shall pollute the covering of the images
of silver, and the rich ornament of the images of gold, and cast them away as
a monstrous cloth, and thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence.

IV. Society with infidels, is here unlawful, that serves not only to
maintain concord, but also to join men in brotherly love. Of this society,
there are many branches.

The first, is Marriage with infidels. Genesis 6.2. The sons of God saw the
daughters of men, that they were fair, and they took them wives of all that
they liked. Malac. 2.11. Judah has transgressed, and an abomination is
committed in Israel, and in Jerusalem: for Judah has defiled the holiness of
the Lord, which he loved, and has married the daughters of a strange god.
Ezra. 9.14. Should we return to break thy commandments, and join in
affinity with the people of such abomination? 2. King. 8.18. He walked in the
ways of the kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab: for the daughter of
Ahab was his wife: and he did evil in the sight of the Lord.

The second, is the league in war: namely, a mutual confederacy, to assist
one another in the same war, and to have one and the same enemies. This is
sundry ways impious. I. If it be unlawful to crave assistance of Gods
enemies, it is likewise unlawful to indent with them, that we will assist
the^. II. It obscureth Gods glory, as though he him self, either would not, or
could not aid his church. III. It is a thousand to one, least we be infected
with their idolatry, and other impieties. IV. It endangereth us to be made
partakers of their punishments. V. 2. Chron. 19.2. And Iehu the son of
Hauanas the Seer, went out to meet him, and said to King Iehoshaphat,
would thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore for
this thing is the wrath of the Lord upon thee.

The third, is Traffic: as when a man wittingly and willingly, does, in hope
to enrich him self, make sale of such things, as he knows, must serve to an
idolatrous use. This condemns all those marchantes, which transport to
idolatours, and sell them frankincense, wax, cloth, or other such things as
help them in the service of their idols.

The fourth, is trial of suits in Law before Judges which are infidels. 1.
Cor. 9.6. Brother goes to law with brother, and that under infidels.

The fifth, is the worshipping of the beast, and receiving his mark. Revel.
14.9. If any man worship the beast, and his image, and receive the mark in his
forehead, or on his hand verse. 10. The same shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God. This beast is the Church of Rome, I mean not that old, but this
new Rome, now no better then an heretical, and apostaticall Synagogue.

V. Wilworshippe, when God is worshipped with a naked and bare good intention,
not warranted by the word of God. Coloss. 2.23. Which things in deed have a
show of wisdom in voluntary religion, and humbleness of mind, and in not
sparing the body: neither have they it in any estimation to satisfy the
flesh. 1. Sam. 13.9, 10. And Saul said, Bring a burn offering to me, and peace
offerings: and he offered a burnt offering. And as soon as he had made an end of
offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came, and ver. 13. said to Saul,
thou have done foolishly, thou have not kept the commandment of the Lord God,
which he commanded thee. Hitherto may we add popish superstitions in
sacrifices, meats, holidays, apparel, temporary and beadridden prayers,
indulgences, auster life, whippings, ceremonies, gestures, gate, conversation,
pilgrimage, building of Altars, pictures, Churches, and all other of that
rabble.

To these may be added, consort, music in divine service, feeding the ears,
not edifying the mind. 1. Corinthians. 14.15. What is it then? I will pray with
the spirit, but I will pray with the understanding also. I will sing with the
spirit, but I will sing with the understanding also. Justinius Martyr in his
book of Christian Quaest. and Ans. 107. It is not the custom of the Churches,
to sing their meeters with any such kind of instruments, etc. but their
manner is only to use plain song.

Lastly, monastical vows, which I. repugne the Law of God: as that unchaste
vow of single life, and proud promise of poverty do plainly euince: For he
that labors not, must not eat, says Paul: and it is better to marry,
then to b^rne in lust, says the same Paul. II. They are greater, then man's
nature can perform: as in a single life, to live perpetually chaste. III.
They disanull Christian liberty, and make such things necessary, as are
indifferent. IIII. They renew Iudaisme. V. They are idolatrous, because they
make them parts of Gods worship, and esteem them as meritorious.

VI. Hypocrisy, which gives to God painted worship, that is, if you regard
outward behavior, great synceritie: if the inward and hearty affections, none
at all. Matthew. 15.7. Hypocrites, well has Esaias prophesied of you, saying,
This people comes near me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips,
but their heart is far from me. Psalm. 10.4. The wicked man is so proud, that
he seeks not for God.

The effects of hypocrisy, are these. I. To seek the pomp and glory of the
world, and by all means to enrich it self, notwithstanding it make a glorious
show of the service of God. II. It is sharp sighted, and has eagles eyes to
observe other men's behavior, when in the regarding his own, it is as blind as
a beetle. III. To be more curious in the observation of ancient traditions,
then the statutes and commandments of almighty God. IV. To stumble at a straw
and skip over a block, that is, to omit serious affairs, and hunt after
trifles. Matthew. 23.4. V. To do all things that they may be seen of men.
Matthew. 6.5.

Popish fasting, is mere hypocrisy: because it stands in the distinction of
meats, and it is used with an opinion of merit.

External abstinence from meats, without internal and spiritual fasting from
sin, and unlawful desires. Esaias. 58.5, 6. Is this such a fast, as I have
chosen, that a man should afflict his soul for a day, and bow down his head
as a bulrush, and lie down in sackcloth and ashes? will thou call this a
fasting, or an acceptable day unto the Lord? Is not this the fasting that I
have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to take off the heavy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?

VII. Contempt, neglect, and intermission of Gods service. Revel. 3.15, 16. I
know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot, J would thou werest cold
or hot. Therefore because thou art luke warm, and neither cold nor hot, it
will come to pass, that I shall spewe thee out of my mouth.

VIII. Corrupting of Gods worship, and that order of government, which he has
ordained for his Church: the which is done, when any thing is added, detracted,
or any way, against his prescript, mangled. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Every thing which I
command you, that do: neither add to it, nor detract from it. This condemns
that Popish elevation of bread in the Lords supper, and the administration of
it alone to the people without wine, together with that fearful abomination
of the Mass.

By this, we may learn to reject all popish traditions. Matthew. 15.9. In vain
do they worship me, teaching for doctrines, men's precepts. Now it is manifest,
that all popish traditions, they either on their own nature, or others abusing
of them, serve as well to superstition and false worship, as to enrich that
covetous and proud Hierarchi^ whereas the Scriptures contained in the Old and
New Testament, are all sufficient, not only to confirm doctrines, but also to
conform manners. 2. Timothy 3.16. The whole Scripture is given by inspiration
of God, and is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousnesses that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
all good works.

The Romish Hierarchy is here also condemned; from the pardoner to the Pope:
the government whereof, is an express image of the old Roman Empire,
whether we consider the regiment it self, or the place of the Empire, or the
large circuit of that government. Revel. 13.15. And it was permitted to him,
to give a spirit to the image of the beast, so that the image of the beast
should speak, and should cause that as many as would not worship the image of
the beast, should be killed.

IX. A religious reverence of the creature, as when we attribute more unto him,
then we ought. Reu. 22.8. When I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship
before the feet of the Angel, which showed me these things. But he said unto
me, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant. Act. 10.25. As Peter came
in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his feet, and worshipped him. But
Peter took him up, saying, Stand up, for even I my self am a man.

If then it be so heinous a thing, to reverence the creature, much more to pray
unto it, whether it be Saint or Angel. Romans 10.14. How shall they call upon
him, in who^ they have not believed. Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Neither may we pray unto Christ as he is only man, but as he is God and man:
for we direct not our prayers to the humanity, but to the deity, to which
the humanity is knit by an hypostatical vnio^.

This teaches us plainly, that invocation of any creature is unlawful: for
we must pray to the^, that are able to know the secrets of the heart, and
discern the wisdom of the spirit: now none is able to do that, but such a
nature as is omnipotent. Romans 8.27. He that searches the hearts, knows what
is the meaning of the spirit: for he makes request for the Saints, according
to the will of God.

Nevertheless, such as are Saints indeed, are to be honored by an
approbation of Gods gifts in them, and by an honorable mention of them, and
also by imitation of their manners and lives, being as paterns for us to walk
after.

X. Worshipping of devils. I. Magic, which is a mischievous art,
accomplishing wonders by Satan's assistance.

The foundation of Magic, is a covenant with Satan.

The covenant, is either Secret or Express.

Secret, when in heart a man trusts in the devil, and his Satanicall
operations.

Express, when one does not only put his confidence in Satan, but couenanteth
with him upon conditions, that he, giving himself wholly over to the devil,
may again by observing certain ceremonies accomplish his desire.

Magic, is either coniecturall, or operative.

Coniecturall, whereby things are by Satan's direction prophesied of before. Of
Prophesies, some are done with means, others without.

Prophesies done with means, are these.

I. Soothsaying, divination by the flying of birds. Deuteronomy. 18.11.

II. The kind of divination, which is, by looking into beasts entrals. Ezech.
21.21. The king of Babel, etc. consulted with idols, and looked in the liver.

III. Necromancie, or coniuring: by which the devil, in the form of some dead
man, is sought unto for counsel. 1. Sam. 28.11. Then said the woman, whom
will thou I call up unto thee* and he said call up Samuel unto me. ver. 13.
The king said unto her, fear not, but what saw thou? And the woman said
unto Saul, I saw gods ascending out of the earth. ver. 14. Then said he unto
her, what fashion is he of? and she answered, an old man comes up lapped in
a mantell. And Saul knew that it was Samuel, and he inclined his face to the
ground, and bowed him self. and Samuel said to Saul, why have thou disquieted
me, to bring me up? Then Saul answered, I am in great distress, for the
Philistines make war against me, etc. This Samuel, was not that true Prophet
of God, who anointed Saul King over Israel: for, I. the souls of the Saints
departed are far from the devils claws and dominion. II. That good Samuel,
if it had been he indeed, would never have permitted Saul to worship him.
III. He says to wicked Saul, To morrow thou shall be with me, verse. 14.
Neither could this be a bare illusion; and as I may say, legerdemaine of the
witch, for he plainly foretold Saul's destruction, which an ignorant woman
could not know, much less durst she constantly avouch any such matter to the
King. It remains then, that this Samuel was a mere illusion of Satan.

Divining without means, is, when such as are possessed with an unclean
spirit, use immediately the help of the same spirit, to reueile secrets. Act.
16.16. A certain maid having a spirit of divination, met us, which gate her
masters much vantage with divining. Esaias. 29.4. Thy voice shall be out of the
ground, like him that has a spirit of divination, and thy talking shall
whisper out of the dust.

Magic operative has two parts. Iuggling, and Enchantments.

Iuggling, whereby through the devils conueyance, many great and very hard
matters, are in show effected. Exodus 7.10, 11, 12. Aaron cast forth his rod
before Pharaoh and before his servants, and it was turned into a serpent: Then
Pharaoh called also for the wise men and sorcerers, and those charmers also of
Egypt did in like manner with their enchantments, for they cast down every man
his rod, and they were turned into serpents: but Aarons rod devoured their rods.

Enchauntment or charming is that, whereby beasts, but especially young
children, and men of riper years, are by Gods permission infected, poisoned,
hurt, bounden, killed, and otherwise molested, or contrarilye, sometimes cured
of Satan, by mumbling up some few words, making certain characters and
figures, framing circles, hanging amulets about the neck, or other parts, by
herbs, medicines and such like trumperye, that thereby the punishmente of the
faithles may be augmented, in reposing their strength upon such rotten slaves,
and the faithful may be tried, whether they will commit the like
abominations. Psalm. 18.4. Their poison is even like the poison of a Serpent:
like the deaf adder that stops his ear, which hear not the voice of the
enchanter, though he be most expert in charming. Eccle. 10.11. If the serpent
bite when he is not charmed, etc.

Thus have we heard Magic described out of Gods word, the which how, as yet,
common it is, in those especially which are without God in the world, and
whom Satan by all means stronglye deludeth, the lamentable experience which
many men, and most places have thereof, can sufficientlye prove unto us.

They which spread abroad by their writings or otherwise, that witches are
nothing else, but melancholic doting women, who through the devils delusion,
suppose, that they themselves do that, which indeed the devil does alone:
albeit they endeavor cunningly to cloak this sin, yet by the same means they
may defend murder, adulterye, and what other sin so ever.

II. Those which consult with Magitians, they do also woorship the devil: for
they revolt from God to the devil, how so ever they plaster up their impiety
with untempered mortar, that they seek Gods help, though by the means of
Magitians, 1 Samuel 28.13. The woman said to Saul, I saw Gods ascending
from the earth. Leuit. 20.6. If any turn after such as work with spirits,
and after soothsaiers, to go awhoring after them, then will I set my face
against that person, and will cut him off from among his people. Esaias. 8.19,
20. When they shall say to you, enquire at the^ which have a spirit of
divination, and at the soothsayers, which whisper and murmr, should not a
people enquire at their God? from the living to the dead? to the Law and to the
testimony?

The affirmitiue part.
Thou shall worship God in spirit and truth. John 4.24. God is a spirit, and
they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth. For so soon as
any man begins to worship God after an overthwart and unlawful manner, he
then adoreth an idol, howsoever he seems to color his impiety. Paul
therefore Romans 1.23. says that such as worshipped the creature, and turned the
glory of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of a corruptible man, did
forsake the Creator. ver. 25. and 1. Corinthians. 10.20. Those things which the
Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils and not unto God.

To this part therefore appertain such things as respect the holy and solemn
service of God.

I. The true and ordinary means of Gods worship, as calling upon the name of
the Lord by humble supplication and hearty thanksgiving: and the ministry of
the word, and Sacraments. Act. 2.41, 42. They that gladly received his word,
were baptized: and the same day there were added to the Church, about three
thousand souls. And they continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowshippe,
and breaking of Bread, and of prayer. 1. Timothy. 2.1. I exhort you
especially, that prayers and supplycations be made for all men, for kings, and
all in authority. Acts. 20.7. The first day of the week, the Disciples
being come together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart
on the morrow, and continued the preaching unto midnight. Tertull. Apolog.
Chap. 39. We come into the assemblye and Congregation, that with our prayers,
as with an army we might compass God. This kind of violence offered to God,
is acceptable to him. If any man so offend, that he must be suspended from the
public place of prayer, and all holy meeting, all ancient men, that be of
any account, bear rule, being advanced to this honor, not by bribes, but by
their good report, etc. Read the rest.

II. An holy use of the means. First, in the ministers, who ought to
administer all things belonging to Gods worship, according to his word. Mat.
28.20. Teaching the^ to observe all things, which I have commanded. 1.
Corinthians 11.23. I have received of the Lord that, which also J have
delivered. Secondly, in the rest of the assemblye whose duty is in praying
unto God, in hearing the word preached and read, and in receiving the
Sacraments. To behave themselves outwardly in modesty and without offense. 1.
Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done honestly, and by order. Inwardly, they must
take heed, that their hearts be well prepared to serve God. Eccles. 4.17. Take
heed to both thy feet, when thou entrest into the house of God, etc. and
Chap. 5.1. Be not rash with thy mouth, nor let thine heart be hasty, to utter a
thing before God. Again, we must look, that we approach nere God in confidence
of his mercy, together with a contrite and repentant heart for all our sins.
Heb. 4.2. The word that they heard, profited not them, because it was not mixed
with faith in those that heard it. Psalm. 26.6. I will wash mine hands in
innocence, O Lord, and so come before thine alter.

III. The helps and furtherances of true woorshippe, are two: Vows, and
fasting: and they are not to be taken, as the woorshippe of God it self. For
we may not obtrude any thing to God, as good service, and as though it did
bind the conscience, except he have ordained it for that end and purpose.

A vow, in the new Testament, is a promise to God, with a full intent to
observe some corporal and external duties, which a Christan has on his own
accord, without iniunction, imposed upon himself, that he may thereby the
better be excited unto repentance, meditation, sobriety, abstinence, patience,
and thankfulness toward God. Genesis 28.20. Then Iaacob vowed a vow saying, if
God will be with me, and will keep me in this journey, which I go, and will give
me bread to eat, and clothes to put on; so that I come again to my fathers
house in safety, then shall the Lord be my God, and this stone which I have
set up as a pillar, shall be Gods house, and of all that thou shall give me, I
will give the tenth to thee.

In vowing, we have these things to observe. 1. We must not vow that which is
unlawful. 2. We ought not to vow the performance of that, which is contrary
to our vocation. 3. Vows must be of that which we can do. 4. They must be
far from so much as a conceit of merit, or worship of God. 5. We must so
perform our vows, as that they encroche not upon Christian liberty, given us
in Christ: for we are bounden to pay our vows, no longer then the causes
thereof remain, and ought to be observed. Deuteronomy. 23.18. Thou shall neither
bring the hyre of a whore, nor the price of a dog, into the house of the Lord
thy God, for any vow. verse 21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy
God, thou shall not be slack to pay it: for the Lord thy God will surely
require it of thee: But when thou absteinest from vowing, it shall be no sin
unto thee. etc. ver. 23. Psalm. 66.14. I will pay^ thee my vows which my lips
have promised.

Fasting is, when a man perceiving the want of some blessing, or suspecting and
seeing some imminent calamity upon himself, or other, absteineth, not only
from flesh for a season, but also from all delights and sustenance, that he
thereby may make a more diligent search into his own sins, or offer most
humble prayers unto God, that he would withhold that, which his anger
thretned. Mat. 9.15. Can the Children of the marriage Chamber mourn, so long
as the Bridegroom is with them? 1. Corinthians 7.5. Defraude not one another,
except for a time, that ye may the better fast and pray. Joel. 2.12. Wherefore
even now, says the Lord, be ye turned unto me, with all your heart, with
fasting and prayer. verse. 13. Rent your hearts and not your garments, and
turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious and merciful, long suffering,
and of great kindenes, that he might repent him of this evil. verse. 15. Blow
the trumpet in Syon, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assemblye, verse. 16.
Gather the people, sanctify the Congregation, gather the Elders, assemble the
Children, and those that suck the breasts. Let the Bridegroom go forth of
his Chamber, and the bride out of her bride chamber: verse. 17. Let the
priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porche and the alter,
and let them say, Spare thy people, O God, etc.

A fast is sometimes private, sometimes public. 2. Chronicles 20..3 Iehoshaphat
feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout
all Judah. Hester. 4.16. Fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink for the
space of three days and nights, I also and my maids will fast.

A fast is either for one day alone, or for many days together. Iud. 20.23.
The children of Israel had gone up and wept before the Lord unto the evening;
etc. Dan. 10.3. I Daniel was in heaviness for three weeks of days, J eat no
pleasant bread, neither, came flesh nor wine in my mouth, etc.

IV. Leagues of amity among such as fear God according to his word, are
lawful: as contractes in Matrimony, league in war, especially if the war
be lawful, and without confidence in the power of man. Chron. 19.2. Mal. 2.11.

To those may be added that covenant which the Magistrates and people make
among themselves, and with God for the preservation of Christian religion. 2.
Chron. 15.12. And they made a covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers
with all their heart, and with all their soul, etc. ver. 14. and they swear
unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with shooting, and with trumpets, and with
Cornets.

Chap. 22. Of the third Commandment.
THe third Commandment concerns the glorifying of God in the affairs of
our life, without the solemn service of God.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

The Resolution.
Name. This word properlye signifies Gods title, here figuratively it is used
for any thing, whereby God may be known, as men are by their names; so it is
used for his word, works, judgments. Act. 9.15. He is an elect vessel to
conuaye my name among the Gentiles. Psalm. 8.1. O Lord our God, how great is thy
name through all the world? which set thy glory above the heavens.

Take. That is usurp, this word is translated from precious things, which
may not be touched without license. And in truth, men, which are no better
then woormes creeping on the earth, are utterly unworthy to take, or, as I may
say, touch the sacred name of God, with mind, or mouth: nevertheless God of
his infinite kindenes permits us so to do.

In vain. Namely for no cause, any matter, and upon each light and fond
occasion.

For. The reason of this commandment is taken from the penalty annexed. He
that abuses Gods name, is guilty of sin before Gods judgment seat: and
therefore is most miserable. Psalm. 32.1.2. Blessed is the man whose iniquity is
forgiven, and whose sin is covered: Blessed is the man to whom God imputes
not sin.

Guiltless. That is, he shall not be unpunished.

The negative part.
Thou shall not bereave God of that honor that is due unto him.

Here is included each several abuse of any thing, that is used in the course
of our lives, out of the solemn service of God.

I. Perjury, when a man perfourmeth not that, which he on his own accord
swear to do. Matthew. 5.33. Thou shall not foresweare thy self, but perform
thine oath to the Lord.

Perjury, contains in it four capital sins. I. Lying. II. False
invocation on Gods name, because a foreswearer calls on God to confirm a
lie. III. Contempt of Gods threatninges, that he will most greeuouslye punish
perjury. IV. A lie in his covenant with God, for the forswearer binds
himself to God, and lies unto God.

II. To swear that which is false. This is to make God and the devil both
alike. John. 8.44. Ye are of your father the devil, etc. When he speaks a
lie, he speaks of himself, because he is a liar, and the Father of lies.
Zacha. 5.4. It shall enter into the house of him that swears falslye by my
name.

III. To swear in common talk. Mat. 5.37. Let your communication be yea, yea,
and nay, nay: for whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil.

IIII. To swear by that which is no GOD. Matthew. 5.34, 35. But I say unto you,
swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods throne; neither by earth
for it is his footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the
great King. 1. King. 19.2. Iesabell sent a messenger to Elias, saying: thus do
the Gods, and so (...) them deal with me, if I by to morrow this time, make
not thy life, as is the life of every one of the^. Ier. 12.16. They taught my
people to swear by Baal. Ier. 5.7. Thy Sons forsake me, and swear by them
which are no Gods.

This place conde^neth that usual swearing by the Mass, faith, and such like.
Mat. 23.22. He that swears by heaven, swears by Gods throne, and him that
sits thereon.

But for a man to swear by Christ's death, wounds blood, and other parts of
his, it is most horrible and is as much, as to crucify Christ again with the
Jews, or account Christ's members, as God himself.

V. Blasphemy, which is a reproach against God, and the least speech, that
sauoureth of contempt to his Majesty. Leuit. 24.15, 16. Whosoever curses his
God, shall bear his sins. And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord,
shall be put to death. 2. King. 19.10. So shall ye say to the King of Judah: let
not thy God deceive thee, in whom thou trustest, saying: Jerusalem shall not be
given into the hand of the King of Ashur. Aiaxi^ the Tragedy, has this
blasphemous speech, that every coward may overcome, if he have God on his
side: as for him, he can get the victory without Gods assistance. That slye
taunt of the Pope, is likewise blasphemous, wherein he calls himself the
servant of all Gods servants: when as in truth, he makes himself Lord of
Lords, and God subject to his vain fantasy.

VI. Cursing our enemies: as, go with a vengeance: or, the devil go with
thee: or, our selves: as, I would I might never stir: or, as God shall judge my
soul, etc. To this place we may refer the execrations of Job. 3. Iere. 15.
chap.

VII. To use the name of God carelessly in our common talk, as when we say, good
God! good Lord! O Jesus! or, Jesus God! etc. Phil. 2, 10. At the name of Jesus
shall every knee bow, of things in heaven, things in earth, and things under
the earth. Esaias. 45.23. Every knee shall bow unto me, and every tung shall
swear by me.

VIII. Abusing Gods creatures, as when we either deride the woorkmanship of
God, or the manner of working: again when we abase the excellency of the
work, obscure Gods gifts in our brother, or discommend such meats as God
has sent us to eat: finally, when as we in the contemplation of any of Gods
creatures, give not him the due praise and glory. 1. Cor. 10.31. Whether ye
eat or drinker whatsoever ye do else, see that ye do all to the glory of
God. Psalm. 19.1. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handie work.

IX. Lottes, as when we search what must be (as they say) our fortune, by
dice, bones, books, or such like. For we are not to use Lottes but with great
reverence: in that the disposition of them immediatlye comes from the Lord,
and their proper use is to decide great controversies. Pro. 16.33. The lot is
cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord. Proverb.
18.18. The lotte causes contentions to cease, and makes a particion among the
mighty. For this cause the Land of Canaan was divided by Lottes. Iosu. 14. and
15. chapters. By which also both the hye Priests, and the Kings were elected:
as, Saul. 1. Samuel. 10. And Mathias into the place of Judas Iscariot. Acts.
1.23.

X. Superstition, which is an opinion conceived of the woorks of Gods
providence: the reason whereof, can neither be drawn out of the word of GOD,
nor the whole course of nature. As for example, that it is unlucky for one in
the morning to put on his shoe awrye, or to put the left shoe on the right
foot, to sneeze in drawing on his shoes, to have salt fall toward him, to have
an hare cross him, to bleed some few drops of blood, to burn on the right
ear. Again, that it is contrarily good luck to find old iron, to have
drink spilled on him, for the left ear to burn, to pare our nails on some
one day in the week, to dream of some certain things. The like superstition
is, to surmyze that beasts may be tamed by verses prayers, or the like: that
the repetition of the creed or Lords prayer, can infuse into herbs, a
faculty of healing diseases. Deuteronomy. 18.11. Here also is palmestry condemned,
when by the inspection of the hand, our fortune is foretold.

These and such like, albeit they have true events, yet are we not to give
credence unto them: for god permits them to have such success, that they
which see and hear such things, may be tried, and it may appear what
confidence they have in God. Deuteronomy. 13.

XI. Astrology, whether it be in casting of natiuities, or making of
Prognostications. This counterfeyt art is nothing else, but a mere abuse of
the heavens, and of the Stars. 1. The twelve houses which are the ground of
all figures, are made of the fained signs of a supposed Zodiake, in the
highest spear, commonly called the first Moveable. and therefore to these
houses, a man can not truly ascribe any influence or virtue. 2. This art
arises not from experience, because it never happens that the same position
of all stars is twice together observed: and if it were, yet could there not
certain ground arise from thence, in that the efficacy and influence of the
stars is confusedlye mixed both in the air, and the earth, as if all herbs
were mingled together in one vessel. 3. This art withdraws men's minds from
the co^templation of Gods providence, when as they hear, that all things fall
out by the motion and disposition of the stars. 4. Stars were not ordained to
foretell things to come, but to distinguish days, months, and years. Genesis
1.14. Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven, to separate the day
from the night: and let them be for signs and for seasons, and for days and
for years. 5. Esaias. 47.13. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels:
let now the astrologers, the Star gazers, and Prognosticators, stand up and
save thee from these things, that shall come upon thee. ver. 14. Behold, they
shall be as stubble: the fire shall burn them, etc. Dan. 2.2. The King
commanded to call the inchanters, astrologers, sorcerers, and Caldeans, to
show the King his dreams Act. 19.19. Many of them which used curious arts,
brought their books, and burned them before all men.

XII. Popish consecration of water and salt, to restore the mind unto health,
and to chase away devils. The reformed Missall. page 96.

XIII. To make jests of the Scripture phrase. Esa. 66.2. I will look even to
him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and which trembles at my words.
We have an example of such scoffing in the Tripart Hist. chap. 39. book. 6.
The Heathen did grievously oppress the Christians, and inflicted sometimes upon
their bodies corporal punishments. The which when Christians signified to the
Emperor, he disdained to assist them, and sent them away with this scoff: you
are to suffer injuries patiently, for so are you commended of your God.

XIIII. Lightly to pass over Gods judgments, which are seen in the world.
Matthew. 16.34. Verilye, verilye, I say unto thee, this night before the
Cock^crowe, thou shall deny me thrice. Verse. 35. Peter say^ unto him, though I
should dye with thee, I will not deny thee. Luke 13.1, 2, 3. There were
certain man present, at the same season, that showed him of the Galeleans,
whose blood Pilate had mingled with their own sacrifices. And Jesus answered
and said unto them, suppose ye that these Galeleans were greater sinners, then
all the other Galeleans, because they have suffered such things? J tell you nay,
but except ye amend your lives, ye shall likewise perish.

XV. A dissolute conversation. Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men,
that they seeing your good works may glorify your Father which is in heaven.
2. Sam. 12.14. Because that by this deed, thou have made the enemies of the
Lord, to blaspheme, the child that is borne unto thee, shall surely die.

The affirmitiue part.
Jn all things give God his due glory. 1. Cor. 10.13. To this part appertain.
I. Zeal of Gods glory above all things in the world besides. Numb. 25.8. When
Phineas the Son of Eleazer saw it, he followed the man of Israel into the
tent, and thrust them both through, to wit, the man of Israel, and the woman
through her belly. Psalm. 69.22. The zeal of thine house has eaten me up, and
the reproaches of the scornful have fallen upon me.

II. To use Gods titles only in serious affairs, and that withal reverence.
Deuteronomy. 28.58. If thou will not keep and do all the words of the Law (that are
written in this book) and fear this glorious and fearful Name. THE LORD THY
GOD. Romans 9.5. Of whom are the Fathers, and of whom, concerning the flesh,
Christ came, who is God over all, blessed for ever. Amen.

III. An holy commemoration of the creature, whereby we, in the contemplation
and admiration of the dignity and excellency thereof, yield an approbation
when we name it, and celebrate the praise of God, brightly shining in the
same. Psalm. 64.9, 10. And all men shall see it, and declare the work of God,
and they shall understand what he has wrought: but the righteous shall be glad
in the Lord and trust in him, and all that are upright of heart shall rejoice.
Luke 2.18, 19. And all they that heard it, wondered at the things that were
told them of the shepheardes: but Mary kept all these things and pondred them
in her heart. Ier. 5.22. Fear ye not me, says the Lord? or will ye not be
afraid at my presence, which have placed the sands for the bounds of the
seas, by the perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it, and though the waves
thereof rage, yet can they not prevail, though they roar, yet can they not
pass over.

IV. An oath, in which we must regard 1. how an oath is to be taken, 2. how it
is to be performed. In taking an oath, 4. circumstances must be observed.

I. The manner and parts of an oath: the parts are in number four. 1.
Confirmation of a truth. 2 Invocation of GOD alone, as a witness of the truth,
and a revenger of a lie. 3 Confession that God punishes periurye, when he is
brought in as a false witness. 4. An obligation, that we will undergo the
punishment at Gods hand, if we perform not the condition.

II. The form. We must swear. 1. Truly, least we forswear. 2. Justly, least
we commit impietye. 3. In judgment, for fear of rashness. Iere. 4 2. Thou
shall swear the Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness.
Esaias. 48.1. Which swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God
of Israel, but not in truth and righteousness, etc.

III. The end, namely, to confirm some necessary truth in question. Heb.
6.16. Men swear by him that is greater then themselves: and an oathe for
confirmation, is among them an end of all strife. I call that a necessary
truth, when some doubt, which must necessarily be decided, can none other way
be determined then by an oath: as when Gods glory, our neighbors body and
goods, or the credit of the party for whom the oath is ministered, are
necessarilye called into question. Romans 1.9. God is my witness (whom I serve in
my spirit in the Gospel of his Son) that without ceasing I make mention of
you. 2. Cor. 1.23. I call God for a record into my soul, that to spare you, I
came not as yet unto Corinth.

IIII. The diverse kinds of sorts of oaths. An oath is public, or private.

Public, when the Magistrate, without any peril to him that swears, does
upon just cause exact a testimony together with an oath.

A private oath is, which two or more take privately. This, so that it be
sparingly, and warily used is lawful. For in serious affairs and matters of
great importance, it be lawful in private to admit God as a Judge, why should
he not as well be called to witness? Again, the examples of holy men show
the practice of private oaths, as not unlawful. Jacob and Laban confirmed their
covenant one with an other by a private oath: the like did Booz in his contract
with Ruth.

To this place may be added an asseueration, the which albeit it be like an
oath, yet in deed is none: and is nothing else, but a constant assertion of our
mind, interserting sometimes the name of a creature. Such was Christ's
assertion, Verily, verily, I say unto you. And Paul's, I call God to record in
my spirit. Where is both an oath and an asseueration. 1. Cor. 15.31. By your
rejoicing which I have in Jesus Christ, I die daily. 1. Sam. 20.3. In deed, as
the Lord lives, and as my soul lives, there is but a step between me and
death. And truly in such a kind of asseueration there is great equity: for
albeit it be unlawful to swear by creatures, least Gods honor and power
should be attributed unto them: yet thus far may we use them in an oath, as
to make them pledges, and as it were cognisances of Gods glory.

The performance of an oath is on this manner. If the oath made be lawful, it
must be performed, be it of much difficulty, great damage, and extorted by
force. Psalm. 15.4. He that swears to his own hinderance and changes not, he
shall dwell in Gods tabernacle.

Contrarily, if a man swear, to perform things unlawful, and that by
ignorance, error, or infirmity, his oath is to be recalled. For we may not
add sin unto sin. 1. Sam. 25.2. And David said, in deed I have kept all
in vain, that this fellow had in the wilderness, etc. ver. 22. So and more
also do God unto the enemies of David: for surely I will not leave of all that
he has, by the dawning of the day, any that p^seth against the wall. ver. 33.
David said, Blessed be thy counsel, and blessed be thou, which have kept me
this day from coming to shed blood, and that mine hand has not saved me. 2.
Sam. 19.23. David promises that Shimei should not die: but 1. King. 2.9. David
says to Solomon, Though J swear so, yet thou shall not count him innocent, but
cause his hoare head to go down to the grave with blood.

V. Sanctification of Gods creatures and ordinances, the which is a separation
of them to an holy use. Thus ought we to sanctify our meats and drinks, the
works of our calling, and marriage.

The means of this sanctification are two: Gods word, and prayer. 1. Tim. 4.4.
All which God has created is good, and nothing must be rejected, if it be
received with thanksgiving: for it is sanctified by the word and prayer.

By the word we are instructed, first, whether God allows the use of such
things or not: secondly, we learn after what holy manner, in what place, at
what time, with what affection, and to what end we must use them. Heb. 11.6.
Without faith it is impossible to please God. Psalm. 119.24. Thy testimonies are
my delight, they are my counselors. Joshua 22.19.29. 1. Sam. 15.23.

Prayer, which sanctifies, is petition and thanksgiving.

By petition, we obtain of Gods Majesty, assistance by his grace, to make an
holy use of his creatures, and ordinances. Coloss. 3.17. Whatsoever ye shall
do, in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to
God even the father by him. 1. Sam. 17.45. Then said David to the Philistim,
Thou come to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I
come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the host of Israel,
whom thou have railed upon. Mich. 4.5. We will walk in the name of the Lord
our God, for ever and ever. Here may we observe prayers made upon particular
occasion. 1. For a prosperous journey. Act. 21.5. When the days were ended, we
departed, and went our way, and they all accompanied us with their wives and
children, even out of the City: and we kneeling down on the shore, prayed,
etc. 2. For a blessing upon meats at the table. Ioh. 6.11. Then Jesus took
the bread, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to his disciples, and the
disciples to them that were set down: and likewise of the fishes as much as
they would. Act. 27.35. He took bread, and gave thanks to God, in presence
of them all, and brake it, and began to eat. 3. For issue in childbirth.
This did Anna. 1. Sam. 1.14. And Zachary, Luke 1.13. 4. For good success in
business. Genes. 24.12. Abraham's servant prayed. Thanksgiving is the
magnifying of Gods Name, even the father through Christ, for his grace, aid,
and blessing in the lawful use of the creatures. Philip. 4.6. In all things
let your requests be showed unto God, in prayer, and supplication, and giving
of thanks. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. Jn all things give thanks, for this is the will
of God in Christ toward you. This we may read used, 1. After meat. Deutr.
8.10. When thou have eaten and filled thy self, thou shall bless the Lord thy
God, for the good land which he has given thee. 2. After the loss of outward
wealth. Job. 1.21. And Job said, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and
naked shall I return again: the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken
away, blessed be the name of the Lord for ever more. 3. For deliverance out of
servitude. Exodus 18.10. Iethro said, Blessed be the Lord, who has delivered
you out of the hands of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who
also has delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians. 4. For
children. Genesis 29.35. She conceived again and bore a son, saying, now will I
praise the Lord, therefore she called his name Judah. 5. For victory. 2. Sam.
22.1. And David spoke the words of this song unto the Lord, what time the Lord
had delivered him out of the hands of all his enemies, and out of the hand of
Saul. And he said, The Lord is my rock, and my foretresse, etc. 6. For good
success in domestical affairs. Abraham's servant. Genesis 24.12. Blessed be the
Lord of his master Abraham.

Chap. 23. Of the fourth commandment.
THe fourth commandment concerns the Sabbath: namely, that holy time
consecrated to the worship, and glorifying of God. The words are these.

Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: Six days shall thou labor, and
do all thy work: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in
it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter,
thy man servant, nor thy maid, nor thy beast, nor thy stranger that is within
thy gates. For in six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth, the sea
and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, therefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

Remember. This clause does insinuate, that in times past there was great
neglect in the observation of the Sabbath: and would that all degrees and
conditions of men should prepare themselves to sanctify the same: especially
those that be governors of families, incorporations, and Cities, to whom this
commandment is directed.

To keep it holy, or, to sanctify it. To sanctify, is to sever a thing from
common use, and to consecrate the same to the service of God. Here are
described the two parts of this commandment: the first whereof, is rest from
labor: the second, sanctification of that rest.

Six days. These words contain a close answer to this objection. It is
much to cease from our callings one whole day. The answer (together with a
first reason to enforce the sanctification of the Sabbath) is in these words:
it is taken from the greater to the less. If J permit thee to follow thy
calling six whole days, thou may well, and (...) leave one only to serve
me.

But the first is true. Therefore the second.

The first proposition is wanting: the second, or assumption are these words,
Six days, etc. The conclusion is the commandment it self.

Here may we see, that God has given us free liberty to work all the six
days. The which freedom, no man can annihilate. Nevertheless, upon
extraordinary occasions, the Church of God is permitted to separate one day or
more of the seven, as need is, either to fasting, or a solemn day of
rejoicing, for some benefit received. Joel. 2.15.

The seventh day. The second reason of this commandment taken from the end
thereof.

If the Sabbath were consecrated to God, and his service, we must that day
abstain from our labors.
But it was consecrated to God, and his service.
Therefore we must then abstain from our labors.
The assumption is in these words (the seventh day, etc.) where we must note,
that God alone has this privilege, to have a Sabbath consecrated unto him:
and therefore all holy days dedicated to whatsoever either Angel or Saint,
are unlawful: howsoever the Church of Rome have imposed the observation of
them upon many people.

In it thou shall do no. This is the conclusion of the second reason,
illustrated by a distribution from the causes. Thou, thy son, thy daughter,
thy servant, thy cattle, thy stranger, shall cease that day from your labors.

Any work. That is, any ordinary work of your callings, and such as may be
done the day before, or left well undone till the day after. Yet for all this
we are not forbidden to perform such works even on this day, as are both holy,
and of present necessity.

Such are those works, which do upon that day preserve and maintain the
service and glory of God, as 1. A Sabbath days journey. Act. 1.12. Which is
now to Jerusalem, containing a Sabbath days journey. 2. The killing and
dressing of sacrificed beasts in the time of the law. Matt. 12.5. Have ye not
read in the Law, how that on the Sabbath days, the Priests in the Temple
break the Sabbath, and are blameless? 3. Iourneyes unto the Prophets, and
places appointed unto the worship of God. 2. king. 4.23. He said, Why will thou go to him this day? it is neither new moon, nor Sabbath day. Psalm. 84.7.
They go from strength to strength, till every one appear before God in Zion.

Such also are the works of mercy, whereby the safety of life or good is
procured: as that which Paul did. Act. 20.9. As Paul was long preaching,
Eutichus overcome with sleep, fell down from the third loft, and was taken up
dead: But Paul went down and laid himself upon him, and embraced him,
saying, Trouble not your selves, for his life is in him. v. 12. And they
brought the boy alive, and they were not a little comforted. 2. To help a beast
out of a pit. Luke 14.5. Which of you shall have an ox, or an ass fallen into
a pit, and will not straight way pull him out on the Sabbath day? 3. Provision
of meat and drink, Matthew. 12.1. Jesus went through the corn on a Sabbath
day, and his disciples were an hungered, and began to pluck the ears of corn
and to eat. In provision, we must take heed that our cooks, and household
servants break not the Sabbath. The reason of thi^ framed from the lesser to
the greater, out of that place. 2. Sam. 23.15. David longed and said, Oh the
one would give me to drink of the water of the well of Beth-lehem, which is by
the gate. ver. 16. Then the three mighty brake into the host of the
Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Beth-lehem that was by the gate,
and took and brought it to David who would not drink thereof, but powered it
for an offering unto the Lord. ver. 17. And said, O Lord be it far from me,
that I should do this: is not this the blood of the men, that went in
ieopardie of their lives? therefore would he not drink it. The reason stands
thus. If David would not have his servants adventure their corporal lives for
his provision, nor drink the water when they had provided it: much less ought
we, for our meats, to adventure the souls of our servants. 4. Watering of
cattle. Matthew. 12.11. The Lord answered and said, Thou hypocrite, will not any
of you on the Sabbath days, loose his ox or ass out of the stable, and bring
him to the water? Upon the like present necessity, Phisicians, upon the
Sabbath day, may take a journey to visit the diseased, Mariners their voyage,
Shepheardes may tend their flock, and Midwiues may help women with child.
Mar. 2.27. The sabbath was made for^, (...) not man for the Sabbath.

Within thy gates. This word gate, signifies by a figure, jurisdiction and
authority. Matthew. 16.18. The gates of hell shall not overcome it. Let this be
a looking glass, wherein all inholders, and intertayners of strangers may
look into themselves, and behold what is their duty.

For in six days. The third reason of this commandment from the like
example.

That which I did, thou also must do,
But I rested the seventh day and hallowed it:
Therefore thou must do the like.
God sanctified the Sabbath when he did consecrate it to his service; men
sanctify it, when they worship God in it. In this place we are to consider the
Sabbath, how far forth it is ceremonial, and how far forth moral.

The Sabbath is ceremonial, in respect of the strict observation thereof,
which was a type of the internal sanctification of the people of God, and that
is, as it were, a continual resting from the work of sin. Exodus 31.13.
Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, and say, Notwithstanding keep ye
my Sabboths: for it is a sign between me and you in your generation, that ye
may know that I the Lord do sanctify you. The same is recorded, Ezech. 20.12.

It signified also that blessed rest of the faithful, in the kingdom of
heaven. Esa. 66.23. From month to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath shall
all flesh come to worship before me, says the Lord. Heb. 4.8, 9, 10. If Jesus
had given them a rest, etc.

The Sabbath is likewise ceremonial, in that it was observed the seventh day
after the creation of the world, and was then solemnized with such ceremonies.
Nom. 28.9. But on the Sabbath day, ye shall offer two lambs of a year old
without spot, and two tenth deals of fine flower for a meat offering, mingled
with oil, and the drink offering thereof. ver. 10. This is the burnt offering
of every Sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering and drink offering
thereof.

But now in the light of the Gospel, and the churches professing the same, the
ceremony of the Sabbath is ceased. Coloss. 2.16. Let no man condemn you in
meat and drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the
Sabbath: ver. 17. which are but shadows of things to come, but the body is
Christ. The observation of the Sabbath was translated by the Apostles from the
seventh day, to the day following. Act. 20.7. The first day of the week, the
disciples being come together to break bread, Paul preached to them. 1. Cor.
16.1.2. Concerning the gathering for the Saints, as I have ordained in the
churches of Galatia, so do ye also, every first day of the week, let every one
of you put aside by himself, and lay up as God has prospered him, that then
there be no gatherings when I come. This day, by reason that our Savior did
upon it rise again, is called the Lords day. Revel. 1.10. I was ravished in
the spirit on the Lords day.

The observation of the Sabbath thus constituted by the Apostles, was
nevertheless neglected of those churches which succeeded them, but after was
revived and established by Christian Emperors, as a day most apt to celebrate
the memory of the creation of the world, and to the serious meditation of the
redemption of mankind. Leo and Anton. Edict. of holy days.

The observation of the Sabbath is moral, in as much as it preserves the
ministry of the word, and the solemn worship of God, especially in the
assemblies of the Church. And in this respect we are upon this day, as well
enjoined a rest from our vocations, as the Jews were. Esa. 58.13. Jf thou
turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will on mine holy day,
and call my Sabbath a delight, to consecrate it, as glorious to the Lord, and
shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, etc.

Finally, it is moral, in that it freeth servants and cattle from their
labors, which on other days do service unto their owners.

The affirmative part.
Keep holy the Sabbath day. This we do, if we cease from the works of
sin, and our ordinary callings: performing those spiritual works, which
are commanded in the second and third commandment.

I. To arise early on that morning, that so we may prepare our selves to the
better sanctifying of the Sabbath ensuing. This preparation consists in
private prayers, and taking account of our several sins. Mark 1.31. In the
morning very early before day, Jesus arose and went into a solitary place,
and there prayed. The day following was the Sabbath, when he preached in the
Synagogues. ver. 39. Exodus 32.5, 6. Aaron proclaimed, saying, To morrow shall
be the holy day of the Lord. So they rose up the next day early in the morning.
Eccl. ver. last. Take heed to thy feet when thou entrest into the house of
God.

II. To be present at public assemblies, at ordinary hours, there to hear
reverently and attentively the word preached and read, to receive the Lords
Supper, and publicly with the Congregation, call upon and celebrate the name
of the Lord. 1. Tim. 2.1, 2, 3. Act. 20.7. 2. King. 4.22.43. Act. 13.14, 15.
When they departed from Perga, they came to Antiochia, a city of Pisidia, and
went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and sat down. And after the
lecture of the Law and Prophets, the rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them,
saying, Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people,
say on.

III. When public meetings are dissolved, to spend the rest of the Sabbath in
the meditation of Gods word, and his creatures. Ps. 92. from the beginning to
the ending. Act. 17.11. These were also more noble men, then they which were at
Thessalonica, which received the word with all readiness, and searched the
Scriptures daily whether those things were so. We must also exercise then the
works of charity: as, to visit the sick, give alms to the needy, admonish
such as fall, reconcile such as are at jar and discord amongst themselves,
etc. Nehe. 8.12. Then all the people went to eat and to drink, and to send
away (...), and to make great joy.

The negative part.
Pollute not the Sabbath of the Lord. This is a grievous sin. Matt. 24.20.
Pray that your flight be not in winter, nor on the Sabbath day. Lament. 1.17.
The adversaries saw her, and did mock at her Sabboths. Leuit. 19.30. Ye shall
keep my sabboths, and reverence my sanctuary, I am the Lord. In this part are
these things prohibited.

I. The works of our calling, wherein if we do ought, it must be altogether
in regard of charity, and not in regard of our own private commodity.

II. Unnecessary iourneyes. Exodus 16.29. Tarry every man in his place, let no
man go out of his place the seventh day. By this reason, the master of a
family must that day remain at home, to sanctify the Sabbath with his
household.

III. Fayres upon the Sabbath day. Nehe. 3.19. When the gates of Jerusalem
began to be dark before the Sabbath, I commanded to shut the gates, and
charged that they should not be opened till after the sabbath, and some of my
servants set I at the gates, that there should no burden be brought in on the
Sabbath day. read verse 15, 16, 17, 18.

IV. All kind of husbandry, as plowing, sowing, reaping, mowing, bringing
home harvest, and other the like. Exodus 34.21. Jn the seventh day shall thou
rest, both in earing time, and in harvest shall thou rest.

V. To use jests, sports, banketting, or any other thing whatsoever, which is a
means to hinder, or withdraw the mind from that serious attention, which
ought to be in Gods service: for if the works of our calling must not be
exercised, much less these, whereby the mind is distracted as well from Gods
service, as the greatest labor.

VI. An external observation of the Sabbath, without an internal regard of
godliness. Esaias. 1.14, 15. My soul hates your new moons, and your appointed
feasts: they are a burden unto me, I am weary to bear the^, And when you
shall stretch forth your hands I will hide mine eyes from you, and though you
make many prayers, I will not hear, for your hands are full of blood. 2. Tim.
3.5. Which have a show of godliness, but deny the force thereof, such
therefore avoid.

VII. The manifest profanation of the Sabbath, in pampering the belly,
surfeiting, adultery, and other like profaneness, which is nothing else, but
to celebrate a Sabbath to the devil, and not to God.

Chap. 24. Of the fifth Commandment.
HItherto we have spoken of the commandments of the first table: now
follows the second table, which concerns the love of our neighbor. Romans
13.9. Thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not
steal, thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not covet: and if there
be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely,
thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Our neighbor is every one, which is of our own flesh. Esaias. 58.7. When thou
seast the naked, cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh.

The manner of loving, is so to love our neighbor as our selves, to wit, truly
and syncerely: when as contrarily, the true manner of loving God, is to love
God without measure.

The second table contains six commandments: whereof the first, and, in
the order of the ten commandments, the fifth, concerns the preservation of
the dignity and excellency of our neighbor.

The words are these.

Honor thy father and thy mother, that they may prolong thy days in the land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Honor. This word, by the figure, signifies all that duty, whereby our
neighbors dignity is preserved, but especially our superiors. This dignity
proceeds of this, that every man bears in him some part of the image of
God, if we respect the outward order and decency, which is observed in the
church and common wealth. In the Magistrate, there is a certain image of the
power and glory of God. Dan. 2.37. O king, thou art a king of kings: for the
God of heaven has given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.
Hence is it, that magistrates are called gods. Psalm. 82.1. In an old man, is the
similitude of the eternity of God: in a father, the likeness of his
fatherhoode. Matthew. 23.9. And call no man your father upon the earth: for there
is but one, your Father which is in heaven. In a man, is the image of Gods
providence and authority: for a man ought not to cover his head, because he is
the image of the glory of God: but the woman is the glory of her husband.
Finally, in a learned man, is the likeness of the knowledge and wisdom of
God. Now therefore, that person, in whom even the least title of the image of
God appears, is to be honored and reverenced.

Thy father. By a figure we must here understand, all those that are our
superiors: as parents, magistrates, ministers, our Elders, and those that do
excel us to any gifts whatsoever. The Kings of Gerar were called Abimelech.
Genesis 20.2. Genesis 45.8. God has made me a father unto Pharaoh, and Lord over
all his house. 1. Corinthians. 4.15. For though ye have ten thousand
instructours in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I
have begotten you. 2. Kings. 5.13. But his servants came, and spoke unto him,
and said, Father, if the Prophet had commanded thee a great thing, would
thou not have done it? 2. King. 2.12. And Elisha saw it, and he cried, my
father, my father, my father, the charet of Israel, and the horsemen thereof.

And thy mother. This is added, least we should despise our mothers, because
of their infirmities. Prou. ^3.22. Obey thy father, which has begotten thee,
and despise not thy mother when she is old.

Here we are put in mind to perform due honor to our stepmothers and
fathers in Law, as if they were our proper and natural parents. Ruth. 3.1.
and 5. Afterward Naomi her mother in law said unto her, my daughter, shall not
I seek rest for thee, that thou may prosper? and she answered her, all that
thou biddest me, I will do. Exodus 18.17. But Moses Father in law said unto
him, the thing which thou do, is not well. 19. Hear now my voice, I will
give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee. 24. So Moses obeyed the voice
of his Father in law, and did all that he had said. Micah. 7.6. For the Son
reuileth the Father, the daughter rises up against her mother, the daughter in
law against her mother in law.

That they may prolong. Parents are said to prolong the lives of their
Children, because they are Gods instruements, whereby their childrens lives are
prolonged: for oftentimes the name of the action is attributed to the
instruement, wherewith the action is wrought. Luke 16.9. Make you friends with
the riches of iniquity, that when ye shall want, they may receive you into
everlasting habitations. 1. Tim. 4.16. For in doing so, thou shall both save
thy self, and them that hear me.

But parents do prolong the lives of their Children in commanding them to
walk in the ways of the Lord, by exercising justice and Judgment. Gene.
18.19. For being become godly, they have the promise both of this life, and
the life to come. 1. Tim. 4.8.

Further, they effect the same thing by their prayers made in the behalf of
their children. Hereby it plainly appears, that the usual custom of
children saluting their parents, to ask their blessing, is no light or vain
thing.

Moreover, in these words, the reason to move us to the obedience of this
commandment, is drawn from the end: which reason is also a promise, yet a
special promise. Ephesians 6.2. Honor thy father and thy mother, which is the
first commandment with promise, (I say, special) because the promise of the
second Commandment is general, and belongs to all the rest of the
commandments.

And God promises long life not absolutely, but so far as it is a blessing.
Ephe. 6.3. That it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on
earth: for we must think that long life is not always a blessing, but that
sometime it is better to die the^ to live. Isay. 57.1. The righteous perishes,
and no man considers it in heart: and merciful men are taken away, and no man
understands that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.

But if at any time the Lord gives a short life to obedient children, he
rewards them again with eternal life in heaven, and so the promise fails
not, but changes for the better.

The affirmative part.
Preserve the dignity of thy neighbor.
Under this part is commanded.
First. Reverence toward all our superiors: the actions whereof, are:
reuerentlye to rise up before any man which passes by us. Leuit, 19, 32. Rise
up before the horehead, and honor the person of the old man, and dread thy
God: I am the Lord. To meet him that comes toward us. Gene. 18.2. And he
lifted up his eyes, and looked: and lo, three men stood by him, and when he
saw them he ran to meet them from the tent door. 1. Kings 2.19. When
Bethsheba came to speak to King Solomon, the King rose to meet her, and bowed
himself unto her. To bow the knee. Mar. 10.17. And when he was gone out of the
way, there came one running and kneeled to him. Genesis 18.2. He ran to meet
them, and bowed himself to the ground. To stand by those that sit down.
Genesis. 18.8. And he took Butter, and milk, and the calfe that he had
prepared, and set before them, and stood himself by them under the tree, and
they did eat. Exodus, 18.13. Now on the morrow, when Moses sat to judge the
people, the people, stood about Moses from Morning unto Even. To give the
cheifest seat. 1. Kings. 2.19. And he sat down on his throne, and he caused
a seat to be set for the Kings mother, and she sat at his right hand. Luke
14.7, 8, 9. He spoke also a parable to the guestes, when he marked how they
chose out the chief rooms, and said unto them, When thou shall be bidden of
any man to a wedding, set not thy self down in the cheifest place, least a
more honorable man then thou be bidden of him, and he that bad both him and
thee, come and say to thee, give this man room, and thou then begin with
shame to take the lowest room. Genesis. 43.33. So they sat before him, the
eldest according to his age, and the youngest according to his youth, and the
men marueiled among themselves.

To let our superiors speak before us. Job. 32.7, 7, 17. To keep silence in
courts and judgment places, until we be bidden to speak. Acts 24.10. Then
Paul, after that the governor had beckened unto him that he should speak
answered. To use titles, when we talk with men, which importe reverence. 1.
Peter. 3.6. As Sarah obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord: whose daughters ye
are, whiles ye do well. Mark. 10.17. Good Master, what shall I do, (...)
may possess eternal life? 20. Then he answered, and said unto him, Master,
all these things have I observed from my youth up. 1. Samuel. 1.14, 15. And
Eli said unto her, how long will thou be dronken? Put away thy drunkenness
from thee: then Hannah answered, and said, nay my Lord, but I am a woman
troubled in spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink.

Secondly, toward those that are our superiors in authority: and first,
obedience to their commandments. Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers.

We are to be admonished to obedience, because every higher power is the
ordinance of God, and the obedience which we perform to the^, God accepts it
as though it were done to himself and to Christ. Romans 13.2. Whosoever
therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that
resist shall receive to themselves judgment. Coloss. 3.23. And whatsoever ye
do, do it hartilye, as unto the Lord, and not unto men. ver, 24. Knowing that
of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the
Lord Christ. Obedience is to be performed to our superiors with diligence and
faithfulness. Genesis 24.2. Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house,
which had the rule over all that he had: put now thy hand under my thigh, and I
will make thee swear by the Lord God of heaven, and God of the earth, that
thou shall not take a wise unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites,
amongst whom I dwell. 10. So the servant took ten Camels of his master, and
departed. 12. And he said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, I beseech thee,
send me good speed this day, and show mercy unto my master Abraham. 33.
Afterward the meat was set before him, but he said, I will not eat until I
have said my message: and Laban said, speak on. 56. But he said, hinder me not,
seeing the Lord has prospered my journey: send me away that I may go to my
master. Gene. 31.38. This twenty years have I been with thee, thine ewes and
thy goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not
eaten. 39. Whatsoever was torn of beasts, I brought it not unto thee, but made
it good my self: of mine hand did thou require it, were it stolen by day,
or stolen by night. 40. J was in the day consumed with heat, and with frost
in the night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes.

Furthermore, we must yield obedience to our superiors: yea, although they be
cruel and wicked, but not in wickedness. 1. Pet. 2.18. Servants, be subject to
your masters with all fear, not only to the good and courteous, but also to the
froward. Acts 4.19. Whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey you
rather then God, judge ye.

2. Subjection in suffering the punishments inflicted by our superiors. Genesis
16.6. Then Abraham said to Sarai. Behold, thy maid is in thine hand, do with
her as it pleases thee: then Sarai dealt roughly with her: wherefore she fled
from her. 9. Then the Angel of the Lord said unto her, return unto thy dame,
and humble thy self under her hands.

And although the punishment should be unjust, yet must we suffer it, until we
can get some lawful remedy for the same. 1. Peter 2.19. For it is thank
worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wronfully.
20. For what praise is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye take it
patiently? but and if, when ye do well, ye suffer wrong, and take it
patiently, this is acceptable to God.

III. Thankfulness in our prayers. 1. Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort ye therefore,
that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks
be made for all men, for Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we
may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godlynes, and honesty. 1. Tim.
5.17. Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor. Genesis 45.9. Haste
you, and go up to my father, and tell him, thus says thy Son Joseph, God
has made me Lord over all Egypt, come down to me, tarry not, 10. and then
shnll dwell in the land of Goshen. 11. Also I will nourishe thee there, for yet
remain five years of famine, least thou perrish through poverty, thou and thy
household, and all that thou have.

Thirdlye, toward those that excel us in gifts, our duetye is to
acknowledge the same gifts, and speak of them to their praise. 1.
Corinthians. 22, 23.

Fourthlye, toward all our equalles, to think reuerentlye of them
Phillippians. 2.3. Let nothing be done through contention, or vain glory, but
in meekenes of mind, let every man esteem other better then himself.

In giving honor, to go one before onother, and not in receiving it. Romans.
12.10. In giving honor, go one before another. Ephesians. 5.21. Submitting
your selves one to another in the fear of God. To salute one another with holy
signs, whereby may appear the love, which we have one to another in Christ.
1, Pet. 5.14. Greet ye one another with the kiss of love. Romans. 16.16.
Salute one another with an holy kiss. Exodus. 18.7. And Moses went out to meet
his Father in Law, and did obeisance, and kissed him. Ruth. 2.4. And behold,
Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers, the Lord be with you, and
they ansqered him, the Lord bless thee.

Fiftlye, the duties of all superiors toward their inferiors, to yield to
them in good matters, as to their brethren. Deutronomi. 17.20. That his heart be
not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not from the commandment,
to the right hand, or the lefe. Job. 31.13. If I did contemn the judgment of
my servant, and of my maid. 2. Kings 5, 13. But his servants came and spoke
unto him, and said. 14. Then he went down, and washed himself seven times
in Jorden, etc. To shine before their inferiors by an example of a blameles
life. Titus 2.2. That the elder men be sober, honest, discreet, sovnd in the
faith, (...) love, and in patience. 3. The elder women likewise, that they be
in such behauoiur as becomes holiness, not false accusers, not given to much
wine, but techers of honest things. 1. Peter. 5.3. Not as though ye were Lords
over Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensam^ to the flock. Philippians 4.9.
To show forth gravity joined with dignity, by their countenance gesture,
deeds and words. Titus. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Job. 29.8. The young men saw me
and hid themselves, the aged arose, and stood up.

Sixthly, toward inferiors in obedience, that is, toward their subjects. I.
To rule the^ in the Lord, that they do not offend. 1. Pet. 2.13. Submit your
selves unto all manner ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be unto
Kings as unto superiors, 14. Or unto governors, as unto the^ that are sent of
the King, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that
do well. Deuteronomy. 17.19. And it shall be with him, (namely, the book of the law)
and he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to
fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of this Law, and those
ordinances to do them. Col. 4.1. Ye masters do unto your servants, that which
is just and equal: knowing that ye also have a master in heaven. II. To
provide such things as shall be to the good of their subjects, whether they
belong to the body or to the soul. Romans 13.4. For he is the minister of God
for thy wealth. Isay. 49.23. And Kings shall be thy noursing Fathers, and
Queens shall be thy nourses. Psalm. 132.1. Lord remember David with all his
troubles. 2. Who swear unto the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty God of Iaakob,
saying: 3. I will c^ enter into the tabernackle of mine house, nor come upon my
pallet or bed. 4. Nor suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eye lidds to
slumber. 5. Until I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the
mighty God of Iaakob. III. To punish their faults, the lighter by rebuking,
the greater by correction, that is by inflicting real or bodily punishment.

There is an holy manner of punishing the guilty, whereunto is required. I.
After diligent and wise examination being had, to be assured of the crime
committed. II. To show forth of Gods word, the offense of the sin: that the
conscience of the offender may be touched. III. It is convenient to defer or
omit the punishment, if thereby any hope of amendment may appear. Eccle. 7.23.
Give not thy heart also to all the words that men speak, least thou do hear
thy servant cursing thee. 24. For oftentimes also thine heart knows, that thou
likewise have cursed others. 1. Sam. 10.27. But the wickedmen said, How shall
he save us? so they despised him, and brought him no presents: but he held his
t^ng. IIII. To inflict deserved punishment, not in his own name, but in Gods
Name, adding the same holily and reverently. Josh. 7.19. Then Joshua said unto
Achan, my son. I beseech thee, give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make
confession unto him, and show me now what thou have done, hide it not from me.
20. And Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indeed I have sinned against the Lord
God of Israel, and thus, and thus have I done. 25. And Joshua said, in as
much as thou have troubled us, the Lord shall trouble thee this day: and all
Israel threw stones at him, and burned them with fire, and stoned them with
stones. V. and lastly, when thou punishest, aim at this one only thing, that
the evil may be purged and amended, and that the offender by sorrowing for his
sin, may unfeignedly repent for the same. Pro. 20.30. The blewnes of the wound
serves to purge the evil, and the stripes within the bowels of the belly.

Seventhly, and lastly, there is a certain duetye of a man to be performed
toward himself, which is, that a man should preserve and maintain with
modesty, the dignity and worthiness, which is inherent in his own person.
Phil. 4.8. Furthermore, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good report, if
there be any virtue, or if there be any praise, think on these things.

The negative part.
Diminishe not the excellency or dignitye, which is in the person af thy
neighbor. Hither are referred these sins.

First, against our superiors. I. Vnreuerent behavior and contempt of them.
The actions hereof, are, deriding our superiors. Genesis 9.22. And when Have the
father of canaan saw the nakedness of his Father, he told his two brethren
without. Pro. 30, 17. The eye that mocketh his Father, and despises the
instruction of his mother, let the Ravens of the valley pick it out, and the
young Eagles eat it. To speak evil of, or revile our superiors. Exodus 21.17.
And he that curses his father or his mother, shall dye the death.

II. Disobedience, whereby we contemn their just commaundeme^ts. Romans 1.30.
Disobedient to parents. 2. Tim. 3.3. No striker, but gentle, no fighter. The
actions hereof, are, to make contracts of marriage, without the counsel and
consent of the parents. Gene. 6.^. Then the sons of God saw the daughters of
men that they were fair, and they took them wives of all that they lyked.
Genesis. 28.8, 9. And Esau seeing that the daughters of Canaan displeased Izh^k
his Father, then went Esau to Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had,
Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's son. the sister of Nabaioth, to be
his wife. The eye service of servants. Coloss. 3, 22. Servants, be obedient to
the^ that are your masters, according to the, (...) in all things: not in eye
service, as men pleas^, but in singleness of h^rt, fearing God. Ephesians 6.6.
Not with service to the eye, as men pleas^ Aunswering again when they are
reprehended. Titus. 2.9. Let servants be subject to their masters, and please
them in all things, not answering again. Deceitfulnes and wasting their masters
goods. Titus. 2.10. Neither pickers, but that they show all good faithfulness.
To flee from the power of their superior. Genesis 16.6. Then Sarah dealte
roughlye with her, wherefore she fled from her. To resist the lawful authority
of their superiors. 1, Pet. 2.20. To obey them in things unlawful. Act. 4.19.
To extol themselves above their betters: this is the sin of Antichrist. 2.
These. 2.3, 4. Which (man of sin) exalts himself against all that is called
God. Lastly, the freedom of the Papists, whereby they free children from the
government of their parents: and subjects from the authority of their
Princes: so that they make it lawful for them to pretend and procure their
death. 1. Samuel. 26.8, 9. Then said Abishai to David, God has closed thine
enemy into thine hand this day, now therefore, I pray thee, let me smite him
once with a spear to the earth, and I will not smite him again: and David
said to Abishai, destroy him not, for who can lay his hand on the Lords
anointed, and be guiltles.

III. Ingratitude and want of a loving affection toward parents. Mat. 15.5, 6.
But ye say, whosoever shall say to Father or mother, By the gift that is
offered by me, thou may have profit, though he honor not his Father, or his
mother, shall be free. 1. Tim. 5.4.

Secondly, we offend against our equals, in preferring our selves before them,
in talking or in sitting down. Mat. 20.20. Then came unto him the mother of
Zebedeus children, with her Sons, worshipping him, and desiring a certain
thing of him. 21. And he said, What would thou? and she said unto him,
Grant, that these my two sons may sit, the one at thy right hand, and the
other at thy left hand in thy kingdom. 24. And when the other ten heard this,
they disdained at the 2. brethren.

Thirdly, toward our inferiors. I. Through negligence in governing them, and
providing for their good estate. Hag. 1.4. Is it time for your selves to dwell
in your sieled houses, and this house lie waste? Dan, 3.28. This condemns
those mothers, which put forth their children to be nourced, having both
sufficient strength and store of milk themselves to nource the^. 1. Tim. 5.10.
If she have nourished her children. II. By too much gentleness and lenity, in
correcting the^. 1. King. 1.5. Then Adorij^th the son of Haggith exalted
himself, saying: I will be King. Ver. 6. And his father would not displease
him from his childehoode, to say, why have thou done so? 1. Sam. 2.22. So Eli
was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all Israel, and how they
lay with the women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the
congregation. ver. 23. And he said unto them why do ye such things? for of
all this people I hear evil reports of you. ver. 24. Do no more my sons:
for it is no good report that I hear, namely, that ye make the Lords people to
trespass. Ver. 25. Notwithstanding, they obeyed not the voice of their father,
because the Lord would slay them. 3. By overmuch cruelty and threatenings. Ephe.
6.4. And ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath. ver. 9. And ye masters
do the same things unto them, putting away threatenings.

Fourthly and lastly, a man offends against him self, when through his
naughty behavior, he does obscure, and almost extinguishe those gifts which
God has given him. Mat. 25.2.16. Or contrarilye, when he is too wise in his
own conceit. Romans 12.3. For I say, through the grace that is given unto me, to
every one that is among you, that no man presume to understand, above that
which is meet to understand.

Chap. 25. Concerning the sixth Commandment.
THou shall not kill.

The resolution.
Kill. The part is here set for the whole, by a Synecdoche: for killing
signifies any kind of endamaging the person of our neighbor.

The equity of this commandment appears by this, that man was created
after the likeness of God. Genesis 9.6. He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed: for in the image of God has he made man. Again all men
are the same flesh. Esaias 58.7. When thou see the naked, cover him, and hide
not thy face from thine own flesh.

Neither ought we to be ignorant of this also, that it is unlawful for any
private person, not called to that duty, to kill another, but a public
officer may that is, if he be warranted by a calling. So did Moses. Exodus 2.12.
And he looked round about, and when he saw no man, he slew the Egiptian, and
hid him in the sand. Act. 7.25. For he supposed his brethren would have
understood, that God by his hand should give them deliverance. And Phinchas.
Nom. 25.8. And he followed the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust them
both through (to wit, the man of Israel, and the woman) through her belly: so
the plague ceased from the children of Israel. ver, 11. Phinchas the son of
Eliazar, has turned mine anger away from the children of Jsrael, while he was
zealous for my sake among them: therefore I have not consumed the children in my
jealousy. And Eliiah. 1. King. 18.40. And Elijah said unto them, take the
Prophets of Baal, let not a man of them escape: and they took them, and Elijah
brought them to the brook of Kishan, and slew them there. And soldiers in
battles, waged upon just causes. 2. Chron. 20.15. Fear ye not, neither be
afraid of this great multitude, for the battle is not yours, but Gods.

The Negative part.
Thou shall neither hurt, nor hinder, either thine own or thy neighbors life.
The sins then that are referred to this part, are such, as are committed
against our neighbor, or our selves.

Against our neighbor, are these following, I. In heart, as 1, Hatred against
him. 1. John 3.15. Who so hates his brother, is a manslayer. 2. Unadvised
anger. Mat. 5.22. I say unto you, whosoever is angrye with his brother
unadvisedly, is in danger of judgment. 3. Envy. Romans. 1.29. Full of anger,
murder, contention. 4. Grudges. Ia. 3.14. Jf ye have bitter envying, and
strife in your hearts, rejoice not. 5. Want of compassion, and sorrow at our
neighbors calamities. Amos. 6.5, 6. They sing to the sound of the viole, etc.
but no man is sorry for the affliction of Joseph. 6. Frowardnes, when we will
not be reconciled to our neighbor. Romans. 1.30. Such as can never be
appeased, unmerciful. 7. Desire of revenge. Psalm. 5.6. The Lord will aborre the
bloudye man and deceitful.

II. In words, 1. Bitterness in speaking. Pro. 12.18 There is that speaks
words like the pricking of a sword: but the tung of wise men, is health. 2.
Reproaches and railing: which is a casting of a man's sins in his teeth which
he has committed, or an obiecting unto him, some inherent infirmities. Mat.
5.22. Whosoever says unto his brother Raca, shall be worthy to be punished by
the counsel: and whosoever shall say fool, shall be worthy to be punished with
hell fire. 2. Sam. 6.16. As the Ark of the Lord came into the city of David,
Michal Saul's daughter looked through a window, and saw king David leap and
dance before the Lord, and she despised him in her heart. v. 20, and Michal the
daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said, O how glorious was the
King of Jsraell this day, which was uncovered to day in the eyes of the maidens
of his servants, as a fool uncovers himself. 3. Contentions, when two or
more strive in speech one with an other, for any kind of superiority. 4.
Braulings in any conference. 5. Crying, which is an unseemly elevation of the
voice against ones adversary. Gal. 5.19. The works of the flesh are manifest,
which are, ver. 20. Emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions. Ephe. 4.31. Let
all bitterness, and anger, and wrath, crying, and evil speaking, be put away
from you, with all maliciousnes. ver. 32. Be ye courteous one to another. Genesis
16.11. He (vz. Ismael) shall be a wild man, his hand shall be against every man,
and every man's hand against him. 6. Complaints to every one of such as offer us
injuries. Iam. 5.9. Grudge not one against an other brethren, least ye be
condemned.

III. In countenance, and gesture, all such signs, as euidentlye decipher the
malicious affections lurking in the heart. Genesis 4.5, 6. His countenance fell
down: And the Lord said unto Cain, why art thou so wrath? Matthew. 27.39. They
that passed by, rayled on him, nodding their heads.

Hence is it, that derision is termed persecution. Genesis 21.9. Sarai saw the
Son of Hagar the Egiptian, mocking, etc. Galat. 4.29. He that was borne after
the flesh, persecuted him, that was borne after the spirit.

IV In deeds. 1. To fight with, or to beat our neighbor, and to maim his body
Leuit. 24.19, 20. If any man cause any blemmish in his neighbor: as he has
done, so shall it be done to him: Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for
tooth. 2. to procure any way ^e death of our neighbor, whether it be by the
sword, famine, or poison. Genesis 4.8. Cain rose up against his brother, and slew
him. 3. To exercise tyranous cruelty in inflicting punishments. Deuteronomy. 25.3.
Forty stripes shall he cause him to have, and not past, least of he should
exceed, and beat him above that with many stripes, thy brother should appear
despised in thy sight. 2. Cor. 11.24. Of the Jews I received five times forty
stripes save one. To use any of Gods creatures hardly. Prou. 12.10. A righteous
man regards the life of his beast, but the mercies of the wicked are cruel.
Deuteronomy. 22.6. If thou find a birds nest in the way, in any tree, or on the
ground, whether they be young or eggs, and the dam sitting upon the young, or
upon the eggs, thou shall not take the dam with the young, but shall in any
wise let the dam go, and take the young to thee, that thou may prosper and
prolong thy days. 5. To take occasion by our neighbors infirmities, to use
him discourteously, and to make him our laughing stock, or taunting recreation.
Leuit. 19.14. Thou shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before
the blind. 2. King. 2.23. Little children came out of the city, and mocked
him, and said unto him, come up thou bald head, come up thou balde head. 6. To
injury the impotent, feeble, poor, strangers, fatherless, or widows. Exodus
22.21, 22. Thou shall not do injury to a stranger, neither oppress him: for
ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. Ye shall not trouble any widow or
fatherless child. ver. 25. Thou shall not be an usurer unto the poor. We then
injury these. 1. If we pay not the labourer his hyre. Deutr. 24.14. Thou shall
not oppress an hired servant that is nee^ and poor, neither of thy brethren,
nor of the stranger that is within thy gates. v. 15. Thou shall give him his
hyre for his day: neither shall the sun go down upon it: for he is poor,
and therewith sustaineth his life: least he cry against thee to the Lord, and
it be sin unto thee. 2. If thou restore not the pledge of the poor. Exo.
22.26, 27. If thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shall restore it
unto him before the sun go down: for that is his garment only, and his
covering for his skin. 3. If we withdraw corn from the poor. Proverb.
11.26. He that withdraws the corn, the people will curse him: but blessing
shall be upon the head of him that sells corn.

Again, this law is as well transgressed by not killing, when the law
charge to kill, and by pardoning the punishment due unto murder, as by
killing when we should not. Nomb. 35.16. If one smite another with an
instrument of iron that he die, he is a murderer, and the murderer shall die
the death. ver. 33. The land can not be cleansed of the blood that is ^ed
therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.

By this place also are combats of two men hand to hand, for deciding of
controversies, utterly unlawful. 1. Because they are not equal means
ordained of God, to determine, controversies. 2. In that it falls out in such
combats, that he is conqueror before man, who indeed is guilty before God.

This also condemns popish sanctuaries, and places of privilege: as
Churches, and the like, wherein murderers shelter and shroud themselves from
the danger of the law. For God expressly commands (Exodus 21.14.) that such
an one shall be taken from his Altar, that he may die. And Ioab. 1. King. 2.24.
Touching the horns of the altar, was slain in the Temple.

Hitherto in like sort belongs such things as concern the soul of our
neighbor. 1. To be a scandale or offense to the soul of our neighbor, either
in life or doctrine. Matthew. 18.7. Woe be to the world because of offenses: it
is necessary that offenses should come, but woe be to them by whom they do
come.

2. To minister occasions of strife and discord. The which we then do, 1.
When we can not be brought to remit somewhat of our own right. 2. When we
return snappish, and crooked answers. 3. When we interpret every thing
amiss, and take them in the worst part. 1. Sam. 25. Nabal is his name, and
folly is with him. 2. Sam. 10.3. And the Princes of the children of Ammon said
to Hanun their Lord. Think thou that David does honor thy father, that he
has sent comforters to thee? has not David rather sent his servants unto
thee, to search the city, to spy it out, and to overthrow it? Wherefore Hanun
took David's servants, and shaued off the half of their beards, and cut off
their garments in the middle, even to their buttockes, and sent them away.

3. The ministers sin against their neighbors, is this, not to preach the word
of God to their charge, that they thereby might be instructed in the ways of
life. Prou. 29.18. Where there is no vision the people decay, but he that
keeps the Law is blessed. Esa. 56.10. Their watchmen are all blind, they
have no knowledge, they are all dumme dogs, they can not bark: they lie and
sleep, and delight in sleeping. And these greedy dogs can never have
enough: and these shepheardes they can not understand: for they all look to
their own way, every one for his advantage, and for his own purpose. Ezech.
3.18. When I shall say to the wicked, thou shall surely die, and thou give
him not warning, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood
will I require at thy hands.

And not only not to preach at all, but to preach negligently, is utterly
condemned. Ierem. 48.10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently. Revel. 3.16. Because thou art lukewarm, and neither hate nor
cold: it will come to pass that J shall spew thee out of my mouth. This
reprooueth non residencie of ministers, which is an ordinary absence of the
minister from his charge: namely, from that particular congregation committed
unto him. Esa. 62.6. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which
all the day and all the night continually shall not cease: ye that are mindful
of the Lord keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he repair, and
until he set up Jerusalem, the praise of the world. Act. 20.28, 29, 30, 31.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock whereof the holy
Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. For I know this, that after my departing, shall
grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Moreover, of your
selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw disciples after them.
Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years, I ceased not
to warn every one night and day with tears. 1. Pet. 5.2, 3. Feed the flock
of God, which depends upon you, caring for it, not by constraint but
willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: Not as though ye were
Lords over Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the flock. The
Council of Antioch. the 17. Canon. If any Bishop be by imposition of hands
inducted into a charge, and appointed to govern a people, and he neglect to
take upon him that office, but delayeth to go unto the congregation alloted
unto him: such an one shall be prohibited from the Lords table, till he be
enforced to attend upon that charge, or at the least, somewhat be determined by
a complete assembly of the ministers of that province. The Council of Sardice
the 14. Canon. We remember that our brethren in a former assembly decreed,
that if any lay man remaining three Sabboths or Lords days, that is, three
weeks, in a city, did not in the same city frequent the Church assemblies,
he should be excommunicated* If then such things are not allowable in lay men,
much less in ministers, for whom it is neither lawful nor convenient, without
urgent necessity, to be absent from his parish Church longer then the time
above mentioned. To this decree there was not one non placet, but every one
said, It likes us well. The Council held at Constantinople, in the 24.
Canon decreed that Ministers ought not to have their substitutes, or vt^ars,
but in their own persons, with fear and cheerfulness, perform all such
duties as are required of them in the service of God. The Canon law does
conclude the same thing, did. 36. Canon siquis vult. debent in desine^ter,
etc. The Bishops (says that Canon) ^ught to be contenually resident in Gods
tabernacle, that they may learn somewhat of God, and the people of them,
whilst they read often and meditate upon Gods word. Again, in the Canons
entitled Pontifices, and siquis in clero. Episcopos, qui dominici gregis
suscipiunt curam, etc. The Bishops which take upon them to feed Gods flock,
ought not to depart from their duty, least they loose that excellent talent
which God has bestowed upon them, but rather strive with that one talent, to
get three more talents. And in the 80. Canon of those which are termed the
Canons of the Apostles, there is an express mandate, that such, whether
Bishop, or Senior, who attends not upon their office, in the Church, shall
forthwith be removed from that place. The Calced, Council, can. 10. Let no
man be ordained minister of two Churches, in two several cities, but let him
remain in that, unto which he was first called. And if for vain glory, he
shall afterward go to a greater congregation, let him immediately be recalled to
his first charge, and in that only exercise his ministry. But if one he
called to another charge, let him simply give over the forever, and have no
interest in the same, etc. For this thing, look to the decrees of Damasus, and
the Council of Trent, section 7. can. 8.

There are, notwithstanding the former testimonies, some cases, wherein it is
permitted to the minister, that he may be absent. I. Sickness, the Council of
Mentz, 25. canon. If a Bishop be not at home, or be sick, or upon some
exigent, can no^ present at his parish, let him procure one, who, upon Sabboths
and festival days, will preach unto his charge. Augustine testifies, epist.
138. that he was absent on the like occasion.

II. Allowance of the Church, to be absent for a time upon some necessary and
public commodity of the same. Coloss. 1.7. Epaphras is their minister, but
chap. 4.12. he being absent saluteth them. And Ambrose though he were Bishop of
Millain, yet went he twice Ambassador into France 1, to make agreement
betwixt Maximus, and Valentinian. Ambrose 5. book, and 27. epist. to
Valentinian the Emperor.

III. If by reason of persecution he be enforced to flee, and see no hope to
procure the safety of his people. This made Cyprian to be absent from
Carthage, as he testifies in his Epistles.

Thus much concerning sins against our neighbor. Now follows such sins, as
a man commits against his own person, as when a man does hurt, kill, and
endanger him self. Mat. 16.24. If any man will follow me, let him deny him
self, take up his cross and follow me. Matthew. 4.6. He said unto him, Jf thou
be the Son of God, cast thy self down headlong, for it is written, he shall
gi^e his Angels charge over thee, and with then hands they shall lift thee up,
least at any time thou should dash thy foot against a stone. ver. 7. Jesus
said unto him, it is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

The affirmative part.
Thou shall preserve the life of thy neighbor. Hitherto may we refer these
duties.

I. Such as appertain to the person of our neighbor, and concern, first his
welfare both of body and mind: as to rejoice with them that rejoice. Romans
12.15. Mark. 10.20. Then he answered and said unto him, All these things I
have observed from my youth. And Jesus be held him, and loved him. Secondly his
miseries, to be grieved with him for the^. Romans 12.15. Mourn with those that
mourn. Esaias. 24.16. And I said, My leanness, my leanness, woe is me: the
transgressors have grievously offended. Psalm. 119.136. Mine ^esgush out with
water, because men observe not thy Law. Again, we must help him as much as in
us lies. Job. 29.15. I was as an eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame.
2. Corinthians. 8.3. To their power, yea beyond their power, they were willing. And
that we do, we must do speedily. Prou. 3.28. Say not to thy neighbor, go,
and come again to morrow, and I will give thee, if thou now have it. Leuit.
19.17. Thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer him to sin.

Thirdly, concerning such injuries as he offers unto thee: 1. Thou shall not
be angry against him, upon a small occasion. Nomb. 12.3. Moses was a week man
above all that lived upon the earth. Prou. 9.11. The discretion of a man
deferreth his anger, and his glory is to pass by an offense. 2. Thou must be
slow to wrath, and never angry, but for a most just cause. Mark 3.5. Then he
looked round about on them angerly, mourning also for the hardness of their
hearts. Prou. 14.29. He that is slow to wrath, is of great wisdom: but he that
is of an hasty mind, exalts folly. 3. Thine anger must be but for a while.
Ephesians. 4.26. Be angry and sin not, let not the sun go down upon thy wrath.
4. Forgive freely an injury, and revenge it not. Ephesians. 4.32. Be ye courteous
one to another, and tender hearted, forgiving one an other, even as God for
Christ's sake forgave you.

Fourthly, his wantes and infirmities. 1. Avoid occasions whereby they may be
stirred and laid open. Genesis 13.8. Then said Abraham to Lot, Let there be no
strife, I pray thee, between thee and me, neither between thy heard men and
mine: for we are brethren. ver. 9. Is not the whole land before thee? depart, I
pray thee, from me: If thou will take the left hand, I will take the right, or
if thou go to the right hand, I will take the left. Genesis 27.44. And tarry with
him a while until thy brothers fierceness be assuaged. ver. 45. And till thy
brothers wrath turn away from thee, and he forget the things which thou have
done to him. 2. Depart sometimes from thine own right. Mat. 17.25, 26. What
think thou, Simon? of who^ do the Kings of the earth take tribute, or poll
money? of their children, or of strangers? Potes said unto him, Of strangers.
Then said Jesus unto him, Then are the children free. v. 27. Nevertheless,
least we should offend the^, go to the sea, and cast in an angle, and take the
first fish that comes up, and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall
find a piece of twenty p^ice: that take and give it unto the^ for me and thee.
3. To appease anger kindled: which is done. 1. by o^uercomming evil with
goodness. Romans 12.21. Be not overcome of evil: but overcome evil with goodness.
2. By following after peace. 1. Pet. 3.11. Decline from evil, and do good,
seek peace, and follow after it. 3. By courteous answers. Pro. 15.1. A soft
answer puts away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger. 1. Sam. 1.14.
Eli said unto her, How long will thou be drunken? put away thy drunkenness from
thee. v. 15. Then Hannah answered, and said, Nay my lord, but I am a woman
troubled in spirit, I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have powered
out my soul before the Lord. Philemon v. 15. It may be, that he therefore
departed for a season, that thou should receive him for ever. 4. By
ouerpassing some wantes and infirmities in men's words, and deeds. Prou. 19.11.
It is a man's honor to pass by infirmities. 5. By covering them with silence.
1. Pet. 4.8. Above all things have fervent love amongst you, for love covers
a multitude of sins. Prou. 17.9. He that covers transgression, seeks love:
but he that repeateth a matter, seperateth the Prince. 6. By taking every thing
(if it be possible) in the best part. 1. Cor. 13.5. Love thinks none evil.

This shows the lawfulnes of truces, covenants, and other agreeme^ts
concerning peace, being made to avoid injuries, maintain ancient bounds,
procure security in traffic, possessions, and iourneyes, set pensions,
commons for cattle, liberties of hunting, fishing or fouling, and getting
fuel, or other necessaries, for public commodities, if there be no unlawful
conditions annexed unto the same. And we may make this covenant not only with
Christians, but for the maintenance of peace, with infidels also. For that
which is godly to be performed, is no less godly to be promised. But it is a
note of true godliness, to be as much as may be, at peace with all men.
Therefore to promise peace by covenant is very godly. We may see the experience
of this in the lives of holy men. Genesis 21.22. At that same time Abimelech and
Pichol his chief captain, spoke unto Abraham, saying, God is with thee in all
that thou do. v. 23. Now therefore swear unto me here by God, that thou will not hurt me, nor my children, nor my childrens children,, etc. ver. 24.
Then Abraham said, I will swear. v. 27. Then Abraham took sheep and beeues,
and gave the^ unto Abimeclech: and they two made a covenant. Genesis 31.44. Now
therefore come and let us make a covenant, J and thou, which may be a witness
between me and thee. ver. 45. Then took Iaakob a stone, and set it up as a
pillar, etc. v. 51. Laban said to Iaakob, Behold this heap, and behold the
pillar, which I have set between me and thee. verse. 53. The God of Abraham,
and the gods of Nahor, and the God of their father be judge between us: But
Iaakob swear by the fear of his father Izhak.

II. Concerning his body, we are to regard it alive and dead. Being alive, we
ought if need be, 1. to minister unto it food and raiment. Matthew. 25.41, 42.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire which is prepared for the devil
and his angels. For I was an hungered and ye gave me no meat, I thirsted and ye
gave me no drink etc. verse. 45. In as much as ye did it not to one of the
least of these, ye did it not to me. 2. To lend our helping hand, when our
neighbors body is in any danger. 1. Ioh. 3.16. Hereby we perceived love, that
he laid down his life for us, therefore also ought we to lay down our lives
for the brethren. v. 17.

When a man is dead, we ought to commit the dead corpse to the grave, as may
appear by these arguments. 1. The instinct of Nature it self. 2. The examples
of the Patriarchs, and other holy personages. Abraham buried Sarah. Genesis 23.19.
Iaakob is buried by his sons. Genesis 50.12. Steven by religious and devout men.
Act. 8.2. 3. The Lords own approbatio^ of burial, in that he numbreth it
amongst his benefits. For the want thereof is a curse. Ier. 22.19. He (viz.
Iehoiakim) shall be buried as an ass is buried, even drawn and cast forth
without the gates of Jerusalem. Therefore rather then Moses should be unburied,
the Lord himself did bury him. Deuteronomy. 34.5, 6. Moses the servant of the Lord
died in the land of Moab, according to the word of the Lord. And be buried
him in a valley, in the land of Moab, over against Beth-^oor, but no man
knows of his sepulcher unto this day. 4. There is no dead carkase so loathsome
as a man is, the which both argues the necessity of burial, and how ougly we
are in the sight of God, by reason of sin. 5. The body must rise again out
of the earth, that it may be made a perpetual mansion house for the soul to
dwell in. 6. The bodies of the faithful are the temples of the holy Ghost, and
therefore must rise again to glory. 7. Burial is a testimony of the love,
and reverence we bear to the deceased.

A funeral ought to be solemnized after an honest, and civil manner: namely,
agreeable to the nature, and credit as well of those which remain alive, as
them which are dead. Concerning the living, they must see that 1. Their
mourning be moderate, and such, as may well express their affection and love
to the party departed. Ioh. 11.34. He said, Where have ye laid him? they
answered, Lord, come and see. ver. 35. Then Jesus wept. And (ver. 36.) the
Jews said, Behold how he loved him. 3. They must avoid superstition, and not
surmise that funeral ceremonies are available to the dead. Such are the tites
of the Church of Rome; as to be buried in a Church, especially under the altar,
and in a Friars cool. 3. They ought to take heed of superfluous pomp, and
solemnities. For of all ostentations of pride, that is most foolish, to be
boasting of a loathsome and a deformed corpse. Esa. 22.15, 16. Thus says the
Lord God of hosts, Go, get thee to that treasurer, to Shebnah the steward of
the house, and say, what have thou to do here? and whom have thou here? that
thou should here how thee out a sepulcher, as he that howeth out his
sepulcher in an hie place, or that graueth (...) habitation for himself in a
rock.

To this commandment belongs these duties. 1. Before the vintage or harvest,
we ought to permit any man, for the repressing of hunger, to gather grapes, or
pluck off the ears of come in the field. Deuteronomy. 23.^4, 25. When thou come
into thy neighbors vineyard, then thou may eat grapes at thy pleasure, as
much as thou will: but thou shall put none in thy vessel. When thou come
into thy neighbors corn, thou may pluck the ears with thine hand, but
thou shall not move a sickle to thy neighbors corn. Mat. 12.1. Jesus went on
the Sabbath day through the corn, and his disciples were an hungered, and began
to pluke the ears of the corn and to eat, etc. 2. In the vintage, and time
of harvest, we ought neither to leave the trees naked of grapes, nor rake up
after the reaping, ears of corn: but leave the after gatherings for the
poor. Leuit. 23.22. When you reap the harvest of your land, thou shall not
rid clean the corners of thy field, when thou reapest: neither shall thou make
any after gathering of thine Harvest, but shall leave the^ unto the poor, and
to the stranger: I am the Lord your God. Ruth. 2.8. Go to none other field to
gather, neither go from hence: but abide here by my maidens. v. 7. So she
gleaned in the field until evening.

III. Concerning the soul of our neighbor. 1. We must seek all means to win
him to the profession of Christian religion. 1. Cor. 10.33. I please all men in
all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they
might be saved. Heb. 10.24. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love
and to good works. 2. We must live amongst men without offense. 1. Cor. 10.32.
Give no offense neither to the Jews, nor to the Grecians, nor to the Church of
God. 1. Cor. 8.13. If meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh whole the
world stands, that I may not offend my brother. 3. The light of our good life
must be, as a lantern, to direct the ways of our neighbor. Act. 24.14. This I
confess unto thee, that after the way (which they call heresy) so worship I
the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and
the Prophets, 15. And have hope toward God, that the resurrection of the dead,
which themselves look for also, shall be both of just and unjust. 16. And herein
I endeavor my self to have always a clear conscience toward God, and toward
men. 4. If our neighbor offend, we are to admonish him. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. We
desire you, brethren, admonish them that are unruly: comfort the feeble minded:
bear with the weak: be patient toward all men. 5. If our neighbor run the
ways of Gods commandments (as David speaks) we ought to encourage him in
the same.

IIII. We may refer such things unto this commandment, as appertain to the
peculiar preservation of every several man's life. 1. Recreation, which is an
exercise joined with the fear of God, conversant in things indifferent, for
the preservation of bodily strength, and confirmation of the mind in
holiness. Eccl. 2.2. I said of laughter, thou art mad: and of joy, what is
this that thou do? Esa. 5.12. The harp, violl, timbrell, and pipe, and
wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither
consider the work of his hands. 1. Corin. 10.7. Neither be ye idolaters, as
were some of them, as it is written: The people sat down to eat and drink,
and rose up to play. Luke 6.25. We be to you that laugh: for ye shall wail and
weep. Deu. 12.7. There ye shall eat before the lord your god, and ye shall
rejoice in all that ye put your hand unto, both ye and your households, because
the lord thy god has blessed thee. To this end has the word of God permitted
shooting. 1. Sam. 1.18. He bad them teach the children of Judah to shoot, as it
is written in the book of Iasher. And musical consort. Nehe. 7.6, 7. Besides
their servants and maids, which were seven thousand, three hundredth, and
seven and thirty: they had two hundredth and five and forty singing men, and
singing women. And putting forth of riddles. Iud. 14.12. Samson said unto the^,
I will now put forth a riddle unto you: and if you can declare it me within 7.
dates of the feast, and find is out, I will give you thirty sheets, and thirty
change of garments. 13. And they answered him, Put forth thy riddle that we may
hear it. 14. And he said unto them, out of the eater came meat, and out of
the strong came sweetness: and they could not in three days expound the riddle.
And hunting of wild beasts. Cant. 2.15. Take us the foxes, the ^ile foxes which
destroy the vines, for our vines have small grapes. Lastly, the searching out
of contemplation of the works of God. 1. King. 4.33. And he spoke of trees
from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon, even unto the hyssop that springs out
of the wall be spoke also of beasts, and of fowls, and of creeping things, and
of fishes. II Physic, the use whereof is holy, if before the receipt of it, a
man crave remission of his sins, and repose his confidence only upon God, not
upon the means. Matthew 9.2. And lo, they brought unto him a man sick of the
palsy, bring on a bed. And Jesus seeing their faith, said unto the sick of
the palsy, Son be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. 6. Then he
said to the sick of the palsy, arise, take up thy bed and walk to thine
house: Ioh. 5.5. A certain man was there, which had bin diseased eight and
thirty years. 8. Jesus said unto him, take up thy bed and walk. 14. After
that Jesus found him in the Temple, and said unto him, Behold, thou art made
whole: sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee. 2. Chro. 16.12. And
Asa in the nine and thirteth year of his reign was diseased in his feet, and
his disease was extreme: yet he sought not the Lord in his disease, but to the
physicians. III. Avoiding of an iniurye, offered by some private person: this,
if it be against an unruly and unstayed adversary, and the defense be
faultlesse, is very lawful, and is so far from a private revenge, that it
is to be accounted a just defense. The defense is then faultles, when a man
does so assault his adversary, as that he neither purposes his own revenge,
or his enemies hurt, but only his alone safety from that unminent danger.

Chap. 26. Of the seventh Commandment.
THe seventh commandment shows how we may preserve the chastity of our
selves, and of our neighbor. The words are these.

Thou shall not commit adultery.

The resolution.
Adultery. To commit adulterye, signifies as much, as to do any thing, what
way soever, whereby the chastity of our selves, or our neighbors may be
stained. Mat. 5.28.

The negative part.
Thou shall no way either hurt or hinder thy neighbors chastity.

In this part are prohibited.

I. The lust of the heart, or the evil concupiscense of the flesh. Mar. 5.28. I
say unto you, whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, he has already
committed adultery with her in his heart. Coloss. 3.5. Mortify your members
which are on earth: fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil
concupiscense.

II. Burning in the flesh, which is an inward feruencie of lust, whereby the
godly motions of the heart are hindered, overwhelmed, and as it were with
contrary fire, burnt up. 1. Cor. 7.9. If they cannot abstain, let them marry,
for it is better to marry then to burn.

III. Strange pleasures about generation, prohibited in the word of God: the
which are many.

1. With beasts. Leuit. 18.23. Thou shall not be with any beast, to be defiled
therewith, neither shall any woman stand before a beast, to lie down thereto,
for it is an abomination.

2. With the devil, as witches do, by their own confession. For why should
not a spirit as well have society with a witch, as to eat meat.

3. With one of the same sex. Leuit. 18.22. Thou shall not lie with the male,
as one lies with a woman, for it is abomination. This is a sin, which they
commit, whom God has given over to a reprobate sense. Romans 1.26. For this
cause God gave them up to vile affections: for even their women did change
their natural use, into that which is against nature. v. 27. And the men left
the natural use of the women, and burned in their lusts one toward another,
and man with man wrought filthiness: It was the sin of Sodom, Genesis. 19. where
it was so common, that to this day it is termed Sodomie.

4. With such as be within the degrees of consangumitie or affinity,
prohibited in the word of god. Leuit. 18.6. None shall come near to any of the
kindred of his flesh, to uncover her shame: I am the Lord.

5. With unmarried persons. This sin is termed fornication. Deuteronomy. 22.28. If
any man find amaid that is not betrothed, and take her and lie with her, and
they be found, v. 29. Then the man that laid with her, shall give unto the
maids father fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife, because he has
humbled her, he can not put her away all his life. 1. Cor. 10.8. Neither let us
commit fornication, as some of them committed fornication, and fell in one day
one and twenty thousand.

6. With those, whereof one is married, or at the least betrothed. This sin
is called adultery, and God has inflicted by his word, the same punishment
upon them, which commit this sin, after they be betrothed, as he does upon
such as are already married. Deuteronomy. 22.22. If a man be found lying with a woman
married to a man, then they shall dye even both twain: to wit, the man that
lay with the wife, and the wife: so thou shall put away evil from Jsrael. v.
23. Jf am aid be betrothed to an husband, and a man find her in the town and
lie with her. ver. 24. Then shall he bring the^ both unto the gate of the same
city, and shall stone the^ to death with stones. This is a marvelous great
sin, as may appear, in that it is the punishment of idolatry. Romans 1.23.
They turned the glory of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of the image
of a corruptible man, etc. Ver. 24. Wherefore God gave them up unto their
hearts lusts, unto uncleanness. Yea, this sin is more heinous then theft.
Pro. 6.30. Men do not despise a thief, when he steals to satisfy his soul
when he is hungry: ver. 32. But he that commits adultery with a woman, is
destitute of understanding: he that does it, destroys his own soul. Again,
the adulterer breaks the covenant of marriage, which is Gods covenant.
Proverbs 2.17. Which forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the
covenant of her God. Adulterers dishonest their own bodies. 1. Corinthians. 6.18.
Flee fornication, every sin that a man does, is without the body, but he
that commits fornication, sins against his own body. And bereave their
neighbors of a great and unrecoverable benefit: namely, of chastity. As for
the children, which are begotten in this sort, they are shut out from that
pre-eminence, which they otherwise might obtain in the congregation. Deuteronomy.
^3.2. A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord: even to his
tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregagation of the Lord. He
makes his family a stews, as appears in David, whose adultery was
punished by Absaloms lying with his Fathers concubines. 2. Samuel 16.21.
Achitophel said to Absalom, G^ to thy Fathers concubines, which he has left
to keep, the house. Job. 31.9. If mine heart have been deceived by a woman, or
if I have laid wait at the door of my neighbor: let my wife grind unto
another man: and let other men bow down upon her. Man's posterity feels the
smart of this sin. Job. 31.12. This (adulterye) is a fire that shall devour
to destruction, and which shall root out all mine increase. To conclude,
though this sin be committed never so closely, yet God will reveal it. Nomb.
5. from the 12. verse to the 23. And it usually has one of these two, as
companions: namely, dulnes of heart, or a marvelous horror of conscience.
Hose. Chap 4. ver. 11. Whordome, and wine, take away their heart.

As for the Patriarks Polygamie, or marrying of many wives, albeit it cannot
be defended, yet it may be excused, either because it served to the enlarging
of the number of mankind, when there were but few: or at the least, to the
propagation of the Church of God.

7. With man and wife. They abuse their liberty, if they know each other so
long as the woman is in her flowers. Ezekiel. 22.10. In thee have they
discocouered their Fathers shame, in thee have they vexed her that was polluted
in her flowers. Leuit. 18.19. Thou shall not go unto a woman to uncover her
shame, as long as she is put aparte for her disease. Ezekiel. 8.6. If a man has
not lain with a menstrous woman. Again, they finne if they live together
intemperately. Ambros. lib. de Philos. which Augustine cites, lib. 2. contra
Julian, says, that he commits adulterye with his wife, who in the use of
wedlock has neither regard of seemelynes nor honestye. Hierome in his 1.
book contra Iulianum, says. A wise man ought to love his wife in judgment,
not in affection. He will not give the bridle unto headstrong pleasure, nor
headily company with his wife. Nothing (says he) is more shameless, the^ to
make a strumpet of his wife. 8. Nocturnall pollutions, which arise of
immoderate diet, or unchaste cogitations, going before in the day. Deuteronomy 23.10.
Onans sin Genesis 38.8. was not much unlike these.

IIII. Effeminate wanto^nes, whereby occasions are sought to stir up lust. Gal.
5.19. The works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness. Of this kind are 1. Eyes full of adultery. 2. Peter 2.14.
Having eyes full of adulterye, and that cannot cease to sin. 2. Idleness. 2.
Samuel 11.2. When it was evening tide, David arose out of his bed, and walked
upon the roof of the kings palace, and from the roof he saw a woman washing
her self: and the woman was very beautiful to look upon. Verse 3. And David
sent and enquired what woman it was, and one said, Is not this Bethsheba the
daughter of Eliam, wife to Vriah the Hittite? Then David sent messengers, and
took her away: and she came unto him, and he lay with her. 3. Ryotous and
lascivious attire. 1. Timothy 2.9. The women shall array themselves in comelye
apparel, with shamefastness and modestye, not with broydered hair, or gold,
or pearls, or costlye apparel, but (as becomes women that profess the
fear of God) with good works. Esaias. 3.16. Because the daughters of Zion a^
^hantye, and walk with stretched out necks, and with wandering eyes, walking
and minsing as they go, and making a tinckling with their feet. v. 17.
Therefore shall the Lord make the heads of the daughters of Zion balde, and the
Lord shall discover the secret parts. v. 18. in that day shall the Lord take away
the ornament of the slippers, and the caules, and the round tyres. ver, 19. The
sweet balls, and the bracelets, and the bonnets. v. 20. The tyres of the head,
and the sloppes and the headbands, and the tablets, and the earings, 21. the
rings and the mufflers. v. 22. The costly apparel and the vailes, and the
wimples, and the crisping pins, 23. and the glasses, and the fine linnin, and
the hoodes and the lawnes. And no marvel if the Prophet be so sharp against
excessive and wanton apparel: for this is 1. a lavish and prodigal wasting of
the benefits of God, which might well be employed upon better uses. 2. It is a
testimonye, and as it were the cognizance or ensign of pride, whereby a man
would have himself in greater reputation, then another. 3. It is a note of
great idleness and slothfulnes. For commonly such as bestow much time in
tricking and trimming themselves up, do quite neglect other business, and of
all things cannot away with pains. 4. It argues leuitie, in devising every
day some new fashion, or imitating that, which others devise. 5. It makes a
confusion of such degrees and callings, as God has ordained, when as men of
inferior degree and calling, cannot be, by their attire, discearned from men
of higher estate. 4. Fulness of Bread and meat, which provoke lust. Exechi.
16.45. This was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness of broad, and
idleness was in her, and in her daughters. Luke 16.19. There was a certain rich
man which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared well and delicately
every day. Romans 13.13. Walk honest lie, as in the day, not in gluttony and
drunkenness, neither in chambring and wantonness. 5. Corrupt, dishonest, and
unseemly talk. 1. Corinthians. 15.33. Err not, evil talk corrupts good
manners. Such are vain love songs, ballads, enterludes, and amorous books.
This is the thing we are carefullye to shun, in the reading of Poets, yet so,
as mariners do in navigations, who forsake not the sea, but decline, and fly
from the rocks. 6. Lascivious representations of love matters, in plays and
comedies. Ephesians. 5.3, 4. Fornication, and all uncleanness, let it not once be
named among you, as it becomes Saints, neither filthiness, nor foolish
talking, neither jesting, which are things not comely. 7. Indecent and
unseemly pictures. 1. These. 5.22. Abstain from al appearance of evil. 8.
Lascivious dancing of man and woman together. Mar. 6.22. The daughter of the
same Herodias came in and daunced, and pleased Herod, etc. 9. Company with
effeminate persons. Prouer. 7.25. Let not thine heart decline to her ways:
wander thou not in her paths.

V. To appoint some light or slight punishment, for adultery, such as that
Romish Synagogue does. For this is nothing else, but to open a gap for other
lewd persons, to run headlong into the like impietye.

The Affirmative part.
Thou shall preserve the chastity of thy neighbor; Chastity is the purity
of soul and body, as much as belongs to generation. The mind is chaste;
when it is free, or at the least, freed from fleshlye concupiscence. The body
is chaste, when it puts not in execution, the concupiscences of the flesh.
1. Thessaloni. 4.3. This is the will of God, even your sanctification, and that
ye should abstein from fornication. verse. 4. That every one of you should know,
how to poss^sse his vessel in holiness and honor. ver. 5. And not in the lust
of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles, which know not God. 1. Corinthians. 7.34.
The unmarried woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy
both in body and spirit.

There are two especial virtues, which preserve chastity. Modestye, and
Sobriety: Modesty, is a virtue which keeps in each work an holy decorum,
or comelynes: and it is seen, 1. In the countenance and eyes, namelye, when
they neither express, nor excite the concupiscence of the heart. Job. 31.1. I
made a covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think on a maid? Gene. 24.64.
Rebekah lift up her eyes, and when she saw Izhak, she lighted down from the
camel. ver. 65. So she took a veil, and covered her face. Proverb. 7.13. She
caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face, said unto him, etc. In
words: when a man's talk is decent, in speaking of such things, which
through our sins, we cannot but be ashamed of. Genesis 4.1. Then Adam knew
Hevah his wife: who, etc. Psalm. 51.1. A Psal^ of David, when the Prophet Nathan
came unto him, after he bad g^ in to Bethsheba. Esaias. 7.28. In that day shall
the Lord shave with a refer that is bired, even by them beyond the river, by
the king of As^, the head and the hear of the feet, and it shall consume the
heard. Judge. 3.24. When he was gone out, his servants came: who seeing that the
doors of the parlar were shut, they said, Surely he covers his feet, (that
is, he does his easement) in his summer chamber. Again, a man's talk must be
little and submisse. Matthew. 12.19. Behold my servant whom I have chosen, he
shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the
streets. Pro. 10.19. In many words there cannot want iniquity: but he that
refraineth his lips, is wise. And it is a note of a strumpet to be a giglot,
and loud tongued. Proverbs 7.11. She is babbling and loud. In apparel we must
observe an holy comelynes. Titus. 2.3. The elder woman must be of such
behavior as becomes holiness. Holy comelynes, is that which expresses to
the eye the synceritye, that is, godlynes, temperance, and grauitye either of
man or woman. This decencye will more plainelye appear, if we consider the
ends of apparel, which are in number five. 1. Necessity, to the end that
our bodies must be defenced against the extreamitie of parching heat, and
pinching cold. 2. Honesty, that that deformitye of our naked bodies might be
covered, which immediately followed the transgression of our first parents. 3.
Commodity, whereby men, as their calling, work, and trade of life is
different, so do they apparel themselves: and hence it is, that some apparel
is more decent for certain estates of men, then other. 4. Frugalitie, when a
man's attire is proportionable to his ability and calling. 5. Distinction of
persons, as of s^xe, ages, offices, times and actions. For a man has his set
attire, a woman hers, a young man apparelled on this fashion, and an old man on
that. And therefore it is unseemly for a man to put on a woman's apparel, or a
woman the man's. Deutronomie. 22.5. The woman shall not wear that which
pertains to the man, neither shall a man put on woman's raiment: for all that
do^ so, are an abomination to the Lord thy God.

To set down precisely out of Gods word, what apparel is decent, is very
hard: wherefore in this case the judgment and practice of modest, grave, and
sincere men, in every particular estate, is most to be followed, and men must
rather keep much within the bounds of measure, then to step one foot
without the precinctes thereof. 4. Concerning the purging of excrementes of
nature, care must be had, that they be cast forth into some separate and close
place, and there also covered. Deutr. 23.14. Thou shall have a place without
the host, whether thou shall resort. ver. 13. And thou shall have a paddle
among thy weapons, and when thou would sit down without, thou shall dig
therewith, and returning, thou shall cover thine excrements. 14. For the Lord
thy God walks in the mids of the camp to deliver thee: therefore thine host
shall be holy, that he see no filthye things in thee, and turn away from
thee. 1. Samu, 24.5. And he came to the shepcoats by the way, where there was a
cave, and Saul went in to cover his feet.

Sobriety is a virtue, which concerns the usage of our diet in holiness. For
the better observation thereof, these rules may serve. 1. The cheifest at the
banquet, let him consecrate the meats to God by saying grace. 1. Samuel 9.13.
The people will not eat, till he (that is, Samuel) came, because he will
bless the sacrifice: and then eat they, that be bidden to the feast. Mark.
6.39. He commanded them to make them all sit down by companies, upon the green
grass, etc. Verse 14. And he took the five Loaves and two Fishes, and looked
up to heaven, and gave thanks. Act. 27.35. When he had thus said, he (that is,
Paul) gave God thanks in the presence of them all, and when he had broken
bread he began to eat. 2. It is lawful to furnish a Table with store of
dishes, not only for necessity, but also for the good intertainement of a
friend, and for delight. Luke. 5.29. Leuy made him (that is, Jesus) a great
feast in his own house, where there was a great company of Publicanes, and of
other that sat at table with him. Psalm. 104.15. He gives wine that makes
glad the heart of man, and oil to make the face shine, and bread that
strengthens man's heart. John. 12.2. There they made him a supper, and Martha
served, but Lazarus was one of them that sat at table with him. Verse. 3. Then
took Marie a pound of ointment of Spykenard, very costly, and anointed Jesus
feet. III. Choose the lower room at a banquet, and rather then be
troublesome, sit as the master of the feast assigns thee. Luke. 14.7. He
spoke a parable to the guestes, when he marked how they chose out the chief
rooms, and said. ver. 8. When thou shall be bidden of any man to a wedding,
set not thy self down in the cheifest place, least a more honorable man then
thou be bidden of him. Verse. 9. And he that bad both him and thee, come and
say, Give this man room. Verse. 10. But go and sit down in the lowest room,
that when he that bad thee comes, he may say unto thee, Friend sit up
higher. Proverb. 25.5. Stand not in the place of great men, etc. III. Man must
eat at due times, not at unseasonable hours. Ecclesiastes 10.16. Woe to thee,
O Land, when thy Princes eat in the morning. ver. 17. Blessed art thou O Land,
when thy princes eat in time. V. Man must eat and drink moderately, so that
the body may receive strength thereby, and the soul be more fresh and
liuelye, to perform the actions of Godlynes. Luke. 21.34. Take heed to your
selves, least at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and
drunkenness. Prou. 23.24. To whom is woe, etc. Even to them that tarry long at
wine, to them that go and seek mixed wine. ver. 3. Look not thou upon the
wine when it is red, and when it shows his color in the Cup, and goes down
pleasantly, etc. Pro. 25.16. If thou have found honye, eat that is sufficient
for thee, least thou be over full and vomit. Pro. 31.4. It is not for Kings to
drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink. ver. 5. Least he drink and forget
the decree, and change the judgment of all the children of affliction. VI. We
must then especially regard these things, when we eat at great men's tables.
Pro. 23.1. When thou sit to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what is
before thee. Verse 2. Put the Knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to
thine appetite. Verse 3. Be not desirous of his daintye meat: for it is a
deceiuable meat. VII. Godly mirth at meat is tolerable. Acts. 2.46. They did
eat their meat together with gladness and singleness of heart. VIII. Table
talk (according as occasion of talk is offered) must be such as may edify.
Such was Christ's talk at the Pharisees table. Luke. 14. from the 1. verse to
the 16. verse. IX. See that after the banquet ended, the broken meat be not
lost, but reserved. John. 6.12. When they were satisfied, he said unto his
disciples, gather up the broken meat which remaineeh, that nothing be lost. X.
At a feast leave some what. Ruth. 2.14. She did eat and was suffised, and left
thereof.

Chastity is double: one of single life, another in wedlock. They that are
single must I. with great care keep their affections, and bodies in holiness.
Psalm. 119.9. How shall a young man purge his ways! by directing the same after
thy word., 1. John. 2.13. I write unto you, fathers, because ye have known
him, that is from the beginning. J write unto you young men, because ye have
overcome that wicked one. ver. 14. I write unto babes, because ye have known
the Father. Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creator, in the days of thy youth,
whiles the evil days come not, nor the years approach, wherein thou shall
say, I have no pleasure in them. II. They must fast often. 1. Cor. 9.27. J
beat down my body, and bring it into subjection, least by any means, after I
have preached to others, I my self should be reproved. III. They must take
heed they burn not in lust: for, 1. Cor. 7.9. It is better to marry then to
burn.

Chastity in wedlock, is when the holy and pure use of wedlock is observed.
Heb. 13.4. Marriage is honorable among all and the bed undefiled: but
wh^rm^ngers and adulterers God will judge. To preserve purity in wedlock, the
cautions are profitable.

I. Contractes must be in the Lord, and with the faithful only. Mala 2.11.
Judah has transgressed, and an abhommation is committed in Israel, and in
Jerusalem: for Judah has defiled the holiness of the Lord, which he loved, and
has married the daughter of a strange God. 1. Cor. 7.39. If her husband be
dead s^ is as liberty to marry with whom she will, only in the Lord, 2. Both
parties must separate themselves in the time of a woman's disease and at
appointed fastes, E^ech. 18.6. 1. Cor. 7.5. Defraude not one another, except it
be with consent for a time, that you may give your sel^ to fasting and prayer,
and again come together, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinencie. III.
Wedlock must be used rather to suppress, then to satisfy that corrupt
concupiscence of the flesh, and especially to enlarge the church of God, Romans
13.14. Put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take not care of the flesh, to
satisfy the lusts thereof. IIII. It must be used with prayer and
thanksgiving, 1. Tim. 4.3, 4.

Chap. 27. Of the eight Commandment.
THis Commandment concerns the preservation of our neighbors goods. The
words are these. Thou shall not steal.

The resolution.
Steal. To steal, is properlye to con^ye any thing closely from another. Genesis
31.20. Ja^kob stole away the h^rt of L^ Ar^. In this place it signifies
generallye to wish, (...) which is another man's, to get it by mind, and any
way to impair his wealth.

The negative part.
Thou shall neither be ^ing to preserve, nor (...) to hinder or heart thy
neighbors goods. In this place these sins are forbidden.

I. Inordinate living, whether it be in no set calling, or idly, wherein by
neglecting their duties, such persons mispend their time, goods, and revenues.
2. These. ^.11. We hear that there are some among you, which walk
inordinar^lye, and work not as all, but are busy bodies Gene. 3.19. In the
sweat of thy br^s shall thou (...) thy bread, til thou return to the earth.
1. Tim. 5.8. If there be any the provides not for his own, especially for the^
of his household, he denies the ^th, and is worse t^ an In^.

II. Unjust dealing, the which is either in heart, or deed. Unjust dealing in
heart is named covetousness. Mat. 15.19. Out of the heart come evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, fornications, theftes, etc. Covetousness is idolatry.
Ephe. 3.5. We know that no covetous person, which is an idolatour, shall enter
into the kingdom of Christ and of God. Yea, it is the very root of all evil.
1. Timothy. 6.9. The love of money is the root of all evil, which whilst
some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through
with man ^w^.

Vn^st dealing indeed, is in b^g^ining, or out of bargayning. Unjust dealing
in bargaining, (...) many branches. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Let no (...) oppress^, or
deceive his neighbor ^n a bargain, for God is the ^ger of all such things. I.
To fell, or bargain for that which is not saleable. Of this kind, 1. Is the
gift of the holy Ghost, which cannot be bought with money. Act. 8.18. When
Simon saw, that through laying on of the Apostles hands, the holy Ghost was
given, he offered them money, 19. Saying, give me also thee power, that on whom
soever I lay the hands, he may re^ the holy Ghost. 20. Then Peter said unto
him, thy money perish with thee, because thou think that the gift of God way
be obtained w^ money. 2. Church goods are not saleable. Therefore it is not to
be allowed, for men to sell or alienate them from the Church. Prou. 20.25. It
is destruction for a man to de^ that which is sanctified, and after the vows
to enquire. Malach. 3.8. Church goods are the possession of the Lord. 3.
Whatsoever is unprofitable either to the Church, or common weal, must not be
sold.

II. All colored forgery and deceit in bargaining Luke ^9.8. Zache^ stood ^h,
and said ^ot^ the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the
poor: and if I have taken ought from many man by forged ca^lation, J restore
it four ^de. This deceit is used, I. when men sell that, which is
counterfeit, for good: as copper for gold, and mingle any ways bad with good,
making show only of the good. Amos. 8.4, 5, 6. Hear this, ye that swallowe by
the poor, saying, when will the new month be gone, etc. that we may fell the
refuse of the wheat. II. When m^n falsify measures and weightes. Deuteronomy, 25.13.
Thou shall not have in thy bag two manner of weights, a great and a small. 14.
But thou shall have a right (...) a just weight: a perfect, and a just measure
shall thou have. Leuit. 13.35. Ye shall not do unjustly in judgment, in line,
in weight, or in measure. 36. Ye shall have just balances, true weightes, a
true Epha, and a true Him. Amos 8.4. Hear this, ye that say, when will the
Sabbath be gone, that we may sell corn, and make the Epha small, and the
shekell great, and falsify the weightes by deceit.

III. When the buyer concealeth the goodness of the thing, or the seller the
faults of it, and blind-foldeth the truth with counterfeit speeches. Mat.
7.12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do to the^ for
this is the Law and the Prophets. Pro. 20.14. It is naught, it is naught, says
the buyer: but when he is gone apart, he boasts.

IIII. When in buying and selling the people are oppressed. And this is. 1.
When the just price of things is raised. For in bargaining, it is not lawful
to purse one penny, without the giving of a peniworth. 2. Sale upon a set day,
which is, when day is given, that the price may be the dearer. For what is
this, I pray you, but to sell time, and to take more of our neighbor, then
right. 3. To ingrosse, which is to buy up all of one commodity into thine own
hands, that when no other has any of the same, thou may sell it at thine
own price. 4. To become bankerupt, that thou may be enriched by the
damages, and goods of other men. 5. Not to restore that, which was lent to one,
pledged to him, or found by him. Ezech. 18.7. Neither has oppressed any, but
has restored the pledge to his debtours he that has spoiled none by violence,
etc. 6. To delay any kind of restitution, from one day to an other. Prou.
3.28. Say not to thy neighbor, Depart, and come again, to morrow I will pay
you, when thou may do it then. Psalm. 37.21. The wicked man borrows, and
pays not again, but the righteous is merciful, and lends. 7. To practice
usury. Psalm. 15.5. Which has not put his money to usury. Exodus 22.25. If thou
lendest money to my people, to the poor man which dwells with thee, be it
not to him as an usurer, lay not usury upon him.

Usury is a gain exacted by covenant, above the principal only in lue, and
recompense of the lending of it. Usury being considered as it is thus
described, is quite contrary to Gods word, and may very fitly be termed,
biting lucre. Exodus 22.14. If any man has borrowed any thing of an other,
whatsoever is hurt or dies, if the owner of the thing be no^ present, let him
be recompensed. 15. If he be present, recompense him not: if it be hired for a
price, it is sold for the same price. Exodus 18.8. He has not given to usury,
neither has taken increase. 2. Cor. 8.13. Neither is it, that other men should
be eased, and you grieved, 14. But upon like condition at this time, your
abundance supplieth their lack, that also their abundance may be for your
lack: that there may be equality.

Last of all, when a man deteineth the laborers wages. Iam. 5.4. Behold, the
hire of the laborers (which have reaped your fields, which is of you keep
back by fraud) cries, and the cries of them which have reaped, are entered
into the ears of the Lord of hosts.

Unjust dealing out of bargaining, is likewise manifold. I. To pronounce false
sentence or judgment for a reward, either proffered, or promised. Isay. 1.2.3.
Thy princes are religious, and companions of thieves: every one loves gifts,
and follows after rewards: they judge not the fatherless, neither does the
meadows cause come before them. This is the Lawyers and Judges sin. II. To
feed, or cloth stout and lusty rogues or beggars. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. When we
were with you, we en^yned you this, that if an^ would not labor, the same
should not eat.

What then, think you, must those licensed rogues, and beggars by authority,
I mean, all idle Monks, and Abby-lubbers have? Socrates in the Tripartite
history, says plainly, that that Monk which labors not with his hands,
is no better then a these. III. Gaming for money and gain. For thoumaiest not
enrich thy self by impouerishing thy brother. This gaming is worse far then
usury, and in a short while will more enrich a man. IIII. To get money by
unlawful arts: such are Magic, Judicial Astrology, Stage plays, and such
like. Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that has stolen, steal no more, but rather let
him labor, working with his own hands the thing that is good, that he may
give unto him that has need. Deuteronomy. 18.11. Ephesians. 5.3. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Abstain
from all appearance of evil. V. To f^ch and pilfer the least pin, or point
from an other. Mar. 10.19. Thou shall not stoale, thou shall not hurt any m^n.
Romans 3.8. And (as we are blamed, and as some affirm that we say,) why do we
not evil, that good may come thereof? whose damnation is just. VI. To remove
ancient bounds. Prou. 22.28. Thou shall not remove the ancient bounds, which
thy father have made. Hose 5.8. The Princes of Judah are like them which
remove the bounds. VII. To steal other men's servants, or children, to commit
sacrilege, or robbery. 1. Tim. 1.10. To wheremongers, buggerers, and
menstealers. Josh. 7.19. Achans theft. 1. Cor. 6. Neither thieves nor covetous
persons, nor robbers, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God. For robberies,
these sorts of men especially are famous. Thieves by the Queens high ways,
Pirates upon the seas, Soldiers not content with their pay, and whosoever they
be, that by maine force take that, which is none of their own. Luke 3.14. The
soldiers asked him, saying, what shall we do? he said, Do violence to no
man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages. VIII. To
conspire with a thief, whether by giving advice how he may compass his
enterprise, or by concealing his fact, that he be not punished. Prou. 29.24. He
that is partaker with a thief, hates himself, and he that hears cursing
and discovers it not.

The punishment of theft, may at the discretion of the Judge be sometimes
aggrauated, as he sees the quality of the offense to be. Therefore thieves
sometimes are punished with death.

Now if any man object, that the Judicial Law of God, does only require the
restitution thereof, foure-folde for such an offense: I answer, that the
civil magistrate, when he sees some one, or many offenses to increase, he
may by his authority increase the civil punishment due to that sin. Now it
is manifest, that the sin of theft is far more grievous in our common
weal, then it was among the Jews. For, first the inhabitants of this common
weal, are generally by many degrees poorer then the Jews were: Therefore to
steal a thing, but of some small value, from one in this country, does more
endammage him, then a thing of great value would have done the Jews.

Again, the people of this country are of a more stirring, and fierce
disposition: the which makes thieves to be more outrageous with their
robberies, joining violence, and the disturbance of the public tranquillity
of the country: whereof more regard ought to be had, then of one private man's
life.

The affirmative part.
Thou shall preserve and increase thy neighbors goods. To this are required
these that follow.

I. A certain calling: wherein every man, according to that gift which God
has given him, must bestow himself honestly, to his own, and neighbors
good. 1. Corinthians. 7.24. Let every man, wherein he was called, therein abide
with God. Ephesians. 4.28. 1. Pet. 4.10. According as every man has received a gift,
so let him administer to another, that ye may be good dispensers of the
manifold graces of God. Gal. 5.13. In love serve one an other.

II. The true use of riches, and all the goods a man has: to which belong two
virtues. Contentation and thriftinesse.

Contentation is a virtue, whereby a man is well pleased with that estate,
wherein he is placed. 1. Tim. 6.6. Godliness is great gain, with a contented
mind: 7. for we brought nothing into the world, neither shall we carry any
thing out of the world. But, having food and raiment, let us be content. Phil.
4.11. I have learned, in whatsoever estate J am, therewith to be content. ver.
12. I can be abased, and I can abound, every where in all things I am
instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, and to abound, and to have
want. Mat. 6.11. Give us this day our daily bread. Heb. 13.5. Let your
conversation be without covetousness, and be content with the things which ye
have: for he says, I will not forsake thee, nor leave thee.

Thriftines or frugalitie, is a virtue, whereby a man carefully keeps his
goods which he has gotten, and imployeth them to such uses, as are both
necessary and profitable. Proverbs 5.15. Drink the water of thy Cesterne,
and of the Rivers out of the midst of thine own well. verse. 16. Let thy
fountains flow forth, and the Rivers of waters in the streets. verse 17.
Let them be thine own, yea, thine only, and not the strangers with thee.
Prouer. 21.5. The thoughts of the diligent do surely bring abundance, verse
17. He that loves past^, shall be a poor man, and be the loves wine and oil
shall not be rich. Prou. 12.27. The deceitful man rests not that which he
has taken in hunting: but the riches of the diligent are precious. Ioh. 6.12.

III. To speak the truth from the heart, and to use an harmless simplicity
in all affairs. Psalm. 15.2. He that walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, he that speaks the truth in his heart. Genesis 23.15. Ephron
said to Abraham, The land is worth four hundredth shekles of silver, what is
that between me and thee? bury therefore thy dead. ver. 16. So Abraham
hearkened to Ephron, and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which he had
named in the audience of the Hottites, even four hundredth shekels of current
money among merchants, etc.

IV. Just dealing, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Of this there are many kinds.

I. In buying and selling, in setting and hyring of Farms, tenements, lands:
in merchandise, and all manner of commodities, men must rack nothing, but
keep a just price. A just price is then observed, when as the things prized,
and the price given for them, are made equal, as near as may be. For the
observation of this equality, these four rules are to be considered: for by
the^ all bargains must be ordered. I. There must be a proportion and equality
in all contracts: the which will then be, when as the seller does not value the
thing, only according to his own pains, and costs bestowed upon it, but also
sees what profit it may be to the buyer, and in what need he stands of it.
Leuit. 25.14. When thou fellest ought to thy neighbor* or buyest ought at his
hands, ye shall not oppress an^ an other: verse 15. But according to the
number of years after the Iubile, thou shall buy of thy neighbor. Also
according to the number of years of thy revenues he shall sell unto thee. v.
16. According to the number of years thou shall increase the price thereof:
and according to the fewness of years, thou shall abate the price of it: for
the number of fruits does he sell unto thee. II. They must be squared according
to the law of nature, the sum whereof Christ propounds in these words:
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do the same unto them. III.
The bond of nature must be kept, which binds him that receives a benefit,
and makes a lawful gain of another man's goods, that he being once enriched,
shall make a proportionable and natural recompense, even above the principal.
IIII. Men must communicate and make use of their goods, with that caveat which
Paul gives. 2. Corinthians. 8.13. Not so to bestow them, as that others may be
eased, and they grieved: or contrariwise.

II. Men must make sale of such things, as are in their kind substantial, and
profitable.

III. They must use just weights and measures. Deutr. 25.13. Thou shall not
have in thy bag two manner of weights, a great, and a small: but thou shall
have a right and just weight, a perfect and just measure shall thou have.
Ezech. 45.10. Ye shall have just balances, a true Ep^ah, and a true Bath.
Micah. 6.11. Shall I justify the wicked balances, and the bag of deceitful
weightes?

IV. He that hyreth any thing, must not only pay the appointed hire, but make
that which he hired, good, if ought but good come unto it, by his default.
Exodus 22.14, 15. If a man borrow any thing of his neighbor, and it be hurt,
he shall surely make it good, etc.

V. The pledge or pawn ought to be redeemed, and if it be of important
necessity, as that which preserves the life of our neighbor, it must be
restored to him incontinently. Exodus 22.26. If thou take thy neighbors raiment
to pledge, thou shall restore it again before the sun go down, for that is
his covering only. Deuteronomy. 24.6. No man shall take the nether or upper millstone
to pledge: for this gage is his living. Neither may a man in a pledge be his
own caruer, but he must take such an one, as is offered. Deuteronomie 24.10.
When thou shall ask again of thy neighbor any thing lent, thou shall not
go into his house to fet his pledge. verse 11. But thou shall stand without,
and the man that borrowed it of thee, shall bring the pledge out of the doors
unto thee. verse 12. Furthermore, if it be a poor body, thou shall not sleep
with his pledge, verse 13. But shall restore him the pledge, etc.

VI. To become surety only for men that are honest, and very well known:
and that wa^ly with much deliberation. Proverbs 11.15. He shall be sore vexed,
that is surety for a stranger. And he that h^th s^shippe is sure. Proverbs
17.18. A man destitute of understanding touches the hand, and becomes
surety for his neighbor. Proverbs 22.26. But if it be so that a man have
entangled himself by suretishippe, the best way is to crave his creditours
favor, by his own humble suit, and the instant request of his friends.
Proverbs 6.1. My son, if thou be surety for thy neighbor, and have str^ken
hands with the stranger, verse 2. Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth,
thou art even snared with the words of thine own mouth. 3. Do this now, my
son, and deliver thy self, seeing thou art come into the hand of thy
neighbor, go, and humble thy self, and solicit thy friends. ver. 4. Give
no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eye liddes. ver. 5. Deliver thy
self, as a Do from the hand of the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of
the fouler.

VII. All just covenants and promises, though they be to our hinderance, must
be performed. Psalm. 15.4. Which swears to his hurt, and charge not.
Proverbs 25.14. A man that boasts and keeps not promise, is like clouds
and wind without rain. Judges 1.24. The spies saw a man come out of the
city, and they said unto him, Show us, we pray thee, the way into the city,
and we will show thee mercy. verse 25. And when he had showed them the way
into the City, they smote the City with the edge of the sword, but they let
the man and all his household depart.

VIII. To lend that we do, freely. Luke 6.35. Lend, looking for nothing
again, and your reward shall be great. And when we borrow, we must be careful to
make restitution, even, if need be, with the sale of our own goods. 2. King.
4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Here the wife of the sons of the Prophets sells her
oil, which God sent by the hand of Elisha, to pay her creditour.

IX. To restore that, which is committed to our custody, without delay. Matthew.
21.41. He will destroy those evil husbandmen, and let out his vineyeards to
others, which shall deliver him the fruits in their seasons. Prou. 3.28. But
if such a thing be lost, not by our default, we are not urged to repay it.
Exodus 22.7. If a man deliver his neighbor money, or stuff to keep, and it be
stolen out of his house, if the thief be found, he shall pay the double. ver.
8. If the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be brought
before the Judges, to swear whether he have put his hand to his neighbors
goods or no.

X. That which a man finds, is to be kept in his own hand, if the true
owner can not be heard of: but if he be, he must restore it. Deutron. 22.1.
Thou shall not see thy brothers ox, nor his sheep go astray, and withdraw
thy self from them, but shall bring them again unto thy brother. 2. Jf he be
not near unto thee, or thou know him not, thou shall bring it into thine
house, and it shall remain with thee, until thy brother seek after it, then
shall thou deliver it to him again. 3. So shall thou do with all lost things.

XI. To get our own, we may, if we cannot do otherwise, sue our neighbor in
law. But we must follow our suites in an holy manner, and with these
circumstances. I. In all suits, we must not do any thing, that may prejudice
the profession of Christian religion. Therefore all suitors in law, offend,
when they trust more in man, then in God, and make their religion a jest to
worldlings, partly by striving about things of small importance: and partly by
not admitting any conditions of reconciliation. 1. Corinthians 6.1. Dare any
of you, having business against another, he judged under the unjust, and not
under the Saints? II. Law must be the last remedy, as a desperate medicine is
the last remedy the Physician uses. We must assay all means possible, before
we use this, especially to a brother. 1. Corinthians 6.7. There is utterly a
fault among you, because ye go to law one with an other: why rather suffer ye
not wrongs? why rather sustain ye not harm? III. In all suites of law, we
must be mindful of the law of charity, and not so much endeavor to
maintain our own right, as to recall our brother, which erreth, into the
right way.

Chap. 28. Concerning the ninth Commandment.
THe ninth commandment belongs to the preservation of our neighbors good
name. The words are these.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

The exposition.
Thou shall not bear. That is, answer when thou art asked before a Judge.
Deutr. 19.17. Then both the me^ which strive together, shall stand before the
Lord, even before the Priests and the Judges which shall be in those days. 18.
And the Judges shall make diligent inquisition, and if the witness be found
false, and has given false witness against his brother.

Witness. By a figure, signifies every word whereby the credit and estimation
of our neighbor is either impaired or diminished.

The negative part.
Thou shall not diminish or hurt the good name and estimation of thy neighbor.

Here is forbidden.

I. Envy, disdain of others, desire of a man's own glory. 1. Tim. 6.4. He is
puffed up, and knows nothing, but doteth about questions, and strife of words,
whereof comes envy, strife, railinges. 1. Pet. 2.1. Wherefore laying aside
all maliciousness, and all guile, and dissimulation, and envy, and all evil
speaking. Mat. 21.15. But when the chief Priests and Scribes saw the
marueiles that he did, and the children crying in the Temple, and saying,
Hosanna the son of David, they disdained.

II. Evil suspicions. 1. Tim. 6.4. 1. Sam. 17.28. And Eliah his eldest brother
heard when he spoke unto the men, and Eliah was very angry with David, and
said, Why came thou down hither? and with whom have thou left those few
sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the malice of thine heart. Act.
28.4. Now when the Barbarians saw the worm hang on his hand, they said among
themselves, this man surely is a murderer, whom though he has escaped the
sea, yet vengeance has not suffered to live. Here are condemned, hard censures
and sinister judgments against our neighbor. Mat. 7.1. Judge not, that ye be
not judged: v. 2. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and
with what measure ye meat, it shall be measured to you again. These judgments
which Christ forbids, are private and reproachful or slanderous judgments:
namely, when either a good or an indifferent action is interpreted to the worse
part: or when a light offense is made heinous thorough evil will, without all
desire either to amend, or covet the same. Act. 2.13. And others mocked, and
said, they are full of new wine. 14. But Peter standing with the eleven, lift
up his voice, and said unto them, Ye men of Judea, and all ye that inhabit
Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken unto my words. 15. For these
are not drunken, as ye suppose, since it is but the third hour of the day. 1.
Sam. 1.13. For Hannah spoke in her heart, her lips did move only, but her
voice was not heard, therefore Else thought that she had been drunken. But we
must know, that there are three kinds of Judgments, which are not forbidden
by this commandment of Christ. The first is, the ministry of the Gospel,
which judges and reprooueth sin. The second is, the judgment of the
Magistrate. The third is, the judgment of a friend admonishing us: as when he
says, Abstain from the company of such a man, for I know him to be a drunkard.

III. A relation of the bare words only, and not of the sense and meaning of
our neighbor. Mat. 26.59. Now the chief Priests and the Elders and all the
whole council, sought false witness against Jesus, to put him to death. 60.
But they found none, and though many false witnesses came, yet found they none:
but at the last came two false witnesses, 61. And said, This man said, I can
destroy the Temple of God, and build it in three days. In deed Christ said
some such thing in words, as appears. Ioh. 2.19. Jesus answered, and said
unto them, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up again.

IIII. To pronounce unjust sentence in judgment, to rest in one witness, to
accuse another wrongfully, to bewray a man's cause by collusion. 1. King. chap.
21. ver. 12. They proclaimed a fast, and set Nabaoth among the chief of the
people. v. 13. And there came two wicked men, and sat before him, and the
wicked men witnessed against Nabaoth in the presence of the people, saying,
Nabaoth did blaspheme God and the King: then they carried him away out of the
city, and stoned him with stones that he died. Deuteronomy. 17.6. At the mouth of two
or three witnesses shall he, that is worthy of death, die: but at the mouth of
one witness he shall not die.

V. Openly to raise forged and hurtful tales and reports of our neighbor, or
privily to devise the same. Romans 1.29. Whisperers, 30. Backbiters, haters of
God, proud, boasters, inuenters of evil things. Leuiticus 19.16. Thou shall
not walk about with tales among thy people, thou shall not stand against the
blood of thy neighbor: I am the Lord. 1. Tim. 5.13. And likewise also being
idle, they learn to go above from house to house: yea, they are not only
idle, but also prailers and busi-bodies, speaking things which are not
comelye. To spread abroad flying tales, or to feign and add any thing unto
them. Prou. 26.20. Without wood the fire is quenched, and without a talebearer
strife cease. 21. As a cole makes burning coals, and wood a fire, so the
contentious man is apt to kindle strife. 22. The words of a talebearer are as
flatterings, and they go down into the bowelles of the belly. 2. Cor. 12.20.
For I fear least when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and that J
shall be found to you such as I would not, and least the^ be strife, envying,
wrath, contentions, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, and discord among you.
To receive or believe those tales which we hear of others. Exodus 23.1. Thou
shall not receive a false tale, neither shall thou put thine hand with the
wicked, to be a false witness. 1. Sa. 24.10. And David said to Saul, wherefore
give thou an ear to men's words, that say, Behold, David speaks evil
against thee?

VI. To accuse our neighbor, for that which is certain and true, through
hatred and with intent to hurt him. 1. Samuel. 22.9. Then answered Doeg the
Edomite (who was appointed over the servants of Saul) and said, I saw the Son
of Jshai when he came to Nob. to Abimilech the Son of Ahitub. verse 10. Who
asked counsel of the Lord for him, and gave him vitailes, and he gave him also
the Swoorde of Goliath the Philistim. Of this deed David thus speaks. Psalm.
52.1. Why boastest thou thy self in thy wickedness, O man of power? the loving
kindenes of the Lord endures daily. ver. 2 Thy tongue imagines mischief, and
is like a sharp ^fer, that cutteth deceitfullye. Verse 3. Thou do l^ evil
more then good, and lies more then to speak the truth. ver. 4. Thou love all
words that may destroy, O deceitful tongue.

VII. To open or declare our neighbors secret to any man, especially if he did
it of infirmity. Mat. 18.15. Moreover, if thy brother trespass against thoe
go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he hear thee, thou
have won thy brother. Proverb. 11.13. He that goes about as a slaunderer,
discovers a secret: but he that is of a faithful heart, concealeth a matter.

VIII. All babbling talk and bitter words. Epho. Chap. 5. Verse 3. But
fornication, and all uncleanness. let it not be once named amongst you. Verse.
4. Neither filthiness, neither foolish talking, neither jesting, which are not
comelye, but rather giving of thanks. John. 9.34. They answered, and said
unto him, thou art altogether borne in sins, and do thou teach us? so they
cast him out.

IX. Flattery, whereby we praise our neighbor above that, we know in him.
Proverbs. 27.6. The wounds of a lover are faithful, but the kisses of an
enemy are to be shunned. v. 14. He that praises his friend with a loud voice,
rising early in the morning, it shall be counted to him as a curse. Acts
12.22. And the people gave a shoute, saying, the voice of God, and not of man.
This is a grievous sin in the ministers of the word. 1. Thessalonians chap.
2. verse. 5. Neither did we ever use flattering words, as ye know, nor
colored covetousness, God is record. Iere. chap. 6. verse. 13. For from the
least of them, even unto the greatest of them, every one is given unto
covetousness, and from the Prophet even unto the Priest, they all deal falsely.
ver. 14. They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people with sweet
words. saying. Peace, peace, when there is no peace. Romans 16.18. For they that
are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and with
fair speech and flattering, deceive the hearts of the simple.

X. Foolish and over confident boasting. Prou. chap. 27. ver. 1. Boast not thy
self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth. ver. 2. Let
another praise thee, and not thine own mouth: a stranger, and not thine own
lips.

The affirmative part.
Preserve the good name of thy neighbor. Eccle. 7.3. A good name is better
then a good ointment. Here is commanded.

I. A rejoicing for the credit and good estimation of thy neighbor. Gal. 5.22.
But the fruit of the spirit. is love, joy, peace, gentleness. Romans 1.8. First I
thank my God through Jesus Christ, for you all, because your faith is
published throughout the whole world.

II. Willingly to acknowledge that goodness we see in any man whatsoever, and
only to speak of the same. Titus. 3.2. That they speak evil of no man. that
they be no fighters, but soft, showing all meekenes to all men. More over, we
must with all desire, receive and believe reports of our neighbors good. Acts.
16.1. Then came he to Derbe and Lystra, and behold, a certain Disciple was
there, named Timotheus, a woman's son which was a Jewesse, and believed, but
his father was a Grecian. verse. 2. Of whom the brethren which were at Lystra
and Jeonium, reported well. ver. 3. Therefore Paul would that he should go
forth with him, and took and circumcised him. Not withstanding, this must so
be performed of us, that in no wise we approve and allow of the vices and
faults of men. 2. Chro. 25.2. And he did vprightlye in the eyes of the Lord,
but not with a perfect heart. And chap. 27.2. And he did uprightly in the sight
of the Lord, according to all that his father Vzziah did, save that he entered
not into the Temple of the Lord, and the people did yet corrupt their ways

III. To interpret a doubtful evil, to the better part. 1. Cor. 13.5. Love
thinks not evil. verse 7. It believes all things, it hops all things.
Gene. 37.31. And they took Joseph's coat, and killed a kid of the goats and
dipped the coat in the blood. Verse. 32. So they sent that parti-colored
coat, and they brought it to their Father, and said, This have we found, see
now, whether it be thy sons coat or no. ver. 33. Then he knew it, and said,
It is my sons coat, a wicked beast has devoured him, Joseph is surely torn
in pieces.

IIII. Not to believe an evil report, running abroad amongst the common
people, by the whisperinges of tale bearers, as it were, by the Conduit pipes.
Psalm. 15.3. He that slaundereth not with his tunge, nor does evil to his
neighbor, nor receives a false report against his neighbor. Iere. 40.14. And
they said unto him, Know thou not, that Baalis the King of the Ammonites,
had sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, to stay thee? but Gedaliah the son
of Ahikam, believed him not. ver. 16. But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, said
unto Johanan the son of Kareah. Thou shall not do this thing, for thou
speak falsely of Jshmael. But we ought also to be angry at such whisperings.
Pro. 25.23. As the north wind drives away the rain, so does an angry
countenance the slaundering tung.

V. To keep secret the offense of our neighbor, except it must of necessity
be revealed. Pro. 10.12. Hatred stirs up contentions, but love covers all
trespasses. Mat. 1.19. Then Joseph her husband being a just man, and not
willing to make her a public example, was minded to put her away secretly.

A man would suppose, that by this means, we should be partakers of other men's
sins. But we must know, that we ought to conceal our neighbors
imperfections, least he should be provoked to offense: yet in the mean season
he must be admonished that he may amend. Gal. 6.1. James 5.19. Brethren, if any
of you has erred from the truth, and some man has converted him, verse. 20.
Let him know, that he which has converted the sinner from going astray out of
his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

But if the sin which is concealed, cannot thereby be taken away, then must we
in love and charity, declare the same to those, which may remove and amend the
same. Genesis. 37.2. When Joseph was seauenteene year old, he kept Sheep
with his brethren, and the child was with the sons of Bilhah, and with the
sons of Zilpah, his Fathers wives: and Joseph told unto their Father their
evil sayings. 1. Cor. 1.11. For it has been declared unto me, my brethren, of
you by them that are of the house of Cloe, that there are contentions among
you. Mat. 18.16. But if he hear thee not, take with thee one or two, that by
the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be confirmed.

VI. To get a good name and estimation amongst men, and to keep the same, when
we have gotten it. Phillippians 4.8. Furthermore, brethren, whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things pertain to love, whatsoever
things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise,
think on these things. A good name i gotten, 1. If we; seeking the kingdom of
God before all things, do repent us of all our sins, and with an earnest
desire, embrace and follow after righteousness, Proverbs 10.7. The memorial
of the just shall be blessed: but the name of the wicked shall not. Mark 14.9.
Verilye I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached throughout
the whole world, this also that she has done, shall be spoken of in the
remembrance of her. 2. We must have a care both to judge, and speak well of
others.. Mat. 7.2. With what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged. Ecclesi.
7.23. Give not thine heart also to all the words that men speak, least thou do
hear thy servant cursing thee. ver. 24. For oftentimes also thine heart
knows, that thou likewise have cursed others. 3. We must abstein from al
kind of wickedness: for one only vice or sin, does obscure and darken a man's
good name. Eccle. 10.1. Dead flies cause to stink, and putrify the ointment
of the Apothecarie, so does a little folly him that is in estimation for
wisdom, and for glory. 4. We must in all things earnestly seek for the glory
of God only, and not our own. Mat. 6.5. And when thou praiest, be not as the
hipocrits, for they love to stand and pray in the Synagogues, and in the
corners of the streets, because they would be seen of men, verily J say unto
you, they have their reward. ver. 6. But when thou praiest, enter into thy
chamber, and when thou have shut thy door, pray unto thy father which is in
secret, and thy father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.

But if when we seek the glory of God, honest and godly men do praise and
testify well of us, we must not despise this their testimony and commendation:
and although they neither praise us, nor testify of us at al, yet must we take
it in good part. 2. Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and most of
all to youwards. And chap. 10.13. But we will not rejoice of things which are
not with in our measure, but according to measure of the line, whereof God has
distributed to us a measure, to attain eu^n unto you Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is
the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou shall maintain my lotte.
ver. 6. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, y^, I have a fair
heritage. 1. Cor. 1.31. He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord.

Chap. 29. Of the tenth Commandment.
THe tenth commandment, concerns concupiscences, committed against our
neighbor. The words are these.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing
thy neighbor has.

The resolution.
Covet. The cogitation or motion of the heart, is of three sorts. The first is,
some glauncing or sudden thought, suggested to the mind by Satan, which
suddenly vanishes away, and is not received of the mind. This is no sin.
For it was in Christ, when he was tempted by the devil. Matthew. 1.4. The second
is, a more parmenent thought or motion, the which, as it were, tickleth and
inueigleth the mind with some inward joy. The third is, a cogitation drawing
from the will and affection, full assent to sin. We are to understand this
commandment of the second sort of motions only, not of the first, or of the
last, to which the five former commandments do belong.

Now then to covet, is to think inwardly, and also to desire any thing, whereby
our neighbor may b^e hindered, albeit there ensue no assent of the will, to
commit that evil. For the very Philosophers condemn covetousness of the very
heart, and Civilians disalow a purpose only to do evil, if it be enjoined with
a manifest deliberation. As for the concupiscence in this place forbidden, we
may well think it is more close and secret because St. Paul a Doctor of the law,
was a together ignorant of it. Romans 7.7. J had not known lust, except the L^e
had said, Thou shall not lust. Again, if that concupiscence immediatlye going
before the consent, were not prohibited in this place, there must be a great
confusion in the decalogue. For the seventh commandment forbids some
kind of coveting of our neighbors wife.

House. The commandment is illustrated by an argument drawn from the
distribution of the objects of concupiscence; whence it is apparent, that
only evil concupiscence is condemned in this place. Col. 3.5. For there is a
good concupiscence or desire: as of meat, and drink, and that of the spirit.
Gal 5.17. The spirit lusts against the flesh.

The negative part.
Thou shall not covet that which is thy neighbors. Here are prohibited.

I. Concupiscence it self, namelye, original corruption, in as much as it is
hurtful to our neighbor. James. 1.14.

II. Each corrupt and sudden cogitation and passion of the heart, springing out
of that bitter root of concupiscence. Gal. 5.17. The ^sh lusts against the
spirit. Luke. 10.27. Thou shall love the Lord with (...) by soul. To this
place appertains Satan's suggestion, if after the first offer it be
entertained and received in the closet of the heart.

III. The least cogitation and motion, the which though it procure not consent,
delights and tickleth the heart. Of this kind are these foolish wishes: I
would such an house were mine, such a living, such a thing, etc. And hitherto
may we refer all unchaste dreams, arising from concupiscence.

The affirmative part.
Covet that only, which is available to thy neighbor. Here are commended.

I. A pure heart toward our neighbor. 1. Tim. 1.5. The end of the
commandment, is love out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith
unfeigned.

II. Holy cogitations and motions of the spirit. Paul prays. 1. These. 5.23.
that the Thessalonians may be holy, not only in body and soul, but also in
spirit. Ephe 4.23.

III. A conflict against the evil affections and lusts of the flesh. Romans
7.22. I rejoice in the Law of God, in regard of the inward man. v. 23. But I
see another Law in my members, rebelling against the Law of my mind, and
making me captive to the Law of sin, which is in my members. v. 24.
Miserable man that J am, who shall deliver me from this body of death. 2. Cor.
12.7, 8, 9.

Chap. 30. Of the use of the Law.
THe use of the Law in unregenerate persons is threefolde.

The first is, to lay open sin, and make it known. Romans 3.20. By the works
of the Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the Law comes
the knowledge of sin.

The second use is accidentarily, to effect and augment sin, by reason of the
flesh, the which causes man to decline from that which is commanded, and ever
to incline to that which is prohibited. Romans 7.8. Sin took occasion by the
commandment, and wrought in me all manner of concupiscence: for without the
Law sin is dead. verse 9. For I once was alive without the Law: but when the
commandment came, sin revived. v. 10, But I died, and that commandment,
which was ordained unto life, was found to be unto me unto death.

The third use is, to denounce eternal damnation for the least obedience,
without offeri^g any hope of pardon. This sentence the law pronounces against
offenders, and by it, partly by threatening, partly by terrifying, it reigns
and rules over man. Romans 3.19. We know that whatsoever the Law says, it says
to them which are under the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the
world be culpable before God. Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the works of the
Law, are under the curse: for it is writter. Cursed is every one that
continues not in all that is written in the book of the law to do them. 2. Cor.
3.7. If the ministration of death written with letters, and engraven in stones
was glorious. v. 8. How shall not the ministration of the spirit be more
glorious? ver. 9. For if the ministration of condemnation were glorious, etc.

The end why sin reigns in man, is to urge sins to fly unto Christ.
Gala. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded al under sin, that the promise by the
faith of Christ should be given to them that believe. Verse. 24. Wherefore the
Law was our Schoolmaster to Christ. Heb. 12.18, 19, 20.

The countenance of this power of the law is perpetual, unless a sinner
repent: and the very first act of repentance so freeth him, that he shall no
more be under the law, but under grace. 2. Sam 12.13. Then said David to
Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord: wherefore Nathan said to David, the Lord
also has forgiven thy sin, and thou shall not dye. Rom 6.14. Sin shall not
have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but under grace.

If therefore thou desire seriouslye eternal life: first take a narrow
examination of thy self, and the course of thy life, by the square of Gods
Law: then set before thine eyes the curse that is due unto sin, that, thus
bewailing thy misery, and dispairing utterly of thine own power, to attain
everlasting happiness, thou may renounce thy self, and be provoked to seek,
and sue unto Christ Jesus.

The use of the Law in such as are regenerate is far otherwise: for it
guides them to new obedience in the whole course of their life, which
obedience may be acceptable to God by Christ. Romans 3.31. Do we therefore
through faith make the law of none effect? God forbid: nay we rather establish
the law. Psalm. 119.24. Thy testimonies are my delight, they are my counselors.
ver. 105. Thy word is a Lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths.

Chap. 31. Of the covenant of grace.
HItherto concerning the couenont of works. and of the Law, who follows the
covenant of Grace.

The covenant of Grace is that whereby God freely promising Christ, and his
benefits, exacteth again of man, that he would by faith receive christ, and
repent him of his sins. Hose. 2.18. In that day will I make a covenant for
them, etc. ver. 19. And J will marry thee to me for ever: yea, I will marry
thee unto me in righteousness and judgment, and in mercy, and in compassion.
ver. 20. I will even marry thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know
the Lord. Ezech. 36.25. I will pour clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean:
yea from all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you. ver.
26. And J will give you a new heart, and a new spirit will I put within you. ver.
27. And cause you to walk in my statutes. Mal. 3.1. The Lord whom ye seek
shall speedily come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant whom ye
desire: behold, he shall come, says the Lord of hosts.

This covenant, is also named a testament: for it has partly the nature and
properties of a testament or will. First, it is confirmed by the testator. Heb.
9.16. When a Tastament is, there must be the death of him that made the
testament. v. 17. For the testament is confirmed when men are dead: for it is
yet of no force, so long as he that made it is alive. Secondly, in this
covenant, we do not offer much, and promise small to God, but in a manner do
only receive: even as the last will and testament of a man, is not for the
testators, but the heirs commodity.

The covenant albeit it be one in substance, yet it is distinguished into the
old and new Testament.

The old Testament or covenant, is that, which in tipes and shadows prefigured
Christ to come, and to be exhibited.

The new testament declares christ already come in the flesh, and is apparently
showed in the Gospel.

The Gospel is that part of Gods word, which contains a most worthy and
welcome message: namelye, that mankind is fullye redeemed by the blood of
Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, manifest in the flesh: so that
now, for all such as repent, and believe in Christ Jesus, there is prepared a
full remission of all their sins, together with salvation and life
everlasting. John. 3.14. As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so
must the son of man be lift up. v. 15. That who so believes in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life. Act. 10.43. To him also give all the
prophets witness, that through his name, all that believe in him shall receive
remission of sins.

The end and use of the Gospel is. 1. To manifest that righteousness in Christ,
whereby the whole law is fully satisfied, and salvation attained. 2. It is the
instrument, and as it were the conduit pipe of the holy ghost, to fashion and
derive faith into the soul; by which faith they which believe, do as with an
hand apprehend Christ's righteousness. Romans 1.16. J am (...) ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God to salvation to as many as
believe: to the Jew first, and then to the Grecian. v. 17. For the justice of
God is revealed by it from faith to faith. John. 6.63. It is the spirit which
quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, the words which I speak are spirit
and life.

The gospel preached, is in the flourishing estate of Christ's church, that
ordinary means to beget faith: but in the rumous estate of the same, when as
by apostacy, the foundations thereof are shaken, and the clear light of the
word is darkened, then this word read or repeated, yea, the very sound thereof
being but once heard, is by the assistance of Gods spirit, extraordinarily
effectual, to them whom God will have called out of that great darkness into his
exceeding light. Rom 10.14. How shall they call on him, in who^ they have not
believed? And how shall they believe in him, of who^ they have not heard? And how
shall they hear without a preacher? Act. 11.19. And they which were scattered
abroad, because of the affliction that arose about Steven, walked throughout
till they came to Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antiochia, preaching the word to no
man but to the Jews only. v. 20. Now some of them were men of Cyprus, and of
Cyren, which when they were come into Antiochia, spoke unto the Grecians, and
preched the lord Jesus. v. 21. And the hand of the Lord was with them, so that
a great number believed and turned unto the Lord. Ioh. 4.28. The woman then
left her water pot, and went her way into the City, and said to the men. v.
22. Come, see a man which has told me all things that ever I did: is not he
the Christ? then they went out of the City, and came unto him. v. 39. Now many
of the Samaritans believed in him, for the saying of the woman which testified.
He has told me al things that ever I did. ver. 4. And many mo believed,
because of his own word. ver. 42. And they said unto the woman. Now we believe
not because of thy saying: for we have heard him our selves, and know that this
is indeed the Christ the Savior of the world. Romans 10.18. I dem^und, have
they not heard? no doubt their sound went out through all the earth, and then
words into the ends of the world. Thus we may see, how many of our
forefathers, and ancestors in the mids of poperye obtained eternal life.
Reuela. 12.13. The dragon was wroth with the woman, and went and made war
with the remnant of her seed, which kept the commandments of God, and have
the testimonye of Jesus Christ. Sam. 11.4. What says the divine oracle? J have
reserved to me seven thousand men, which never bowed knees to Baal.

Chap. 32. Of the Sacraments.
THus much of the preaching of the word: now follow the appendants to the same:
namelye, the Sacraments

A sacrament is that, whereby Christ and his saving graces, are by certain
external rites, signified, exhibited, and sealed to a Christian man. Romans
14.11. He received the sign of circumcision, as the seal of the righteousness
of the faith which he had, when he was ^ncircumcised. Genesis 17.11 Ye shall
circumcise the for^ of your flesh, and it shall be a sign of the covenant (...)
and you.

We must not therefore surmise that there is any inherent force or efficacy of
sanctifying, in the visible and external sign of the sacrament, as the bath
waters have to cure diseases: for the power of sanctification, is appropriate
only to the holy Ghost: and Christ has ordained the sign to signify grace,
not to confer it.

In every Sacrament we must observe the parts, and the mutual relation that
parts have one to another.

The parts of a Sacrament are, either the external signs, or the thing
signified, that is, the substance of the Sacrament.

The external sign is, either some prescript and sensible matter, or the
external action in the use of the same.

The things signified in the Sacrament, are either Christ and his benefits,
or the internal action that is about Christ.

The internal action, is the action either of God, or of faith.

The action of God is his offering, applying, and sealing up of Christ and his
benefits in the hearts of the faithful.

The action of faith is the consideration, desire, apprehension, and receiving
of Christ in the Sacrament.

The mutual relation of the parts of a Sacrament, is an agreeable union and
respect, of external and internal, both things with things, and actions with
actions, according to Gods holy institutions by which it is made a Sacrament,
because the signs incurring into the external senses, do by a certain
proportion move a Christian mind to consider the things signified, and also
to apply them unto their holy end.

This mutual, and as I may say, sacramental relation, is the cause of so many
figurative speeches, and metonymies, which are used: as, when one thing in the
sacrament is put for an other. As,

I. The sign is used for the thing signified. Exo. 12.11. Ye shall eat it
(namely the Lamb) in haste, for it is the Lords passover. Ioh. 6.51. I am
that living bread which came down from heaven: If any eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever, and the bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world. 1. Cor. 5.7. Christ our Passover is sacrificed
for us. 1. Cor. 10.17. We that are many, are one bread, and one body, because
we are all partakers of one bread.

II. The name of the thing signified is given to the sign: as, The bread is
Christ's body, the cup is Christ's blood. 1. Cor. 11.24. Mat. 26.28.

III. The effect of the thing signified is given to the sign as circumcision
is a covenant. Genesis 17.10. Act. 7.8. The cup is the new testament in Christ's
blood. Luke 22.16. Baptism is the washing of the new birth.

IIII. That which properlye belongs to the sign, is attributed to the thing
signified. Deuteronomy. 10.16. Circumcise the fore skin of your hearts. Ioh. 6.35.
Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall
have no life in you.

Hence it appears that there is small or no cause why the Papists should so
urge transubstantiation, and the Lutherans consubstantiation as they do.

Chap. 33. Of Baptism.
THere are two Sacraments. 1. Cor. 10.1. I would not have you ignorant, that
all our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea. verse 2.
And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea. v. 3. And did
all eat the same spiritual meat. ver. 4. and drank all the same spiritual
drink: (for they drank of the spiritual Rock that followed them, which
Rock was Christ.) Tertull. 4. book contra Marcion. August. de Symbol. ad
Catechum. 4. book 6. Chap.

The first Sacrament is that, whereby Christians are imitiated, and admitted to
the Church of God: and this is Baptism.

The second Sacrament, whereby the Church is preserved and nourished, is the
Lords Supper.

Baptism is a Sacrament, by which such as are within the covenant are washed
with water, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: that
being thus engraffed into Christ, they may have perpetual fellowship with him.
Mat. 28.19. Go teach all nations, baptizing them in the (...) of the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost. Matthew. 16.16. He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be s^ he that believes not, shall be condemned. 1. Corinthians. 1.13.
Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? either were ye baptized into the
name of Paul. verse 14. I thank God I baptized none of you but Chrispus, and
Gaias. verse 15. Least any should say, I had baptized into mine own name.

Within the covenant are all the seed of Abraham, or the seed of the
faithful. These are either of ryper years, or Infantes.

Those of riper years, are all such as adjoining themselves to the visible
Church, do both testify their repentance of their sins, and hold the
foundations of religion, taught in the same Church. Matthew. 3.6. And they were
baptized of him in Jorden, confessing their sins. Act. 8.36. As they went
they came to a water: then the Eunuch said, See, here is water, what hinders
me to be baptized? verse 37. Then Philip said, If thou believe with all thine
heart, thou may: he said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God.
verse 38. And they went down into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and
he baptized him. Exodus 12.48. If a stranger dwell with thee, and will observe
the passover of the Lord, let him circumcise all the males that belong unto
him, and then let him come and observe it, and then he shall be as one that is
borne in the land: for none uncircumcised person, shall eat thereof.

Infantes within the covenant, are such, as have one at the least of their
parents faithful. 1. Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the
wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband, else were your
children unclean, but now they are holy. Romans 11.16. If the first fruits be
holy, so is the whole lump^: and if the root be holy, so are the branches.
Genesis 17.7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be God unto
thee, and thy seed after thee. verse 13. He that is borne in thine house, and
he that is bought with money, must needs be circumcised: so my covenant shall be
in your flesh, for an everlasting covenant. Act. 16.31. They said, Believe in
the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved and thy whole household.

To be baptized into the Name of the father, etc. after the receipt of the
outward sign of washing, is to be made one of Gods family, which is his
Church, and to be partaker of the privileges thereof. Genesis 48.16. The Angel
which has delivered me from all evil, bless the children, and let my name be
named upon them, and the name of my fathers, Abraham and Izhak, that they may
grow as fish into multitude, in the mids of the earth. Esaias. 4.1. In that
day shall seven women take hold of one man, saying, We will eat our own
bread, and we will wear our own garments: only let us be called by thy
name, and take away our reproach.

By this it is manifest, that in this washing of baptism, there is sealed and
propounded a marvelous solemn covenant and contract: first of God with the
baptized, in that God the Father vouchsafed to receive him into favor, the
Son to redeem him, the holy Ghost to purify and regenerate him: secondly of
the baptized with God, who promises to acknowledge, invoke, and worship none
other God, but the true Jehovah, which is the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

The external and visible matter of baptism is water: for the minister may
not baptize with any other liquor, but only with natural water.

This was the judgment of the Primitive Church. For when as a certain
minister, for want of water, took sand, and baptized one with that, the
party thus besanded, was further baptized, the former being esteemed of none
effect. Niceph. hist. 3. book. 33. chap.

The external form of baptism, is the ministers washing of the baptized,
according to the prescript rule of Gods word. Romans 10.14.

The ancient custom of baptizing, was to dip, and as it were, to diue, all the
body of the baptized in the water, as may appear in Paul, Romans 6. and the
Councils of Laodicea, and Neocaesarea: but now especially in cold countries,
the Church uses only to sprinckle the baptized, by reason of childrens
weakness: for very few of ripe years, are now adays baptized. We need not
much to marvel at this alteration, seeing charity and necessity may
dispense with ceremonies, and mitigate in equity the sharpness of them.

The Sacramental union of the parts of Baptism.
Thing sensible. Water. The union of the sign and the thing signified.
Christ's blo^d, and figuratively all Christ. Things spiritual. Sprinkling or
dipping in the water. 1. Forgiveness of sins and imputation of Christ's
justice. ^all Baptism. The Minister, to wash the unclean body in the Name
of, etc. the 2. Mortification of sin by the force of Christ's death. Gods
spiritual washing i^ regeneration. Inward bapti^ the Continuance in water. The
progress and continuance in mortification. Actions sensibl^ of the Arising
from water. Vi^ification and sanctify action through Christ's resurrection.
Actions spiritual and inward. Receiver to Give his body to be washed. To
consecrate him self to God, and forsake the flesh, devil, and world. Receiver
Receive that washing. To feel the inward washing of the spirit.

Rebaptizing is at no hand to be admitted, for as in natural generation, man
is once only borne; so must he be in the spiritual generation.

Therefore they that are baptized of a minister, which is an heretic, not yet
disgraded from that calling, (if the external form of administration be
observed) must not be baptized again of the Church of God: especially, if
after baptism they have been made partakers of the Lords Supper: only they
ought to be instructed in the true faith. Eusebius. eccles. hist. 7. book 8.
chapter, says. There was in our Province an ancient professor of the faith,
yea before I was created Bishop, nay before my predecessor Heraclas: who, when
he was present at the baptism of some, and heard what questions they were
asked, and what answer they returned, forthwith come weeping unto me, and
humbling himself before me, confessed that he was baptized by an heretic: yet
in regard of that administration which he saw in our church, he accounted that,
no baptism, in that the confession there used, was fraught with blasphemies.
This also be added, that he was for this offense so sore grieved, that he durst
not so much as lift up his eyes unto heaven: wherefore he most earnestly
besought me, that he might be cleansed and purified with the baptism of our
Church, and so receive the gift of the holy Ghost. The which notwithstanding, I
durst not presume to administer, but s^ was sufficient for him, that he had
been so long a professor amongst us, and that at the receite of the Lords
Supper, he answered. Amen. These things I told him were of force enough to
purge him. And therefore I advised him, to rest himself in his former fa^ and
conscience already sufficiently purified, especially in that he so long was
partaker with us in the Sacraments. Augustine book 3. chapter 2. contra
Petiliani literas.

The right use of baptism is this. When inwardly in thine heart thou sensibly
feel, that through the heat of concupiscence, thou art moved to commit some
sin, then begin to have some holy meditation of that solemn vow, which
thou did make to God in Baptism.

Again, if through infirmity, thou fallest once or often into some sin,
still have recourse unto Baptism, that there thou may again receive
courage to thy soul. For although baptism be but once only administered, yet
that once testifies that all a man's sins past, present, and to come, are
washed away. 1. Pet. 3.20. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Therefore baptism may be
truly termed the Sacrament of repentance, and as it were, a board to swim
upon, when a man shall fear the shipwreck of the soul. Mark 1.4. 1. Tim.
1.19. Romans 6.4, 6.

Last of all, see thou never rest, till such time as thou have a feeling of
that renewing power, signified in baptism: namely, the power of Christ's death
mortifying sin, and the virtue of his resurrection, in the renouation of the
Spirit.

Chap. 34. Of the Lords Supper.
THe Lords Supper, is a Sacrament, wherewith, in the signs of bread and wine,
such as are engraffed into Christ, are in him daily, in a spiritual manner,
nourished to eternal life. 1. Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. Romans 6.5.



Such as will, in an holy sort prepare themselves to celebrate the Lords
Supper, must have

First, a knowledge of man's fall, and of the promised restoration into the
covenant by Christ. 1. Corinthians. 11.^6. So often as ye shall eat this bread,
and drink of this cup, ye shall show the death of the Lord till he come.
verse 29. and discern his body.

Secondly, true faith in Christ for every man receives so much* as he
believes he receives. Heb. 4.2. For unto us was the Gospel preached, as also
unto them: but the word, that they heard, profited not them, because it was
not mined with faith in those that heard it. Furthermore, true repentance of
their sins* Esaias. 16.6^. He that kills a bullock, is as if he slow a man:
he that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs neck: he that offers
an oblation, as if he offered s^es bl^d: he that remembers increase, (...) if
he blessed (...) ^e: yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their ^le
delights in their abominations. Psalm. 26.6. ^ wash mine hands in innocence,
O Lord, and so come before thine altar.

The Sacramental relation, which is in the Lords Supper, is on this manner.
Things sensible. 1. Bread. 2. Wine.
The relation of the parts of the Lords Supper. 1. The body of Christ. 2. The
blood of Christ.
Things spiritual. The (...) and i^ actions of The sensible and external
actions of the Minister to Take bread and wine in his hands. To seal Christ,
to bear the office of a Mediator. John ^ 6.7. God. Consecrate the bread and
wine by repeating the promise, and prayers made for that end. To send Christ to
be a Mediator, for which he was sealed from all eternity. Break bread, and
power out wine. The execrable passion of Christ, and effusion of his blood.
Give the bread and wine into the receivers hands. To offer Christ to all, even
to the hypocrites, but to give him only to the true Christians. Take the bread,
and cup in his hand. To apprehend Christ by faith. The christian receiver
Christian receiver* to Eat the bread, and drink the wine, for the nourishment
of his body. To apply Christ unto him, that the true union and Communion with
Christ may be increased.

This Table is to be referred to this mark

Thirdly, renewed faith and repentance, for daily and new sins committed upon
infirmity: because every new sin requires a new act, both of repentance
and faith: and this renouation must be seen, by our reconciliation of our
selves to our neighbor, for injuries and wrongs. Matthew. 5.23. If thou bring
thy gift to the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought
against thee, ver. 24. Leave thy gift before the altar, and go, first be
reconciled to thy brother, then come, and offer thy gift. If thou can come
furnished with these things abstain not from the Lords Table, by reason of thy
many infirmities.

It being thus prepared. thou feel that thou have a corrupt and rebellious
heart, know this: that then thou art well disposed to the Lords table, when
thou art lively touched with a sense of thy crooked disposition. Luke 4.18. The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me, that I should
preach the Gospel to the poor: he has sent me, that I should heal the
broken hearted, that I should preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, that I should set at liberty them that are
bruised. Matthew. 15.24. He answered, and said, I am not sent, but to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. The Lords Supper, is a medicine to the
diseased and languishing soul: and therefore men must as well seek to
purify, and heal their hearts in it, as to bring pure and sound hearts unto
it.

If thou feel in thy self, some great defect and want of faith, pray unto God
earnestly, that he will vouchsafe to increase it. Mark 9.24. The father of the
child crying with tears, said, Lord, I believe, help mine unbelief.

If thou can not do this thy self, use the aid of the faithful, which may
by their faith carry thee as men did the sick of the palsy upon their
shoulders, and laid him before Christ. Mark. 2.3.

If thou come not furnished on this manner to the Lords Table, thou shall be
adjudged guilty of the body and blood of Christ: as he is guilty of high
treason, who does counterfeit or clippe the Princes coin. 1. Cor. 11.27. He
that eats this bread, and drinks this cup unworthily, shall be guilty of
the body and blood of Christ.

Chap. 35. Of the degrees of executing Gods decree of Election.
WE have hitherto declared the out-warde means, whereby Gods decree is
executed. Now follow the decrees of executing the same.

The degrees are in number two. The love of God, and the declaration of his
love. Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has
made us accepted in his blood. verse 9. And has opened unto us the mystery of
his well, according to his good pleasure, which he has purposed in him.

Gods love is that, whereby God does freely love all such as are chosen in
Christ Jesus, though in themselves altogether corrupt. 1. John 4.19. We love
him, because he loved us first. Romans 5.8. God sets out his love toward us,
seeing that, while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. verse 10. For if
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his son, much
more we, being reconciled, shall be saved by his life.

The declaration of Gods love is two fold. The first, toward infantes elected
to salvation: the second, toward men of ryper years.

The declaration of Gods love toward infants, is on this manner.

Infants already elected, albeit they, in the womb of their mother before they
were borne, or presently after, depart this life, they, I say, being after a
secret, and unspeakable manner by Gods Spirit engraffed into Christ, obtain
eternal salvation. 1. Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit we are all baptized into one
body, whether Jews, or Grecians, or bond, or free, and have been all made
to drink into one Spirit. Luke 1.35. The Angel answered, and said unto her,
the holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall
ouershadowe thee: therefore also that holy thing, which shall be borne of thee,
shall be called the son of God. 41. And it came to pass, as Elizabeth heard
the salutation of Marie, the babe sprange in her belly. And Elizabeth was
filled with the holy Ghost. verse 64. And his mouth was opened immediately, and
his tongue loosed, and he spoke and praised God. ver. 80. And the child grew,
and waxed strong in spirit. Ie^. 5. Before I formed thee in the womb, I knew
thee, and before thou came out of the womb, I sanctified thee.

The declaration of Gods love, in those of years of discretion, has
especially four degrees. Romans 8, 30. 1. Cor. 1.30.

Chap. 36. Concerning the first degree of the declaration of Gods love.
THe first degree, is an effectual calling, whereby a sinner being severed
from the world, is entertained into Gods family. Ephess. 2.17. And came, and
preached peace to you, which were a far off, and to them that were near. 19.
Now therefore ye are no more strangers and forreners, but citizen^ with the
Saints, and of the household of God.

Of this, there be three parts. The first is Election, which is a separation
of a sinner, from the cursed estate of all mankind. Ioh. 15.19. If ye were of
the world, the world would love his own but because ye are not of the world,
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.

The second is, the donation or free gift of the father, whereby he bestows
the sinful man upon Christ, and Christ again upon the sinful man. Romans 8.32.
He spared not his own son, but gave him for us. Esaias. 6.9. Unto us a child
is born, and unto us a son is given. Ioh. 17.2. Thou have given him power
upon all flesh, that he should give eternal life to al them, who^ thou have
given him. v. 6. I have declared thy name to the me^ which thou gave me out
of the world: thine they were, and thou gave them me, and they kept thy word.
ver. 7. Now they know that all things, what so ever thou have given me are of
thee. Ioh. 10.29. My father, which gave them me, is greater then all, and none
is like to take them out of my fathers hands.

The third, is an union, or conjunction, which is the ingraffing of such, as
are to be saved, into Christ, and their growing up together with him: so that
after a peculiar manner, Christ is made the head, and every repentant sinner,
a member of his mystical body. Ioh. 27.20. I pray not for these alone, but
for them also which shall believe in me, thorough the^ word. ver. 21. That they
all may be one, as thou, O Father, art in me, and I in thee: even that they may
be also one in us. Ephesians. 5.30. We are members of his body, of his flesh, and
of his bones. Ioh. 15.1. I am that true vine, and my Father is the husbandman.
2. Every branch the bears not fruit in me, he takes away: and every one that
bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Ephesians. 2.20.
Built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, whose corner stone is
Jesus Christ himself. 21. In whom all the building coupled together, grows
unto an holy temple in the Lord. 2^. In whom ye are also built together, to be
the habitation of God by the Spirit.

This, albeit it be a most near, and real union, yet we must not think, that
it, by touching, ^ture, or as it were, by souldering of one soul with another,
neither by a bare agreement of the souls among themselves but by the
communion, and operation of the same spirit, which being by nature ^nite, is
of sufficient ability to conioyne those things together, which are of
themselves far distant from each other: the like, we see in the soul of man,
which co^ioyneth the head with the foot. Ephesians. 2.22. 2. Pet. 1.4. Whereby
most great and precious promises are given unto us, that by them ye should be
partakers of the godly nature, in that ye flee the corruption which is in the
world through lust. Phil. 2.1. Jf there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, etc.

God executes this effectual calling by certain means.

The first, is the saving hering of the word of God, a which is, when the said
word outwardly is preached, to such an one as is both dead in his sins, and
does not so much as dream of his salvation. b And 1. of all, the Law, showing a
man his sin, and the punishment thereof, which is eternal death: afterward
the Gospel, showing salvation by Christ Jesus, to such as believe. c And
inwardlye the eyes of the mind are enlightened, d the heart and ears opened,
that he may see, hear, and understand the preaching of the word of God. a
Ezech. 16.6. When I passed by thee, I saw thee polluted in thine own blood,
and I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, thou shall line. Esaias 55.1.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no
silver, come buy and and eat: come, I say, and buy wine and milk without
silver, and without money. John. 1.12. As many as received him, to them he gave
this privilege, that they should become the Sons of God: namely, to them
which believed in his name. b Romans 7.7. I knew not sin, but by the Law, for
J had not known lust, except the Law had said, thou shall not lust. c 1. Ioh.
2.27. But the anointing, which ye received of him, dwells in you: and ye
neade not that any man teach you: but as the same Anointing teaches you of
all things, and it is true, and is not lying, and, as it taught you, ye shall
abide in him. d Act. 16.14. A certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple,
of the City of the Thyatirians, a worshipper of God, heard us, whose heart God
opened, that she attended to the things, that Paul spoke. Psalm. 40.6. Thou art
not delighted with sacrifice and burnt offerings, but mine cares have thou
opened Ioh. 6.44. No man can come unto me, except the father which has sent
me, draw him: and J will raise him up at the last day. Esaias. 54.6. The Lord
has called thee, being as a woman forsaken, and afflicted in spirit, and as a
young wife, when thou wast refused, says the Lord.

The second, is the mollifying of the heart, the which must be bruised in pieces,
that it may be fit to receive Gods saving grace offered unto it. Eze. 11.9. I
will give them one heart, and J will put a new spirit within their bowels, and J
will take the stony heart out of their bodies, and will give them a heart of
flesh.

There are for the brusing of this stonye heart, four principal hammers. 1.
The knowledge of the law of God. 2. The knowledge of sin, both original, and
actual, and what punishment is due unto them. 3. Corruption, or pricking of the
heart, namelye, a sense and feeling of the wrath of God for the same sins. 4.
An holy desperation of a man's own power, in the obtaining of eternal life.
Acts 2.37. When they heard these things, they were pricked in heart, and said
unto Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?
ver. 38. Peter said unto the^, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the
name of Jesus into the remission of sins and ye shall receive the gift of the
holy Ghost. Luke. 15.17. Then he came to him self, and said, How many hired
servants at my Fathers have bread enough, and dye for hunger? ver. 18. I will
rise and go to my Father, and say unto him, father, I have sinned against
heaven, and before thee, verse. 19. And am no more worthy to be called thy
son: make me as one of thy hired servants, etc. Mat. 15.24. He answered, and
said, I am not sent, but to the lost Sheep of Jsraell.

The third, is faith, which is a miraculous and supernatural faculty of the
heart, apprehending Christ Jesus, being applied by the opperation of the holy
Ghost, and receiving him to it self. Ioh. 1.12.6.35. Jesus said unto them, I
am the bread of life, he that comes unto me shall never hunger, and he that
believes in me, shall never thirst. Romans 9.30. What shall we say then? The
Gentiles which followed not righteousness, have attained unto righteousness, even
the righteousness which is of Faith.

Christ is received when every several parson does particularly apply unto
himself, Christ with his merits, by an inward persuasion of the heart, which
comes none other way, but by the effectual certificate by the holy Ghost,
concerning the mercy of God in Christ Jesus. 1. Corinthians. 2.12. We have
received not the spirit of the world but the spirit, which is of God, that we
might know the things that are given to us of God. Ezech. 12.10. I will power
the Spirit of grace, upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem: and they shall look unto me whom they have wounded. Romans 9.16. His
spirit bears witness to our Spirit, that we are the sons of God. Ephe.
1.13. In whom also ye have trust, after that ye heard the word of truth, even
the Gospel of your salvation, wherein also after that ye believed, ye were
sealed with the holy spirit of promise. 2. Cor. 1.22.

In the work of faith, there are 4. degrees, or motions of the heart, linked
and united together and are worthy the consideration of every Christian.

The first, is knowledge of the Gospel, by the illumination of Gods spirit.
Esaias. 53.11. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. John.
17.3. This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God, and
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

To this, in such as are truly humbled, is annexed a serious meditation of the
promises in the Gospel, stirred up by the sencible feeling of their own
beggerie.

And after the foresaid knowledge in all such as are enlightened, comes a
general faith, whereby they subscribe to the truth of the Gospel. Heb. 4.2.
Unto us was the Gospel preached, as also unto them: but the word that they
heard, profited not them, because it was not mixed with faith in those that
heard it. 1. Tim. 1.19. Having faith and a good conscience, which some have put
away, and as concerning the faith, have made Shipwreck. 1. Tim. 2.4. Who will
that all men should be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth.

This knowledge, if it be more full and perfect, is called in Greek (...) that
is, the full assurance of understanding. Col. 2.2. Th^^ their hearts might be
comforted, and they knit together in love, and in all riches, of the full
assurance of understanding, to know the mystery of God, even the Father, and of
Christ. Romans 14.14. J know and am persuaded through the Lord Jesus, that there
is nothing unclean of it self. Luke. 1.1. For as much as many have taken in
hand to set forth the story of those things, whereof we are fully persuaded. 1.
These. 1.5. Our Gospel was unto you, not in word only, but also in power, and
in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance.

The second, is hope of pardon, whereby a sinner, albeit he yet feels not that
his sins are certainly pardoned, yet he believes that they are pardo^ble.
Luke 15.18. I will go unto my father, and say, father, I have sinned against
heaven, and against thee, and a^ (...) more worthy to be called thy Son,
make me as one of thine hi^ed servants.

The third, is an hungring and thirsting after that grace, which is offered to
him in Christ Jesus, as a man hungreth and thirsts after meat and drink.
John. 6.35. and 7 37. Revel. 21.6. And he said unto me, It is done, I am oe
and (...), the beginning and the end. I will give to him that is a thirste, of
the well of the water of life freely. Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they which hunger
and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.

The fourth, is the approaching to the throne of grace, that there flying from
the terror of the Law, he may take hold of Christ, and find favor with God.
Heb. 4.16. Let us therefore go boldelye to the throne of grace, that he may
receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

This approaching has two parts. The first, is an humble confession of sins
before God particularly, if they be known sins, and generally, if unknown:
this done, the Lord forth with remitteth all our sins. Psalm. 32.5. I thought,
I will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest
the punishment of my sin. Selah. 2. Sam. 12.13. David said to Nathan, J have
sinned against the Lord: wherefore Nathan said to David, the Lord has taken
away thy sin, thou shall not dye. Luke. 15.19.

The second, is the craving pardon of some sins, with unspeakable sighs, and
in perseverance. Luke 15.21. Act. 8.22. Repent of this wickedness, and pray God,
the if it be possible, the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. Romans
8.26. The Spirit helps not infirmities: for we know not what to pray as we
ought: but the Spirit it self makes request for us, with sighs, which can
not be expressed.

The fifth arising of the former, is an especial persuasion imprinted in the
heart by the holy Ghost, whereby every faithful man does particularlye apply
unto himself, those promises which are made in the Gospel. Mat. 9.2. They
brought unto him a man sick of the palsy: and when Jesus saw their faith, he
said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, be of good comfort, thy sins are
forgiven thee. Mat. 15.28. O woman, great is thy faith, be is unto thee, as
thou desire.

This persuasion, is, and ought to be in every one, even before he have any
experience of Gods mercies. Mat. 15.23. A Woman, a Cananite, came out of the
same coasts, and cried, saying unto him have mercy on me, O Lord the Son of
David: my daughter is miserably vexed with a devil, etc. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
Ioh. 20.29. Jesus said unto him, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou
beleeuest: blessed are they which have not seen, and have believed. Heb. 11.1.
Faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things which are
not seen. In philosophy, we first see a thing true by experience, and
afterward give our assent unto it: as in Natural philosophy, I am persuaded
that such a water is hot, because, when I put mine hand into it. I perceive, by
experience, an hot quality.

But in the practice of faith, it is quite contrary. For first, we must consent
to the word of God, resisting all doubt and diffidence, and afterward will an
experience, and feeling of comfort follow. 2. Cro^ 20.20. Put your trust in the
Lord your God, and ye shall be assured: believe his Prophets, and ye shall
prosper. They therefore do very ill, who are still in a doubt of their
salvation, because as yet they feel not in themselves, especial motions of
Gods spirit.

Thus much concerning the way which God uses in begetting of faith. There are
beside this, 2. notable degrees of faith. The one is, the lowest, and as I may
speak, the possitiue degree: the other is the highest, or superlatiue.

The lowest degree of faith, is called (...), a little or weak faith, like a
grain of mustard seed, or smoking flax, which can neither give out heat nor
flame, but only smoke. Math. 8.25. His Disciples awaked him, saying, Save,
master, we perish. 26. And he said unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of
little faith. Matthew 7.20. Jf ye have faith as much as a gra^ne of mustarde
feed, ye shall say unto this mountain, move, and it shall remove. Esaias.
42.3. The smoking flax shall be not quench.

Faith is then said to be weak and feeble, when as, of those five degrees
above mentioned, either the first, which is knowledge, or the fifth, which is
application of the promises, is very feeble, the rest remaining strong. Romans
14.2. One believes that he may eat all things, and another which is weak,
eats herbs. ver. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not:
and let not him which eats not, judge him which eats: for God has received
him. The Apostles although they believed, that Christ was that Son of the
living God: yet they were ignorant of his death and of his resurrection. Mat.
16.16. Ioh. 6.69. Mat. 17.22. Luke. 9.49. They understood not that word: for
it was hid from them, so that they could not perceive it. Acts. 1.6. They
asked him, saying, Lord will thou restore at this time the kingdom of Jsraell?

For the better knowledge of this kind of faith, we must observe these two
rules.

I. A serious desire to believe and an endeavor to obtain Gods favor, is the
head of faith. Mat. 5.6. Bless^ are they which hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. Revel. 21.6. I will give to him that
is a thirst, of the well of the water of life freely. Psalm. 145.19. He will
fulfill the desire of the^ that f^de him: he also will hear their cry, and
will save them. I^ in such as begin to be renewed, the will lies not idle, but
being moved by the holy Ghost, strives with doubtfulnes, and distrust, and
endeavors to give her assent to the sweet promises made in the Gospel, and
in the sense of her weakness, desires assistance from above.

II. God does not despise the least spark of faith, if so be, it, by little
and little do increase, and men use the means to increase the same. Luke.
17.5. The Apostles said unto the Lord, increase our faith. verse 6. And the
Lord said, if ye had faith as much as a grain of mustard seed, and should
say unto this Mulberye tree, pluck thy self up by the roots, and plant thy
self in the sea, it should even obey you. Man must therefore stir up his
faith, by meditation of Gods word, serious prayers, and other exercises
belonging unto faith.

The highest degree of faith, is (...), a full assurance, which is not only
certain and true, but also a full persuasion of the heart, whereby a Christian
makes full and resolute account that God loves him, and that he will give to
him by name, Christ, and all his graces pertaining to eternal life. Romans
4.20. Neither did he doubt of the promise of God through unbelief, but was
shrengthened in the faith, and gave glory to God. verse 21. Being fully assur^
that he, which had promised, was able also to do it. Romans 8.38. I am
persuaded, that neither life, nor death, etc. can separate us from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus. Psalm. 23.6. Doubtless, kindenes and mercy shall
follow me all the days of my life. 1. Sam. 17.36. Thy servants show both the
Lion and the bear: therefore this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of
them, seeing he has railed on the host of the living God. Man comes to hie
degree, after the sense, observation, and long experience of Gods favor and
love.

Chap. 37. Concerning the second degree of the declaration of Gods love.
THe second degree, is Justification, whereby such as believe are accounted just
before God, through the obedience of Christ Jesus. 2. Cor. 5.21. He has made
him to be sin for us, which knew no sin: that we should be made the
righteousness of God in him. 1. Cor. 1.30. Romans 5.19. As by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, (that is,
Jesus christ. ver. 17.) shall many also be made righteous.

Justification has two parres: Remission of sins, and Imputation of Christ's
righteousness.

Remission of sins, is that part of justification, whereby he that believes,
is freede from the guilte and punishment of sin, by the merits of the
passion of Christ. Col. 1.21, 22. You has he now reconciled in the body of his
flesh through death, to make you holy, and unblameable, and without fault in
his sight. 1. Pet. 2 24. Who, in his own flesh, bare our sins in his body, on
the tree, that we being delivered from sin, should live in righteousness, by
whose stripes ye were healed.

Imputation of righteousness, is the other part of Justification, whereby such
as believe, having the guilt of their sins covered, are accounted just in the
sight of God, through Christ's righteousness. 2. Cor. 5.21. Psalm. 32.1. Blessed
is he whose wickedness is forgiven and whose sin is covered. Romans 4. the whole
chap. Phil. 3.9. I have counted all things loss, and do judge them to be
damage, that I might win Christ, and might be found in him, that is, not having
mine own righteousness, which is by the law, but that which is through the
faith of christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith.

The form of justification, is as it were a kind of translation, of the
believers sins unto Christ, and again, Christ's righteousness unto the believer,
by means of Gods divine imputation. As is apparent in this picture following.

diagram linking "Christ a Savior Just" with "Passion" "Obedience" "Holiness."
and "Justified." and "The unjust sinner. to be saved." with "Guilt"
"Disobedience" "Corruption" and "A sinner."

Justification has annexed unto it adoption, whereby al such as are
predestined to be odopted, receive power, to be actually accounted the sons
of God by Christ. Ephe. 1.5. Who has predestinate us, to be adopted through
Jesus Christ, unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.

By means of adoption, God has bestowed many notable privileges upon his
children. I. They are the Lords heirs apparent. Romans 8.17. If we be children,
we be also heirs, even the heirs of God.

II. They are fellow heirs with Christ, yea kings. Romans 8.17. Revel. 1.6. And
made us Kings and Priests, even to God his Father.

III. All their afflictions, yea even their wantes, and offenses, are turned to
fatherly chastisementes, inflicted upon them for their good. Romans 8.28. We know
that all things work together for the best, unto the^ that love God. ver. 36.
It is written, for thy sake are we killed all the day long we are counted as
Sheep for the slaughter. ver. 37. Nevertheless, in all these things, we are
more then conquerours through him that loved us. Psalm. 89.32. I will visit
their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes. v. 33. Yet
my loving kindenes will I not take from him. 2. Cor. 12.7. There was given unto
me a prick in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, because I should
not be exalted out of measure. 2. Sam. 7.14. I will be to him a father, and he
shall be to me a son: and if he sin, I will chasten him with the rod of men,
and with the plagues of the children of men.

IIII. They have dominion over all creatures. 1. Cor. 22.23. Whether it be
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, whether they be
things present or things to come, even all are yours. Heb. 2.7. Thou made him
little inferior to the Angels, thou crownedst him with glory, and honor, and
have set him above the works of thine hands. 8. Thou have put all things in
subjection under his feet.

Last of all, they may have the angels as ministering spirits attending on them
for their good. Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister for their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation? Psalm. 34.7 The
Angels of the Lord pitch round about them that fear him, and delivers them.

Chap. 38. Concerning the third degree of the declaration of Gods love.
THe third degree is Sanctification, whereby such as believe, being delivered
from the tirannye of sin, are by little and little renewed in holiness, and
righteousness. 1. Ioh. 3.9. Whosoever is born of God, sins not: for his seed
remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is borne of God. Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to those which are in Christ Jesus, which walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit.

Sanctification has two paates: Mortification, and Vivification.

The mortification of sin is the first part of sanctification, whereby the
power of sin is abated, and crucified in the faithful. To. 6.2. How shall we
that are dead to sin, live yet therein? 3. Know ye not that all we which have
been baptized into Jesus Christ; (...) been baptized into his death? 4. We are
buried then with him by baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised
up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newnes
of life. Eccl. 5.6, 7, 11, 12, 13. Gal, 5.24. They which are Christ's have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof.

The means that work mortification, is the death and burial of Christ, from
whence proceeds such a virtue, as does both keep under the strength that it
cannot break out as it would, and in man as it were in a grave, does cause it
to dye and not putrify. Romans 6.6. Our old man is crucified with him, that the
body of sin might be destroyed.

Vivification is the second part of sanctification: whereby inherent holiness
being begun, is still augmented and enlarged. First, we receive the first
fruits of the spirit, then a continual increase of the^. Ephe. 4.23. Be renewed
in the spirit of your mind. v. 24. And put on the new man which after God is
created in righteousness, and true holiness. Ephesians. 2.1. And you that he quickened,
that were dead in trespasses and sins. Gal. 2.20. Thus J live, yet not I now,
but Christ in me: and in that I now live by the flesh, I live by the faith of
the son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. Romans 8.23. We
which have the first fruits of the spirit, even we do sigh in our selves,
waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our bodies. 1. Cor. 15.45. The
first man Adam was made a living soul, and the second man Adam was made a
quickened spirit.

The efficient cause of vivification is the holy Ghost, who does by his divine
power convey himself into the believers hearts, and in them creates holiness.
Job. 33.24, 25. Then will he have mercy upon him, and will say, deliver him,
that he go not down into the pit: for I have received a reconciliation. Then
shall his flesh be as fresh as a childs, and shall return as in the days of his
youth. Romans 8.9. Now ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, because the
spirit of God dwells in you: but if any man have not the spirit of Christ,
the same is not his. ver. 11. But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus
from the dead dwell in you, be that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also
quicken your mortal bodies, because that his spirit dwells in you.

The preservative of viuificaton, is a virtue derived from Christ's
resurrection, to those that are quickened, which makes them to rise up to
newnes of life. Phil. 3.10. That J may know him, and the virtue of his
resurrection.

Furthermore, this inherent holiness is to be distinguished into parts,
according to the several faculties of the body and soul of man. Thessa.
5.23. The very God of peace sanctify you throughout: And I pray God, that your
whole spirit, soul, and body may be kept blameles, until the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

I. The holiness of the mind, which is the illumination thereof, to the
knowledge of the will of God. Coloss. 1.9. We cease not to pray for you, and to
desire that ye might be fullye filled with knowledge of his will, in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding, 1. Cor. 12.8. To one is given by the
spirit, the speech of wisdom, to another the speech of knowledge, by the same
spirit.

Illumination, is either spiritual understanding, or spiritual wisdom.

Spiritual understanding, is an illumination of the mind, whereby it
acknowledges the known truth of the word of God.

Spiritual wisdom, is also an illumination of the mind, whereby the same
truth, is applied to the good ordering of particular both things and actions,
as persons, place, and times require.

These two, have these effects which follow.

1. To discern between good and evil. Heb. 5.14. Strong meat belongs to
them that are of age, which through long custom have their wits exercised, to
discearne both good and evil. Phil. 1.10. That ye may discearne things that
differ one from another.

2. To discern of spirits. 1. Ioh. 4.1. Derely beloved believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God. 1. These. 5.21. Try all
things, and keep that which is good. Acts. 17.11. These were more noble men,
then they which were at Thessalonica, which received the word with all
readiness, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether these things were so.

3. To meditate upon the word and works of God. Psalm. 1.2. But his delight is
in the law of God, and in that Law does exercise himself day and night. Psalm.
119.15. J will meditate in thy precepts, and consider thy ways. Psalm. 107. the
whole Psalm.

4. To discern and acknowledge a man's own inward blindness. Psalm. 119.33. Teach
me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it unto the end. ver. 18.
Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy Law.

II. The sanctity of the memory, is an ability to keep a good thing, when
it is offered to the mind, and as need serves, to remember it. Psalm. 119.11.
I have hid thy promise in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.
Psalm. 16.7. I will praise the Lord who has given me counsel: my reins also
teach me in the nights. Luke 2.51. His mother kept all these things in her
heart.

III. The sanctity of conscience, which is a grace of God, whereby a man's
conscience excuses him for all his sins, after they are forgiven him in
Christ, as also of his upright walking in the whole course of his life. 1. Tim.
1.19. Having faith and a good conscience, which some having put away, etc. 1.
Cor. 4.4, I know nothing by my self: yet am I not thereby justified. Act. 23.1.
Paul said, I have in all good conscience, served God until this day. Act.
24.16. I endeavor my self to have always a clear conscience, toward God and
toward men. Psalm. 26.1, 2, 3. Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine
innocence, my trust has been also in the Lord: therefore shall I not slide.
Prove me, O Lord, and try me, examine my reins and mine heart. For thy loving
kindness is before mine eyes, therefore have I walked in thy truth.

Hence, in all godly men arises the inward peace of God, and the outward
alacrity in the countenance. Phil. 4.7. The peace of God which passes al
understanding, shall preserve your hearts and minds in Jesus Christ. Prou.
28.1. The wicked flee, when none pursues: but the righteous are bold as a Lion.

IIII. Sanctity of will, whereby man begins to will that which is good, and
to refuse the contrary. Therefore in this estate, the will is partly freed
from bondage, partly in bondage to sin. Philip. 2.13. It is God which works
in you, both the will and the deed, even of his own pleasure. Romans 7.18. I
know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing: for to will is
present with me, but I find no means to perform that which is good, etc.
verses 19, 20, 21, 22.

V. Sanctity of affections, is the right moving of them. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Romans
7.24.

Affections of most especial note, are these:

I. Hope, whereby men with sighinges, look for the accomplishing of their
redemption. Romans 8.23.

This hope, when it is once strong and lively, has also her (...), that is,
full assurance, as faith has. Coloss. 1.23. If ye continue grounded and
stablished in the faith, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel,
whereof ye have heard, etc. 1. Pet. 1.3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which, according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us
again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

II. Fear of offending God, because of his mercy. 1. Pet. 1.17. If ye call
him father, which without respect of person, judges according to every man's
work, pass the time of your dwelling here in fear. Ps. 103.4. There is mercy
with thee that thou may be feared.

III. A base account of all worldly things, in respect of Christ Jesus. Philip.
3.7. But the things that were advantage to me, I accounted loss for Christ's
sake. verse 8. Yea doubtless, I think all things but loss, for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things
loss, and do judge them to be doung, that I might win Christ.

IIII. The love of God in Christ, which is like unto death, and as a fire that
can not be quenched. Canticles 8.6. Love is strong as death, jealousy is cruel
as the grave, the coals thereof are fire coals, and a vehement flame.

V. A fervent zeal to Gods glory. Romans 9.3. I would wish my self to be
separate from Christ, for my brethren, that are my kinsmen, according to the
flesh.

VI. An anguish of mind for the sins of the world. Psalm. 119.136. Mint
eyes gush out with tears, because men keep not thy Law. 2. Pet. 2.7. And
delivered just Lot, being vexed with the uncleanly conversation of the wicked.
ver. 8. For he being righteous, and dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing,
vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds.

VII. Exceeding great joy in the holy Ghost. Romans 14.17. The kingdom of God is
not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

6. Sanctity of body, whereby it is a fit instrument for the soul to
accomplish that which is good. Romans 6.19. At ye have given your members
servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity, to commit iniquity: so now give
your members servants unto righteousness in holiness.

Chap. 39. Of Repentance and the fruits thereof.
FRom sanctification Repentance is derived; (...) no man can repent, before he
have begun to hate sin.

Repentance is, when a sinner turns unto the Lord. Act. 26.20. He showed
first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and through all the coasts of
Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and
to do works worthy amendment of life. 1. John. 3.3. Every man that has this
hope in him, purges himself, as he is pare.

This is performed, when as any one, by the instinct of the holy Ghost, does
purpose, will, desire, and endeavor to relinquish his former sins, and to
become a new man. Psalm. 119.112. I have applied my heart to fulfill thy statutes
always, even unto the end. 1. John 3.3. Act. 11.23. Who when he was come, and
had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted all, that with purpose of
heart, they would clean unto the Lord.

The fruit of repentance, is a Christian conversation, wherein are brought
forth fruits worthy amendment of life. Matthew. 3.8. Bring ye therefore
fruits worthy of repentance.

A Christian conversation, is such a course of life, whereby we following
Christ's example, do by him, perform new obedience to God. Matthew. 11.29. Take
my yoke on you, and learn of me, that (...) meek and lowly in heart: And ye
shall find rest unto your souls. 1. Pet. 4.1. For as much as Christ has
suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind,
which is, that he which has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin. 1.
Pet. 2.21. For hereunto are ye called, for Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an ensample that we should follow his steps. 1. Pet. 3.10, 11. If any man
long after life, and to see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil,
and his lips that they speak no guile. Let him eschew evil and do good,
let him seek peace and follow after it.

There are two parts of new obedience: the denial of our selves, and the
profession of Christ. Matthew. 16.24. If any man will follow me, let him forsake
himself, take up his cross, and follow me.

The denial of our selves, consists partly in Christian warrefare, partly in
the patient bearing of afflictions.

Chap. 40. Of Christian warrefare.
CHristian warfare, is concerning the right way of fighting in the spiritual
battle.

The parts thereof, are the preparation to battle, and the combat it self.

To the preparation, we must use the complete armor of God. Ephesians. 6.13. For
this cause, take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
resist in the evil day, and having finished all things, stand fast.

The parts hereof, are especially six. I. Truth. II. Justice. III.
Evangelical obedience. IIII. Faith. V. The word of God. VI. Continual and
fervent prayers with watching. Ephesians. 6.14. Stand therefore, and your loins
girded about with verity, and having on the breastplate of righteousness.
verse 15. And your feet shodde with the preparation of the Gospel of peace.
verse 16. Above all, take the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the
fiery darts of the wicked. verse 17. And take the helmet of salvation, and
the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. verse 18. And pray always
with all manner prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watch thereunto with
all perseverance and supplication for all Saints. 1. Pet. 5.8. Be sober, and
watch, for your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walks about, seeking
whom he may devour.

The combat is a mutual conflict of them that fight spiritually.

The warriors, are the Tempter and the Christian soldier. Ephesians. 6.12. For we
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against
powers, and against the worldly governors, the princes of the darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickednesses, which are in hie places.

The tempter, is the prince or his helpers. The prince is Satan and his angels,
which are spiritual wickednesses, in hie things. His helpers are the flesh and
the world.

The conflict of all these, is temptation, whereby man is provoked to commit
such wickedness, as is hurtful to the salvation of his soul. 1. Pet. 2.11.
Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims abstain from
fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul.

In the soldier, two things are to be considered: his resisting, and his fall.

Resistance is an action, whereby the soldier does withstand temptation,
through grace working inwardly in him. 1. John. 2.14. I write unto you babes,
because ye have known the father. I have written to you fathers, because ye
have known him that is from the beginning. J have written to you young men,
because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome
the wicked. 1. Pet. 5.8. Ephesians. 6.16. Ps. 91.13. Thou shall walk upon the lion
and aspe: the young lion and the dragon shall thou tread under feet.

To confirm this, these preservatives which follow are very necessary.

I. When thou art tempted to sin, do not only abstain from it, but earnestly
love and follow after the contrary. Ioh. 8.44.

II. Never yield or consent to Satan's words, whether he speak the truth,
accuse falsely, or flatter dissemblingly. John. 8.44. Ye are of your father the
devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do: he has been a murderer
from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in
him: when he speaks a lie, then speaks he of his own, for he is a liar,
and the father thereof. Mark. 5.7. And cried with a loud voice, and said, What
have I to do with thee, Jesus, the son of the most high God. Act. 16.17. She
followed Paul and us, and cried, saying, These men are the servants of the most
high God, which show unto us the way of salvation. August. Sermon. 241.

III. One temptation is to be looked for after another, and then especially,
when our enemy after he has set his snares, is at rest: for the devil never
makes an end of his malice. 1. Pet. 5.8.

The fall is, whereby the soldier through infirmity faints, being subdued
by the power of the enemy. Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if a man be fallen by oc^^sion
into any faule, ye, which are spiritual, restore s^ a one with the spirit of
meekness, considering thy self, have thou also be tempted.

To this appertains the spiritual remedy. A remedy, is a thing having
aptness to restore him which is fallen, to his former estate. Gal. 6.1.

And here two things must always be thought on.

I. If there be a willing mind, every one is accepted for that grace which he
has, not for that which he has not. 1. Cor. chap. 8. verse 12. For if there
be first a willing mend, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
according (...) h^ he has (...).

II. In all these things, whosoever will lead a godly life in Christ, the
power of God is to be made perfect through their infirmities. 2. Cor. 12. 9.
And he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee, for my power is made
perfect through weakness: very gladly therefore will I rejoice rather in
^ine infirmity, that the power of God may dwell in me. verse. 10. Therefore J
take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
anguish for Christ's (...) whom I am weak, th^n am I strong.

Chap. 41. Of the first assault.
Assaults are threefold.

The first is, about the Christian man's effectual calling. The temptation is,
the enterprise of the devil to make blind man's mind, and to harden his
heart, least the word of God should work in him to salvation. Matthew. 13.4. And
as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and the fowls came and devoured them
up. verse 5. And some fell upon stan^ ground, where they had not much earth,
and a^o^ they sprange up, because they had no depth of earth. verse 6. And when
the sun rose up, they were parched, and for lack of rooting withered away.
verse 7. And some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprung up and choked
them. ver. 19. Whenever a man bears the word of the kingdom, and
understands it not, the evil one comes, and catches away that which was
sown in his heart: and this is he which has received the seed by the way
side.

A resistance in those that are called, is wrought by the the spirit of God,
that causes men to lend their ears to hear, and does ingraffe the word in
their hearts, that the immortal seed of regeneration may spring in them.
Psalm 4.6. John. 6.44. Acts. 16.14. Iam. 1.21. Wherefore lay apart all
filthiness, and superfluity of maliciousness, and receive with meckenesse
the word that is graffed in you, which is able to save your souls. 1. Pet.
1.22. Seeing your souls are purified in obeying the truth through the spirit,
to love brotherly without faining, love one another with a pure heart
fervently. 1. John. 3.9. Whosoever is borne of God sins not: for his seed
remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is borne of God. A
resistance in those that are to be called, is when in a sincere heart they do
join the word which they have heard, with faith. Luke 8.15. But that which
fell in good ground, are they which with an honest and good heart hear the
word and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. Heb. 4.2.

Here are certain preservatives to be noted.

I. Premeditation of the power and use of the word. Eccles. 4.17. Take heed to
thy feet, when then entrest into the house of the Lord, and be more near to
hear, then to give the sacrifice of fools, for they know not that they do
evil. Chap. 5.1. Be not rash with thy mouth, nor let thine heart be hasty to
utter a thing before God: for God is in the heavens, and thou art on the earth:
therefore let thy words be few.

II. Diligent attention of the mind. Act. 16.14.

III. An hungering desire of the heart. Ioh. 7.37. Now in the last and great
day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst let him come
to me and drink.

IIII. Integrity of life. Psalm. 26.6.

V. The casting away of evil affections. Iam. 1.22. And be ye doers of the
word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.

VI. The inward consent and agreement of the heart with the word preached. Act.
2.37.

VII. An hiding of the word in the heart, least we should sin. Psalm. 119.11.
I have hid thy word in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.

VIII. A trembling at the presence of God in the assembly of the Church. Isa.
66.2. For all these things has mine hand made, and all these things have been
says the Lord, and to him will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at my words. Act. 10.33. Then sent I for thee
immediately, and thou have well done to come: now therefore are we all here
present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.

The fall, is either a coldness in receiving the word, and a neglect thereof, or
else a falling into errors.

The remedy for this, is subjection, which must be made to the judgment and
censure of the brethren, and ministers. Revel. chap. 3. verse. 15. I know thy
works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou werest either cold
or hot^. Galat. chap. 6. verse. 2. 1. Timot. chap. 1. verse. 20. Of whom is
Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they might
learn not to blaspheme.

Chap. 42. Of the second Assault.
THe second assault is concerning faith.

The temptation is an illusion which the devil casts into the hearts of
godly men: as when he says, thou art not of the number of the elect: thou art
not Justified: thou have no such: thou must certainly be condemned for thy sins.
Mat. 4.3. Then came to him the tempter, and said, If thou be the son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.

Helps which the devil abuses for the strengthening of such illusions, are
these.

I. Adversity, as dangers, losses, persecutions, jealousy, grievous offenses,
etc. Psalm. 73.12. L^, these are the wicked, yet prosper they always and increase
in riches. 13. Certainly I have cleansed mine heart in vain, and washed mine
hands in innocence. Job. 13.23. How many are mine iniquities and sins? show
me my rebellion and my sin. 24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face and take me
for thine enemy? 25. Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and will thou
pursue the dry stubble?

II. The remembrance of sins past. Job. 13.26. For thou writest bitter things
against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth.

III. A feeling of death even already at hand.

The resistance is made by a true faith, applying Christ with all his merits
particularly, after this manner. I assuredly believe that I shall not be
condemned, and that I am elected, and justified in Christ. Esa. 53.11. He shall
see the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall
my righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities. Romans
8.38. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, 39. Nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The preservative is in temptation, not to behold faith but the object of
faith, which is Christ. Phil. 3.12. Not as though I had already attained unto
it, either were already perfect: but I follow if that I may comprehend that,
for whose sake also I am comprehended of Christ Jesus. 13. One thing I do, I
forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self to that which is before.
14. And follow hard toward the mark, for the price of the hie calling of God
in Christ Jesus. John. 3.14. And as Moses lift up the serpent in the
wilderness, so must the son of man be lift up.

The falling, is doubtfulnesse, and distrust of our election, and of Gods
mercy. Psalm. 77.6. J called to remembrance my song in the night: I communed
with mine own heart, and my spirit searched diligently. 7. Will the Lord
absent himself for ever? and will he show no more favor? 8. Is his mercy
clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? Ps. 22.1. My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me, and art so far from my health, and from the
words of my roaring?

The remedy is double.

First, the operation of the holy spirit stirring up faith and increasing the
same. Phil. 1.6. I am persuaded of this same thing, that he that has begun
this good work in ^ou, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. Luke.
17.5. And the Apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith.

The second is, an holy meditation, which is manifold.

I. That it is the commandment of God that we should believe in Christ. 1.
Ioh. 3.23. This is then his commandment, that we believe in the name of his
son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave commandment.

II. That the Evangelical promises are indefinite, and do exclude no man,
unless peradventure any man do exclude himself. Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no silver, come, ^uie and
eat: come, I say, buie wine and milk without silver, and without money. Math.
11.28. Come unto me, all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you.
John. 3.15. That whosoever believes is him, should not perish, but have
eternal life.

III. That doubtfulnes and despair, are most grievous sins.

IIII. That contrary to hope, men must under hope believe with Abraham. Roman.
cha. 4. ver. 18. Which Abraham above hope believed under hope, that he should
be the father of many nations: according to that which was spoken to him, so
shall thy seed be.

V. That the mercy of God, and the merit of Christ's obedience, are infinite.
Isa. 54.10. For the mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down:
but my mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall my covenant of peace
fall away, says the Lord, that has compassion on thee. Psalm. 103.11. For as
high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that
fear him. 1. John. 2.1. My babes, these things write I unto you, that ye sin
not: and if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the Just. verse. 2. And he is the reconciliation for our sins: and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. Psalm. 130.7. Let
Jsrael wait on the Lord: for with the Lord is mercy, and with him is great
redemption.

VI. That God measures the obedience due unto him, rather by the affection and
desire to obey, then by the act and perfourmance of it. Romans 8.5. For they
that are after the flesh, savor the things of the flesh, but they that are
after the spirit, the things of the Spirit. ver. 7. Because the wisdom of the
flesh, is enimitie against God: for it is not subject to the law of God,
neither indeed can be. Romans 7.20. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more
I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me. verse. 21. I find then by
the Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me. 22. For I delight
in the Law of God, concerning the inner man.

VII. When one sin is forgiven, all the rest are remitted also, for remission
being given once, without any prescription of time, is given for ever. Romans
11.29. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Acts. 10.43.
To him also give all the Prophets witness, that through his name, all that
believe in him, shall receive remission of sins.

VIII. That grace and faith are not taken away by falls of infirmity, but
thereby are declared and made manifest. Romans 5.20. Moreover, the Law entered
thereupon, that the offense should abound: nevertheless, when sin abounded,
there grace abounded much more. 2. Cor. 12.8. For this thing I besought the
Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.

Chap. 43. Of the third Assault.
THe third Assault is, concerning Sanctification. The temptation, is a
provoking to sin, according as the disposition of every man, and as occasion
shall offer it self. 1. Chron. 21.1. And Satan stood up against Israel, and
provoked David to number Israel. John 13.2. And when supper was done, the
devil had now put in the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simons son, to betray him.

In this temptation, the devil does wonderfully diminish and make less those
sins, which men are about to commit, partly by obiecting the mercy of God, and
partly by covering or hiding the punishment which is due for the sin.

Then, there are helps to further the devil in his temptation.

First, the flesh which lusts against the spirit, sometimes by begetting
evil motions and affections, and sometimes by ouerwhelming and oppressing the
good intents and motions. Gal. 15.17. For the flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary one to
another, so that ye can not do the same things that ye would. verse 19.
Moreover, the works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness. ver. 20. Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
debate, emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, verse 21. Envy,
murders, drankennesse, gluttony, and such like, whereof I tell you before, as
I also have told you before, that they which do such things, shall not
inherit the kingdom of God. James. 1.14. But every man is tempted, when he
is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is entised.

Secondly, the world, which brings men to disobedience, through pleasure,
profit, honor, and evil examples. Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom we also had our
conversation in time past, in the lusts of our flesh, in fulfilling the will
of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath, as
well as others. 1. John 2.16. For all that is in the world, as the lusts of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the father,
but is of the world.

Resistance is made by the desire of the spirit, which woorketh good motions
and affections in the faithful, and drives forth the evil. Galla. 5.22. But
the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith. Verse. 23. Meekenes, teemperancie: against such there is no
law. Ver. 24. For they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and the lusts thereof. Verse. 26. Let us not be desirous of vain
glory, provoking one another, en^ying one another.

The preservatives are these, whereby men are strengthened in resisting.

I. To account no sin, light or small. Gal. 5.9. A little leaven does leaven
the whole lump. Romans 6.23. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of
God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

II. To avoid all occasions of sin. To these rather agrees the proverb used
of the plague. Long, tarde, cito: that is, Aloof, slowly, quickly. 1 Thessalonians.
5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil. Jude. verse. 23. And others save
with fear, pulling them out of the fire, and hate even the garment spotted by
the flesh.

III. To accustom thy self to subdue the lesser sins, that at the last thou
may also overcome the greater. Romans 13.4.

IIII. To apply thy self to thy appointed calling, and always to be busily
occupied about some thing in the same.

V. To oppose the Law, the judgments of God, the last judgment, the glorious
presence of God, and such like, against the rebellion and loosenes of the
flesh. Pro. 28.14. Blessed is the man that fears always; but he that hardneth
his heart, shall fall into evil. Genesis 39.9. There is no man greater in this
house then I, neither has he kept any thing from me, but only thee, because
thou art his wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and so sin
against God.

In this temptation the fall is, when a man being prevented, falls into some
offense. Gal. 6.1.

Here Satan does wonderfullye make grievous the offense committed, and does
accuse and terrify the offender with the judgments of God. Mat. 27 3. Then
when Judas which betrayed him, saw that he was condemned, he repented himself,
and brought again the thirty pieces of silver, to the chief preests and
elders, v. 4, Saying, I have sinned, betraying the innocent blood: but they
said, What is that to us? see thou to it. Verse. 5. And when he had cast down
the silver pieces in the Temple, he departed, and went and hanged himself.

The remedy is, a renewed repentance, the beginning whereof is sorrow in regard
of God, for the same sin: the fruits hereof are especially seven. 2. Cor.
7.9. Now I rejoice not that ye were sorry: but that ye sorrowed to repentance:
for ye sorowed godly, so that in nothing ye were hurt by us. ver. 10. For godly
sorrow, causes repentance unto salvation, not to be repented off: but worldly
sorrow causes death. ver. 11. For be bold, this thing that ye have been
godly sorry, what great care has it wrought in you: yea, what clering of your
selves: yea, what indignation: yea, what fear: yea, how great desire: yea,
what zeal: yea, what punishment: in all things ye have showed your selves,
that ye are pure in this matter.

I. A desire of doing well.

II. An Apollogie, that is, a confession of the sin before God, with a
requiring of pardon for the offense. Psalm. 32.5. Then I acknowledged my sin
unto thee, neither hid J mine iniquity: for I thought, J will confess against
my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my
sin. 2. Sam. 12.13 Then David said unto Nathan, J have sinned against the
Lord, and Nathan said unto David, The Lord also has put away thy sin, thou
shall not die.

III. Indignation against a man's self for his offense.

IV. A fear not so much for the punishment, as for offending the Lord. Psalm.
130.3. If thou straight he markest iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand?

V. A desire to be fully renewed, and to be delivered from sin.

VI. A fervent zeal to love God, and to embrace^ and keep all his
commandments.

VII, Revenge, whereby the flesh may be tamed and subdued, least at any time
afterward, such offenses be committed.

Chap. 44. Of the patient bearing of the Cross.
THe patient bearing of the Cross, teaches how Christians should undergo the
burden.

The Cross, is a certain measure of afflictions, appointed by God, to every
one of the faithful. Math. 16.24. If any man will follow me, let him forsake
himself, take up his cross, and follow me. Coloss. 1.24. Now rejoice I in my
sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my
flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church.

We ought to take up this Cross willingly, even with both hands, when it
shall please God to lay it upon us.

And after we have taken it up, we must bear it with patience and
perseverance. Coloss. 1.11. Strengthened with all might, through his glorious
power, unto all patience, and long suffering with ioyfulnes. Luke 21.19.
Possess your souls with patience.

The preservatives of patience, are I. Strength by the holy Ghost. Philip.
4.13. I am able to do all things through the help of Christ, which
strengthens me. Phil. 1.29. It is given to you for Christ, that not only ye
should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake.

II. An holy Meditation, which is manifold: 1. That the afflictions of the
faithful, come not by chance, but by the counsel and providence of God,
which disposes all things in a most excellent sort. Genesis 45.4, 5. It was God
that sent Joseph into Egypt. 2. Sam. 16.10. The Lord bids Shemei curse
David. Psalm. 119.71. It was good for me, that I was afflicted, that J might
learn thy statutes. 2. That albeit afflictions are grievous, yet are they good
and profitable. For they are helps, whereby men being humble for their sins
before God, obtain peace, and holiness of life. 2. Cor. 1.9. We received
sentence of death in our selves, because we should not trust in our selves, but
in God, which raised the dead. Isa. 26.16. Lord, in trouble have they visited
thee, they powered out a prayer, when thy chastening was upon them. Hos. 5.15. J
will go, and return to my place, till they acknowledge their fault, and seek
me: in their affliction they will seek me diligently. Psalm. 78.34. When we
slew them, they sought him, and they returned, and they sought God early. Ier.
31.18. J have heard Ephraim lamenting thus, thou have corrected me, and J was
chastised as an untamed calfe: convert thou me, and J shall be converted. Hebr.
12.11. No chastisement for the present seems joyous, but grievous: but
afterward, it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them, which are
thereby exercised. Psalm. 30.5. Weeping may abide at evening, but joy comes in
the morning. 3. That God has promised favor, mittigation of punishments, his
presence, and deliverance. Phil. 1.29. 1. Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above measure, but with tentation will give
deliverance. 2. Sam. 7.14. Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in time of trouble, and J
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

4. That in all troubles of the faithful, Christ is a companion. 1, Pet. 4.13.
Rejoice, that ye are partakers of the afflictions of Christ. 2. Cor. 4.10.
Every where we bear about in our body the dying of Christ, that the life of
Jesus might also be made manifest in our bodies. Col. 1.24. 5. That the Angels
are ready to defend such as fear God. Psalm. 34.8.2. King. 6.16. Fear not,
there are more with us, then against us.

Chap. 45. Of the calling upon God.
THus much concerning the denial of our selves, now follows the profession
of Christ. In which we consider either Christ himself, or his members: namely,
the faithful. Mat. 25.20. Verily, J say unto you, in as much as ye did it ^on^
of the least of my brethren, ye did it unto me.

That profession which directly concerns Christ, is either continual, or
only in the ^e of danger.

Continual, is the calling upon the name of God, and ought ever to be
performed of us, in the name of christ Jesus our mediator. 1. Cor. 1.2. To the
church of God which is at Corinthus, to them that are sanctified in Christ
Jesus, in every place, both their Lord and ours. Act. 9.14. He has authority
from the hic priest, to bind all that call upon thy name. Col. 31.7. Whatsoever
ye shall do in word or in deed, do it in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving
thanks to God, and the Father by him.

The calling upon Gods name, is by prayer or thanksgiving. Phil. 4.6. Jn all
things let your requests be showed unto God, in prayer and supplication, with
giving of thanks.

Prayer has two parts, Petition, and Assent. Mar. 11.24. J say unto you,
whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it, and it shall be
done unto you.

Petition, is the first part of prayer, whereby we, according to the rule of
Gods word, ask his help, for the obtaining of such necessaries as we want.
1. John. 5.14 This is the assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any
thing according to his will, he hereth us.

In every petition, we must express two things. I. A sense of our wantes. II.
A desire of the grace of God to supply those want^ 1. Sam. 1.10. She was
troubled in her mind, and prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore. Dan. 9.4. And J
prayed to the Lord my God, and made my confession, saying. verse 5. We have
sinned, and have committed iniquity, etc. verse. 16. O Lord, according to all
thy righteousness, J beseech thee, let thine anger and thy wrath be turned from
thy City Jerusalem, etc. to the 20. verse. Psalm. 130.1. Out of the deep I
called to thee, O Lord. 1. Sam. 1.15. Then Hannah answered, and said, nay my
Lord, but J am a woman troubled in spirit. J have drunk neither wine nor
strong drink, but have poured out my soul before the Lord, etc. 16. v. Psalm.
143.6. I stretch forth mine hands unto thee, my soul desires after thee, as
the thirsty land.

Assent, is the second part of prayer, whereby we believe and profess it
before God, that he, in his due time, will grant unto us those our requests,
which before we have made unto his Majesty. 1. Ioh. 5.14, 15. This is the
assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will,
he hears us. And if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know
that we have the petitions, that we have desired of him. Matthew. 6.13. Lead us
not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom,
thine is the power, and thine is the glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

As for the faithful, howsoever they in their prayers, bewray many
infirmities: yet no doubt, they have a notable sense of Gods favor,
especially, when they pray zealously, and often unto the Lord. Iam. 5.16. Pray
one for an other, that ye may be healed: for the prayer of a righteous man
avails much, if it be fervent. Luke. 1.13. The Angel said unto him, Fear
not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard. Jonah. 4.1. It dispeased Jonah
exceedingly, and he was angry. v. 2. And Jonah prayed unto the Lord, and said,
J pray thee, O Lord, was not this my saying, when J was yet in my country?
therefore J prevented it to flee unto Tarshish: for J knew that thou art a
gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and
repentest thee of the evil. Romans 8.26. Genesis 19.18. Lot said unto them, do
not so, J pray you, my lords, etc. Psalm. 6.1. O Lord, rebuke me not in thine
anger, neither chastise not in thy wrath, etc. verse. 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 8.9.
Psalm. 20.5. Psalm. 35.9.18.28. Psalm. 16.7.

Thanksgiving, is a calling upon Gods name, whereby we, with joy, and
gladness of heart, do praise God for his benefits either received, or
promised. Psalm. 45.1. Mine heart will utter forth a good matter, I will
entreat in my words of the King: my tung is as the pen of a swift writer.
Ephe. 5.20. Giving thanks always for all things unto God, even the Father, in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Psalm, 36.8, 9. How exclle^t is thy mercy, O
God? therefore the children of men trust under the shadow of thy wings, they
shall be satisfied with the fatness of thine house, and thou shall give them
drink out of the river of thy pleasures. Coloss. 3.16.

Chap. 46. Of Christian Apology, and Martyrdom.
THe profession of Christ in dangers, is either in word, or deed.

Profession in word, is called Christian Apology, or the confession of Christ.
Romans 10.10. With the heart, man believes unto unrighteousness: and with the
mouth, man confesses to salvation. Psalm. 22.23. J will declare thy name unto
my brethren: in the mids of the Congregation will I praise thee.

Christian Apology, is the profession of Christ in word, when as we are ready
with fear, and meeknes, to confess the truth of christian religion, so often
as need requires, and the glory of God is endaungered, even before
unbelievers, especially, if they be not past all hope of repentance. 1. Pet.
3.15. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready alwais to give an
answer to every man, that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you:
Verse. 16. And that with meekenes and reverence, having a good conscience, that
when they speak evil of you, as of evil doors; they may be ashamed, which
blame your good conversation in Christ. Acts 7. the whole Chapter. Steven
there makes an Apology for himself. Mat. 7.6. Give not that which is holy
to dogs, nor cast your pearls before Swine: least they tread them under
their feet, and turning again, all to rent you.

Profession, which is indeed, is called Martyrdom. Martyrdom is a part of
Christian profession, when as a Christian man does, for the doctrine of faith,
for justice, and for the salvation of his brethren, undergo the punishment of
death, imposed upon him by the adversaries of Christ Jesus. Mat. 6.18, 27, 28.
John told Herod. It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife. And
immediatlye the King sent the hangman, and gave him charge that his head should
be brought: so he went and beheadded him in the prison. 2. Cor. 12.15. I will
most gladlye bestow, and be bestowed for your souls, though the more I love
you, the less am I loved.

Notwithstanding, it is lawful for Christians to flee in persecution, if they
find themselves not sufficiently resolved, and strengthened by Gods spirit to
stand. Mat. 10.23. When they persecute you in one City, flee into another.
Verilye, I say unto you, ye shall not have finished all the Cities of
Israel, till the Son of man come. John 10.39. Again they studied to
apprehend him, but he escaped out of their hands. Acts 9.30. When the
brethren knew it, they brought him to Cesar^, and sent him forth to Tarsus. 1.
Kings 18.13. Was it that told my Lord, what I did when Iesabel slew the
Prophets of the Lord, how J hid an hundredth men of the Lords Prophets, by
fiftyes in a cave, and fed them with bread and water? Acts 20.22. Now
behoulde, I go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem, and know not what things
shall come unto me there.

Chap. 47. Of edification, and Alms among the faithful.
THat profession of Christ, which concerns his members, namely, the saints
and faithful ones, is either edification or alms.

Edification, is every particular duetye toward our brethren, whereby they
are furthered either to grow up in Christ, or else are more surely united to
him. Romans 14.19. Let us follow those things which concern peace, and wherewith
one may edify another.

To Edification these things which follow appertain.

I. To give good example. Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that
they may see your good works and glorify your Father which is in heaven. 1.
Pet. 2.12. Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they which
speak evil of you as of evil doers, may by your good works which they shall
see, glorify God in the day of thy visitation.

II. To exhort. Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily while it is called to
day, least any of you be ha^ through the deceitfulnes of sin. Romans 1.12.
That I might be comforted together with you thorough our mutual faith, both
yours and mine.

III. To comfort. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Comfort the feeble minded, bear with the
weak, be patient toward al men. James. 5.16. Acknowledge your faults one to
another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. ver. 20. He that
conuerteth a sinner from going astray out of his way, shall save a soul from
death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. 1 Thessalonians. 4.18. Comfort your
selves one an other, with these words.

IIII. To admonish. Romans 15.14. I my self am persuaded of you brethren, that
ye also are full of goodness, and filled with all knowledge: and are able to
admonish one an other. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. We desire you, brethren, admonish them
that are unruly.

They shall observe an holy manner of admonition, who in the spirit of
meekenes, and as it were, guilty of the like infirmity themselves, do
admonish forth with all their brethren of such faults, as they certainlye
know by them, and that out of Gods word. Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if any man by
occasion be fallen into any fault, ye, which are spiritual, restore such an one
in the spirit of meeknes, considering thy self, least thou also be tempted.
Matthew. 5.7. Thou hipocrite, cast (...) first the beam out of thine own eye,
and then shall thou se^ to take the mo^e out of thy brothers eye. 2. Timoth.
4.2. Preach the word, be instant in season and out of season improve, rebuke,
exhort, with all long suffering, and doctrine. Mat. 18.15. If thy brother
trespass against thee, go^ and tell him his fault between thee and him alone:
if he hear thee, thou have won thy brother. Romans 15.14. 2. Tim. 4.2. Leuit.
19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainlye
rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin.

Relief peculiar to the godly among themselves, is a duetye, whereby the rich
do out of their plenty supplye the wantes of the poor, both according to their
ability, and sometimes beyond their ability. 2. Corin. 8.3. To their power (I
bear record) yea, beyond their power they were willing. Acts. 2.44, 45. All
that believed were in one place, and had all things common: and they sold
their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every one had need.

Chap. 48. Of the 4. degree, of the declaration of Gods love: and of the estate
of the elect, after this life.
THe fourth degree of the declaration of Gods love, is Glorification. Romans
8.30.

Glorification, is the perfect transforming of the Saints into the image of the
Son of God. Phil. 3.21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is
able even to subdue all things unto himself. 1. Cor. 15.44. It is sown a
natural body, and is raised a spiritual body: there is a natural body, and
there is a spiritual body. 45. As it is also written, The first man Adam was
made a living soul: the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. Verse. 49.
And as we have borne the image of the earthly, so shall we bear the image of
the heavenly. Psalm. 17.15. I will behold thy face in righteousness, and when I
awake, I shall be satisfied with thine image.

The beginning of glorification, is in death, but it is not accomplished and
made perfect, before the last day of Judgment.

The death of the Elect, is but a sleep in Christ, a whereby the body and soul
is severed. The body, b that after corruption it may rise to greater glory.
The soul, that it c being fully sanctified, may d immediatlye, after departure
from the body, be transported into the kingdom of heaven.

a 1. Cor. 15.18. If Christ be not raised, they which are asleep in Christ,
are perished. Acts. 70.60. When he had thus spoken, he slept. b 1. Cor. 15.36.
O fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it dye. c.Revel.
21.27. There shall enter into it, none unclean thing, neither whatsoever
works abomination or lies: but they which are written in the Lambs book of
life. Romans 7.25. I my self in my mind serve the Law of God, but in my flesh
the Law of sin. d Luke. 23.42. He said to Jesus, Lord, remember me, when
thou come into thy Kingdom. Verse 43. Then Jesus said to him, this day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. Revel. 14.13. Then I heard a voice from
heaven, saying unto me. Write, Blessed are the dead, which hereafter dye in the
Lord. Even so says the spirit: for they rest from their labors, and their
works follow them.

The faithful need not to fear death, because Christ has taken away the
sting thereof. 1. Cor. 15.55. O death where is thy sting! O grave, where is thy
victory! ver. 56. The sting of death is sin: and the strength of sin, is
the law. ver. 57. But thanks be to God, which has given us victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Heb. 2.15. That he might deliver all them, which for
fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage.

Souls being once in heaven, remain there till the last day of judgment,
where they partly magnify the Name of God, and partlye do wait, and pray
for the consummation of the kingdom of glory, and full felicity in body and
soul. Revel. 5.8. And when he had taken the book, the four beasts, and the
four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one harpes
and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints. Verse 9.
And they sang a new song, saying, thou art worthy to take the book and to
open the seals thereof: because thou wast killed, and have redeemed us to God,
by the blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. Revel.
14.2. I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harpes. ver. 3. And they
sung as it were a new song before the throne: Revel. 6.10. And they cried with
a loud voice, saying, how long, Lord, holy and true? do not thou judge and
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?

Chap. 49. Of the estate of the Elect, at the last day of judgment.
THe last day of judgment, shall be on this manner.

I. Immediatlye before the coming of Christ, a the powers of heaven shall be
shaken: the Sun and Moon shall be darkened: and the stars shall seem to
fall from Heaven: b at which sight the Elect then living shall rejoice, but the
reprobate shall shake every joint of them a Mat. 24.29. Immediately after the
tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be darkened, the Moon shall not
give her light, the Stars shall fall from heaven, and the power of heaven
shall be shaken: Verse 30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man
in heaven: and then shall all the kinreds of the earth mourn, and they shall
see the Son of man come in the Clouds of heaven, with power and great
glory. b Luke. 21.26. Men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for looking
after those things, which shall come on the world. Verse. 28. And when these
things begin to come to pass: then look up and lift up your heads, for your
redemption draws near. 2. Tim 4.8. Hence forth is laid up for me the crown
of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge shall give me at that day:
and not to me only, but unto all the^ also that love his appearing.

II. Then the heavens, being all set on fire, shall with a noise, like to that
of Chariot wheels, suddenly pass away, and the elements, with the earth, and
all therein, shall be consumed with fire. 2. Pet. 3.12. Looking for, and hasting
unto the coming of the day of God, by which the heavens being set on fire
shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with heat. Ver. 13. But we look
for new heavens, and a new earth, according to his promise, wherein dwells
all righteousness.

At the same time, when as all these things shall come to pass, a the sound
of the last trumpet shall be heard, sounded by the Archangell. b And Christ shall
come suddenly in the clouds, with power, and glory, and a great train of
Angels. a Matt. 24.31. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a
trumpet. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a
showte, even with the voice of the Archangell, and with the trumpet of God: and
the dead in Christ shall rise first. b Matthew. 24.30. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Then shall
we, which live and remain, be caught up with them also in the clouds, to
meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

III. Now at the sound of the trumpet, the elect, which were dead, shall arise
with their bodies: and those very bodies, which were turned to dust, and one
part rent from another, shall by the omnipotent power of God, be restored, and
the souls of them shall descend from heaven, and be brought again into those
bodies. As forathem, which then shall be alive, they shall be changed in the
twinkling of an eye, and this mutation shall be in steed of death. At that
time, the bodies shall receive their full redemption: b and all the bodies of
the Elect, shall be made like the glorious body of Christ Jesus, and therefore
shall be spiritual, immortal, glorious, and free from all infirmity. a 1.
Cor. 15.52. We shall not all sleep, but we shall be changed in a moment, in
the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. bverse. 43. It is sown in
dishonor, it is raised in honor: it is sown in weakness, it is raised in
power. verse. 44. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual
body, etc.

IIII. Last of all, when they are all conuented before the tribunal seat of
Christ, he will forthwith place the Elect, severed from the Reprobate, and
taken up into the air, at his right hand, and to them being written in the
book of life, will he pronounce this sentence. Come ye blessed of my Father,
possess the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. Matt.
25.33. He shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on the left.
1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Revel. 20.12.15. Whosoever was not found written in the book
of life, was cast into the lake of fire.

Chap. 50. Of the estate of the Elect after judgment.
THe last judgment being once finished, the elect shall enjoy immediately
blessedness in the kingdom of heaven.

Blessedness is that, whereby God himself is all in all his elect. 1. Cor.
15.28. When all things shall be subdued to him, then shall the Son also
himself be subject unto him, that did subdue all things under him, that God
may be all in all. And it is the reward of good works: not because works can
merit, but by reason of Gods favor, who thus accepts works, and in respect
of the merit of Christ's righteousness, imputed to the elect. Romans 6.23. The
wages of sin is death, but eternal life is the gift of God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. 2. Timoth. 4.8. Revel. 22.12. Behold, I come shortly, and my
reward is with me, to give every man according at his work shall be.

Blessedness has two parts: Eternal life, and perfect glory.

Eternal life, is that fellowship with God, awhereby God himself, is, through
the Lamb Christ, life unto the Elect. For in the kingdom of heaven, the elect
shall not need meat, drink, sleep, air, heat, cold, physic, apparel,
or the light of the Sun and Moon: b but in place of all these, shall they
have in them Gods Spirit, by which immediately they shall be quickened for
ever. a John. 14.23. If any man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father
will love him, and we will come unto him, and dwell with him. 1. John. 4.15.
Whosoever confesses that Jesus Christ is the Soon of God, God dwells in
him, and he in God. Revel. 21.3. And I heard a voice, saying, Behold, the
Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them: and they shall be
his people, and God himself shall be their God with them. verse. 23. And that
City has no need of Sun or Moon to shine in it: for the glory of God
did light it, and the lamb is the light of it Revel. 22.2. In the mids of
the street of it, and of either side of the river, was the tree of life, which
bare twelve manner of fruits, and gave fruit every month: and the leaves of
the tree served to heal the nations with. verse. 5. And there shall be no night
there, and they need no candle or light of the sun: for the Lord gives
them light, and they shall reign for euermor^. b1. Corinthians. 15.45. Romans 8.11.
If the spirit of him, that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, because
that his spirit dwells in you.

Perfect glory, is that wonderful excellency of the Elect, whereby they
shall be in a far better estate then any heart can wish. This glory
consists in three points. I. In that they shall still behold the face of
God, which is his glory and majesty. Revel. 22.4. And they shall see his
face, and his name shall be in their foreheads. Psalm. 17.15. I will behold thy
face in righteousness and when I awake I shall be satisfied with thine image. II.
In that they shall be most like to Christ, namely, just, holy, incorruptible,
glorious, honorable, excellent, beautiful, strong, mighty, and nimble. 1.
Ioh. 3.2. Dearly beloved, now are we the sons of God, but yet it does not
appear what we shall be: and we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him: for we shall see him as he is. Philip. 3. verse. 21. Who shall change
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body,
according to the working, whereby he is able even to subdue all things to
himself. III. They shall inherit the kingdom of heaven, yea the new heavens,
and new earth shall be their inheritance. 1. Pet. 1.4. God has begotten you to
an inheritance immortal and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
heaven for you. Mat. 25.34. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand,
Come ye blessed of my Father, possess a kingdom prepared for you, before the
foundations of the world were laid. Revel. 5.10. Thou have made us unto our
God, Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the earth. Revel. 21.7. He that
overcomes, shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be
my sonn^.

The fruit that comes from both these parts of blessedness, is of two
sorts: Eternal joy, and the perfect service of God. Psalm. 16.11. Thou will
show me the path of life, in thy presence is the fullness of joy: and at thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 36.8. They shall be
satisfied with the fatness of thine house, and thou shall give them drink one
of the river of thy pleasures. verse. 9. For with thee is the well of life, and
in thy light shall we see light.

The parts of Gods service, are Praise, and Thanksgiving. Revel. 21.3. And I
heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, behold, the Tabernacle of God is
with men, and he will dwell with them: and they shall be his people, and God
himself shall be their God with them. Chapter. 5.12. Saying with a loud voice,
Worthy is the Lamb, that was killed to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise, etc. verse. 13.
Chapter. 11.17. The four and twenty Elders, which sat before God on their
seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying, We give thee
thanks, Lord God Almighty, which art, and which wast, and which art to come:
for thou have received thy great might, and have obtained thy kingdom.

The manner of perfourming this service, is to worship God by God himself
immediately. In heaven there shall neither be Temple, ceremony, nor Sacrament,
but all these wantes shall God himself supply together with the Lamb, that is,
Christ. Reu. 21.22. I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty, and
the Lamb are the Temple of it.

This service shall be daily and without intermission. Reave. 7.15. They are in
the presence of the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple.

A Corollarie, or the last conclusion.
THus God, in saving the Elect, does clearly set forth his Justice and
Mercy. His Justice, in that he punished the sins of the Elect, in his Sons
own person. His mercy, in that he pardoned their sin, for the merits of
his son. Ephesians. 1.18. That the eyes of your understanding may be lightened,
that ye may know what the hope is of his calling, and what the riches of his
glorious inheritance is in his Saints, 19. And what is the exceeding greatness
of his power toward us, which believe, according to the working of his mighty
power. verse. 20. Which he wrought in Christ. cha. 3.18. That ye may be able to
comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height: 19. And to know the love of Christ.

All these things the Lord himself has thus decreed, and in his good time
will accomplish them, to the glorious praise of his name. Prou. 16.4. The Lord
has made all things for his own sake: yea even the wicked for the day of
evil.

Chap. 51. Concerning the order of the causes of salvation according to the
doctrine of the Church of Rome.
THere are two things requisite to obtain salvation: Predestination, and the
Execution thereof.

Predestination is a fore-ordaining of the reasonable creature to grace in this
life, and glory in the life to come. Sebast. Catta. Enchirid. tract. 1. cap.
vlt.

This in regard of the first effects thereof, which are vocation, election, and
ordination to eternal life, has the cause of it in God, namely his will: but
in regard of the last effect, which is, the execution of such an ordinance, and
the obtaining of eternal life, it has the cause of it from man. But for the
more evident declaration of this, these seven conclusions must be set down.

I. The Predestination, and Reprobation of God, do not constrain or enforce
any necessity upon the will of man.

II. God has predestined all men, that is, he has appointed and disposed
all men, so as they might obtain eternal salvation.

III. Man is neither by necessity nor chance saved or condemned, but
voluntarily.

IIII. God has Predestined some, other has he rejected.

V. Those whom God has predestined by his absolute predestination, which
cannot be lost, they shall infallibly die in grace: But they which are
predestinate by that predestination which being according to present justice,
may be lost by some mortal sin which follows, are not infallibly saved,
but oftentimes such are condemned, and loose their crown and glory. Hence
arises that positio^ of theirs, that he which is justified may be a
reprobate, and perish eternally. Torrensis Aug. Confess. 2. book. 4. chap. 20.
sect. Therefore predestination is not certain, seeing it may be lost.

VI. God alone does know the certain and set number of them which are
predestinate.

VII. There is one set number of them which are predestinate, or reproved, and
that can neither be increased nor diminished.

The execution of Predestination, is either in infants, or those of years of
discretion.

Concerning infants, the merit of Christ is applied unto them, by baptism
rightly administered: so that whatsoever, in original corruption, may truly and
properly be accounted for sin, it is not only, as I may say, not pared away,
or not imputed, but utterly taken away. For there is nothing that God can hate
in such as are renewed. Council. Trid. 5. sect. 5. can.

Nevertheless they are urged to confess, that there remains yet in such as
are baptized concupiscence, or the relikes of sin. The which seeing it is
left in men for them to wrestle withal, it has not power to hurt such as
yield not unto it.

The execution of predestination in such as are of riper years, has six
degrees.

The first is vocation, whereby men, not for their own merits, but by Gods
preventing grace through Christ, are called to turn unto God.

The second is, a preparation to righteousness, whereby men, through the
inherent power of free will, do apply themselves to sanctification, after that
the same power is stirred up by the holy Ghost. For free will is only somewhat
diminished, and not extinguished: and therefore so soon as the holy Ghost
touches, and enlighteneth the heart, it works together with the same spirit,
freely assenting unto the same. This preparation has seven degrees. Biel. 4.
book. 14. did. 2. quest.

The first is faith, which is a knowledge and an assent, whereby men agree that
those things are true which are delivered concerning God, and his will,
revealed in the word of God.

This is the foundaion of justification, and prepares the heart: because it
stirs up free will that it may affect the heart with those motions by which it
is prepared to justification.

I. The first act of faith is to apprehend the vglines of sin, and the wages
thereof.

II. After this follows a fear of Gods anger, and of hell fire.

III. Then begin men to dislike, and in some sort to detest sin.

From these arises a certain disposition which has annexed unto it, the
merit of congruitie, yet not immediate nor sufficient, but imperfect.

IIII. At the length, faith returns to the contemplation of Gods mercies, and
believes that God is ready to forgive sins by the infusion of charity into
those, which are before sufficiently prepared and disposed.

V. Out of this contemplation proceeds the act of hope, whereby faith
begins to desire and to wait on God, as the cheifest good.

VI. Out of this act of hope arises love, whereby God is loved above all
things in the world.

VII. After this love follows a new dislike, and detestation of sin, not
so much in regard of fear of the punishment in hell fire, as in regard of
the offense to God, who is simply loved more then all other things.

VIII. After all these follows a purpose of amendment of life: and here
comes in the merit of congruitie, that is sufficient: or else, the immediate,
sufficient and last disposition before the infusion of grace.

The third degree of predestination, is the first justification, whereby men of
vniustare are made just, not only through the remission of their sins, but
also by a sanctification of the inward man, by his voluntary receiving of
grace and gifts.

The efficient cause of this justification, is the mercy of God, and the
meritorious passion of our Savior Christ, whereby he purchased justification
for men. The isntrumental cause is baptism. The formal cause is not that
justice, which was inherent in Christ, but which he infuseth into man: and that
is especially hope and charity.

The fourth degree is the second justification whereby men are of just, made
more just: the cause hereof is faith, joined with good works.

It is possible for such as are renewed, to keep the commandments: And
therefore it is false that is just (...) commits so much as a venial s^ne,
in his best actions, much less, that he deserves eternal death for the same.

The fifth degree is the reparation of a sinner by the sacrament of Penance. The
which is as it were, the second board after a shipwreck. The cause why this
reparation is necessary, is, because men loose the grace of justification by
every mortal sin.

The last degree is the fruit of Justification: which is nothing else, but the
meritorious reward of good works, namely eternal life, which the good works
of such as are in the estate of grace do ex condigno, that is, of sufficient
worthiness deserve.

Thus much concerning the degrees of executing Predestination. Now follows
the applying of predestination particularly to the persons of men.

No man, so long as he lives in this mortal life, ought so much to presume on
the secret mystery of God predestination, as to determine undoubtedly that he
is in the number of them whom God has ordained to eternal happiness. For no
man, without especial revelation can know, whom God has chosen to be his
heirs. Sess. 6. c. 12.

The errors.
This doctrine of the Church of Rome, is in truth, a blasphemous doctrine, and
to be no better accounted off, then as a gibbet, which is set up to torment and
to rack the consciences of men: But I will only touch in a word, the maine
absurdities of this their doctrine.

I. They make the name of Predestination proper only to the Elect, as though
God had not predestined the reprobate, but only foreknowen that such should
be reprobates: fearing least in so doing, they should make God a cause, why
the reprobates are damned. But Gods foreknowledge may as well be termed such a
cause, as his predestination. Acts. 2.23. And Augustine acknowledges Gods
predestination, as well in the reprobate as Elect. For, in his 15. book of the
City of God, 1. chap. he makes all men Citizens of one of these two Cities,
heaven and hell. The Citizens of the one, are predestinate to reign with God
perpetually, the other, to suffer eternal punishment with the devil and his
Angels.

II. They teach, that Gods predestination is mutable: and so as that he, whom
God has predestinate to life, may for all that be condemned: and he, who in
Gods foreknowledge is a reprobate, may afterward obtain eternal life. All
this is flat contrary: for God has undoubtedly and unchangeably decreed, what
shall become of every man, who shall be saved, and who shall be condemned. Romans
11.29. The gifts and calling of God, are without repentance. Math. 24.24. There
shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and
wonders, so that (if it were possible) they should deceive the very Elect. Romans
8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that
instifieth, verse. 34. Who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, etc.
verse. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? 2. Tim. 2.19. This
foundation stands sure, The Lord knows who are his. Again, if we grant
this, it must needs follow that the foreknowledge of God may be deceived, his
will altered, and his power weakened. The which is most blasphemous to think,
or say. Finally, by this means, every man should be uncertain of his
predestination to life: and so that excellent and only sure groundworke of
full assurance o salvation, is not only sore shaken, but quite and clean
ouerturned.

III. They teach, that God has predestinate all to salvation: but Paul, 2.
These. 2.10. faith plainly, that there are certain men ordained to
destruction, who^ he distinguishes from the Elect, verse. 13.2. Tim. 2.20. In a
great house, there are not only vessels of gold, and of silver, but also of
wood and of earth, and some for honor, and some for dishonor. Math. 20.16.
There are many called, but few chosen. And of so great a number of the Jews,
a remnant only are saved. This also serves to set out Gods goodness, in that
his benefit is not common to all men. For we usually admire nothing, but that
which is rare.

IIII. They teach, that predestination, in regard of the last effect thereof,
has his cause in man: namely, in his free will and works. For whom God has
foreseen, that they would willingly receive the grace of God offered them in
Christ, and which would lead their lives according to the commandments, them
did he predestinate: not by reason of their works, but of his free grace, yet
so, as that he had an eye or respect unto the good works which they would do.
This their brainesick imagination, Paul utterly overthrows, when he teaches.
Ephesians. 1.4. that God has chosen the Ephesians before the foundations of the
world were laid, not because he did foresee that they would be holy, but that
they should be holy and without blame before him in love. Tit. 2.12.
Furthermore, seeing there is nothing either above God, or greater then God, it
is palpable impiety to set down any cause of his will, which should be either
without, or above himself. Therefore we do not without good cause deny, that
Gods foreknowledge of faith, and good works in any, can be a motive why God
should decree, that some men should be saved.

V. They say, that Baptism truly administered, does not only wash away the
guiltiness, but also the corruption of original sin, in such sort, as that
after it is no more accounted a sin. But contrariwise, it is most certain,
that, howsoever the guiltines of sin be taken away, yet that natural
pollution and corruption, is not by and by extinguished, but curbed, as it
were, and kept under, that it bear not a full sway in man. For if it were
otherwise, why should Paul so bewail his original corruption, as he does, I
see, says he, an other law in my members, rebelling against the law of my
mind, and leading me captive to the law of sin, which is in my members:
miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? And the
same Paul, Romans 7.13. calls original sin, the worker of death.

Again, concupiscence is the very root of actual sin: therefore it must
needs be properly a sin, even after Baptism. James. 1.14. Lastly, unless
concupiscence were of the same nature with sin, that vehement and earnest
combat between the flesh and the spirit, would presently cease.

VI. They teach, that the power of freewil, which man received of God, to do
that which is good, is only lessened before true conversion, and not
extinguished: and therefore that it is possible for man, to prepare himself for
Justification. But the Scripture says, that a natural man cannot perceive the
things which are of God, much less will them. 1. Cor. 2.14. And (...) the same
we are taught, Ephesians. 2.1. that men are (...) ^eake, or sick, but dead in sin.

VII. Were as they say, that the holy Ghost doo^ stir up the will, to well
doing: it is apparan^e. For 1. Cor. 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is Lord,
but by the holy Ghost. And, Phil. 2.13. It is God which works in you, to do,
and to will. And no man can come to the Son, except the Father draw him. To
conclude, how ca^ there be any spark of goodness in him, who is anew to be
fashioned after God, in righteousness and true holiness. Ephesians. 4.24.

VIII. They teach, that in man there is a natural preparation to Grace: and
that it does by a merit, which is of sufficient worthiness, deserve
justification. This position sauoureth of more then Sathanicall pride. For can
any man think, (unless he be besides himself) that he, who deserves
infinite thousand damnations, can deserve the least drop of grace? 2. Cor.
3.5.

IX. They teach, that that faith, which they make to be the maine pillar of
man's justification, is nothing else, but a knowledge and illumination of the
mind, concerning the truth of Gods word. The which if it be so, I would feign
know why the devil might not be saved, who has this faith, which is the ground
of justification with the^: and yet, albeit he have this faith, no man will be
so simple, as to think, that he is, or can be, accounted one of the faithful.

X. They maintain, that the love of God, comes before reconciliation with
God, which is made in the work of justification: but contrarily, unless we
were surely persuaded of Gods love to us, in the justifying and sanctifying, it
were impossible for us to love God. 1. Ioh. 4.14. We love him, because he loved
us first. Even as we see that the sun by his heat, must first warm the air,
before the air by any heat of his, can warm our bodies.

XI. They say, that the formal cause of justification, is inherent justice.
But albeit, this infused and inherent justice, has indeed his use, and
commendations, and reward: nevertheless, because it is in this life, by reason
of the flesh, imperfect, and polluted, (as Esaias speaks) it cannot stand
before Gods judgment seat, and acquit any man from the sentence of
condemnation, so as he might become heir of eternal life.

They will here further say, that God does accept this inherent righteousness,
as a merciful father. This I grant, nevertheless, Gods justice must be
satisfied, or else we are damned. Wherefore Christ's obedience, apprehended by
a true and lively faith, is to be accounted the true essence of justification.
In temptation and the combat with sin and Satan, faith does not reason thus:
Now I have charetie and inherent justice, and therefore God will receive me into
his mercy; But faith does rather look directlye to the Son of God, who was
sacrificed for us, and sits at the right hand of the Father, making
intercession for us: to him does faith fly, and is persuaded that for his
cause, our sins are pardoned, and we reconciled to God, and that we are
accounted just, not by any inherent quality, but by the merit of Christ's
death and passion. Romans 5.19.

XII. That devised subtiltye of second Justification, is a mere delusion of
the devil. For first, the word of God allows none other justification but
one: there is one only justice, and one only satisfaction of the wrath of
God. Secondlye, if the increase of inherent justice, were a sufficient cause,
to distinguishe justification, they might as well make an hundredth
iustifications, as two. Thirdlye, where as they say, that men are justified by
good works, it is both false and rediculous. False, 1. All works, yea those
which are done after we are received into Gods favor, are excluded from
justifying. Ephesians. 2.10, Romans 3.28. We conclude that a man is justified by faith,
without the works of the Law. Where Paul speaks not of ceremonial, but of
moral works done under grace. 2. The cause of the cause, is the cause also
of that, which is caused, but grace without works is the cause of
predestination, which is the cause of justification: therefore grace without
works, shall much more be the cause of justification. I say it is also
ridiculous, because to affirm that inherent justice may be increased by good
works, which are the fruit thereof, is as if one should say, that the Vine
is more strong and liuelye by bearing Grapes: and that the inward brightness of
the sun is made greater, by sending forth of beams. That saying of Luther is
most true: Good works makes not a man just, but a just man makes good works.
For good fruit makes not a good tree, but declares it to be good, but a good
tree must needs make good fruit.

XIII. They affirm, that every mortal sin extinguisheth grace, the which,
if we may believe Gods word, is far otherwise. John. 6.37. All that the
Father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to me, J cast not
away. Mat. 16.16. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will J build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. 1. John. 2.19. They went
out from us, but they were not of us: for, if they had been of us, they would
have continued with us. Romans 5.1. We being then justified, we have peace with
God. Now how can this be true, if he, that is once justified may fall from
grace.

XIIII. They affirm, that works do of sufficient worthiness, merit eternal
life. Here we must consider, that, if any work be meritorious, it must first
be equivalent and proportional to the justice of God: secondly, God must
receive it upon desert, not upon favor: Now for our works, look to the
holiest, and they are very imperfect: and if so be they were in perfection
answerable to the law, yet were they no more, then we are bound by duetye to
perform. And indeed nothing can merit ought at Gods hands, but the works
of Christ. For the humanity of Christ gives the matter of a meritorious
work: and his deity, whereunto his humanity is, by an hypostaticall union
united, ministers sufficient merit and worthiness to the same work. This also
may we add, that the doctrine of works, does greatly darken the merit of
Christ: because the obtaining of eternal life is detracted from Christ's death
and obedience, and attributed to works. For (say these men) Christ by his
passion deserved that man should be justified, but man being justified,
deserved by his works eternal life. Augustine has a notable sentence against
this their doctrine in his 10. sermon de verbis Apostoli. If God (says he)
made us men, and we our selves made us good men, we have made somewhat better
then that which God has made. For a man that is saved is better then any man.
If therefore God made thee a man, and thou did make thy self a good man, that
which thou did make, is better then that which God made. Lift not thy self
against God, submit rather thy self and reverence him.

XV. They say, that without especial revelation, no man knows whether he be
predestinate. But it is out of all contrauersie, that God by his Spirit, word,
and effects of predestination, gives certain testimonies to such as are his
children, that they are elect and shall be saved. 1. Cor. 1.12. We have not
received the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might
know the things which are given us of God. Luke. 10.20. Rejoice that your names
are written in the book of life. But no man can rejoice for any good which he
assuredly knows not.

Chap. 52. Of the decree of Reprobation.
THus much shall suffice for the decree of Election: now follows the decree
of Reprobation, whereby God in his just judgment has determined eternally to
reject some, to the praise of his justice. 1. Pet. 2.8. Being disobedient, unto
the which thing they were ordained. Jude. 4. There are certain men crept in
which were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly, etc. 1.
Thessa. 5.9. He has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our
Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 9.22. What if God would to show his wrath, and to make
his power known, suffer with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared to
destruction.

Some, fearing least they should make God an unjust and cruel God, refer this
word Predestination only to the elect: as for the reprobate, they hold that
God does not predestinate them, but only foreknow that they should be
condemned. Of this mind is Heming. Syntag. chap. of Predestination: and
Iacobus Andreas. These men turn the causes of salvation and damnation vpside
down: following this order.

Gods decree, whereby he would that all men should be saved in Christ. The fall
of Adam, not preordeined of God, but only foreknowen Predestination, whereby God
purposed with himself to justify, and pertually to glorify certain of Adams
posteritye, freelye of his own mercy, not by their faith or works, which he
fore saw. Gods foreknowledg of man's incredulity, and co^tumacie, whereby the
rest of Adams posterity refuse that grace which is offered in the Gospel. The
decree of reprobation, whereby God foreknowing their co^tumacye, adiudgeth them
to eternal damnation.



An universal vocation, whereby grace and salvation is offered to al men without
exception.

But this description halteth right down, as may be proved by many reasons.
First, it is untrue, that God would have al men saved in christ. For no man can
be said to be elected, if God will that all men should be elected in christ.
For election is a singling out of some from others: and he that electeth or
chooses, cannot be said to receive all: neither can he that takes all, be
said to make choice of a few. Wherefore, as all men agree that there is a
decree of election: so by the law of contraries we must conclude, that there is
in like order and place, the decree of reprobation opposite unto it.

If any man reason out of 1. Tim. 2.4. That God would that all men should be
saved. He must know, that this sentence is not generallye meant of all men, but
indefinitely of some. And therefore it must not be understood of every
singular and particular man, but of every singular estate and condition of man.
Revel. 5.9. Christ redeemed his by his blood out of every kindred, and tung, and
nation, and people. And he is said Mat. 4.23. To have cured every disease, that
is, every kind of disease* And Romans 5.18. As by the offense of one, the fault
came on all men to condemnation: so by the justifying of one, the benefit
abounded toward al men, to the justification of life. 19. For as by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many
also be made righteous. In this place we must note, that the words (all men)
are indifinitelye put for many. August. in Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 103. The
Scripture (says he) that speaks of God, that he would have all to be saved,
not as though there were none whom he would have condemned, seeing he would not
show his miracles to the^, who if he had showed to them any, they would as he
himself says, have repented: But we must understand by all men all sorts of
men, whether kings or subjects, or any other condition whatsoever, etc. And in
his book de Corrept. and Gratia. c. 14. It is said, that he will have all to
be saved, namely, such as are predestinate to salvation, because of all sorts
of men some are predestinate, as it is spoken of the Pharasies, Ye ^ithe every
herb. Whereas Peter says. 2. Pet. 3.9. God would have no man to perish, but
all men to come to repentance, this must be understood of all the elect: because
he speaks of such as are faithful, and sanctified.

As for the place in Ezekiel. 18.23. God will not the death of a sinner: we must
hold this, that (God will) is not, as it is the overthrow and destruction of
his creature: yet may he be said to will it another way: namely, as death is a
punishment, and means to declare the justice of God.

Now in that John says. 1. John. 2.2. That Christ is a propitiation for the
sins of the whole world: his meaning is not, that all the world shall be
saved, but that the elect, chosen out of all the world, shall have Christ their
propitiatour. For so says Christ himself, that he asks not for the world,
but for the^ whom the father has given him out of the world. Now it cannot be,
that he should be a propitiation for them, for whom he does not vouchsafe to
pray.

Secondly it is false that God will have none damned. For seeing that some men
are condemned, it must needs be either with his will, or without his will. If
without his will, then violence shall be offered to the will of God, something
being done against it, which is impious once to think, if with it God must
needs change his mind, which cannot be. Neither is there any cause why we
should think that God is an accepter of persons, if so be he ordain any to
condemnation: because he was not moved hereunto by any inherent circumstance of
any man's person: neither owes he ought to any man, and may do with his own
that which seems good unto him.

Neither must any think that hereby God hates his creature: for he decreede
to destroy his workmanship, not because he hated it, but upon just causes
known to him, he ordained it to be subject to his hatred. And God does not
actually hate any thing for ought but sin. That saying of Aug. to Simpl. is a
true saying. When God makes the wicked, whom he does not justify, vessels of
wrath, he does it not to hate that which he made: for in that he made them
vessels, they have their use, namely, that by their pains to which they were
ordained, the vessels of honor might reap profit. God therefore does not hate
them, in that they are men, or vessels, neither any thing that he made in them
by creation, or ordination. For God hates nothing which he has made. But in
as much as he made them vessels of destruction, he did it to instruct others.
As for their impiety which he never made, that he hates utterly. As
therefore a judge hates theft in a man, but he does not hate his punishment
that he is sent to work in the mines. For the thief does the first, the Judge
the latter: so God, whereas of the company of them which perish, he makes
vessels of perdition, he does not therefore hate that which he does, that is,
the condemnation of those which perish in their due punishment for sin.

If any oppose against this, the place of Mal. 2.10. That God is the Father of
all: they must consider that it is to be understood of Gods Church: out of
which all the corrupt posteritye of Adam are the sons of wrath, and children
of Satan. Ephesians. 2.2. Ioh. 8.44. Last of all this reason must not be urged,
that God created any to the end he might destroy them. For the end of every
man's creation is the glory of God: to the manifestation whereof the wicked
were ordained. Pro. 16.4.

Thirdly, whereas they say, that God did only foreknow, and not from eternity
decree, the fall of Adam, it is most impious. For there is not the very least
thing in nature, but it comes to pass by Gods decree. Mat. 10.30. Yea, those
actions which are sin, the Lord has in his counsel determined of the^. Act.
4.28. Therefore, if any be of this mind, they either ouerturn Gods providence
and counsel, or at the least, make it to be but a fond and idle speculatio^.

Fourthly, this is a preposterous doctrine, namely, that God did first
foreknow the fall of mankind in Adam: and after that ordained such as he
foreknew, to death or life. For the end is always first in the intent of the
agent. Again, the fall of Adam is a subordinate means, whereby God does execute
the decree of predestination. Therefore no man may think, that God first took
counsel of the means whereby his decree might be accomplished, and afterward
considered of the thing to be accomplished, that is, of the decree of his
election and reprobation.

Last of all, it is not true, that all men are called to salvation: and that
therefore that grace which is in Christ, is offered to all: and that God decreed
to reject some, for their unbelief which he foresawe in them. For many
children of faithful parents have died before they had any use of reason at
all: ye many thousands of riper years, which have not had so much as a
glimmering of Christ. Act. 14.16. Andalbeit a man should never contemn the
Gospel, yet the corruption of original sin, were enough to condemn the
whole world. Again, that great admiration of Paul. Romans 9.20. O man, who art
thou which pleadest against God? shows manifestly that the cause why God
decreed to reject some is unsearchable, and that it does not depend upon his
foresight, that such would spurn against the grace offered them in the
Gospel. Aug. has a fit speech for this purpose. Epist. 105. Who, says he,
created the reprobate, but God? and why? because it was his good pleasure? But
why was it his pleasure? O man, what art thou which disputest with God?

Chap. 53. Concerning the execution of the decree of Reprobation.
IN the execution of this decree, there is to be considered, the foundation or
beginning, and the degrees or proceeding thereof.

The foundation of executing the decree of reprobation is the fall of Adam, by
which fall he was subject both to sin and damnation. To. 11.32. For God has
shut up al^ in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all. 1. Pet. 2.8. Here
we must note, that God has so decreed to condemn some, as that
notwithstanding all the fault and guilt of condemnation remains in the men
only.

Further, whom God rejects to condemnation, those he hates: this hatred of
God is, whereby he detesteth and abhors the reprobate when he is fallen into
sin, for the same sin. And this hatred which God has to man, comes by the fall
of Adam: and it is neither an antecedent or a cause of Gods decree, but only a
consequent and follows the decree.

Reprobates are either infants, or men of riper age.

In reprobate infants, the execution of Gods decree is this: as soon as they
are borne, for the guilt of original and natural sin being left in Gods
secret judgment unto themselves, they dying are rejected of God for ever. Romans
5.14. But death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them also that sinned not
after the like manner of the transgression of Adam, which was the figure of him
that was to come. To. 9.11. For yet the children were borne, and when they had
neither done good nor evil, that the purpose of God might remain according to
election, not by works, but by him that calls.

Reprobates of riper age, are of 2. sorts, they that are called (namelye by an
ineffectual calling) and they that are not called.

In the Reprobates which are called, the execution of the decree of reprobation
has 3. degrees, to wit, an acknowledgement of Gods calling, a falling away
again, and condemnation.

The acknowledgement of Gods calling, is, whereby the Reprobates for a time do
subject themselves to the calling of God, which calling is wrought by the
preaching of the word. Matthew. 22.14. For many are called, but few are chosen.
And of this calling there are five other degrees.

The first, is an enlightening of their minds, whereby they are instructed of
the holy Ghost to the understanding and knowledge of the word. Heb. 6.4. For
it is impossible that they which were once lightened, etc. 2. Pet. 2.20. For if
they, after they have escaped from the filthiness of the world, through the
knowledge of the Lord, and of the savior Jesus Christ, are yet tangled again
therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the beginning.

The second, is a certain penitencie, whereby the reprobate, I. Does know his
sin. II. Is pricked with the feeling of Gods wrath, for sin. III. Is grieved
for the punishment of sin. IIII. Does confess his sin. V. Acknowledges God to
be just in punishing sin. VI. Desires to be saved. VII. Promises repentance
in his misery or affliction, in these words. I will sin no more. Mat. 27.3.
Then when Judas which betrayed him saw that he was condemned, he repented
himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver, to the chief
Preests and Elders. Heb. 12.17. For ye know how that afterward also when he
would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place to
repentance, though he sought the blessing with tears. 1. King 21.27. Now when
Ahab heard those words, he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon him, and
fasted, and lay in Sackecloth, and went softlye. Nomb. 23.10. Let me dye the
death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his. Psalm. 78.32. For all
this they sinned still, and believed not his wondrous works. Verse 33.
Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years hastily. Verse
34. And when he slew them, they sought him, and they returned, and sought God
earlye. Ver. 35. They remembered that God was their strength, and the most high
God their redeemer.

The third degree is, a temporary faith, whereby the reprobate does confusedly
believe the promises of God, made in Christ, I say, confusedlye, because he
believes that some shall be saved, but he believes not that he himself
particularly shall be saved, because he being content with a general faith, does
never apply the promises of God to himself: neither does he so much as
conceive any purpose, desire, or endeavor to apply the same, or any wrestling
or striving against securirie or carelesnes and distrust. Iam. 2.19. Thou
beleuest that there is one God, thou do well: the devils also believe it,
and tremble. Matthew. 13.20. And he that received seed in the stonye ground, is
he which hears the word, and incontinentlye with joy receives it. 21. Yet
has he no root in himself, and dureth but a season. Ioh. 2.23. Now when he
was at Jerusalem at the Passover in the feast, many believed in his name, when
they saw his miracles which he did. v. 24. But Jesus did not commit himself
unto them, because he knew them all.

The fourth is, a tasting of heavenly gifts: as of Justification, and of
Sanctification, and of the virtues of the world to come. This tasting is
verilye a sense in the hearts of the reprobates, whereby they do perceive and
feel the excellency of Gods benefits, notwithstanding they do not enjoy the
same. For it is one thing to taste of dainties at a banquet, and another thing
to feed and to be nourished thereby. Heb. 6.4. For it is impossible, that they
which were once lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost.

The fifth degree, is the outward holiness of life for a time, under which, is
comprehended the zeal in the profession of Religion, a reverence and fear
toward Gods ministers, and amendment of life in many things. Mark 6.20. For
Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and reverenced
him, and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly. Acts
8.13. Then Simon himself believed also, and was baptized, and continued with
Philip, and wondered when he saw the signs and great miracles which were done.
Hose. 6.4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat
thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the morning dew, it goes
away.

The second degree of the execution of Gods counsel of reprobation, in men of
ripe age which are called, is a falling away again, which for the most part is
effected and wrought after this manner. First, the reprobate is deceived by
some sin. Secondlye, his heart is hardened by the same sin. Thirdlye, his
heart being hardened, it becomes wicked and perverse. Fourthly, then follows
his incredulity and unbelief, whereby he consents not to Gods word, when he
has heard and known it. Fifthly, an Apostacy or falling away from faith in
Christ, does immediatlye follow this unbelief. Heb. 3.12, 13. Take heed
brethren, least at any time there be in any of you an evil heart, and
unfaithful, to depart away from the living God. 1. Tim. 1.19.

This Apostacy, is sometimes sin against the holy Ghost, which is, when any
man willinglye through obstinate malice, does speak blasphemye against Christ
and his divine truth, which he has certainly known. This obstinacy of the
heart arises from the old and engraffed affections, hatred, envy, and malice,
directly against God himself and Christ. It has his name, not because it is
committed against the person of the holy spirit, but because it is done
against the gift of the holy Ghost, namelye, Illumination. This cannot be
forgiven, because it excludes all faith and repentance. Heb. 6.4 and chap. 10.
ver. 26. For if we sin willingly after that we have received the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sins.

After Apostacy follows pollutio^: which is the very fulness of all iniquity,
altogether contrary to sanctification. Gene. 15.16. And in the fourth
generation, they shall come hither again, for the wickedness of the Amorites is
not yet full.

The third degree, is damnation, whereby the reprobates are delivered up to
eternal punishment. The execution of damnation begins in death, and is
finished in the last judgment. Luke. 16.22. And it was so, that the beggar
died, and was carried by the Angel into Abraham's bosom, the rich man also
died, and was buried. ver. 23. And being in hell torments, he lift up his eyes
and saw Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his bosom.

The execution of the degree of reprobation in Infidels, which are not called,
is this. First, they have by nature ignorance and vanity of mind. After that,
follows hardness of heart, whereby they become void of all sorrow for their
sins. Then comes a reprobate sense, which is, when the natural light of
reason and of the judgment of good and evil is extinguished. Afterward when
the heart cease to sorrow, then arises a committing of sin with greedines.
Then comes pollution, which is the fulness of sin. Lastly, a just reward is
given to all these, to wit, fearful condemnation. Ephesians. 4.18. Having their
cogitation darkened, and being strangers from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their hearts. Romans 1.28.
For as they regarded not to know God, even so God delivered them up unto a
reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient.

Chap. 54. Of the state and condition of the Reprobates when they are dead.
THe death of the Reprobate, is a separation of the body and the soul: of the
body, that for a time it may lie dead in the earth: of the soul, that it may
feel the torments of hell, even until the time of the last judgment: at
which time the whole man shall be cast into the most terrible and fearful
fire of hell. 1. Pet. 3.19. By the which he also went, and preached unto the
spirits that are in prison, Luke. 8.2. Peter. 2.4. For if God spared not the
Angels that sinned, but cast them down into hell, and delivered them into
chains of darkness to be kept unto damnation.

The reprobates when they die, do become without sense and astonished, like unto
a stone: or else they are overwhelmed with a terrible horror of conscience,
and despairing of their salvation, as it were, with the gulf of the sea
ouerturning them. 1. Sam. 25.37. Then in the morning when the wine was gone out
of Nabal, his wife told him those words, and his heart died within him, and he
was like a stone. verse. 38. And about ten days after the Lord smote Nabal
that he died. Math. 27.5. And when he had cast down the silver pieces in the
temple, he departed, and went and hanged himself.

CHAP. 55. Of the condemnation of the Reprobates at the last judgment.
IN the last judgment, at the sound of the trumpet, the living being stricken
with horror and fear, shall be changed in a moment, the dead shall rise
again to condemnation: both the living and the dead shall then have immortal
bodies, but without glory: and they standing upon the earth at the left hand
of Christ the Judge, shall hear the sentence of condemnation: Depart from
me, ye curssed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and
his Angels. John. 5.29. And they shall come forth that have done good, unto
the resurrection of life: but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection
of condemnation. Matthew. 25.41. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. For the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a showte, and with the voice of the Archangell, and
with the Trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first. verse. 17.
Then shall we, which live and remain, be caught up with them also in the
cloud, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we be ever with the Lord.

Chap. 56. Of the estate of the Reprobates in hell.
AFter that the sentence of condemnation is pronounced, then follows
everlasting death: whereof this is the estate.

I. The Reprobates are separated from the presence and glory of God.

II. They are punished with eternal confusion, and most bitter reproaches:
because all their secret wickednesses and sins are reueiled. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
Which shall be punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power. Math. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God. 1. Ioh. 2.28. And now little children, abide in
him, that when he shall appear, we may be bold, and not be ashamed before him
at his coming.

III. They have fellowship with the devil and his angels. Mat. 25.41.

IV. They are wholly in body and soul, tormented with an incredible horror,
and exceeding great anguish, through the sense and feeling of Gods wrath,
powered out upon them for ever. Isay. 66.24. And they shall go forth, and look
upon the carkaises of men, that have transgressed against me: for their worm
shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched: and they shall be an
abhorring unto all flesh.

Hereupon is the punishment of those, that are condemned, called Hell fire, a
worm, weeping, and gnashing of teeth, utter darkness, etc. Revel. 21.8. But
the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idoloters, and all liars, shall have their
part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death. Math. 13.42. And shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Isa. 66.24.

A Corollarie.
ANd this is the full execution of Gods decree of reprobation, whereby
appears the great justice of God in punishing sin: from whence also comes
Gods glory, which he propounds to himself, as the last and cheifest end in
all these things. Therefore let every Christian propound the same end unto
himself. Romans 9.14. What shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with
God? God forbid. verse. 15. For he said to Moses, I will have mercy on him to
whom I will show mercy: and will have compassion on him, on whom I will have
compassion. verse. 16. So then, it is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, but in God that shows mercy. verse. 17. For the Scripture says
unto Pharaoh, for this same purpose have I stirred thee up, that I might show
my power in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth.
1. Corinthians. 10.31. Whether therefore, ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do,
do all to the glory of God.

CHAP. 57. Of the Application of Predestination.
THe right applying of Predestination to the persons of men, is very
necessary: and it has two parts. The first, is the judgment of particular
predestination, and the second, is the use of it.

The judgment and discerning of a man's own predestination, is to be
performed by means of these rules which follow.

I. The Elect alone, and all they that are elect, not only may be, but also in
Gods good time, are sure of election in Christ to eternal life. 1. Cor. 2.12,
2. Cor. 13.5.

II. They have not this knowledge from the first causes of Election, but rather
from the last effects thereof: and they are especially two: The testimony of
Gods Spirit, and the works of Sanctification. 2. Pet. 1.10. Romans 8.16.

III. If any doubt of this testimony, it will appear unto them, whether it
come from the Spirit of God, or their own carnal presumption. First, by a
full persuasion which they shall have, for the holy Ghost will not barely say
it, but persuades such, that they are the children of God, the which the flesh
cannot in any wise do. Secondly, by the manner of persuasion: for the holy
Ghost draws not reasons from the works, or worthiness of man, but from Gods
favor and love: and this kind of persuasion is far different from that
kind, which Satan uses. Thirdly, by the effects of that testimony. For if
the persuasion arise from presumption, it is a dead persuasion: but contrarily,
it is most lively and stirring, if it come from the holy Ghost. For such as are
persuaded that they are elected, and adopted children of God, they will love
God, they will trust in him, and they will call upon him with their whole heart.

IV. If the testimony of Gods Spirit, be not so powerful in the elect, then
may they judge of their election, by that other effect of the holy Ghost:
namly, sanctification: like as we use to judge by heat that there is fire, when
we cannot see the flame it self.

V. And of all the effects of sanctification, these are most notable. I. To
feel our wants, and in the bitterness of heart, to bewail the offense of God
in every sin. II. To strive against the flesh, that is, to resist, and hate the
ungodly motions thereof, and with grief to think the^ burthenous and
troublesome. III. To desire earnestly and vehemently the grace of God, and
merit of Christ to obtain eternal life. IIII. When it is obtained, to accounte
it a most precious jewel. Phil. 3.8. V. To love the minister of Gods word, in
that he is a minister, and a christian, in that he is a christian: and for that
cause, if need require, to be ready to spend our blood with the^. Mat. 10.42.
1. Ioh. 3.16. VI. To call upon God earnestly, and with tears. VII. To desire
and love Christ's coming, and the day of judgment, that an end may be made of
the days of sin. VIII. To fly al occasions of sin, and seriously to endeavor
to come to newnes of life. IX. To persevere in these things to the last gasp of
life. Luther has a good sentence for this purpose, He that will serve God,
must (says he) believe that which cannot be seen, hope for that which is
deferred, and love God, when he shows himself an enemy, and thus remain to
the end. Now, if so be all the effects of the spirit are very feeble in the
godly, they must know this, that God tries them, yet so, as they must not
therewith be dismayed, because it is most sure, that if they have faith, but as
much as a grane of mustard seed, and as weak as a young infant is, it is
sufficient to ingraffe them into Christ, and therefore we must not doubt of
their election, because they see their faith foeble, and the effects of the
holy Ghost faint within them.

VI. Neither must he, that as yet has not felt in his heart any of these
effects, presently conclude, that he is a reprobate: but let him rather use
the word of God, and the sacraments, that he may have an inward sense of the
power of Christ, drawing him unto him, and an assurance of his redemption by
Christ's death and passion.

VII. No man may peremptorily set down, that he, or any other is a reprobate.
For God does oftentimes prefer those, which did seem to be most of all
estraunged from his favor, to be in his kingdom, above those, who in man's
judgment were the children of the kingdom. Hence is it, that Christ says: The
Publicanes and harlots go before you: and, many an one is called at the
eleventh hour, as appears by that notable example of the thief upon the
Cross.

The uses, which may be made of this doctrine of predestination, are very many.
First, for our instruction, we are taught these things.

I. That there is neither any justification by works, nor any works of ours
that are meritorious. For election is by the free grace of God: and therefore
in like sort is justification. For (as I said before) the cause of the cause,
is the cause of the thing caused. And for this reason, is the work of
salvation, grace in the matter of salvation does challenge the whole work to
it self. Romans 11.5. At this time there is a remnant through the election of
grace. 2. Tim. 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given to us, through Christ Jesus, before the world was. Phil. 1.29. Unto you
it is given for Christ, that not only ye should believe in him, but also
suffer for his sake. Romans 3.24. We are justified freely by grace. Tit. 3.5. Not
by the works of righteousness, which we had done, but according to his mercy
he saved us. Ezech. 36.27. I will cause you to walk in my statutes. Roman.
6.23. The gift of God is eternal life.

II. That Astrology, teaching, by the casting of Natiuities, what men will be,
is ridiculous, and impious: because it determines, that such shall be very like
in life, and conversation, whom God in his predestination has made unlike.
Iaakob and Esau, borne of the same parents, and almost in the same moment of
time, (for Iaakob held Esau by the heel, as he was borne) were of most unlike
dispositions, and had diverse events. The like may we see in all twins, and
others which are borne at the same time.

III. That God is most Wise, Omnipotent, Just, and merciful. O the wonderful
riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! Ephesi. 1.5. Who has predestinate
us, to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will.

Secondly, being the servants of Christ, we are admonished.

I. To fight against all doubting and diffidence of our salvation, because it
neither depends upon works, nor faith, but upon Gods decree which is
immutable. Math. 24.24. Luke 10.20. Rejoice that your names are written in the
book of life. Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen?
it is God that justifies, who shall condemn? 2. Tim. 2.19. This teaches,
that the anchor of hope must be fixed in the truth, and stabilitie of the
immutable good pleasure of God: so that albeit our faith be so tossed, as that
it is in danger of ship wrack, nevertheless it must never sink to the
bottom, but even in the mids of danger, take hold upon repentance, as on a
board, and so recover it self.

II. To hubmle our souls under the mighty hand of God: For we are as clay in
the hand of the potter. Romans 9.21. They through infidelity are broken off, but
thou stand through faith. Be not his minded but fear.

III. To give all glory to God. 2. These. 2.13. We ought to give thanks always
to God for you brethren, beloved of the Lord, because that God has from the
beginning chosen you to salvation.

IIII. To bear crosses patiently. Romans 8.29. Those which he knew before, he
also predestinate, to be made like to the image of his Son. This likeness to
Christ, is in bearing afflictions. Phil. 3.10. That I may know him, and the
virtue of his resurrection, and (...) saved. And by Paul, Ye which are
baptized, have put on Christ. David being armed with the like comfort from his
circumcision, feared not to join battle with that great Giant Goliath: and if
this were not so, it must needs follow, that Baptism were nothing else but
an idle ceremony, and also the persons of the Trinity would be thought
liars. Wherefore those afflicted men, when Satan assaulteth them, must resist
him with these words: Depart from me Satan, thou have neither part nor
portion in the inheritance of my soul, because I am baptized in the Name of
the holy Trinity, and so am truly made the Son of God by adoption. And are
these the strong weapons, which so many times, and in so many words, have
been objected against me by D. Andreas? and whereby he has gotten the
victory? but because this his reason is somewhat intricate, I will explane it
after this sort. First, for the place of Scripture which he alleges, namely,
that God is greater then our hearts. It is so far from comforting an
afflicted conscience, that it will rather drive him to despair. Neither does
Ioh. 1. epist. 3.20. make mention of it, to ease such as are in despair,
showing unto them by that sentence, the greatness of Gods mercies: but rather
that he might thereby, even bruise in pieces, the hearts of proud persons, when
they consider the greatness of Gods majesty. And for the other place, when as a
man doubts of his salvation, and feels no testimonies of faith in himself,
(for such an one we here speak of) what comfort, think you, (...) is
baptized, shall be saved? For he would rather reason contrarily, thus: I indeed
am baptized, yet for all that I believe not, and therefore my baptism is not
available, I must needs be condemned. For the saying of August. in his
treatise upon Ioh. 6. is very true, who speaking of Simon Magus, says, What
good did it him to be baptized? Brag not therefore (says he) that thou art
baptized, as though that were sufficient for thee, to inherit the kingdom of
heaven. As for the place of Paul, Gal. 3. I showed plainly before, how D.
Andreas did violently wrest it to his purpose.

Neither are his reasons, taken from the absurdity that would follow, of more
force then the former, albeit he makes the^ especial pillars to underprop the
truth of his cause. For, I pray you, is God of less truth, because his truth
is neglected, and derided of them that contemn it? Is the ceremony of
Baptism therefore in vain, because some refuse the grace offered in baptism:
others (if we may believe D. Andreas) reject that grace when they have received
it? What? Is not the Gospel therefore the power of God to salvation, because it
is to such as believe not the savor of death to eternal death? May not the
Supper of the Lord, be a pledge of Gods covenant, because so many abuse these
holy signs, or (as D. Andreas is of opinion) the very body and blood of our
Savior Christ? And, that I may reason from that which is true in the
experience of every child, can the sun be said to be without light, because
they which are blind, and asleep, have no benefit by the light thereof,
neither such as shut their eyes so close that they will not enjoy the comfort
of the light? But amongst all, this one is most childish, that D. Andr. will
make this his principal argument, namely, that in vain did men, thus tempted,
fly at all unto Baptism, unless we conclude with him, that all such as are
baptized, are in baptism adopted the sons of God. For first, if this were a
good conseque^t in baptism: it were in vain, for such an afflicted
conscience, to gather unto himself a testimony from the word of God, and the
other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, unless we make all those to be in like
sort regenerate, and adopted, unto whom the word of God is preached, and the
Lords Supper administered: either of which, for D. Andreas to affirm, is a
bold untruth.

But to omit this, what if we grant this which D. Andr, requires concerning
Baptism? may not for all that, any that is so tempted, by Satan's policy,
refel this great comforter, by his own argument? after this sort. I will grant
D. Andr. your question: suppose I have been baptized, and adopted the son of
God: yet seeing you teach, that the grace of God is not so sure but that I may
fall from the same, as indeed I feel that I have grievously fallen, what do ye
now else but lift me up with one hand to heaven, and with the other cast me
down into hell? What mean you therefore to teach me those things which are so
far from easing me, as that contrarily, they do more and more lay out unto me,
mine abominable and ungrateful heart? See now what sure consolation,
consciences grievously afflicted may reap by this doctrine of their comforter
D. Andreas.

Now if any be desirous to know, what spiritual comfort is most meet to be
ministered unto consciences so troubled, I will show them that which is
grounded upon a sure foundation, and which I my self have often found to be
true in mine own experience: the which also I purpose to handle more largely,
for the benefit of the christian reader. First therefore we teach, contrarily to
that which D. Andreas does most falsely object against us, that the eternal
decree, or as Paul speaks the purpose of God, must not be sought in the
bottomless counsel of God, but rather in the manifestation of it, namely in
his vocation, by the word and sacraments. This I speak of such as are of
years of discretion, as they must needs be, whom we seek to comfort in this
place.

Now because that external vocation, is not proper only to the elect (for
many are called, but few are chosen) but such a vocation as is effectual, that
is, whereby the understanding is not only enlightened, with the saving
knowledge of God, but in the will also there is created, a true, though not a
perfect hatred of sin, from whence arises an abhorring of sin, and love of
that which is good, or rather a desire to will, and do that which is right.
Therefore when we see one thus dangerously tempted, we apply unto his
afflicted conscience, that true Nepenthes, and comfortable and restoratiue
medicine, which is taken from Gods effectual vocation, as it were out of an
Apothecaries box.

If therefore I have to do with such an one, (...) ^ed by the preaching of the
Gospel, or if he were called, yet seems both to himself and others never
to have regarded him that called: and hence concludes that he is not in the
number of them who^ God has purposed to take pity upon: I forthwith tell him,
that Satan plaieth the Sophister, in teaching him thus to conclude: for this
his reason is as untrue, as if a man looking at midnight, and seeing that the
sun is not then risen, should therefore affirm that it would never rise. And
this is that which when I objected to D. Andreas. page 482. He very boldly
corrupting my meaning, printed this as mine assertion, Say unto a man that is
afflicted, the sun is risen, although as yet it be not rise^. But I teach not
lies, howsoever this deprauation of my words came from D. Andr. printers, or
himself. And whereas D. Andr. excepted, that this consolation were to no
purpose, because he that was afflicted might doubt, whether this sun would
ever rise or not: I answered to him, that which the printers have quite left
out, and which I will now therefore more fully repeat. I was wont therefore to
tell the party thus troubled, after he had forsaken his false and deuelish
position: that although an external vocation were not of force enough to
appease an afflicted conscience, yet it was of sufficient force and efficacy
against the devil. For I tell him that they which never had external nor
internal calling, they (if we regard an ordinary caling) must needs perish: but
whosoever is once called, he has set as it were his foot in the first entry
into the kingdom of heaven: and unless it be by his own default, he shall
come afterward into the courts of God, and so by degrees into his Majesty's
palace. And for the confirmation of this, I use diverse ways. For why, say I,
doubtest thou of his good will toward thee, who in mercy has sent me a
minister to call thee unto him? thou have no cause, unless thou allege the
number of thy sins. If this be all, why, oppose the infinite greatness of Gods
mercy against thy sins, who has sent me to bring thee unto him. The Lord
vouchsafes to bring thee into the way of the elect, why art thou a stumbling
block unto thy self? and refusest to follow him? If thou feel not as yet
inwardly in thy self to be stirred forward, pray that thou may be. Know
this for a most sure truth, that this desire in thee is a pledge of Gods
fatherlye good will toward thee. He neither can, nor will be wanting to this
which he has stirred up in thee. After these exhortations, I show him, how
some are called at the eleventh hour, how the Gentiles, after many thousand
years were called to be Gods people, how the thief was saved upon the cross:
these and many other remedies I used, whereof, I never remember that I repented
me.

But If I deal with such as have before obeyed the Lords calling, and either
by reason of some grievous sin into which they have fallen, or because they
have absented themselves from the Church of God, or in that they, refusing
public and private admonitions, have been offenciue to the Church, or, which
in mine experience, has befallen many very good and godly persons, whilst
they satisfy not themselves, they are so altogether busily conversant in
reprehending and judging themselves, that they for a while forget the mercy of
God, with these, to omit such as for some natural infirmities, are, if they
procure not speedy help of some expert Minister most daungerouslye tempted,
with these (I say) I use this order.

First, I desired, that they intimate unto me, that which especially greeueth
them, and as I understand both the thing, and measure thereof by them: I take
especial care of this, that they being already overmuch cast down, that I
then, by the severe denunciation of the Law, do not quite ouerturne them: yet
so, as that I do not altogether withdraw them either from condemning their
former sins, or the meditation of Gods Judgment: And so, as much as I can, I
temper the words of consolation, as that I nothing cloak Gods anger against
them for their sins.

After I have thus prepared the^, I then demand, whether they have been ever
in this case, or no? Nay, (say they for the most part) the time was, when I was
in great joy and peace of conscience I served the Lord, the^ was I an unhappy
person, full of faith, full of hope: But now wretch that I am, I have lost my
first love, and there is nothing vexes me more then to remember those times
past. But (say I) whether consideration is more grievous unto thee, the
apprehension of Gods judgments, or the dislike of thy self, that thou
should offend so gracious and so loving a father? Both, say they, but
especially the latter. Therefore (say I) sin also displeases thee in that it
is sin, namely, because it is evil, and God who is goodness it self, is
offended with it? It is even as you have told us (say they) and I am now
ashamed that so vile and wicked a wretch as my self, should come before so
gracious and merciful a father. Then I tell them, that no man is offended, but
rather is glad when he can injury one whom he hates: this they grant, and
withal say. God forbid, that albeit the Lord hate me, I in like sort should
hate him, unto whom if it were possible, I would be reconciled again. Then I ad
this: Be of good comfort my deer brother, you are in good case. For who can
love God, especially when he was wounded by him, who can bewail the loss of
his freendship, who can desire to come again into his favor, but he, whom
God still loves, although for a time he be angry with him? except peradventure
you have not learned thus much, that the knowledge of our salvation comes not
from flesh and blood, but from God himself, who first vouchsafes to instruct
us, and from Christ Jesus, manifesting the father unto us: and that is Gods
blessing, that we do love God, who loved us first when we were his enemies. You
have therefore (my good brother) just cause why you should be greatly displesed
with many things past, but there is no cause why you should despair. Briefly you
have inwardly, and as it were dwelling with you evident testimonies of your
reconciliatio^ with god: especially if you cease not to pray unto him
earnestly, who has laid the foundation of repentance in you, to wit, a dislike
of sin, and a desire to be reconciled unto him. The sheep which wandered out
of the fold ceased not to be a sheep, albeit it went a straye for a time: you
now are that sheep, to whom that faithful Shepherd of all those sheep which
the father has committed to him, leaving those ninety and nine, does not so
much by our ministerye, declare that he seeks you, as having already sought
you, though you, not seeking him, has indeed found you. Knock (says he) and
it shall be opened unto you. And have you now forgotten those promises, which
were so often made to them that repent? and also which they had experience of,
who in the sight of the world were in a desperate case? But I, says he,
again, feel no motions of the Comforter, I have now no sense of faith, or
hope: but I feel all the contrary. Nay, say I, you deceive your self, as I
told you before. For it is the comforter alone, which teaches you to hate
sin, not so much for the punishment, as because it is evil and disliketh
God, albeit he show not himself so fully at the first: because you had so
many ways grievously offended him, as that he seems for a while quite to
forsake you. And, that you have not qutte lost him, but that he is as yet in
some secret corner of your soul, from whence at your instant prayers he will
show himself unto you, this will plainly declare unto you, which I now
admonish you of the second time. But let us grant as much as you say: yet,
sure it is, that your faith was not dead, but only possessed with a spiritual
lyturgie. You lived in the womb of your mother, and there were ignorant of
your life. A drunken man, although he lose for a time the use of reason, and
also of his limbs, yet he never loses reason it self. You would think that
in winter the trees were dead, but they spring again in the Summer season. At
night the Sun sets, but in the next morning it rises again. And how
often see we by experience, that he which at one time took the foil in a
combat, at another did win the price? And know this, that in the spiritual
combat of the flesh with the spirit, the like we may see in many, partlye by
reason of the weakness of our nature, partlye through sloth to resist, and
partlye for default to beware. To these he replyeth, for such temptations are
hardly removed, I would to God (says he) I could persuade my self that these
promises belonged to me. For my present estate constrains me to doubt,
whether I am the child of God, or no.

FINIS.

