A CASE OF Conscience THE GREATEST TAHT EVER WAS.

How a man may know, whether he be the child of God or no. Resolved by the
word of God.

Whereunto is added a brief Discourse, taken out of HIER. ZANCHIVS.

2. PET. 1.10. Give all diligence to make your election sure, for if ye do
these things, ye shall never fall.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Robert Walde-graue, Printer to the K. Majesty. 1592.

To the godly Reader.
IN Gods Church commonly they, who are touched by the Spirit, and begin to
come on in religion, are much troubled with fear, that they are not Gods
children, and none so much as they. Therefore, they often think on this point,
and are not quiet till they find some resolution.

The Spirit of God [as best knowing the estate of Gods children] has penned
two parcels of holy Scripture, for the full resolving of this case: namely,
the 15. Psalm, and the first Epistle of S. John.

And for the helping of the simple and unlearned, who desire to be informed,
concerning their estate, I have propounded these two parts of Scripture, in
form of a Dialogue: and have joined thereunto, a little discourse, concerning
the same matter: penned in Latin, by H. ZANCHIVS, a learned Divine, and now
englished.

Use this labor of mine for thy benefit and comfort: and the Lord increase the
number of them which may rejoice, that their names are written in heaven.

W. PERKINS.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF John, in form of a Dialogue The Speakers, John. Church.

CHAP. 1.
CHVR. Many among us deny the Godhead, and many the Manhood of Christ.


IOH. 1. That which was from the beginning (and therefore true God,) which we
have heard (namely, speaking,) which we have seen with these our eyes, which
we have looked upon, and these hands of ours, have handled of that Word (not
the sounding, but the essential word of the Father,) of life. (living of
himself, and giving life to all other.)


CHAPTER Before you go any further, this word of life is invisible: how then could
it be seen?


IOH. (Yes) 2. For that life was made manifest, (to wit, in the flesh,) and we
(I with many others) have seen it, and bear witness, and publish unto you,
that eternal life, which was with the father (eternally before this
manifestation) and was made manifest unto us.


CHAPTER Menander, Ebion, and Cerinthus, having bin teachers among us, confidently
deny these things which you say: and they bear us in hand, that they seek
our good.


IOH. 3. That (which I will repeat again, for more certainties sake) which we
have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye may have fellowship with us,
and that our fellowship also may be with the father, and with his son Jesus
Christ.

4. And these things write we unto you, that your joy might be full. (vz. might
have sound consolation in your consciences.)


CHAPTER Well then, lay us down some ground, whereby we may come to be assured, that
we have fellowship one with an other, and with Christ.


IO. 5. This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto
you, that God is light (vz. pureness it self, and blessedness; whereas men and
Angels are neither, but by participation) and in him is no darkness.


CHAPTER Some that make profession among us, continue still in their old course and
conversation; and yet they say, they have fellowship with God.


IOH. Profession without practice, a note of an hypocrite.
6. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk (lead the course of our
lives) in darkness (vz. ignorance, error, impiety,) we lie (dissemble) and do
not truly. (deal not sincerely.)


CHAPTER What then is the true mark of one, which has fellowship with God?


IO. 7. If we walk in the light (lead the course of our lives in sincerity of
life and doctrine) we have fellowship one with another. Sincerity of life and
religion, a note of communion with God.



CHAPTER We are so defiled with sin, that we often doubt, least we have no
fellowship with God.


IOH. The blood of Jesus Christ his son, cleanses us from all sin.


CHAPTER Some among us are come to that pass, that they say, they have no sin:
and that this estate is a sign of fellowshippe with God.


IOH. 8. If we say that we have no sin, To profess perfect sanctification
in this life, a note of an hypocrite.
we deceive our selves, (imagining that to be true which is otherwise) and
truth is not in us


CHAPTER How then may we know that our sins are washed away by Christ?


IOH. 9. If we confess our sins (namely, humble confession of sin to God*
is a note of remission of sin.
with an humbled heart, desiring pardon) he is faithful and just (in keeping
his promise) to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from al unrighteousness.

10. If we say (as they before named do) we have not sinned, we make him a
liar (whose word speaks the contrary,) and his word is not in us. (his
doctrine has noe place in our hearts.


CHAP. 2.
CHAPTER IF this be true which has bin said, that the blood of Christ does cle^se
from all sin: and that if we do confess them, they shall be pardoned; our
corruption tells us, that we may sin freely.


Ioh. 1. My little children, these things I write unto you, that ye sin not.


CHAPTER Alas, we fall often by infirmity: what shall we then do?


Ioh. If any man sin, we have an advocate (who in his own name, and by his
own merits, pleades our cause) to the Father, Jesus Christ the just (and
therefore fit to make intercession)


CHAPTER But how may every one of us in particular, know that Christ is his
advocate?


IOH. 2. He is the propitiation (vz. a covering of sin, or reconciliation, as
the propitiatory of the Arc covered the law) and not for our sins only,
but also, for the sins of the whole world (not only Jews, but also Gentiles
of all sorts.)


CHAPTER Be it that I know him to be my advocate: may I not be deceived? how may
I know, that this my knowledge is effectual to salvation?


IOH. 3. Hereby are we sure that we know him (here, that knowledge is meant, An
endeuo^ to keep the commandementes, a sign of faith*
whereby a man applies Christ and all his benefits to his own soul) If we
keep (to keep is not to fulfill, but to have a care and desire to do it; for
God of his mercy in his servants, accepts the will for the deed.) his
commandments.


Chapter Many among us, profess that they know Christ; but their lives be not
according.


Ioh. 4. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar,
Faith without obedience, a note of an Hypocrite.
and the truth is not in him.


CHAPTER How may it be proved, that the endeavor to keep gods commandments is a
mark of faith, and felloship with Christ?


Ioh. (He in whom the love of God is perfect, may hereby know, that he is in
Christ.) 5. But he that keeps his word, in him is the love of God: (vz. not
that love wherewith God loves him; but that, whereby he loves God) is perfect
indeed: (vz. sincere and sound perfection, being opposed, not to
imperfection, but to hypocrisy:) hereby (therefore) we know that we are in
him. 6. He that says he remains in him, ought to walk even so, as he has
walked: (and therefore he must needs endeavor himself in the commandementes.


CHAPTER Declare unto us some of the principal of these commandments?


IOH. 7. Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but an old
commandment which ye have heard from the beginning: this old commandment
is the word, which ye have heard from the beginning. 8. Again, a nevve
commandment I write unto you, that which is true (to wit, that the
commandment is new which he will now write) in him (who renews the
commandment of old given to Moses) and also in you, for the darkness is past.
(vz. the hardening of the minds of men, under the old testament, whereby they
did but in a small measure understand the word) and that true light (a greater
mesure of illuminatio^; as also the writing of Gods laws, not in Tables of
stone, but in the fleshie hearts, so as they be transformed into the obedience
thereof) now shines.


CHAPTER Well: set down this commandment which is so ancient, and is now renewed.


Ioh. profession joined with hatred and malice, a note of an hypocrite
9. He that says (as many among you do) that he is in the light (that is, that
he is both plentifully enlightened and borne anew) and hates his brother, is
in darkness (under the estate of damnation, not yet truly regenerate) until
this time. 10. He that loves his brother, Love of our brother, a sign of
regeneration.
abides in the light (is truly enlightened and regenerate.) and there is no
offense, (vz. he will give no occasion of evil) in him. 11. But (on the
contrary) he that hates his brother, is in darkness, and walks in darkness,
(leads his life in ignorance and ungodliness) and knows not whither he
goes; because that darkness has blinded his eyes.


Chapter What moves you to deliver unto us, al these notes and signs of our new
birth and communion with Christ.


Ioh. 12. Little Children, I write unto you, because your sins are forgiven
you* for his namesake (vz. by Christ and his merits; that ye may be certified
to your comfort of this.)

(And that no kind of men among you might doubt of this) 13. I write unto you
fathers, because ye (delighting to tell and hear of old and ancient matters)
have known him (that is, christ) that is from the beginning. I write unto you
young men, because ye (delighting to show your valor and strength) have
overcome the evil one. (that is, Satan.) 14. I write unto you little children,
(who delight always to be under the Fathers wing,) because ye have known
the Father. (And again, because we are dull to mark and remember that which
is good for us.) I have written unto you Fathers, because ye have known him
that is from the beginning: I have written unto you young men, because ye are
strong, and the word of God abides in you: and ye have overcome that wicked
one


CHAPTER If we be in the estate of grace under Gods favor in Christ; how may we
abide in it?


IOH. 15. Love not this world (the corrupt estate of mankind out of Christ,)
neither the things that are in the world (for first of all, to give
reasons,) if any man love this World, the love of the father (wherewith he
loved the Father) is not in him. (Secondly,) 16. For all that is in this
world, as the lust of the flesh (the corruption of nature, which chiefly
breaks out in evil concupiscence) the lust of the eyes (the fruit of the
former, stirred up by outward prouocations, especially in the eye, as it is
manifest in Adultery and covetousness) and the pride of life (vz. Arrogancy
and Ambition, among men, in common conversation of life,) is not of the father,
but of the world. 17. And (Thirdly) this world passes away and the lust
thereof: but he that fulfilleth the will of God, abides for ever.


Chapter What other things are we to do, that we may continue?


IOH. 18. Little Children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard, that
Antichrist shall come, (a special Antichrist, the chief of all other; who is
now manifest to be the Pope of Rome) even now, ar there many Antichrists,
(Heretics, denying, either the natures of Christ, or his offices: or the
union and distinction of his Natures:) whereby we know, that it is the last
time:


CHAPTER Those whom you call Antichrists, were of our company; and professed as we
do.


Ioh. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had
been of us, they should have continued with us. But (this comes to pass,
that it might appear, that they are not al of us.


CHAPTER How can we be assured of our continuance in grace; for we may fall as
well as they do?


IOH. 20. But ye have an annointment, Gods spirit dwelling in the heart, a
sign of perseverance.
(the grace of Gods holy spirit, resembled by the annoynting in the old
testament) from that holy one (Christ, Luke. 1.15.) and know all things.


CHAPTER If we know all things, then you need not write unto us of these matters.


Ioh. 21 I have not written unto you, because ye know not the truth, but
because you know it, and that no lie is of the truth (vz. ye can distinguish
between the sound doctrine of the Gospel, and errors)


Chapter What is this lie which you speak of?


Ioh. papists deny Jesus to be Christ, for though in words they magnify him,
yet in their doctrine by necessary consequent, they deny him to be a king, a
priest a prophet.
22. Who is a lier (a deceauer, a seducer) but he that denies that Jesus is
Christ? (the Messiah or Savior of mankind.) The same is the Antichrist, that
denies the father and the son.


Chapter These whom you mean (say they) defend the doctrine of God as well as we;
and they use to call him their father.


Io. 23. Who so denies the son, has not the Father.


Chapter What do you infer upon this; if it be the last time, as you have said?


Io. 24. Let therefore abide in you, the same (doctrine concerning Christ) which
ye have hard from the beginning (which the Apostles preached; perseverance in
the knowledge and obedience of the Gospel, a sign of communion with Christ.
and before them the Prophets, since the beginning of the world) If that which
ye have heard from the beginning, remain (ye believing and obeying it) in you,
ye also shall continue in the son, and in the father. 25. And this, is the
promise which he has promised us, even life eternal.


Chapter We cannot persuade our selves of perseverance, seeing men so commonly
fall away from Christ among us.


Ioh. 26. These things have I written unto you, concerning them that deceive
you (not meaning them of you, as you seem to tak it) 27. But the anointing
(the spirit which ye have received of Christ, and which has led you into all
truth) which ye have received of him, dwells in you, (abides in you, and
will so continewe) and ye need not that any man teach you, (any other
doctrine beside this, which ye have learned already:) but as the same
anointing, teaches you all things, and it is true and not lying, and as it
taught you, ye shall abide in him. 28. And now, little Children, abide in him,
that when he shall appear, we (being justified in Christ,) may have boldness,
and not be ashamed: (neither Satan, nor our consciences accusing us for
sin,) before him at his coming.


Chapter We are still in doubt to return back to that which you say before, how
an endeavor to keep the commandments, should be a sign of fellowshippe
with Christ.


Ioh. 29. If ye know that he (God) is righteous, know ye, that he which
works righteousness, is borne of him. (as a Child is known to have such a
man for his Father, because he resembles him.


CHAP. 3.
CHAPTER ARe we then borne of God?


Io. 1. Behold, what love the father has given to us, that we should be
called the sons of God.


Chapter The World does not report us, as the sons and daughters of God, but for
the reffuse and ofscouring of the world.


Ioh. For this cause the world knovveth not you, because it knovveth not him.


Chapter Can Gods Children be subject to such infirmities and miseries as we are?


Ioh. 2. Dearly beloved, now are we the sons of God, but yet it is not
made manifest what we shall be: and we know, that when he shall be made
manifest, we shall be like him; (having not equality, but likeness of holiness
and glory:) for we shall see him as he is, (for now we see him as it were,
through spectacles, in the word and Sacraments.)


Chapter Alas poor wretches, we are not like Gods children; for we are even sold
under sin, and daily carry a mass of corruption about us.


Io. 3. Every one that has this hope (to see him as he is, A desire, and an
endeavor to use good means to cleanse our selves of our corruptions and privy
sins, is a mark of adoption.
) purifieth (vz. though he be subject to sin, yet he desires, and uses the
means to cleanse him self from sin:) even as he is pure. (setting before him
Christ as a pattern to follow.)


Chapter How prove you, that an endeavor to purify our selves, is a note of
Adoption?


Ioh. (By the contrary) 4. Whosoever commits sin, (practices sin with
full consent of will; not endeavoring himself in holiness of life,)
transgresses also the law (and for that cause, being under the curse of the
Law, cannot be Gods children) for sin is the transgression of the law.
(Understand, by law, not moral law, but any commandment of God, whether it
be in the law or Gospel. 5. And (again,) ye know, that he was made
manifest, (took our nature on him) that he might take away our sins, (the
guilt and punishment at once, and the corruption by little and little,) and in
him is no sin.

(Thirdly,) 6. Whosoever abides in him, sins not: (he does not give
himself to sin, so as it should reign in him:) Whosoever sins, has not
seen him, nor known him: (to wit, effectually, so as he can apply Christ and
his benefits to himself.)


CHAPTER But some teach, that faith is sufficient: and they emboulden us to live as
we will.


Io. 7. Little Children, let no man deceive you; he that works righteousness,
is righteous as he is righteous. 8. He that commits sin (though he say, he
does believe, and therefore thinks himself justified before God) is of the
devil, (rese^bleth the devil, as the child does the father, and is governed by
his spirit:) for the devil sins from the beginning: (of the world:) (which
appears, that) for this purpose was made manifest the son of God, that he
might dissolve the works (for the beginning and continuance of all rebellion,
and disobedience to God,) of the Devil. (And further, to displaie these
Seducers) 9. Whosoever is born of God, sins not, (vz. does not keep a
course in sin, howsoever he fall by infirmity) for his seed (vz. Gods word,
cast into the heart, by the operation of the Spirit, making a man to spring up
into a new creature, ( remains in him: neither can he sin, because he is
borne of God.


CHAPTER Briefly, to come to the point, how may it be known, who is Gods child,
and who is to be reputed the child of the devil


IOH. 10. In this are the children of God known, Loosnes of life, or the
practice of sin, a note of the child of the devil, for the present time.
and the children of the devil: whosoever works not righteousness, is not
of God, neither (to give you a plain example) he that loves not his brother.
11. For, this is the message, which ye have heard from the beginning, that we
should love one another. 12. Not as Cain: he was of that evil one (Satan)
and slew his brother: and wherefore slew he him? because his own works
were evil, and his brothers good.


Chapter Yet if we love those which be our brethren, according to the flesh never
so much; they cease not to hate and persecute us.


Ioh. 13. Marvel not my brethren, though this world hate you.


Chapter If not to love, be a note of the Child of the Devil, what is the note of
Gods child?


Ioh. 14. We know that we are translated from death to life, because we love
the brethren, To love a christian, because he is a christian, or godly man, is
a note of Gods chiid.
(vz. such as be Christians, because they are Christians:) (as on the contrary,)
he that loves not his brother, abides in death: (is under the estate of
damnation.) 15. Whosoever hates his brother, is a manslayer: and ye know
that no manslayer has eternal life abiding in him.


CHAPTER You have showed us fully, that love is a mark of adoption. Now show us
how we may know whether we love our brethren or not?


Ioh. 16. Hereby we have perceived love, that he laid down his life for us:
therefore we ought (carried with the like affection of love) to lay down our
lives for the brethren.


Chapter Many in speech do pretend love, but we find not this willing affection
and readiness to show love.


Ioh. 17. Whosoever has this worlds good, (wherewith this life is sustained)
and sees his brother have need, Compassion stirring in the heart, a note of
love
and shuts up his bowels (vz. has no compassion, because it shows it
self by the rowlling of the intrals) from him, how dwells the love of God in
him?


Chapter What other note is there of true love?


Ioh. 18. My little Children, let us not love in word, nor in tongue only, but
in deed and in truth (sincerely.) 1.19. For thereby we know that we are of
the truth (sound professors of the Gospel of Christ, Works of mercy, signs
of love.
) 2. and shall before him appease our hearts: sincere love a note of sincere
profession.
(in regard of any accusation that our conscience shall lay unto us, before Gods
judgment seat) 20. If our heart condemn us (an evil conscience accuse us,)
God is greater then our heart (namely in judging of us,) and knows all
things.


Chapter How may we know that our consciences will not condemn us?


IOH. 21. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, Boldness in prayer, a sign of
a pacified conscience.
then have we boldness toward God. (vz. to to come unto him by prayer.)


Chapter What other fruit is there of true love?


Ioh. 22. Whatsoever we ask we receive of him: because we keep his
commandments, and do those things which are pleasant in his sight


Chapter What are these commandments?


Ioh. 23. This then is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his
son Jesus Christ and love one another as he gave commandment.


Chapter Have they, which keep these commandments, their prayers granted?
prove this.


Ioh. (Yes) 24. For he that keepeeh his commandments dwells in him, and he
in him.


Chapter How may we know that God dwells in us, and we in him?


Ioh. Hereby we know, that he abides in us by that spirit (of
sanctification, The operation of gods spirit in sanctifying us, a sign of
communion with God.
whereby we are renewed) which he has given us.


CHAP. 4.
CHAPTER TO return again to that which was before mentioned: shall we believe all
that say they have the spirit?


Ioh. 1. Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit (vz. doctrines, which men
bragging of the spirit do teach;) but try the spirits whether they be of God,
for many false prophets are gone out into the world.


Chapter How may we discern of spirits?


Ioh. 2. Hereby shall we know the spirit of God, every spirit (doctrine)
which confesses that Jesus Christ (the Messiah) is come in the flesh (is made
true man; this being the substance of the Gospel,) is of God. 3. And every
spirit that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of
God: but this is the spirit of Antichrist, of whom ye have hard, how that he
shall come, and now already is in the world.


Chapter We fear, because these falls spirits ar of great power, to persuade and
seduce many


Ioh. 4. Little Children, ye are of God, and have overcome them: for greater is
he that is in you (Gods spirit) then he that is in the world. (the spirit of
Satan.)


Chapter But the doctrine of these men is of great account, and has many followers
in the world; ours has but few which embrace it.


Ioh. 5. They are of this world, therefore speak they of this world, and this
world (vz. Ignorant and ungodly men) hears them. 6. We are of God; he
which knows God, hears us: he which is not of God, hears us not. Hereby
know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error (namely, by the liking,
and applause of the world.)


Chapter How may we preserve our selves against these seducers?


Ioh. 7. Beloved, let us love one another* for love comes of God: and every
one that loves, is born of God, and knows God: (by a special knowledge,
whereby they are assured that God, the father of Christ, is their father,
Christ, their redemer, the holy ghost their sanctifier.) 8. He that loves not,
knows not God, for God is love (vz. wholly bent to show his love and
compassion to his people.) (For a proof of this,) 9. Herein was that love of
God made manifest among us, because God sent that his only begotten son into
the world, that we might live through him. 10. Herein is that love, not that we
loved God; but that he loved us: and sent his son to be a reconciliation for
our sins.


Chapter What of all this?


Ioh. 11. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also one to love another.


Chapter How can God manifest his love to us, he being a spirit and invisible?


Io. 12. No man has seen God at any time: (nevertheless,) if we love one
another (this is a sign) that God dwells in us, and his love is perfect in
us: (vz. that love wherewith he loves, is thoroughly made manifest toward us
by our love: as the light of the Moon shining on us, argues the light of the
sun shining upon the moon, of whom (as from a fountain) the moon takes her
light.


Chapter How may we know, that God dwells in us?


Ioh. 13. Hereby do we know, that we dwell in him, and he in us* because he
has given us of his spirit.


Chapter What other sign have you, of Gods dwelling in us?


Ioh. 14. We have seen and do testify, that the father sent that son to be
the Savior of the world. A sincere confession of the Gospel, a note of
communion with Christ.
15. Whosoever confesses (in faith and love) that Jesus is the son of God,
in him dwells God, and he in God.


Chapter The Devil will confess Christ.


Ioh. 16. And we (which is more) have known and believed the love which God
has in us


Chapter Declare how our love should be a sign of God his dwelling in us.


Ioh. God is love, and (therefore) he that dwells in love, dwells in God,
and God in him.


Chapter God is love we grant, but how may we know, that God is love to us.


Io. To be like God in holiness of life, a sign of his love to us particularly.
17. Hereby is that love perfect, (vz. fully made manifest in us,) that we may
have boldness (to stand before him without fear) in the day of judgment, for
even as he is, so are we in the world. (not in equality, but in conformity
of holiness.) (As may appear by the contrary) 18. there is no fear in love
(vz. when a man is assured of Gods love to him, he does not distrust, nor
servile fear him, in respect of his sins,) but perfect love casts out
fear: for fear has painfulnesse (checkings and torments of conscience:) and
he that fears is not perfect in love.


Chapter What other sign is there that God is love to us?


Io. 19. We love him, because he loved us first, Our love of God, a sign that
he loves us particularly.
(As when a man warmes him, the heat of his body is because the fire is first
hot.)


Ch* If this be so, then they which love not their brethren, loved of God in
Christ: seeing al generally say they love God.


Ioh. 20, If any man say, I love God, and hate his brother, he is a liar: for
how can he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God, whom
he has not seen. 21. And this commandment have we of him, that he that
loves, God should love his brother also.


CHAP. 5.
1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is that Christ (true Messiah) is born of
god, and every one that loves him which did beget (vz. God the Father,) loves
him also, which is begotten of him. (the Child of God, a true Christian.)

Chapter This being manifest, that they are hypocrites which say they love God, yet
show no love to their brethren, teach us how we may know that we love our
brethren?


Ioh. 2. In this we know that we love the children of God, An endeavor to keep
the commandments, a sign of love of our brother.
when we love God and keep his commandments (that is, endeavor to keep; the
beginning of the action, being put for the whole.) 3. For this is the love of
God (the duty of love to God) that we keep his commandments.


Chapter But no man can keep the law?


Ioh. His commandments are not burdenous (to them that are in Christ; and are
freed from the curse of the law, which makes the law grievous, and are also
guided by his holy spirit.) (And this is apparent) 4. for all that is borne of
God, overcomes the world (Satan with all corruptions and works of darkness.)


Chapter By what means?


Ioh. And this is the victory which has overcome the world, even our faith
(which is the instrument and hand, whereby we lay hold on him, that he in us,
and so we by him, might overcome the world.) 5. Who is this that overcomes
this world, but he which believes that Jesus is that Son of God?


Chapter How may we be resolved that Jesus of Nazaret, the son of Marie, was the
son of God, and the Messiah: he came but basely into the world?


Ioh. Proofs invinsible, that Jesus of Nazaret, the son of Mary was the son of
God, against the Jews.
6. This is that Jesus Christ, which came by water (sanctification signified
by the legal washings) and blood (imputation of Christ's righteousness or the
sprinkling of his blood:) not by water only, but by water and blood: (because
Christ works both justification, and sanctification together) and it is that
spirit (a man's own conscience inwardly purified) that bears witness, for that
spirit is truth: (that is, that the testimony of the spirit of adoption,
certifying us, that we are the sons of God is true.) 7. For, (that I may speak
it more plainly,) there are three which bear record in heaven, the father, the
word, (the Son) and the holy Ghost; and these three are one, (namly in
testimony.) 8. And there are three which bear record in earth, the Spirit,
and the water, and blood: and these three agree in one.


Chapter How show you that these witnesses be autenticall, and to be believed?


Ioh. 9. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater: for
this is the witness of God. (vz. that was said to come from heaven,) which he
testified of his son. (Again) 10. he that believes in that son of God, has
the witness in himself (the peace of conscience, which he may feel in
himself:) (And further,) he that believes not God, makes him a liar: because
he believed not the record, that God witnessed of his son.


Chapter What is the effect of that, which these witnesses testify?


Ioh. 11. And this is that record, to wit, that God has given unto us eternal
life, and this life is in his son. 12. He which has the son, has life and he
which has not the son of god, has not life. (And to conclude,) 13. These
things have I written unto you that believe in the name of the son of God, that
ye may know, that ye have life eternal, and that ye may believe (vz. increase
in faith,) in the name of that son of God.


Chapter How can we have life eternal now, that are so miserable, and so full of
wants?


Ioh. 14. And this is that assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any
thing according to his will, he hears us.


Chapter How may we know that God grants our prayers made acording to his will?


Ioh. A sign of our prayers granted us, if God do but hear them.
15. If we know that he hears (that is, (as it were) to give an ear to our
prayers,) whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions, which
we have desired of him, (though the things that we asked be not given us in
that measure, manner, and time, in which we asked them.)


Chapter Let us hear an example of those things which God will grant, when we pray


Io. 16. If a man see his brother sin a sin, that is not unto death; (that is,
which may be pardoned,) let him ask (pardon in his behalf) and he shall give
him life for them that sin not unto death: there is a sin unto death,
(after which, necessarily damnation follows, as the sin against the holy
Ghost: I say not that thou should pray for it.


Chapter But is not every sin, a sin to death?


Ioh. 17. All unrighteousness is sin, (and therefore deserves death:) but
there is a sin not unto death; (namely that which is pardoned in Christ.)


Chapter We fear least we have committed this sin, which is unto death.


Ioh. 18. We know that whosoever is borne of God sins not; but he that is
begotten of god, keeps himself, and that wicked one (Satan) touches him
not. (vz. does him no violence, or he cannot give him a deadly wound.) 19. We
know that we are of God, and this whole world lies in evil: (that is in
servitude under Satan and sin.)


Chapter How show you, that we are of God?


Ioh. 20. We know that the Son of God is come, and has given us a mind to
know him that is true: and we are in him that is true, that is, in his son
Jesus Christ, this same is that very God and that eternal life.


Chapter How may we keep our self in God, and never commit the sin to death?


Ioh. 21. Little Children keep your selves from images (whether they be of
false Gods or of the true God.)


PSALM. 15.
Iehoua. David. DAVID. 1. O Iehoua, who shall dwell (as Pilgrims dwell in tents)
in thy tabernacle, (the Church millitant?) who shall rest in thy holy
mountain, (the kingdom of heaven?)


IEHO. Sincerity of life, in righteousness and holiness, a note of Gods child.
2. He that walks perfectly (that is, he which leads the course of his life
uprightly.)


DAV. Who is the upright man?


IEHO. He that works righteousness (according to the commandments of the
second Table,) and speaks the truth in his heart (as he thinks, his heart
and tongue agreeing.)


DAV. By what notes may this upright man be known, and who is he?


IEHO. Seven notes of an upright man.
3. I. He that slandreth not with his tongue: II. nor does hurt to his
neighbor: III. nor receives a falls report against his neighbor. IV. 4. In
whose eyes a vile person, (an ungodly and unrighteous man;) is contemned, but
he honors them that fear God: V. He that having sworn to his own
hinderance, changes not. VI. 5. He that gives not his money to Usury. VII.
neither takes reward of the innocent.


DAV. Are these notes infallible?


IEHO. 6. He that does these things, shall never be moved, (shall abide in Gods
favor for ever*)


A BRIEF DISCOVRSE, TAKEN OVT OF THE Writings of Hier. Zanchius. WHEREIN
THE FOREsaid case of Conscience is disputed and resolved.
ASSERTION. I.
Only the elect, and all of them: not only truly may be, but also, are in
that time which God has appointed them in this life, indeed assured of their
Election to eternal life in Christ: and this is done not one way, but many
ways.
We say, that the elect alone may be, and indeed are made sure of their
Election: that so we may exclude the reprobat hipocrites: for considering they
are not elected, they can never be truly persuaded, that they are elected.
I say truly: because it may come to pass, that many in their own thinking
shall be predestinate: yet in truth they are not persuaded so: for they are
deceived. We have an example in temporary Christians, who think of
themselves, that they believe in Christ, but truly do not believe: for their
Faith is in hypocrisy: and for a time only. Wherefore a true and certain
persuasion of Election, can never befall any of the reprobates: because the
true persuasion of Heavenly matters, 1. Cor. 2.10 Math. 11.27
comes of the holy Ghost; which never persuades any false matter. Wherefore
how can Reprobates be persuaded that they are elected? This considered, it is
not amiss, that we attribute this persuasion (of which we now speak) to
the elect alone. We ad further, that all the elect, not only may be, but are
indeed made sure of their Election: Which must be demonstratiuelie confirmed
against schoolmen, and other our adversaries. We say, this is done in the
time appointed; because the Elect, before they be called to Christ, are never
sure of their election: nay, they never think of it, as appears in Paul
before he was called, and in others. Again, in like manner after they have
been called; yet not presently are made sure of their election: but some
sooner, some latter. Lastly, we ad, that this is done many ways, what they are
(if not perfectly, yet in part I will afterward show.) Now let us come to
the matter.

The Schoolmen demand, whether a man may be made sure of his Election? And
they determine that a man cannot, except it be by divine revelation: because
Predestination is in God, and not in us. And no man knows the things of God,
but the spirit of God: 1. Cor. 2.16.
as no man knows the things of man, but the spirit of man, which is in him:
Again, who knows the mind of the Lord? Romans 12.34. The elect by the
testimony of the holy Ghost, are made sure of their election.
therefore (say they) some special revelation is needeful: if any desire to be
certified, either of his own or of any other man's predestination, their
sayings are not simply to be disliked: but in that meaning, in which they
understand them, they are no way to be approved. For they take a special
revelation to be this, if God shall signify and say expressly to any, either by
some Angel outwardly, or by his spirit inwardly, that he is predestinate to
life: after which sort, they hold that Paul, and a few other Saints, had
their predestination revealed to the^, So they conclude, that, because every
man has not his Election revealed to him after this manner, that all men cannot
be assured of their election. But they are deceued, for God, not only by this
one manner, which they spoke off, does reveal his will and his counsels, but by
many: for God reuealeth things, either by the inward inspiration of his
spirit, or outwardly by his word: or both inwardly and outwardly, by inward and
outward effects. By his spirit, he did inspire his Prophets, and open many
things to come. And Christ said to his Apostles, as concerning the holy Ghost:
he shall lead you into all truth. By his word, he spoke unto the Prophets, and
in like manner, chapter 19.13
by his word he teaches us his will. Also, by diverse effects, he declares,
either his mercy or his justice: as it is known. The same must be thought of
the revealing of his election: to wit, that God reuealeth the same to the
elect, by the holy Ghost, by the word, and by the most certain effects of
predestination.

The first testimony, by which God assures us of our election, is the inward
testimony of the spirit, of which, the Apostle says: the spirit (of God)
testifies unto our spirits, that we are the children of God. Now what is it
to be the son of God, but first of al, to be predestined to be the child
of God by adoption: and then to be made actuallie the son of God by faith:
and lastly, by the same spirit also, to be regenerate as Gods Children are, and
to put on the nature of the son of God, or rather the son of God himself,
as the Apostle speaks. Therefore the holy Ghost, whilst he inwardly bears
record unto our spirits, that is, to our minds, being enlightened by his
light, that we are the sons of God: most plainly reuealeth that we were
predestinate from all aeternitie to adoption; for men are not made the sons
of God by faith, nor regenerate to be the sons of God, nor put on Christ:
except they be first of all predestined to adoption. And there can be nothing
more certain, then this testimony: for who better knows the things of God,
his counsels and decrees, then the spirit of God, which searches all things,
1. Cor. 2.10*
yea the deep things of God: therefore he can most truly reveal unto every
one of us, the certainty of our election. And he cannot deceive us in
reueiling it: for he is the spirit of truth which can neither deceive nor be
deceived. Ioh. 16.13.
If an Angel from heaven should be sent to thee, as he was sent to Marie, and
as he spoke unto the fathers, and should tell thee in the name of God, that
thou were elected to life everlasting: would not thou say, that thou
could not then doubt any longer of thy election? But so much the more
certain is the testimony of the spirit, which bears record unto our
spirit, that we are the sons of God: by how much the holy Ghost does more
know the things of God then any Angel: and can less deceive then an Angel.
And so much the more sure, is this testimony, considering it is not keept in
the bodily ears, where it might soon vanish away, but in our mind and
spirit: because the spirit bears record to our spirit. Ad further, that the
holy Ghost never departs from our spirit, but dwells in us, abides in us,
speaks in us, shows forth his power in us, prays in us. Therefore the
Apostle says, that we have received the spirit of adoption, Romans 8.15 Gal.
4.6.
by which we cry Abba Father: as though he should say, this testimony of the
spirit is altogether so sure, by which, he bears us record, that we are the
sons of God, that presently without doubting, we can call upon God, and cry
Abba Father. And all the elect have this testimony, being made the sons of
God by faith, and being renewed by the holy Ghost: and ingrafted into Christ;
For so the Apostle speaks, Romans 8 9
if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is not his: therefore, whosoever
is Christ's, and is ingrafted into Christ, it is necessary he should have the
spirit of God. And whosoever have received, and do enjoy the spirit of
Christ; to their minds the same spirit bears record, that they are the
sons of God, and makes them to cry Abba, Father. And it is certain, that
noe man is renewed by the holy Ghost, which is not persuaded, that God is his
most merciful and most loving Father: and therefore, can call upon him as a
Father. Therefore, although al men, in that they are assured by the certainty
of faith, that God is their Father, and they are his sons, do not thereby argue
and conclude, that they are elected to eternal life: yet al men indeed, have
thereby a sure testimony of their election to glory: because, if they be the
sons of God, they are also heirs of eternal life. This testimony I will
briefly comprise within this demonstration: whosoever call upon God, and in
their hearts cry, Abba Father, they are the sons of God, and it is certain,
that they thus cry by the spirit of God. And they which are the sons of God,
are also heirs of eternal life, and they have been predestinate to adoption:
therefore it must needs be, that all they which are persuaded, that they are
the sons of god by the holy Ghost; are predestinate to eternal life, and must
be persuaded of it. This is the first testimony, and the first way, by which
God reuealeth to every elect man his predestination: namely, by the holy Ghost
within our hearts, bearing record unto us, that we are the sons of God, in
christ and by Christ. And let this be the first argument, also serving to
confirm our assertion.

Verse. 2. The elect out of the word of god, their conscience making the
assumption, at length they may be certainly persuaded of their predestination.
The second way, by which God reuealeth to every man his predestination, is by
his word. I mean not any particular word, by which he does declare to any,
outwardly, in private and special manner, and that in express words, his
election: but the general word of the Gospel, by which Christ calls all them,
which believe in him, elect, both by himself, and by his Apostles, as in the
new Testament, every where is most manifest. For, although in particular
propositions he say not to thee, or to him particularly, thou art elect to
eternal life: yet, by means of general propositions, he does as well conclude
in the heart of every one that believes, that he is elected; as any man shall
be able to conclude unto particular men, that every one of them is a living
creature, indewed with reason, by this general proposition: Every man is a
reasonable creature, endued with reason: the Assumption being suppressed.
Therefore, after this manner deals God. He has chosen all, and every
several man, whom he was to indew with Faith, to have the everlasting
inheritance*

Furthermore, he publishes it to all the Elect, by the Apostles, in this
general proposition, that all the faithful are elect to eternal life: the
That, whereby a man applies the general promise to himself.
assumption is concealed in the word of God. But when he gives us faith, he
makes every one of us, to make an assumption by himself in his mind: but I
am of the faithful: for I find in my self, that I truly believe in Christ.
Therefore, who is it that makes this conclusion for thee, that thou art
predestinat to everlasting life? even God himself: the proposition being taken
forth of the gospel, and the assumption proceeds of the gift of faith. But
that indeed, by which we properly attain to the knowledge of the matter,
contained in the conclusion, is the middle term; as they call it. Wherefore,
it is manifest, that God, by the word of his Gospel, where he says, that all the faithful ar elect: does reveal to every faithful man, his own
predestination. Only this one thing is to be required, that the faithful
man, hearing the universal propositions, in his mind should make an
assumption; But I am faithful, by the gift and grace of God. And is not God
said to have revealed to every man, his special malediction, in this general
proposition, Cursed is every one, that does not continue in all things that are
written in this book: Deuteronomy. 27.26
although he say to no man specially, thou art accursed: for every one does make
this assu^ptio^, that he is accursed: because he knows most certe^ly, that he
does not continue in all things that are written in the book of the Law.
Therefore, the schoolmen ar deceived, when they say, it maybe, that every man
may be sure of his election: namely, if God, which is able, will reveal it to
him: yet, that he does only reveal it to a very few, as the Apostles: for
God (as has been proved and declared) even by his word, in general
propositions, does reveal to every man his predestination: For, what can be
more certain, than this demonstration? Whosoever do truly believe in
Christ, they are elect to eternal life in Christ: but I truly believe in
Christ: therefore I am elected. But some make an exception, and say, that this
were a demonstration, and that most certain and evident, if a man might be
able to know, that he were indewed with true faith in Christ: but here lies
all the difficulty. For many think that they truly believe in Christ,
whereas nevertheless, their faith is hypocritall and te^porary, as appears by
the Evangelists.

Answer. We grant, that they which believe by such a faith, which is in
hypocrisy* and only lasts for a time* that they are deceived, whilst they
think, that they do truly believe, and yet do not indeed: They which do
truly believe, know that they believe.
for they are like them, which dream that they are Kings, when as they are very
beggars: but we say, that they which believe by a true faith, do know,
whether they truly believe or no: and they are not deceived, when they say,
and think that they truly believe. For, they are like unto the^, which
handeling a precious stone, by reason that they are endued with sense, know and
say, that they handle it. And if no man might certainly know, whether he
believed truly or not, why does the Apostle say, Try your selves, 2. Cor.
13.65
whether you be in the faith? And if it be so, no man can ever certainly
know, whether he be justified, considering that they only, which truly
believe, can be justified. And if a man, giving credit to another man's words,
does certainly know, that he believes him, how much more does he know it,
which being endued with true faith by the holy Ghost, believes the Gospel? In
a word, godly Writers have proved against Schoolmen, that they, which are
endued with true faith in Christ, cannot be ignorant of it. But (say they) no
man is certain of his perseverance in faith: And therefore, out of this
universal proposition, He which believes, namely, with a true and constant
faith, is elected to life: no man can conclude that he is elected, by reason,
that albeit he may know, that he is endued with true faith, yet he cannot
tell, whether it shall be perpetual. This collection is absurd: and the learned
have fully proved, that true faith is perpetual. And therefore, they which
certainly know, that they believe in a true faith, are also certain, that the
same their true faith, shall never perish in this world: partly, for the
promise of God, Ier. 32.40.
I will put my fear into their hearts, that they may never depart from me:
and partly for the prayer of Christ, I have prayed for thee, Peter, Luke 22.33
that thy faith do not fail. Seeing it is so, it is very certain, that God by
his word, in which generally he says, that all the faithful are elect, does
reveal to every man his election: considering that the proposition taken out
of the Gospel, is most certain: and every faithful man may assume to
himself, that he is indewed with true faith in Christ.

Verse. 3. By the effects of predestination, a man may gather his predestination.
The third way, by which God reueleth to every one of us his predestination, is
by the effects of predestination, as well inward in us, as outward: by which, as
by certain marks imprinted in us, he does seal us to himself in Christ:
and does so seal us, that if we shall give diligent heed, we may thereby
evidently perceive, that we are set apart from the common sort of men, which is
often called by the name of the world: that we are foreknowen for his sons,
and loved in Christ, and predestined to eternal life; yea, and that we
appertain no longer to the world, but to that City which is above, that has
his foundation as the Apostle says. Heb. 11.12.
And we have a two fold reason of this argument: one, because these effects
(of which we speak, and which we will afterward handle) God works not in
any, but his elect as also afterward we will show. Therefore, by right a man
may, by a true feeling and experience of these effects in himself, be assured
of his particular election, and predestination, to have fellowshippe with
Christ in all his graces. For predestination (as Augustine witnesses) is a
preparation to the blessings of God, by which most certainly they are made
free, The effects of predestination which are in us, are like seals imprinting
the image of Gods electi- in us.
whosoever are made free: therefore whosoever feels himself freed through
these graces of God, may be assured and certified of his predestination. The
other reason is, that these effects are not only the effects simply of
predestination, but also such effects they are, that they may also may be
seals of it: namlie, in printing in us a lively form and image of God,
foreknowing us, loving us, electing us. And therefore, albeit we cannot see
the purpose, the foreknowledg, the election and predestination of God, as
concerning our selves, in God himself foreknowing, willing, and electing us:
yet we may behold in our selves, some sure representations of al these
imprinted, and even stamped in us by the word: and so by the beholding of these
forms and impressions in our selves, we shall easily be brought to the
knowledge of those patterns (as it were) which are in the Lord himself. The
matter (by reason it is very good and comfortable) may be declared by a
similitude: God is like unto the Sun in regard of us: the sun when it
shines upon us, and after a sort looks us in the face, it does after such a
sort imprinte an image of his light in our eyes, that we also in like manner
being made partakers of his light, may look again upon the sun it self,
and upon his light; for the light of the Sun, and his beams being sent down
upon us, are beaten back and reflected again toward the sun. So in like
manner, the forknowledg of god by which he has and would acknowledge us for his,
from all eternity; it always rests in God, and cannot of it self be
perceived of us. But yet whilst God does acknowledge us for his, he does
portrait in us his elect, a certain form and image of his foreknowledge: by
which, he makes us, renouncing all other gods, to acknowledge him for our
only true God. Thus it comes to pass, that through this true knowledge of
God, which he vouchsafes us, and by which we do acknowledge God, for our God
and Father: we may after a sort, behold in God himself his foreknowledg, by
which he has foreknowen us for his sons. For first of all, God does
acknowledge us for his, and then the elect being made partakers of this his
light and knowledge, he causes us in like manner to acknowledge him. To this
purpose serves that, which our Savior Christ says: first, (says he) I know
my sheep, after he adds, and again, Ioh. 10.14
I am known of mine. As though he should say, whiles I acknowledge them for my
sheep, I make them, by means of this my light and knowledge, that they also can
acknowledge me for their pastor. So the Apostle says to the Galathians: When
ye shall know God, or rather are known of him: he teaches therefore, that
God knew the Galathians, because he had first acknowledged them for his, in
his eternal Predestination: And by giving unto them this his wisdom, Col. 4.9.
he made them acknowledge the true God, for their God. The same may be said of
the love of God, by which he loved us in Christ to everlasting life, before
the foundation of the world; God by loving us does print in our hearts the
Image of his love, by which we may love him again from our hearts: and as it
were, by the reflection of the sunbeams, sent down into our hearts, we may
be provoked to love again. For the love of god to us being eternal, and
causing eternal life, begets in the time appointed, a certain love in us,
serving for his eternal glory. And to this purpose is that of saint John: 1*
Ioh 4.10.
not that we first loved God, but because he first loved us. As though he had
said, therefore we love God, because he first, that is, before the
foundation of the world loving us in Christ, by the ingrauing of his love in
our hearts, causes us to love him again as a Father. So love is said, (to
wit, 1. John. 4.7. Romans 5.5.
that love, by which we love God) to be of God: that is to proceed of the love
of God toward us. And Paul writes, that the love of God, (namely, that love,
by which he loved us) to be shed in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is
given us: And by this shedding of the love of God in our hearts, it comes to
pass, that love is also wrought in our hearts toward God. And therefore, by
that sound love by which we feel our selves to love God: we are made to know
how great that love of God is, by which he loved us, from all aeternitie in
Christ. And what is that love else, but predestination?

In like manner, election, by which he singled us from the rest of the world
in Christ, that we might be holy before him; begets in us a certain image, even
of God himself, that is, another election, by which, we renouncing all other
gods which are worshipped in the world, make our choice of this our true God
Jehovah, to be our God, that he may be always before our eyes, he which
sanctifies us, and the Author of our whole salvation. Wherefore, through this
constant election, which is in us, we perceive that that election which is in
God as concerning us, is firm and sure; not only as we gather the cause by
the effect, but also, as we gather the pattern by the picture: like as by the
similitude of the form of a seal, fashioned in wax, we do easily
understand, what is the very form and fashion of the seal. Therefore it is
manifest, that it is the manner of God, by the effects of his election and
predestination imprinted in us, to reveal to every one of us, his own
election and predestination: And that two ways, both because there are
certain effects of predestination, and by the effects, the causes are known:
and also because there are certain lively types of Gods fore-knowledg and
election, by which we are sealed up unto God.

Now by the imprinting of these forms and types in us, as the seal is in wax:
the very first patterns themselves are known what they are.

Furthermore, that there is no man elected to eternal life, which shall not be
sealed up in the time appointed, with these marks of Gods election: It is
manifest out of these places of Scripture, which treat of election and
predestination. The Apostle teaches, Ephesians. 1.4 Romans 8.30.
that we were elected, that we might be holy, and without blame. Also
he teaches, that all they whom God has predestined, are likewise called,
and justified, and, by consequent, endued with faith, and knowledge of God, by
which they take him for their Father, with love also, wherewith they love him
as a Father; also, with a good will and constant purpose, by which they desire
constantly his glory. Again, he says in another place, The foundation
stands sure, 2. Tim. 2.19.
having this seal (in respect of God) the Lord knovveth who are his. Now, in
respect of us, he puts down another seal, saying: Let him depart from
iniquity, which calls upon the name of the Lord: For with this mark, all
the elect are branded. They call upon the name of the Lord, and depart from
iniquity: seeking after holiness and a good conscience. And this is that
sealing, which is so often mentioned in the Scriptures. As when in the
Apocalypse it is said, Apoc. 2.3
that an innumerable multitude was sealed to the Lord. For, like as the Father
sealed Jesus Christ, as he was man and Mediator, so also, the rest of his
children he has sealed, and does daily seal, with sure notes and seals,
Ioh. 6.27.
to distinguish them from other men, 2. Cor. 1.21.
and the children of this age. For, God is said to have anointed us, and
sealed us, and given us the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts. And again, to
have sealed us with the holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30.
and that to the day of redemption. As it is easy to discern a right seal
from a counterfeit, so the true souls of God (by the sealing of the Spirit)
are distinguished from Hypocrites, and lawful children, from bastards.

It remains, that we should declare some effects of predestination: The
chief effects of predestination, by which the elect ar discerned from the
Reprobate.
by which, as by marks and seals, the elect may be discerned from Reprobats.
The first effect of predestination, is Christ himself, as he is a Mediator
and a Savior, dwelling in our hearts by his holy Spirit. For, as we are
elected in him, and by him redeemed, so by the sprinkling of his blood, we are
cleansed and sealed; and by his dwelling in us, quickened (for he is our life,
and that eternal) and therefore, we are severed from Reprobates, which always
remain in death, as in the holy Scriptures we are taught. We say, that this
is the first effect of Predestination, because we can enjoy none of the gifts
of God, either of election, vocation* or justification, except in Christ, and
by Christ: For he has powered out all the effects of Predestination into us.
In that therefore, every elect faithful man feels Christ to dwell in him,
and to quicken him; he has a seal in himself, by which he may know, that he
was elected to everlasting life in the same Christ: A part and beginning of
which life, is this spiritual life, by which we now live to God. And as
every man knows himself to be the son of God in Christ, because he calls
upon God from his heart, as a Father: So he may conclude, that he is
predestined to be the son of God, for Christ's cause: And that by this first
note, the faithful may know, that they are elect to eternal life; the Apostle
shows, know ye not (says he) your selves, 2. Cor. 13.5.
that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? And no doubt a type of
this kind of sealing, was that sealng, which was done in Egypt, by the blood
of the Lamb: namely, when the houses of the Israelites were sprinkled with
this blood, that they might be discerned from the houses of the Egyptians, and
so be passed over untouched of the Angel. And by Christ, as by the chief
effect: yea, and the cause to of all the effects which follow; all other
effects of predestination are put into us, and we are sealed with them. The
Apostle names three principals; our calling (to wit, Romans 8.30
effectual) our justification, and glorification. This third effect, we shall
obtain in the life to come, the two first in this life. And to these two, may
very well be referred all other, which we receive in this life by Christ: with
the effectual calling, we join a sound hearing of the word of God, and the
understanding of it, accompanied with great and constant delight and joy, faith
also, and a true knowledge of the Deity, humanity, and office of Christ. Unto
justification, we refer a persuasion of the remission of our sins by Christ
(for by this we are justified:) and regeneration too, or sanctification, and
renouation of life, a good conscience, love not feigned, a pure heart and
clean, patience in adversity, and boasting in tribulation, all good works
and fruits of the spirit: ad hereunto the cross it self, which we bear for
the truth of the Gospel; wherefore, whosoever feels that he is effectually
called, that he does willingly hear the word, that he does believe the
Gospel, that he is sure of the remission of his sins, that he burns with
true love to his neighbor; that he is bent to every good work; he cannot but
must needs be persuaded of his election: for God only does communicate these
unto the Elect. Therefore it is plain, that the elect are confirmed in the
assurance of their election, by the effects of predestination: and that there
is a threefold way, by which God reuealeth to every man his predestination.

But if any shall take an occasion the rather of doubting of his election, The
weakness of our faith, as touching our eternal election, by what stays it may
be held up.
then of confirming himself in it, of that which has bin spoken, as
concerning the fruits of the Spirit, and the effects of predestination: and
that peradventure, because he can feel in himself few and very weak
fruits of regeneration and election; yet let him not be discouraged, neither
let him doubt of his election, but let him underset himself with these props.
First of all, if ever he truly felt in himself, that testimony of the
Spirit, (which before I mentioned) namely, that he is the son of God: let
him know undoubtedly, that he is such a one, and therefore elected to eternal
life: For, the holy Ghost never bears record, or persuades a man of that,
which is false; for he is the spirit of truth. And they are not the sons of
God, except they have been predestinate (as the Apostle says) to adoption by
Christ: And none that is the son of God, and a man elected, can be made a
reprobate, and the child of the Devil. Therefore, albeit he feel in himself
both few and feeble effects of regeneration, yet let him not doubt of his
election* otherwise, he shall disgrace the testimony, which he has received
of the holy Ghost; yea, and that to, which as yet he enjoys; although
peradventure, by reason that his mind is troubled by evil affections, that
testimony of the holy Spirit, can scarce be heard in him. For the true
testimony of our adoption by the holy Ghost, being once given unto our spirit,
lasts for ever; although it is other whiles heard more plainly, and at other
times is more slenderly and scarce perceived. But how (say you) may I know,
whether that testimony does proceed from the holy Ghost, How a man may know,
whether the testimony, which is given of the Spirit, be of of the spirit or
not.
and therefore, whether it be a true and certain testimony. I answer, first, by
the persuasion: secondly, by the manner of the persuasion: lastly, by the
effects of this testimony and persuasion. For the first, the holy Ghost does
not simply say it, but does persuade with us, that we are the sons of God:
and no flesh can do this. Again, he persuades us by reasons, drawn, not from
our works, or from any worthiness in us, but from the alone goodness of God the
Father, and grace of christ. In this manner the Devil will never persuade any.
Lastly, the persuasion of the holy ghost is full of power; for, they which are
persuaded, that they are the sons of God, cannot, but needs must call him
Abba, Father, and in regard of love to him, do hate sin, and whatsoever is
disagreeing to his will: and on the contrary, they have a sound and a hearty
desire to do his will. If at any time thou have felt in thy self any such
testimony, persuade thy self, it was the testimony of the holy Ghost: and
that very true and certain to: and therefore, that thou art the child of God,
and predestinate to eternal life. This is the first proppe, by which we must
underset that weak belief we have, of our certain election to eternal life.
Again, hold this without wavering, whosoever thou art, that art tempted to
doubt of thy election: even as nothing is required at our hands to work our
election, (for God chose us of his only mere goodness) so that we may truly
know, whether we be elect or not; this one thing shall be sufficient; namely,
if we shall attain to the certain knowledge of this, that we are in Christ, and
partakers of him: for, he that is now ingrafted into Christ, and is justified,
it cannot be, but that he was elected in Christ, before the foundation of the
world. And that we may be in Christ, Faith is both required, and is
sufficient; not perfect faith, but true faith, though it be so little, that it
be like a grain of mustarde seed, and feeble, like a young borne babe, and
that sore diseased to. Now, that faith, which is a lively and a true faith,
lasts always, as has been before declared, neither can it at any time
altogether fail. And so it comes to pass, that they which once have been
truly ingrafted into Christ, remain always and continue in him, according to
that saying. All that my father gives me, shall come to me: and he which
comes unto me, I will not cast forth. This is true, no doubt, that look how
much the faith is more perfect, so much the greater power it has, to knit us
more to Christ: and therefore, we must always endeavor to increase in Faith.
Yet for all that, this is most certain; one little spark of true faith, is
sufficient to ingraft us into Christ. And for that cause, we must in no wise
doubt of our ingrafting into Christ, and of our election to; by reason of the
weakness of Faith, and of the small and slender fruits it brings out.

But how shall I certainly know (say you) whether my Faith be a true and lively
Faith or not? Whereby a man may know whether his faith be a true faith or not.
Out of the same grounds, from whence the testimony of our adoption is
perceived. First of all, if you shall truly feel, that you are persuaded of
the truth of the Gospel; yea, and that all your sins are pardoned you for
Christ, and you received to favor. Again; if you see that this persuasion is
grounded, not upon any merits of yours, but on the sole goodness of God, and
grace of Christ.

Lastly, if you feel such a confidence to approach unto, and call upon the
Father, and such a love toward him, and his son Jesus Christ, that ye do hate
and detest whatsoever is against his glory, (as all sin) and on the
contrary, be carried away with a desire to do those things, which serve for
the advancing of his glory: and therefore, that you love all those, which
desire and seek the same, as the brethren and friends of Christ. For these be
the effects, which can never be severed from true Faith. And this is the
disposition of true faith: therefore, as long as thou feel these effects in
thy self, albeit, very slender, and greatly languishing: yet assure thy
self, thou art indewed with true Faith, although it be weak, and therefore
thou art in Christ; yea, and in Christ elected to. Wherefore, thou must not
doubt of thy salvation and election, by reason of thy daily slips, proceeding
from thy weakness of Faith, no, not for heinous crimes; like as neither David,
for his adultery and murder, nor Peter for his threefold denial, did despair
of their election: which appears, in that being plunged in the very gulfes
of their temptations, they held fast their Faith, as an anchor, and called
upon God, This is the second propp. Lastly, in no wise we must forget;
namely, that our election is certain, and immutable: and therefore, as it is
done without respect of any works of ours, so in like sort, it can never be
changed by any of our evil deserts. For as it is first proceeded from the only
free purpose of God, so it is grounded thereon. True it is, we provoke Gods
wrath against us by our sins, and neither will God let them escape unpunished,
but he chastises us by diverse, both inward and outward scourges; as may
appear in David above all other: Yet for all that, it is his good pleasure,
that for his goodness sake and truth, for the obedience of Christ, that his
purpose should remain sure, and our election. So it comes to pass, that he
gives us repentance anew, to raise us up, and to receive us to favor.
Therefore, although for the present, thou feel thy self to be of weak
faith, and to have fallen to diverse sins: Yet, whereas heretofore, thou have
had many and evident testimonies of thy election, as the testimony of the holy
Ghost, and the testimony taken from Faith, and the effects of Faith: at this
present assuredly thou can not doubt of thy election, for thy sins
committed, but thou shall much derogate from this free election, and also from
the testimonies of thy election heretofore enjoyed; yea, and those which yet
thou enjoyest. For, if thy sins displease thee, and thou desire to live
without blame, only for that thy sins displease thee; why, now thou have a new
testimony of thy election: For, such repentance as this is, is only proper
unto the elect. Therefore, by these three proppes we must uphold our faith, as
touching every ones particular election. And thus much as concerning the
certainty, with the which every man must be persuaded, that he is elected in
Christ to eternal life, before the foundation of the world.

ASSERTION. II.
Whosoever are predestinate to the end, they are also predestinate to the
means, without which they cannot attain to the end: and therefore, as the
elect necessarily at length do come unto the end, by reason of the certainty
of their election: so also, by reason of the same certainty, it is necessary,
that they should be traced through those means, which tend to the same end.
We must mark the end to which we are predestinate, The end of our
predestination.
and to which we say, that one day we shall be brought: for there is a double
end of our election: the one concerns the elect themselves, namely their
glorification, or their eternal life and glory in heaven. Of which is spoken
Romans 8. The other concerns God himself, which chooses, namly, the glory of
God: that is, that the glory of his grace may be known and eternally made
manifest, of which, is mention made. Ephesians. 1. Both of them are so coupled
together, that whosoever are praeelected to the first, are also predestinat to
the latter, and the latter follows of the former. For the more we shall be
made partakers of the grace of God, and the heavenly glory: so much also more
and more shall the glory of God be made manifest in us. But because the end,
which concerns God, is almost all one in the reprobatio^ of the wicked, and
in the predestination of the Saints: namely, that as by the salvation of these,
which proceeds of his mere goodness, the glory of his grace is made manifest:
so also by the just damnation of the other, the glory of his divine justice may
be made known to al: Nevertheless, considering that the end, to which the
elect shall attain, is far diverse from that (for it is eternal life) unto
which the reprobates are appointed (for that is eternal death:) therefore the
end, of which we treat in this assertion, is our eternal glorification, and
everlasting life in Heaven.

Let us now see in the second place, what are those means, The means to which
we are predestinate how many they be.
by which the elect are brought unto this end: and therefore to which means we
hold, that al are predestinate, whosoever are predestinate to the end? And they
are of two sorts, some of them are so necessary unto all, that without them,
no man simply can attain unto eternal life and glory: and they are Christ's,
as he is mediator and high Priest, and his obedience and justice (for without
Christ no man can be saved:) also our effectual calling to Christ, by the holy
ghost; and that which follows this, is our justification, yea, and our
regeneration to. For these four, predestination, vocation, justification, and
glorification, are so linked together, that it is not possible to sever the one
from the other. And therefore, no man can be glorified, which is not justified;
and no man can be justified, which is not effectually called; as also, no man
can be effectually called, which is not predestinate: therefore without these,
not so much as children and infants, can be brought to this end of eternal
glory. And therefore even all the elect infants are inwardly, in a certain
peculier manner, by the holy ghost, called, and justified, and glorified. Now,
there are some certain means annexed unto these, albeit they have no place in
infants, by reason of their age, yet they belong to all other elect, howsoever
they are found in some more plenteous and lively, and in other some more sle^der
and weak. As namely, a lively faith, the hearing of the word, a detestation of
sin, the love of righteousness, patience in adversity, a care to do good
works (and such like) all which, the Apostle comprehends under the name of
good works, when he says, that we are created, that is, borne a new in
Christ, unto good works, which God has prepared, Ephesians. 2.20
that we might walk in them, that is, that we might lead our lives in them,
and so walking, at length might come to eternal life: for without the^, we
cannot come to eternal glory; but by them God traileth us thither. Therefore
we say, that all which are elect to that end, are also predestinate to the same
means. For predestination is not only of the end, but also of the means,
which concern the end and all, as well the end as the means, are the effects
of predestination. And therefore, it is very true which Augustine says,
Predestination (says he) is a preparation to the graces of God, by which they
indeed ar freed, whosoever ar freed.

The first benefit of god, predestnating us, is Christ.
without which, they can in no wise come to the end* and therefore the first
effect of predestination is our Lord Jesus, with his obedience, merits,
death, resurrection, glory: namely, in that respect he is made Mediator
between God the father and us, and the head of all the elect. And therefore, in
as much as he is such a one, he is also the cause of all other graces and
benefits, which come unto us by the free predestination of God. For, the
effects of predestination, are so ordered among themselves, that the first
which go before, are the causes efficient, or (if we will so speak) the
material causes of the latter, and those that follow. Therefore, seeing Christ
is the first effect of predestination, he is also the cause of all other
effects, by whom we are made partakers of them. The Apostle therefore, does
very well to the Ephesians: In the first place, Ephesians. 1.4. etc.
(says he) We are elected in Christ, namely, as in the head, to be his
members. Secondly, he writes, that we are predestinat to adoption by Christ,
namely to obtain it, for we are adopted into the sons of God in Christ, the
first begotten son of God, and by making us partakers of his Sonneship, we
are really made the sons of God: yea, and we are also indewed with his spirit
too, that we might be borne anew. Thirdly, (he says) we are made acceptable
and beloved unto the Father, and his beloved son, namly, Christ. Fourrhly,
that we have our redemption in the same Christ, by his blood, and have
obtained remission of sins, and all wisdom and understanding. Fifthly, that
in the same Christ, all things are reconciled, as well in Heaven, as in earth.
In a word, the Apostle shows there (as also else were) that whatsoever
benefits we do, or shall hereafter obtain, counting from our eternal
election, even unto our glorification: all those we now do, and shall obtain
hereafter in Christ, and by Christ. Therefore, whosoever are elected to
eternal life, besides this, that they are elected in Christ, they are also
predestinate to Christ, that is, to have fellowship with him, that they may by
him enjoy all other benefits. The 2. Tim. 1.5 Romans 8.30
in which the elect are only called: Because it is by the purpose and grace
of God, which is given us in Christ: And an effectual calling is known by the
effects, two of which proceed directly from it: a hearty kind of hearing the
word, and the conceauing of it with a very great, constant and continual
delight, and a true, and sure belief of the word of the Gospel. John. 8.47
Thence it is that Christ says, who is of God (says he) namely, by election
and effectual calling, hears the word of God, very willingly, and from his
heart and that continually: but ye hear not, because ye are not of God. And
this calling is wrought not only by the preaching of the word, (as it is in all
that be of years) but also, (and that chiefly) with the inward inspiration
of the holy Ghost, whiles that the Father draws them by his spirit, whom he
will have to come to Christ: Which also was said to be done in infants. For
this calling is the beginning of salvation, even in this life: and therefore it
is the Apostles manner, in the beginning of his Epistles, to make mention of
this calling, naming all the faithful, The Saints called: Romans 1.7. 1. Cor. 1.2
Therefore it must needs be, that all they which are elected in Christ, must
also at length be effectually called, and drawn to Christ. After an effectual
calling, follows Faith, the third effect of predestination, which is said
to; Tit. 1.1 Heb. 11.6
And without which (as the Apostle says) it is not possible to please God. For
by it we are engrafted into Christ, and are made the members of Christ, and
without faith no man can be saved.

And that this is an effect of predestination, the Apostle plainly shows, 1.
Cor. 7.25.
when he says, that he had obtained mercy (namely, in Gods eternal
predestination) that he might believe. Wherefore, whosoever ar predestinate to
obtain eternal life, in Christ and by Christ, they are also elect to have the
very gift of Faith. Therefore, it must needs be, that at length they shall
believe in Christ. The fourth benefit is justification, And that justification
is an effect of predestination. The Apostle shows, when he puts it after
calling, before which he sets predestination. And when he says, that we
are elect in Christ, that we might be holy, Romans 8.30 Ephesians. 1.4.
and without spot or blame in the presence of God: and that this is not done,
while we are in this world, but by the pardoning of all our faults, and by the
imputation of his perfect obedience. Wherefore, it must needs be, that all the
elect shall be justified, and be taken for most pure, and without blame in Gods
presence. With justification, is joined regeneration, and For, when Christ
justifies us, he does not only forgive us our unrighteousness, and impute his
righteousness to us, but also he takes from us our stony heart, and gives us
a fleshie heart of his own: and he strips us of our old man, and puts on his
new man. Lastly, he takes away the corruption of our nature, and makes us
partakers of his divine nature: and so indeed, of the sons of men, he makes
us the sons of God, and his brethren to. Therefore it is said, that we are
predestined to adoption, by Jesus Chrst, Ephesians. 1.4.5 John. 3.6
and elect, that we may be holy, without blame, and that which is borne of the
spirit, is called spirit. Therefore, the elected to eternal life, must
needs be begotten anew, to be the sons of God, and be made partakers of
the divine nature, and be a new creature in Christ, Hence issues the sixth
effect of predestination, which is heedfullie to be regarded: the love of
righteousness, and Namely, the affections of the corrupt nature and flesh,
into the affections of the divine nature and spirit. Hence it is, that the
Apostle says, that they which are borne anew, Romans 8.1 and 5.
do walk according to the spirit, and not after the flesh: and not to savor
the things of the flesh, but the things of the spirit. And the chief
affections of the flesh, are the love of sin: that is, the concupiscence of
the flesh: and contrariwise, the hatred of righteousness, and the law of God,
which are not of the Father, but of the world. Therefore, the chief affections
of regeneration and the spirit, are, the love of righteousness, and of the law
of God, and the hatred of sin. Psalm. 45 8.
For that which is spoken chiefly of Christ: Thou have loved righteousness, and
hated iniquity: is to be understood of all the members of Christ, endued with
his spirit, because it is truly accomplished in them. Hence it is, that
David, who in himself did represent the disposition of all the regenerate, psa.
119.113 and 40.9. and 101.3 and 26 5.
said of himself, I have loved thy law, thy law is in the middle of my heart I
have hated all the works of iniquity, I will not sit with the wicked. Romans
7.22.
Also Paul, I am delighted (says he) in the Law of God, according to the
inner man: That is, in as much as I am borne anewe. And no man doubts, but
that both these affections, are the effects of predestination, except he be
ignorant, that all these are the gifts of God: which as in time, he bestows
on his, so also, he has decreed to bestow them on them, before the foundation
of the world. And from these two affections, the seventh effect of
predestination. For he which hates any thing from his heart, he takes heed
of it as much as he can, and he flies from it, and escheweth it: and on the
contrary, he which loves any thing from his heart, that also he seeks
after, and endeavors himself to the compassing of it. Therefore, the Apostle
John makes this a chief difference, 1. Ioh. 3 7.
between the sonns of God, and the children of the devil: that is, between
them that are borne anew, and them that are not borne anew: that the children
of God both love, and do righteousness, and the children of the devil love
sin, and do it: as also, the devil sinned from the beginning; and Christ came
to dissolve the works of the Devil; namely, in his elect; for, in the
reprobate he leaves them untouched, because they are not given him of the
father to be purged, borne anew, and saved. Therefore, seeing Christ was before
ordained, and predestinate to the doing of all these works, and that there is
no good wrought in us, which was not provided for us in Christ, from al
eternity: it is a clear case, that the care also of doing good works, is an
effect of predestination. And the Apostle plainly teaches it, when he says,
Ephesians. 2.10.
that we were created in Christ to good works, which God has prepared, that we
might walk in them. To this purpose, serves that which the Apostle delivers
of love, not unfeigned, Ephesians. 1.4. 1, Tim. 1.19.
to which he shows, that we were elect, and of a good conscience* which he
makes the inseparable companion of the faith of the elect. Lastly, of a pure
heart, which he ascribes to the elect; considering the unfaithful have
nothing clean in them, Tit 1.15.
and that their mind and conscience is defiled. Now, that this care to do good
works, is necessary in all the elect, Peter shows it, 2. Pet. 1.10
when he bids us endeavor to make our election and calling sure, by good works,
as some copies have it. But to whom shall we make it sure? not unto God, (for
it was sure unto him, before the foundation of the world) but unto our selves,
and to our neighbors. And this is one of the chiefest uses of good works,
that by them, not as by causes, but as by effects of predestination and Faith,
both we, and also our neighbors, are certified of our election, and of our
salvation to. Furthermore, considering whiles we have a care to glorify God,
to do good works, and we will not be conformable to the world in the
wickedness of it, neither submit our selves to our flesh, and Satan: the flesh,
the world, and Satan, do perpetually war against us: and therwithal it
comes to pass, they being most valiant enemies, that either we are overcome,
or at the least, in fighting are foiled.

And therefore, we are constrained to fly unto the Lord, and to crave his
assistance: Therefore, the eight effect of our predestination, For this is the
property of the Spirit, which the elect have, to stir them up to prayer: for
the Spirit it self makes request for us, with groninges which cannot be
uttered: that is to say, it moves us to make request. And because we are
sons, God has sent the spirit of his son into our hearts, crying, Abba,
Father. Romans 8.29 Gal. 4.6. Psalm. 50.15.
And God bids us call upon him in the day of tribulation, promising to hear
us. From these proceeds the ninth effect of predestination: So that also, for
this cause chiefly, we heartily desire to be dissolved out of this world, and
to be with Christ, for this end, that we might sin no more. For, this is a
thing proper to the elect of God, even now borne anew, as we may see in the
Apostle, who speaks thus, in the name of all the regenerate: O miserable man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans 7.27 phil.
1.23*
And again, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

From this ninth effect, proceeds the tenth: That this is proper to the
elect, 2. Tim. 4. 8
the Apostle shows, when he says, that they love the coming of the Lord:
and John brings in the Spouse of Christ, crying, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, Yea, Apoc. 22.17.20
and Christ himself has taught us to pray; Mat. 6.10
Let thy Kingdom come: And because that they which pray on this wise, are also
heard, according to Gods promise, In the day of tribulation call upon me,
Psalm. 50.15
and I will Romans 5.3* and 8.28
true patience: that is, not only true comfort, but also a rejoicing in
adversity, as the Apostle describes it. And therefore a certain taking up of
courage, and recovery of strength against his enemies: Whereby it comes to
pass, that al things turn to the salvation of the elect. For the elect,
albeit they be often beaten down in fight, yet, because Christ speedily
sends aid from heaven unto them, they rise up courageously, and begin again
the fight, against sin and the Devil, and al other the enemies of Christ: and
they fight so long, til they be made conquerers, and are assured of the
victory, and of the crown: which assurance also is an For what (says the
Apostle) shall we say to these things? If God be on our side, Romans 8.31 Mat.
24.24.
who can be against us? Therefore our Lord Jesus techeth, that the elec^ cannot
be seduced, and so perish, no not by the coming of Antichrist, and his
miracles. And lastly, hence appears that last effect of predestination, unto
the end, in faith and a true confession of Christ, joined with a manifest care
to live a godly life, and a desire to glorify him; For this gift is bestowed
upon all the elect, as the Lord promises by Jeremy: I will put my fear into
their hearts, Ier. 32.4^
that they may not depart from me. And when they shall come to the end of their
lives, they shall be received into the heavenly glory, until such time, as
their bodies also being raised up, they may take full possession of eternal
life. Thus we see, that it is very certain, that those which are elected to
eternal life, ar also predestinate to use those means, by which, as by
certain steps and stayres, they climb into that heavenly dwelling place.
And therefore, that we were predestinate to these means, namely, Faith,
Justification, and good works, because we were elected to eternal life,
according to the purpose and grace of God.

Wherefore, by this means the doctrine also of the Pelagians is confuted, as
touching predestination to life, The use of this doctrine.
by our faith and works, which God foresaw we should do. Whereas on the
contrary, therefore God did predestinat us to faith, and good works, because
he did choose us to eternal life. 1. Cor. 7.25.
For the Apostle says not, I obtained mercy, because I was faithful, or
because I should be faithful, but that I might be faithful. Neither says he,
that we are elected in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4.2
because we should be holy and without blame, but that we might be holy and
without blame. Neither does he say, that we were created in Christ, because we
did or should do good works, but we were created to good works: which God
prepared, that we might walk in them. Lastly, Tit* 2.11.
he says not, that the grace of christ appeared, because we were to live
soberly, justly, and godly, but that it therefore appeared, that we denying all
ungodliness, and the lusts of this world, might live soberly, justly, and godly
in this present world. We see therefore, that by this doctrine, that wicked
opinion is overthrown, which teaches, that we do prevent the grace of God by
our merits which God foresaw. And on the contrary, here we see, how fowlly
the belli-gods of this world are deceived, which reason thus: If we be
predestinate to eternal life, and our predestination be certain and
unchangeable, what need we endeavor our selves, believe, or do good works?
for howsoever it fall out, and howsoever the elect do live, undoubtedly they
cannot perish, because they are predestinate to eternal life. Alas poor
wretches, they see not, that they sever those things that are to be conjoined:
namely the end, and the means of the end: and that they break the cheine,
which in no wise, either can or must be loosed, whilst that they sever their
calling and justification, yea, and Faith too, and good works, from
predestination and glorification. As though God did glorify them whom he did
predestinate, before he called and justified them: yea, and before they can
believe, and show their quick and lively faith by works. Contrariwise, let us
learn what our duty is. If any be elect to eternal life, they also are
predestinate to the means by which they come unto it. And we believe (as we
are bound to do) that we are predestinate to eternal life: and therefore we
must also believe, that we have been elected to Faith and good works, that by
them, as by certain steps, we might be brought to eternal life. And
therefore, so far must we be from neglecting faith, and the means of good
works, and of a holy life: that contrariwise, it is rather our duty to keep
faith in a good conscience, and to be conversant in good works, which God has
prepared, that we might walk in them. And because we can neither attain to
the end, nor the means that bring us thereunto of our selves. Therefore it is
our parts, to crave them at Gods hands by prayer, that he would give us
Faith, and a care to do good works, and increase them in us. Nether must we
only ask them; but also certainly, trust that we shall obtain them for Christ
his cause. For, if for all them which are predestined to eternal life, God
has prepared faith, by which they may believe, and good works to walk in:
therefore if we believe (as by Gods commandment we are bound) that we are
in Christ elected to eternal glory: we must also be persuaded, that before we
depart hence, he will give us true repentance, increase true faith, inflame us
with love: lastly, that he will minister unto us abundantly, all things in
Christ, to obtain the end. Yea, this confidence also and prayer, it is one
effect of predestination, by which we get the rest. Therefore this doctrine we
must hold, that predestination to eternal life: does not take away the means
of obtaining it, but rather establish them. And therefore, both these
principles are true; namely, that the elect to life cannot perish: and unless
a man believe in Christ, Ioh. 3.3.
and persevere unto the end, in this faith working by love, he shall perish.
The reason is, because in predestination, the means and the end of it are so
joined together, that the one cannot be severed from the other. Wherefore
whosoever holds not the means unto the end (amongst which faith is one) it
is manifest, that he was never predestinate, and therefore mu^^ needs perish:
as on the contrary, he which holds faith, must needs be saved. So the truth
of these propositions is evident: he which believes in the son, has eternal
life: contrariwise, he which believes not in the Son, the anger of God
remains upon him, because, as a constant faith is a sign of election: so
obstinat infidelity, is a token of reprobation.

FINIS.
Bradfords answer to Careless.
Careless. I Am troubled with fear, that my sins are not pardoned.


Brad. They are for God has given thee a penitent and believing heart: that
is, an heart, which desires to repent and believe. For such an one is taken of
him (he accepting the will for the deed) for a penitent and believing heart
indeed.


Trin. vni Deo gloria.

