A DIRECTION FOR THE GOVERNment of the Tongue according to Gods word.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE Printer to the University of Cambridge. And are to be
sold by Abraham Kitson at the sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard in
London. 1593

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, lamentable and fearful is the abuse of the tongue among
all sorts and degrees of men every where. Hence daily arise manifold sins
against God, and innumerable scandals and grievances to our breethren. It
would make a man's heart to bleed, to hear and consider how Swearing,
blaspheming, Cursed speaking, Railing, Backbiting, Slandering, Chiding,
Quarrelling, Contending, Jesting, Mocking, Flattering, Lying, dissembling,
Vain and Idle talking overflowe in all places, so as men which fear God had
better be any where, then in the company of most men. Well then, art thou a
man which have made little conscience of thy speech and talk? repent seriously
of this sin, and amend thy life, least for the abusing of thy tongue thou
cry with Dives in Hell, Luke 16.14.
Send Lazarus that he may dippe the tippe of his finger in water and cool my
tongue. And if thou be one which have had care to order thy self in speech and
silence according to Gods word, oh, do it more. For what ashame is it, that
men with the same tongue wherewith they confess the faith and religion of
Christ, should by vain and ungodly speech utterly deny the power thereof? And
for thy better help herein, I have penned these few lines following,
concerning the Government of the tongue. Use them for thy benefit, and finding
profit thereby, give glory to God. M.D.XCII. December. 12.

W. Perkins.

OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE TONGVE.
CAP. I. Of the general means of ruling the tongue.
THE government of the tongue is a virtue pertaining to the holy usage of the
tongue according to Gods word.

And for the well ordering of it, two things are requisite: a pure heart, and
skill in the language of Canaan.

The pure heart is most necessary, Matt. 15.19.
because it is the fountain of speech, and if the fountain be defiled, the
streams that issue thence can not be clean.

And because the heart of man by nature is a bottomless gulf of iniquity,
two things are to be known: first, how it must be made pure: and then how it
is always afterward to be kept pure.

The way to get a pure heart, is this. First, thou must seriously examine thy
life and thy conscience for all thy sins past then with a heavy and bleeding
heart confess them to God, utterly condemning thy self. Thirdly, with deep
sighs and groans of spirit cry unto heaven to God the Father in the name of
Christ for pardon, I say, for pardon of the same sins, as it were for life
and death, and that, day and night, till the Lord send down from heaven a
sweet certificate into the perplexed conscience by his holy spirit, that all
thy sins are done away. Now at the same instant in which pardon shall be
granted, God likewise will once again stretch forth that mighty hand of his,
whereby he made thee when thou wast not, to make thee a new creature, to
create a new heart in thee, to renew a right spirit in thee, and to stablish
thee by his free spirit. For whom he justifies, them also at the same time
he sanctifies.

The purified heart appears by these signs. I. If thou feel thy self to be
displeased at thine own infirmities and corruptions, and to droupe under them
as men do under bodily sickness. II. If thou begin to hate and to fly
thine own personal sins. III. If thou feel a grief and sorrow after that
thou have offended God. IIII. If thou heartily desire to abstain from all
manner of sin. V. If thou be careful to avoid all occasions and intisements
to evil. VI. If thou travel and do thine endeavor in every good thing. VII.
If thou desire and pray to God to wash and rinse thine heart in the blood of
Christ.

When the heart is pure, to keep it so is the special work of faith, which
purifieth the heart. Acts 19.15.


Faith purifieth the heart by a particular applying of Christ crucified with
all his merits. 2. kin. 4.34.
Elisha when he went up and lay upon the dead child, and put his mouth on his
mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands; and stretched
him self upon him, the flesh of the child waxed warm. Afterward Elisha rose
and spread him self upon him the second time: verse. 35.
then the child neesed seven times and opened his eyes. So must a man by faith
even spread himself upon the cross of Christ, applying hands and feet to his
pierced hands and his feet, and his wretched heart to Christ's bleeding heart,
and then he shall feel him self warmed by the heat of Gods spirit, and
sin from day to day crucified with Christ, and his dead heart quickened and
reviued. And this applying which faith makes, is done by a kind of reasoning,
which faith makes thus. Has God of his mercy given his own Son to be my
savior, to shed his blood for me? and has he of his mercy granted unto
me the pardon of all my sins? I will therefore endeavoure to keep my heart
and my life unblameable that I do not offend him hereafter in word or deed,
as I have done heretofore.

The language of Canaan is, Isa. 19.18. Romans 15.6.
whereby a man endewed with the spirit of adoption, unfainedly calls upon
the Name of God in Christ, and so consequently does as it were, familiarly
talk and speak with God. This language must needs be learned, that the
tongue may be well governed. For man must first be able to talk with God,
before he can be able wisely to talk with man. For this cause when men are to
have communication one with another, they are first of all to be careful that
they often make their prayers to God that he would guide and bless them in
their speeches, as David did: Set a watch, O Lord, Psalm. 141.3.
before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. And again: O Lord open thou
my lips, Psalm. 51.17.
and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. where we may see, that the mouth is,
as it were, locked up from speaking any good thing, until the Lord open it.
And Paul having the gift of ordering his tongue in wonderful measure, Ephesians.
6.19.
yet desires the Ephesians to pray for him, that utterance might be given him,
and good reason, because God rules the tongue. Prove. 16 1.


CAP. II. Of the matter of our speech.
THe government of the tongue contains two parts: Holy speech, and holy
silence. In holy speech must be considered the matter of our speech and the
manner.

The matter is commonly one of these three: either God, our neighbor, or our
selves.

As concerning God, this caveat must be remembered, that the honorable titles
of his glorious Majesty be never taken into our mouths, unless it be upon a
weighty and just occasion, so as we may plainly see that glory will redound
to him thereby: and for this cause the third commandment was given, that men
might not take up the Name of God in vain, Exodus 20.7.
that is, rashly and lightly.

And therefore lamentable and fearful is the practice every where. For it is
a common thing with men to begin their speech, and to place the titles of Gods
most high Majesty in the forefront almost of every sentence, by saying, O
Lord! O God! O good God! O merciful God! O Jesus! O Christ! etc. If a man be
to say any thing, he will not say Yea, or Nay: but, O Lord yea, or O Lord
nay. If a man be to reprove his inferior, he will presently say, O Lord have
mercy on us, what a sloubacke art thou? what a lie is this, etc. An earthly
Prince, if he should have his name tossed in our mouths at every word, would
never bear it, and how shall the everliving God suffer it? nay, how can he
suffer it? I say no more, but thou with thy self think how: for in the third
commandment the punishment is set down, that he will not hold him guiltless
that takes his Name in vain. And the Angels in reverence to Gods Majesty
cover their faces, Isa. 6.2.

Concerning our neighbor, we are to consider whether the thing which we are
about to speak be good or evil.

This being weighed, if it be good, and so commendable, then we are readily and
cheerfully, and that upon every occasion to utter it, especially in his
absence, whether he be a friend or a foe: as S. John writes of Demetrius.
Demetrius (says he) has good report of all men, 3. Ioh. 12.
and of the truth it self: yea, and we our selves bear record, and ye know
that our testimony is true.

As for the evil which any man shall know by his neighbor, he is in no wise
to speak of it, whether it be an infirmity or a gross sin, unless in his
conscience he shall find him self called of God to speak.

A man is called to speak in three cases: I. when he is called before a
magistrate, and is lawfully required to testify the evil which he knows by
another. II. when any is to admonish his brother of any fault for his
amendment. III. when the hurt or danger that may arise of the evil is to be
prevented in others. As a man may say to one well disposed, take heed of such
a man's company: for he is given to such or such a vice.

To this end, they of the house of Cloe do certify Paul of the disorders in
Corinth. 1. Cor. 1.11.
And Joseph certifieth his father of his brethrens slanders. Gene. 37.2.
In this case all treasons are to be revealed, as tending to the ruin of the
whole Commonwealth. Thus Elisha reveals the secret of the King of Syria. 2.
Kin. 6.8.


And if it shall be thought convenient to mention the evil which we know by
any man, it must be done only in general manner; the person, and all
circumstances which will descrie the person, concealed.

Concerning things which are secret in our neighbor, we are not to be
suspicious, but to suspend both speech and judgment. Love suspecteth no evil.
Judge nothing (says Paul) before the time, 2. Cor. 13. 1. Cor. 4.5.
until the Lord come, who will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and
make the counsels of the heart manifest. Augustine has a good and a special
rule to this purpose, Aug. li. 10. co^fess. 23.
that there be three things of which we must give no judgment; Gods
predestination, the Scriptures, and the Estate of men uncalled.

As touching a man's self, he is neither to praise nor dispraise himself. As
Solomon says, Prove. 27.2.
Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth: A stranger, and not
thine own lips. Yet otherwhiles the times do fall out, that a man may use
an holy kind of boasting, especially when the disgrace of the person is the
disgrace also of the Gospel, and of Religion, and of God himself: as Paul
did, But wherein, says he, 2. Cor. 11.22.
any will use boldness, (I speak foolishly) I will use boldness. They are
Hebrews, so am I, etc.

CAP. III. Of the manner of our speech, and what must be done before we
speak.
THVS much of the matter of our speech. Now follows the manner.

In the manner of our speaking, three things are to be pondered: What must be
done before we speak: what in speaking: what after we have spoken.

Before we speak, consideration must be used of the thing to be spoken, and of
the end. James requires that men should be slow to speak, and swift to
hear. Iam. 1.19.
Solomon says, Prove. 18.13.
He that answers a matter before he hear it, it is folly and shame to him.
The mind is the guide of the tongue: therefore men must consider before they
speak. The tongue is the messenger of the heart, and therefore as often as we
speak without meditation going before, so often the messenger runs without
his arrand. The tongue is placed in the middle of the mouth, Chrysostom. hom. 22. ad
pop. Antioch.
and it is compassed in with lips and teeth as with a double trench, to show
us, how we are to use heed and preconsideration before we speak: and
therefore it is good advise to keep the key of the mouth not in the mouth, but
in the cupbourd of the heart. Augustine says well, that as in eating and
drinking men make choice of meats: Lib. de not. and great.
so in manifold speeches we should make choice of talk.

Here are condemned idle words, that is, such words as are spoken to little
or no end or purpose. And they are not to be esteemed as little sins, when
as men are to give account of every idle word. Mat. 12.36.


CAP. IIII. What is to be done in speaking; and of wisdom.
WHEN we are in speaking, two things are to be practiced: first, care must be
had of the speech, that it be gracious: secondly, it is to be uttered with
convenient bonds of truth.

The speech is gracious, when it is so uttered, Col. 4.6.
that the graces of God wrought in the heart by the holy Ghost, are as it were
pictured and painted forth in the same: for speech is the very image of the
heart.

Ephe. 4.25. (...).
Contrary to this is rotten speech, that is, all such talk as is void of
grace, which is the heart and pith of our speech.

And by this it appears, Ephesians. 5.3. Psalm. 16.4.
that no vice can be named but with disliking: and hereupon in Scriptures when
by occasion a vice should be named, in token of a loathing thereof, the name of
the vice is omitted, and the name of the contrary virtue used in the room
thereof, as in these words: Job. 1.5. 1. Kin. 21.10.
For Job thought: It may be that my sons have sinned and blessed, that is,
blasphemed God. This being true, then by proportion the visible representation
of the vices of men in the world, which is the substance and matter whereof
plays and enterludes are made, is much more to be avoided.

Gods graces, which we are to show forth in our communication, are these:
Wisdom, Truth, Reverence, 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.
Modesty, Meekness, Sobriety in judgment, Vrbanitie, Fidelity, Care of
others good name* but let us consider of them in order.

Wisdom in our speech is a goodly ornament. The Apostles when they waited for
the Holy Ghost in Jerusalem, it descended upon them in the form of fiery
tongues: Act. 2.4. (...). Prove. 6.23.
and then it is said that they spoke as the holy Ghost gave them uttera^ce in
Apophthegmes or wise sentences. And he that governs his tongue wisely, adds
doctrine to the lips, that is, so speaks, as that others be made wise thereby.

This wisdom is then showed, when a man can in judgment apply his talk,
and, as it were in good manner make it fit to all the circumstances of persons,
times, places, Prove. 19.11.
things. A fool powers out all his mind: but a wise man keeps in till
afterward. A word spoken in his place, is like apples of gold with pictures
of silver.

Now he that would have his speech to be wise, must first of all him self
become a wise man. And the wise man of whom the holy Scriptures speak, is a
godly man, and such an one as fears God: because this fear of God is the
beginning and head of wisdom: Prove. 1.7. eccles. 12.13. Psalm. 14.1. and 38.5.
Gene.
as on the contrary, the fool, whereof the Scripture often speaks, is the
ungodly person, that makes no conscience of any sin. And indeed such a one
is the most senseless fool of all. He that shall ever and anon be casting him
self into the fire and water, and run upon dangerous places to break his
legs, arms, neck: and further shall take pleasure in doing all this, is
either a fool or a mad man. Now the ungodly man as often as he sins, he
indevoureth as much as in him lies to pitch his soul into hell, and whereas he
takes pleasure in sin, he sports him self with his own destruction.
Furthermore the man fearing God must have two things in his heart: a persuasion
of Gods presence, and Awe.

The persuasion of Gods presence is, whereby a man is continually resolved,
that wheresoever he is, he stands before God, who does see even into the
secrets of his heart. This was in Cornelius: Act. 10.33.
Now therefore, says he, we are in Gods presence to hear all things that are
commanded thee of God.

Awe in regard of God, is that whereby a man behaveth him self reverently,
because he is in Gods presence.

Awe is either in regard of sin, or of chastisements.

Awe in respect of sin, is when one is afraid to sin, fearing not so much
the punishment, as sin it self, because it is sin. For he fears God
indeed, which is of this mind, that if there were no Judge to condemn him;
no hell to torment him no Devil nor conscience to accuse him; yet he would not
sin, because Gods blessed Majesty is by it offended and displeased: and if
he had it in his choice, whether he would sin or loose his life, he had
rather dye then willingly and wittingly sin against God. This awe being in
Joseph, was the cause that moved him not to commit folly with Putiphars wife.
Genesis 39.9.
How then, says he, can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?

Awe in chastisements is, when one humbles him self under the mighty hand
of God with all meekness and patience, when God lays his hand on him more
or less. When Shemi came forth and cursed David, and flung stones at him,
what did he? truly he stood in awe of God, and therefore said, 2. Sa^. 16.10.
What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zerviah? for he curses, even
because the Lord has bidden him curse David, who dare then say, wherefore
have thou done so?

When a man is thus made wise, that is, righteous and fearing God, he is so
guided by the spirit of fear, that he can not but speak wisely. Solomon
says, Prove. 10.31.
The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable: but the mouth of the
wicked speaks froward things. And again, The heart of the wise guides the
mouth wisely. Contrary to this is fond and foolish talk, an example hereof we
have in Luke, where Pilate wanting the fear of God, says, I find no fault in
Christ: let us therefore chastise him, Luke 23.14.
and send him away.

CAP. V. Of Truth, and of Reverence in speech.
TRVETH of speech is a virtue whereby a man speaks as he thinks: and so
consequently, he speaks as every thing is, so far forth as possibly he
can. It is made a note of a righteous man, to speak the truth from the heart:
Psalm. 16.2. Prove. 12.22.
and they that deal truly are Gods delight.

This is always required in all our doctrines; accusations, defenses,
testimonies, promises, bargainings, counsels: but especially in Judges and
Magistrates sitting on judgment seat, Prove. 17.7.
because then they stand in Gods stead, who is truth it self.

To this place belongs Apollogie, which is, Matt. 10.32.
when a Christian called before a Magistrate, and straightly examined of his
religion, confesses Christ boldly, and denies not the truth.

Contrary to this, is Lying, Cogging, Glosing, Smoothing, dissembling: As for
example, 1. Kin. 5.25.
Gehazi, after he had received money and garments of Naaman the Syrian against
Elis^^es will, he went and stood before his master, who said unto him, whence
come thou, Gehazi? who making it nothing to lie for a vantage, smoothed it
over finely, and said, thy servaunt went no whither. To the like effect and
purpose, report is made of a rich man that had two chestes: the one whereof he
calls all the world; the other, his friend. In the first he puts
nothing: in the second he puts all his substance. When his neighbor came
to borrowe money, he uses to answer, truly I have never a penny in all the
world, meaning his empty chest, but I will see (says he) what my friend can
do, looking thereby for interest by the money out of his other chest.

This vice is very common, and it is a rare thing to find a man that makes a
conscience of a lie.

Lying is when a man speaks otherwise then the truth is, with a purpose to
deceive. Here note that there is great difference between these two speeches,
It is an untrueth; and, It is a lie. The first may be used when a man speaks
falshoodes. But in using the second, we must be heedie and sparing: for when a
man is challenged for a lie, three things are laid to his charge. I That he
speaks falsely. II. That he is willing to do so. III. That he has a desire
and purpose to deceive.

Quest. Whether may not a man lie, if it be for the procuring of some great
good to our neighbor, or to the whole country where we are?

Answ. No: Reasons are these. I. Lying is forbidden, Iam. 3.12. prove. 12.22.
as an abomination to the Lord. II. Romans 3.8.
We are not to do any evil that good might come thereof. III. He which lies,
in so doing conformeth him self to the devil, who Ioh. 8.44.
is a liar and the father thereof.

Object. I. Such lying is for our neighbors good and not against charity.
Answ. No: for 1. Cor. 13.6.
charity rejoices in the truth.

Object. II. The holy Scriptures have mentioned the lies of the Patriarchs.
Answ. We must not live by examples against rules of Gods word.

Object. III. Rahab and the mydwives of Egypt in saving the spies, and in
preserving the Israelites infantes used lying, and are commended for their
factes.

Answ. They are commended for their faith, not for any lying.

As truth is required in speech, so also reverence to God and man.

Reverence to God is, when we so speak of God and use his titles, that we show
reverence our selves, and move reverence in others. Deu. 28.58.
If thou will not keep (says the Lord) and do all the words of this Law,
(that are written in this book) and fear the glorious and fearful Name, THE
LORD THY GOD, then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful.

Here take heed of all manner of blaspheming, which is, when men use such
speeches of God, as do either detract any thing from his Majesty, or ascribe
any thing to him, not beseeming him: A sin of all to be detested. Reasons. I.
A blasphemer is viler then the rest of the creatures: for they praise God in
their kind, and show forth his power, goodness, and wisdom: but he
dishonors God in his wretched speech. II. He is as the mad dog that
flies in his masters face, who keeps him and gives him bread. III. Custom
in blasphemies shows a man to be the child of the devil, and no child of God
as yet. A father lying on his death bed called the three children to him which
he kept, and told them that only one of them was his own son, and that
the rest were only brought up by him: therefore unto him he gave all his
goods: but which of these three was his natural son he would not in any wise
declare. When he was dead, every one of the three children pleaded that he
was the son, and therefore that the goods were his. The matter being brought
before a Judge could not be ended: but the Judge was constrained to take this
course: he caused the dead corpse of the father to be set up against a tree,
and commanded the three sons to take bows and arrows, and to, shoot
against their father and to see who could come nearest the heart. The first and
second did shoot at their father and hitte him, the third was angry with
both the other and refused to shoot. This done, the Judge gave sentence that
the two first were no sons, but the third only, and that he should have the
goods. The like trial may be used to know who be Gods children. Such persons
with whom blaspheming is rife, are very devils incarnate, and the children of
the devil, who rend God in pieces, and shoot him through with their darts,
as it is said of the Egyptian when he blasphemed, Levit. 24.11. vaijkkobh.
that he smote or pierced through Gods Name.

Again, here we must be warned to take heed of that customable swearing, and
also of perjurie. It is a very strange sin: for the perjured person does not
only sin himself, but withal he endeavors to entangle God in the same
sin with himself.

Further, take heed least thou do either make or recite the jestes which
are contrived out of the phrases of Scripture: which are very many and very
usually rehearsed in company. Exodus 30.31.
The oil wherewith the tabernacle and the arc of the testament and the
Priests were anointed, was holy: and therefore no man might put it to any
other uses, as to anoint his own flesh therewith, or to make the like unto
it. John 19.8.
Pilate a poor Painyme when he heard the name of the Son of God was afraid:
and we much more ought to tremble at the word of God, not to make our selves
merry with it. And therefore the scoffing of Julian the Apostata is very
fearful, who was wont to reach Christians boxes on the ear, and with all,
bid them turn the other, and obey their masters commandment, Whosoever
shall smite thee on the right cheek, Mat. 5.39.
turn to him the other also. And he denied pay and like reward to his
soldiers that were Christians, because he said he would make them fit for
the kingdom of heaven, considering that Christ had said, Blessed are the poor
in spirit: Matt. 5.3.
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Here also men must learn to take heed of all manner of charms and
inchauntments, which commonly are nothing else but words of scripture or such
like, used for the curing of pains and diseases both in men and beasts. As
for example, the first words of S. John's Gospel, In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God etc. are used to be written in a paper and
hung about men's necks to cure agues. But the truth is, such kind of practices
are deuilish. Patrones of charms hold that in such words as are either
divine or barbarous, is much efficacy. But whence is this efficacy? From God?
from men? or from the devil? If it shall be said from God, we must know that
the word used in holy manner, is the instrument of God to convey unto us
spiritual blessings, as faith, regeneration, repentance: but it does not
serve to bring unto us corporal health. Well then, belike words take virtue
from the speaker, and are made powerful by the strength of his imagination.
Parac. libr. de Tartar^.
Indeed of this opinion are some Physicians, as Avicenna and Paracelsus, who
think that fantasy is like to the sun, which works on all things to
which his beams do come: and the latter that by imagination miracles may be
wrought. But this opinion is fond and the reasons alleged for it are without
weight. For imaginations are no things but shadows of things. And as an image
of a man in a glass has no power in it, but only serves to resemble and
represent the body of a man: so it is with the fantasy and conceit of the
mind and no otherwise. And if imagination have any force, it is only within
the spirits and humors of a man's own body: but to give force to work in the
bodies of others it can not; no more then the shadow of one body can
ordinarily cure the body of another on which it lights. Wherefore words used
in the way of bodily cure, be they in they in them selves never so good, are no
better then the devils sacraments: and when they are used of blind people, he
it is, that coming under hand, works the cure, and by turning himself into
an Angel of light, deludes them. But it were better for a man to die a
thousand times then to use such remedies, which in curing the body, destroy the
soul.

Lastly, avoid all imprecations and cursings either against men or other
creatures: For God in judgment, to punish such cursed speaking, often brings
to pass such imprecations: as may appear in the Jews, who at the arraignment
of Christ, cried saying, Matt. 27.25.
His blood be upon us and upon our children: which imprecation is verified upon
them till this day. At Newburge in Germany a certain mother cursed her son,
saying, Get thee away, Lonicerus theatr. histor. prec. 4.
I would thou might never come again alive: the very same day he went into
the water and was drowned. Again, a mother brought her child to the
University of Wittemberge, Idem.
by reason he was possessed with an unclean spirit: being demanded how it
came to pass, she answered in the hearing of many, that in her anger she
said, The devil take thee, and thereupon presently the child was possessed.
And in our country, men often wish the plague, the pox, the pestilence to
their children, their servants, their cattle: and often it falls out
accordingly.

Reverence to man is in two respects, either because he is created after the
image of God, or because he is above us in age, gifts, authority.

In the first consideration, men must have care to give such names to children
as are proper and fit, usual and known: the signification whereof, may
admonish them of the promises of God, of godliness, or of some good duty. And
there be four allowed ends of giving names. I. To preserve the memory of some
thing by the name given, as Adam, Israel, Isaac. II. To signify some thing to
come, as Evah, Abraham, John, Peter. III. To preserve the name and memory of
parents and kindred, which was used in the birth of John Baptist. This custom
may still be retained, if there be any good example in the ancetours that the
child may follow. IIII. That the life and profession of good men may be
revived in the renewing of their names.

Here we must take heed, in no wise to give to children, the proper names or
titles of God, as Jesus, Immanuel, etc.

Neither are the professors of the Gospel to be entitled by the names of
such as have been famous instruments in the Church, as to be called
Calvinists, Lutheranes, etc. Now this I say, 1. Cor. 12.13.
that every one of you says, I am Paul's, and I am Apollos, I am Cephas and I
am Christ's: Is Christ divided? or was Paul crucified for you either were ye
baptized in the name of Paul?

And it is a bold part of the pestilent generation of Papists, who take to
themselves the name of Jesuits, Acts 11.26. Romans 11.4.
for the name of Christian was given to the disciples at Antioch not by the
devise of man, but by devine oracle.

Reverence to man as he is superior, is in using fit titles of reverence.
Sara is commended in Scriptures for obeying her husband and for calling him
Sir. But excess must here be avoided, when titles of honor proper to God are
given to men, 1. Pet. 3.6.
as head of the Catholic Church to the Pope, Lady and Queen of heaven to the
mother of Christ. This fault Christ. This fault Christ reprooved in the young
man, saying, Why call thou me good, Marc. 10.18.
there is none good but God.

CAP. VI. Of Modesty and of Meekness.
MODESTY in speech has diverse caveats: first if a man speak any thing of him
self, that is, in his own commendation, let him alter the person and speak
of him self as of another: I know a man (says Paul, speaking of himself) in
Christ above fourteen years ago, 2. Cor. 12.2.
etc. which was taken up into Paradise, and heard words which can not be
spoken. And John says of himself; John 19.26.
When Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved, standing by, etc.
Here take heed of boasting, whereby men imitate the devil, who said, Luke 4.6.
All this power will I give thee, and the glory of those kingdoms, for that
is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will give it.

Again, when a man shall have occasion to speak of his own faults and
corruptions, let him speak the uttermost against himself, as Paul called him
self the first of all sinners. 1. Tim. 1.13, 15.
But (...) be to mention any thing of him self, that may minister matter of
commendation, let his speech rather incline to the defect, then to the excess:
as Paul says, I am the least of the Apostles, 1. Cor. 15.9.
which (...) not meet to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church
of God.

Secondly, in the mentioning of things which moove blushing, we are to use as
seemly words as may be chosen. Genesis 41 1. Afterward Adam knew Hevah his
wife, which conceived and bare Cain. 1. Sam. 24.4. And when he came to the
sheepecoates by the way where there was (...), and Saul went in to cover his
feet, that is, to do his easement.

Meekness also required in communication, which is, when a man uses (...)
and fair speech. (...) (...) remembrance etc. that they be courteous, Tit.
3.2, 3.
showing all meekness to all men, for we our selves also were in times past
unwise, disobedient, etc.

Meekness and gentleness shows it self in Salutations, Answers and
Reproves.

For the first, daily experience shows, that it makes much for the
maintaining of love, to call men by their proper names or surnames. And this
was a sign of special favor that God called Moses by his proper name. Yet
more convenient it is, to salute our betters by names of honor or office. Thus
the disciples call our Savior Christ Rabbi: and it was the usual manner among
the Jews, to call their betters Adon, that is, Lord, or sir.

The forms of salutations are to be after the order practiced in scripture. An
Angel saluted Gedeon thus: The Lord be with thee thou valiant man. Iud. 6.12.
And Boaz came to Bethlehem, and said to the repers, The Lord be with you:
Ruth. 2.4.
and they answered, The Lord bless thee. And the Angel saluted Mary: Hail,
freely beloved, the Lord is with thee, etc. Christ coming among his
disciples, said, Peace be among you: and he taught them coming to any house
to say, Matt. 10.11, 12, 13.
Peace be to this house.

By this it appears, that our common forms of salutations are commendable:
which are of diverse sorts: as when one meets another, God save you: when one
goes away, God be with you* in the morning, God give you a good morning: after
noone, God give you a good evening: when one is going on his journey, God
speed your journey: when one is working, God speed you: in eating, much good
do it you: when one has a new office, God give you joy of your office: when
one is sick, God comfort you, etc.

And when children salute their fathers and mothers after this manner: I pray
you father bless me, I pray you mother bless me: it is a seemly thing. For
God has made parents to be the instruments of blessing to their children in
nurtoring them and praying for them. As the fifth commandment says, Honor
thy father and mother, that they may prolong thy days.

It is (...) use in all places, when a man neeseth, to salute him by saying,
Christ help you. But there is no cause why the words should then be used more
then at another time* Aug. de hist. animal. l. 1. cap. 10. and probl. sect. 33
Plin. li. 28. c. 2.
The reasons are* I. It is an old custom fetched from the Gentiles before
Christ, and has no ground at all: for they used with the like words to wish
men health, because they thought neesing to be a sacred and holy thing: and
because some take it to be a sign of unhappie and evil success, which indeed
is otherwise. II. If there be any danger in the brain before neesing when a man
has neesed the danger is past* as learned Physicians teach: therefore* there is
no cause of the using such words then more then at coughing.

Our answers must be soft that anger be neither kindled nor increased. Prove.
15.23.
A soft answer puts away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger. 1. Sam.
24.7, 8
Nabal by (...) language provoked David to wrath, but Abigail by the contrary
appeased him. Gedeon spoke gently to the men of Ephraim, Judge. 8.3.
when they were angry against him, and appeased them. For the text says, When
he had thus spoken, then their spirits abated toward him. Therefore Solomon
says well, A joy comes to a man by the answer of his mouth, but how good is
a word in due season.

Now if any shall rail on us, our duty is, not to rail again. Romans 12.14.
Bless them that persecute you, Bless, I say, and curse not. Be courteous, 1.
Pet. 3.4.
not rendering evil for evil neither rebuke for rebuke, but contrariwise
bless, knowing that ye be thereunto called, that you should be heirs of
blessing. This thing was notably practiced by David. Psalm. 109.4. For my
friendship, they were mine adversaries, but I gave my self to prayer. And
therefore in this case, either silence is to be used, or at the most only a
just and manifest defense of our innocence to be made. 2. Kin. 18.36.
Ezechias commanded the people to be silent, and not to say any thing to the
speech of Rabsachai, now flattering now threatening. When Eli spoke hardly of
Anna, and badde her put away her drunkenness, she answered, 1. Sam. 1.15.
Nay, my lord, I am a woman troubled in spirit, I have neither drunk wine
nor strong drink, but have powered out my soul before the Lord. Gene. 40.15.
Thus Joseph clears himself, saying, I have done nothing wherefore they
should put me in the dungeon. And Daniel to Nabuchodonosor: Unto thee, O King,
Dan. 6.22.
have I done no hurt. And our Savior Christ when the Jews said unto him,
Ioh. 8.48, 49.
Say we not true, that thou art a Samaritane and have a devil? answered, I
have not a devil, but I honor my father, and ye have dishonored me. And
Paul being to make an apology for himself, begins thus: Men and brethren,
Acts 23.1.
I have in all good conscience served God until this day.

Now when a man has thus cleared him self, though his own word in his own
behalf take no effect, yet let him patiently commit his cause to God, who in
time will manifest the truth, Psalm. 26.
and bring it to light: As David did, Judge me, O God (says he) for I have
walked in mine innocence. And again, Psalm. 37.32* 33.
The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him: but the Lord will
not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.

Meekness in reproves is, when any shall admonish his brother of any fault
for his amendment, with the like moderation that Surgeons use, who being to
set the arm or leg that is forth of joint, handle it so tenderly, that the
patient shall scant feel when the bone falls in again. This counsel Paul
gives: Breethren, if any man be fallen by occasion into any fault, Galat. 6.1.
ye which are spiritual, restore such a one (or set him in joint again) with
the spirit of meekness. This was practiced by Abraham toward Lot, when
their heardmen were at variance, saying, Let there be, I pray thee, Gene. 13.8,
9.
no strife between thee and me, neither between mine heardmen and thine: for
we are brethren.

And this is done four ways. First, when we reproove a man generally, as
Nathan did David by a parable. 2. Sam. 12.
Secondly, when in the room of a reproof we put an exhortation: In the
exhortation insinuating an oblique reproof, as when a man shall swear in his
talk, I, shall not need always to say, Ye* do very ill to swear, and so
to dishonor God: But, I w^ll lap it up in the form of an exhortation, as
pills are lapt in sugar by saying, Yea and nay* yea and nay shall serve among
us. Rebuke not an Elder, 1. Tim. 5.1.
but exhort him as a father, and young men as breethren, says* Paul to
Timothy. Thirdly, when the reproof is propounded in a man's own person as
though he were faulty which reprooveth. Paul practiced this: Now these
things, breethren, 1. Cor. 4.6.
(says he) I have figuratively applied to mine own self and Apollos for
your sakes, that ye might learn by us, that no man presume above that which
is written. Fourthly, when the fault is directly reprooved, but yet partly
with prefaces, that we do it of love, Galat. 61.
that we wish well to the party, that we speak as considering our selves,
that we also are in danger of the same fault: and partly by framing the
reproof out of the word of God, that the party may see himself, rather to
be reprooved by God, then by us: after this manner the inferior may admonish
his superior, especially when there is no other way of redress, and he is to
listen, yielding himself tractable. Naaman is advised by his servant, who
said, Father, if the Prophet had commanded thee a great thing, 2. Kin. 5.13.
would thou not have done it: how much rather then, when he says to thee,
Wash, and be clean? Then went he down and washed himself seven times in
Jordan*

When any shall in this manner be admonished of a fault, they are to yield
themselves tractable and thankful and heartily glad of so good a friend.
Notable is the speech of the Psalmist: Let the righteous smite me, it is a
benefit: Psalm. 141.5.
and let him reproove me, it is the chief ointment, let it not be wanting to
my head. And Solomon says, A reproof enters more into him that has
understanding, Prove. 17.10.
then an hundredth stripes into a fool. Prove. 27.5.
And, Open rebuke is better then secret love.

CAP. VII. Of Sobriety, Vrbanitie, Fidelity, and care of others good name.
SOBRIETY in judgment is, when a man either suspendeth his opinion of his
neighbors sayings or doings, or else speaks as charitably as he can, by
saying as little as may be, if the thing be evil: or by interpreting all in
better part; if the speech or action be doubtful. Therefore do thus: despise
not thy neighbor, but think thy self as badde a sinner, and that the like
defectes may befall thee. If thou can not excuse his doing, excuse his
intent, which may be good: or if the deed be evil, think it was done of
ignorance: if thou can not no way excuse him, think some great temptation
befell him, and that thou should be worse, if the like temptation befell
thee: and give God thanks that the like as yet has not befallen thee. Despise
not a man being a sinner, for though he be evil to day, he may turn to morrow.

Here is condemned all headie and rash judgment, Matt. 7.1.
whereby men make things either worse then they are, or else they take and
turn all things to the worse part. Thus the devil dealt with Job, saying,
Does Job fear God for naught, Job. 1.9, 11.
etc. but stretch out thine hand now and touch all that he has, to see if he
will not blaspheme thee to thy face. Such was the dealing of Doeg with David.
1. Sam. 22.9.
I saw the son of Ishai (says he) when he came to Abimelech the son of
Ahitub, who asked counsel of the Lord for him, and gave him victuals, and he
gave him also the sword of Goliath the Philistin. Here the backe-bither
concealeth the necessary circumstances, whereby Achimelech might have been
excused, as that David asked bread being hungry, and that he told not
Ahimelech that he was out of Saules favor but he turns all his speech to
this end, to bring the Priest into suspicion with Saul.

Thus the Pharisees dealt* John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say,
Matt. 11.19.
He has a devil. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say,
Behold a glutton, and a drinker of wine, and a friend of Publicanes and
sinners.

Contrary to this sobriety is Flattery, whereby for hope either of favor or
gain, men, and especially such as are of dignity and place, are soothed up in
their sins, and extolled above measure, even to their faces. As when Herod
arrayed in royal apparel, and sat on the judgment fear, and made an
oration, Acts 12.22.
the people gave a showte, saying, the voice of a God, and not of a man. But
mark what Solomon says, Prove. 27.14.
He that praises his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning:
it shall be counted to him for a curse. One being asked which was the worst of
all beasts, answered, Of wild beasts, the tyrant: of tame beasts, the
Flatterer. And another said, that Flatterers were worse then crows. For they
eat only dead carrion: these feed on living men.

And of all kinds of Flattery, that is the worst, when a man shall speak
fair to his neighbors face, and praise him: but behind his back, speak his
pleasure, and even cut his throat. Psalm. 54.21.
David complains of his familiar friend, that the words of his mouth were
softer then butter, yet war was in his heart; that his words were more
gentle then oil, yet they were swords. The Pharisees behind Christ's back,
took counsel how they might entangle him in talk: but before his face they
say, Matt. 24.16.
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truly,
neither carest thou for any man: for thou considerest not the person of men.

Vrbanitie is a grace of speech, whereby men in seemly manner use
pleasantness in talk for recreation, or for such delight as is joined with
profit to them selves and others. The Preacher says, There is a time to
laugh, Eccle. 3.4.
and a time to weep. When the Lord brought again the captivity of Sion, we
were like them that dream. Ps. 126.1, 2.
Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy.

Now this mirth must be joined with the fear of God, otherwise Solomon says
well. I have said to laughter, thou art mad: Eccle. 2.2.
and of joy, what is that thou do? And Christ says, Woe to you that now
laugh, Luke 6.25.
for ye shall weep. Secondly with compassion, and sorrow for Gods people in
affliction and misery. They drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with
chief ointments, Amos 6.6.
but no man is sorry for the affliction of Joseph. Thirdly, it must be sparing
and moderate. Paul condemns such as are lovers of pleasures, 2. Timot. 3.
more then of God. Fourthly, it must be void of the practice of sin. Hebr^ 11.
Moses is commended that he refused the pleasures of sin.

The usual time of mirth is at meats. And here Sampsons practice may be
followed, Judge. 14.12.
who at his marriage feast propounded a riddle or hard question to his
friends. And Ambrose thinks that he did this to stop the mouths of
talkers, and to occupy their wits.

Withal it must be remembered to be a Christian duty, even at the table to
maintain talk of religion, Luke 11.37* and 14.1. and 22.15.
and of duties of godliness, after the practice of our Savior Christ: though
many upon little ground think otherwise. Tertullian records of the
Christians of his time that they used in their love feasts to talk together,
Apol. ca. 39.
as considering with themselves that they had God him self as an earewitnesse
to them. Chrysostom of this point says well. Hom. 2. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. cap.
I would to God (says he) that in tavernes, and feasts, and at bathes men
would talk and dispute of Hell: for the remembering of Hell would hinder a man
from falling to hell. And it was the manner of the Primative Church at Dinner
and Supper to use the reading of the Scriptures. When ye come to the table
(says Augustine) hear that which is read according to custom, Aug. epist.
109.
without any stir or striving: that your mouths may not only receive the
meat, but your ears may hunger after the word of God.

And this holy rejoicing at meats, is specially to be used with such as are
godly. As Solomon says, that he which eats at the covetous man's table,
Prove. 23.8.
shall vomit his morsels, and shall loose his sweet words. The faithful at
Jerusalem did break bread together, Acts 2.46.
with gladness and singleness of heart.

Quest. Whether jesting be tolerable in any sort, or not?

Answ. That jesting which stands in quippes, tauntes, and girdes, which
serves only for the offense of some, with the delight of others, is not
tolerable: Ephesians. 4.25.
because all speech must edify, and minister grace to the hearers: neither
does it agree with Christian gravitie and modesty. But two kinds of jesting
are tolerable: the one is moderate 1. Kin. 18.27. 2. Kin. 2.23. Isa. 14.11.
At noone Eliah mocked them, and said, Cry alowd, for he is a god: either he
talks or pursues his enemies, or is in his journey, or it may be he
sleeps, and must be awaked*

As for laughter, it may be used: otherwise God would never have given that
power and faculty into man: but the use of it must be both moderate and
seldom, as sorrow for our sins is to be plentiful and often. Luke 19. John
11. Hebr. 5.7.
This we may learn in Christ his example, of whom we read that he wept
three times at the destruction of Jerusalem, at the raising of Lazarus, and in
his agony: but we never read that he laughed.

Fidelity is constancy in all our lawful sayings and promises.

A promise is to be made with this condition (If God will) and then if a man be
prevented by death, James 1.15. 1. Chr. 13.2.
or by any like means, he is not to be blamed: otherwise a man's lawful word
and promise binds him according to the will and pleasure of him to whom it
is made. 2. Cor. 1.17, 23.


Now if afterward it be hurtful to him that made it, he may crave to be free
from his promise: and liberty being granted, Psalm. 15.4.
take it. But a promise bound with an oath is to be kept, though private
hindrances follow: yet so as the Magistrate may order the matter, and proceed
in equity, that the damage may be the less.

The last grace which is to be used in speech, is care of our neighbors good
name, Prove. 22.
which is far better to him then great riches.

Here is condemned the talebearer, which of an evil mind tells a thing of
another, to bring him into hatred, or to revenge himself, or to get something,
which otherwise he could not obtain.

This talebearing is of diverse sorts. One is, Romans 1.30.
when men whisper abroad secretly the fault of another, whereas they should
rather admonish the party, as Cham when he had seen his fathers nakedness,
Ge^. 9.
ran straight and told his breethren. The second, when they add to or
change the thing said or done, as it serves for their purpose. Some of the
witnesses which came against Christ, charged him to say, I will destroy this
Temple which is made with hands, and in three days build another without
hands. Where first they change his meaning; for Christ spoke of the temple of
his body. Secondly, they add to the words. For Christ said not, I will
destroy this temple: but, Matt. 26.60, 61^
destroy ye this temple. Therefore the Holy Ghost notes them with the name of
false witness bearers. The third, when men surmise, and tell that which was
never done. When Jeremy was going out of Jerusalem to the land of Benjamin,
Iere. 37.13.
and was in the gate of Benjamin, Irijah took him, and said, Thou fleest to
the Chaldeans. Then said Jeremy, that is false, I flee not to the Chaldeans,
but he would not hear him. The fourth is the colored tale-bearing, when one
speaks evil of another, with fine prefaces and preambles, feigning that he
is very sorry that his neighbor has done such or such a thing: that he
speaks it not of malice, but of a good mind: that he is constrained to
speak: that he speaks not all he could speak: that the party to whom the
tale is told must keep it secret. Upon Psalm. 15.3.
Luther writes of this fault very well. This vice (says he) whereby we tell
abroad the things which we hear of others, and take them in worse part, is
very rife, and of great force to sow discordes: the rather because it often
shows it self under the pretense and name of counsel and good advise. And
it is a notable visard for a talebearer, to transform him self into an angel
of light, and under zeal for Gods glory to backbite anll accuse his neighbor
of heresy, error, and wicked life.

Therefore the Prophets meaning is, that we should conceal the evils that be
in our neighbor, and not speak them to others* though he be an enemy and
deserve it at our hands, and only speak of those good things in him, which
seem to preserve concord: for this we would that men should do unto us. Yea,
and let us take heed that we judge not or condemn any man's saying or doing
rashly. Confess. lib. 9.
Augustine says, that this was the care which his mother had toward her
enemies. To do this is a notable point of just dealing, but indeed there is no
man utterly without this fault in this life: such is our wretched state in this
world. For though some are of this mind, that they desire not to have other
men's wants told them, and will not take all in worse part, yet if they be told
and taken in worse part of others, they can willingly hear them, neither will
they check the teller, but suffer bad surmises to take place with them. But
Gedaliah the son of Ahicham excelled in the contrary virtue, Ier. 40.
who chose rather to hazard his life, then to suspect evil by Ismaell.

This tale-bearing is the common table talk in England: and it is wonderful
to see, how those, who are otherwise godly, are overtaken with it: but men must
learn to stand more in awe of Gods commandment, and also to consider that
the same thing a man speaks of another, comes home again by his own door.
Wherefore, when men shall enter any evil communication of others, we are to
interrupt it by other talk, as not regarding it.

Here remember that when governors and Magistrates shall use hard words, not
in the way of defamation, but for the reprooving of a vice, it is not to
slander: Gal. 3. mat. 3.
as, O foolish Galathians: O generation of vipers. And Christ terms Herod,
Fox.

CAP. VIII. Of the bonds of Truth.
THVS much of grace in speech. Now follows bonds of truth, whereby the
truth of our talk is testified and confirmed.

There are three: A simple assertion, an asseveration, an oath.

A simple assertion, is either a simple affirmation, as yea, yea: or a simple
negation, as nay, nay: they are to be used only in our familiar and common
talk. Let your communication be yea, yea; nay, Matt. 5.
nay: and whatsoever is more, comes of evil.

If the truth which we affirm or deny be doubtful or contingent, then such
clauses as these ( It is so, or it is not so as I think, as I remember, as I
take it) are to be added. If one shall say, It is so, and afterward it prove
otherwise, he receives discredit, because he spoke an untrueth. But if he
shall say, I think it is so, though it fall out otherwise, yet he saves his
credit, because he deceives not, but only is deceivrd.

An asseveration is, when one does vehemently affirm or deny any thing. This
is not to be used at every word: but then only when a truth of greater
importance is to be confirmed. When the false prophets among the Jews and the
Priests would not believe that Jeremy was sent of God: what says he? not
simply, Iere. 26.15.
The Lord has sent me: but, In truth the Lord has sent me. Our Savior
Christ, when he used to speak any weighty matter, used to say, Amen, Amen,
Verily, Verily, which is a plain asseveration: for Amen is more then a simple
affirmation, and it is less then an oath, as the very sense of the word does
import: which is no more, but Truly, Certainly.

The third is an oath, which must not be made by any thing in heaven or earth,
but only by the Name of God alone.

It must be used as the last refuge and remedy of all. For when any truth of
great importance is to be confirmed, and all signs, evidences, proofs,
witnesses, fail among men on earth: then we may lawfully fetch the Lord as a
witness from heaven, who is the knower of all truth.

And in this case an oath may be taken: either publicly before a Magistrate,
or privately among private persons, if it be done with reverence and
consideration: Gene. 31.53.
as it was between Jacob and Laban.

CAP. IX. What is to be done when we have spoken.
AFter a man has spoken his mind, very few words more are to be added. He
that has knowledge spares his words. In many words there can not want
iniquity: Prove. 17.25.
but he that refraineth his lips is wise.

He that speaks many words, speaks either false things or superfluous, or
both: as when a river overfloweth, the water gathers much slime: so many
words many faults. When a vessel being smitten makes a great noise, it is a
token that it is empty: and so the sound of many words shows a vain heart.
The Gentiles have said, that God gave a man one tongue and two ears, that he
might hear more and speak less. Valerius Maximus reports of Xenocrates,
that being in the company of some that used railing speeches, held his tongue:
and being asked why he did so, answered, That it had repented him that he had
spoken, but it never repented him that he had held his peace. And the proverb
is, He that will speak what he will, shall hear what he would not. To the
framing of our speech Ambrose requires three things: Offic. lib. 1.
a yoke, a balance, and a metwand: a yoke, to keep it in a stayed gravitie: a
balance, to give it weight of reason: a metwand, to keep it in measure and
moderation.

This rule must be practiced carefully, for the avoiding of chiding, brawling,
and contention. Let nothing be done by contention, Philip. 2.3. Let students
and scholars learn to practice this: for what shall another man's opinion hurt
thee, though in reasoning he be not of thy mind in every point.

Here take heed of the spirit of Contradiction, whereby some by thwarting and
contradicting every man, at length prove either obstinate Heretics, or lewd
Atheists, and make no bones to contradict the holy Ghost, and to call the
scriptures in question, and dispute that there is no God.

Now if a man speak necessary things, though he continue his speech till
midde-night, as Paul did, Acts 20.7.
it can not be called immoderate or superfluous talk.

CAP. X. Of Writing.
ALL this which is set down (...) concerning speech, must as well be practiced
in writing as in speaking. Whereby are condemned ballads, books of love, all
idle discourses and histories, being nothing else but inticements and baits
unto manifold sins, fitter for Sodom and Gomorrah then for Gods Church. And
it must be followed as well in speaking of Latin or any other tongue, as
English, which students have not marked: for whereas they will not swear in
English, yet in Latin they make no bones of it, saying, Mehercule, medius
fidius, aedipol, per deos immortales. And whereas they hold but one God in
judgment, yet in their Latin exercises, they speak of Jupiter, and of the
immortal gods, after the manner of the heathen. What a shame is this, that a
Christian, and that in Christian schools, should either be ashamed or not use
to speak as a Christian, but as Atheists do? If thou have many tongues and
know not how to use them well: he which has but his mother tongue,
ordering it aright, is a better linguist then thou.

CAP. XI. Of Silence.
WIse and godly silence is as excellent a virtue as holy speech: for he
knows not how to speak, which knows not how to hold his tongue. The
rule of our silence must be the law of God. By means of which, wise
consideration must be had, whether the thing which we have in mind be for Gods
glory and our neighbors good: which done, we are answearably to speak to be
silent.

Here must be considered the things of which silence must be used, and the
persons before whom* The things are many. First, if any truth be to the
hinderance of Gods glory, or of the good of our neighbor, it must be
concealed.

The concealing of the truth, is either in whole or in part. In whole, when
the speaking of the least word is hurtful: Aug. li. ad Consen.
As for example, the father and the son are both sick at once: the son
dies first, the father asks whether his son be dead or not: if it be said
no, an untrueth is told: if yea, then the fathers grief is increased, and his
death hastened: therefore silence is the best. In days of persecution holy
Martyrs have chosen rather to suffer death then to reveal their brethren, that
have been of their private assemblies with them.

The concealing of a thing in part is, when a man speaks a little of the
truth, and concealeth the rest. Which is warranted in all good and lawful
proceedings, which manifestly tend to the glory of God. When Samuel (...)
David, he answers the Lord and says, (...) ^an I go? for if Saul (...) of
it he will kill me. Then the Lord answered, (...) with thee, and say, 1. Sa^.
16.1, 2, 3.
I am come to (...) sacrifice to the (...), and call for (...) to sacrifice,
and I will (...) thee (...) had showed King Zedekiah how he might escape death,
then the King said unto him, Let no man know of these words, Iere. 38.24, 25,
26.
etc. but if the princes understand that I have talked with thee, and they come
unto thee, and say unto thee* Declare unto us what the King has said unto
thee, etc. then shall thou say unto them, I humbly besought the King that he
would not cause me to (...) to (...) house to die there. And afterward he so
answered, and the matches was not perceived. The like was practiced by (...)
Acts. 23.6.

Secondly, thou art to conceal thine own secrets. Sampson revealing his own
secret, Judge. (...) overthrewe himself* If thou desire ease by revealing, then
^ell them but (...) few and to such as are faithful.

That which thou would not have known, (...)(...) for how shall another
keep thy counsel, when thou can not do it. Keep thy friends (...)
likewise, if it be not hurtful: and let ministers conceal the sins and
wantes that trouble the conscience of such as are dying. Let Magistrates
conceal things done in the Senate* especially concerning war, least they be
revealed to the enemy.

If God bring any strange thing to pass, speak not boldly of it, but in
silence wonder* Job at the consideration of Gods Majesty in his works, says,
Behold, Job. 39.37.
I am vile: what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Na^^b
and Abehu for offering incense with strange fire before the Lord were both
distroyed with fire: which being done, Moses told Aaron that God would be
sanctified in them that come near him, and be glorified before all the people:
and then the text says, Levit. 10.3.
but Aaron held his peace. When Peter had taught the Gentiles, and after
returned to Jerusalem, they of the circumcision contended with him: he then
renders a reason of his fact, which being made, they were silent. For so the
text is, When they heard these things, Act. 11.18.
they held their peace, and glorified GOD. When Gods judgementes befall men
among us, if we speak any thing we must judge charitable. Blessed is he that
judges wisely of the poor, Psalm. 41.1.
the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble.

Thirdely, the infirmities and sins of our neighbors are always to be
concealed, unless it be in the case before named, that we find our selves
called of God to speak. He that covers a transgression seeks love. Prove.
17.4.
If God in mercy cover his sins, why should thou reveal them. Solomon
says, It is the glory of a man to pass by an infirmity. Prove. 19.11.


Fourthly, all unseemely matters, all things unknowen, things which concern
us not, things above our reach are in silence to be buried.

The persons before whom silence must be used, are these. I. Malicious enemies
of religion: Give not that which is holy unto dogs, Mat. 7.6.
neither cast your pearls before swine. This was among the rest one cause of
the silence of Christ before Caiaphas and Pilate. Mat. 27.14.
II. Secondly, before Magistrates in their open courts: where such as come
before them are not to speak till they be bidden. Then Paul after that the
governor had beckened unto him that he should speak, Act. 24.10.
answered. III. In the presence of our elders and betters, who must have leave
and liberty to speak first, Ecclus 32.8.
and must of others be heard with silence. The practice of this was in Elihu to
Elithaz and Bildad. Job. 32.6. Ecclus 7.5, 11
A company of men (as some say) is like to the Alphabet, in which are vowels,
half vowels, and mutes: vowels are old men, learned, wise, expert: half
vowels, are young men and women, who are then only to speak when they are
asked; mutes, are the same parties, who being not occasioned, are in silence
to hear their betters. Tit. 2.9.
And here all servants and children must remember when they are justly
reproved, to be silent, and not to answer any thing again. IIII. Fools and
pratlers are not to be answered, unless it be to let them see their folly.

CAP. XII An exhortation to keep the tongue.
THVS have I in part set down how the tongue is to be governed: and I
heartily desire, that (...) Christians would put these rules in practice.
Reasons. I. If any man seem to be religious, and restrain not his tongue,
Iam. 1.26.
he deceives himself, and his religion is in vain. II. The man of an evil
tongue, is a beast in the form of a man; for his tongue is the tongue of a
serpent* under which lies nothing but venime and poison: nay, he is worse
then a serpent: for it can not hurt, unless it be present to see a man, Psalm.
140.3.
or to bite him, or to strike him with his tail: but he which has not the
rule of his tongue, hurts men as well absent as present, neither sea nor
land, nor any thing can hinder him. And again, his throat is like a grave
that has a vent in some part, and therefore sends forth nothing but stink
and corruption. III. As the holy men of God when they preached, Isa. 6.6
had their tongues, as it were, touched with a cole from the altar of God:
Matt. 3.11.
and as godly men when they speak graciously, have their tongues inflamed with
the fire of Gods spirit: so, contrariwise, when thou speak evil, thy
tongue is kindled by the fire of hell, and Satan comes from thence with a cole
to touch thy lips, James 3.6.
and to set them on fire to all manner of mischief. Chrysostom says, that
when men speak good things, Chrysostom. ho^. 79. in Mat.
their tongue is the tongue of Christ: but all manner of ungodly and cursed
speaking is the devils language. IIII. The moderating of the tongue is a matter
of great difficulty. S. James says, James 3.7, 8.
The whole nature of beasts and of birds, and of creeping things, etc. but the
tongue can no man tame: it is an unruly evil. Pambus, one without learning,
came to a certain man to be taught a Psalm: who when he had heard the first
verse of the 38. Psalm, I said, that I will keep my ways that I offend not
in my tongue, Histor. Tripar. l. 8. c. 1.
would not suffer the next verse to be read, saying, this verse is enough, if I
could practice it. And when his teacher blamed him, because he saw him not of
six months (...), he answered, that he had not yet done the verse. And one
that knew him many years after, asked him whether he had yet learned the
verse* I am forty years old (says he) and have not yet learned to
fulfill it. Now then, the harder it is to rule the tongue, the more care is to
be had therein. V. The strange judgments of God, Gods Judgment for the abuse
of the tongue* Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 8.
for the abuse of the tongue especially in blasphemies and perjuries are many
and fearful. Three men conspired together against Narcissus Bishop of
Jerusalem, a man that led a godly and blameless life, and they charged him
with a most heinous crime, all three confirm their accusation by oath: the
first wishes, if it were not so that he were burnt. The second, that he might
die of the jaundise: the third, that he might loose his eyes. Afterward in
process of time, the first had his house set on fire in the night, and he
with all his family was burnt. The second had the jaundise from the head to the
sole of the foot and died thereof. The third seeing what was befallen these
twain, repented, and confessed the conspiracy against Narcissus, and yet for
all that he lost his eyes. Again, In the days of Q. Mary as James Abbes was
led by the sheriff to execution, Fox Act. Mon.
diverse poor people stood in the way and asked their alms: he then having no
money to give them, did pull off all his apparel save his shirte, and gave it
unto them, to some one thing, to some another in the giving whereof he
exhorted them to be strong in the Lord, and to stand steadfaste to the truth
of the Gospel. While he was thus instructing the people, a servant of the
sheriffs going by, cried out alowde and blasphemously said: Believe him not
good people, he is an heretic, and a mad man out of his wit: believe him
not, for it is heresy that he says: And as the other continued in his godly
admonitions, so did this wicked wretch blow forth his blasphemous
exclamations, until they came unto the stake where he should suffer. But
immediately after this martyr was bound to the stake and fire put to him, such
was the fearful stroke of Gods justice upon this blasphemous railer, that he
was there presently in the sight of all the people stricken with a frenzy,
wherewith he had before railingly charged that good martyr of God: who in this
furious rage and madness, casting off his shoes and the rest of his clothes,
cried out unto the people and said: thus did James Abbes the true servant of
God, who is saved, but I am damned: And thus ran he round about the town
of Bury, still crying, that James Abbes was a good man, and saved, but I am
damned.

Act. Mon. Fox.
Again, Children sitting in company together, fell into communication of God,
and to reason what God was. And some said one thing, some another* among the
rest, one said, He is a good old father, to which another named Dennis
Benfielde replied with a most outrageous blasphemy: What, he (said she) is an
old doting fool. But shortly after this young gyrle was so stricken, that all
the one side of her was black, and she became speechless, and died.

Jdem.
Again, One Leav^^ a ploughman, railing, said, that he saw the (...) favored
knave Latimer, when he was burned: and also in despite, said, that he had
teeth like an horse. At which time and hour, as near as could be gathered,
the son of the said Leaver most wickedly hanged himself.

Again, in the time of K. Edward, Idem.
a young gentleman of Cornwall being in company with other more gentlemen
together with their servants, being about the number of twenty horsemen,
among whom this lusty yonker entered into talk, and began withal to swear,
and use ribauld speech: being gently reprooved, the young gentleman took
snuff, and said to the reproover, why take thou thought for me? take thought
for thy winding sheet: well, quoth the other, amend, for death gives no
warning: for he soon comes a lambs skin to the market, as an old sheep
skin. Gods wounds, (says he) care not thou for me: raging still in this
manner worse and worse in words, till at length passing on their journey, they
came riding over a great bridge, standing over a piece of an arm of the sea,
upon which bridge this gentleman swearer spurred his horse in such sort as he
spring clean over with the man on his back, who as he was going, cried,
saying, Horse and man, and all to the devil.

P. Stubbes book printed 1581.
Again, there was a serving man in Lincolnshire, who had still in his mouth an
use to swear, Gods precious blood, and that for very trifles: being often
warned by his friends to leave the taking of the Lords blood in vain, did
notwithstanding still persist in his wickedness, until at the last it pleased
God to acite him first with sickness, and then with death: during which time
of the Lords visitation, no persuasion could move him to repent his foresaid
blaspheming, but hearing the bell to towle, did most hardly in the (...)
anguish of his death, start up in his bed, and swear by Gods blood this bell
towled for me. Whereupon immediately the blood abundantly from all the joints of
his body, as it were in streams, did issue out most fearfully from mouth,
nose, wrestes, knees, heels, and toes, with all other joyntes, not one left
free, and so dyed. These and such like judgments must be as warnings from
heaven to admonish us, and to make us afraid of the abuse of the Tongue:
especially when it tends to the dishonor of God. And we are to imitate the
example of Policarpe the Martyr, who, when he was bidden to take his oath, and
curse Christ, answered, Fourscore and six years have I been his servant,
yet in all this time has he not so much as once hurt me: how then may I speak
evil of my King and Sovereign Lord, which has thus preserved me? VI.
Lastly, God has honored thy tongue with the gift of speech and utterance:
and the great excellency of this gift thou should perceive, if thou werest
stricken dumme for a time. Therefore let thy tongue be applied to the honoring
of God, and to the good of thy neighbor.

FINIS.
Errata sic corrigenda.
Page 29. in marg. Act. 11.26. (...). sic Romans 11.4. page 34 in marg. August.
for Arist.


