A contention between three Brethren: That is to say, the VVhoremonger, the
Dronkarde, and the Diceplayer, to approve which of them three is the worste, by
reason that their deceased Father had given his Succession from the worste of
them three.

A work no less profitable then pleasurable to read, for so much as the
vileness of those three vices, is herein set out at large.

Compiled by Thomas Salter. Tout a l'honneur de Dieu.

Imprinted at London, for Thomas Gosson, dwelling in Pater noster Roe, next to
the sign of the Castle. 1581.

WIthin this little book,
is vice set out at large:
By those that to excuse the same,
give severally his charge.
In it also is seen,
how every several man:
Others to blame (and hides his own
Vice) does the most he can,
Whereby we may perceive,
how Satan subtly:
Makes men seem blind in their own faults,
when others they discry.
FINIS.
TO HIS (...) Scholar, William (...) wishes (...) felicity 1581.
AS the giving of a gift unto any one (my good Scholar) on hope to receive for
it a greater gift, is a kind of usury: So to give none at al for fear of
losing reward, is a degree of avarice.

Again, as to repent the giving of a gift after it is given, is a testemonie
of imprudencie: So to give one perforce without receiving satisfaction for it
from the^ that receive it is an unwise bargain. But who so co^sidereth in his
giving of any gift, what he gives, when he gives, to whom he gives and how
much he gives, may not only be thought a true, but also a liberal and
discreet friend.

Now I thy Tutor, loving thee faithfully, do give unto thee with a most hearty
and Zealous good will, this little Pamdhilet, entitled: A strange Contention
between three brethren etc. And therefore eue^ as the right giving of a gift,
is an act of liberality, so a little remuneration is a manifest token of a
thankful mind. Now the recompense that I request (for this) at thy hands, is
no other, the^ first to have thee courteously to accept it, next willingly to
read it, and lastly, wisely and discretely to consider of it. And so doing,
although it bears outwardlye the badge of brauling between brethren, yet by
means of the same, thou shall see theree execrable vices so pithily deciphered
and set forth, that is to say, Whoordome, Dronkenness, and Diceplaying, as I
have no doubt, but it shall both turn to thy pleasure, and others Profit. For
what greater Pleasure may be presented unto the, or what sweeter profit unto
other, then to see, (by sundry exampls, valeable reasons, and invincible
arguments) those dangerous shelues, and Perilous rocks laid open (thereby the
better to shun and avoid them) on which many erst have made, and diverse yet
daily do make most shameful and grievous shipwrake. Well as I said, touching
this my gift, my request once again is, that you first courteously accept it,
and the^ that you request others uprightly to judge of it. By doing wheroff
they whom you request shall do wisely to themselves, and tha^kfully to you, and
you courteously unto them, and thankfully unto me, and I lovingly, liberally,
and courteously unto you all, which am yours in all I may to do you good.

Thomas Salter.

(...) Reader
Here have I set forth unto thy view (gentle Reader) a strange Contention
moved between three brethere^ which notwithstanding is not so strange as
profitable to be considered of, and therefore although it be not so filled
with fine phrases, as the works of some late worthy writers are: yet for so
much as it tends only to the treading down of vice, and rearing up of virtue,
(for I tell thee, vice now is aloft, and virtue lies low, and therefore
needs help of rearing) I beseech thee to take it in good part, and by so
doing, thou shalt encourage me to invre my pen to thy farther profit, in
other such petite Pamphlets.

Farewell T.S.

THE ARGUMENT OF this present Book, Entitled: A Contention between three
Brethren: that is to say, the Dronkard, the VVhooremonger, and the Diceplayer.
A Certain Father dravving nere unto his end, (having three lewd disposed
sons, the one a VVhooremonger, the other a Dronkarde, and the third a
Diceplayer, ordained by his last Will and Testamente, that the most wicked
and vicious of them three should be deprived of his succession. He being
deceased, by reason of the strife risen through this bequest betvveene the said
Brethren, they pleaded their cause themselves before Judges, for the same
purpose appointed. To the intent that by reciprocal, and mutual accusations,
personally declaimed, the matter might more clearly, and with greater
Vehemence be deciphered and understood, then if it were set forth and
debated by the voice and Organe of an advocate. The Dronkard first, (as
appertaining unto him for some cause) begins the Alarm against his two
Brethren, severally, and by sundry assaults: to the intent that he might
again at one time, receive from both of them, by one only assault the like.
Upon this the parties being amply heard, there is sentence given. Certifying
you right courteous and gentle Readers (for it is to you, and to no envious or
malignaunt persons, that I address this present) that if it please you to
behold the same, it shall not be without some pleasure, and as I hope less
without profit. For the principal end thereof tends unto the teaching of
all men, cheefely and first of all to be careful of themselves, and not to
think or imagine any thing prejudicial or hurtful to their neighbor,
neither to search (as Socrates alleged in xenophon) the imperfections of
others, leaving to enquire afte^ their own fault, by examining of themselves.
Being counseled by this wise advertisement, to take heed rather (as the
scripture teatheth us) unto the great beam that restes in our own eyes, then
unto the little more that hinders the sight of others, that is to say, to
consider, make clear, correct and a mend our own great faults, and offenses,
before we intermeddle with those little ones of our neighbors. For to do
the contrary, and to stumble on this error no less dangerous then common, is
the right property and nature, says Cicero in his Tosculanes of folly and
ignorance.

The declamation of the Drunkard, against his brother the Whooremonger.
THe three brethren aforesaid, to wit, the Drunkarde, the Whooremonger, and
the Dice player, being come (according to appointement) before the Judges to
plead their causes themselves, concerning the inheritance of their deceased
Fathers succession: the Drunkarde first and for some consideration, stood forth
and after silence was made, said in this manner.

I am not ignorante (right honorable) with what weighte and importance, the
present altrication and controversy between us three brethren, is pursued
and followed by means of our Fathers last will and Testament. By the which
our vices must of necessity, be openly heard and understood, and by
reciprocal accusation, one brother must unnaturally and wickedly by
constraint set upon an other, a deed no doubt greatly to be avoided: But he
which has (as having sequestered from him all honesty) according to the French
proverb, once passed over the bridge of Gournay, or entered the Pic bakers
door, that is to say, has drunk up all his shame, fears not so much reproach
and infamy, as he does, hunger and beggary, but staieth himself upon ye
Greek proverb mentioned in Homer, and reported in Titus Liuius, that is, to
dye for hunger is a most miserable thing, which thing having before mine eyes
and with the same, the pitiful complainte of Franclipeur in plautus, where he
thus cries. O misery of miseries, to be hungry, and not to have whereof to
feed or satisfy hunger, to the end I may avoid such a calamity, and not
be forced to stretch out my hand in begging (if by adventure I should by your
sentence be disherited) I ente^nd this day to plead mine own cause, on
purpose by fallible reasons and sufficient arguments to approve yt our father
meant not to disherite one of these my brethren, but both of them, and I only
to be his successor and heir, for so much as I am assured to prove yt both of
their crimes and offenses do far exceed and surpass mine, and to make it
clear and manifest unto you, I am purposed to set upon both of them, to the
intent yt the vile filthiness of the one being beaten down, I may with one
only charge and alarome assail the vile infamous life of the other, not
forgetting nevertheless how sacred the name of inuectable brotherhood is,
neither how straightly the conjunction of brothers is bound, nor how much one
brother ought to love an other. But at this present all the same is not so much
of my part to be observed and kept, as beggary is to be contemned and avoided,
beside there is of antiquity a proverb no less practiced the^ common, which
is: nearer unto me is my shirt then my coat, by following of which every man
commonly loves his own profit more then others. Wherefore (right honorable) not
to hold you with to long an oration know you that our present strife is to
understand which of us three Brethren, as the most wicked and vicious, shall
be deprived of our deceased Fathres succession, following the order of his last
will and Testament, which of necessity and infallibly we must accomplish and
keep, and you to the same, as to the only mark, direct and areste your
sentence.

Now to begin my assault, who is he that does not euidentlye see that my
brother the whoremonger is notably and especially marked as worthy for the
vileness of his life, to be disherited more the^ any other. I cannot but
confess my self to be an excessive bibber, marvelous desirous of strong
drink, as by the Scarlet color on my face and fiery heat in mine eyes it is
evidently to be seen: but though the same be a vice, yet is it much less then
that of whoredom: Every man given to think his own fault ^east.
for (speaking only now unto the Whooremonger) is there any thing more
vicious and infamous then to be tormented and incensed even unto the becoming
Bedlem mad for the love (if so I ought to term lascivious lust) of one or
many harlots: and among such vile and infamous sowes not to live so long, as
to languish and to imprison themselves, as in a most vile and filthy stinking
hogs stye, and with those lewd Callottes and accursed queanes to change their
most desired liberty, into a most vile and filthy subjection and servitude
where and with whom they make shipwreck not only of good name and honor,
(treasures most precious) but also of health and goods, only there to attain
shame, infamy, misery, and beggary.

If all men, after Caesar in his Commentaries, naturally desire to live free
and at liberty, hating above all things to be held in servitude, a thing
most noisome and loathsome to all, cheefely to such as be noble and free borne:
how can we sufficientlye and worthily blast out the execrable vice of the
infamous Whooremonger or Adulterer, who like to a brute beast (for Whooredome
or Adultery transformeth a man into a beast, says Plutarch: and it is most
near to beastialitie says Erasmus of any vice, and far more meet says
Herodia^ for a heard of swine the^ for me^) goes willinglye as it were
headlong, and casts himself into the gulf and bottomless bondage of an
harlot, a bondage says Socrates mentioned in Plutarch most vile and infamous,
of which opinyon Cicero was also, saying: In his book of age, shall I call or
accoumpt that man free or at liberty, whom an harlot commands, or to whom
such a one imposes and gives laws? If she ask, he must give: if she
calls, he must come: if she becketh, he must be^d, if she bids, he must
avoid: if she threatens he must tremble. No: such a one says the most
eloquent Orator, and famous Philosopher, in my judgment ought not only to be
called a slave, but a most wicked, vile, and filthy slave, yea, were he issued
out of ye stock of Priam, or any other more illustrius. But pass we on
farther, al those yt be given to whordom, and thereon sets al their minds and
thoughts as on their only joy and felicitye, they be not only breakers, and
disdainers of human laws, but also of divine precepts, and that even unto
their leaving and losing, both of ye true knowledge and pure worshipping of ye
only almighty and omnipote^t God, to convert and turn to ye culture, and
sacrifice of Idols, and other such like execrable abhominatio^s By harlots and
whores, ye wise king Solomon became an adulterer: and for the same, as it is
written in the book of kings, all ye realm of Israel fell wholly into ye hands
of Jeroboam his servant, ye stock and cities of Judah excepted, which ramained
under the rule of Roboam his son. By adultry many and sundry have been
perverted, and ye sacred estate of marriadge so violated, as bastardes became
possessors of ye inheritance of ye right begotten, through harlots children
have assailed and murdered their own fathers and mothers, by adultry diverse
wives have died and imbrued their hands in the blood and bowels of their
louinge husbands. By whordome many kings and princes, with their kingdoms and
countries have been betrayed and rendered into to the hands of their enemies,
even by those of his own Country, yea, oftentimes of their kindred, and their
Towns and Cities sacked, and thrown to the dust. The most wisest and
learnedste have become mad and foolish, and the most virtuous, strong, and
magnanimious have been made weak, and effeminate, and of men (even like as by
the poison and witchcraft of Circes the companions of Ulysses) have been
tra^sformed and turned into swyne, and other such kind of Beasts. Which
things well considered, is there any to be found more worthy to be blamed, or
more vicious and damnable then the Whooremonger, Adulterer, or fornicator.
Trust me these kind of livers aunciently by the law of the most just God,
were condemned to be publicly stoned to death among the children of Israel
(as the most faulty) and it was executed as in Joshua it is to be approved.
There be two things greatly desired and esteemed among men, that is, renown
and riches. For what thing can there happen during this life unto men,
that is more precious and dear, then renown, and the Title of an honest and
virtuous man, which thing, says the wise man, is far better then infinite
riches, and unto us more permanente and laudable then all worldly Treasures,
yea what thing can a man wish or desire to have more noble, or more bright and
honorable, then a good name, and glorious renown: to attain unto the which,
all labors perrils and dangers even unto death, are freelye and with a
willing heart undertaken, and borne with an invincible courage, and constancy,
as Horace that famous Author affirms by these words following, Thou Glory
only do heat both the hearts and minds of men: Likewise what greater
contentmente is there to be found in the world. or what greater felicity then
a wealthye patrimony, and abundance of riches, for the getting of which, the
lives of men are continually in labor and without rest, and that in such
wise, says Ecclesiasticus, as a number do account it better to be without
life, the^ to live in need and poverty, as who should say, it is almost
impossible to support and suffer our lives to want that, whereof we have had
before time abundance. Now notwithstanding that those two things, renown and
riches, be so precious, excellent, and necessary, and so much esteamed and
sought for of all men, yet is the whoremonger, adulterer and fornicator so
wicked and evil of himself, as he nothing at all esteems of them, but rather
as one without any respect or care, does willingly make shipwreck of them: for
this filthy lusting love does always bring and draw after it, dishonor and
beggerie, the reason is for so much as ye whoremonger or adulterer does ever more
slenderly foresee or regard his goods and fame, of which two things, when a
man is once naked, especially of the last, that is, renown or good name, he is
then most vile and reprochful, and as an infamous person is poynted at with the
finger of all men, as one unworthy to be moned or lamented, because that of
his own free will, as preferring like a brute beast) lascivious lust and
lecherye, before virtuous humanity, he plungeth himself into an execrable
puddle of fylthines, wherein both his goods and good name are so swallowed up
and devoured, as he ever afterward remayns like one bewrapped in miserye and
beggerye: for besides so many instructions both natural and evident, it is
good reason says the harlot in plautus, that infamy, reproach and beggerie
should follow and pursue my company: Besides for me and for my sake says she
in Solomon, man shall be consumed unto a crumbe of bread, yt is to say, who
soever haunteth the company of an harlot, shall wast his substance as it were
Wax against the warm Sun.

Also says plautus, the Whoremonger accoumptes of his goods as of dross,
for without any regard he sells and spends it away, for it is the
propertye of these vylanous Harlots, to waste and ruinate all, soul, body, and
goods, and to be so catching, and shameless snatching, that they never cease
craving and taking. For even as the lecherous desire of the Whoremonger
increases and springs up hot and insatiable within him, even so is the
importunity of an Harlot never satisfied nor filled from asking, catching, and
drawing? for haste thou given her to day, to morrow thou must also do the
same, yea, says Plautus, so long as she sees any thing to be gotten by
thee, as money, or moneys worth, she will with sweet honnye words in
flattering wise seek to content and please thee, and all the rooms in her
house shall be opened unto thee, and her servants as slaves shall serve and
obey thee, but art thou frowned on by Fortune? or are thy goods and substance
gone and wasted? then farewell, fair friends have good day, for no longer
Penny, no longer pater noster, thy credit is cracked, and thy former professed
friendship, utterly maimed, nay, says the Harlot, if thou bring no money
with thee, thou comst in vain to have dalyaunce or countenance of me.
Besides, being so disfurnished and powlde of substance, every one will fly
from thee, and reproach and sorrow accompanied with grief will pursue and
follow thee, banished from all estimation, as a thing by thee, and unto thee,
worthelye merited, for says the Poet.

We cannot enough reprove
him, that his goods so spends:
Or who in lust does love,
his fame and credit ends.
Likewise it appears, that the worthy Poet, and most famous Philosopher
Hesiodas, went about carefullye to advertise and withdraw us, by these his
verses.

Beware and take good heed,
that thou so rul'st thy heart,
As it be not agreede
to take an harlots part.
For when she fairest speaks,
and sweeteliest seem to smile:
Then only does she break,
her trains thee to beguile.
Likewise, whereunto tends all the Comicall Poets, or the end of their
Comedies, for Comedy is nothing else after Cicero, alleged in the Aucolastus
of Gnaseus, then the myrrour and representation of humayne life, save only to
reprove and blame this filthy shameless and abominable love, and from the
same, as from a thing most vicious and infamous to estrange and turn all
wanton youthful folk, as also to be an example and instruction to fly and
abhor the baytes and allurements of these harlots, together their infinite
cautels and deceptions, and as many dangers and evil haps as depend
thereupon: behold in the Merchaunt of Plautus, how the father with sharp
threatninges and verbal rebukes, with all the force he has endeavored
himself to revoke and unwrap his son Charin out of the snares and hooks of
harlots, in which he was synfully snared, as knowing the same vice to be above
all other most pernicious and hurtful, principally to youth, and generally to
al ages. In the Turculent of the same Poet, says one named Getus, I cannot
better resemble an harlot the^ to ye sea: because yt she deuoureth, like unto
ye sea, al yt she gets, and yet never will be satisfied, give unto her as
much as thou will, and there shall nothing be seen either of ye giver or the
receauer: for which cause Diogenes in plutarche calls the belly of an harlot*
ye Caribdes or gulphe of life, because yt it swaloweth and glutteth up al
things, and is never content nor filled. Now Caribdes was a gulphe of ye sea,
and very dangerous, which swalowed up only all that passed by it, nevertheless it
afterward did vomit it out again. But as touching the insatiable belly of an
harlot, neither ye air, ye earth, ye sea, nor ye rivers suffice, but it
swalloweth and deuoureth fields, castles, and houses, and never re^dreth or
returns any thing back again, which thing Argiripus knowing very well,
though somewhat too late, for so much as he had been spoiled of all that ever
he had, in a brothell house, and afterward cast out of it naked: he cried
out in his complaint, and said: O sea, thou art not the sea, but you O ye
harlots are the same, whereon so many thousand of young youths sustain
shameful loss and shipwreck, for you suck and sip up the blood of men, of
whose labors and trauayles you have your houses most sumptuously and
gorgeously decked and adorned to their shame, ruin, and confusion. Wherefore,
says Plautus again in his Stico. Whosoever can eschew them, let them eschew
them, whose name among the Auncientes, have been in such detestation, as many
fathers have disherited their Heirs, because they yielded their necks to the
yoakes of Harlots. The nature of whom being ingendered of Pluto and Tisiphone
(says Palingenius) is to promise Sugar, and honny, but to give nothing but
bitter Gall and poison.

Among the x. Commandments of Almighty God, this one is specially noted Thou
shall not commit adultery, by which words we are expressly prohibited and
forbidden all manner of fornication, whatsoever it be comprehended (as it is
written in Augustine) under this word, Adultery. The which commandment is
notably and very often reapeated in the holy Scriptures, by the only mouth of
God, his Apostles, and Evangelists. Now then if it behooves us inuiolably, and
infallibly, and that on pain of eternal death, to observe, fulfill, and keep
the divine Laws and statutes, in which there is nothing forgotten needful to
our health: What say thou O Adulterer, O Whoremonger, O Fornicator, which
against say the same, do thou not see, or will thou not confess thy
vicious life to be far more filthy and abominable the^ mine? I will tell the,
whoredom was in old time so abhorred in Italy, as by the thirteenth Law of
Romulus the first King of the Romans, it was establyshed and permitted to
husbands and parents to kill or cause to be killed after what manner so ever
they would, their wives or kinsfolks taken in adultery, which thing thou
never heardst any Law command against any dronkard.

And although that Lycurgus, that King and severe Law maker of the
Lacedaemonians, has not written (as the Iurisconsull Baw^ow^ in his Commentarye
upon the Romulan Laws re^^^eth) neither made any Law for whoremongers,
possible it was because he thought that there would be no whoredom, used in
Lacedemon, where the people by means of his severe Laws, were most modest and
content: nevertheless the time of Romulus was not so, and therefore he wisely
thought no Law to be more necessary in a common weal, then that against
Adulterers and Whormongers.

And yet Lycurgus peradventure would have answered, to them that had
demanded it, that he omitted and left out that Law, because that he hoped,
that with great pain and difficulty it could have endured with such
severity. For what is it that Whordome dares not do? what is it that it
undertakes not?

What is that it does not break, vyolate and pervert? What is it that can
restrane the lascivious and lewd will or affection of sensual and disordinate
men? Truly there was never Law more required, nor oftener made and reapeated,
neither more boldly and often broken and despised.

Which Law of Romulus, the ancient Germans or Almaines seemed to follow:
For among them as Tacitus writes, husbands were so permitted to punish their
wives taken in adultery.

Also by the Law of Julius, it was lawful for the Father, to burye his
Daughter quick, if he had taken her in Adulterye.

Zeleucus likewise among many other laws which he made to the Locrians,
ordained that the adulterer or whoremonger, what soever he or she were, should
have both his and her eyes put out, and as he would have executed the said Law
in the person of his own son accused of the same crime, and that the
magistrates and citizens of Locres, in favor of the virtues and deserts of his
father, had compassion and pity of the Son, and remitted and acquitted his
offense, he nevertheless being a rare myrrour of Princely Justice, desirous
first to keep the Law inuiolate, which he himself had made, caused one of his
own eyes and one of his sons to be put out.

Beside amongst the ancient Egyptians, ye who^remonger was whipped till ye
blood followed, and the harlot had her nose cut, to the end that by the same
means (as Tauet writes in his Cosmographie of Leuant) she might be deprived
of that part of her face, by loss of which she presently lost all her bewtye
which had lead both her, and the Whooremonger, her vicious lover to commit
evil.

Thus lo by the Laws and statutes both of the Scripture and otherwise it is
evidently approved, that the Whooremonger has been used to be condemned to
death, and to be greeuouslye punished for adulterye, which thing never was
done upon the Dronkard: by which only argument, O Whooremonger thou art
iustlye to be adjudged far more worse and evil then I, and so by
consequence depryued of our Fathers Lands.

And yet notwithstanding all these vices and inconveniences above named
belonging to the whooremonger, tell me what is whooredome and such dishonest
love (if as before I said, I may term it love) but only a mere madness, a
forgetfulness of reason, a trouble of Council, a corrupting of good and
virtuous minds, and a plucking back of virtuous and Heavenly enterprises, to
dark and earthly, nay rather hellish vsages, making men become ever more,
complaynours, quarrellours ready to ryotte and anger, proud, rash, slauishlye
fawninge, unprofitable for all things, yea finallye, for themselves.

For the Whoremonger broylyng in the disordinate and insatiable desire of
reaping his delight, after that he has during this hunting, lost and
consumed long space of his time, in madness, mourning, tears, sorrowing and
lamenting, he at the last, wastes in such manner, as miserablye (says
Alciat) being so wrapped and snarreled, he whollye perishes, whereby he not
only becomes hateful to all other, but also to him self, for then he
hates to live.

O where is that so shameless an Whoremonger or so obstinate a Venerian
warrior, or bold Souldioure of Cupid, that these aduertisements will not
enforce to blushe and sownde for shame, and that acknowledginge his own
infamye, with weepinge and wayling, tremblinge and quakinge, will not condemn
himself as the most reprochefull and vile creature in the world.

Or if this will not suffice thee, O Adulterer, hark yet what Valerius says
in exclaminge against thee.

What is there (says he) more vycious and infamous, more infectious and
hurtefull, then whordome: the which as by Witchcrafte or Inchauntemente so
far transporteth the mind of man, that it throws him from reason to
beastialitye, making him not only foolish, sottish and filthye mopish, but also
so mad and witless, that he willingelye nourishethe the Aspe in his boosome
that bytethe him even to the heart, not feeling the poison so near.

By the which: Virtue is changed, Glory quenched, and good name killed, for it
does not al only consume and wast the goods belonging to the body, but also
those most precious gifts belonging to the soul: in such manner, as it is
hard to judge, which of these two dangers are most to be feared, either to be
taken of enemies or of harlotes, which misery most woefully wrapped the City
of the Volsians in grievous calamities and shameful infamies: for as soon as
the same City, (which wontedly was the head of Hetruria, no less garnished
with good Laws, manners and customs, then with abundance of wealth and
riches) was once brought into the bonds of filthiness, it fell in and unto
the very bottom of all wretchedness, in such wise, as it submitted it self
most slauishlye unto the servitude of slaves.

At what time also that the mighty King Xerxes, gave himself over unto lust
and Whooredome, at that very same time, began both the ruin of himself and
his Persian Monarchy.

By Whooredome that mighty tamer of Monsters, and only subduer of tyrants,
Hercules became so vile and effeminate, that he took a Distaffe and spindle,
and with the same in the attire of a woman did spinne among women, as hereafter
I will show more at large.

Who, or what brought that victorious and deadly vowed enemy of the Romans,
Hanniball to utter ruin in Capua, and that most famous King Priam of Troy,
but only Whoores, and Whooredome, the which also alienated the good King and
Prophet David, from the fear of god, and provoked him to murder.

Infinite of such other like examples of mighty Princes, and worthy
personages I might and could allege, which through that vice of Whooredome,
became soon infamous and most ruinous of goods and honor.

Likewise many glorious public Weals, puissant Empyres and kingdoms, yea
the most mightiest, says Titus Liuius, thereby have been brought to utter
ruin and desolation.

But because that books be filledfull with such things, and that the same
unto us al is so euidentlye known, I will as from superfluous matter, make my
retreat, although to speak truly, I cannot sufficientlye set out the
abhomynation of the same sin.

For the brave and gallant train belonging thereunto is: Effemination,
Pusillanimitie, Destruction, loss, Ill hap, Infamy, Care, Grief, Dolor,
Sorrow, Frenzy, Derision, Travail, Tribulation, Folly, Filthiness,
Foolishness, Rashness, shameless Malice, Covetousness, Sloth, Beggerie, Rage,
Suspicion, Injury, hate, Wrath, and Enmity. To be short, as an other Poet
says, in speaking of the same infamous, and voluptuous love, the cause of
many evils.

Love (says he) is a gulphe of evil, meaning lascivious love, for it
assotteth the wise, it blinds reason, it overthrows houses, it shameth
renown, it ingendereth nothing but repentance, and yet it is but a Smoke,
which dispearceth it self into wind in the air.

Likewise says he, those lusting lovers, (Lubbers he might have termed them)
are so tied unto their Harlottes, as their hearts, minds, and thoughts, are
as it were imprisoned within their breasts, where they make them live and
abide in other bodies besides their own: in such manner, as the Whooremonger
may say with Plautus, where I am, I am not: and where I am not, my heart,
mind, and thought is. To which the elder Cato agreeing in Plutarche, says.
The Lover lives and dwells in the body of his beloved.

Besides, we commonly say in these days, the mind and affection is rather
there where it loves, then there were it lives.

If it be then so certain, that such villainous love is no other thing but
mere madness and furye, and that whooredome or adultery is nothing else but
destruction and infamye, does it not appear more then playnelye, that the
Whooremonger is the most vicious, and so much the more to be blamed, because
of his own free will he subiecteth himself to so villainous and pernicious a
vice, for the intertaining of which, he commits a thousand evils,
carrying all that he can catch or come by, unto his polling mistres. moved
thereunto, by the wrath and iealousye that he has, least any of his
companyons, or other as honest as himself, should shroude themselves
between her sheets, a suspicion sure not without cause, for as it is written
in Ecclesiasticus: The common woman is trodden down under the feet of all
passers by, as it were dyrt, and mire in the high way, for so much as it is not
her nature and condition to serve only to one, but to intertaine many, and
of sundry Grapes to make her Uintage, and fill up her Barnes, for she opens
her mouth to drink of all waters, and notoriously lends and sells her
self to them that give most, resembling (says Plautus in his Cistellarius) a
great mighty City which cannot come to abound in wealth without the use and
frequention of many men.

Thus by reasons before alleged it is made manifest unto you (right
Honorable) how the whoormonger is not only most wicked and infamous, but
also most filthy and vicious, above all other: in such manner, that the more I
am moved against him, the more matter I find still abounding to beat down
his vile ignomious life.

Wherefore I pray harken what the Mother of king Lamuel said.

My son, give neither thy self nor thy substance to these common uncomely
Curtizans: for they be the cause of many kings destruction, neither harken
thou to their deceites, says the wise, for their lips are like distilling
honnie: but the end more bitter then gall. Their tongues cut as a two edged
sword: they walk not in the paths of life, but their feet stretch unto death,
and their steps unto the pit. Make thou thy passage therefore far from them,
and beware of approaching near to their houses, for who so ever follows them
is foolish, and the gain he gets by them is* shame, reproach, and dishonor,
which can no ways be done away again, yea, to be short, whosoever is in ye
favor of harlots, is lead by them as an Ore to the Sacrifice. Avoid them
therefore, for by them the most mightiest have binne slain: Their houses are
the ways to death, and I have found them says Ecclesiasticus more bitter then
death, for their hands be mere hooks and limetwigs.

Whosoever will please God let him eschew them, for he with whom the Lord is
angry shall fall into their pits, and the sinner shall be taken in their
ginnes and snares, through which many have perished, refrain thy heart
therefore from them, least thou also perishest with them, for the false
sweetness and honnied flatery of an harlot, hunteth after the precious soul
of a man, unto his hurt and ruin, drawing the unwary and il advised to go
toward them to their shame and destruction* for so much as it is ye peculiar
property of harlots to consume and wast al things in their filthiness (says
Alciat) which thing is approved by the Acolastus of Gnafeus, when he cries
out in complaining, saying: Thou whooredome, who^ I have had for my especial
friend and companion, have carried from me, both my gods, renown, and frindes,
leaving me in their places, thy daughters, infamy and beggary.

Fly from fornication says S. Paul: for all other sins, whatsoever man
commits is without ye body, but who commits adultery sins within his
body, and therefore shall not possess ye kingdom of God, wherefore I shall be a
sudden witness against whormongers and adulteries says the Lord in Malachie,
and their portion shall be in the lake burning with fire and Brimstone.

Then seeing that the whooremonger is in such execration before God and men, it
most evidently appears that the vice or sin of whoordome is greatest,
vilest, and most infamous of all other, go your ways therefore you
whooremongers, or adulterers, go your way and hide your loathsome heads,
within the brothell houses of your most lewd lascivious Ladies.

I was ready to conclude when there came mustering and marching before mine
eyes, these most profitable aduertisementes of the most rare and learned Poet
and Christian Philosopher Pallingenius. The which I think good, desent, and
convenient to allege here, translated as follows.

Neither the Circes of Libia, nor the devouring Silla, nor the rage of
Charibdis, nor any other thing in the world whatsoever it be, is so much to be
detested, feared, and euited, as filthy fleshly pleasure, for alas to how
many destructions and ruins, do that abominable sin lead men unto.

How many renowned and valiant captains, how many Cities, Towns and kingdoms
have there ben brought to utter decay thereby.

And to the end I may not anoy you by citing so many examples.

This one which I will now rehearse shall suffice, and so I will end with the
whoremonger.

Who was ever more renowned and famous for his works, then Hercules, who ever
ended mo noble acts them he.

First being but a child, he strangled two horrible Serpents by force of
hands.

He bruised and broke in sunder the bones of Lions, and cut off the seven
increasing deades of the Lernian monster Hidra.

He out ran by footemanshippe the mighty stagge of Menalon.

He overcame* the fierce furious Bull of Crete.

Likewise the cruel king of Thrace was slain by his prowess.

He subdued the Oxen of Iberides.

He brake the horn of Achelous.

He turned the Strinphales. He wone the golden apples of Hesperides. He brake
the gates of Hell, and from thence he drew the three headded hound Cerberus.
He slew the Erimautean borne, Cacus and Anteus.

Afterward he sustained and bare upon his shoulder (whilst the mighty Atlas
for being weary, took his ease and rest) the two near fallinge Poles.

And yet notwithstanding all these his invincible virtues, he slauishlye did
quake and tremble at the commandment of a simple Lady.

I pray you consider the case, he that neither feared the wrath, ire, or
filthy flames of Pluto, Megera, and phlegiton.

He that never quaked at the terrible looks of ugly Charon.

He fearing oftentimes (most effeminatly) the blaming threats of his Mistres:
in steed of a black warlike Morian, took one him the white kerchife of a
woman, and in steed of his swoorde and Targotte, (most infamously) he took
the distaffe and spindle, and spanne threde all day, and at night as a servile
servant he rendered up his task to his Mistres among the rest, quaking for
fear, least she finding fault should chide or beat him.

O what infamy, nay rather what villanye was this, by which only example,
every man may easilye and rightly judge that there is nothing more contrary
to virtue then whooredome: Seeing that by the same, we behold here the over
commer of Monstrous and Extirpatour of Tyrauntes, to be short, the most
valiant and virtuous worthy that ever was, to be most vilest beaten down
and brought under the yoke and seruage of Ioele, a silly young Damsel.

Credit me I am abashed to behold me^ make no more account of the greatness
of this vice then they do, and that they consider not how much it
displeases God, seeing with what grievous wounds and daily plagues: without
excepcion of person he punishes Whores, and whoremongers, as with scabbes,
gowtes, pockes, baldenesse, and other like lazares diseases, the due and
ordinary rewards of whormongers, whose bastardes most oftentimes sit in the
seats, and inheryte the lands of the true begotten.

Well I have done, wherefore now vaunt ye, you Adulterers, vaunt ye hardlye,
upon you to common and unruly adulterye, for seeing it is time to sound
retreat, I will conclude yielding good and profitable mediocritye.

Aduertising thee, seeing that among and with harlots thou do willinglye wast
and spend both thy time, honor, and goods, taking as it seems delight and
pleasure in following thy ruin and destruction, to confess and acknowledge
thy self to be, (as certainly thou art) the most vicious and reproachful of us
three, which thing good brother I believe thou will not deny, by following the
use of such as thou art, which is, never to hide or keep close their vice, but
rather to vaunt and boldly boast of it. Thus having said sufficient against the
adulterer, I will bend my piece toward the dice player, and with him I will
skirmidge an other while with other new examples, unto which I beseech you
right honorable, to lend as attentive ear as they shall by me be curiously
and zealously set forth.

The Drunkards declamation against his Brother the Dyce-palyer.
TO the end I may in like manner bring to open view the greatness of the
Diceplayers vice and infamye, as I have done the same of the Adulterer, I
beseech you my Lords, consider if there be any thing more pernicious and
dishonest then that Game of Diceplaying (if the same be worthy to bear the
Title of a Game) the which is no other thing, then a mere tormente: a
conciliation of Thieves: a father of bloody thoughts, a racking of the
interioure man, that is to say, a labor of the mind, a repulse of virtue, a
decaying of honesty, a rayser of anger, a kindler of blasphemy against GOD
and men, and a breaker of friendship, unto which accursed Game, whosoever is
given or inclined, they are always sorrowful and disquieted with vexation, for
wrath and dispight makes their faces pale and wanne, they always do that
which they have to do in furye and desperately beeinge continually tossed and
tormented with a malicious will, and consequentlye noted with open reproach: in
such manner, as not without just and great cause, all good authors have
condemned and reproved this game or play, infaminge and blaminge all those
that give themselves unto it.

Among which, that excellent Philosopher Aristotle, in the fourth of his
moralls, very sharplye does follow their defame, calling them infamous
villains, as giving themselves to all abominable filthynesse.

All Law makers by their statutes does reprove and punish them severely.

The Iurisconsul^s have a title, by the which penalty is indicted and
constituted, not only against those which play at the Dice, but also those
which make, lead, or move any to play at them.

Likewise that ye laws prohibit them, Horace witnesses by this his verse The
play of dice, the law forbids. etc.

Moreover Cato teaches and instructs us to eschew them. Also the most
ancient and virtuous Roman senate, forbid it straightly by express decree:
following the which, Lenticulus who played oftentimes, with the renowned Mark
Anthony at dice, was sharply reproved and condemned. The Author whereoff is
Cicero (who calls that man most wicked and evil, which commonly plays and
ordinarily spends his time among dicers, saying: that the congregation and
assembly of them is most filthye and villainous.

The satiricall teeth of Iuuenal, not only justly, but iolily does touch and
bite them, and before him Plato (as Plutarch rehearses) reproved and blamed a
young man bitterly yt had played at dice. To be brief, ye ordinary judgments
cryminally executed upon dice players do sufficientlye witness how great
vicious, and punishable dyceplaying is.

O thou inuentor or deuisor of them, whatsoever thou art (for to thee it is
that I direct my speech) hearken unto me, thou haste not devised or invented a
place of pleasure, or of pastyme, as no less coakishlye then commonly men
make accounte of it: but rather bloodye tormente and dangerous pain. The end
of which among a thousand inconveniences and euylles that happen, is, (after
they have dispoyled men of their goods, honors, and faculties, to provoke and
(almost by force and necessity) constrayne and thrust them, to the committing
of murders and theft, and so lastly most miserablye and shamefully to yield up
their bodies as a pray to the hangman, and a most infamous spoil to the
Gallows.

But for so much as we plead not before unlearned Judges, or ignorant folk,
I will a little stray abroad, and wander along the pleasant Rivers and green
flourishing groves, of such human documentes and disciplines as have been
collected and taken of the most fertile and delightful studies of plato, which
Prince of Philosophers says, that there was once in Aegipt one named Theuth or
Theuthas, otherwise Tempungine, or Triuegeste, whom some, only Cicero and
Lactantius, affirm to be Mercury the fifte, to whom the bird called Ibis, was
dedicated, which bird is like the stork, not that it is the same, the which
feeds upon Serpents, and with the end of her Bill or Beak, purges her
self behind: whereby it is thought that some learned of it, yt art or
practice of Clisters: The which Theuth or Theuthas, first devised Geometrye,
Astronomy, Arithmeticke, and Letters, and also Dice, for the which first four
inventions, I worthilye think him worthy of great honor and commendation.
But as I think him so for these four, so I am of opinyon, that he deserves
no less reproach and infamy, for devising and inuenting of the fith, which is
Dice, for the great evil and hurt that commeh of their use, being put in
ballaunce against the goodness and profit of the first four noble Arts is
found to be far more heavy and weighty,

Notwithstanding Herodotus the father of Histories attributes unto the Lidians
(a people of Asia ye less) the first invention of Dice: But be it that Theuth
or Theuthas (after Plato) or the Lidians (after Herodotus) that were the
inuentors, surely which of them soever did it, did devise for men a most
pernicious and miserable thing. For the use and exercise thereoff, ingendereth
in the heart of ye diceplaier, a facility and inclination to al wickedness and
vice: In such wise, as many have been, and oftentimes are most filthy and
infamous ends to themselves, and a sorrow, grief, dolor and shame to their
frindes and parents. The which no less elegantly then truly, the worthy
renowned Bourbon Poet noted in these words following.

The play at dice begotten by avarice,
That father of theft or plague of friendship.
Being a bloody toil and pitilesse fury.
Is wholly filled with grief, care and iniquity.
For alas how many, has the use thereoff.
Drawn as it were by hap most dampnable.
To an infamous death, and end abominable.
The Germans or Almaines of antiquity were such great and obstinate plaiers
at dice, as not withstanding how earnest so ever their other affairs were,
they would thereat continually exercise themselves, forgetting and neglecting
all their other business, committing to the hazard and peril of that game all
their goods and faculties, and that oftentimes in such sort, as being
thoroughly heat with grief of loss, when all other means to maintain play
wanted, they would lastly hazard their bodies and liberty.

So that the loser entered (as willingly) into miserable bondage and subjection
of the winner, at whose will and for his profit the looser (were he never so
noble, young or strong,) suffered himself to be bound and soulde like a beast.
Which thing says Cornelius Tacitus was a great presumption and pertinacitie,
howbeit among them, they called it faith or fidelitye.

Credit me, I cannot comprehend how so many men should come to be so subject
and thrall to such a miserable hap and hazard, whether it proceeds of
themselves, of Nature, or of the influence of Stars, and yet now I remember
my self (if we may credit Firmicus Maternus) whatsoever they be that have
their Horoscope and birth in the ninth part of Libra, shall be hot and
hardy Diceplayers. O Star most dangerous, O complexion most calamitous,
and O Planets most cruel and pernicious: under which, and by which, men are
borne to be Dece players, and thereby bound to the bondage of all vices. Would
to God for my part, that all Dice, with the games and pastime belonging unto
them, I mean their cursed hap, miserye and torment (for in them there is not
found neither does there proceed from them, any other thing) I would to God I
say for my part, that they were altogether taken away, and removed from men, to
the end that so the thousand inconuenie^ces, calamities, hurts, and mischa^ces
might be avoided, which the same vile and most execrable game brings and
draws with it.

I pray thee, thou Dice player, tell me one thing truly, as often and when
sooner thou hear thy self called by that abominable name, do thou not
blushe? or if thou know not what it is to blush, (for blushing is a sign of
grace) do thou not wax pale and wanne?

Trust me, I had rather far be called a drunkard, then either a whoremonger,
or a Dice player.

For to be drunken now and then Every man flatters him self in hi^ sin.
is a point of Physic because (as a Prusian Doctor writes) by wine the
strengh of the body is nourished and increased, the courage quickened, the
magnanimity exercised, the blood and natural heat conserved, the debilytie
or weakness of the stomach comforted, the appetite caused, the vryne
provoked, and besides all the rest, it is a sovereign remedy against venyms
and poisons hurting by coldenesse.

Also even as Whoredom and Diceplaying are accompanied ever more with grife,
sorrow, vexation, and anguish, so to the contrary, wine drinking, carries with
it delyght to the heart (says Solomon) driving away sadness, and clearing
the darkness of the mind, and is a very ready help against al cares and
solicitudes, for it carries with it (says Horace) rest and sleep: calling it
forgetful (an Epithete very proper unto it) because it causes forgetfulness
of all wrath and dolor.

Therefore to be short considering the great commoditye that comes by
Drinking, and the exceeding discommoditye by Whooredome and Dice playing, I
conclude, that it can not be, but that by observing the laws and institution
of our deceased Fathers Will, my Brother the Whoremonger, or both of them, as
the Dice player, or both of them, as the most vicious and wicked, shall be
condemned, and I by your upright and impartial Judgment, adjudged wheritour of
the succession, for which presently we contend, and so I end.

This being said, the Drunkard gave place, and his Brother the Whoremonger
proceeded in answearing him as follows.
Right honorable, Aesope in one of his Fables no less eligant and
delighfull, then full of good Doctrine, and erudition, makes mention of
certain men, carrying by Sackes or Wallets, upon their shoulders, who in the
Bag that hanges before them, use to put all the little faults and small
crimes of other men, and in that beehynde their backs their own great and
horrible ones, thereby giving us no less truly then pleasauntly to
understand that we willingly watch and carefullye take heed to the
imperfections and faults of our neighbors, as men by an natural ill hap
covered over with clear seeing eyes, much like unto Argus and Linx: but to see,
search out, and understand our own faults and offenses we be as blind as
Beetles, and sleepy as Moles. The which with infinite other we have this day
especially and manifestlye perceived in our Brother the Drunkarde, who more
then assotted and blinded in his own doings, but most subtle and watchful
in ours, casting his eyes upon our small biles, neither sees nor favors his
own most dangerous fistoles and deep scarres, and so abused in himself
declayming against us twain his brethren, and such like whormongers, and
diceplaiers, as we be, has not only maintained drunkenness by certain small
examples, touching the virtue of Wine to deserve as it were excuse and pardon,
but also in a manner to be desired as a thing praise worthy. But we will not
any ways hide or keep secret our vice, but freely and plainlye we confess
whordome, and Diceplaying to be two things very vicious and infamous, marrye
yet not so much as drunkenness: the which we will sustain and plainly
approve, by invincible examples and arguments. Beseeching you, as you have
attentively heard our brother to complain against us, so with willing
affection you will do the like on our side: to the end that if in defaming
and quibbing other, he has taken pleasure, he in hearkening and feling the
like, may be set beside his Cushions. Now to the end, yt by this we may begin,
I say, yt man is not made and composed of soul only, nor of body only, but
of both of the^ together, and therefore for yt cause he entertayneth and
preserves by great care and diligence the good disposition and integrity of
them both. As touching the soul, he indeauoureth himself with all his force,
to conserve it in the gifts of grace, divinely bestowed upon it, which are
the virtues: among the which, Prudence first and principally glistereth, as
the Sun among the Stars, and touching the body he gives no less heed and
care to keep and preserve it in the gifts of nature, as in strength, agillity,
dexterity, health, and such like, and although both these gifts be so precious
and inestimable, only yt first (to wit of yt soul, especially prudence, which
is the only art of life, without which it is impossible for any to guide
himself by reason) yet notwtstanding all this, they be spoild and utterly
ouerthrown by drunkenness, For says Plautus, Drunkenness is no other thing,
then a mere and manifest hurt, neither does it draw after it (says the
prophet Abacuc) other then defame and beggerye. Besides, it is a thing greatly
to be noted, yt all such as are given to wine, how excellent and perfect
workman soever they be in any Art or Science, they never wax rich, says
Solomon.

Does not Drunkenness depryue man of understanding? does it not make him to
becomme as one mad, and frentike, does it not spoil him of his brain,
banishing both reason and prudence from him, does it not steal away health,
and engender prodigality, and consume honor, it has shame of nothing, it
expulseth virtue it wastes renown, it shiuereth Judgment, and blinds the
mind, In considering of which, I cannot but greatly marvel at the diligence
and sagacitye of our forefathers, who no less learnedlye then wittilye, did
term Wine by the name of T^ema, that is to say, holding or tempting the
thought: and by consequente have also named Drunkenness Temulenes, names no
doubt very apt and proper, for the lively expressing of the effect of wine
taken above measure. For Dronkennes tosseth and tourneth the mind and thought
of man here and there, casting it at pleasure, like a ship upon the wallowing
waves,

O what vice more infamous and dishonest can happen unto man then drunkenness,
the which (after the opinion of Ennus Seneca, that dedly enemy to all vices)
is a mere madness and voluntary incensement. Is there any thing more
villainous, or more near to bestialitie, then for a man voluntarily and of will
to throw and alienate himself from himself, that is to say, from his
understanding and power, and to become without judgment and reason, like unto
a child of a year old? which thing the drunkarde does ordinarily and of use,
for so soon as the wine or strong drink excessiuely taken spread in ye body,
begins once to wax hot and to boil, then even as soon does it beat down
and cast under feet, y^ vigor or virtue of ye mind, rauishinge and bereauing
man of courage and spirit, and that in such wise as he has no understanding or
knowledge what he does.

^rust me it is the greatest injury that to a man may be done, to reprove him
of a will to have pleasure in foolish madness, and to say that of himself he
is such a one: for so much as it is the property of a man to seem prudent and
to have his wit and understanding at will, of which, drunkenness is the only
decay and ruin. Wherefore not without cause has Androcides said very wisely
that even as ye hemlocke is a venime and poison unto a man, so is wine unto the
hemlocke, signifiyng thereby, and giving to understand, that wine is unto man,
a venime of venimes, or poison of poisons. And truly if we have good
consideration of the words and effect, venime is rightly no other, then a
dimunitiue of wine, for so much as of it, more then of any other venime,
proceeds greatest evils and dangers, For who knows not that the
superfluity and intemperature of Wine, ingendereth infinite evils and
inconveniences, to the prejudice and hurt of man's health, as well inwardlye as
outwardly? From whence comes these swimmings of the brain, these head aches,
this continual heaviness to sleep, this grife of stomach, these fiery eyes,
this weakness of sight, this stifnes of sinowes, this palsy, these stinking
breths, these hot burning agues, these ulcers in ye legs, and thousand other
such like, save only of dronkennes? which also makes a man's going stu^bling,
staggering, and uncertain. For says Plautus, wine is a wily wrastler, and it
first gets victory over ye legs, To be short, of dronkennes comes innumerable
sorts and kinds of sickenesses, and oftentimes intested death.

For which cause Drunkenness is rightly called the nursse or Mother of
diseases, and therefore so soon as any one is fallen into any sickness or
disease, the Physician the first thing that he does, forbids the patient to
drink wine, as the only root and nourishment of sickness. Which thing
Cicero approves in his third book of the nature of Gods, because that wine
(says he) hurts the sick very often (yea very rare and seldom does it good
to the healthful) therefore is it much better to give the^ none at all, then
any at all. For fear least under a dowbtfull and uncertain hope of giving
them health, ye give them death, or some other certain and assured grief or
inconvenience? Beside yt which dangerous accidents, infamies and above named
miseries, the dronkard never makes an end, until he has prodigally spent all
his goods and substance upon the lycorous delicious wine, esteeming and waying
it far more dear and precious then gold, silver, or other metal, and with
far greater pleasure and delectation he beeholdeth it, then he does either
the Sun, Moon, or other glorious parts of the Heavens.

Yea, finally (as it is daily to be seen) without need of other examples,
Drunkenness being evermore attended and waited one by grief and sorrow, goes
infamously and shamefully to yield up it self all naked, says Salamon, into
the hands and arms of his dear beloved companion, beggerie, with whom he
ever afterward remains, as estraunged, and void from good fame and honor,
for which causes, even in these days, if any one offend us, if we be disposed
to vex and touch him as it were to the quick, we presently call him drunkard.

And not only in these our days, but of antiquitye, men have used to reprove
men, by the detestable name. Achilles being moved very wrathfully, with
Agamemnon in Homer, could not devise a more injurious and bitinger name, by
which he might shame and vex him, then to call him Oenobares, a Greek
word, which is as much to say, as taken or overcome with wine.

The mother of Saint Augustine having ben reproved and quibbed by the same
word at the hands of her handmaide, took ye same so grievously, that she
never after would drink any other then fair water.

Besides, consider how many murders, and unnatural slaughters have been
committed and perpetrated (yea oftentimes on their own natural parents and
kinsfolk) by those of god Baccus his hand.

Wine (says Esdras) as a seductor and ouerthrower of understanding, causes
dronkards, to run to weapones, and with them to kill one another, of which
deed, afterward when they are become sober and have slept, they have no more
remembrance then beasts.

That mighty Alexander, did he not being drunken, kill even at his table,
that faithful frinde and wise counselor of his, Clitus? did he not as much
also unto his virtuous Philosopher Calisthenes, and to other his familiar and
household acquaintance?

For whom after that he became again sober, he so mourned and lamented their
deaths, that he bitterly wept and wished to be dead himself.

Who is ignorant of the great slaughters, ruins and calamities that
drunkenness has caused?

By it, the most warlike and puissant nations yt ever were, have been thrown
and rendered into the hands of their enemies: it has submitted the most proud
and arrogant under the yoke of others, it has overcome and vanquished those,
which at arms have been invincible: it was the only overthrow of the
Lapithes, a people of Thessaly, and most mighty warriors. By it, the
Siracusians fell into the hands of Marcel, and under the power of yt Romans.
By it yt horrible Massagetes were overcome by yt Persians. By it, the pride of
Babylon, came unto ye lot of king Cyrus. By it, the so famous and renowned
city Troy was finally brent and sacked in one only night by a small company of
Greeks, for they found them (vsinge the self same words of Virgil, buried in
wine and sleep.

Drunkenness inflamed the king Cambisus, unto the murtheringe and killing of
his good and faithful counselor paraxa^pes, because that he told him of his
drunkenness.

Likewise the most valiant King philip of Macedon, being in Wine, by
judgment, reuerted ye right cause of a poor widow: which widow perceiving
him to be drunken, with a free and bold voice, said unto him: in crying, I
appeal unto thy self, I when thou art become sober.

Also drunkenness caused the cruel and monstrous Ciclops, poliphemus to lose
his only eye by the hands of Ulysses, whom the same monster held prisoner
with other Greeks in cave.

Besides, right honorable, to the end, yt there may not remain within your
breasts one scruple or dram of doubt, but that you may have great reason on
your sides to adiudge our brother the drunkarde the most vile and vicious, and
so by consequence to loose the inheritance of our Father, we are determined
(following the example of our brother, who helped himself with the opinyons
and sentences of the best learned Aucthoures that he could find, to allege
the like, for the justice of our cause, and set forth the authorities and
opinyons also of the best and most approved, that of Drunkenness have
written and entreated. A thing to wright, no less fruitful and profitable,
then unto the ears of the wise, learned, pleasant, and delightful.

The Lacedaemonians, who were so notablye well instructed in all virtue and
modestye of life, by the laws of Licurgus, never knew says Xenophon, what
Wine was: as men drinking none, or if they drunk any, it was with so much
water, as it tasted nothing of wine.

For the same worthy Lawmaker, most straightlye for badde superfluous drinking
and bibbing, upon great pains and punishments, as a vice, says he, that
does both infect ye health, the iolitie of the body, the nobility and
integrity of the mind.

And yet notwithstanding he sometimes permitted them to drink, but always
under subjection of drinking very little and soberly.

Plutarch in his Apothegmes makes mention that the same Lacedaemonians, fearing
least their children should run into the vice or sin of drunkenness, the
better to estraunge and drive them from it, they caused oftentimes their
servants, (or as others say) porters or such kind of men as used to be drunk,
to be brought before them, to the end, that their children seeing the beastly
behavior and filthy fashions of those drunkardes, might have the same vice in
perpetual horror and abomination.

The Persians aunciently (beeinge a warlike people) used to drink no wine, but
(says Xenophon) their only drink was altogether pure water. Whose childeren
says the same author, when they travailed abroad, used ordinarily to carrye
with them cups and pottes of earth, to drink water in by the way, always
when they were thirsty, thinkinge (as no doubt it is) yt to drink when thirst
enforces, and that only pure water, was no less profitable and healthful,
then pleasant and delightful, and that they did to avoid wine, wheroff by that
means they had no desire or care.

The Egyptians, they had of old a certain measure which was very little, ye
quantity whereoff they durst not exceed, when or whersoeuer they were
drinking of wine.

Plato, Aristotle, Eusebius, and Galen, do greatly commend and praise the
Carthaginians law, by which it is denied to any whatsoever he be, during the
time yt they be in camp, or in siege, or in yt affairs of war, to drink
any wine at al, but altogether do abstain from it, drinking all ye time no
other then fair water, as being of opinion, that by Wine men are made
effeminate, and do become over delicate and dayntye to bear any labor or
travail, and also that it does hinder and hurt as well the head Captain, as
the souldyer, of that care, study, policy, and diligence which they ought
to have against their ennimies.

Which consideration it should seem did make the aunciente Captains, men of
war, and Legionaries of Rome, being most worthy and valiant warriors, to be
sober in drink: in such wise as it is written of the Noble captain, Lucius
Papirius Dictator, that being ready to give battle to the Samnites, he
made a solemn vow that if he obtained victory over them, he would drink a
Cup full of wine to Jupiter, as who should say, that to do so, it is a
maruaylous strange thing.

Cato likewise, whom thou O drunkarde, did often bring in for thy purpose
against us, returning victoriouslye from Spain, enuyroned with many notable
spoils, accoumted it a great praise and glory unto him that during the whole
voyage and expedition which he had made unto the same country by Sea, he had
drunk no other drink then the same of the common mariners.

Caesar in his Commentaries rehearses that the Sweaues and Almaines, a nation
very warly, and y^ Neomans, at this day called Tourulsians, in old time never
suffered wine to be brought into their countries, because they thought that
thereby the bodies of men would be made feeble and unapt to endure labor and
sweat, and yt the virtue and vigor of their minds and brains, did thereby wax
weak* their courages saint, and their hearts and strength towardly

Which though Homer went about to approve when he introduced that honor of
knighthoode, ye most valiant Hector, who apperilling himself to pass out of
Troy in battle against the Greeks, said thus unto Queen Hecuba his dear
mother, let no wine be brought unto me: to ye end (after the intense of that
divine Poet) that it might not weaken or make him forget his accustomed force
and virtue.

In following of which opinyon, Archidamus, a most famous prince of the
Lacedaemonians said unto such as promised him sweet and delicate wine: To what
end, seeing that the more we drink of it, the more it makes vain of no
force, the things appertaining to worthy valient men? a refusal and sentence,
no doubt worthy the mouth of a Spartaine Prince, Plutarche in the Apothegmes
aforenamed rehearses that Crates, and Thebane Philosopher, and disciple unto
Diogenes, Cinike was greatly angry and vexed with Demetrius Falerean Duke of
Athens, because he had sent him wine, which was nothing serviceable unto a man
desirous of wisdom, and knowledge said he, whose modestye and sobriety, he
being sent ambassador by yt Thebanes unto this Demetrius Falerean, whom others
named Poliocretes, so much prevailed as the same Athenian Emperor, seduced
thereby raised his Camp from before Thebes which he then beseeged, unto
certain other yt enquired wherefore the Lacedemo^s so refraind and abstained
from wine, drinking scarce any: (the Prince Cleomines son to Anaxandrides,
answered) to the end yt others should not be troubled in counsayling of us,
but rather we others* Signifying by this wise and laconicall answer, with
sharpness and sagacitie, me^ being overcome and laden with wine, are not apt
nor capable to counsel well and wisely: but to the contrary sobriety is yt
only course and head spring of laudable enterpryses, good counsayles and their
executions for it is always accompanied with prudence, diligence, and honesty,
as to ye contrary. Ebrietie or drunkenness is never without folly, sloth, and
filthiness, for so much as there is nothing in this world more unmeet for a
man, then the same vice, contrary to al virtue, and therefore for yt occasion ye
Lacedemons, had it in such horror and execration, as only unto strangers at
their feasts and collasions they gave none but the hardest wine with Biscuit. It
is also written yt Romulus being at a sumptuous feast, was asked why he had
drunk so littel: because, said he, to morrow it behoues me to talk on
matters of great importance.

Also it is not without cause that the good modest Emperor, Mark Anthony
(whose history Herodian begins) drawing near his end, was in a marvelous
great care and pensiveness. Least that his son Commodus (which very young
should succeed him) should give himself to riot and drunkenness.

It comes now to my memory that my brother the drunkard alleged that he
never heard of any law or statute that condemned the drunkard to death, but if
he had turned the lease (as it was said unto the Nun that read but half
the Sentence and leaft the other half vnreade for want of turning over the
leaf) to read a littel farther, he had found the contrary, for only Romulus
by himself heeretoofore mentioned, did expressly ordeine by his thirteen law,
that all women drinking wine, should be punished with death, like to the
adulterer, the which law or the like, long time before the building of Rome,
was made and observed, generally through out all Italy: where women whollye
abstayned from drinking of wine, for fear least they being overcome therewith,
should fall into shame and dishonor, they being forbidden the same, upon
pain of death, with which they were punished without excuse, or exception of
person, whenever it was proved that they had offended: The author of which
is Denis in his antiquities.

The which law or custom (as Bawdoen, the Iurisconsull in his commentaries
aforesaid, upon the Romulan Laws affyrmeth) in Latiae a Region of Italy, was
executed only upon the queen Fawna or Fatua, Daughter to Pic of the Latins,
and Sister and wife to Fanus, the king of the most ancient Aborigenes, which
queen having against the decencye of royal dignitye drunk so much Wine as
made her drunken (was whipped to death with willow rods by the only hands of
the king her husband in such great detestation they had Drunkenness there, and
to the contrary, sobriety in Estimation.

Likewise the wife of the Mecenian Egnacius (as Valerius reheareeth in his
commentaries) was slain by her husband with whippes or wands in the cave or
seller hard by the Uessell, out of the which she had drawn the Wine that made
her dronken.

For whose slaghter Egnacius not only remained untouched or reproved, but also
he was for the same highlye commended and praised by Romulus, for it was his
advise and counsel that the said woman had iustlye suffered herre punishmente,
for breaking and vyolating the bands of sobriety, notwithstanding the
forbidding of his laws.

In the Annualles of Fabius Pictuer, I read of a certain widow that was
forced by her near parents and kinsfolk to sterue for lack of meat (in
following the same law) because only she had opened the cubburd priuilye
wherein the keys of the wineseller were.

Solon in his laws affirms, that Prince to be worthy of death which is
approved to be given to drunkenness, or much drinking of wine.

Pittacus of Mittelene establyshed greiuous punishments against the dronkard.

Aeneas Domicius deprived his wife of her dowry because that unknown to him
she had drunk wine.

For the same cause the ancient Romans following the institution of Marcus
Cato (as himself witnesses, and Tertulian repeteth in the Apologitica) used
always, and as of coustome, to kiss their friends and kinswomen oftentimes,
for no other occasion, save only to know if they smelt of wine, or not, to
the end, that if they were thereby taken in fault, they might without favor
be punished.

And no doubt to speak uprightly, all women overmuch given to drink, little
regarding sobriety, easily and lightly do leave yt reine of continency to
follow and prostrate themselves to all vicious things. Furthermore, ye law
whereof we have spoken before (made by Romulus, which law he himself kept
and observed) has not only ben kept and maintained in Rome and Italy, but also
in Greece, as Xenophon shows in the said commentaries.

To which law agreeing Zeleucus (of whom our brother also has much vaunted
him) among many other excellent laws that he made unto the Locrians, ordained
and established that whosoever drunk any wine without permission of the
Physician, should suffer death, whereof Atheneus and Elian are authors. Moreover
the grave Roman Censor says, yt if any woman does commit a vile or filthy
offense, as drinking of Wine, she shall be punished sharply by her husband.

And surely this laudable* reason that women should not drink wine unless
their husbands license them, remained and stood in effect and force a long
time, among the best and most famous familyes or houses in Italy.

But passing from these profane examples, I will a little enter among those of
the sacred and holy Scriptures.

The most mighty, just, and merciful God, creator of all things, speakinge
unto his Minister of holy things, said: When thou enterest into the witness
of the Tabernacle, thou, nor thy children shall drink any wine, nor other
thing whatsoever that may make you drunken, least that you dye the death.

In an other place by the same divine voice this warning is expreslye repeated
to all, ministering in his temple, in the which besides wine there is also
comprised by these express words, Ale and Cider: by which words (Ale and
Cider,) the Hebrews understand and signify all sorts and manners of drink,
by which a man may be made dronken.

And the said interdiction was made to the end that they might attend and
watch more holylye and warely about the divine Ministry: which thing they had
not done, neither could have done, had they been ouercharged or laden with
wine, the only corruption and marring of the mind and thought, the deuertor
and neglector of true worship, and the very bate or prick of dissolution and
intemperance.

For which cause the ancient Priests of Egypt abstained wholly from wine, all
the time of their sacrifices, even from the beginning of the^, unto the end.

That vessel of election, and most faithful preacher of the truth Saint Paul,
condempning drunkenness, willed and ordained (writing unto Timothy the first
Epistle) that among other things the Bishop should be sober, and not given to
wine, Whereoff the decrees make mention, in the place containing these words:
The^ Apostle condempneth the Priest given to wine.

And therefore his disciple Timothy drank nothing but water, as his writing
unto him witnesses, where he says, let not thy drink hereafter be water,
but for ye health of thy stomach, and the sickness, with which thou art
often troubled, use a little wine. Also in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, the same most Christian Doctor says, that dronkards shall not
inherit the kingdom of Heaven.

For which cause Saint Hierome forbids in a manner the whole use of wine
unto Priests and Churchmen, writing and commanding unto his Neuew Nepotion, in
this sort: Beware (says he) that thy breath does not smell at any time of
Wine, for fear least approaching nere any one, thou hear this saying of the
Philopher pronounced against thee: this is no kiss that thou presentest, but
Wine, the sent of which, issuing out of thy mouth, yields a most filthy
smell.

The same holy man also forbids by express words, all Christian Uirgines,
the use of drinkinge Wine, commanding them to eschew and abhor it, as venime
or poison.

The Esseans a people of Judea, whose sect for their virtues have been so highly
esteemed by Saint Hierome, Philo^, Josephus, Eusebius, Pliny, and porphine,
drunk no wine at all.

Was it not prophesied of that Prophet, and more then a Prophet, Saint John
Baptist, that he should not drink strong drink, to the end that he might
choose the good and leave the evil? an argument most plain and evident that
wine and strong drink corrupts and peruerteth judgment and reason: and that
a man overcome therewith in steed of taking and choosing verity and virtue,
takes and chooses falshoode and vice.

Solomon was of opinion that unto a king it was good to minister neither wine
nor strong drink, to the end that he thereby might judge the causes of the
poor, with a more just and sound reason.

Cursed be he says the Prophet, that rises early to make himself dronken.

We read in Genesis, that drunkenness was the only cause that Lot that godly
man, committed execrable incest with his daughters, who else by noe means
could have drawn him to such an abomination.

After the Deluge, as it is written in Genesis, as Noe first planted the Uine,
first made wine and first dronk thereoff: so also he was the first that was
made drunk therewith: whereby we may gather, that if wine was nothing
fauourrable to him that first made it, what favor should any other hope to
find in it save the like.

Thus by sundry agitations and diverse troubles arising by excess of wine and
strong drink, the thoughts of men are diversely tossed and moved* some become
mad and furious, full of noise, quarrels, and injuries: others idle rash and
careless, of all manner of work and business, some raylors, and gybing
Iesters: some vile and vicious talkers: some merrye without modestye: some
wrathful without virtue or honestye. For wine in force and efficacy is like
unto black Cholar, that is to say, of diverse and variable effects, and of many
sorts and manners: which thing one of the problem ^octors of the most noble
Philosopher Aristotle declares, being as it seems, borrowed by Horace, thus
writing.

Be it that Wine brings joy and delight,
Be it that it draws us with ease unto sleep:
Be it that of it comes hate, furye* and strife,
Be it that foolish love therein nousleth deep.
Which thing an other Poet also approves writing of Bacchus, as follows.

Before thy pompous seat,
Where thou triumphing sits:
Their goes an army great,
of such as mar men's wits.
There marches wrath and ire,
lewd talk ^ake and disdain:
with discord* sloth, and fire
of fury, grife, and pain.
Of like opinion is that Scythian Anacharsis, for he says that the Uine
bears three sorts of grapes, the first of pleasure, the second of
drunkenness, and the third of wrath and vyolence.

The like speech in manner has been used by Aesope* howbeit yt others say it
came from the foresaid Anacharsis, but be it whosoever ye will, it is
certainly the words and sentence of a man both prudent and wise and these
they be: The first Glass of Wine, belongs to thyrste, the second to
delyghte, the third to pleasure, and the fourth to furye or frenzy. If then
the fourth glass of wine being drunk, do make men become mad and
furious, what will become of them, that glowse and carowse, down their
throats, thirty or forty at a time? trust me not only mad but most beastly
and brutishlye mad, as: men transported and alienated whollye from their
right sense and understanding.

For most certain it is, that the more such drunkards do drink, the more
desirous of drink they be, whereby their follye and ma^nsse does the more
increase.

And sure this alteration and hot desire of wine is no otherwise engendered then
by the vicious and excessive use of drinking: unto which they be so
outragiously given, that it seems rightly, that such men (if it be lawful
for me to call them men) are not borne, but only to devour, and glowse, or
glut up wine.

Among which number, Nouelie a Millannon deserves to be put, who being a
Consul during the time of Tiberius Caesar, and having droncke three Congies of
Wine at one meal, (which Congie was a vessel aunciently containing six
Septiers,) had no shame to cause himself to be called and surnamed
Tricongiarie, seeking to acquire renown and fame, by a most vile, fylthie, and
infamous vice.

But if drunkenness be so much the more to be blamed and abhorred by how
much the more the party or personage which is infected and noted therewith
is raised to honor and dignity, with what worthy note shall we make the
infamous Bonosus, that dronken Emperor of Rome. Of whom Aurelian was wont to
say, Bonosus is not born to live, but to drink. Whose death was as honest as
his life, for being vanquished by the Consul Probus, he ended his days with
an halter: of whom being hanged up in the air, this Proverb went. This is no
man that hangs, but an Hogsheade: only because he had during his life,
Tonned up as it were whole hogsheades full of Wine with in his belly, for which
cause he deserved perpetual infamy.

Where to the contrary, the most virtuous Alphonsus King of Naples is worthy
of eternal praise and glory, for his being (among many other excellent
virtues* to ye example of al famous Princes) very sober in drinking, for he
never did drink any wine, but he had three parts of water mingled with it,
which argues great generositie in the said Prince: for the right noble man
which esteems of honor, will above all things have drunkenness in horror,
as a vice most brutishe, vile, and infamous, the abomination and filthiness
whereof, is impossible to be deciphered and also the euilles and inconveniences
that comes thereof.

Because the Drunkarde is unwise, (says the most sapient Solomon) and has no
honor nor prudence in him, I am determined to alienate my self and abstain
from Wine: forbidding and warning us (as the Apostle also does) not to be like
unto them, which thereunto be inclyned and given, neither to be assistaunt
at their tables, nor at the meals or banquets of tumulous dronkardes: for so
much as of drunkenness springs dissentions, quarrels, hates, rancours, and
most often, murders, and slaughters.

Yea, it is the death of Virtue: it is the forgetfulness and misknowledge of
all honest duetye, for in it, (says the Mother of King Lamuell) is no
secrecy, but it utters all things, for the tongue of a Dronkarde cannot be
healde, it also commands the wise as well as the foolish, the learned as
well as the unlearned, and thereof comes, Follye, Furye, Presumption, and
pride.

Also the reason why Denis (commonly called Bacchus) after the Ethnicks, the
first inuentoure of Wine, is pictured or painted with Horns upon his head,
is not because the same goodlye God of dronkardes, did first couple Oxen
together, as Diodorus believes, but because that only by his invention, that
is to say, of Wine, and the outrageous use thereoff, men become horned, that
is to say, furious, and easilye moved to excess and rash insolence.

For only the most poor and wretchedest abiecte that is, if he be once
overcome with wine, he then as forgetful of his calling and quality, takes
horns upon him, says the Poet, that is, he rayseth himself up in all
fierceness and presumption, even unto the disdayning of the most noble and
mighty, and like unto Aesopes Crane, he compares himself with his superiors
and betters.

Also the same is to be seen in the most ignorant, sottish, and unlearned,
for being once upon his Horns, you shall presently hear him, be it right
or wrong, upon his Ergoes, philosophying against Plato and Aristotle: or so
encherubind, he will dispute obstinately on some other Art or Science, against
the best learned and most experimented men that are in the world.

Yea, only the most wicked and infamous, if he be once dronken, he will
boldlye intermeddle himself with the most honorable, and stand upon his
slippers against the honestest man that is.

For which occasion the Scithians wisely and wittily quibbing and reproving the
Greeks Orges and Bacchanales, (which were wont to celebrate the Feast of
their dronken God Baccus, by excess drinking of wine, in playing on Tabors,
Timpanies, and such like dissolate dronkennes) denied and disavowed that a God
should be an inuentor of so pernicious and hateful a thing (speaking of wine)
seeing that men thereby become furious and frenticke.

Also Diogenes called such feasts and banquets as they celebrated to Baccus in
Athens, the miracles of fools.

And pallingenius following the same (in mocking also the Thebans, who gloried
that Baccus was brone in Thebes, but Indie denies it,) cried out: O you
offspring of Cadmus, why vaunt you of your Orges and Bacchanales? Your
frenticke friskes and mad Daunces? your Bacchus is no God, neither did Semel
conceive him of Jupiter, but rather the black and furious Tartar, begat him
on the most cruel and horrible Fury, Megara. No, no, he is no God: for he
himself is the disdayner and hater of the Gods, and never can a dronken
sacrificer, order the use of a Sacrafice orderly.

But who can rehearse the thousand thousand part of the euilles, and
inconveniences that proceed of this read nosed God, for (says Solomon) to
whom, happens care, dolor, ill hap, strife, wounds, want of sight, trouble
of mind, and such like, save only unto those that haunte the Wine Tavern,
and that study and take delight to empty the pots.

Beware (says he) how thou take pleasure in beholding the Wine sparckle or
sprinckle in the Cup, or desire to taste and drink it afterward morely
corouslye or wantonlye, for besides that we of our selves, are too much
inclined and ready thereto, the nature thereoff, is at the beginning so
agreeable and well liking, as it slides down men's throats with great
sweetness and pleasure, but the tail thereoff poysoneth and venometh much
like the Serpent, in such manner that almost by the virtue only of the hot
sparckles that proceeds thereof, (much like to the Basilickes eyes, it
beats down, ouercomes and casts him that uses it, into all opprobrious
ignomy.

Thou therefore, that dwell altogether with the Wine (says the wise manne)
art like unto him which during the greatest storm, and rainiest part of a
tempest, sleeps in the top of the ships Maste, and is so tossed and tumbled
on the wallowing waves and surging billows of the raging Seas, as he is in
iminent danger of drowning.

The like whereoff, Homer in his Odisses rehearsed, happened unto Elphe^^or,
who having drunk himself dronken, brake his neck going down a high hill
near unto the Pallaice of Circes, in following of Ulysses and his fellow
Grecians, which already were descended and nie embarked. Which thing himself
afterward confessed for short time after, the same King of Ithaca fynding
him in Hell, asked the cause of his coming thither, to which Elphenor
answered, the Wine which I drank so excessiuelye whiles I lived, did slay
me.

The same also, beguiling the strength of Holophernes, as it is written in
Judith, was the cause that he lost his head, by the hands of that good
Matrone, which thing had not happened unto that fearful and dreaded Gyaunt,
had he read and followed the saying of the Prophet Esdras, where it is
written: Wine is stronger then they that drink it, for it conuerteth all our
fantasyes into an assured pleasure, it corrupts judgment, it makes the
thoughts of men vain and ridiculous: those of little children, like unto those
of mighty kings: those servants like unto those of masters: and those of the
poor like unto those of the rich. For the drunkard knows neither what he
says, nor what he does: thinks and dreameth, al his hie thoughts to be
honest and lawdable: he makes no accounte of King or Magistrate: he never
speaks but by talentes and thousands: he never remembers or esteameth of
freindeshippe or brotherhoode: but to the contrary, all furyous without
occasion, and for a thing of naught he takes his sword in hand: for strife and
contention (says Solomon) is in wine: and even as fire approves the hardness
of iron, so wine argues ye heart of the proud, being a biternes to the soul,
and ingendreth in man by his excess: a dispightfull boldness and anger to all
wrastlings: which thing is the right and peculyar property of an incensed
fool.

For which occasion wise and discreet men are sufficed with little Wine,
considering that against the force and violence thereof one can resist, be he
never so wise, grave, strong magnanimious, or of what estate or condition so
ever. Thus gentle drunken brother, I have made plain unto thee the gallant,
courteous, precious gifts, and excellent properties with the honest guerdons,
and virtuous recompenses of thy great God Bacchus, who^ thou in heart,
adorest, worshippest, and tearest up to the highest degree of gods.

But to the end (right Honorable Judges) that whiles we render to our
brother the Whoremonger the like assault that he rendered us, we appear not
immodest and superfluous we will sound a retreat, not denying, but freelye
confessing to leave many things vnconf^^ed, and vnaunswered, which our
brother alleged against us. Howbeit, no hard thing to do: but we do not
seek only after that, for so to do is the part of him that intends to
justify himself, and to be approved and found innocente, touching our
selves, we mean otherwise, for we will not hide our faults: neither will we,
like unto many other, excuse our selves, or say, we are blameless, for certain
it is, that whooredome and dice playing are both so vile and vicious offenses,
as they are no less domageable then dishonest, and also the name of them are
(as names filthy and infamous) to be avoided, notwithstanding to the contrary
we will maintein and uphold ye vice of drankennes to be far more greater: then
either ye whoormonger or the diceplayer: for as we have evidently showen
before, not only, honor and good name (ye only treasures of men) with goods
and faculties, are consumed and wasted by drunkenness, but also the soul,
health, and understanding, and the mind of man is troubled, ^ossed and
grieved, and hurt thereby, even unto the making of him that uses it, to become
more vile then any brute beast, which thing our brother chiefly and especially
argued and blamed in us, as a vice most greatest and most infamous of all
other, and for such a one justly, and with good reso^ did condemn and reprove
it by the authority of many famous Philosophers, and worthy authors. Moreover,
besides the same before rehearsed, whosoever will wisely and dilligently advise
and have regard unto the original soever and first beginning of all vices, and
also to ye exercise and continuing of them, they shall find that drunkenness
ought only to be accused, and adjudged most worthy to bear the burden and
blame as the only causer, kindler, and mouer, and procurer of men to all
villainous iniquitis, and especially to fornication, whooredome and adultery.
For wine, says Titus Liuius, among many other excellent authors, follows,
draws, provoke, and nourrisheth, the dishonest pleasures and desires of the
flesh. The rest concerning the equity of this present strife (right honorable
(lies in your fidilcie and prudence, unto which we do commit our cause, be
seeching you, if you do see euedently (as no doubt you do as clear as the
Sun) yt drunkenness is the worst or more vile and infamous then whooredome or
diceplaying, that you will dismiss our brother the dronkerde of our fathers
succession, for which our present question is, adiudging the same unto my
brother the diceplayer, and to me, by your just and rightful sentence, at
which we conclude. Thus pleaded and concluded the parties, which done, the
president arose up on his feet to ask and require the advice and opinions of
the Judges assistant. During whose counsel many learned men and other of
sundry estates and qualities there is present assembled, (who had heard and
understood the difference) murmuring and muttering with soft voice, talked and
uttered their aduises, every one according to his fantasy: being all in a
manner of diverse and contrary opinyons, as naturally and commonly we be
willingly included and given to favor and excuse or hide our own faults and
vices. Some hold with the Dronkard, others with the diceplayer, but the
greatest part with the whoremonger, as these here for the one, and those there
for the other.

Many said, that they were all three as vicious the one as the other, and that
it were therefore best and most expedient (notwithstanding the will of their
father) that each of them did inherit his succession equally. There were
others of opinion y^ said, y^ seeing they were all so vicious and evil, that it
were therefore good to disherit them al three. To be short, there was no one
among them that agreed. The cause peradventure was, for so much as each of them
were perticulerly touched, and infected with one of these three vices, or with
two, or possibly with all three together. But at last among all the rest,
there stood up one an ancient grave Gentleman, named Theophilus Equicolus,
who after he had made obeisaunce, said.

My Lords, to speak in truth and uprightly, I cannot see nor perceive, but
that this judgment is of great weight and importance, and not to be lightly
looked unto and let slip, also I do not think the contrary, but y^ these
honorable Judges before they give a difinite sentence, will have great
consideration theroff, but trust me they should not be in this care and
trouble if one of these brethren were a covetous person: for such a one should
presently be dismissed and put out of the succession (for which this present
contention and question is) as the most vile, wicked, and infamous: not only
of th^se three, but of all other living, by a thousand, thousand reasons,
examples, authorities, and invincible arguments which might be brought forth
and alleged against him only among the rest (for all) these to witnesses of
the Scripture would suffice: covetousness is a servitude of Idols, which is ye
ground of al abomination and iniquity: covetousness is the root of al evil:
and chiefly, said Theophilus, covetousness is the only poison and pestilence of
charity, without the which says y^ Apostle, nothing profits, because, (as
ye same Apostle says father) ye charity is of God, and god is charity, and
charity is the ground of perfection, and the end of commandment, wherefore
follow it, and you shall be clothed therewith.

Which opinion of Theophilus, all the assistantes together with one voice
approved, condemning covetousness as the most wicked and most pernicious
vice that is upon earth. But finally, the officers having caused silence to
be made, the same generallye kept, the president being returned from counsel,
pronounced his sentence, by the which it was ordained: that the parties should
correct and amend their plea, and give replies, and should inform one an
other, if it seemed good unto them, within one month, for all prefixins and
delays, that the same being brought again unto the court might be ordered
and adjudged according to equity and reason,

FINIS.

