Child Hood
depiction of a child The four Ages of Man. 1638

Are to be sold by ^. S^

^ in Cornhill (...)

With ^h^ines scarf feathers staff with posie garnisht
With silks and sattin^ laced faced uarnicht
for first preferment it is my dadies care
To make me hinch boy to the shreive or may^^


PASSION AND DISCRETION, IN YOVTH, AND AGE.

Here in a plain, and most familiar kind
You may behold a Combat in the Mind:
Man's differing motions are the jar in question.
The Combatants are Passion, and Discretion:
Each striving to be chief in the desire.
Or, if you please to strain in any higher,
Then here you, partly, may behold the strife
Between the Flesh, and Spirit in this Life.
LONDON, Printed by T. and R. Cotes, for Francis Grove, dwelling on Snow-hill,
near the Sarazens head, without Newgate. 1641.

Youth
Next place of office which I do attain
is ^washing whiffler with my staff and ch^ine
In which hot office when J long have binn
J swaggering leave and to be stayed beginn

Passion and Discretion in Youth and Age.
WHen that arch light, which makes things made appear,
Dame natures Nurse, bright Phoebus does draw near,
And from our Clymate, this times guider, Sol
Calls winter back to the Autarticke Pole:
Then does our late frost-bitten regions smile,
Our piercing air, cold winds and, fruitles soil,
All suffer change, yea cheerished by the Sun
All things beneath rejoice in what is done.
The earth puts on its rich, and sweet attire,
Sweet to the sense, and rich to the desire.
Fish in the waters do both scip and flote:
Birds in the air tune a melodious note;
Beasts on the earth, yea Nature seems to sing
By signs of joy to well-come in the spring.
How shall these creatures in subjection pent,
Declare such signs and tokens of content,
These sensles creatures glory in this measure,
And in their youth, the spring time take such pleasure;
And shall not I, who hitherto lay hid,
Like Natures power, in winter time, as dead?
In this my spring time have a cheerful voice,
Now in my youth be merry and rejoice?
(...) But here lies that which does undo us still,
That which, dear self, converts our good to ill;
God in his mercy having daign'd to give us
Innumerable good things to rel^eve us;
We out of weakness, either quite ref^se them,
Or in the using of them quite abuse them:
Which most prepost'rous custom to suppress,
Let love and friendship be without excess.
Passion in Age.
FOnd man what meant I? what was in my mind?
When I was Youthful how was I inclind?
I then was heedlesse, ignorant, and nice,
And counted care of worldly gain a vice:
Youths chief contentments, vain delights and pleasure
Were all I sought for, they were then my treasure.
I held them muck worms, and in much disdain,
That did not value pleasure above gain:
I felt no sorrow then for what I spent,
Because it purchased that which gave content.
But now I see my error in the same,
How foolish I was, and how far to blame,
How wanton pleasure did delude my mind,
And wrought upon my weakness in this kind.
How many opportunities most fit,
Which both advice, and reason did admit,
Of gain or profit did I then neglect,
Without all care in any such respect?
Man Hood
^N livery gown and hoode I now have got
(...) which in rank and ffi^e to poules I trott
And swim in sholes to wesminster in barges
and to feed high spare nether cost nor charges


Old Age.
But if my ffeasting have to lavish bin
I must be fforced to turn Child a gin
In stead of posie bear a burning tape^.
(...) man begins in (...) in (...).


And therefore this shall be my highest pitch,
Only to toil, and study to be rich,
And this I will endeavor to express:
Though with my tongue, I do not it confess.
But if I must, for tender Natures sake,
Some further use of Recreation make,
My Liberary to my view presents
The sweet fruition of most choice contents:
There I have certain statute Books at hand,
Where I may view the Tenours of my Land:
There I have just Arethmatickes to count
Unto what sums my usuries amount:
And eke an Affamerides, which may
Show me my other commings in each day.
And there to pleasure me, I may behold
My bonds, and bills, my silver, and my gold;
Which Jewels if I should but feel, I think,
It would refresh me more than meat and drink.
Discretion in Age.
Dear self, what art thou all inclined to earth?
Is nothing else in thy account of worth?
Or, at the leastwise, nothing else that may
Here upon earth, be valued with this clay?
Earth is, indeed, the matter of thy frame,
And thou must sure, again unto the same;
For things Created naturally run,
Into those elements where they begun)
This cannot be denied: that in this kind
Thou may be something to the earth inclined.

