CERTAIN Short PRAYERS and MEDITATIONS upon the Lords Prayer and the Ten
Commandments.

With other particular Prayers for several purposes.

Written by the right Worshipful Sir JAMES PERROTT Knight.

LONDON, Printed by Aug. Mathewes for ROBERT SVVAYNE, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Bible, at Britains Burse. 1630.

TO THE Right Honorable, WILLIAM Earl of Pembrooke, Lord high Steward of his
Majesty's Household, one of the noble Order of the Garter, and of his Majesty's
Honorable Privy Council, Chauncellor of the Un uersitie of Oxenford.
Right Honorable,
IT may seem strange unto some, that J being no professed Divine; should
presume to present unto the view and verdict of curious Censurers, a Treatise
of prayers; It being a subject fittest for deep grounded Divines to deal
withal. And as much, that J should Dedicate these my Medi^ations unto your
Lordship. For the first, my excuse is, that I offer them not for instruction of
the judicious, but for the use of them that are as weak in Judgment, as I am,
and to others of meaner capacity, if any such there be. For my address of
them to your Honor, J have no other excuse, or defense, but that which is best
known unto your Honor, to whom I am more obliged, then my weak Abilities can
give hopes to yield other recompense, then by Prayer unto God, that your
proceedings may prosper by piety, and be rewarded with eternal felicity.

Your Lordships most bounden to be at command'ment. JAMES PERROT.

The Preface to the ensuing Prayers and Meditations
THE Reader may easily find the Writers weakness: yet in reading perchance
he may find sowmewhat, though it be but simple, that may inform his
conscience, and stir up his mind to better meditations. By using that is
good, our inclinations grow to greater goodness; as by the bad, that that which
is evil becoms worse. In this small and slender Tract of mine, of Prayers on
the Lords Prayer, and on the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments.

The first containing the rule of all our Prayers, delivered by our Lord and
Savior, who taught us how, to whom, and for what to pray. This Doctrine being
the fountain, and so from it, by us, there may flow stremes of pious Prayers,
though our cesternes are but shallow, yet the conduit, or rather Conductor of
them, may thereby water the fields of our souls, and hearts with piety,
felicity, and fertilnesse, that so our selves and our posterities may receive
increase of all spiritual and temporal blessings. The true practice of Prayer,
is as the Pathway to heaven, the guide of our life on earth, the remoouers of
such Remoras, and rubbs as do hinder us here, and do stay us from eternal
happiness hereafter: For our true belief, credendorum, of things to be
believed, which we call the Creed, is Regula and via vitae, the rule and way
of life. So the Decalogue, or ten Commandments, being regula faciendorum, the
rule of things to be done, is vita viae the life of this way. both these making
up by fervent, frequent and faithful prayers, our progression unto eternal
life. This as a gate, the other as goles unto eternal glory; betwixt these
two, Prayers are as the Sails, and the holy Spirit as the wings that carries
us through the troblesome waves of this world, and bears us up in all
tentations, afflictions, and calamities. In the use of Prayers, as of the other
parts of piety, Humility is the ground, Faith the foundation, Petition and
thanksgiving the walls, elevated Meditations the roof, and knowledge joined
with conscience, the props and pillars. So is holy prayer made scala caeli, the
ladder that leads us to asscend unto heaven. Prayer then being the precious
balm of Gilead, that cures the festring sores of our sins; I crave pardon to
publish these my weak conceptions of Prayers and meditations; Which proceeds
from no other purpose, but to help the weak and ignorant, in their well
disposed devotions. To such I say, it is not enough to pray much, long and
often, except it be done with a regenerat, a devout, and an understanding
heart, although the saying was ancient: Breuis oration penetrat caelum; short
Prayer pierces the heavens. Yet it is neither the length, nor shortness of our
prayer, that mooues God unto mercy, unless they be joined with a godly and
conscionable use of them, in clensing and casting away our corruptions,
distractions, dullness, coldness, carnal cares and vain imaginations, which
press upon us in the time of Prayer, when it is not the voice, or the sound of
words, but the holy affection and pure desires of the heart, with the
assistance of Gods holy spirit, that makes our prayers unto God profitable, and
powerful, as the old verse has it.

Non vox, sed votum; non cordula musica, sed cor:
Non clamans, sed amans, cantat in ore Dei.
Which signifies thus much, Not voice, but vows; not music but the heart,
Not cr^es but love; sweet songs to God impart.


If any man question, why so many treatises of prayer being published; my self
or any other should set forth any more; therein yet I conceive it is with the
readers, and specially with the users and learners of Prayers, as with
Physicians who seeking simples to cure their Patients, go not only to one
garden, meadow, or field to gather them, but unto many: for in some places
there grows of one kind, in some another sort. So in the relish, use, and
choice of prayers, which is that herb of grace; Some desire such as are short
and pithy, others make use of them that are of good length and weight. Besides,
this consideration, though I acknowledge there are diverse excellent treatises
of Prayers, yet I have seldom seen any, that have closly and punctually
handled the Petitions of the Lords Prayer, and the parts of the Ten
Commandments, with a strict mixture of Doctrinall Meditations in the form,
and to be used as prayers, containing therein their contents, which I have
indeauoured to do according to my weak skill and judgment. First, for mine
own exercise, and then for the use of such as shall need, and desire it as
much as I do. Which I have done the rather, because I see how fearful,
dangerous, and common a thing it is, to find such multitudes of people, who
using only the Lords Prayer, or reading the Ten Commandments, with out
premeditation or knowledge what either of them contains, do yot think that they
have sufficiently served God, when they know little, or use not that aright
they should know, and do better. To know much and do little, does little
avail in divine or humane things: to do much and to know little proves
unprofitable, if not hurtful. Yet not to find fault with others, but to come
home unto my self: for these my Meditations, such as they are I leave them
with the readers and users of them, to the direction of Gods holy Spirit.

The Contents of the Prayers and Meditations contained in this Book.
Several Prayers upon the several Petitions of the Lords Prayer. 1

One entire Prayer framed on all the Lords prayer 45

Several Prayers on the Decalogue or Ten Commandments. 57

Short Meditations for a Christian man to make for the examination of himself,
his conscience, and course of life. 112

A Prayer for the performance of those points. 119

The differences in Devotion and exercises of Religion betwixt the Protestants
and Koman Catholics. 124

A Prayer for the peace and prosperity of the Kings Majesty, his dominions,
and subjects. 142

A Prayer for our afflicted Brethron the Protestants beyond the Seas 149

A Prayer to be used on the Sabbath day. 156

A Prayer in the time of trouble and affliction, 160

A Prayer when public calamities appr^^^^, or are doubted. 164

A Prayer against the reigning sins, that a man finds to remain in
himself. 174

A Prayer necessary to be used often. 179

A Prayer against pride, anger, and Envy. 193

A Prayer after delivery from sickness, and danger of death. 203

A Prayer for the maintenance of Zeal.

Certain short Prayers and Meditations upon the Lords Prayer.
Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name:
O Lord God, most high and ^^uenly (...) hou art our Father by creation. We
are thy Children by Adoption. What an honor and happiness is it to us
miserable Men: that thou our mighty God, vouchsafest to accept and call us thy
Children: Having Elected us, thou have given us a great, a glorious, and an
everlasting Inheritance. Having created us of nothing, thou have yet made v^^
Heirs, yea Possessor^ of thore then earthly even heavenly endowments. Our
earthly mould, and our carthly minds only, keep us from this heavenly
possession. Thy merciful and powerful providence has provided it; our
finnefull and corrupt nature keeps us from it. Thou (O gracious Father) have
given us the earth, and al things in this world to govern; that we might make
use of it for thy service, and for our own sustenance. But the loving of this
earth, and the longing after earthly things, keeps us from aspiring and
attaining to thy heavenly Inheritance. If as sons here on earth, wee^ could
seek the glory of thee our Father^ in heaven; we should sooner and bette^
obtain the blessings both of Earth and Heaven. If we the^ could consider
wherefore thou have chose^ us for thy children and so show our selue^ obedient
children i^ keeping thy heauonl^ Commandment w^ should not only find comfort
in our own souls and consciences, shun thy wrath and the shipwrake of our
souls, enjoy thy blessings, and avoid thy curses, but be made partakers of
that patrimony, which thou have provided for thine elect children. But alas (
most gracious Father) we make our selves by our daily and continual sins
unworthy to be called thy sons, and most unworthy to receive the inheritance of
thy children. Yet thou have sent thy only begotten Son to suffer death for
our sins, to restore us thy adopted Sons to the inheritance which we by
our fallings and transgressions had forfeited; yea, to a far more excellent,
and heavenly inheritance. And yet, as disobedient children, we have again and
again revolted from thee, as Prodigal Sons misspent that Patrimony thou
have given us, wasted in luxury and lust, have been forced to feed on husks
after we have followed sin and Satan. And that which is worse, by our long
and obdurated sins, we do as much as in us lies, crucify the Lord of
life, our elder Brother, thy best beloved Son, whom thou have sent, and we have
sold him by our mis-beliefes and euill-liuing. As Judas sold him to the Jews
for a few Talents or pieces of silver. Thus we of Children become Rebels, and
of Freeborne made our selus slaves. Yet (most merciful Father) fince by thy
own choisethou have called us to be thy Children, Have compassion upon thy
weak, frail, and wandering Children; bring us back from the by-pathes wherein
we have gone astray. Restore us to innocence and to thy favor. Renew in us
right spirits, Mollify our stony hearts, and give us fleshy hearts. Set thy
fear before our eyes, so we shall by thy strength honor thee Our Father
which art in Heaven. So we by thy help shall hallow and honor thy hallowed
and ever honored Name. Let us not dishonor thee by cursing, swearing, or
blasphemy. Thy Name is, as thou art, great and glorious; It is holy as thou
art. We cannot hallow it, except thou make us holy, who of our selves are most
unholy. O sanctify us thy Children, that we may hallow thee our Father upon
earth, and in heaven, with Halleluiahs, praise, and glory, for ever and ever
Amen.

Thy Kingdom come.
THy kingdom (O Lord) is an everlasting Kingdom, and thy Dominion endures
throughout all ages. The earth is thy footstool, thou fittest in the highest
Heaven, and the Scepter of thy power stretches over all the earth. All things
with thee are present, as well that is past, as that is to come. And yet we
poor sinners, who stand still in thy presence, do not as we should, seek
thy kingdom: that it should come unto us, or that we by Faith and Repentance
should come unto thee, that we might enjoy thy kingdom. We seek not thy
kingdom in thy word to do thy will: we seek it not in thy works, to
glorify thee, our Lord and Maker. Thou excellest in eminence, whereby thy
kingdom in heaven and earth is governed. Yet the kings of the earth conspire
against thee and thine Anointed. O make them yet to feel thy high and heavy
hand, that they may seek thee, and shun the suppression of thy truth, Church
and people, which is a great part of thy kingdom here on earth. Thy flock and
fold of thy militant Church is here on earth: gather them together, shield and
shelter them by thy outstretched Arm, that they may make thy kingdom known
to be as it is, great and glorious. O suffer not the sufferings of thy Saints
still to continue, lest the enemies of thy kingdom grow more proud and
presumptuous. Thou in thy eternal wisdom and counsel considerest, that the
chosen children of thy kingdom must be as gold purified in the fire of
affliction; that so they may manifest the glory of thy kingdom; ^y prayers,
persecuti^on, patience and deli^erance. Yet the enemies of thy truth, who
seek their own glory by thy disho^our, tread down ^hy vineyard, to the end
it may bring forth no more fruit. But thy Kingdom cannot be destroyed, though
the members ^hereof may for the ^ime be defaced. Thou can build up ^he
ruins when man cannot restore it. Show thy self a Defender, as thou art a
Builder of thine own Kingdom, in the Church and Common weal. Show us the
way unto thy Kingdom. Teach us the truth: teach us to preserve it, and to
prefer it as a pillar of thy Kingdom, before the safeguard of our own lives:
So shall thy Kingdom of thy grace come, and be conserved by us; that we may
come unto thy Kingdom of Glory. Thy Son our Savior said, His Kingdom was
not of this world: because ^t was not temporatie, but eternal; it was not
earthly, but ^eauenly: yet his power being thine, thy Kingdom is here by
Creation and Preservation: It is in Heaven by all fullness of glory and
^rayses. O let the Kingdom and Scepter of thy word come unto us; rule and
direct our hearts here on earth, that we may come to thy Kingdom in heaven:
That here we may obey and serve thee in this thy kingdom, and hereafter
enjoy thy happiness, and give thee glory in in thine everlasting Kingdom. Amen.

Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
Most gracious and glorious Sovereign, ^hy will and thy wisdom are the same:
^n wisdom have thou ^one all things, Thy wisdom has wroght ^ll; Thy Word has
^euealed thy will and ^hy wisdom. Thou ^n thy vvonderfull works of Creation,
did command all things to be done, and it was done. Our wills (good Lord)
are weak in that which is good, and strong to do evil. In Heaven all things
obey thee, and upon earth Man is most disobedient to thy Majesty. The Earth
brings forth fruits for the sustenance of man; and man is fertile in bringing
forth sin to thy displeasure and dishonor. It is thy will, that we should
serve thee: but our wilful desires draw us from thy service: So in earth and
earthly creatures is contention and corruption: In Heaven and heavenly minded
men is unity, concord, and contentment. Heaven gives thee glory: Earth yields
us fruits. The fruits of the earth not well and thankefully used, turn to the
diseases of our bodies and fowls. As thy good will has wrought all things for
our good: so (good Lord) give us good wills, to do thy will, whilst we live
here on earth (...) that we may make i^ as a foot-step to a^ scend unto
Heauen^ Let it therefore be our chiefest desire to conform our wills to thy
blessed will (...) That when our Pilgrimage is passed here upon Earth (...)
and we have passed through the vale o^ misery, thou mayes^ provide for us a
resting place in Heaven, that we may be seated with thy Saints, to do thee
service, and to sing unto thee perpetual praises.

Give us this Day our daily Bread.
THIS Day (O Lord) as all other days of our frail^ and fading life, being
short, and a space wherein we still commit sin. We stand in need of
sustenance. Our daily bread; and food being the mean^ to maintain our lives we
cannot have it except thou afford it (...) and when we have it, we do not
afford thee deserved praises. Thou have afforded us plenty, and yet of our
thankfulness there is great penury. We riot in excess, and suffer thy
servants to sustain wants. We have not only bread, food, and raiment, but all
things necessary from thy liberal hands, and yet we neither return thee
laud, nor to our needy neighbors supply out of the store thou have sent us. O
Lord as thou have comforted us with thy creatures: so teach us to make a right
use o^ them, that we abus^ not thy bounty i^ mispending them, no^ restrain
our Chari^ tie, in releeuing thos^ who are in greates^ necessity, accordin^ to
the means which in mercy thou ha^ given us. We hau^ need of food for ou^
Souls, and other things necessary, a^ well for our lives a^ for our bodies. O
giu^ us (good God) thi^ day, and at all other times, what is convenient both
for our souls and bodies: and therewith grant us contentment and moderation,
that we may be satisfied with what is sufficient, and not seek things
superfluous to abuse or mispend that we have: So we having sufficient, may not
only ^ee satisfied, but may do good therewith to our own souls, and spare
that which may ^ee spared unto the ^oore, forwhom thou have not provided. And
so not only this day, but all the days of our lives, we may be good Stewards
of thy blessings, and true Accomptants of thy earthly and Heavenly Treasures.

Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
HOW often and continually we offend thy Heavenly Majesty, thou (good God)
only, that feast all things, do best dilcer^e. We sin hourly, and
therefore have still need of thy pardon. We often desire it, and do more often
offend: We desire it with condition, yet we seldom perform the condition.
How fearful is our state when we commit sins, crave pardon, promise to
remitt others trespasses, and yet neither avoid the evil, amend our lives, or
pass by with pardon the smallest harms we have from our Brethren, but seek
release from thee, and revenge against them: O good God, teach us to look
back unto our former backeslidings, even in this behalf. And if there be any
whose faults we have not remitted, done only against our selves. Move our
hearts to relent, and to be reconciled as far forth as may stand with thy
glory and the good of thy Church. If the cause be such as may not be
concealed, or kept from question: Yet let not our particular revenge be the
ground to seek any man's ruin. But so teach and temper our hearts to
distinguish betwixt private spleen and public Justice, thy glory, and our
own vain glory, wrath or displeasure, as this our daily prayer, or forgiving
others, be not made unfruitful unto them, or hurtful unto our own souls,
but by pardoninge their lesser offenses thou may be moved to pardon our
greater sins, and that for thy sake, and the safety of our souls through
Jesus Christ our LORD, Amen.

And lead us not into Temptation. But deliver us from evil:
Lead us not, or rather (Gracious God) suffer us not to be ledd into
temptation: we lead our selves, our Concupiscence and natural corruptions
lead us, The flesh, the World and the Devil lead us and drive us unto
temptations: What help, or what hold have we in our selves, good God? When
that which is without, assayles, that which is within us is more ready to be
overcome then to withstand: Nay, our inward, natural, inbred corruptions,
gives and receives, and therefore cannot withstand these assaults. Our flesh is
pampered and puffed up with Pride. Our lusts rising from our natural
instigations of the flesh, and prouocations of others, procured by internal
inflammations, and external incensements, lead us and ouerwhelme us with
temptations. When we (good Lord) as we are directed, desire thee not to lead
us, or suffer us to be lead into temptation: we therein crave thy deliverances
from the frailty of our flesh, which cannot resist, but ray seth temptations:
Our Captivity comes from our selu, our Deliverance from thee: We are daily,
hourly, and continually assaulted with temptations of lusts, when we do but
see or feel that wherein we delight: Of pride, when exalted, or desiring to
be exalted, we climb higher then our strength, or capacity can reach unto;
or if coming unto it, and coming by ungodly means unto it: we fall (good
Lord) from thy grace further and further, as at the first we fell from it,
when we sought not from the sacred Counsels of thy holy Commandments, which
way we should walk.

Our Temptations, (O blessed resister and restrainer of the Tempter) are,
either sudden, wherein our flesh and frailty, easily suffers us to be
surprised: or else continued; and importunate, wherein we cannot without thy
heavenly assistance, maintain the Combat, or continue the Conflict. In all
these we are weak, and thou (O Lord) art strong; strengthen our weakness,
sustain us against Satan: Suffer us not to be surprised: Repulse him by
re-uniting thy heavenly Spirit unto our frail flesh; stregthening us when we
cannot stand, and restoring us when we are fallen. O Lord, Thou only art able
to deliver us from dangers both of body and soul. Our temptations comes from
both: Our natural corruptions in the body, our infused contagions in the
soul, had need of thy aid to defend and deliver us from temptations. Our
deliverance comes from thee, that our praises and thanksgiving may return unto
thee. O deliver, save, and defend us from the suggestions of Satan. Amen.

For thine is the Kingdom, Power, Glory, and Dominion.
THe Kingdoms and Territories of the Earth (most mighty Lord) are thine in
Creation, power, praise, and Dominion. It is thine (O LORD) for thou have first
framed it: It is thine, for thou do conserve, and presetue it: It is thine,
for thou do rule and govern the Universe: Thy Son has said, His Kingdom
was not of this World, because he would not rule visibly, and temporally, but
spiritually and eternally. Yet thou have given him power in heaven and in earth
to redeem sinners, and to save sinful men: What Kingdom can be greater,
more glorious and firm? What power can be more ample, or so beneficial? What
glory can shine more in and under the firmament of Heaven? O therefore, by that
thy power bring us unto this thy Kingdom: where we may have rest without
trouble, comfort without contention: joy without end: and thou may receive
kingdom without resistance, Power without diminution: Glory without denial:
and Dominion without disobedience: To this thy Kingdom, by thine own power
bring us to give thee glory, and to be true subjects of thy dominion: for thine
own, for thy Son, and for thy servants sake, Amen.

One Prayer framed upon all the parts of the Lords Prayer.
MOst mighty God, most merciful Father, Thou art not only in Heaven by thy
presence, but in Heaven and Earth by thy power: Thou in thy mercy have
vouschsafed to choose and account us for thy children. We by our
transgressions have failed to do the duties of Children. Thou art in heaven
and beholdest us; We are on earth and are so earthly minded, that we cannot
behold and confess, as we should thy Majesty, thy mercy, and thy Justice:
Thy Name is hallowed and holy, yet we take thy name in vain; dishonor it, and
thereby destroy our own souls: Thy Kingdom is already come both in heaven,
and in the hearts of the Regenerate. O grant us regenerate hearts, that we
may come unto thee, and unto thy kingdom. Thy Will (O good and gracious God)
is that they whom thou have ordained to be Saints in Heaven, should be holy,
and so serve thee, to do thy will here on earth that they may attain to thy
heavenly inheritance. But alas, how do we transgress the will, break thy
laws, and follow our own wills. O yet here make us Ministers and fulfillers
of thy holy will, that hereafter we may be partakers of thy heavenly
possessions.

Thou give us (good Lord) daily bread, food, and sustenance; we (as we have
need) daily desire the continuance thereof. We come with hands to receive,
but not with hearts to render pray ^ses for these thy blessings. O let our
days to come be as full of thankefullnesse, as those past have been of
vnthankefullnesse. Teach us day by day to desire not only corporal, but
spiritual food, holyly to use and not fleshly to abuse either of both. That
we may not desire our meat to pamper our bodies, and to provoke them to lust:
but to live soberly, to take sufficient, and to avoid excess. That we seek
not spiritual food only to seem to be, but indeed to be truly religious.

Our trespasses (mos^ merciful Father) are great, infinite, and grievous. We
come to thee, and we cry to thee for forgiveness: Thou, O Lord art ready to
remi^ them upon our repentance: We go o^ with our sins, bu^ not with sorrow
for having committed them, with promis^ of pardon unto other who have offende^
us; and yet we for give not them as we desire to be forgiven. This is the
cause that we neither receive pardon, nor amend our sinful lives: And this
is the cause of our present hardness of our hearts, and will be of our future
greater punishments, except thou in thy mercy forget and forgive our former
trespasses, make us able hereafter to amend them, and make us charitable to
forgive the trespasses of our brethren offending us, as we do thee: It is not
thou (gracious God) that leadest us into temptations, but we are ledd into
them by our own lusts and infirmities, we fall into them by our own
fraileties, we are invited by the inticements o^ others, and by the subtlety
of Satan. I^ thou (good God) do suffer and no^ sustain us, we no^ only
receive, bu^ run headlong into temptations, and eue^ sincke under the
burden; Before we know where we stand, we fall: and can neither withstand,
nor rise up again, except thou help us: O be thou our supporter and
strength: Arm our souls, our hearts, and our consciences, so shall we be
safe under thy salvation, and be covered under the wings of thy most merciful
protection: The evils that come to us are from the evils that are within us,
and are entertained by us: The evil affections of our hearts threaten to pull
upon us corporal, temporal, spiritual, and eternal punishments. O keep us
from the evil of our offenses and sins, that we may shun the evil of
punishment for the same, that so we may not feel the weight of thy power and
indignation, but may here so be subject and obedient to thy Dominion, that we
may hereafter enter into the joys of that celestial kingdom, which is thine,
and which thou have prepared for such as truly serve thee here, and shall be
blessed Saints in heaven, Amen.

Certain short Prayers and Meditations upon the ten Commandments.
I am the Lord thy God that brought thee out of Bon dage.
SInce thou, O Lord GOD, great and glorious, have brought us from bondage, not
only corporal, but from spiritual and eternal captivity, by sending thy
Son, our Savior, to suffer for our sins. Suffer us not (O gracious God) to
fall again into worse then the Egyptian bondage of Idolatry, Infidelity,
Superstition, and Ignorance. Teach us only truly and faithfully to adore thee
our everliving God, and our God that give life. Let us not (O Lord) doubt, or
distrust of thy power or providence, but that our faith may be firm, our hope
assured, and our confidence in thee always constant, to expect the good
pleasure in performance of thy gracious promises: but that I may love and
honor thee above, and more then all creatures which are corruptible, the
workmanship of thy hands, and which as they have their being from thee, so
they can not be at all, or subsist without thy sustentation. As thou art. (O
Lord) grant that we may honor thee as thou art our God, that we may praise
thee World without end, Amen.

Thou shall have no other Gods but me.
THe Heathen, O LORD GOD everlasting, give thy glory unto sticks, stones, and
other imaginary, idle, vain, and evil things. The Infidels and unbelievers
do either openly, or secretly deny thy Deity, and divine incomprehensible
Majesty. The ignorant and evil instructed people, though they by custom
profess somewhat of thy service and power, yet they know not what it is, but
either through evil instruction, or for want of instruction, know not, or care
not how to keep thy Commandments, O Lord, teach them that believe amiss, the
ways of truth, and to amend their errors, those that believe not, touch their
hearts, make them to tremble at thy terrors, and divine Justice, which yet they
feel not, and so to entertain Faith, that their souls may be saved. Teach us
that profess thy truth to practice it, That we may have none other Gods but
thee, the True and only Everliving GOD: There is none other but only thou
that art good, and goodness it self. How then shall we stand in judgment
before thee, who prefer and account any any created thing before, or in
comparison of thee. O let our knees and hearts bow down before thee alone,
with faith, with fear, and with acknowledgement: Then we shall have none other
Gods but thee; neither follow our own fantasies, nor the corrupt doctrine of
such as misleade others.

Thou shall not make unto thy self the Image or likeness of any thing in
Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Waters under the Earth: For,
etc.
AS thy power, O LORD is greatest, and thy pre-eminence above all thy Creatures
in the heavens, and in the earth: So is thine Honor so precious, that thou
would not have it given to any thing in heaven or in in earth. Yet (good
Lord) our natures are so frail, and our souls so sinful, that we fancy and
frame unto our selves imaginary worship of creatures in Heaven, in earth, and
in the waters, by their similitude and likeness; giving, or attributing thy
glory to those glowormes being false and fading fantasies of our own
imaginations: Since then most mighty Maker and Monarch of heaven and earth,
thou see our frailty to fall, and the dishonor of thy Majesty, by false
worship; by framing the likeness of any creature to worship: O suffer us not
to make, to set up, or to adore false Gods, to fall before them, to place any
power, or hope in them, to trust to our own policy or power: to depend upon
earthly helps, joys, or delights, but to rely only upon thy strength, good
will and pleasure: That nothing in heaven above, in the earth beneath, or in
the waters under the earth, may carry us from thy true worship and service,
which is our safety, and concerns thy glory, to whom be given praise without
ceasing, and Honor without Superstition, now and for ever, Amen.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.
O Lord GOD most mighty and merciful, since thy majesty is so high, great, and
glorious, how careful should we be to conserve a reverend and awefull
estimation of thy holy name, as to honor it in thought, word, and deed: But, O
most gracious God, how careless are we to keep thy holy Commandment: How
ready by irreligion to blaspheme thy holy Name with oaths, curses,
execrations, to abuse thy holy Attributes, in forswearing, and false accusing,
to name thee (O our good GOD) in our mouths, when we have thee not in our
hearts, to dissemble and make Hypocritical profession of thy holy and true
Religion, without any care or conscience to put it in practice. O most mighty
and merciful God, we beseech thee to pardon and pass by our profaneness, in
taking thy name in vain, our impiety in blaspheming thy holy name, our
rashness in naming thee without inward reverence, or remembrance of thy power,
honor, and Majesty; our pronesse to mention thy Word, Works, and Worship,
without due premed tation and consideration. O teach us when we talk, think
or invoke thy holy name, to do it with conscience, faith, and sear, when we
think on it, to cogitate and call to memory that we are in thy presence, to
believe that we are under thy power, and subject to thy punishment.

Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day: six days, etc.
SInce thou (most glorious God) by thine omnipotent power have created this
World, and by thy providence, for a perpetual memorial of this thy most
wonderful Work, have or dained a Sabbath, or seaueth day of rest, to be
celebrated and set apart for thy Service. In which we should be free from
servile works, and worldly cares O LORD, therefore sanctify us, and so
prepare our hearts for this thy service, that we may make a conscience of
performing this thy Precept: For this purpose, Let us be careful to keep thy
Sabbaothes in public in the Congregation, and Assembly of thy Servants, by
Prayer, praises, and hearing of thy Word: In private, by Preparation,
Meditation, Conference, Consideration of thy Clemency; and Works of Creation
and Preservation, as in deeds of Charity, Mercy, and Compassion to the needy.
For this end (good and gracious GOD) fit and furnish our hearts, our wits
and our understandings, with Zeal, Knowledge, and Conscience to shake off on
this thy holy Sabbaths, sloth, and slownes to come unto thine Assemblies, and
to exercise these religious Duties, to cast away worldly cares, bodily labors,
except such as are for necessity, for present preservation of things ready to
perish, which cannot be otherwise prevented, or longer deferred, and of that
which may with most Moderation set forward the religious Exercises and holy
Duties of that Day. These Graces grant us, Amen.

Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy, etc.
O Lord God, as thou art the Propagator, and Protector of our souls, to whom
only we should give divine Honor: so would thou that we should give to our
natural Parents, reverence, obedience, sustenance, and faithfulness, which in
Justice is due for the cause of our birth, being, education and maintenance by
them: And that we may do this which thou (good God) requirest; We beseech
thee, remove from us Pride, selfeconceite, and selfeloue, neglect of our duty
to our Parents, and Superiors: impatience, when they shall exercise
authority, inflict punishment, or demand those things to be done, which we
do dislike, or not desire; Hardness of heart, when they stand in need of our
help. O Lord, grant that we ouerweane not our selves, thinking our selves
wiser then our Parents, Teachers, Magistrates or Superiors, but that we may
perform all their lawful Commandments, without grudging or delaying^, lest
by disobedience we dishonor them, procure thy curse, thy displeasure, and our
own danger. Let us not be like to cursed Came, the discouerer of his Fathers
nakedness: But that we may so keep this thy Commandment, that in honoring
them we may receive honor from thee; and that happiness which thou have
promised, that our days may be long and blessed not only in this Land which
thou have given us to live here upon earth, but even in the Land of the
Living, where thou do reign for ever: and where we may remain in thy
glorious presence evermore to give thee Praise, Amen.

Thou shall do no Murder.
MOst merciful GOD, that give life, and desire not the death of sinners,
nor that we by sin, or violence, should slay our own souls, or our
Brethren, that bear thine Image. We beseech thee to teach us wherein we
commit murder, by our hands, tongues, or hearts, that so we may shun the
sin and punishment that follows the same. O Lord we slay our own souls
by our manifold and great sins; we murder other men's souls by causing them
to commit sins; by which we take from our selves, and them, the life of
grace: O Lord we slay our souls by extinguishing the inspirations of thy holy
spirit, not suffering it to purge our sins by Prayer and Repentance, not
receiving or retaining, but rejecting those good motions and holy desires,
which thy grace gives unto us. We commit Murder, if not of the lives of men)
yet of their good Names. In our hearts by Anger, Wrath, and Envy: with our
tongues, by slander, reproach, sowing of sedition, cursing, and evil speaking,
with our hands done upon the persons of our selves by Violence, Drunkenness,
Adultery and other Distempers: whereby either the souls or lives of our
selves, or of others, are destroyed, by not succouring them, as we are able,
with counsel, correction, or charitable relief, when they stand in need of
us: by these and many other ways, most merciful GOD, we murder either our
own souls or bodies, or the souls and bodies of our Neighbors: O Lord God,
therefore who have given us souls and bodies, give us grace and assistance not
to destroy them in our selves or others, but purify our hearts and affections,
inlighten our understandings, kindle zeal to thy glory and truth, which may
save our own souls, and settle us to seek the salvation of others: and not
to be a means of our own, or of other men's subuersions: Plant in our hearts
Charity Meekness, and Mercifulness toward all men, sobriety in our
desires, carriage, and conuersations: a desire to seek the good, and not the
hurt of our Neighbors: Remove from us Pride, Presumption, Cruelty and hardness
of heart, whereby we slay our own souls, and destroy the lives, estate or
estimation of our brethren; So we being thus fenced by the grace and good
gifts of thy holy Spirit, with faith and fear to offend thy Majesty, may
thereby learn to keep this thy holy Commandment, to the saving, and not the
destroying of the souls and lives of our selves and others: Grant this good
Lord, for thy mercies sake, Amen.

Thou shall not commit Adultery.
O Lord GOD, thou by thy holy Word have taught us, that there is spiritual and
corporal Adultery. Thou have commanded not to commit them: Yet our corrupt
natures draw us to both: We forsake thee, our God, the true Spouse of our
souls, by adhering in confidence, worship or disordinate affection unto the
corruptible creatures, and so adulterating thy service and Worship, become
forgetful of thee, following more our own lusts, pleasures, or profits, then
thy precepts: O God, full of power who have created us thy poor creatures, who
see and searchest the secret corners of our hearts, unsearchable and secret
unto our selves. Cleanse these secret, yet strong and prevailing lusts which
draw us to commit the Spiritual and Carnal Adultery: restrain our unchaste
looks, and enticing aspects one of another. Cause us to refrain wanton
speeches, to abstain from Drunkenness, and excess of Diet, (which are the
Instruments and provocation to Idolatry, To forbear pampering of our bodies.
Gorgiousnes and Curiosity of apparel which draws us to overmuch delight of
our selves, and to a desire to defile our bodies, with Adultery, Fornication,
and other filthy bestiall Contaminating of our own bodies, corrupting of
others and breaking the bounds of this thy holy Commandment. That we should
not commit Adultery spiritual against thee, or corporal against one another,
and both against thy Laws. Keep us therefore, O Sovereign Lord, within the
compass of this thy holy Commandment, by thine own power and providence. By,
and for which only we shall be able to give thee laud and glory now, and for
ever. Amen.

Thou shall not steal.
THou, O gracious GOD, who have given us sufficiency, requirest of us
contentedness with that we have: And though we think we have less then we
need, and have much less then we desire: yet thou, O our good God, the giver
of all we have, do only know what is best for us: Our several estates
have need of means for maintenance, according to our callings, but we do
not rightly measure the lawful and right means by which we should come to
this competency, we go by ungodly means to seek it, we only weigh what we
would have, but do not consider so well where and how it may be godly, and
lawfully gotten, which makes us to take from our Neighbors, and others what
belongs unto them. O Lord therefore take from us Covetousness, the root of
deceit and false dealing, stealthes of things we want, or would have. Extortion
to get any thing by color of Justice, and bribing to pervert Justice. Violence
to take any thing by force, power, or strong hand from others; Negligence and
slothfulnes in our several estates and callings, which breed beggary,
necessity, and robbery. Send us lawful, christian, and honest care to provide
things necessary, without deceit, cosening, or double dealing: discretion,
and frugality in the disposing of our Estates, whereby we may provide things
needful without being burthe^some to others, or forced to steal or purloine
from them. Grant, good Lord, therefore that our endeavor may be to get what is
sufficient for our selves, without doing wrong unto others: Diligence in our
callings, without overmuch care, cruelty, covetousness, or circumuention. Just
dealing with all men: Frugalitie without misery, Contentedness with our
estates, And if we have plenty, to use it prouidently, and charitably, avoiding
misery or mispending, not seeking any thing by unjust or unlawful means, nor
keeping it by frande or falsehood. O Lord GOD, grant that we rob not thee
of thine honor, by stealing from our selves in sloth and security, that time
which we should spend in thy service but that we may keep this thy holy
Commandment with care and conscience, to thy honor, and our own salvation,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.
THou, O Lord, that art the God of truth, and teach us to maintain truth,
forbiddest us to bear false witness to the loss, discredit, hinderance, or
shame of our Neighbors: that we neither slander them with our tongs, accuse
them, by oath or word, wrongfully; think or judge evil of the^ without cause,
Deceive them by flatery or Hipocrysie, backebite any, nor boulster any bad
causes by countenance, cunning, or give sudden and rash belief unto raysers
of sedition, or evil reports: that we teach not false doctrine in matters of
faith; nor violate faith, or promise with any man to their delusion and
deceit: but that we may avoyde the peril and punishment of breaking this
Commandment. Teach us most just and wise GOD, to make Conscience of our words,
as well as our works, to avoid slander, false accusation, to speak the
truth, to be sincere, and single-hearted, when we come, or are called to give
testimony of the truth, without respect of persons, profit, friendship, envy,
revenge, or reward, that we may know and consider, we are always in thy
presence, and under thy power to be punished, if we transgre^se these thy
holy precept. That we may say and swear the truth in all things, since all
that we say, swear, or do, is in thy sight, and subject to thy severe and
uncorrupted Judgment.

Grant and give us grace by thy power to do this for thy glory and our own
good, thou gracious God to whom be praise, for ever and ever, Amen.

Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house: his Wife, his servant, etc.
SInce thou, our Soueraign Lord and God, have given us all that we have,
know what is needful for us to have and keep for us that thou have
given. Thou co^mandest we should subdue our lustful thoughts, and desires, of
coveting that which is not ours: and be content with that thou art pleased to
make ours. O make us (most merciful God) moderate in desiring, sober in using,
and abstinent from concupiscence, and coveting those things that belong not
unto us: Suffer not our wanton eyes to wander, our corrupt hearts to covet, or
our loose thoughts to be led with inticements of worldly, vain, and
transitory things which may make us to cover any thing that thou have given,
and does belong to others, and not unto our selves, whether it be the persons
estates, lives, liberties, services, or duties of our Neighbors; be they our
Superiors, equals, or inferiors. O Lord God, holy and just, to this end cleanse
our Conseiences, restrain our appetites and evil affections; chastise our
inordinate desires, subdue our lustful inflammations: Conquer our unbridled
corruptions. Send thy holy and heavenly spirit into our hearts, to take the
possession and protection of our poor sinful souls, that we be not
seduced, but may be kept as cleave vessels, sanctified for thy service to keep
this, and all thy Commandments, for thy mercies sake, for thy merits, and
thorough the Mediation of thy Son our Lord and Savior.

O LORD, if our Houses be but poor, let us not covet to make them better, by
seeking that which belongs not unto us, or by getting that which we cannot
lawfully have: If our store be small, suffer us not to seek that which we
should not seek; either our Neighbors Wives by Adultery, inticements, or
carnal prouocations, or any of his goods, by oppression, deceit or any kind
of corruption, his servants, by fraud, flattery, or false dealing: But do
thou, gracious God, settle our souls to contentment with what we have, or may
obtain by industry, void of injury; by lawefull means without unlawful
practices, with conscience, moderation, and sobriety; that shunning to seek
and covet that which is not ours: we may here faithfully serve thee, set
forth thy glory, and hereafter receive eternal happiness with thee in
Heaven. Amen.

My Mementoes which I should make to my self.
1 THe consideration and acknowledgement of my sins, general, and:
particular; by prayer, and by repentance. 2 The Examination of my life, how it
has been lead, either in goodness, or in looseness of living. 3 Whether I
have amended or continued in any known gross sins. 4 What they are, how they
have their beginning and growth 5 What resistance I have made, and what
success that has had. 6 Whether I have repelled those sins, and whether
they have again returned. 7 What hopes or means I have to banish those, or the
like sins? 8 Whether my prayers befainter or stronger; more frequent or
seldomer then they have been? 9 Whether my distractions, doubts, and dullness,
in the time of prayer remains, or be removed. 10 Whether those Passions which
were more preualent in me are yet pacified 11 Whether I cannot yet heartily
forgive, and pray for those that have injured me. 12 Whether my want of Love
and Charity to my Neighbors be yet amended? 13 Whether I have joined Faith
with Examination, and that with Repentance.
There is no day wherein I live, but I should call my self to account, and
bestow some time in examination of my self, to see and search, which of these,
or the like sins I have committed, which of them I have corrected: what yet
remains to be done, that I may no more do them: And if I can fall to these
remembrances by exact repetition, I shall sooner come to repentance: If I
cannot altogeter remember them, yet I must first read them in these, or the
like lines, then answer to every Article, as if I were examined before the
strickest Judge for any capital offense, or else I may be assured I shall come
at last before a severe and all-seeing Judge, who knows and will judge all:
when I have done this, I must go to prayer for the remoouing of these evils;
the continuance in doing better: Or if I find I cannot do it, I must still
pray that I may be able to do it.

These Meditations and the Prayers following them, being the best Medicines to
cure all the maladies of my mind and soul: for which end, and to attain to
that holy and happy end, It is necessary that I should frame unto my self,
if not unto others, some short supplications, as th^se following or the like.

A Prayer for performance of the former Points.
O Lord GOD, my sins are great and grievous, many and infinite in number: they
are so many that I cannot reckon or remember them. Those that I do remember,
which are the fewest in comparison of the rest; I have not confessed or
acknowledged as I should do.

I have not examined my sinful life that I have led, nor sought amendment
of the same, I have not looked into the beginning or grouth of my sins, nor
how I have resisted the same, or if at any time I have done it, yet I have
fallen more backewards then I went forwards. My hope of resistance is nothing
but in thy power and mercy, O therefore most merciful God, Grant me power not
only to proceed in examination, but in amendment. For my prayers good God
which should be the pathway to thy praise, and the steps to my salvation;
they are feeble and slow. O make them stronger and more frequent. Take from me
in my prayers distractions, doubting, and dullness. Remove my most violent
passions, the perturbers of mind and soul. Grant me grace to forgive them
that wrong me, and that I may pray for them that persecute me, as thy son
my Savior did and has taught me to do And as thy seruan^ Stephen has
showed me an example: Take from me hatred, and increase in me lou^ and
charity: Graun^ me grace to ioyn^ faith with examination, and examination with
repentance: And that I may be the better able to do this and all other good
duties, Give me power to pray unto thee and to praise thee: So be it Good Lord
Amen.

The Differences in Devotion and exercises of Religion betwixt the Protestants
and the Roman Catholics.
Especially in regard of Excess and Defect.
FOr the excess: The Romanists tie themselves too much unto Canonical hours
as they call them, in the public or private service of God. As to say or sing
Mass at such hours: as in the forenoone, at the hours of nine and eleauen to
have Angular Masses whereof many in one Church, and in diverse Corners of the
same Church at the same time: To tie them in their private Devotions, to read
or rather to run over the Jesus Psalter, and other manual books heretofore
altogether in the Lati^e tongue, which most of them understood not at all: So
might they speak as Birds are taught to speak, by the pronunciation, scarce
of syllables aright; sometime saying one word or at the least sounding one for
another without any sense or signification, to themselves, what they speak:
But of latter times here in England (though not so in other Countries, where
the Roman Catholic Religion (as themselves call it) only has use and force
here more then elsewhere,) They are lately tolerated by the authority of the
Church of Rome to have some few prayer books both in Latin and english, but
which of both they do most use, themselves do best know. And either they are so
full farced and stuffed with hymns, short versicles; some without conclusion
of sense, and in most, the sentences so shortly and suddenly set together,
the one leaping so close upon the back of the other, that hardly can they
remember, or scarce perceive what they say. Only they are made to believe,
that these ready, but raw repetitions may serve for Gods service, whereas the
understanding should be as well supplied as the affection, in performance of
true Religion.

Herein is their excess joined with defect: Excess of measure in heaping
many words not well weyed: Defect in the conception and knowledge of what they
do deliver:

Besides there is an exceeding great Error allowed and taught in putting them
not only to pronounce those prayers so peeced, which must needs be over
perfunctorily thus speeded: but some (nay many) I may say most of their prayers
are directed to the Saints as intercessors, whereof some were such as in their
liue^ were scarce holy but so esteemed, and yet were in a manner deified, only
because they adhered to the Pope of: Rome Namely (amongst others) Thomas Becket
sometime Archbishop of Canterbury, rebellious to his Sovereign, and so though
evil slain therefore Canonized: Prayers allowed by public authority printed
and practiced even in our times. As desiring God by the blood of this Becket to
make the poor seduced suppliant to ascend where Christ ascended. They making
in those common prayer books more prayers to the blessed Virgin Mary then to
our Savior himself. They calling on her to beseech God the Father: and to
command God her son by the right of a Mother: Which with many other most
gross superstitions, as well in their public, as in their private Devotions,
themselves cannot deny; or if they should, yet their books are extant and
their practices perspicuous, Their creeping and their bending and bowing of
their Bodies before the Images of some but supposed Saints. The adoring of the
Image of the Cross and crucifixe, with other, but said to be but hallowed
relics: what dishonor it has brought to the Christian Religion, and what
danger to themselves, although they will not acknowledge, and their learnedest
Teachers will seem to defend or to excuse: yet Intelligent and pious men who
are not seduced by Jesuits and Romish Priests, or so unhappy as to be bred up
in their Schools of superstition, may perceive though they will not confess;
That devotion without true understanding, turns soon unto superstition: That
feruor without Faith, and belief without knowledge, makes many men err
grossly, and offend most where they think they do best: Their books of
Meditation are in many parts good to stir Devotion, but in some places
patched with superstition. If this Cockle might be separated from their Corn
it would proouemore profitable.

For the Protestants profession and practice of Religion, whereof I profess to
be one. If most Protestants would be as fervent, and as frequent in their
Prayers, as many of the^ are intelligent in that they pray, they should more
shun sin, and shame the Romanists; who yet seem to shun them by being more
devout in that which they do less understand, and are far more frequent in
Prayer. And if there were more zeal joined with Conscience, it would much
adorn the profession, and make it most excellent as it is in deed, so would
it be in estimation and effect. But no profession can make men perfect: The
most perfection we have consists or is consummated in practice and action.
Peace and prosperity which should help, does yet hinder Devotion. It begets
Pride, and that ingenders presumption: Affliction gives instruction, gains
humility, guides the Conscience, and reformes evil living: Witness, nay, many
witnesses hereof, were the persecutions of the Primitive Church, when under
the Tyrannies and bloody Massacres of the Christians, by the Heathen Emperors,
Princes, and Magistrates: the Christians lives were shining lights of
sanctity: their patient and constant sufferings, causes of conversion to many
men, who before knew not God, nor what Godliness meant: Their sincerity and
singleness of heart set up Trophies for themselves, and made them Conquerors
over their cruellest and causeless Enemies. And I would I could not say in
mine own particular, for my poor sinful self, that when I enjoyed the
World as I did most wish, I was ever then worst. I would I could as well say,
that since Adversity came, I became better: yet if any thing work in me, or
in others, amendment, it must be Affliction, and some Adversity. Affliction
in mind for sin: and a touch of Adversity for the same. O therefore that so
I may do as now I say, and that others may do as I wish. My Prayers (I hope
by the heavenly assistancce) shall be, That yet in these times of Peace and
Prosperity, whilst our Protestant Religion (the best, because the truest) is
enjoyed and established, might by Gods permission, and all helping power in
these serene and and Sunshining days before there come more darkness and
danger, cast off carelessenes of planting Truth, supplanting Errors; practicing
of Piety, preserving the public peace and safety; reforming of things amiss
in the Church and Commonweal, which cannot be done withour more diligence and
vigilancie, courage, providence, and care; especially by setting the chief
watchmen in the Church and State more closely to their Stations, the one by
Doctrine, Discipline, and Diligence: the other by Counsel and Circu^spection
to prevent perils, and to procure the peace of this our Sion. And that this
may be performed, I conclude with the ensuing Prayer, that being the subject
of this small preceding Treatise.

A Prayer for the peace and prosperity of the Kings Majesty, his Dominions,
and Subjects.
MOst mighty, gracious, and merciful God who have made, do govern and
preserve the Heavens, the Earth, and all the Creatures therein contained: Be
merciful unto us most miserable and sinful creatures, who were ordained for
thy service, and yet do nothing more, or so much, as commit sins against thy
sup^came Majesty: We have from the highest to the lowest, been polluted with
original sins. Our great, our grievous, and our outcrying sins call unto
thee for our destruction and damnanation. But because thy Mercy is above all
thy other works, which yet exceed in greatness. We prostrate our selves
before thy Throne of grace; beseeching thee for thy Sons sake, and for thine
own goodness sake to save us poor sinners, who desire to do thee service,
though hitherto we have gone astray: and walked in the ways of wickedness:
Thou have planted thy glorious Gospel of truth here amongst us, we have
professed, but we have not practiced it as we should, yet because it is the
planting of thine own right hand: suffer not our sins to pluck up the same:
but rather supplant our sins and thereby strengthen our states and souls: To
this end (good and gracious God) look upon thy servant our Soueraign whom thou
have set over us: inlighten his royal heart with thy saving Graces of
knowledge, piety, counsel, care, providence, for preservation and advancement
of thy truth, and of the people that thou have committed to his charge. Give
him Zeal, fortitude, power, peace and protection against all that are Enemies
to true Religion, and to those Realms thou have appointed him to rule: Give
him a discerning heart to discover and shun all dangers, and all that be
dangerous to him and to his Dominions, unite his heart in love to his people,
and them in loyalty to him. O LORD, preserve thy people under him in peace:
Protect them from forrayne power, and both him and them from homebred
conspiracies, and all other mischievous machinations: Make the Prince, his
Magistrates and People zealous of thy service and glory, constant and careful
in keeping thy Commandments: courageous for defense of thy Truth, and their
Country: Conscionable and Charitable. That so they may be still thy faithful
servants and thou their merciful God: So shall thy glorious Gospel and the
light of thy Truth ever remain amongst us until the coming of thy Son
Christ Jesus: that thou may reign over us: and we remain with thee in
eternal Bliss. Amen. Amen. Good Lord.

A Prayer for our afflicted Brethren, the Protestants beyond the Seas:
MOst gracious and merciful Father, who use to chasten thy Children, and to
correct whom thou love, Have mercy on those that suffer for mainetenance of
thy truth: Their sins have deserved thy punishments, and yet we that have
sinned as much, if not more, have not suffered so much for our sins: Thou
have sent thy scourge to let them see their sins. Thou have not gone out with
their hosts, but have scattered them. O Lord yet heal and bind up their
bones which thou have broken: gather them together, and now thou have taught
the Princes, that their power is in vain without thy protection, and the
people that there is no confidence in the arm of flesh, give the^ yet
confidence in thy favor, patience in adversity, courage to fight for thy
Truth, comfort amidst their calamities: O Lord thou do permit thy people
Israel many times after thy long sufferings, and their great sins to be
overcome by the Iebusites, Amalachites and Philistims, The Arc was taken, and
they cried out, the glory of Israel was departed, yet thou did send help,
when there was no help nor hope in Man: O Lord thou have executed Justice and
Judgment, yet leave not thine to their oppressors, and when thou have dealt
with them according to thy mercy, teach them thy Statutes; that they may know
thy Testimonies. It is time (O Lord) for thee to work, for the persecutors of
the Truth have destroyed thy Law: The Kings of the earth band themselves, and
the Princes are assembled together against the Lord and his anointed. O yet
thou Lord of Hosts break their bands in sunder, and cast away their cords:
And though the waters rage and be troubled, yet let thy servants find and say;
the Lord of hosts is with them, and the God of Jacob is their refuge. And that
when thy servants, our persecuted brethren, have received comfort and
deliverance; they may rejoice in thy mercies, sing praises unto thee, and call
unto their neighbors, to behold the wonderful works thou have done for them,
to make it known unto the world. It is thou that make wars to cease: It is
thou that have broken the bow, cuttest the spear, and burnest the Chatiot in
sunder: So we pray for them and for one another: Beseeching thee to grant us
these requests. For thy Sons sake our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer to be used on the Sabbath Day.
O Lord God of infinite power and providence, who after thy ever to be admired
and praised work of creating this World, did ordain one day of seven to
be kept as a Sabbath; not only to be free from labor and travel, but to be
wholly dedicated and kept holy, for thy service in Prayers and praises, to be
offered unto thy Majesty, as an incense and oblation of thankful
acknowledgement of thy most great might and mercies; in creating this world and
ordayning man to govern all creatures therein contained: in conseruing all
these thy Creatures for his use, and him for thy service, in giving him light
of Knowledge and understanding, of thy Word and Commandment: and of the things
he should do, or leave undone. As we receive these thy blessings and
benefits, so specially on this day, which thou have selected for thy service. O
Lord settle us unto it, fit us for it, and grant grace not only unto us here
present, but to the public state, and to particular persons in other places:
not only to rest from labors on this day, but to shun sin, to communicate
with thy servants in thy service, to read thy Word, to hear it, where it is
preached; to come unto thy Congregations, and where thy word is not preached,
to use all the good means we may for maintenance and increase of knowledge
and of conscience; by praying, reading, meditating and conference. To this end
(good Lord) teach us to cast away, as all servile works, so sloth, evil and
idle company-keeping, profane speeches, with other evil actions and thoughts;
that may either draw us from our Christian duties, offend thy divine Majesty,
or give evil example unto others: Make our hearts and Consciences clean, our
co^ferences, words and works holy, and conversation upright and pure. So
beginning and continuing in thy service this day in such sort as thou
requirest, we may not only sanctify this, but all the rest of thy Sabbaths,
during the remain of our days here upon earth: until we come to that
Sabbath of Sabbaths, that eternal rest: rejoicing and praising of thy Holy and
Blessed Name in the highest Heavens: wherein grant us the assistance of thy
holy Spirit, and the aid of thy Son our Savior Christ Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer in the time of trouble and affliction.
O LORD our God: great are our sins, and heavy are our visitations: yet our
chastisments are nothing answerable to our corruption, we have sinned much and
thou have suffered us long, yet though our sins be as red as scarlet, thou
have said and we believe that thou will make them as white as snow. Our sins
do fester through our own Corruptions, cleanse them, (O thou the sovereign
and sole physician of our souls: Since thou art pleased to purge us with some
bitter pills that urge us to sweat and groan yet more for worldly matters then
for the offense of thy divine Majesty. Make us therefore first sensible of our
sins and sorrowful for them: And when thou have purged us, take away thy
punishments: Cure first our souls, then make our bodies and estates sound and
safe: Yet again and again bring us back to consider and see from whence all
our calamities do come, Deliver us (if it be thy blessed will from present
and ensuing dangers, or else grant us patience to undergo whatsoever thy good
pleasure shall be to lay upon us: Renew us and then restore us to thy wonted
favor, not for our merits but for the merits and mercies of thy beloved
Son, and our blessed Savior, Amen.

A Prayer when public Calamities approach or are doubted.
OOr sins (O Lord) have drawn upon us thy heavy displeasure and greater
punishments then yet we feel or fear, for we have multiplied our offenses,
and yet thou have held back thy punishing hand, we have not been allured by
thy merits though they be many, nor admonished by thy chastiseme^ts sent to
draw us unto conformity: But rather thy long suffering has made us more
secure, hard hearted and negligent: This has caused thee sometimes to send
signs of thy fearful wrath, as sickness, unseasonable weather, want of
means to maintain many who heretofore have lived well: Our brethren abroad
professing the same Religion suffer many heavy pressuers and are in much
peril, we at home though we have long enjoyed the liberty of exercising the
Religion we profess, yet our coldness and carelessenes in practicing
(besides our many other sins) has hindered the propagation of piety,
dishonored thy name, and endangered the truth: O Lord, yet at length, humble us
in the sight and sense of these our sins: Teach us to learn, consider and
remember, that for such, if not for less sins, thou did consume Sodom,
draw the deluge over the whole earth, and destroy, almost consume at an instant
all the Creatures of the World.

Yet neither these examples nor our own chastisements have prevailed to
persuade us unto true humiliation, repentance and amendment of life: But now of
late when thou have sent signs in the air, inundations of waters, pestilence,
poverty, decay of trades: and have found amongst us a decrease of desire to do
good: a desire to deceive, p^ide of heart, delicious and luxurious living,
perjury, and perfidious dealing, profanation of thy Name, Word and Sacraments:
So that there being little hope of better belief, or of better living when thy
sword of Justice is ready to be drawn, the light of truth in some danger to
be diminished; and we to receive such punishments as we most justly have
deserved: Yet consider we are the workmanship ordained for thy service: And
though the Axe should be put unto the tree, ready to out of our lives, estates
and saving knowledge, yet correct, but do not (for thy mercies sake) confound
us; reform but do not destroy us: Make us yet new creatures: O spare and
de^iuer us from the evil days to come: Thou desire not the death of
sinners, but rather Conversion, Let us yet live to honor thee whom we have
dishono^ed; Though long peace and much plenty has set us a^^eepe, and provoked
us to much pride and presumption, yet let us with Hezechiah, turning to the
wall and weeping, be repriued from that sentence which our sins have sent out
against us: and let us learn to serve thee and not Satan: So being preserved
by thy mercy we may yield Honor and praise to thy eternal Majesty.

A Prayer against the reigning sins that a man finds to remain in himself.
LOrd God, how senseless am I of mine own sins, that cannot see nor feel
those I daily and continually commit: Some are secret and concealed from my
self which I know not or cannot conceive. And those though less heinous, or at
the least, less understood, yet too heavy for me to bear, Other greater and
more grievous by me not acknowledged, or not repented: and amongst many more
that I pass over without any examination of my self or repentance for them:
Those cleave most to the corruptions of mine own nature, as pride, self
conceit, and other sins whereto I am most subject, etc. These press me
most, and others too much; yet pardon me (O Lord) pardon that is past, purge
me from them for time to come, cleanse the corruptions of my nature, cure the
Contagion that comes by evil company and the inticements of others, with whose
fashions, wits, faces or flatteries, we are seduced: And for mine own inward
concupiscense which easily sets it self on fire: O Lord quench it with the
cooling and comforting gifts of Grace, sobriety, temperance and
circumspection. Be thou (most gracious God) that good Samaritan, to pour into
my wounded soul the oil of thy mercy, that so these destroyers of my soul
being by thee destroyed, I may then surely say, O Death where is thy sting: O
Hell where is thy victory, and bless thee, who have blessed me with thine
abundant mercies: to whom be praises and glory for ever Amen.

A Prayer necessary to be used often
O LORD God most mighty merciful and just, who have created all things of
nothing only by thy power and word, who have preserved all that thou have made,
and do save all those that do faithfully call and trust on thee. We most
miserable and wretched sinners do confess unto thee against our selves to our
own shame and to thy glory, that we were borne and conceived in sin, that
we have lived and continued in sin: that our whole lives have been nothing
else but a heaping up of sin and iniquity against thy Holy and Heavenly
Majesty: That there is no sin in his own nature so heinous, or to thee so
displeasing but either we have committed or else we have a pronenesse to
commit the same. The sins of our youth; of our riper age and of our later,
even of these last time shave flowed one upon another, and have polluted our
souls, defiled our bodies, and displeased thy Majesty, so that there is
nothing due unto us, if thou should deal with us according to our deserts,
but death and destruction in this life, Hell and perdition in the life to come.
Whither then should we fly for succor and relief: If we go unto Man, his
breath is in his nostrils: that perishing he perishes: If we go unto Angels,
or to any power in Heaven, they have no power but what they receiue^ from thee;
We come therefore unto thee, whose mercy is above all thy works, beseeching
thee in the multitude of thy mercies to have compassion on us. And in that love
(which thou shewedst unto Mankind, in sending thy Son to suffer for us, and to
save us sinners, that thou would by his blood, death and suffering, wash away
our sins: And since thou have sent him to Redeem us, suffer us not to be
destroyed: O Lord GOD, grant us penitence and true repentance for our sins
past, watchfulness over all our ways for time to come, Care to keep thy
Comman dements, strength to withstand the temptations of Satan. Humility of
heart, patience in the times of trial and adversity: Constancy in calling
upon thee: Feruency in prayer, Faith in thy promises, Assurance of thy love:
Assistance in Temptations, Deliverance from dangers of soul and body, The
right and Sanctified use of thy creatures: Charity toward our neighbors: and
contentednes with our estates, To this end (gracious God) take from us all
those things that take us from thee, and give us those graces that may make us
to love thee, and declare us to be entirely beloved of thee. Take from us
hardness of heart, dullness and slownes, in coming to thy service, Neglect of
those Holy duties thou requirest us to do: Contempt of thy Commandments,
Misbeliefe, Unbelief, Despair and doubting of thy mercy: Distrust of thy
providence, Give us, above all things, Faith, stedfa^^ly to believe in thee,
fervor in thy service: faithfulness in maintenance of thy truth: courage to
lay down our lives for the continuance of thy glorious Gospel: thankfulness
for all thy unspeakable mercies: a love of those that serve thee in sin cerity
of heart, Liberality (according to our abilities) to those that are in
distress and danger for doing that they ought to do. And when thou have fitted
us for thy service, and furnished our hearts with thy good graces, then send us
the joy of thy Holy Spirit, a detestation of our former evil courses, delight
in keeping thy Laws, a desire to be dissolved in thy good appointed time, a
meditation of our frail lives, and a preparation for our uncertain deaths:
And now (O blessed Lord) we pray not for our selves alone here present, but
for thy despised, dispersed and distressed flock through the face of the earth:
It is a little flock. O Lord increase it: It is dispersed, O Lord gather the^
together into thy fold: It is despised and distressed. Lord succor defend and
support them: Let not the wild Boares destroy thy Vineyard; nor the fat Bulls
of Basan inuiro^ and ouerwhelme thy chosen ones, and those that love thy
truth: Thou have heretofore hedged thy Syon, Thou have mightily and
miraculously defended thy chosen Israel: Thy hand is not shortened thy power is
still the same: Let not therefore those that love not thy truth, or them that
love it, say; where is now their God. Be merciful to our soueraign, and to all
the Royal Progeny: Govern the Governors of this Land, Give them true
wisdom, sincere, vncorrupt, and courageous hearts: Innoble the true Nobility,
with Loyalty to their Prince and State, the leading of a good life, and the
longing for a better. Inspire the Clergy, with care and diligence to discharge
their duties in their several places: Make the Commons of this Kingdom more
just, more holy, more conscionable in their courses, more careful of the
common safety and prosperity of the public State: touch us all with a zeal of
thy feruice and truth, an inward reverence of thy most holy Majesty, a remorse
of our former irreligious life That so when we shall part from this place, we
may part from our sins, but not from sorrow for having committed them; but
may leave them and lead a better life, till we be brought from death to that
life where sorrow and sin reigns not, where death has no dominion, and where
complaints and controversies are not known, but have their end. This life,
good Lord, grant us to lead in thy fear, and in the end, to enjoy that
life, where joys do last for ever, by the mercies of thee our Lord and only
Savior, Amen.

A Prayer against Pride anger and Envy.
O LORD God who see and searchest the secrets of all men's hearts; Thou that
know how subject I am to Pride, Anger and Envy: My heart (good Lord) is
puffed up with pride, it swess with self conceit, vain glory and
ostentation: I take too much pride of those parts of my Body, as beauty,
strength and stature, and make my self believe they are much more fair and
fashionable then indeed they are. So am I efflated and blown up like a
bladder with conceit of mine own knowledge, wit, understanding and skill,
making them greater and more goodly unto my self then they are or can be;
These foul faults (gracious God) sometimes I find in my self, but nothing so
often as I commit them: And though now I confess it, yet I have no power of my
self to forsake this sin, by which our first Parents fell out of Paradise,
and we his sinful Progeny follow the same steps, and are ready thereby to
run headlong unto Hell. O yet (most merciful father) cleanse me from this
corruption, cure me and I shall be clean, grant me a lowly, penitent and
humble heart: Teach me to think worse of my self for my sins then of other
men whose faults I know not; that I may not think so well of my self to
contemn others: O teach me to learn meckenesse of thee my Savior, who in thy
humanity have led us to the way of humblenes and meekness both of thy
precepts and practice: Thou have said, learn of me for I am meek, O sweet
Savior, what precept could be sweeter, better or what Example could be more
Holy and perfect. If Lucifer an Angel of Heaven could not be safe but was cast
down from thence through pride and arrogance: How should I be safe whilst I
commit this sin so much, and so often here on earth: Purge me therefore O
God from Pride, and lead me by thy Heavenly hand unto Humility, and lowlines
of heart: Lord God how much am I overwhelmed with wrath and anger, how
suddenly incensed, upon how small and slender occasions am I moved by wrath to
use reproach, and to seek revenge, to forsake Charity, to seek others harm,
and to adventure mine own ruin; so that my mind cannot be peaceable and
quiet: Suddenly by anger, reason is disturbed, love and good will forsaken,
Faith broken, and fury drawing me almost to madness, by which I break the
bounds of Christian Charity, I beseech thee (good Lord) (who feast how much I
am subject to this finne) make me more patient and peaceable, suppress this
passion of anger in me, that I may pass by small offenses and may not be
suddenly provoked unto impatience: O Lord infuse into me moderation and
modesty, temperance and sobriety, by which, and especially by the assistance
of thy holy Spirit, I may be able to master anger and passion, the furies of
my mind, and the enemies of my Soul, And if anger at any time seize on me,
grant that it may be settled on the zeal of thy truth, and the service of thee
my God, for the suppressing of superstition, and the seeking to vindicate thine
honor against such as seek to dishonor thee by Atheism, profaneness and
impiety, yet so as I sin not by rashness or reuiling, but by making a
difference betwixt the persons and their peruersenes, reserving Charity to the
one, and laboring reformation of the other: take from me O Lord God, envy and
malice, suffer me not to fret at the prosperity of any, no not of the wicked
and impious persons whose bounds are set, beyond which they shall not be able
to go, much less let me envy them who walk in upright ways. But if through
offense or injuries I have been at any time provoked to proceed against them
yet let me not continue with them in contention through dislike or disgust to
wish them evil: But teach me by singleness and sincerity of heart to shun
the malicing of any man; that so showing mercy and meekness I may receive
mercy from thee that art the Lord of mercy: to whom be given Honor and glory
now and for ever Amen.

A Prayer of Thanksgiving after delivery from Sickness and Danger of Disease.
THou O Lord most mighty and merciful have sent sickness as a scourge for
sin, as a trial of our Faith, and testimony of thy favor, when it pleases
thee to restore health. Thou have visited me and brought me near the gates of
Death, yet have thou delivered me from danger, to the end I might publish thy
praise and lead a more godly life, Fear came upon me on every side, my flesh
and Spirit did faint, but thy holy hand did sustain me and help me up: What
praises (most gracious God) shall I render unto thee for thy protection and
preservation: But that I do as I am able. And, O Lord, enable me more to laud
thee, more to call upon thy name, and to show thy works unto the people, to
sing unto thee praises for this thy mercy in delivering me from the danger of
Death; And now that thou have restored me to health, O Lord, restore me to
thy favor: And as thou have given strength unto my body: so blessed God,
strengthen my Soul against Sin and Satan, that I may live to give thee
Glory; and during this fading life, I may be made faithful in keeping thy
Commandments, serving thee in sincerity of soul: and seeking thy glory both
now, and at all times, Amen.

A Prayer for the mainetenance of Peace.
O LORD God most mighty and gracious: Our sins are great and grievous, our
pride, malice and ambition, begets contentions, whence grows Wars and
Desolation: Bloodshedding and destruction: thou that art the Lord of Hosts,
see it is in the hands of Princes to make wars, but it is in thy power only
to end them, and to save thy people: Great are the gatherings and forces
already of armed men, ready to destroy one another, and great is like to be the
slaughter, Except thou most merciful God, be pleased to pacify the minds of
the Princes, and of the People, and to save them who otherwise will fall to
slaughter. Take yet (most gracious God) thine own Cause into thine own hand,
help thy people that professethy truth, lest they perish: Preserve them from
perils: Save, good Lord, such as serve thee in truth, and call upon thee in
sincerity of heart: Let not the Mighty ouerwhelme thy chosen Children, but
either let the Oppressors feel thy power, or make them to incline their
hearts unto peace, and so save the effusion of blood, and temper the hearts of
Christian Princes that they may come to the Knowledge of the truth, that Mercy
and Truth may meet together, that righteousness and peace may kiss each
other. So be it, good Lord.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Aug: Mathewes for Robert Swayne, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Sign of the Bible in Britains Burse.


