AN EXPOSITION OF THE LORDS PRAYER, IN the way of Catechism.

By William Perkins.

EDINBVRGH* PRINTED BY ROBERT Walde-graue Printer to the Kings (...) 1593.

TO THE RIGHT honorable, Edward, Lord Russell, Earl of Bedford, grace and
peace be multiplied.
RIGHT honorable, if you consider what is one of the chief ornaments of this
noble state, unto which God has advanced you: It will appear, that there is
none more excellent, then the spirit of grace and prayer. For what does your
heart affect? would you speak the languages? Behold, by prayer you may speak
the most heavenly tongue that ever was, even the language of Canaan. Would you
have the valor of knighthood? By prayer you may stand in the place where Gods
hand has made a breach, and do as much as all the Chariots and horsemen in a
kingdom. Would you enjoy Gods blessings which you want? By prayer, you may (as
it were) put your hand into the cofers of Gods treasures, and inriche your
self. Do you desire the favor of Monarks and Princes? By prayer you may come
in presence, and have speech with Iehoua the King of heaven and earth* Lastly,
would you know, whether now living, you be dead, that being dead you may live
for ever? By prayer a man may know, whether he be dead to sin, dead to the
world, live to God, live to Christ, and live eternally.

Prayer then, being so excellent a point of Religion: I am imboldened to
commend this small treatise your honor: not so much for itself, as because it
does set out the matter and true manner of invocation of Gods holy name. And I
hope for your favor in accepting of it: the rather, because I doubt not but
your desire is to be answerable to your most honorable, and for Religion, most
worthy ancestors, in the care of maintaining and countenancing any good thing,
that may any whit serve for the furthering of the gospel of Christ.

Now Jesus Christ our Lord, and God even the Father which has loved us and
given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace, stablish your
Honor in every good word and work to the end.

Your H. to command William Perkins.

AN EXPOSITION of the Lords prayer, in the way of Catechism.
By M. Perkins.
Matthew. 6. ver. 9. After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc.
THe occasion, and so also the coherence of these words with the former is
this. The Evangelist Matthew, setting down the Sermons and sayings of our
Savior Christ, keeps not this course, to propounde every thing as it was done
or spoken: but sometime he settes down that first, which was done last, and
that last which was done before: according as the spirit of God directed him.
Which thing is verified in these words; where the prayer is mentioned, yet the
occasion wherefore our Savior Christ taught his disciples to pray, is not here
specified. But in Saint Luke. 11. verse 1. the occasion of these words is
evident. For there it is said, that the disciples of our Savior, knowing that
John taught his disciples to pray, made request to their master that he would
do the same to them likewise.

These few words, set before the prayer are a commandment; and it prescribes
unto us two duties; the first, to pray, the second, to pray after the manner
following: Touching the first point, considering very few among the people
know how to pray aright, we must learn what it is to pray.

To make prayer, is to put up request to god, acording to his word from a
contrite heart in the name of Christ, with assurance to be hard.

For the better opening of these words, we are to consider six questions. The
first is, to whom we are to pray. The answer is to God alone: Romans 10. 14.
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed, etc. Mark how
invocation and faith are linked together; And Paul's reason may be framed thus.
In whom we put our affiance or belief, to him alone must we pray; but we
believe only in God: therefore we must only pray to him. As for Saints or
Angels, they are in no wise to be called upon: because not the least title of
Gods word prescribes us so to do: because they cannot hear our prayers, and
discern what are the thoughts and desires of our hearts: and because invocation
is a part of divine worship, and therefore peculiar to God alone.

The second question is, what kind of action prayer is? Answer: it is no
lip-labor, it is the putting up of a suit unto God, and this action is
peculiar to the very heart of a man. Romans 8. 26. The spirit makes request for
us: But how? with groans in the heart. Exodus 14. 15. The Lord said to Moses, Why
criest thou? Yet there is no mention made that Moses spoke any word at all: the
Lord no doubt, accepted the inward mourning and desire of his heart for a cry.

The third question is, what is the form or rule, according unto which we are
to pray. Answer. It is the reueiled will and word of God. A man in humbling his
soul before God, is not to pray as his affections carry him, and for what he
list* but all is to be done according to the express word. So as those things
which God has commanded us to ask, we are to ask, and those things which
he has not commanded us to ask, we are in no wise to pray for. 1. John. 5.
14. This is the assurance which we have of him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will he hears us. This then is a special clause to be
marked, that men must pray in knowledge, not in ignorance. Here weigh the case
of poor ignorant people: they talk much of praying for themselves and
others, they imagine that they pray very devoutly to God, but alas, they do
nothing les: because they know not what to ask acording to Gods will. They
therefore must learn Gods word, and pray according to the same; else it will
prove in the end, that all their praying was nothing but as mocking and flat
dishonoring of God.

The fourth question is, with what affection a man must pray. Answer. Prayer
must proceed from a broken and contrite heart. This is the sacrifice which God
accepts. Psalm. 51. verse. 17. When Ahab abased himself, though he did it in
hypocrisy, yet God had some respect unto it. 1. King. 21. verse 29. Says the
Lord to Eliah, see thou how Ahab is humbled before me? This contrition of
heart stands in two things. The first of them is a lively feeling of our own
sin, misery and wretched estate; how that we are compassed about with
inumerable enemies, even with the Devil and all his Angels, and within a
bound, even with huge seas of wants and rebellious corruptions, whereby we most
grieuouslie displease God, and are vile in our own eyes. Being therefore thus
beset on every side, we are to be touched with the sense of this our great
misery. And he that will pray aright, must put on the person, and the very
affection of a poor wretched beggar: and certainly not being grieved with the
rufull condition in which we are in our selves, it is not possible for us to
pray effectually. Psalm. 130. verse 1. Out of the deepes I called upon thee, O
Lord: that is, when I was in my greatest misery, and as it were, not far from
the gulfes of hell, then I cried to God. Isai. 26. 16. Lord, in trouble have
they visited thee: they powered out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them.
1. Sam. 1. 15 I am a woman (says Anna) of an hard spirit: that is, a troubled
soul, and have powered out my soul before the lord Hence it appears, that the
ordinary prayers of most me^ grievously displease God, seeing they are made for
fashion only, without any sense and feeling of their miseries: commonly men
come with the Pharisie, in ostentation of their integrity, and they take
great pains with their lips, but their hearts wa^der from the Lord. The
second thing required in a contrite heart, is a longing desire and hungring
after Gods graces and benefits, whereof we stand in need. It is not sufficient
for a man to buckle as it were, and to go crooked under his sins and
miseries; but also, he must have a desire to be eased of them, and to be
enriched with graces needful. Thus Hezekias the king, and the Prophet Isaiah
the Son of Amos prayed against Senacharib, and cried unto heaven, 2. Chron.
32. 20. Where we may see what a marvelous desire they had to obtain their
request. So also Romans 8. 26. The spirit makes request with groans* so great,
that they cannot be uttered, as they are felt. David, Psalm. 143. 6. says,
that he desires after the Lord, as the thirsty land. Now we know that the
ground partched with heat, opens it self in rifts and cranies, and gapes
toward heaven, as though it would devour the clouds for want of moisture,
and thus must the heart be disposed to Gods grace till it obtain it. The
people of Israel being in grievous affliction* How do they pray? They power out
their souls like water before the face of the Lord. Lam. 2. verse. 19.

The fifth question is, in whose name prayer must be made. Answer It must not be
made in the name of any creature, but only in the name and mediatio^ of
Christ. Ioh. 14. ver. 14. If ye ask any thing in my name, I will do it. A man
is not to present his prayers to God, in any worthiness of his own merits. For
what is he? to make the best of himself, what can he make of himself? by
nature he is no better the^ the very firebrand of hell, and of all Gods
creatures the most outrageous rebel to God, and therefore cannot be heard for
his own sake. As for Saints, they can be no mediators, seeing even they
themselves in heaven, are accepted of God not for themselves, but only for the
blessed merits of Christ. If any man sin (says S. John. 1. Epistle. chap.
2. verse 1.) We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ: But how proves
he this? It follows then, And he is the reconciliation for our sins. His
reason stands thus: he which must be an advocate, must first of all be a
reconciliation for us: no Saints can be a reconciliation for us: therefore no
Saints can be Advocates. Therefore, in this place is manifest an other fault of
ignorant people. They cry often, Lord help me, Lord have mercy upon me. But
in whose name pray they? poor souls like blind bayardes, they rush upon the
Lord; they know no mediator, in whose name they should present their prayers
unto him. Little do they consider with themselves, that God is as well a most
terrible Judge, as a merciful Father.

The sixth question is, whether says be requisite to prayer or not. Answer.
Prayer is to be made with faith, whereby a man may have a certain assurance to
be heard. For he that prays, must steadfastly believe that God in Christ will
grant his petition. This affiance being wanting, it makes prayer to be no
prayer. For how can be pray for any thing effectually, who doubts whether he
shall obtain it or not. Wherefore, it is an especial point of prayer, to be
persuaded, that God to whom prayer is made, not only can, but also will
grant his request. Mark 11. 24. Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray,
believe that ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you. Here we see
two things required in prayer; the first, a desire of the good things which
we want, the second is faith, whereby we believe that God will grant the things
desired. The ground of this faith, is reconciliation with God, and the
assurance thereof. For unless a man be in conscience, in some mesure
persuaded, that al his sins are pardoned, and that he stands reconciled to
God in Christ, he cannot believe any other promises revealed in the word, nor
that any of his prayers shall be heard.

Thus much of the definition of prayer; now let us see what use may be made of
this commandment, Pray ye thus. Seeing our Savior commands his Disciples,
and so even us also to pray to God; it is our duty, not only to present our
prayers to God, but also to do it cheerfully and earnestly. Romans 15. 30.
Also, brethren I beseech you that ye would strive with me by prayers to God
for me. What is the cause, why the Lord does often defer his blessings after our
prayers? No cause, but that he might stir us up to be more fervent, and more
earnestly to cry unto the Lord. Exodus 32. 10. When Moses prays to God in the
behalf of the Israelites, the lord answers, Let me alone, as though his
prayers did bind the Lord, and hinder him from executing his judgments.
Wherefore this is good advise, for all Christian men to continue and to be
zealous in prayer. If thou be an ignorant man, for shame learn to pray;
seeing it is Gods commandment, make conscience of it. We see that there is no
man unless he be desperately wicked, but will make some conscience of killing and
stealing: and why is this? because it is Gods commandment; Thou shall not kill,
thou shall not steal. Well then; this also is Gods commandment to pray. Let
this consideration breed in thee a conscience of this duty: and although thy
corrupt nature shall draw thee away from it, yet strive to the contrary, and
know it certainly, that the breach of this command, makes thee as well
guilty of damnation before God as any other. Furthermore, this must be a
motive to prick thee forward to this duty, that as God commandes us to pray,
so also he gives the spirit of prayer, whereby the commandment is made easy
unto us. If the Lord had commanded a thing impossible, then there had been some
cause of discourageme^t, but commanding a thing through the grace of his
spirit, very easy and profitable: how much more are we bound to the
obedience of the same? Again, prayer is the key whereby we open the treasures
of God, and pull down his mercies upon us. For as the preaching of the word,
serves to declare and to convey unto us Gods graces: so in prayer we come to
have a live lie feeling of the same in our hearts. And further, this must move
us to prayer, seeing in prayer we have familiarity with Gods Majesty. It is
an high favor for a man to be familiar with a Prince; how much more then, to
be familiar with the King of Kings, the mighty Jehovah? This then can be no
burden or trouble unto us, being one of the many prerogatives that God
bestows on his Church. For in the preaching of the word, it pleases God to
talk to us; and in prayer, God does vouchsafe us this honor, to speak, and
as it were, familiarly to talk with him, not as to a fearful Judge, but as to a
loving and merciful God. Consider also, that prayer is a worthy means of
defense, not only to us, but also to the Church, and them that are absent. By
it Moses stood in the breach, which Gods wrath had made into the pepill of
Israel, and stayed the same, Psalm. 106. ver. 23 by this Christian men fight,
as valiant champions, against their own corruptions and all other spiritual
enemies. Ephesians. 6. verse. 18. Infinite were it to show, how many blessings the
Lord has bestowed on his servant by prayer. In a word, Luther, whom it
pleased God to use as a worthy instrument for the restoring of the Gospel,
testifies of himself, that having this grace given him; to call upon the name
of the lord, he had more revealed unto him of Gods truth by prayer, then by
reding and study.

The second point of the commandment, is to pray after the manner following in
the Lords prayer. Where it is to be noted, that the Lords prayer is a
direction, and as it were, a sampler to teach us, how and in what manner we
ought to pray. None is to imagine that we are bound to use these words only
and none other. For the meaning of Christ is not to bind us to the words, but
to the matter and manner, and to the like affections in praying. If this were
not so, the prayers of Gods servants set down in the books of the old and new
Testament, should be al faulty, because they are not according to the words of
the Lords prayer. Also, by reason of this, diverse in our church, ignorantly
persuade them selves that it is unlawful to use the words as they are set
down for a prayer. First (say they) it is Scripture, and therefore not to be
used as a prayer. I answer, that the same thing may be the scripture of god,
and also the prayer of man; else the prayers of Moses, David and Paul, being
set down in the scriptures, cease to be prayers. Again (they say) that in
prayer we are to expres our wantes in particular, and the graces which we
desire: now in these words all things to be prayed for, are only in general
propounded. I answer, that the maine wants that are in any man, and the
principal graces of God to be destred, are set down in the petitions of this
prayer, in particular. Thirdly, they plead that the pattern to make al prayers
by, should not be used as a prayer. I answer, that therefore the rather it may
be used a^ a prayer; and sure it is, th^^ ancient and worthy divines have
reuere^ced it as a prayer; chosing rather to use these words then any other, as
Cyprianus sermon de orat. Dominic. And Tertullian lib. de fuga in
persequutione. And Augustine sermon 126. de te^pore. Wherefore, the opinion is
full of ignorance and error.

Well, whereas our Savior first gives a commandment to pray, and then after
gives a direction for the keeping of it, this he does to stiree up our
dulnes, and to allure us by all means to this heavenly exercise of prayer:
Wherefore still I say, employ your selves in prayer fervently, and continually;
and if you cannot do it, learn to pray. Thus much of the commandment of our
Savior Christ: now follow the words of the prayer.

Our Father which art etc.
THese words contain three parts, 1. a preface, 2. the prayer it self,
containing six petitions. 3. the testification of faith in the last word:
Amen. Which although it be short, yet it does not contain the smallest point
in the prayer: It is (I say) a testification of our faith, whereas the
petitions that go before, are only testifications of our desires. Now of these
three parts in order.

We must consider how our Savior Christ, does not set down the petitions
abruptly, but he first begins with a solemn preface. Whereby we are taught
this lesson; that he which is to pray unto God is first to prepare himself,
and not boldly without consideration, as it were, to rushe into the presence of
God. If a man be to come before an earthly Prince, he will order himself in
apparel, gesture, and words, that he may do all things in seemelines and
dutiful reverence: how much more are men to order themselves, when they are to
appear before the living God? Eccle. 5. 1. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let
not thine heart be hasty to utter a thing, before the Lord. And David Psalm. 26.
6. Washed his hands in innocence, before he came to the Altar of the Lord to
offer sacrifice.

The means whereby men may stir up their dull and heavy hea^^, and so prepare
themselves to prayer, are three. The first is, to read diligently the word of
God, concerning those matters, about which they are to pray; and what then?
this will be a means not only to direct him, but also to quicken the heart
more fervently to deliver his prayer. This is evident by a comparison. The
beams of the sun descending, heat not before they come to the earth, or some
solid body where they may reflect; and then by that means the earth and air
adjoining is made very hot: even so the Lord sends down unto us his blessed
Word, even as beams and the goodly sunshine, and thereby he speaks to our
hearts: now, when we make our prayers of that which we have read, Gods word is
as it were reflected, and our hearts are thereby warned with the comfortable
heat of Gods holy spirit, to power out our prayers to God more fervently. The
second means is to pray to God, that he would strengthen us with his spirit,
that we might be able to pray, as it is practiced. Psalm 143. 1. The third
means, is the consideration of Gods most glorious majesty; wherein we are to
remember, first, his fatherly goodness and kindenes, whereby he is willing, and
secondly his omnipotency, where by he is able to grant our requests One of
these emboldned the Lepar to pray. Lord* if thou will, thou can make me
clean. Mat. 8. 2. Therefore, both together are more effectual.

Now let us come to the preface it self, Our Father which art in heaven. It
contains a description of the true Iehoua, to whom we pray; and that by two
arguments, the first is drawn from a relation, Our Father: the second is taken
from the subject or place, Which art in heaven.

Father.
1. The meaning.
IN the opening of this word, or title of God, two questions are to be opened.

1. Quest. Whether by this title Father, is signified the whole Trinity, or
some one person thereof. Ans. Otherwhiles this name is attributed to all the
persons in Trinity, or any of them. Malac. 2. 10. Have we not all one Father,
etc. Luke 3. 38. Which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God. And
in Isai. 9. 6 christ is called the father of eternity because all that ar truly
knit to him and born a new by him, they are eternally made the sons of God.
Again, oftentimes it is given to the first person in trinity, as in those
places, where one person is conferred with another. And so in this place
principally for some special respects, this title agrees to the first person.
For first he is the father of Christ, as he is the eternal word of the
father, and that by nature, because he is of the same essence with him:
Secondly, he is father to Christ, in respect of his manhood, not by nature or
adoption, but by personal union, because the humane nature does subsist in
the person of the word. Thirdly, he is a father to all the faithful by
adoption in Christ.

2. Question. Whether we are to pray to the Son and holy Ghost as to the
Father. Ans. Invocation belonges to all the three persons in Trinity, and not
only to the father Act. 7. 59. Steven prays, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. 1.
These. 3. 2. Now God our father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, guide our journey
unto you. 2. Cor. 13. 13. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God,
and the communion of the holy Ghost be with you. Some say, this prayer is a
perfect platform of all prayers: and in it we are taught to direct our
prayers to the Father, not to the Son or holy spirit. I answer, the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost are three distinct persons, yet they are not to be
severed or divided; because they al subsist in one and the same Godhead or
divine nature. And further, in all outward actions, as in the creation and
preservation of the world, and the salvation of the elect, they are not severed
or divided, for they al work together only they are distinguished in the manner
of working. Now if they be not divided in nature or operation, then they are
not to be severed in worship. And in this place we direct our prayers to the
father because he is the first in order; yet so, as then we employ the Son and
holy Ghost. For we pray to the father in the name of the Son, by the
assistance of the holy Ghost. And to what person soever the prayer is
directed, we must always remember in mind and heart to include the rest.

2. The Use.
THe uses of this point are manifold.

1. First, whereas we are taught to com to God, as to a father, and therefore
in the name of his Son our Savior Christ, we learn to lay the first ground
of all our prayers, in the holding and maintaining of the union and distinction
of the three persons in Trinity. This being the lowest and the first
foundation of prayer, it is requisite that al which would pray aright, should
have this knowledge, rightly to believe of the Trinity, and to know how the
three persons agree, and how they are distinguished: and the order of them, how
the Father is the first, the Son the second, the holy Ghost the third: and
therefore, how the father is to be called upon in the name of the Son, by the
holy Ghost. Hence it is manifest, that ignorant and silly people which do not
so much as dream of the union, distinction and order of the persons in
Trinity, make but cold and slender kind of praying.

2. Secondly, we may learn hereby, that we are not in any wise to invoke
Saints and Angels, but only the true Iehoua. The reason stands thus. This
prayer is either a perfect platform for all prayers* or not: to say it were
not, were an injury to our Savior Christ: to say it is so, is also to grant,
that it does fully set down, to whom al prayers are to be made. Papists that
are the great patrons of invocation of Saints, in their reformed breuiaries and
missales deal very fo^dly: for, first they pray to Mary, that she would pray to
Christ for them; and when they have so done, like Iuglers they come to Christ,
and pray unto him that he would accept Mary's prayer for them.

3. Thirdly, we learn that there can be no intercessour between God and us,
but only Christ. For here we are taught to come to God not as to a Judge, but
as to a kind and loving Father. Now he is a father to us only by Christ: as
for Angels and Saints, and al creatures, they are not able to procure by any
means, that God should become a father, no not so much as to one man.

4. Again, if the God to whom we pray be a father, we must learn to acquaint
our selves with the promises which he has made in his word, to quicken our
hearts in prayer unto him. For this word Father, implies redines and willingness
in God to hear, and be merciful to our prayers. And a father cannot but must
needs make some promises of favor to those that be his children: and therefore
it cannot be, that he should call God truly his father, which has not in his
heart this assurance, that God will fulfill his promises unto him. Promises
made to prayer; these and such like are to be marked as follow. 2. Chron. 7.
14. If my people among whom my name is called upon, do humble themselves, and
pray, and seek my presence, and turn from their wicked ways, then I will
heave in heaven and be merciful to their sins. 2. Chron. 15. 2. The Lord is
with you while you be with him: and if ye seek him, he will be found of you.
Isai. 65. 24. Before they call, I will answer, and whiles they speak I will
hear. Mat. 7. 7. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek and ye shall find:
knock and it shall be opened. Luke 11. 13 If ye which are evil can give good
gifts unto your children how much more shall your heavenly father give the holy
ghost to them that desire him? Romans 10. 12. He that is Lord over all, is rich
unto all that call on him. Iam. 4. 8. Draw near unto God, and he will draw
near unto you.

5. If God be a father who is called upon, then prayer is the note of Gods
Child. S. Luke* and S. Paul set out the faithful servants of God by this note.
Act. 9 14. He has authority to bind all that call on thy name 1. Cor. 1. 2. To
them that are sanctified by Jesus Christ saints by calling, with all that call
on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And contrariwise, Psalm. 14. 4. It is
made one of the properties of an Atheist, Never to call on the name of God. And
such persons, as neither will, nor can, or use not heartily to pray to God, they
may say, that they are persuaded there is a God, but in their doings they bear
themselves as if there were no God.

6. He which would pray aright, must be like the prodigal child, that is, he
must not only confess his sin, saying, Father I have sinned against heaven
and against thee, etc. but also have a full purpose never after to offend his
Father. For how can a Child call him father, whom he cares not continually
to displease through his lewd conditions? He cannot do it; neither can any
Father delight in such a child: therefore, in prayer we must call to mind our
lewdnes and rebellions against our heavenly Father, and with the Publican, in
heuines of soul, say, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. He which can truly do
this, is a kind child. If we consider our selves as we are by nature, we are
the children of the devil: noe child so like his Father as we are like him,
and in this estate, we continually rebel against God; for the Devil has all the heart, our whole joy is to serve and please him. A man that is to pray must
think on this, and be heavy for it. And happy, yea a thousand times happy ar
they, who have grace given them to see this their state and to bewail it. And
further, it is not sufficient to confess our sins against our merciful
Father, but we must set down with our selves, never in such sort to offend
him again; and to lead a new life. This point is very profitable for these
times; For many there be, when any cross or sickness comes on them, they will
pray and promise repentance and all obedience to Gods word, if it shall please
God to deliver them: but this usually is but in hypocrisy; they dissemble with
God and men. For when their sickness is past like a dog that has been in the
water, they shake their ears, and run straight with all greediness to their
former sins. Is this to call God father? No; he that does this, shall not
have God to be his father; but the man that is wounded in his soul for his
offenses past, and carries a purpose in his heart never wittingly and
willingly to offend God again.

7. Lastly, here we are to observe, that he which would pray, must be endued
with the spirit of adoption: the works whereof in the matter of prayer are
twofold. The first to move him to cry and call on God as a father. It is no
easy thing to pray. For to a man of himself, it is as easy to move the
whole earth with his hand; how then comes it that we pray? It is a blessed
work of the spirit. Romans 8. 15. We have received the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry Abba, that is, Father, and Romans 8. 26. Likewise the spirit
helps our infirmities: for we know not what to pray as we ought: but the
spirit it self makes request. And. Zach. 12. 10. the holy Ghost is called the
spirit of grace and deprecations or prayers. Well then, the man that would
pray, must have Gods spirit to be his schoolmaster, to teach him to pray with
groans and sighs of the heart* for the words make not the prayer, but the
groans and desires of the heart; and a man prays for no more then he desires
with his heart, and he which desires nothing, prays not at all, but spends
liplabor. The second work of the spirit, is to assure us in our consciences,
that we are in the state of grace, reconciled to God. Romans 8. 16. The spirit of
adoption bears witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God. And
this inward certificate of the spirit in all exercises of invocation is very
necessary: for he which wants this assurance, if he be secure, and benumbed
in his sins, will not, and if he be touched in conscience for them, for his
life he dare not call God Father. Also, this confutes the opinion of the church
of Rome which teaches, that a man must doubt whether he be adopted or no. For
how can a man truly call God Father, when he doubts whether he be the child of
God or no. It is a miserable kind of praying, to call God Father, and to doubt
whether he be a father. Indeed it is true, that doubts will often rise, but it
is our duty to strive against them, and not to yield unto them. Yea, but (say
they) to be certain of Gods mercy is presumption. I answer, if it be
presumption, it is an holy presumption, because God has bidden us call him
father.

Our Father.
The meaning.
THus much of the argument of relation; now let us proceed. It is further
said, Our Father. Quest. Whether may it be lawful for us in prayer to say,
not our father, but my father? Ans. A Christian may in private prayer say, My
Father. This is warranted by the example of our Savior. Mat, 26. 39. O my
Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. And Mat. 27. 46. My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? The meaning of Christ is not to bind us
to these words, but to teach us that in our prayers we must not have regard
to our selves only, but also to our brethren: and therefore when we pray for
them in our private prayers as for our selves, we put in practice the true
meaning of these words.

2. The Uses.
1 When we pray, we must not make request only for our selves and our own
good, but for others also, as the Church and people of GOD, persuading our
selves, that we also are partakers of their prayers, and for the better
clearing of this point, let us search who they are for whom we are to pray. Of
men there be two sorts; some living, some dead. Of these two kinds, the
living are to be prayed for, and there is no praying for the dead. A man that
is dead knows what shall be his estate eternally: if he died a wicked person,
his state shall be according in eternal torments, if he died godly, then he
shall rest with God in his kingdom. Apoc. 14. 13. Blessed are they which die
in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.
Gal. 6. 10. While we have time let us do good to al men. Where we may note,
that there is a time, namely after death, when we cannot.

Again, of the living, some are our enemies, and some our friends* Our friends
are they which are of the same religion, affection, disposition. Foes are
either private or public: public foes, are either enemies to our country, as
tyrants, traitors, etc. or enemies to our religion, as Jews, Turks, Papists,
Infidels, Atheists. Now toward all these, how ought a man to behave himself
in prayer? Ans. He is to pray for them all. Mat. 5. 44. Pray for them which
hurt you and persecute you, 1. Tim. 2. 1. I exhort that prayers, intercessions,
etc. Be made for all men, for kings etc. Yet when Paul gave this commandment:
we read not that there were any Christian kings, but all Infidels. And the Jews
are commanded to pray for Babylon, where they were captive. Jeremy 29. 7. And
seek the prosperity of the City, whither I have caused you to be carried
captive, and pray unto the lord for it. Quest. How, and in what manner are we
to pray for our enemies? Ans. We are to pray against their sins, counsels,
enterprises, but not against their persons. Thus prayed David against
Achitophell. 2. Sa. 15. 31. Lord, I pray thee, bring the counsel of
Achitophell to foolishnes. And thus did the Apostles pray against their
persecuters. Act. 4. 29 O Lord, behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy
servants with all boldness to sp^ake thy word.

Question. David uses imprecations against his enemies, in which he prays
for their utter confusion, as Psalm. 59. and 109. etc. the like is done by Paul.
Gal. 5. 12. 2. Tim. 4. 14. And Peter Act. 8. 20. though afterward he
mitigates his exexcration. But how could they do it? Ans. 1. They were endued
with an extraordinary measure of Gods spirit; and hereby they were enabled to
discern of the estate of their enemies* and certainly to judge that their
wickedness and malice was incurable, and that they should never repent. And the
like prayers did the primative Church conceive against Iulia^ the Apostata,
because they perceived him to be a malicious and desperate enemy. 2. Secondly,
they were endued with a pure zeal against their enemies intending nothing else
but the glory of God. Now, for us it is good that we should suspect our zeal,
because sinister affections, as hatred, envy, emulation, desire of revenge,
will mingle themselves with our zeal.

Question. How far forth may we use those Psalms in which David uses
imprecations against his enemies? Ans. They are to be read and song with these
caueats. 1. We are to use those imprecations indefinitely against the enemies
of God and his Church: for we may persuade our selves, that always there be
some such obstinate enemies: but we must not apply them particularly. 2.
Secondly, we must use them (as Augustine says) as certain prophetical
sentences of the holy Ghost, pronouncing the last sentence of destruction, of
final and impenitent sinners, which oppose themselves against Gods kingdom
Thirdly; they may be used against our spiritual enemies the flesh, the devil
and his Angels, and the world

2. Furthermore, whereas we are taught to say, Our father; this serves to put us
in mind, that in praying to God, we must bring love to me^ with us. We must
all be as the children of one father, lovingly disposed one to another. For how
should he call God his father, who will not take the child of God for his
brother? Mat. 5. 23. When thou art to offer thie gift unto God, if thou have
ought against thie brother, first be reconciled, and then come and offer thy
gift. So also Esaias 1. 15. the Lord says, that when they pray unto him he
will not hear. Why? because their hands were full of blud. In these times many
men can be content formally to pray; but yet they will not leave bribing,
oppression, deceit, usury, etc. The common song of the world is, every man
for himself, and God for us all: this is the common love and care that men
have each to other. The prayers of such are abominable, even as the sacrifice
of a dog, as Esaias says, For how can they call God their Father, that have no
love to their brethren?

3. Thirdly, hence we may learn that God is no accepter of persons. For this
prayer is given to all men of what state or degree soever. All then, as well
poor as rich, unlearned as learned, subjectes as rulers, may say, Our father.
It is not with the Lord as it is with the world, but all are his Children that
do believe. The poor man has as good interest in Gods kingdom, and may call
God Father as well as the King.

Which art in heaven.
1. The meaning.
QVestion. How may God be said to be in heaven, seeing he is infinite, and
therefore must needs be every where? 1. King. 8. 27. The heavens of heavens
are not able to contain him. Answer. 1. God is said to be in heaven, because
his majesty, that is, his power, wisdom, justice, mercy, is made manifest
from thence unto us. Psalm 115. 3. Our God is in heaven and does whatsoever
he will. Psalm. 2. 4. He that dwells in heaven shall laugh them to scorn, and
the Lord shall have them in derision. Esaias says, 66. 2. Thus says the Lord:
Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. 2. After this life, he
will manifest the fulness of his glory there, to his Angels and Saints.

2. The Use
1. Hereby first we learn that Romish pilgrimages, whereby men went from place
to place to worship God, are vain and foolish. The God to whom we must pray
is in heaven: Now let men travel to what place or country they will, they
shall not come the nearer to heaven or nearer to God by traueling; seeing the
earth is in every part alike dista^t from heaven

2. Secondly, this overthrows popish Idolatry, as woorshipping of Crosses,
Crucifixes, Roods, etc. to put us in mind of God and Christ. We are taught to
lift up our eyes to heaven; seeing God is there: and how can we do this, as long
as our minds and eyes are poring upon an image made by man's art?

5. Again, we are here admonished to use the action of prayer with as great
reverence as possible may be. Well reasons Solomon: Eccle. 5. 1. Be not rash
with thy mouth to speak a word before God. Why? he is in heaven, thou art in
earth: therefore let thy words be few. This reverence must appear in holiness
of mind and affection and in all comlines of gesture. And for this cause, al
wandering bythoughts and all vain babbling is to be avoided. But how goes the
case with us, that on the times appointed come to the asse^blies to pray? Many,
by reason of their blindenes, pray without understanding. Many, when they are
present at prayer, yet have their hearts occupied about other matters, about
their goods and worldly business: such men have no joye or gladness in praying;
it is a burden to them. Many come to the assembly for custom only, or for fear
of punishment; if they might be left free, they could find in their hearts not
to pray at all. But let all such me^ know, that this manner of praiing is a
very greenous sin; nay, greater then mocking of father or mother, killing or
stealing; for it is directly against God, the other against men. This sin,
because it is against the first Table, and therefore, more hard to be
discerned, it is lightly esteemed, and it less troubles the consciences of
ignorant men: yet as it is indeed, so it is to be esteemed as a disgrace and
plain mockery of Gods majesty. Wherefore, seeing God is in heaven, away with all drowsy and dead praying, let us come with reverence in our hearts before
the Lord.

4. Again we are here to consider, that our hearts in prayer must mount up
into heaven, and there be present with the Lord. Psalm. 25. 1. Unto thee O Lord
lift I up my soul. The little child is never well, but when it is in the
fathers lap, or under the fathers wing: and the children of God are never in
better case, then when in affection and spirit, they can come into the presence
of their heavenly father, and by prayer, as it were, to creep into his bosom.

5. Lastly, this preface shows, that God is all sufficient, as in all other
things, so in granting our requests: God is willing to hear our prayers, in
that he is our father, and able to perform them, because he is in heaven and
therefore almighty.

Hallowed be thy name.
1. The coherence.
THus much of the preface: now follow the petitions. They be six in number: the
three first, concern God, and his glory: the other three concern our selves.
The three former petitions, are again divided into two parts: the first
concerns Gods glory it self, the other two, the means, whereby Gods glory
is manifested, and enlarged among men. For God his name is glorified among men,
when his kingdom does come, and his will is done.

Question. Why is this petition, Hallowed be thy name, set in the first place?
Answer. Because Gods glory must be preferred before all things: because it
is the end of all creatures, and of all the counsels of God. Prou. 16. 4. The
Lord has made all things for his own sake; yea, even the wicked for the day
of evil. And from the order of the petitions here arises a worthy
instruction; namely, that every one in all things they take in hand, are to
propound to themselves, and to intend the glory of God. The reason is this. The
end which God has appointed to all our doings, we are to propound to our
selves: but God has appointed that the highest end of all our doings should be
his glory: therefore, our hearts must be set to seek it first of all. That God
will have his name glorified by us, appears in this; that he punishes those
which of obstinacy, set themselves to dishonor him, or by negligence did not
sanctify him, when they should have done so. Herod sitting in his royalty,
made such an oration that the people cried, the voice of a God and not of a
man: and immediately the Angel of the lord smote him, because he gave not the
glory to God. Act. 12. 23. And Moses because he did not sanctify the Lord in
the presence of the children of Israel, therefore, he came not into the land of
promise; yet he did but fail in doing of it. Thus we may see by these
punishments, and also by the order of the petitions, that it is our duties to
prefer the glory of God before all things else.

Quest. Whether are we to prefer the glory of God before the salvation of our
souls? Answer. If the case stand thus, that Gods name must be dishonored, or
our souls condemned: we must account the glory of God more precious than the
salvation of our souls. This is manifest in the order of the petitions. The
petition that concerns Gods glory is first, and the petitions that concern
directly our salvation are the fifth and sixth. Where by we are taught, that
before God should want any part of his glory, we are to let soul and all go,
and let God have all his glory. This affection had Moses. Exodus 32. 32. When he
said, Either forgive them, or if thou vvilt not, blot my name out of thy book.

In this petition, as also in the rest, we must observe three things; the first
is; the mening of the words the second, the wants which men must learn to
bewail, the third, the graces of god, that are to be desired

2. The meaning.
Very few among the people can give the right meaning of the words of this
prayer. They pretend, that seeing God knows their good meaning, it is
sufficient for them to say the words and to mean well. But faith being one of
the grounds of prayer, and there being no faith without knowledge, neither can
there be prayer without knowledge, and therefore, ignorant men are to learn
the right meaning of the words.

Name.
Name in this place signifies:

1. God himself. 1. Kings. 5. 5. He shall build an house to my name. 2. His
attributes, as his justice, mercy, etc. 3. His works creatures and judgments.
4. His word.
For God is known to us by all these, as men are known by their names; and as
all a man's praise and glory lies in his name, so all the glory of God is in
these.

Hallowed.
To hallowe is to fever a thing from the common use to some proper and peculiar
end: as the temple was hallowed, that is, set apart to an holy use; and the
priests were sanctified, that is, set apart to the service of God. And all that
believe in Christ are sanctified, that is, set apart from sin to serve God. In
like manner, Gods name is hallowed, when it is put apart from al abuses to an
holy, reverent and honorable use, whether we think, speak, or use it any manner
of way.

Question. How can a sinful man hallow Gods name, which is pure and holy in it
self? Answer. We do not here pray that we might make Gods name holy; but that
we might be means to declare and make manifest to the world by the right
usage of it, that it is holy, and pure, and honorable. The like phrase is
used. Luke 7. 39. Wisdom is justified of her children; that is, acknowledged
and declared to be just.

The scope therefore of the first petition is an earnest desire that we might
set forth Gods glory, whatsoever become of us; and it may be expressed thus.
O Lord, open our eyes, that we may aright know thee, and acknowledge the
gretnes of thy power, wisdom, justice, and mercy, which appears in thy
titles, word, creatures, and judgments: and grant that when we use any of
these, we may therein glorify thee, and use them reverently to thy glory.

3 The wants which are to be bevvailed.
1 THe wants, which we in this place are taught to bewail, are especially
four. The first is, an inward and spiritual pride of our hearts: a sin that
none, or very few can see in themselves, unless the Lord open their eyes. When
our first parents were tempted in Paradise, the devil told them, they should
be as Gods: which lesson not only they, but we have learned: and we conceive
of our selves as little gods, though to the world we show it not. This hidden
pride, when other sins die, it begins to get strength and to show it self:
and it appears in vain thoughts, continually on every occasion ascending in
the mind. As may appear in the Pharisie, whose thoughts were these, when he
prayed thus within himself: O God, I thank thee that I am not as other men,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican, etc. And as this
was in him, so it is in us till God give grace: for so that men may have praise
and glory in the world, they care not for God his glory, though it be defaced.
We must therefore learn to discern this hidden corruption, and to mourn for
it: for it does poison and hinder al good desires of glorifying God, so long
as it may prevail in the heart.

2 Secondly, we are taught here to bewail the hardness of our hearts: whereby
we are hindered from knowing God aright, and from discerning the glory of God
in his creatures. Mark. 6. 52. The Disciples through the hardness of their
hearts could not see Gods power, in the miracle of feeding many thousands with
a few loves, though themselves were instruments of it, and the food did
increase in their hands. Our redemption, what a wonderful work is it, but how
few consider of it, or regard it? If we see a man have more wit, wealth, or
honor than we have, we straight wonder at him: but beholding Gods creatures,
we see nothing in them, because we do not go higher to acknowledge the love,
power, wisdom, and justice of the Creator. And this is the cause why Gods
name is so slenderly honored among men.

3 The third corruption, is our great ingratitude: for the Lord has made
heaven and earth, and all other creatures to serve m^n: yet he is the most
unthankful of al creatures. Bestow many jewels, or a kings ransom on a dead
man, he will never return any kindness; so men being dead in sin deal with
God. Commonly, men are like the swine, that run with their groines and eat up
the mast, but never look up to the tree from whence it falls. But the godly
are with David, to feel this want in themselves, and to beseech God to open,
and as it were, to unlock their lips, that they may endeavor to be thankful
to God. Psalm. 51. 15.

4 The fourth, is the ungodliness and the innumerable wantes that be in our
lives, and the sins committed in the world. Psalm. 119. 136 Mine eyes (says
David) gush out with rivers of waters, because men keep not thy laws. The
reason is, because he which lives in sin reproaches Gods name: even as an evil
child dishonors his father. Now some will say, that this cannot be, because our
sins cannot hurt God. A^. Yet they are a cause of slandring Gods name among
men: for as we honor him by our good works, so we dishonor him by our
offenses. Mat. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.

4 Graces to be desired.
1 The graces to be desired, and to be prayed for at Gods hand, are three. The
first is, the knowledge of God: that is, that we might know him, as he has
reueiled himself in his word, works and creatures. For how shall any glorify
God before he know him? Our knowledge in this life is imperfect. Exo. 23. Moses
may not see Gods face, but his hinder parts. 1. Cor. 13. 12. We may see God
as men do, through spectacles, in his word, sacraments and creatures. And
therefore, as Paul prayed for the Colossians, Col. 1. 10. that they might
increase in the knowledge of God, so are we taught to pray for our selves in
this petion.

2. A zeal for Gods glory. Psalm. 69. 9. The zeal of thine house has eaten
me up. Psalm. 45. 1. My heart shall utter, or cast up a good matter. I will
speak in my works of the king. Here the Spirit of God borrowes a comparison
from men thus. As he which has somewhat lying heavy in his stom^cke, is never
at quiet till he have cast it up: even so the care and desire to glorify Gods
name, must lie upon a man's heart as an heavy burden: and he is not to be at
ease and quiet with himself, till he be disburdened, in sounding forth Gods
praise. Luther says well, that this is sancta crapula: that is, an holy surfeit:
and it is no hurt, continually to have our hearts ouercharged thus.

3 A desire to lead a godly and sincere life, as before Gods Majesty. We see
men that are in some great calling under honorable personages, will so order
and behave themselves, as they may please and honor their masters: even so
must our lives be well ordered, and we are to labor to walk worthy of the
Lord (as Paul speaks) that we may honor our heavenly father:

Thy kingdom come.
1 The Coherence.
THis petition dependes on the former most excellently. For in it is laid
down the means to procure the first. Gods name must be hallowed among men:
but how is it done? by the erecting of Gods kingdom in the hearts of men. We
cannot glorify God until he rule in our hearts by his word and Spirit.

2 The meaning.
[ Thy] This word does put us in mind that there is two kingdoms: one Gods, and
that is the kingdom of heaven: the other the devils, called the kingdom of
darkness. Col. 1. 13. For when all had sinned in Adam, God laid this
punishment on all, that seeing they could not be content to obey their Creator,
they should be in bondage under Satan: So that by nature we are all the
children of wrath, and the devil holds up the scepter of his kingdom in the
hearts of men. This kingdom is spiritual, and the pillars of it are
ignorance, error, impiety, and all disobedience to God, in which the devil
wholly delights; which also are, as it were, the laws of his kingdom. Blind
ignorant people can not abide this doctrine, that the devil should rule in
their hearts: they spit at the naming of him, and say that they defy him with
all their hearts: but whereas they live in sin, and practice it as occasion
is offered, though they can not discern of themselves, yet they make plain
proof, that they line in the kingdom of sin and darkness, and are stat
vessels of Satan, and shall so continue, till Christ the strong man come and
bind him, and cast him out. And this is the estate of all the children of Adam
in themselves. Wherefore, our savior in this petition, teaches us to consider
our natural estate, and to pray that he would give us his Spirit, to set us at
liberty in the kingdom of his own Son.

[ Kingdome] Gods kingdom in scriptures, is taken two ways. First generally,
and so it signifies that administration, by which the Lord governs all
things, yea, even the deuilles themselves, of which kingdom mention is made
in the end of this prayer, and in Psalm. 97. verse. 1. The Lord reigns, let
the earth rejoice. Again, it is taken more specially, and then it signifies
the administration of Christ, the head of the Church, in which he frames men
by his word and Spirit, to the subjection of the same word. And so it is
taken in this petition.

In a kingdom there are four things to be noted. 1. There must be a king. 2
There must be subjects. 3 There are laws. 4 Authority.

In this kingdom, Christ is the king, it is he to whom the father has given
all authority in heaven and earth.

In this kingdom, al are not subjects, but such as ar willing to give free and
frank obedience to Gods word; or at the least, though their hearts be not
sound, make an outward profession of it.

The laws of this kingdom, is the word of God, in the books of the old and
new Testament. Therefore it is called the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 13. The
Gospel of the kingdom. Mar. 1. 13. The rod of his mouth. Isai. 11. 4 The arm
of God. Isai. 53. 1. As a King by his laws bringes his people in order, and
keeps them in subjection: so Christ by his word, and the preaching of it, as it
were by a mighty arm, draws the elect into his kingdom, and fashions them
to all holy obedience.

The power and authority is, that whereby Christ conuerts effectually those
which are to be converted, and glorifies himself in the confusion of the rest.

The kingdom being taken thus specially is also twofold. The first, is the
kingdom of grace, of which mention is made, Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of God
stands not in meat and drink but in righteousness, that is, the assurance of our
justification before God, in the righteousness of Christ: Peace of conscience,
which proceeds from this assurance; and joy in the holy Ghost, which comes
from them both. In this kingdom all men live not, but only those that are
subject to Christ, obedient to the laws of his kingdom, and ruled by his
authority, and are continually taught in his word by his spirit. But those
that refuse to live according unto the laws of this king, and choose to live
at their own liberty, are in the kingdom of darkness, sin and Satan.

The second is the kingdom of glory in heaven, which is the blessed estate of
al Gods people there, when God shall be al in all in them. And the former kingdom
of grace is an entrance and preparation to the kingdom of glory.

[ Come] Gods kingdom comes, when it is established and confirmed in men's
hearts, and made manifest to all people, the impediments being removed.
Question. This coming implies a stopping but how should Gods kingdom, be
hindered? Answer. Kingdom in this place is not taken for the power of God,
whereby he rules all things, for that cannot be hindered: but for the kingdom
of grace, which in the using of the outward means, as ministers, word, and
sacraments may be hindered by the devil, the world, and man's corruption.

3 The wants which are to be bewailed.
THe wantes which we in this petition are taught to mourn for, are of two
sorts: some concern our own selves: some, others. That which concerns our own
persons, is a bondage and slavery under sin and Satan. This bondage indeed
is weakened in Gods servants, but none is wholly freed from it in this life.
Paul complains, that he is sold under sin, and cries pitifully. O
miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Question. What difference then between the godly and the wicked? Answer The
evil and ungodly man, in the very midst of his bondage has a merry heart,
sin is no trouble to him, nay, it is meat and drink to him. But the godly
man is otherwise minded. For, considering the power of the devil, and his
craft in manifold fearful temptations, and seeing the prooffes of his
rebellious nature, ever and anon to start away from God, he is grieved and
confounded in himself, and his heart bleedes within him, that he does offend
so merciful a Father.

Many men live in this world and that many years, and yet never feel this
bondage under Satan and sin. Such undoubtedly cannot tell what the Lords
prayer means; But he that would have the right use of this petition must be
acquainted with it, and be touched in his conscience, for that the flesh and
the devil bear such sway in him: As the poor captive is always creeping to
the prison door, always laboring to get off his bolts and fetters, and to
escape out of prison, so must we always cry to the Lord for his Spirit, to
free us out of this bondage and prison of sin and corruption, and every day
come nearer the prison door, looking when our blessed Savior will unbind us
of all the fetters of sin and Satan, and fully erect his kingdom in us.

2. The wantes which concern others, are twofold. The former is the want of
the good means, which serve for the furthering of the kingdom of Christ, as
preaching, sacraments and discipline. When we shall see a people without
knowledge, and without good guides, and teachers, and when we see one stand up
in the congregation not able to teach, here is matter for mourning: This
petition puts us in mind to bewail these wantes. Our Savior, when he saw
the Jews, as sheep without a shepherd, he had compassion on them, and he
wept over Jerusalem, because they knew not the things which belonged to their
peace. Luke 9. 11. Therefore, when preachers want, to hold up the scepter of
God before the people, and to hold out the word, which is, as it were, the arm
of God, to pull men from the bondage of the devil to the kingdom of Christ:
Then it is time to say, Lord, let thy kingdom come.

3. The third want which we are to bewail, is, that there be so many
impediments, and hindrances of the kingdom of grace, as the devil and al his
Angels, their instruments, the Pope, the Turk, and all the rest of the
professed wicked of the world, which by subtle intisements and tyranny, keep
back and repel the means, whereby Christ ruled as a king in his Church. When
the devil sees one that was sometime of his kingdom, but to cast a look
toward the heavenly Jerusalem, he straightway regeth against him, and labors
quite to overthrow him. Wherefore, in regard of al these impediments, we must
pray, thy kingdom come.

4. Graces to be desired.
1. IN this petition we are taught first, that we are to have a fervent desire,
and to hunger, that God of his mercy would give us his Spirit to reign and
rule in our hearts, and to bow them to all obedience and subjection of his
will, and further, whereas our hearts have been, as it were, filthy sties and
stables of the devil, that he would renew them, and make of them sit temples,
to entertain his own spirit. Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me a clean heart, O
God, and renew a right Spirit in me, etc. Stablish me with thy free Spirit. If
we shall consider the conversation of the wicked and the Godly and their
corrupt hearts together, we shall see little difference, but in this, that the
wicked is delighted and glad to sin, but the godly do wrestle, as for life
and death, with their temptations, and do resist the devil, and do desire, and
cry to heaven, to be freed from his bondage, howsoever their hearts are
always rebelling against God.

2 Forasmuch as the kingdom of grace is erected in Gods church here upon
earth: here in this petition we are commanded to pray for the church of God
and the parts thereof. Psalm. 122. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall
prosper that love thee. Esa. 62. 7. Ye which are the Lord his remembrancers,
give him no rest, until he set up Jerusalem the praise of the world.

And that Gods Church may flourish and be in good estate, we are to pray for
Christian Kings and princes, that God would bless the^, and increase the
number of them. For they are as nursing fathers, and nursing mothers to the
Church. And we especially are bound to pray for the Queens most excellent
Majesty, as also for the French King, that they may be blessed, and Gods
kingdom by them advanced.

And again, because Ministers are the Lords watchmen, in the Church, we are
also here put in mind to seek their good, and to pray that their hearts may be
set for the building of Gods kingdom, for the beating down of the kingdom of
sin and Satan, and for the saving of the souls of his people. And the rather,
because the devil labors night and day, to overthrow them in this glorious
work, and to resist them in their ministry: as appears in Zach. 3 1. When
Joshua the high Priest stood before the Angel of the lord Satan stood at his
right hand, namely, to resist him. Therefore, also we are to pray for them, that
the Lord would keep them, and furnish the^ with gifts, and withal, make them
faithful, for, Where vision fails, the people are left naked, says Solomon.
2. These. 3. 1. Brethren pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have a free
passage, and be glorified.

Thirdly, we must pray for all Christian Schools of learning. Howsoever some
think but basely of them, yet they are the ordinary means to maintain the
ministry, and so the Church of God. A man that has diverse Orchards, will also
have a feminarie full of young plants to maintain it. Schools they are as
feminaries to God his Church, without which the church falls to decay: because
they serve to make supply of Ministers.

3 Thirdly, we are to desire, that the Lord would hasten the second coming of
Christ, as the Saints in heaven pray, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: and
therefore, the godly are said to love the coming of Christ. 2. Tim. 4. 8. A
penitent sinner so abhors his own corruptions, and the yrkesome temptations of
Satan, that in this respect he desires that Christ would hasten his particular
coming to him by death, for no other cause, but that he might make an end of
sinning and displeasing God.

Thy will be done.
1 Coherence.
IN the second petition, we desired that God would let his kingdom come, vz.
that he would rule in our hearts. If he then must reign we must be his subjects:
and therefore, here we crave, that being his subjects, we may obey him, and do
his will. Mal. 1. 6. If I be a Father, where is mine honor? If I be a master,
where is my fear?

2. The meaning.
VVIL] Will here signifies Gods word, written in the old and new Testament.
For in his word his will is revealed. Of the whole will of God, there be three
special points, which are in this place meant. 1. To believe in Christ. John.
6. 40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one that sees the
Son, and believes in him, should have life everlasting. 2. Sanctification of
body and soul. 1. These 4. 3. This is the will of God, even your
sanctification, etc. 3. The bearing of affliction in this life. Romans 8. 29
Those which he knew before, he did predestinat, to be made like to the image of
his own son. Phil. 3. 10. That I might know him and the virtue of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his afflictions, and be made conformable to
his death.

[ Thy will] not mine: For man's own will is wicked and corrupt; yea, it is
flat enmity to God Romans 8. 5.

[ Done] That is, obeyed and accomplished of men. Then, the effect of the
prayer is this; As we would have thee our king: so Lord, teach us to obey thy
holy will.

3 The wants to be prayed against.
1 HEre first, we are to bewail this, that our hearts are so prone to
ungodliness, and disobedience to Gods commandments. Put a match to an heap of
gunpowder, on a sudden it will be all on a flame, and as long as we add matter
to the fire, it burns: So by nature, we are most ready to sin so soon as the
least occasion is given. David had experience of this, when he prayed, Knit my
heart to thee, O Lord, etc. Psalm. 86. 11. and incline mine heart to thy
commandments. Psalm. 119. 37. Those which find not this want in themselves, and
the like affection to bewail it, are in a miserable and dangerous case: even
as a man that has a great disease upon him, and knows not of it.

2 Again, we must here bewail the sins of the world, as ignorance,
heresies, schisms, hypocrisy, pride, ambition, contempt of Gods word,
covetousness, oppression, want of love of God and his word, etc. 2. Pet. 2. 7.
Lot was vexed, and his righteous heart was grieved, with the unclean
conversation of the Sodomits from day to day: so ought our souls to be vexed
and grieved continually, at the wickedness of our time: and further, in this
grief we are to send up our prayers to God for them, that they may be brought
to the obedience of Gods will, Ezech. 9. 4. In a common judgment upon
Jerusalem, they are marked in the forehead* that mourn and cry for all the
abominations that be done in the midst of it.

3 Here also we must humble our selves for our unquietness of mind, and
great impatience, when God lays any cross upon us. It is Gods will, that we
should suffer affliction. Our Savior prayed, that the cup might be taken away,
but with submission to his fathers will, Luke. 22. 42. And this David had
learned, when he said, But if he thus say, Behold, I have no delight in thee,
behold, here I am, let him do to me, as seems good in his eyes. 2. Sam. 15.
26

4 Graces to be desired.
1 THe first thing which we are here to desire, is, that we may have grace to
deny our selves, wills, and affections: because herein we are unlike to God,
and like the Devil. This is the first lesson that our Savior does give his
Disciples, that they must deny themselves, and follow him.

2 The second thing, is the knowledge of Gods will: for otherwise, how shall we
do it? How shall that servant please his master, which cannot tell what he
would have done of him? Most men will have books of statutes in their houses,
and if they be to deal in any great matter, they will do nothing until they
have looked on the Statute. In like manner, men must have the Bible, that is,
the book of Gods statutes in their houses; the laws of God must be the men
of our counsel: Before every action, we are to search what is the will of
God, and then to do it. Here the^ we are taught to use the means, and to
pray for knowledge.

3 Again, we are here taught to have a desire in our hearts, and an endeavor
in our lives in all things to do obedience to Gods word.

4 Lastly, we desire patience and strength, when it shall please God at any
time to exercise us with the cross, as Paul prays for the Colossians, that
God would strengthen them by the power of his might, unto all patience and long
suffering with joy fullness.

5. Error confuted.
THe Church of Rome teaches, that men by nature have free will to good: and
that men, being stirred up by the holy ghost, can of themselves will that which
is good. But if this were so, why might we not pray, Let my will be done? So
far forth as the will of man shall agree with Gods will: but this cannot be,
as we see in the tenor of this petition.

In earth as it is in heaven.
1 The meaning.
Having showed the meaning of this petition, thy will be done, Now we are to
speak of the condition, which is, in what manner we should do it. For the
question may be, how we should do Gods will: the answer is, his will must be
done in earth as it is in heaven.

Heauen] By heaven here is meant the souls of faithful men departed, and the
elect Angels. Psalm. 103 20. Praise the Lord ye his Angels, that excel in
strength, that do his commandments, in obeying the voice of his word.

Earth] By earth is understood nothing but men on earth, because all other
creatures in their kind obey God: only man, he is rebellious and disobedient.
Then the meaning is, Let thy will be done by us men on earth, as the Angels and
saints departed, do thy will in heaven.

Qu. Do we here desire to do the will of God in that perfection it is done by
angels? must we be as perfect as they? Ans. the words here used ( in earth as
it, etc.) do not signify an equality, as though our obedience should in this
life be in the same degree of perfection with with Angels; but a similitude or
the like manner of obeying; it may be said, in what manner do the Angels obey
God? Answer. They do the will of God willingly, speedily, and faithfully; and
this is signified, in that they are said in the scriptures to be winged, and
to stand continually beholding the face of our heavenly Father. And this is the
manner in which we desire to perform Gods will.

2. The wants to be bewailed.
WE are here admonished to be displeased with our selves, for our imperfect
obedience to God, and for our hypocrisy, privy pride, presumption, deadnes of
spirit* and many other wants which break out, when we are in doing Gods will.
There is no servant of God, but has wants in his best works, so we must
understand, Paul. To. 7. 18. he says as much, as if he culd begin a good
thing, but not perfect it, and go through stitch, as we say. When the godly do
good works, as hear, speak Gods word, pray, praise God, etc. they perform
things acceptable to God: but in these actions, they find matter of mourning;
namely; the imperfection of the work, therefore, David prays. Psalm. 143. 2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, and here we may see, how far wide
the Church of Rome is, that holds good works to be any way meritorious, that be
every way imperfect. If the me^ of that church had grace, they might see that
the corruptions of the flesh were as gynes and fetters about their legs, that
when they would feign run the ways of Gods comma^dements, they are
constrained to halt down right, and to trail their loins after them.

3 Grace to be desired.
THE grace here to be desired, is synceritie of heart in doing Gods will, so as
we may keep a good conscience before God and men. Act. 24. 16. And for this
cause I endeavored always to have a clear conscience toward God, and toward
men. This must we hunger after, and pray for: seeing it is not sufficient to
abstain from evil, but also to do good, and in doing good, strive to come to
perfection.

Give us this day our daily bread.
1 The Coherence.
THus much of the three first petitions, which concern God: now follow the
other three, which concern our selves; In which order we learn to pray for
those things, which concern God absolutely, and for those things, which
concern our selves, not absolutely; but so far forth as they shall make for
God his glory, the building of his kingdom, and the doing of his will. But how
dependes this petition on the former? In the first we are taught to pray, that
Gods name might be hallowed: which is done, when God raigns in our hearts, and
his will is done. Now further, his will is obeyed in three things: first, by
depending on his providence for the things of this life: secondly, by
depending on his mercy, for the pardon of sin: thirdly, by depending on his
power and might, in resisting temptations. And thus Gods will is obeyed.

2 The meaning.
BRead] By this one means of sustayning our bodies, and temporary lives, all
other means are understood: as meat, drink, clothing, health, liberty, peace,
etc. Gen 3. 19. Thou shall eat thy bread, vz. get thy living, in the sweat of
thy brows.

Out of this we learn 2. instructions; for why does the Lord teach us to crave
only bread, and not meat and other dainties? It is for 2. causes: the first
is, that we might hereby learn frugalitie and moderation in our diet, apparel,
houses, and be content if we have no more but bread, seeing we desire no
more. We must not with the Israelites murmur because they had nothing but Manna.

Quest. Must we use Gods creatures only for necessity? Ans. we may use them
not only for necessity, but also for honest delight and pleasure. Psalm. 104.
15. God gives wine to make glad the heart of man: and oil to make his face
shine. And John 12. 3. Our Savior Christ allowed of the fact of Mary, which
took a pound of ointment of spikenard very costly, and anointed his very
feet, so that all the house was filled with the smell; though Judas did
esteem it wast. But yet if the Lord shall grant but bread, that is, so much
as shall but hold body and soul together, we must be content therewith. 1.
Tim. 6. ver. 8. Therefore, when we hauue food and raiment, let us be
therewith content. This contentation was in Jacob. Gene. 28. 20.

A second cause is, to teach us that there is a particular providence. All men
confess that there is a general providence of God over all things, but here
we must acknowledge an other more special, even in the least things that be:
because every morsel of bread which we eat, would no more nourish us, then a
piece of earth, or a stone, unless God gave his blessing unto it.

[ Daily] The word in the original is thus much in effect, Bread unto our
essence or substances: then the meaning is; Give us such bread from day to day,
as may nourishe our substances. Thus prays Agur Prou. 30. 8. Feed me with
food convenient for me. Some there are which put an Angelical perfection in
fasting: But we are taught in Scriptures, that as above all things, we are to
seek for life eternal, so we must in this life, sustain and maintain our
natural bodies, so long as we live in this world. Fasting in it self, as it
is abstinence, is no part of Gods worship; but in it own nature a thing
indifferent: and therefore, it is to be used so far forth, as it shall
further us in prayer, and no further. For seeing we are taught to pray for such
food as shall preserve nature, and maintain the vital blood, we must not use
fasting to the hindrance or destruction of nature.

[ Our bread.] 1. Question. How is bread ours? 1. Corinthians. 3. 22. Ye are
Christ's, and all things ar yours. So then, by means of Christ, bread is
called ours. For God having given Christ to us, does in him and by him, give
all things else to us. 2. Question. How may I know that the things I enjoy,
are mine by Christ, and that I do not usurp them? Answer. 1. Tim. 4. 4.
Paul says, that the creatures of God are good, and that the use of them is
sanctified to us, by the word and prayer. Then, if we have the word of God, to
tell us that we may enjoy and use them: and also, if we pray to God for the
right and pure use of them, we are no usurpers, but indeed right owners of
them. 3. Question. If the creatures must be made ours by Christ, how comes it
to pass, that the ungodly have such abundance of them? Answer. We lost the
title and interest of the creatures in Adam: yet God of his mercy bestows
temporary blessings upon the unjust as well as upon the just: but for all that,
unless they be in Christ, and hold the title of them by him, they shall in the
end, turn to their great conde^natio^

And whereas we call it, our bread, we learn, that every man must live of his
own calling, and his own goods. Here also is condemned all oppression,
stealing, lying, cogging, and other such deceitful means to get wealth and
goods. Many think it no sin to provide for their family in such order, but
in saying this petition* they pray against themselves. 2. These. 3. 10. He
which labors not, let him not eat. Ephesians. 4. 28. He which stole let him
steal no more, but rather labor with his hands the thing that good is.

[ This day] We say not here this week, this month, this age, but this day,
what means this? may ye not provide for the time to come? Answer. It is
lawful, yea, a man is bound in good manner to provide for time to come. Act.
11. 28. The Apostles provide for the Church in Iudaea, against the time of
dearth, spoken of by Agabus. And Joseph in Egypt, in the years of plenty,
stored up against the years of famine. Wherefore, in these words, our Savior
his meaning, is only to co^demn al distrust full care, and to teach us to rest
on his fatherly goodness from day to day, in every season: this is noted unto
us, Numb. 11. where the Israelits were commanded to gather no more Manna, than
would serve for one day, and if they did, it putrified. Whereby God taught them,
to rest on his providence every particular day, and not on the means.

[ Give vs] Not me. This serves to teach us, that a man must not only
regard himself, but also be mindful of others. For a man that has wealth, is
made a steward, to distribute his goods to the poor, and the good of Gods
Church. True love seeks not her own things: the branches of the vine are
loaded with clusters of grapes, not for themselves, but for others: the candle
spends it self to give others light.

[ Giue] If bread be ours, wherefore are we to ask it? It may seem needles.
Answer. Not so, for hereby we are taught very worthy lessons. 1. First, those
that are in poverty, are taught to wait on God, who is the fountain and giver
of al blessings* Men usually driven to this estate, use evil means, as
robbing, deceiving, consulting with wisards, etc. 2. Again, here we learn,
that though a man had all the wealth in the world, all is nothing without Gods
blessing.

Quest. The rich need not say, Give ^s, etc. for they have abundance already,
and what need they ask that which they have? Answer. Let a man be never so
rich, and want nothing that can be desired, yet if he want Gods blessing, in
effect he wants al. Wherefore, even kings, and the greatest personages that be,
are as much bound to use this petition, as the poorest. Gods blessing is
riches, says Solomon. Pro. 10 22. Thou may eat, and not have enough, be
clothed and not warm, earne wages, and put it in a broken bag. Hag. 1. 6. If
God do not bless thee. This blessing of God, is called the staff of bread.
Esaias. 3. 1 In bread there be two things, the substance, and the virtue from
Gods blessing: this second, that is, the power of nourishing, is the staff of
bread. For take away from an aged man his staff, and he falls: and so take
away Gods blessing from bread, it becomes unprofitable, and cease to nourish.
Lastly, here we see, that all labor and toil taken in any kind of calling,
is nothing, and auailes not, unless God still give his blessing. Psalm. 127. 1.

3. The wants to be bewailed.
Our corruptions against this petition, are two especially. I Covetousness, a
vice which is naturally ingraffed in every man's heart; it is, when a man is not
content with his present estate. This desire is insatiable, for men would be
ever having of more. Wherefore he which shall use this petition, must be
grieved for this sin, and pray with David. Psalm. 119. 36. Incline my heart
to thy commandments, and not to covetousness. And he must sorrow, not so
much for the act of this sin, as for the corruption of nature in this
behalf. Covetous people will plead, that they are free from this vice, but
mark men's lives, and we shall see that this is a common disease, in the most,
as it is noted. Psalm. 4. 6. Who will show us any good? This then is a common
sin that we are taught to mourn for.

2. The second want, is our diffidence and distrustfulnes, for the things of
this life. Men also will shift this off, and say, they would be sorry to
distrust God. But if we look to our corrupt nature, man is wonderful prone
to this sin, for being in prosperity, we are not troubled: but if once we be
pressed with adversity, then we houle and weep, and as Paul says, 1. Tim. 6.
10. Men pearce themselves through with many sorrows. If any shall lose a part
of his goods, what then does he? straight he goes out to the wise man: is
this to believe in God? No, it is to distrust God, and believe the devil.

4. Graces to be desired.
THe grace to be desired, is a readiness in all estates, to rest on Gods
providence, whatsoever fall out. Psalm. 37. 5. Commit thy way to the Lord, and
trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass. Prou. 16. 3. Commit or role thy
works upon the Lord, and thie thoughts shall be directed: Whereby we are
admonished to take pains in our callings to get meat and drink, etc. If the
Lord bless not our labor, we must be content: if he do, we must give him
thanks. Now for this cause, we are further to pray to God, that he would open
our eyes, and by his spirit, teach us in all his good creatures to see his
providence, and when means fail and are contrary, then also to believe the
same.

5. Errors confuted
1. Papists teach, that men by works of grace, may merit life eternal, and
increase of justification in this life. But how can this be? for here we see,
that every bit of bread which we eat, is the free gift of God, without any
merit of ours. Now, if we cannot merit a piece of bred, what madness is it to
think, that we can merit life everlasting?

2. They also are deceived, who think, that any thing comes by mere chance or
fortune, without Gods providence. Indeed, in respect of men, who know not the
causes of things, many chances there are: but so, as they are ordered and come
to pass by Gods providence. Luke 10. 31. By chance there came down a certain
priest that way.

Forgive us our debts.
1. Coherence.
THis is the fifth petition, and the second of those which concern our selves:
in the former we craved temporal blessings, in this and the next which
follows, we crave spiritual blessings. Where we may note, that seeing there
be two petitions, which concern spiritual things, and but one for temporal;
that the care for our souls must be double, to the care for our bodies. In the
world men care for their bodies, their hearts are set for wealth and
promotion: they can be content to hear the word on the Sabbath, yet neither
then, nor in the week day do they lay it up in their hearts, and practice it,
which argues, that they have little or no care for their souls.

Question. What is the cause, that first we crave things for the body, and in
the second place, those which concern the soul? Ans. The order of the holy
Ghost in these petitions is wonderful: for the Lord considers the dulnes and
backewardnes of men's natures: therefore, he trains them up, and draws them on
by little, even as a schoolmaister does his young scholars: propounding unto
them some elements and principles, and so carrying them to higher points.
(...) the former petition is a step or degree to these two following. He that
will rest on Gods (...) so the pardon of his (...) of al, rest on Gods
providence (...) this life, and he that cannot put his affiance in God for the
provision of meat and drink, how shall he trust in Gods mercy for the
salvation of his soul? Here we may see the faith of worldings: they say that
God is merciful, and that they believe in Christ: which how can it be true?
Seeing in les^er matters, as meat and drink, they distrust God, as appears by
their covetousness.

2. The meaning.
DEbts) By debts sins ar meant, so it is in Luke 11. 4. and they are so called,
because of the resemblance between them. For even as a debt does bind a man,
either to make satisfaction, or else to go to prison: so our sins bind us,
either to satisfy Gods justice, or else to suffer eternal damnation.

[ Forgive.] To forgive sin, is to cover it, or not to impute it. Psalm. 32.
1. And this is done, when God is content of his mercy to accept the death and
passion of Christ, as a sufficient payment and ransom for man's sins; and so
to esteem them as no sins. And here under this one benefit, all the rest of
the same kind are understood, as justification, sanctification, redemption,
glorification, etc.

3. The uses of the words.
1. HEre we may learn many lessons; the first is, that seeing we must pray
thus, Lord forgive, etc. We must hold, that there is no satisfaction to Gods
justice for sin by our works; no not in temporary punishments: but that the
doing away of our sins, is of Gods mere favor: for, to forgive and to
satisfy be contrary: wherefore the doctrine of humain satisfactions, taught in
the Church of Rome, is vile and devilish.

2. Secondly, we are taught thus to pray continually, from day to day: where we
note the great patience and long suffering of God: in that we offending daily,
yet he suffers and forbears still, and does not power out his confusion upon
us. This teaches us, like patience toward our brethren: we cannot put up the
least injury, and forbear but one day, yet we desire that god would forgive us
all our lives long.

3. Again, we may observe, that there is no perfect sanctification in this
life, seeing we must every day, to the end, crave the pardon of our sins.
Therefore, wicked is the opinion of the Catharists or puritans, which hold that
men may be without sin in this life.

4. And when we say, forgive, not me, but us: we are put in mind to pray, not
only for the pardone of our own sins, but likewise for our brethren and
enemies. Iam. 5. 17. Confess one to another, and pray one for another for the
prayer of the righteous avails much, if it be fervent And as son think, the
prayer of Steven was a means of the conversion of Saul.

5. Also we note, that before prayer for pardon of sin, must go a confession
of sin: for whereas we say, forgive our debts, we confess before God, that we are stat banckrouts, and not able to discharge the least of our sins; this
appears 1. Ioh. 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful to forgive us:
And it was practiced by David, Psalm. 51. and 32. 5. The manner of making
confession is this; known sins, and those which troble the conscience, are
to be confessed particularly: but unknown sins generally. Psa. 19

6. Lastly, hence it is manifest, that there is noe justification by works.
Our sins are debtes: and so also are all works of the law. Now, how can any
man discharge one debt by another?

4. Wants to be bewailed.
THe wantes to be bewailed are the burden of our sins, and the corruptions of
our natures, and the wickedness of our lives, and the sins of our youth, and
of our old age. Psalm. 40. 12. My sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am
not able to look up: they are more in number then the hairs of my head:
therefore mine heart has failed me. Thus with David, we are to travel and
groan under this burden: but this grief for sin, is a rare thing in the world.
Men can mourn bitterly for the things of this life, but their sins never
trouble them. And further, this sorrow must be for sin, because it is sin,
though there were neither hell nor devil, nor conscience to accuse, nor Judge
to revenge.

5. The grace to be desired
THe grace which we must desire, is the spirit of grace and deprecations.
Zacha. 12. 10. It is that work of the spirit, whereby we are enabled to call
to God for the pardone of our sins. A man having offended the laws of a
Prince, and being in danger of death, will never rest, or be at quiet, till he
have gotten a pardon: eue^ so, they which feel and see their sins, having
this spirit are so moved, that they can never be at rest, till in prayer they
be eased of their sins A man may, I grant, babble and speak many words, but
he shall never pray effectually, before he have this spirit of prayer, to
make him cry, Abba Father. For worldly commodities all can pray: but learn to
pray for the want of Christ.

As we forgive our debts.
1. Coherence.
THese words be a part of the fifth petition, for it is put down with a
condition. Forgive us, as we forgive others: and these words depend on the
former, as the reason thereof, and it is taken from the comparison of the less
to the greater: thus, if we, who have but a spark of mercy, do forgive
others: then do thou, who art the fountain of mercy, forgive us: but we
forgive others, therefore, do thou forgive us. Thus Luke 11. 4 has it, Forgive
us our sins: for even we forgive. The Papists gather a contrary doctrine:
they say, Forgive us as we forgive, making our forgiving a cause, for which God
is moved to forgive us. But we are to know, that our forgiving is no cause,
but a sign that God will forgive us.

2 The meaning.
QVestion. Whether is a man bound to forgive all debts. Answer. The word debt,
in this place, is not understood of debt that is civil, and comes by lawful
bargaining, but of hurtes and damages; which are done unto us in our bodies,
goods, or good name; as for the former civil debts a man may exact them, so he
do it with showing of mercy.

2 Question. How may any man forgive trespasses, seeing God only forgiues
sin? Answer. In every trespass which any do to their neighbors, there be two
offenses* one to God, another to man. In the first respect it is called a sin,
which God only forgiues: In the other respect, it is called an injury or
damage: and so man may forgive it. When a man is robbed, the law is broken by
stealing, and the injury that is done, is against a man that has his goods
stolen. This injury, as it is an injury, a man may forgive: but as it is a
sin, he can not, but God only.

3 Quest. Whether may a man aright pray this petition, and yet sue him at the
law, who has injured him. An. Yea, for a man may in an holy manner sew another
for an injury: and as a soldier in lawful war may kill his enemy, and yet
love him: so may a man forgive an injury, and yet seek in a Christian manner
the remedy: but in doing of this, we must observe five things. 1. We are to
tak heed of all private revenge and inward hatred, which if we conceive, we
do not forgive. 2. We must take heed of offense, and have care that our
doings be not scandelous to the Church. 3. Our suits must be taken in hand to
maintain godly peace: for, if all injuries were put up, there would be no
civil state or government. 4. It must be, that the party offending may be
chastised, and be brought to repentance for his fault: for, if many me^ were
not repressed, they would grow worse. 5. Law must be the last remedy: as
Physicians use desperate remedies, when weaker will not serve: even so must we
use law, as the last means, when all other fail. The dealing of the world in
this case, is no example for us to follow. For through rage and stomach they
will abide no private agreement: and therefore, they use the law in the first
place, so did the Corinthians, but what says Paul 1. Cor. 6. 7. It is
utterly a fault among. But if the Law be used aright, a Christian may sue at
Law, and love the party sued; for there is difference between dealing against
a man before a Magistrate, and the dealing of one private man with another. For
private dealing is commonly revenge, and therefore unlawful.

3. The Use.
THE use of this clause is very profitable, for it shows us a lively sign,
whereby our consciences may be assured of the pardon of our sins. Indeed,
many use these words long and often, yet find no assurance of pardon, and
the cause is, because they have no desire of Gods mercy, nor willingness to
forgive men, which if they had, then the forgiveness of their sins should
hereby be sealed unto them. Wherefore, if any would be persuaded of Gods mercy
in this point, let them descend into their own souls, and search them
narrowly, if they can find their hearts as ready to forgive, as they are
ready to desire forgiveness at Gods hand, then they may assure themselves of
Gods mercy in Christ, as we are taught by our Savior Christ, Mat. 5. 7.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Consider these
comparisons. A man walking under a wall in a cold sunnie day, is heated of the
wall, which first received heat from the Sun. So he that shows mercy to
others, has first received mercy from God. Also; take a piece of wax, and
put to a seal, it leaves an impression or mark like it self in the wax:
which, when a man looks on, he does certainly know that there has bin a
seal, the print whereof is left behind. Even so it is in every one, that has
readiness to forgive others: by it a Christian may easily know, that God has
sealed to him the forgiveness of his sins, even in his heart: Therefore, let
men look into their hearts, whether they have any affection to forgive others,
for that is; as it were, the print in their hearts, of Gods mercy toward the^.

Many there are, which pray for pardon at Gods hand, but they cannot brook
it, that they should forgive their neighbors. Hereupon come these sayings, I
may forgive him, but I will not forget him: He may come in my Paternoster, but
he shall not come in my Creed. Behold, the devils logic, which makes malice
to be charity. Blind people play with the Lords prayer, as the fly does
with the candle till she be burnt: for the more they pray these words, the
more they call for vengeance against themselves. Iam. 2. 13

Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
1 The Coherence.
IT might seem to some, that this petition is superfluous: for what need he
care for temptations, that has the pardon of his sins? But our savior did
not teach us thus to pray without special reason. 1. Because forgiveness of
sins, and wonderful temptations, be inseparable companions in this life:
which thing we find to be true, both in Gods word, and in Christian
experience: there is no man in this world so beaten and buffeted with
temptations, as the penitent sinner, that cries most bitterly for the pardon
of his sins. This is the estate, that few men in the world are acquainted
with, for they are never troubled with temptation, but live in all peace and
quietness, both in body and soul. Luke. 11. 21. When the strong man armed
keeps his hold, the things that he possesses are in peace. Even so, the
wicked of the world, being possessed of Satan, are not a whit molested by him
with any temptations; Neither need he, seeing he has them at commandment, to
do what he will. But when a man once begins to make conscience of sin, and to
sue unto the Lord for pardon of his offenses, and still continues in dislike of
sin and Satan: then the enemy bestirs him, and uses all means to bring
that man to famine: he offers all manner of temptations to molest him, and
never afford this poor sinner any rest. Hereupon, he for fear of being
overcome, continually must pray unto the Lord, that he may not be led into
temptation.

Here some christian conscience may reason thus. No man is so troubled with sin
and Satan, as I, Therefore, I am not in Gods favor, but am a plain castaway.
Ans. If pardon of sin, and temptations go together, al is contrary. If thou
had no grief for sin, no buffeting of thine enemies, the flesh, the world,
and the devil, thou could not be in Gods favor, but under the power of Satan:
now this great mesure of the spiritual temptations, is a sign rather of Gods
love: For who^ God loves, the devil hates: and where God works in love, the
devil works in malice.

2. Meaning.
THese words be but all one petition: which has two parts, the latter being a
declaration of the former, Lead us not into temptation, how is that done? by
delivering us from evil.

[ Temptation.] Temptation is nothing else, but the entisement of the soul or
heart, either by the corruption of man's nature, or the allurements of the
world, or the devil to any sin. Iam. 1. 13. God temptes no man. That is, God
moves no man to sin.

[ Lead us not] Or carry us not into temptation, to be led, is to be overcome
of the temptation, when it preuailes and gets the victory. Then the meaning is
this. When we are moved or entised to sin, Lord keep us, that we be not
overcome: and give thou an issue with the temptation.

Question. God is just, and cannot sin: but if he lead men into temtation,
shall he not be the author of sin? Answer. Indeed many fearing to charge God
with sin, read the words thus, suffer us not to be led, but the text is very
piaine, lead or carry us not. And the scriptures elsewhere, use the like
phrases of God. Exodus 7. 3. God is said to harden Pharaos heart. 2. Sam. 24. 1.
The Lord moved David to number the people. 2. These. 2. 11. God sent strong
delusions, that men might believe lies. These and such like places have a
worthy meaning, thus to be gathered. There is no action of man or of the
devil, absolutely evil: but although in some respects it be evil, yet in some
other it is good: for we are not thus to think, that as there is a maine good,
so also there is a maine evil. Thus then, temptation being an action, it is
not in every respect evil: but in some good, in some evil. And so far forth
as it is good, the Lord works it: but as it is evil, he does not work it,
but willingly permits it to be done by him and Satan.

1. And there be four respects in which God may be a worker in temptations,
and yet be free from sin. 1. First, he tempts by offering occasions and
objects, to try whether a man will sin or not. A master suspecting his
servant, that in word professes fidelity, lays a purse of money in his way,
to try if he will steal it: which if he steal, he has found by watching him,
a secreete thief; and so has laid him open, for deceiving any more. Now,
this trying o^ him is no sin, though he sin in stealing. In the same manner
tempts God his own servants to prove and try them. Deuteronomy. 13. 3. Tho^ shall
not harken unto the (...) of the Prophet or dre^amer of dreams: in the Lord
your God pro^^ (...) whether ye love the ^^rd your God with all your heart

2. Secondly, God leads into temptation, by withdrawing his grace. Neither can
this be a sin in God: because he is bound to no man to give him grace. And
here is a difference between the tempting of God and Satan. God holds back
grace, when he tempts, the Devil suggesteth evil morions.

3. Every action so far forth as it is an action, is good, and of God. Act.
17. 28. In him we live, move, and have our being. Therefore, God is a worker in
temptations, so far forth as they are actions. One man killes another: the very
moving of the body, in the doing of this villainy is of God: but the wickedness
of the action, is from man and the devil. Again, a man rides upon a lame
horse, and stirs him: the rider is the cause of the motion, but the horse
himself of the halting motion. So God is the author of every action, but not
of the evil of the action.

4. The fourth way, is in regard of the end. God tempts his servants only to
correct and humble them for their sins, and to try how they will abide the
cross, and to move them the more to love him. Deuteronomy. 8. 2. God afflictes the
children of Israel, to try them whether they would keep his commandments.
2. Chron. 32. 31. He tries Hezekiah, to see what was in his heart. The devils
end in tempting, is only to bring the party unto destruction. Thus we need
not for to say, that God in some respects does lead his servants into
temptations.

[ Deliver us from euill] that is, free us from the power of the flesh, the
devil and the world. Some take evil in this place, only for the devil, but we
may take it more largely, for all spiritual enemies. 1. John. 5. 19. The
whole world lies in evil. vz. Under the power of sin and Satan. These
words (as I have said) are a proof and explanation of the former; for when a
man is delivered from evil, he is not led into temptation: the cause being
taken away, the effect cease.

3. The uses.
1. HEnce we learn, what a righteous God, Iehoua is, that can work an evil
action, and yet be void of sin.

2. Whereas we say, Lead us not, etc. We note, that the devil in temptations
can go noe further, then God permits him.

3. We are not to pray, that temptations be quite taken from us, or that we be
wholly freed from them: but that they do not overcome us. For it is the
Lords will, that his Church should be tempted. Nay, David desired some kind of
temptations. Psalm. 26. 1. Prove me O Lord. And James says, account it for
exceeding joy, when ye shall fall into diverse temptations. Iam. 1. 2.

4. Note also, that every man by nature is the bo^dslaue of sin and Satan. For
where is deliverance, there was a bondage first, This confutes the Papists, who
maintain fre-wil: for we are dead in him by nature, as a man in a grave; and we
must still pray thus, til we be fully delivered.

4. Wants to be b^wailed.
THE corruption, which in this petition we ought to mourn for, is, the
continual rebellion of our wicked natures; and our pronenes to yield up our
selves in every temptation to sin, and Satan. And the remnants of the old
bondage under Satan, must be grievous and irksome unto us, and we must bewail
it very bitterly. The Jews in a bodily captivity, wept when they remembered
Sion. Psalm. 127. How much more should we weep, when we feel the law of our
members rebelling against the law of our minds, and leading us captive to sin.

5. Graces to be desired.
THE contrary blessing to be desired, is, that God would stablish us by his
free spirit. Ps. 51. 12 which is so called, because it settes us every day more
and more at liber tie out of the reach of sin and Satan.

For thine is the kingdom, the power, and glory for ever.
1. Meaning.
THese words contain a reason of all the former petitions: whereby we are
moved to crave things needful at Gods hand.

[ Thine is] Earthly kings have kingdom power, and glory, Dan. 2. 37 Yet not
from themselves, but from God, whose vicegerents they are on earth. Therefore,
to make a difference between Gods kingdom, power, and glory; and those of
earthly kings, it is said, thine is the kingdom, etc. that is, God has all
these in himself, and from himself, and they from him.

[ The kingdome] These words. 1. Chron. 29. 11. at fully expounded. Thine, O
Lord, is greatness, power, and victory, and praise: for all that is in heaven
and earth is thine: thine is the kingdom, and thou excellest as head over al,
etc. The kingdom is said to be Gods, because he is absolute possessor, and
owner of al things that are; and also has sovereign rule over all things at
his will. Now out of this first property of God, we may gather a strong
motive, to induce us to pray unto him alone. For seeing all things are his,
both in heaven and earth whatsoever; therefore, we must come to him for the
graces and blessings which we desire.

[ The power] Oftentimes, earthly princes have kingdoms, yet want power: but
God has kingdom, and power also: yea, his power is infinite, and he can do all that he will, and more then he will: as for those things which come of
impotencie; he cannot do the^, for if he c^ld, he should not be omnipotent. And
as he is omnipotent in himself, so all the power which any creture has, is
from him alone. Question. How can this be, seeing the devil has power to
sin; which is not from God? Ans^er. To sin is no power, but rather a want
of power: otherwise, all the strength and power that Satan has, is of God.

And from this second property, is taken another motive, to move us to pray
unto God. Because all power being his, we can never do any of the things
which we ask, but by power received from him.

[ Thine is the glory.] This third property of God arises from the two
former, for seeing the title and interest in all things, and the power whereby
they are disposed and governed, is of God: therefore it follows, that all
glory is his: yea, in him is fulness of glory, and the glory of the creature is
all of him. To sinful men belonges nothing, but shame and confusion. Dan. 9.
verse 7.

This third property ministers a third motive to induce men to pray unto God
alone. For seeing all glory by right is his: therefore we must invocate his
holy name; that in so doing, we may give him the glory due unto him.

[ For ever,] The words in the original are, for ages. Now an age signifies
the space of an hundred years: but here it is taken for eternity; because
eternity is nothing but the multiplication of ages. And as eternity is here
noted by ages: so on the contrary we read, that eternity is taken for a
certain and distinct time. Genesis 17. 8. God promises Abraham, to give him the
land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession: that is, for a long season. For
else Abraham's seed should inherit the land until this time, which it does
not. Wherefore, as often the whole is put for the part, vz. eternity for a
certain time: so here the part is put for the whole, an age for eternity.
This also makes a difference between earthly Princes, and the mighty
Jehovah, They have kingdom, power, and glory for a short time, but he
absolutely and for ever.

2. The uses.
1. HEre we learn in prayer, to abase our selves before God, and utterly to
deny all that is in us. Kingdom, power, and glory, is all his, not ours: we
are no better then rebels and traitors to him: if we have any good thing, it is
from him, even the grace whereby we pray. And he that in prayer will not
confess this, shall no more be heard, then the insolent beggar that will not
acknowledge his want.

2. Secondly, again in prayer we learn, that we must be persuaded of two
things, and build upon them, Gods power and will: his power, in that he is
able, his will, in that he is careful to perform our requests, as it was noted
in the preface: the first of these, is set out in his kingdom, and power. The
second is noted, in that glory is his, 2. Cor. 1. 20. For all the promises of
God in him ar yea, and Amen, unto the glory of God.

3. And hence we gather, that prayer and thanksgiving must go together; for
as in the six petitions we made request to GOD; so in these words, we give
him thanks and praise him. Phil. 4. 6. But in all things, let your requests be
shevved to God in prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving. There is none,
but in want he will be ready to pray: but when we have received, we are slack in
giving of thanks: but he which will pray aright, must join the^ both together.
And the sum of all Gods praise stands in these three points. 1. That he is an
absolute King. 2. Secondly, that he has absolute power to rule al things. 3.
That having power and a kingdom, he has glory also, which appears in the
holding of his kingdom, and the ^hewing of his power in governing of it.

4. Whatsoever we ask, we must refer it to Gods glory: this is the first
thing, which we were taught to crave, and the (...) we are to perform, because
it is noted both in the beginning and end of the prayer

Thus much of the use of these words altogether. Now let us make use of the^
particularly. First, where as we say, Thine is the kingdom. Magistrates and
rulers must know, that all the authority and rule which they have is from the
Lord; and therefore they must remember to order themselves as gods Vicegerents,
using their power to bring men in subjection to Gods laws: and referring all
their callings to his glory.

2 Where we say* Thine is the power. We are admonished, when we are to
perform any work, as to do service to God, to walk in our callings, that we
have no power of our selves: and for this cause we must ask power at Gods
hands, that we may be enabled to walk uprightly before him, and do our
duties.

3 In saying, Thine is the glory, we learn, that if we would have a good report
and praise among men: we must above all things, seek Gods glory, not
regarding so much our own. If he give thee praise among men, give him thanks:
if not, be content, because al glory is his.

Amen.
1. The meaning.
WE have heard the preface, and the petitions what they are: Now follows the
third part, which is the assent or testification of faith, required in prayer,
in this word Amen. And it contains more than men at the first would imagine:
It signifies Certainly* so be it, or, it shall be so. 2. Cor. 1. 20. It is
often taken for a bare assent of the people, saying Amen to the Minister: but
in this place it contains more: for every point in this prayer, is not only
a direction for public prayer, but for private also, and must be said as well
of the Minister, as of the people. Now then, there being two principal
things in prayer: the first a desire of grace: the second faith, whereby we
believe that God will grant things desired. The first is expressed in the six
petitions: The latter is set forth in this word Amen, carrying this sense in
effect. As we have craved these things at thy hands, O Lord, so we do
believe, that for Christ his sake, in good time thou will grant them to us.
Therefore, this part is more excellent than the former, by how much our faith
is more excellent than our desire. For in this word is contained the
testification of our faith, whereas the petitions are only testifications of
our desires. And as it is in the end, so also it is the seal of our prayers,
to make them authentical, and it is to be used (as I take it) not only for
this end, to answer the Minister, but also to testify our faith, for the
things desired.

2 Grace to be desired.
HEreby we are taught, what grace we are to show in prayer. We must labor to
give assent to Gods promises, when we pray, and strive against doubting and
unbelief. Mar. 9. 11. Lord, I believe, Lord help my unbelief. Psalm. 42. 11.
Why art thou cast down my soul? and why art thou (...) within me: wait on god.

Many there are, that will stand upon the strength of their faith, and plead
for themselves, that they never doubted, but they are far wide: for true faith,
being imperfect, is always accompanied with doubting* more or less:
Wherefore, the heart which feels no doubting, is not filled with faith, but
with presumption. As for them, which are molested with doubtings, and complain
of them, they have less cause to fear, for as fire and water do never strive
til they meet, no more does doubting and unbelief, til faith come into a man.

To conclude, we see what an excellent work prayer is, in which, two most
excellent graces of a Christian man be showed forth: hungring after mercy and
faith: this might move men to learn to pray, prayer being the exercise of grace.

Of the use of the Lords prayer.
THe principal use of the Lords prayer is, to direct God his Church, in making
their prayers in all places, at al times, and upon all occasions, though their
prayers should be innumerable: and unless they be framed after this, they can
not be right.

In the using of it for direction, there be three things required. 1 The first
is, the knowledge of the Lords prayer, and all the parts thereof. He that
would pray by it, must understand the meaning thereof, the wants therein to be
bewailed, and the graces to be desired, for which end it has bin expounded.
2. Knowing this, there is in the second place required thus much skill, that he
be able to referr every want and grace to one of the six petitions: for
example: feeling in himself pride of heart, he must be able to say, this is a
want in the first petition: and feeling a rebellion and slownes in doing Gods
commandment, he must be able to say, this is a sin to be prayed against in the
3. petition. Thus, every want he must refer to his proper head; again, he must
refer every grace to be desired, to one of the six petitions: is strength in
temptation to the sixth; assiance in Gods providence to the fourth; knowledge of
God to the first, etc. and so in the rest. 3. In the third place, he must
before he pray, consider what be his wantes and imperfections, which most
trouble him, as also the graces which he would obtain: then, for the helping of
his memory, he must go to the petitions, and he must set those things first
in his mind, which do concern the first petition; and those which concern the
second petition, must have the second place in his mind and so he must proceed
in order as shall have occasion. Thus a man keeping in mind the order of the
petitions as they stand, shall be able by referring every grace and want unto
his proper head, to make a distinct prayer, and to vary it as time, place, and
other occasions shall move him.

Quest. Must we of necessity follow all the petitions in conceiving a prayer?
An. No, but only those which do principally belong to the time, place and
occasion; as Paul makes a prayer, Col. 1. 9. 10. and all the points of it may
be referred to the third and last petitions.

Again, a Christian man may make an excellent confession of his sins by this
prayer, if he shall, keeping the order of the petitions, confess and bewail the
sins which every petition requires us to pray against: and it serves to make a
thanksgiving to God: Thus, let a man remember all the graces which he has
received from God: let him then refer them to the petitions, and give thanks
to God after the order of them, turning every petition into a thanksgiving.

Of the circumstances of prayer. Quest. 1. Whether a man is to use a voice in
prayer? Ans. In publik prayer it is requisite that there be a voice, for the
Minister is the month of the people, and to the prayer which he conceiues,
they give assent. For private prayer, using of a voice is convenient: yet so,
as it may be done in silence. 1. the Lord gave us the voice, as well as the
heart to bless him withal. Iam. 3. 9. 2 God created the tongue as well as the
heart, and so will be praised by both. 3 The voice often stir* up the heart;
and again, the veheme^cie of affection does often draw out a voice: the voice
then in private prayer is requisite, yet in some cases may be omitted, for it
is not absolutely necessary. Moses and Anna prayed in silence.

Quest. 2. What gesture is to be used in prayer? An. The word does not afford
any certain direction. Our Savior and his Disciples prayed in diverse gestures,
kneling, standing, groueling, looking to heaven, looking down to the earth,
sitting, lying, etc. Luke 11. 41. Act. 7 God respects not the gesture, but the
affection of the heart; yet two things must be always in the gesture: 1. that
it be comely. 2. that it do fitly express the affection of the heart; as when
we ask mercy, to look to heaven, when we bewail our sins, to look downward,
etc.

Question. 3. What place must we pray in? An. The place is set down, 1. Tim. 2.
8. we may pray in all places, of which there is no difference: Some will say,
that in the time of the Law, the Tabernacle and Temple were places for divine
prayer. Ans. The Temple and Tabernacle were types of Christ, and his Church, and
the unity of it: but now, we having the thing it self, signified thereby,
may pray in all places. Our Savior prayed in the wilderness, on the Mount; Peter
on the house top Paul by the sea shore: yet so, that publik prayer must be
used in public places, as Churches, chapels, etc. not because in them is more
holiness, but for orders sake.

Quest. 4. What is the time appointed for prayer? Ans. Pray continually. 1.
The 5. 7. that is, upon al occasions, or when a man begins any business, whether
it be in word, or deed, Col. 3. 17. or as Daniel, who prayed thrice every
day. Dan. 6. 11. or as David, who prayed at evening morning, and noontide, Ps.
55. 18 and seven times a day. vz. many. Psa. 119. 140. Thus we shall pray
continually. Every day affoords three especial occasions. 1. The entrance to
our callings in the morning. 2. The receiving of Gods creatures at noonetide.
3. the going to rest at night.

Of Gods hearing our prayers.
HItherto we have spoken of the making of prayer to God: a word or two of God
his hearing our prayers.

Question. How many ways does God hear men's prayers? Ans. Two ways. The first
in his mercy, when he graunts the requests of such as call upon him in the
fear of his name. Secondly, he hears men's prayers in his wrath. Thus he gave
the Israelites, quails according to their desire. Psalm 78. 29. 30. 31. Thus
often men curse themselves, and wish that they were dead: and accordingly they
have their wish.

Quest. 2. Why does God defer to hear the prayers of his servants?

Ans. 1. to prove them by delay. 2. To exercise their says. 3. To make them
acknowledge, that the things which they receive, ar gods gifts, and not from
themselves* 4. That graces quickly given might not be lightly esteemed 5. That
an hungring after grace, might be sharpened and increased.

Quest. After what manner does God hear his servants prayers. An. Two ways.
First, by granting the thing which was asked according to his will. Secondly,
by denying the thing desired, and by giving something proportional to it. Thus
God denies temporary blessings, and in the room thereof, gives eternal in
heaven. Thus he refuses to remove the cross from his servantes, and gives in
stead thereof strength and patience. Christ prayed that the cup might be
remooved. It was not removed, but he in his manhood was enabled to bear the
wrath of God. When

ded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height, 19 And know the love of Christ,
which passes knowledge, that ye may be filled with all fullness of God. 20
Unto him therefore, that is able to do exceeding abundant lie, above all that
we ask or think, according to the power that works in us, 21 Be praise in
the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all generations for ever, Amen.
The Exposition.
THese words contain two parts, a prayer, and a thanksgiving. In the prayer
these points are to be marked. First, the gesture; I bow my knees, whereby
Paul signifies, his humble submission unto God in prayer. Secondly, To whom he
prays. To the father; who is described by two titles: the first, the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and that by nature, as he is God, and as he is man, by
personal union. The other title: Of whom the whole family which is in
heaven and earth, is named: In which words, is set down a description of the
Church, first it is a Family, because it is the company of Gods elect
children, under the government of one Father: 1. Timoth. 3. 15. It is called
the house of God. Ephesians. 2. 19. They that believe, are said to be of the
household of God: Secondly, the parts of the Catholic Church are noted,
namely, the Saints in heaven departed, and saints living on earth: Thirdly,
it is said to be named of the Father of Christ, because as the Father of
Christ, is the Father of this family; so also this family is called by him.
Genes. 6. 2. Dan. 9. 18. Thirdly, the matter of the prayer stands of four
most worthy points.

The first, is strength, to bear the cross, and to resist spiritual
temptations, verse. 16. where this strenth is set out by diverse arguments.
First, that it is the mere gift of God, that he would grant you: Secondly, the
cause of strength, by his spirit: Thirdly, the subject or place, where this
strength must be, in the inner man: that is, in the whole man, so far
forth, as he is renewed by grace. Ephesians. 9. 24. The second is, the dwelling
of Christ, by faith in their hearts: Faith is, when a man being seriously
humbled for his sins, is further in conscience persuaded, and resolved of the
pardon of the^, and of reconciliation to god. Now where this persuasion is
indeed, there follows necessarily, Christ's dwelling in the heart, which
stands in two things; the first, is the ordering and ruling of the thoghts,
affections and desires of the heart, according to his will, as a master rules
in his house: the second, is the continuance of his rule. For he cannot be
said to dwell in a place, who rules in it but for a day.

The third, is the knowledge, and the acknowledgement of the infinite greatness
of God his love in Christ, an effect of the former, verse. 18. 19. the words
are thus explaned. Rooted and grounded. Here the love of God, wherewith he
loves the elect, is as a root and foundation of all Gods benefits; election,
vocation, justification, and glorification: Men ar rooted and grounded in love,
when Gods spirit assures their hearts of Gods love, and does give them some
inward sense and feeling of it. For then they are as it were sensibly put into
the root, and laid on the foundation: With all Saints: Paul desires this
benefit, not only to the Ephesians, but also for all the faithful with them.
What is the length, the breadth. Here is a speech borrowed from Geomitricians,
and it signifies the absolute greatness, or infinitenes of Gods love, and that
it is like a world, which for length breadth, height and depth, is endless.
Here note the order of receuing grace. First, Christ dwelles in the heart by
faith: Secondly, the^ comes a sense and feeling of Gods love, as it were, by
certain drops thereof: Thirdly, after this, arises a ple^tifull knowledge, and
apprehension of Gods love, and as it were the pouring out of a sea into a man's
heart, that for greatness, has neither bottom nor bank. And know the love of
Christ, these words (as I take it) are an exposition of the former, for to
comprehend the love of God, is nothing else, but to know the love of Christ:
considering, that all whom the father loves, he loves them in Christ: Which
passes knowledge: That is, which for the greatness of it, noe man can fully
know.

The fourth thing, is the fullness of Gods graces. verse 19. Here the fullness
of God, does not signify the fulness of the Godhead, or divine nature, but the
perfection of the inner man, which shall not be till after this life, Now
follows the tha^ksgiuing, or the praise of God, ver. 20. 21. containing these
points 1. The matter of praise, his power and bountifulnes, whereby he can
work exceeding abundantly, above all we ask or think: and both these are not
only to be conceived in mind, but also may be felt in the heart, according to
the power that works in us. 2. the form of praise, glory unto God by
Christ, as all benefits are received from the father by Christ. The proper
place of true praise of God the Church. 4. The continuance of his praise,
through all generations for ever.

Philip. 1. 9. AND this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more,
in knowledge and al sense.

10. That ye may discern things that differ: to the end, ye may be pure and
without offense, to the day of Christ.

11. Filled with fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the
praise and glory of God.


The Exposition
THis prayer contains three parts. In the first, Paul prays for increase of
love in the Philip. whether it be to God or to men, verse 9. and he shows the
means of increase, which are two: knowledge and sense or feeling. For (to go
backward) the more a godly man feels Gods love, and has experience of Gods
word in himself, the more he knows Gods word, and perceiues his love unto
him: the more he is assured of Gods love, the more he loves god again, and his
neighbor for his sake.

The second thing prayed for, is the gift of discerning, whereby me^ know what
is true, what falls, what is to be done, what to be left undone: the ends of
this gift ar two. The first, that by means of it, they may be pure or
sincere: that is, keep a good conscience before God and men, in their lives
and callings. The second is, to be without offense: that is, innocent, giving
no occasions of evil to any, and not taking the^ offered by others: and the
continuance of these is noted, to the day of Christ, which is the time in
which he comes to us, either by our death, or by the last judgment.

Thirdly, he prays, that they might abound in good works, which are
described by a similitud; fruits of righteousness: Christians being, fruitful
trees. Exech. 4. 7. 12. Esaias. 61. 3. 2. By the cause efficient, which are by
Christ. 3. By the end, unto the glory and praise of God.

Colos. 1. 9 I cease not to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be
filled with knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.

10. That ye might walk vvorthie of the lord, and please him in all things,
fructifying in all good works, and increasing in the acknowledgment of God.

11 Strengthened with all might thorough his glorious power, unto all
patience, and long suffering with ioyfulnes.

12 Giving thanks to the father, which has made us fit to be partakers of the
inheritance of the saints in light.

13 Who has delivered us from the power of darkness and has translated us
into the kingdom of his own son.


The Exposition.
THese words contain a prayer and a thanksgiving. In the prayer, three
things are asked. The first is the increase of the knowledge of Gods reueiled
will in his word, and he deuides it into two parts: Wisdom, which is not
only to know Gods word, but also to apply it to every action, for the right and
holy performing thereof: and spiritual understanding: which is, when men by the
assistance of Gods spirit, do conceive the will of God in general, without
applying.

Secondly, Paul prays for the fruits of this knowledge, which are four. 1.
To walk worthy of God, as good servants do, who in their apparel, gesture,
and all their doings, (...)


