A Reformed Catholic: OR, A DECLARATION SHOWING HOW NEAR WE MAY COME TO THE
PRESENT Church of Rome in sundry points of Religion: and wherein we must for
ever depart from them: with an Advertisment to all favorers of the Roman
religion, showing that the said religion is against the Catholic principles
and grounds of the Catechism.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE* Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1598.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL, SIR WILLIAM BOWS KNIGHT, etc. Grace and peace.
RIght Worshipful, it is a notable policy of the devil, which he has put
into the heads of sundry men in this age, to think that our religion and the
religion of the present Church of Rome are all one for substance; and that they
may be reunited as (in their opinion) they were before. Writings to this
effect, are spread abroad in the French tongue, and respected of English
Protestants more the^ is meet, or ought to be. For, let men in show of
moderation, pretend the peace and good estate of the Catholic Church as long
as they will; This union of the two religions can never be made, more then the
Union of light and darkness. And this shall appear, if we do but a little
consider, how they of the Roman church have rased the foundation. For, though
in words they honor Christ, yet in deed they turn him into a Pseudo-Christ
and an Idol of their own brain. They call him our Lord, but with this
condition that the Servant of Servants of this Lord may change and add to his
commandments: having so great a power, that he may open and shut heaven to
whom he will; and bind the very conscience with his own laws, and
consequently be partaker of the spiritual kingdom of Christ. Again they call
him a Savior, but yet in Us: in that he gives this grace unto us, that by our
merits we may be our own Saviors: and in the want of our own merits, we may
partake in the merits of the Saints. And they acknowledge that he Died and
Suffered for us, but with this caveat, that the Fault being pardoned, we must
satisfy for the temporal punishment either in this world or in Purgatory.
In a word, they make him our Mediator of Intercession unto God; but withal,
his Mother must be the Queen of heaven, and by the right of a mother command
him there. Thus, in word they cry Osanna, but in deed they crucify Christ.
Therefore we have good cause to bless the name of God, that has freed us from
the yoke of this Roman bondage, and has brought us to the true light and
liberty of the gospel. And it should be a great height of unthankfulness in
us, not to stand out against the present church of Rome, but to yield our
selves to plottes of reconciliation. To this effect and purpose I have penned
this little Treatise, which I present to your Worship, desiring it might be
some token of a thankful mind, for undeserved love. And I crave withal, not
only your Worshipful (which is more common) but also your Learned protection;
being well assured, that by skill and art you are able to justify whatsoever I
have truly taught. Thus wishing to you and yours the continuance and the
increase of faith and good conscience, I take my leave. Cambr. June 28. 1597.

Your Worships in the Lord, William Perkins.

THE AVTHOR TO THE Christian Reader.
BY a Reformed Catholic, I understand any one that holds the same necessary
heads of religion with the Roman Church: yet so, as he pares off and reiects
all errors in doctrine whereby the said religion is corrupted. How this may
be done, I have begun to make some little declaration in this small Treatise:
the intent whereof is to shevve how near we may come to the present Church of
Rome in sundry points of religion: and wherein we must for ever dissent.

My purpose in penning this small discourse is threefold. The first is, to
confute all such Politikes as hold and maintain, that our religion and that
of the Roman Church differ not in substance, and consequently that they may be
reconciled: yet my meaning is not here to condemn any Pacification that tends
to persuade the Roman church to our religion. The second is, that the papists
which think so basely of our religion, may be won to a better liking of it:
when they shall see how near we come unto them in sundry points. The third,
that the common protestant might in some part see and conceive the point of
difference betvveene us and the Church of Rome: an^ know in what manner and
how far forth, we condemn the opinions of the said Church.

I crave pardon for the order which I use, in handling the several points.
For I have set them down one by one, as they came to mind, not respecting the
laws of method. If any Papist shall say, that I have not alleged their
opinions aright, I answer that their books be at hand, and I can justify
what I have said.

Thus craving thine acceptance of this my pains, and wishing unto thee the
increase of knowledge and love of pure and sound religion, I take my leave and
make an end.

The places of doctrine handled, are
1 Of Free Will. page 11 2 Of Original sin. 28 3 Assurance of Salvation. 38
4 Justification of a sinner. 61 5 Of merits. 103 6 Satisfactions for sin. 117
7 Of Traditions. 134 8 Of Vows. 151 9 Of images. 170 10 Of Real-presence. 185
11 The sacrifice of the Mass. 204 12 Of Fasting. 221 13 The State of
perfection. 232 14 Worshipping of Saints departed. 245 15 Intercession of
Saints. 258 16 Implicit faith. 266 17 Of purgatory. 278 18 Of the Supremacy.
283 19 Of the efficacy of the Sacraments. 297 20 Of Faith. 305 21 Of
Repentance. 316 22 The sins of the Roman church. 331
REVELAT. 18. 4. And I heard another voice from heaven say, Go out of her my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues.
IN the former chapter S. John sets down a description of the whore of Babylon,
and that at large as he saw her in a vision described unto him. In the
sixteenth verse of the same chapter, he foretells her destruction: and in the
three first verses of this 18. chapter, he goes on to propound the said
destruction yet more directly and plainly; withal alleging arguments to
prove the same, in all the verses following. Now in this fourth verse is set
down a caveat serving to forewarne all the people of God, that they may escape
the judgment which shall befall the whore: and the words contain two parts:
a commandment, and a reason. The commandment, Come out of her my people, that
is, from Babylon. The reason, taken from the event least ye be partakers, etc.
Touching the commandment, first I will search the right meaning of it, and
then set down the use thereof and doctrine flowing thence. In history
therefore are three Babylons mentioned: one is, Babylon of Assyria standing on
the river Euphrates, where was the confusion of languages, and where the Jews
were in captivity: which Babylon is in Scripture reproched for Idolatry and
other iniquities. The second Babylon is in Egypt standing on the river Nilus,
and it is now called Cayr; of that mention is made 1. Pet. 5. v. 13. (as some
think) though indeed it is as likely and more commonly thought, that there is
meant Babylon of Assyria. The third Babylon is mystical, whereof Babylon of
Assyria was a type and figure; and that is Rome, which is without question here
to be understood. And the whore of Babylon, as by all circumstances may be
gathered, is the state or regiment of a people that are the inhabitants of Rome
and appertain thereto. This may be proved by the interpretation of the holy
Ghost: for in the last verse of the 17. chapter the woman that is the whore of
Babylon is said to be a city which reigns over the kings of the earth: now
in the days when S. John penned this book of Revelation, there was no city
in the world that ruled over the kings of the earth but Rome; it then being
the seat where the Emperor put in execution his Imperial authority. Again
in the seventh verse she is said to sit on a beast having seven heads and
ten horns which seven heads be seven hills, v. 9. whereon the woman sits,
and also they be seven kings. Therefore by the whore of Babylon is meant a city
standing on seven hills. Now it is well known, not only to learned men in the
Church of God, but even to the heathen themselves, that Rome alone is the city
built on seven distinct hills, called Caelius, Aventinus, Exquilinus, Tarpeius
or Capitolinus, Viminalis, Palatinus, Quirinalis. Papists to help themselves,
do allege that old Rome stood on seven hills, but now is removed further to
the plain of Campus Martius. I answer, that howsoever the greatest part of the
city in regard of habitation be not now on seven hills, yet in regard of
regiment and practice of religion it is: for even to this day upon these hills
are seated certain Churches and Monasteries and other like places where the
Papal Authority is put in execution: and thus Rome being put for a state and
regiment; even at this day, it stands upon seven hills. And though it be come
to pass that the harlot in regard of her later days even changed her seat,
yet in respect of her younger times in which she was bred and borne, she sat
upon the seven hills. Others, because they fear the wounding of their own
heads, labor to frame these words to an other meaning, and say, that by the
whore, is meant the company of all wicked men in the world wheresoever, the
devil being the head thereof. But this exposition is flat against the text: for
in the second verse of the 18. chapter, she is opposed to the kings of the
earth with whom she is said to commit fornication:) and in the last verse
she is called a city standing on seven hills and reigning over the kings of
the earth (as I have said,) and therefore must needs be a state of men in some
particular place. And the Papists themselves perceiving that this shift will
not serve their turn, make two Romes, heathenish Rome, and that whereof the
Pope is head: now (say they) the whore spoken of, is heathenish Rome, which was
ruled by cruel tyrants, as Nero, Domitian, and the rest: and that Rome whereof
now the Pope is head, is not here meant. Behold a vain and foolish
distinction: for Ecclesiastical Rome in respect of state, princely dominion,
and cruelty in persequuting the Saints of God, is all one with the heathenish
Empire: the Sea of the Bishop being turned into the Emperors court, as all
histories do manifest. But let the distinction be as they suppose, yet by
their leaves, here by the whore must be understood not only heathenish Rome,
but even the Papal or Ecclesiastical Rome: for v. 3. of this chapter the holy
Ghost says plainly, that she has made all natious drunk with the wine of
the wrath of her fornication: yea it is added, that she has committed
fornication with the kings of the earth, whereby is signified that she has
endeavored to entangle all the nations of the earth in her spiritual
idolatry, and to bring the kings of the earth to her religion. Which thing
cannot be understood of the heathenish Rome, for that left all the kings of
the earth to their own religion and idolatry: neithet did they labor to
bring foreign kings to worship their Gods. Again chapt. 18. v. 16 it is
said, that the ten horns, which be ten kings, shall hate the whore, and make
her desolate and naked, which must not be understood of heathenish Rome, but
of popish Rome: for whereas in former times all the kings of the earth did
submit themselves to the whore, now they have begun to withdraw themselves,
and make her desolate; as the king of Bohemia, Denmark, Germany, England,
Scotland, and other parts: therefore this distinction is also frivolous. They
further allege that the whore of Babylon is drunk with the blood of the
Saints and Martyrs, chap. 17. 6. shed not in Rome, but in Jerusalem: where
the Lord was crucified: and the two prophets being slain lie there in the
streets, Rev. 11. ^8. But this place, is not meant of Jerusalem, as Hierome
has fully taught, but it may well be understood o Epist. 17. E^st^. and Paula
ad Marcellam.
of Rome: Christ was crucified there, either because the authority, whereby he
was crucified was from the Roman Empire, or else because Christ in his members
was and is there daily crucified, though locally in his own person he was
crucified at Jerusalem. And thus, notwistanding all which has bin said, we
must here by the whore understand the State and Empire of Rome, not so much
under the heathen Emperors as under the head thereof the Pope: which
exposition, besides the authority of the text, has the favor and defense of
ancient and learned Sermon. in Ca^t. 33. Epist. 125.
men. Bernard says, They are the ministers of Christ, but THEY SERVE
ANTICHRIST. Again, The beast spoken of in the Apocalypse, to which a mouth is
given to speak blasphemies, and to make war with the Saints of God, is now
gotten into Peter's chair, as a lion prepared to his pray. It will be said,
that Bernard speaks these latter words of one that came to the Popedom by
intrusion or usurpation. It is true indeed: but wherefore was he an usurper?
he renders a reason thereof in the same place: because the Antipope called
Innocentius was chosen by the kings of Almaine, France, England, Scotland,
Spain, Jerusalem, with consent of the whole Clergy and people in these
nations, and the other was not. And thus Bernard has given his verdict, that
not only this usurper, but all the Popes for this many years are the beast in
the Apocalypse; because now they are only chosen by the college of Cardinals.
To this agrees the decree of C. in nomine did. 23.
Pope Nicolas the second, ann. 1059* that the Pope shall afterward be created
by the suffrages of the Cardinal bishops of Rome, with the consent of the rest
of the clergy and people, and the Emperor himself: and referente Iuello 2*
These. 2.
all Popes are excommunicate and accursed as Antichrists, that enter
otherwise, as al now do. Ioachimus Abbas says, Antichrist was long since
borne in Rome, and shall be yet advanced higher in the APOSTOLIC^ SEE. Petracrh
says, Once Rome, now Babylon. And Ireneus book 5. chap. last, said before all
these, that Antichrist should be Lateinus, a Roman.

Again, this commandment must not so much be understood of a bodily departure
in respect of cohabitatio^ and presence, as of a spiritual seperatio^ in
respect of faith and religion. And the meaning of the holy Ghost is, that men
must depart from the Romish Church in regard of Iudgememt and doctrine, in
regard of their faith and the worship of God.

Thus then we see that the words contain a commandment from God, inioyning
his Church and people to make a separation from Babylon. Whence I observe, That
all those who will be saved, must depart and separate themselves from the faith
and religion of this present Church of Rome. And whereas they are charged with
scisme that separate on this manner; the truth is, they are not scismatikes
that do so, because they have the commandment of God for their: warrant: and
that party is the scismatike in whom the cause of this separation lies: and
that is in the church of Rome, namly the cup of abomination in the whores hand,
which is, their heretical and scismaticall religion.

Now touching this duty of separation I mean to speak at large, not
standing so much to prove the same, because it is evident by the text, as to
show the manner and measure of making this separation: and therein I will handle
two things. First how farforth we may join with them in the matter of
religion: secondly how farforth and wherein we must dissent and depart from
them. And for this cause I mean to make choice of certain points of religion,
and to speak of them in as good order as I can, showing in each of them our
consent and difference: and the rather, because some harp much upon this
string, Exame^ pac^^q^^, imprime de nou v^^u a Caen 1590.
that a union may be made of our two religions, and that we differ not in
substance but in points of circumstance.

The first point wherewith I mean to begin shall be the point of Freewill:
though it be not the principal.

1. Our consent.
Free will both by them and us, is taken for a mixed power in the mind and will
of man; whereby discerning what is good and what is evil, he does accordingly
choose or refuse the same.

I. Conclus. Man must be considered in a fourfold estate, as he was created,
as he was corrupted, as he is renewed, as he shall be glorified. In the first
estate, we ascribe to man's will liberty of nature in which he could will or
nill either good or evil: in the third, liberty of grace: in the last,
liberty of glory. All the doubt is of the second estate: and yet therein also
we agree, as the conclusions following will declare.

II. Conclus. The matters where about freewill is occupied are principally the
actions of men, which be of three sorts, natural, humane, spiritual. Natural
actions are such as are common to men with beasts, as to eat, drink, sleep,
hear, see, smell, taste, and to move from place to place: in all which we
join with the Papists, and hold that man has free will, and even since the
fall of Adam by a natural power of the mind does freely perform any of these
actions or the like.

III. Conclus. Humane actions are such as are common to all men good and bad,
as to speak and use reason, the practice of all mechanical and liberal
arts, and the outward performance of civil and ecclesiastical duties, as to
come to the Church, to speak, and preach the word, to reach out the hand to
receive the sacrament, and to lend the ear to listen outwardly to that which
is taught. And hither we may refer the outward actions of civil virtues; as
namely, Justice, temperance, gentleness, liberality. And in these also we join
with the church of Rome, and say (as experience teaches) that men have a
natural freedom of will, to put them or not to put them in execution. Paul
says, Romans 2. 14. The Gentiles that have not the law do the things of the law
BY NATVRE, that is, by natural strength: and he says of himself, that before
his conversion touching the righteousness of the law, he was vnblame able,
Phil. 3. 6. And for this external obedience, natural men receive reward in
temporal things. Mat. 6. 5. Ezech. 29. 19. And yet here some caueats must be
remembered, I. that in humane actions, man's will is weak and feeble, and his
understanding dim and dark; and thereupon he often fails in them. And in
all such actions with Augustine I d Hypogn. 3.
understand the will of man to be only wounded or half dead. II. That the will
of man is under the will of God, and therefore to be ordered by it; as Jeremy
says, chap. 10. v. 23. O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself:
neither is it in man to walk or direct his steps.

IIII. Conclus. The third kind of actions are spiritual more nearly
concerning the heart and conscience, and these be two fold: they either
concern the kingdom of darkness, or else the kingdom of God. Those that
concern the kingdom of darkness are sins properly: and in these we likewise
join with the Papists and teach, that in sins or evil actions man has
freedom of will. Some peradventure will say, that we sin necessarily,
because he that sins can not but sin: and that freewill and necessity can
not stand together. Indeed the necessity of compulsion or coaction, and
freewill can not agree: but there is another kind of necessity which may
stand with freedom of will: for some things may be done necessarily and also
freely. A man that is in close prison, must needs there abide and cannot
possibly get forth and walk where he will; yet can he move himself freely
and walk within the prison: so likewise, though man's will be chained naturally
by the bonds of sin, and therefore cannot but sin: and thereupon sins
necessarily, yet does it also sin freely.

V. Conclus. The second kind of spiritual actions or things, concern the
kingdom of God; as repentance, faith, the conversion of a sinner, new
obedience, and such like: in which we likewise in part join with the Church of
Rome and say, that in the first conversion of a sinner, man's freewill concurres
with Gods grace, as a fellow or coworker in some sort. For in the conversion
of a sinner three things are required: the word, Gods spirit, and man's will:
for man's will is not passive in all and every respect, but has an action in
the first conversion and change of the soul. When any man is converted, this
work of God is not done by compulsion, but he is converted willingly: and at
the very time when he is converted, by Gods grace he wills his conversion. To
this end said Augustine, He which made thee Ser. 15. de verb. Apost.
without thee, will not save thee without thee. Again, that is certain, that our
will is required de great. and ^ arbitr. 1.
in this, that we may do any goodthing well: but we have it not from our own
power but God works to will in us. For look at what time God gives grace, at
the same time he Posse velle, and actu velle recipere.
gives a will to desire and will the same grace: as for example when God works
faith, at the same time he works also upon the will causing it to desire faith
and willingly to receive the gift of believing. God makes of the unwilling will
a willing will: because no man can receive grace utterly against his will,
considering will constrained is no will. But here we must remember, that
howsoever in respect of time the working of grace by Gods spirit, and the
willing of it in man go together: yet in regard of order, grace is first
wrought, and man's will must first of all be acted and moved by grace, and then
it also acts, wills, and moves it self. And this is the last point of
consent between us and the Roman church touching freewill: neither may we
proceed further with them.

II. The dissent or difference.
The point of difference stands in the cause of the freedom of man's will in
spiritual matters, which concern the kingdom of God. The Papists say, man's
will concurreth and works with gods grace in the first conversion of a sinner
by it self, and by it own natural power; and is only helped by the holy
Ghost. We say, that man's will works with grace in the first conversion, yet
not of it self, but by grace. Or thus; They say, will has a natural
cooperation: we deny it, and say it has cooperation only by grace, being in
it self not active but passive; willing well only as it is moved by grace,
whereby it must first be acted and moved, before it can act or will. And that
we may the better conceive the difference, I will use this comparison: The
Church of Rome sets forth the estate of a sinner by the condition of a
prisoner, and so do we: mark then the difference. It supposes the said
prisoner to lie bound hand and foot with chains and fetters, and withal to
be sick and weak, yet not wholly dead but living in part: it supposes also
that being in this case, he stirs not himself for any help, and yet has
ability and power to stir. Hereupon if the keeper come and take away his
bolts and fetters, and hold him by the hand and help him up, he can and will
of himself stand and walk and go out of prison: even so (say they) is a
sinner bound hand and foot with the chain of his sins; and yet he is not
dead but sick, like to the wounded man in the way between Ierico and
Jerusalem. And therefore does he not will and affect that which is good; but
if the holy Ghost come and do but untie his bands, and reach him his hand of
grace, then can he stand of himself and will his own salvation, or any thing
else that is good. We in like manner grant, that a prisoner fitly resembles a
natural man, but yet such a prisoner must he be, as is not only sick and
weak but even stark dead; which cannot stir though the keeper untie his
boltes and chains, nor hear though he sound a trumpet in his ear; and if the
said keeper would have him to move and stir, he must give him not only his
hand to help him, but even soul and life also: and such a one is every man by
nature; not only chained and fettered in his sins but stark dead therein;
as one that lies rotting in the grave, not having any ability or power to
move or stir: and therefore he cannot so much as desire or do any thing
that is truly good of himself, but God must first come and put a new soul
into him, even the spirit of grace to quicken and revive him: and then being
thus revived, the will begins to will good things at the very same time,
when god by his spirit first infuseth grace. And this is the true difference
between us and the Church of Rome in this point of free will.

III. Our Reasons.
Now for the confirmation of the doctrine we hold, namely, that a man wills
not his own conversion of him self by nature either in whole or in part, but
by grace wholly and alone; these reasons may be used. The first is taken from
the nature and measure of man's corruption, which may be distinguished into two
parts. The first is the want of that original righteousness, which was in man
by creation: the second is, a prones and inclination to that which is evil,
and to nothing that is truly good. This appears Genesis 8. 21. The frame of
man's heart (says the Lord,) is evil even from his childhood: that is, the
disposition of the understanding, will, affections, with all that the heart of
man deuiseth, f^rmeth, or imagines, is wholly evil. And Paul says, Romans 8. 5.
The wisdom of the flesh is ENMITY against God. Which words are very
significant: for the word [(...)] translated vvisdome, signifies that the best
thoughts, the best desires, affections, and endeavors that be in any natural
man, even those that come most near to true holiness, are not only contrary to
God, but even enmity it self. And hence I gather, that the very heart it
self, that is, the will and mind, from whence these desires and thoughts do
come, are also enmity unto God. For such as the action is, such is the
faculty whence it proceeds; such as the fruit is, such is the tree; such as
the branches are such are the roots. By both these places it is evident, that
in man there is not only a want, absence, or deprivation of original
righteousness, but a prones also by nature unto that which is evil* which
prones includes in it an inclination not to some few, but to all and every
sin; the very sin against the holy Ghost not excepted. Hence therefore I
reason thus.

If every man by nature do both want original justice, and be also prone unto
all evil, then wants he natural freewill to will that which is truly good.
But every man by nature wants original justice, and is also prone unto all
evil. Ergo: Every man naturally wants freewill, to will that which is good.
Reason II. 1. Cor. 2. 14. The natural man PERCEIVES NOT the things of the
spirit of God: for they are foolishnes unto him, neither CAN HE KNOW them,
because they are spiritually discerned. In these words Saint Paul sets down
these points: I that a natural man does not so much as think of the things
revealed in the Gospel. II. that a man hearing, and in mind conceiving them;
can not give consent unto them* and by natural indgement approve of them, but
contrariwise thinks them to be foolishness. III. that no man can give assent
to the things of God, unless he be enlightened by the spirit of God. And hence
I reason thus.

If a man by nature does not know and perceive the things of God: and when he
shall know them, can not by nature give assent unto them: then has he no power
to will them. But the first is evidently true. Ergo. For first the mind must
approve and give assent, before the will can choose or will: and when the mind
has not power to conceive nor give assent, there the will has no power to
will.
Reason III. Thirdly the holy Ghost avouches, Ephesians. 2. ^. Colloss. 2. 13. that
all men by nature are dead in sins and trespasses: not as the Papists say,
weak, sick, or half dead. Hence I gather, that man wa^teth natural power not
to will simply, but freely and franckly to will that which is truly good. A
dead man in his grave cannot stir the least finger, because he wa^ts the very
power of life, sense, and motion: no more can he that is dead in sin, will the
least good nay if he could either will or do any good, he could not be dead in
sin. And as a dead man in the grave, cannot rise but by the power of God; no
more can he that is dead in sin rise, but by the power of Gods grace alone,
without any power of his own.

Reason IV. Fourthly, in the conversion and salvation of a sinner, the
scripture ascribes al to God, and nothing to man's freewil. John 3. 3. Except a
man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his
worekmanship CREATED in Christ Jesus to good works. And c. 4. v. 24. the new
man is CREATED to the image of God. Now to be borne again, is a work of no
less importance then our first creation; and therefore wholly to be ascribed
to God as our creation is. Indeed Paul, Philip. 2. 12. 13. bids the
Philippians work out their salvation with fear and trembling: not meaning to
ascribe unto them a power of doing good by themselves. And therefore in the
next verse he adds, It is God that works both the will and the deed:
directly excluding all natural freewill in things spiritual: and yet withal
he acknowledges, that man's will has a work in doing that which is good, not
by nature but by grace. Because when God gives man power to will good things,
then he can will them: and when he gives him a power to do good, then he can
do good, and he does it. For though there be not in man's conversion a natural
cooperation of his will with Gods spirit, yet is there a supernatural
cooperation by grace, enabling man when he is to be converted, to will his
conversion: according to which S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 15. 10. I have labored
in the faith: but least any man should imagine, that this was done by any
natural power: therefore he adds* yet not I, that is, not I by any thing in
me, but Gods grace in me, inabling my will to do the good I do.

Reason V. The judgment of the ancient Church. August. de correp. and great.
c. 12.
August. The will of the regenerate is kindled only by the holy Ghost: that
they may therefore be able because they will thus: and they will thus, because
God WORKS IN THEM TO WILL. And, Epist. 105.
We have LOST OUR FREE WILL to love God by the greatness of our sin. Sermon. 2.
on the words of the Apostle. Man when he was created, receive a great strength
in his freewil: but by sinning HE LOST IT. Fulgent. lib. Prad.
Fulge^tius, God gives grace freely to the unworthy, whereby the wicked man
being justified is enlightened, WITH THE GIFT OF GOOD WILL, and with a
FACVLTIE OF DOING GOOD: that by mercy preventing him, he may BEGIN TO WILL
WELL, and by mercy coming after he may do the good he will. Bernard says,
Bernard. l. de lib^ro arbitrio.
It is WHOLY THE GRACE OF GOD that we are created, healed, saved. Council.
Arausic. 2. cap. 6. To believe and to will is GIVEN from above by INFVSION,
and inspiration of the holy Ghost. More testimonies and reasons might be
alleged to prove this conclusion, but these shall suffice: now let us see
what reasons are alleged to the contrary.

III. Objections of Papists.
Object. I. First they allege that man by nature may do that which is good,
and therefore will that which is good: for none can do that which he neither
wills nor thinks to do, but first he must will and then do. Now (say
they) men can do good by nature, as give alms, speak the truth, do
justice, and practice other duties of civil virtue: and therefore will that
which is good. I answer, that a natural man may do good works for the
substance of the outward work: but not in regard of the goodness of the
manner: these are two diverse things. A man without supernatural grace may give
alms, do justice, speak the truth, etc. which be good things considered in
themselves as God has commanded them; but he cannot do them well. To think
good things and to do good things are natural works: but to think good
things in a good manner, and to do them well, so as God may accept the action
done, are works of grace. And therefore the good thing done by a natural man
is a sin, in respect of the doer: because it fails both for his right
beginning, which is a pure heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned; as also
for his end which is the glory of God.

Object. II. God has commanded all men to believe and repent: therefore they
have natural free will, by virtue whereof (being helped by the spirit of God)
they can believe and repent. Ansvv. This reason is not good: for by such
commandments God shows not what men are able to do; but what they should
do, and what they can not do. Again, the reason is not well framed, it ought
rather to be thus: Because God gives men commandment to repent and believe,
therefore they have power to repent and believe, either by nature or by grace:
and then we hold with them. For when God in the Gospel commands men to
repent and to believe, at the same time by his grace he inableth them both to
will or desire to believe and repent, as also actually to repent and believe.

Object. III. If man have no freewill to sin or not to sin, then no man is
to be punished for his sins: because he sins by a necessity not to be
avoided. Ansvv. The reason is not good: for though man can not but sin, yet
is the fault in himself, and therefore he is to be punished: as a bankrupt is
not therefore freed from his debts, because he is not able to pay them: but the
bills against him stand in force, because the debt comes thorough his own
default.

The second point: of Original sin.
The next point to be handled, is concerning Original sin after baptism:
that is, how farforth it remains after baptism. A point to be well
considered, because hereupon depend many points of popery.

I. Our consent.
I. Conclus. They say, natural corruption after baptism is abolished, and so
say we: but let us see how far it is abolished. In original sin are three
things: I. the punishment, which is the first and second death. II. Guiltines,
which is the binding up of the creature unto punishment. III. the fault or the
offending of God, under which I comprehend our Guiltines in Adams first
offense, as also the Corruption of the heart: which is, a natural inclination
and pronesse to any thing that is evil or against the law of God. For the
first we say, that after baptism in the regenerate, the punishment of
original sin is taken away: There is no condemnation (says the Apostle) to
them that be in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 1. For the second, that is the guiltines,
we further condescende and say; that is also taken away in them that are borne
anew: for considering there is no condemnation to them, there is nothing to
bind them to punishment. Yet this caveat must be remembered, namely that the
guiltines is removed from the person regenerate, not from the sin in the
person; but of this more afterward. Thirdly, the guilt in Ada^s first offense
is pardoned. And touching the corruption of the heart, I avouch two things: I.
That, that very power or strength whereby it reigns in man, is taken away in
the regenerate. II. That this corruption is abolished (as also the fault of
every actual sin past) so far forth as it is the fault and sin of the
man in whom it is. Indeed it remains till death, and it is sin considered
in it self, so long as it remains, but it is not imputed unto the person: and
in that respect is as though it were not; it being pardoned.

II. The dissent or difference.
Thus far we consent with the Church of Rome: now the difference between us
stands not in the abolishment, but in the manner, and the measure of the
abolishment of this sin.

Papists teach, that Original sin is so far forth taken away after
baptism, that it cease to be a sin properly: and is nothing else but a
want, defect, and weakness, making the heart fit and ready to conceive sin:
much like tinder, which though it be no fire of it self, yet is it very apt
and fit to conceive fire. And they of the church of Rome deny it to be sin
properly, that they might uphold some gross opinions of theirs, namely, That
a man in this life may fulfill the law of God; and do good works void of
sin: that he may stand righteous at the bar of Gods judgment by them.

But we teach otherwise, that though original sin be taken away in the
regenerate, and that in sundry respects: yet does it remain in them after
baptism, not only as a want and weakness but as a sin, and that properly:
as may by these reasons be proved.

Reason I. Romans 7. 17. Paul says directly: It is no more I that do it, but
sin that dwells in me: that is, original sin. The Papists answer again,
that it is so called improperly: because it comes of sin and also is an
occasion of sin to be done. But by the circumstances of the text, it is sin
properly: for in the words following, Saint Paul says, that this sin
dwelling in him, made him to do the evil which he hated. And v. 24. he cries
out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
whence I reason thus.

That which once was sin properly, and still remaining in man makes him to
sin, and intangleth him in the punishment of sin, and makes him miserable:
that is sin properly.

But original sin does all these. Ergo.

Reason II. Infants baptized and regenerate, die the bodily death before they
come to the years of discretion: therefore original sin in them is sin
properly; or else they should not die, having no cause of death in them: for
death is the wages of sin, as the Apostle says, Romans 6. 23. and Romans 5. 12.
Death entered into the world by sin. As for actual sin they have none, if
they die presently after they are borne before they come to any use either of
reason, or affection.

Reason III. That which lusts against the spirit, and by lusting tempts,
and in tempting intiseth and draws the heart to sin, is for nature sin it
self: but concupiscence in the regenerate lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5.
17. and tempts as I have said, Iam. 1. 14. God tempts no man, but every
man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is
intised: then when lust conceiueth, it brings forth sin. And therefore it
is sin properly: such as the fruit is, such is the tree. Aug. contra Iul. l.
5. cap. 3.
August. Concupiscence against which the spirit lusts IS SINN^, because in
it there is disobedience against the rule of the mind: and it is the
punishment of sin because it befalls man for the merits of his disobedience:
and it is the cause of sin.

Reason V. The judgment of the ancient Church. August. epist. 29. Charity in
some is more, in some less, in some none: the highest degree of all which
cannot be increased, is in none, as long as man lives upon earth. And as long
as it may be increased, THAT WHICH IS LESS THEN IT SHOULD BE, IS IN FAVLT: by
which fault it is, that there is no just man upon earth that does good and
sins not: by which fault none living shall be justified in the sight of God:
for which fault, if we say we have no sin, there is no truth in us: for which
also, though we profit never so much, it is necessary for us to say, forgive
us our debts, though al our words, deeds, and thoughts be already forgiven in
baptism. Indeed August. in sundry places seems to deny concupiscence to be
sin after baptism: but his meaning is, that concupiscence in the regenerate
is not the sin of the person in whom it is. For thus he expoundes himself,
ad Valor. lib. 1. c. 24.
This is not to have sin, not to be guilty of sin. And, Lib. 2. contra Iul.
The law of sin in baptism is remitted and not ENDED. And, Tract* 42. in
Ioh.
Let not sin reign: he says not, let not sin be, but let it not reign.
For as long as thou li^est, of necessity sin will be in thy members: at the
least, look it reign not in thee, etc.

Objections of Papists.
The arguments which the Church of Rome alleges to the contrary, are these.
Object. I. In baptism men receive perfect and absolute pardon of sin; and
sin being pardoned is taken quite away: and therefore original sin after
baptism cease to be sin. Ans. Sin is abolished two ways: first in
regard of quoadimputationem.
imputatio^ to the person: secondly in regard of quoad ex^^tiam.
existing and being. For this cause, God vouchsafes to man two blessings in
baptism, Remission of sin, and Mortification of the same. Remission or
pardon abolisheth sin wholly in respect of any imputation thereof unto man,
but not simply in regard of the being thereof. Mortification therefore goes
further, and abolisheth in all the powers of body and soul, the very
concupiscence or corruption it self, in respect of the being thereof. And
because mortification is not accomplished till death, therefore original
corruption remains till death, though not imputed.

Object. II. Every sin is voluntary; but original sin in no man after
baptism is voluntary: and therefore no sin. Ans. The proposition is a
politic rule pertaining to the courts of men, and must be understood of such
actions as are done of one man to an other: and it does not belong to the court
of conscience, which God holds and keeps in men's hearts, in which every
want of conformity to the law is made a sin. Secondly I answer, that
original sin was voluntary in our first parent Adam: for he sinned, and
brought this misery upon us willingly: though in us it be otherwise upon just
cause. Actual sin was first in him, and then original corruption: but in us
original corruption is first, and then actual sin.

Object. III. Where the form of any thing is taken away, there the thing it
self cease also: but after baptism in the regenerate, the form of
original sin, that is, the guilt is quite removed: and therefore sin
cease to be sin. Answ. The guilt, or obligation to punishment, is not the
form of original corruption, but (as we say in schools) an accident or
necessary companion thereof. The true form of original sin, is a defect
and deprivation of that which the law requires at our hands in our mind,
will, affections, and in all the powers both of soul and body. But they urge
this reason further, saying; where the guilt and punishment is taken away,
there is no fault remaining: but after baptism the guilt and punishment is
removed: and therefore, though original corruption remain, it is not as a
fault to make us guilty before God, but only as a weakness. Ans. Guilt is
removed, and not removed. It is removed from the person regenerate, which
stands not guilty for any sin original or actual: but guilt is not
removed from the sin it self; or, as some answer, there be two kinds of
guilt, actual, and potentiall. The actual guilt is, whereby sin makes man
stand guilty before God: and that is removed in the regenerate. But the
potentiall guilt, which is an aptnes in sin, to make a man stand guilty if
he sin, that is not removed: and therefore still sin remains sin. To
this or like effect says Augustine, contra Iu^. l. 6. c. 6.
We say that the guilt of concupiscence, not whereby IT IS GVILTIE (for that is
not a person) but that whereby it made man guilty from the beginning, is
pardoned, and that the thing it SELF IS EVIL so as the regenerate desire to
be healed of this plague.

Object. III. Lastly, for our disgrace they allege that we in our doctrine
teach, that original sin after baptism is only clipped or pared, like the
hair of a man's head, whose roots still remain in the flesh, growing and
increasing after they are cut, as before. Ans. Our doctrine is abused: for in
the paring of any thing* as in cutting of the hair or in lopping a tree, the
root remains untouched, and thereupon multiplieth as before. But in the
mortification of original sin after baptism, we hold no such paring: but
teach, that in the very first instant of the conversion of a sinner, sin
receives his deadly wound in the root, never afterward to be recovered.

The third point: Certentie of salvation.
I. Our consent.
I. Conclus. We hold and believe that a man in this life, may be certain of
salvation: and the same thing does the Church of Rome teach and hold.

II. Conclus. We hold and believe that a man is to put a certain affiance in
Gods mercy in Christ for the salvation of his soul: and the same thing by
common consent holds the foresaid Church: this point makes not the
difference between us.

III. Conclus. We hold that with assurance of salvation in our hearts is joined
doubting: and there is no man so assured of his salvation, but he at some time
doubts thereof, especially in the time of temptation: and in this the Papists
agree with us, and we with them.

IV. Conclus. They go further and say, that a man may be certain of the
salvation of men, or of the Church by catholic faith: and so say we.

V. Conclus. Yea they hold that a man by faith may be assured of his own
salvation through extraordinary revelation, as Abraham and others were, and so
do we.

VI. They teach that we are to be certain of our salvation by special faith in
regard of e Bellar. l. 3. page 1129. cl.
God that promises: though in regard of our selves and our indisposition we
can not: and in the former point they consent with us.

II. The dissent or difference.
The very maine point of difference lies in the manner of assurance.

I. Conclus. We hold that a man may be certain of his salvation in his own
conscience even in this life, and that by an ordinary and special faith. They
hold that a man is certain of his salvation only by hope: both of us hold a
certentie, we by faith, they by hope.

II. Conclus. Further, we hold and avouch that our certentie by true faith is
infallible: they say, their certentie is only probable.

III. Conclus. And further though both of us say, that we have confidence in
Gods mercy in Christ for our salvation: yet we do it with some difference.
For our confidence comes from certain and ordinary faith: theirs from hope,
ministering (as they say) but a coniecturall certentie.

Thus much of the difference: now let us see the reasons two and fro.

III. Objections of papists.
Object. I. Where there is no word there is no faith: for these two are
relatiues: but there is no word of God saying, Cornelius believe thou, Peter
believe thou: or thou shall be saved. And therefore there is no such ordinary
faith to believe a man's own particular salvation. Ans. The proposition is
false, unless it be supplied with a clause on this manner. Where there is no
word of promise, nor any thing that does countervaile a particular promise,
there is no faith. But (say they) there is no such particular word. It is true,
God does not speak to men particularly, Believe thou, and thou shall be saved.
But yet does he that which is answerable hereunto, in that he gives a general
promise, with a commandment to apply the same: and has ordained the holy
ministry of the word to apply the same to the persons of the hearers in his
own name: and that is as much as if the Lord himself should speak to men
particularly. To speak more plainly, in the Scripture the promises of
salvation be indefinitely propounded; it says not any where, if John will
believe he shall be saved, or if Peter will believe he shall be saved: but
whosoever believes shall be saved. Now then comes the minister of the word,
who standing in the room of God, and in the stead of Christ him self, takes
the indefinite promises of the Gospel, and lays them to the hearts of every
particular man: and this in effect is as much as if Christ himself should say,
Cornelius believe thou, and thou shall be saved: Peter believe thou, and thou
shall be saved. It is answered, that this applying of the Gospel is upon
condition of men's faith and repentance, and that men are deceived touching
their own faith and repentance: and therefore fail in applying the word unto
themselves. Answ. Indeed this manner of applying is false in all hypocrites,
heretics, and unrepentant persons: for they apply upon carnal presumption,
and not by faith. Nevertheless it is true in all the Elect having the spirit
of grace, and prayer: for when God in the ministry of the word being his own
ordinance, says, Seek ye my face: the heart of Gods children truly answers,
O Lord, I will seek thy face. Psalm. 17. 8. And when God shall say, Thou art my
people, they shall say again: The Lord is my God, Zach. 13. 6. And it is a
truth of God, that he which believes knows that he believes: and he that
truly repents knows that he repents; unless it be in the beginning of our
conuersiou, and in the time of distress and temptation. Otherwise what
thankfulness can there be for grace received.

Object. II. It is no article of the Creed, that a man must believe his own
salvation: and therefore no man is bound thereto. Ans. By this argument it
appears plainly, that the very pillars of the Church of Rome do not
understand the Creed: for in that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed,
every article implies in it this particular faith. And in the first article, I
believe in God, are three things contained: the first, to believe that there is
a God, the second to believe the same God is my God, the third to put my
confidence in him for my salvation: and so much contain the other articles,
which are concerning God. When Thomas said, Ioh. 20. 28. 29. My God, Christ
answered, Thou have believed Thomas. Where we see that to believe in God, is to
believe God to be our God. And Psalm. 78. v. 22. to believe in God and to put
trust in him are all one, They believed not in God, and trusted not in his
help. And the articles concerning Remission of sins and Life everlasting,
do include, and we in them acknowledge our special faith concerning our own
salvation. For to believe this or that, is to believe there is such a thing,
and that the same thing belongs to me: as when David said, I should have
fainted except I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living. Psalm. 27. 13. It is answered, that in those articles we only profess
our selves to believe remission of sins, and life everlasting, to be
vouchsafed to the people and Church of god. Ans. This indeed is the exposition
of many, but it sta^ds not with common reason. For if that be ^ll the faith
that is there confessed, the devil has as good a faith as we. He knows and
believes that there is a god: and that this god imparteth remission of sins
and life everlasting to his Church. And to the end that we being Gods
children, may in faith go beyond all the devils in hell, we must further
believe, that remission of sins and life everlasting belongs unto us: and
unless we do particularly apply the said articles unto our selves, we shall
little or nothing differ from the devil, in making confession of faith.

Object. III. We are taught to pray for the pardon of our sins day by day,
Math. 6. 12. and all this were needless, if we could be assured of pardon in
this life. Ans. The fourth petition must be understood not so much of our old
debts or sins, as of our present and new sins: for as we go on from day to
day, so we add sin to sin; and for the pardon of them must we humble our
selves and pray. I answer again, that we pray for the pardon of our sins:
not because we have no assurance thereof, but because our assurance is weak
and small; we grow on from grace to grace in Christ, as children do to man's
estate by little and little. The heart of every believer is like a vessel with
a narrow neck, which being cast into the sea is not filled at the first; but
by reason of the straight passage, receives water drop by drop. God gives
unto us in Christ even a sea of mercy, but the same on our parts is apprehended
and received only by little and little, as faith grows from age to age: and
this is the cause why men having assurance pray for more.

Our reasons to the contrary.
Reason. I. The first reason may be taken from the nature of faith on this
manner. True faith is both an infallible assurance and a particular assurance of
the remission of sins and of life everlasting. And therefore by this faith, a
man may be certainly and particularly assured of the remission of sins and
life everlasting. That this reason may be of force, two things must be proved:
first that true faith is a certain assurance of Gods mercy to that party in
whom it is. Secondly that faith is a particular assurance thereof. For the
first that faith is a certain assurance, Christ says to Peter, Mat. 14. 31. O
thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt. Where he makes an opposition
between faith and doubting: thereby giving us directly to understand, that, To
be certain, and To give assurance is of the nature of faith. Romans 4. 20. 22.
Paul says of Abraham, that he did not doubt of the promise of God through
unbelief: but was strengthened in faith, and gave glory to God, being fully
assured, that he which had promised was able to do it: where I observe first,
that doubting is made a fruit of unbelief; and therefore infallible certentie
and assurance, being contrary to doubting must needs proceed from true faith;
considering that contrary effects come of contrary causes: and contrary
causes produce contrary effects. Secondly I note that the strength of Abraham's
faith, did stand in fullness of assurance: for the text says, he was
strengthened in the faith, being fully assured: and again Heb. 11. 1. true
saving faith is said to be the ground and subsistence of things hoped for: and
the evidence or demonstration of things that are not seen: but faith can be no
ground or evidence of things, unless it be for nature certentie it self: and
thus the first point is manifest. The second, that saving faith is a particular
assurance, is proved by this, that the property of faith is to apprehend and
apply the promise, and the thing promised, Christ with his benefits. Ioh. 1.
12. As many, says S. John, as received him, to them he gave power to be the
sons of God, namely to them that believe in his name. In these words to
believe in Christ, and to receive Christ, are put for one and the same thing.
Now to receive Christ, is to apprehend and apply him with all his benefits unto
our selves, as he is offered in the promises of the Gospel. For in the sixth
chapter following, first of all he sets forth himself not only as a Redeemer
generally, but also as the bread of life and the water of life: secondly he
sets forth his best hearers as eaters of his body and drinkers of his blood:
and thirdly he intends to prove this conclusion, that to eat his body and to
drink his blood, and to believe in him, are all one. Now then if Christ be as
food, and if to eat and drink the body and blood of Christ, be to believe in
him, then must there be a proportion between eating and believing. Look then
as there can be no eating without taking or receiving of meat, so no believing
in Christ without a spiritual receiving and apprehending of him. And as the
body has his hand, mouth, and stomach, whereby it takes, receives, and
digesteth meat for the nourishment of every part: so likewise in the soul
there is a faith, which is both hand, mouth, and stomach to apprehend,
receive, and apply Christ and all his merits for the nourishment of the soul.
And Paul says yet more plainly, that through faith we receive the promise of
the spirit. Gal. 3. 14.


Now as the property of apprehending and applying of Christ belongs to
faith, so it agrees not to hope, love, confidence, of any other gift or grace
of God. But first by faith we must apprehend Christ, and apply him to our
selves, before we can have any hope or confidence in him. And this applying
seems not to be don by any affection of the will, but by a supernatural act of
the mind, which is to acknowledge, set down, and believe that remission of
sins, and life everlasting by the merit of Christ, belong to us particularly.
To this which I have said agrees Augustine Tract. 25. on Ioh. why preparest
thou teeth and belly: BELIEVE AND THOU HAVE EATEN. and Tract. 50. How shall I
reach my hand into heaven, that I may hold him sitting there? Send up thy
faith, and thou laiest hold on him. And Bernard says, homil. in Cant. 76.
Where he is thou can not come now --; yet go to follow him and seek him
--: believe and thou have found him: for TO BELIEVE IS TO FIND. Chrysostom. on
Mark. Homil. 10. Let us believe and we see Jesus present before us. Ambr. on
Luke lib. 6. cap. 8. By faith Christ is touched, by faith Christ is seen.
Tertul. de resurrect. carnis. he must be chewed by understanding, and be
digested by faith.

Reason II. Whatsoever the holy Ghost testifies unto us, that we may, yea that
we must certainly by faith believe: but the holy Ghost does particularly
testify unto us our adoption, the remission of our sins, and the salvation
of our souls: and therefore we may and must particularly and certainly by faith
believe the same. The first part of this reason is true, and cannot be denied
of any. The second part is proved thus: Saint Paul says. Romans 8. 15. We have
not received the spirit of bondage to fear: but the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry Abba, father: adding further, that the same spirit bears
witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God. Where the Apostle
makes two witnesses of our adoption: the spirit of God, and our spirits, that
is, the conscience sanctified by the holy Ghost. The Papists to elude this
reason, allege that the spirit of God does indeed witness of our adoption, by
some comfortable feelings of Gods love and favor, being such as are weak and
oftentimes deceitful. But by their leaves, the testimony of the Spirit is more
then a bare sense or feeling of Gods grace: for it is called the pledge and
earnest of Gods spirit in our hearts. 2. Cor. 1. 21. and therefore it is fit to
take away all occasion of doubting of our salvation: as in a bargain the
earnest is given between the parties, to put all out of questistion. Bernara
says, that the testimony of the spirit is a most sure testimony. Epist. 107.

Reason III. That which we must pray for by Gods commandment, that we must
believe: but every man is to pray for the pardon of his own sins, and for
life everlasting; of this there is no question: therefore he is bound to
believe the same. The proposition is most of all doubtful: but it is proved
thus. In every petition there must be two things: a desire of the things we
ask, and a particular faith whereby we believe, that the thing we ask shall
be given unto us. So Christ says, Whatsoever ye desire when Mark. 11. 24.
you pray, believe that you shall have it, and it shall be given unto you And
Saint John further notes out this particular faith, calling it our assurance
that God will give unto us. whatsoever we ask according to his will. 1. Ioh.
5. 14.
And hence it is, that in every petition there must be two grounds: a
commandment to warrant us in making a petition, and a promise to assure us of
the accomplishment thereof. And upon both these, follows necessarily an
application of the things we ask to our selves.

Reason IIII. Whatsoever God commands in the Gospel, that a man must and can
perform: but God in the Gospel commands us to believe the pardon of our own
sins: and life everlasting: and therefore we must believe thus much, and may
be assured thereof. This proposition is plain by the distinction of the
commandments, of the law, and of the Gospel. The comma^dements of the law
show us what we must do, but minister no power to perform the thing to be
done: but the doctrine and commandments of the Gospel do otherwise; and
therefore they are called spirit and life; god with the commandment giving
grace Ioh. 6. ^6.
that the thing prescribed may be don. Now this is a commandment of the
gospel, to believe remission of sins: for it was the substance of Christ's
ministry, repent and believe the Gospel. And that is not generally to believe
that Christ is a Savior, and that the promises made in him are true (for so
the devils believe with trembling:) but it is particularly to believe that
Christ is my Savior, and that the promises of salvation in Christ belong in
special to me, as Saint John says: This is his commandment, that we believe
in the name of Jesus Christ: now to believe in Christ is to put confidence in
him; which none can do, unless he be first assured of his love and favor.
And therefore in as much, as we are enjoined to put our confidence in Christ,
we are also enjoined to believe our reconciliation with him, which stands in
the remission of our sins, and our acceptance to life everlasting.

Reason V. Whereas the Papists teach, that a man may be assured of his
salvation by hope: even hence it follows, that he may be infallibly assured
thereof. For the property of true and lively hope is never to make a man
ashamed. Romans 5. 5. And true hope follows faith and ever presupposes
certenty of faith: neither can any man truly hope for his salvation unless by
faith he be certainly assured thereof in some measure.

The popish doctors take exception to these reasons on this manner. First they
say, it cannot be proved that a man is as certain of his salvation by faith, as
he is of the articles of the creed. I answ. First they prove thus much that we
ought to be as certain of the one as of the other. For look, what commandment
we have to believe the articles of our faith; the like we have inioyning us to
believe the pardon of our own sins, as I have proved. Secondly these
arguments prove it to be the nature of essential property of faith, as
certenlie to assure man of his salvation, as it does assure him of the articles
which he believes. And howesoeuer commonly men do not believe their salvation
as infallible, as they do their articles of faith: yet some special men do;
having Gods word applied by the spirit as a sure ground of their faith, whereby
they believe their own salvation, as they have it for a ground of the articles
of their faith. Thus certainly was Abraham assured of his own salvation: as
also the Prophets and Apostles, and the martyrs of God in all ages; whereupon
without doubting they have bin content to lay down their lives for the name of
Christ; in whom they were assured to receive eternal happiness. And there is
no question, but there be many now, that by long and often experience of Gods
mercy, and by the inward certificate of the ho^ Ghost, have attained to a full
assurance of their salvation.

II. Exception. Howesoeuer a man may be assured of his present estate, yet no
man is certain of his perseverance unto the end. Ans. It is otherwise: for in
the sixth petition, lead us not into temptation, we pray that God would not
suffer us to be wholly overcome of the devil in any temptation: and to this
petition we have a promise answerable, 1. Cor. 10. That God with the temptation
will give an issue: and therefore howsoever the devil may buffit, molest, and
wound the servants of God, yet shall he never be able to overcome them. Again
he that is once a member of Christ, can never be wholly cut off. And if any by
sin were wholly severed from Christ for a time, in his recovery he is to be
baptized the second time: for baptism is the sacrament of initiation or
ingrafting into Christ. By this reason we should as often be baptized as we
fall into any sin, which is absurd. Again S. John says, 1. Ioh. 2. 19. They
went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they
would have continued with us. Where he takes it for granted, that such as be
once in Christ, shall never wholly be severed or fall from him. Though our
communion with Christ may be lessened, yet the union and the bond of
conjunction is never dissolved.

III. Exception. They say, we are indeed to believe our salvation on gods
part: but we must needs doubt in regard of our selves: because the promises of
remission of sins are given upon condition of man's faith and repentance. Now
we cannot (say they) be assured that we have true faith and repentance, because
we may lie in secret sins; and so want that indeed, which we suppose our
selves to have* Ansvv. I say again, he that does truly repent and believe,
does by Gods grace know that he does repent and believe: for else Paul would
never have said, Prove your selves whither you be in the faith or not: and the
same Apostle says, 2. Cor. 12. We have not received the spirit of the world,
but the spirit which is of God, that we might KNOW THE THINGS WHICH ARE
GIVEN OF GOD: which things are not only life everlasting, but justification,
sanctification, and such like. And as for secret sins, they cannot make our
repentance void: for he that truly repents of his known sins, repents
also of such as be unknown, and receives the pardon of them all. God
requires not an express or special repentance of unknown sins; but
accepts it as sufficient, if we repent of them generally: as David says, Psalm.
19. Who knows the errors of this life: forgive me my secret sins. And
whereas they add that faith and repentance must be sufficient. I answer that
the sufficiency of our faith and repentance, stands in the truth and not in
the measure or perfection thereof; and the truth of both where they are, is
certainly discerned.

Reason VI. The judgment of the ancient Church. de verbis Dei. sermon. 28.
August. Of an evil servant thou art made a good child: therefore PRESVME not
of thine own doing, but of the grace of Christ: it is not arroga^cy BUT
FAITH: to acknowledge what thou have received, is not pride but devotion. And,
Tract. 5. epist. Ioh.
Let no man ask an other man, but return to his own heart; if he find
charity there, he HAS SECVRITIE for his passage from life to death. Hilar. on
Math. 5. The kingdom of heaven which our Lord professed to be in himself,
his willis that it must be hoped for VVITHOVT ANY DOVBTFVLNES OF UNCERTAIN
VVIL. Otherwise there is no justification by faith, if faith it self be MADE
DOVBTFVLL. Bernard. epist. 107. Who is the just man but he that being loved of
God, loves him again: which comes not to pass but by the SPIRIT REVEALING BY
FAITH the eternal PVRPOSE OF GOD of his SALVATION to come. Which revelation is
nothing else but the infusion of spiritual grace; by which, when the deeds of
the flesh are mortified the man is prepared to the kingdom of heaven --.
Together receiving in one spirit that whereby he MAY PRESVME that he is loved
and also love again --.

To conclude, the Papists have no great cause to dissent from us in this point.
For they teach and profess, that they do by a special faith believe their
own salvation certainly and infallibly in respect of God, that promises. Now
the thing which hinders them is their own indisposition and unworthiness (as
they say) which keeps them from being certain otherwise then in a likely hope.
But this hindrance is easily removed, if men will judge indifferently. For
first of all, in regard of our selves and our disposition we cannot be certain
at all, but must despair of salvation even to the very death. We cannot be
sufficiently disposed so long as we live in this world, but must always say
with Jacob, I am less then all thy mercies, Genesis 32. and with David, Enter not
into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for none living shall be justified in
thy sight: and with the Centurion, Lord I am not worthy, that thou should
come under my roof, Matthew. 8. Secondly God in making promise of salvation
respects not men's worthiness. For he chose us to life everlasting when we were
not: he redeemed us from death being enemies: and intitles us to the promise
of salvation, if we acknovvledge our selves to be sinners, Matthew. 9. If we
labor and travail under the burden of them. Matthew. 11. If we hunger and
thirst after grace. Ioh. 7. 37. And these things we may certainly and sensibly
perceive in our selves: and when we find them in us, though our unworthiness
be exceeding great, it should not hinder our assurance. For God makes manifest
his power in our weakness, 2. Cor. 12. and he will not break the bruised reed,
nor quench the smoking flax. Isa. 42. Thirdly if a man love God for his
mercies sake, and have a true hope of salvation by Christ, he is in Christ and
has fellowship with him: and he that is in Christ, has all his unworthiness
and wants laid on Christ, and they are covered and pardoned in his death: and
in respect of our selves thus considered AS WE ARE IN CHRIST, we have no cause
to waver, but to be certain of our salvation, and that in regard of our selves.

The fourth point: touching the justification of a sinner.
That we may see how far we are to agree with them and where to differ: first
I will set down the doctrine on both parts: and secondly the maine differences
wherein we are to stand against them, even to death.

Our doctrine touching the justification of a sinner, I propound in four rules.

Rule I. That, justification is an action of God, whereby he absolueth a
sinner, and accepts him to life everlasting for the righteousness and merit of
Christ.

Rule II. That, justification stands in two things: first in the remission of
sins by the merit of Christ his death: secondly in the imputation of Christ
his righteousness; which is an other action of God whereby he accounts and
esteems that righteousness which is in Christ, as the righteousness of that
sinner which believes in him. By Christ his righteousness we are to understand
two things: first his sufferings specially in his death and passion, secondly
his obedience in fulfilling the law; both which go together: for Christ in
suffering obeyed* and obeying suffered. And the very shedding of his blood to
which our salvation is ascribed, must not only be considered, as it is
passive, that is, a suffering, but also as it is active, that is, an obedience,
in which he showed his exceeding love both to his father and us, and thus
fulfilled the law for us. This point if some had well thought on, they would
not have placed all justification in remission of sins, as they do.

Rule III. That, justification is from Gods mere mercy and grace, procured
only by the merit of Christ.

Rule IV. That, man is justified by faith alone; because faith is that alone
instrument created in the heart by the holy ghost, whereby a sinner lays hold
of Christ his righteousness, and applies the same unto himself. There is
neither hope, nor love, nor any other grace of God within man, that can do
this, but faith alone.

The doctrine of the Roman Church touching the justification of a sinner is on
this manner.

I. They hold that before justification there goes a preparation thereunto;
which is an action wrought partly by the holy Ghost and partly by the power of
natural freewill, whereby a man disposes himself to his own future
justification.

In the preparation they consider the ground of justification, and things
proceeding from it. The ground is faith, which they define to be a general
knowledge, whereby we understand and believe that the doctrine of the word of
God is true. Things proceeding from this faith are these; a sight of our
sins, a fear of hell, hope of salvation, love of God, repentance, and such
like: all which, when men have attained, they are then fully disposed (as they
say) to their justification.

This preparation being made, then comes justification it self: which is an
action of God, whereby he makes a man righteous. It has two parts: the first,
and the second. The first is, when a sinner of an evil man is made a good man.
And to effect this, two things are required: first the pardon of sin, which
is one part of the first justification: secondly the infusion of inward
righteousness, whereby the heart is purged and sanctified: and this habit of
righteousness stands specially in hope and charity.

After the first justification, follows the second; which is, when a man of a
good or just man, is made better and more just: and this, say they, may proceed
from works of grace: because he which is righteous by the first justification,
can bring forth good works: by the merit whereof, he is able to make himself
more just and righteous: and yet they grant that the first justification
comes only of Gods mercy by the merit of Christ.

1. Our consent and difference.
Now let us come to the points of difference between us and them touching
justification.

The first maine difference is in the matter thereof, which shall be seen by
the answer both of Protestant and Papist to this one question. What is the very
thing, that causes a man to stand righteous before God, and to be accepted to
life everlasting? we answer, Nothing but the righteousness of Christ, which
consists partly in his sufferings, and partly in his active obedience in
fulfilling the rigor of the law. And hear let us consider, how near the
Papists come to this answer, and wherein they dissent.

Consent I. They grant, that in Justification sin is pardoned by the merits
of Christ, and that none can be justified without remission of sins: and that
is well.

II. They grant, that the righteousness whereby a man is made righteous
before God, comes from Christ, and from Christ alone.

III. The most learned among them say, that Christ his satisfaction, and the
merit of his death is imputed to every sinner that does believe, for Bellar. d^
Iustif. lib. 2. cap. 7.
his satisfaction before God: and hitherto we agree.

The very point of difference is this, we hold that the satisfaction made by
Christ in his death, and obedience to the law; is imputed to us and becomes
our righteousness. They say, it is our satisfaction and not our righteousness
whereby we stand righteous before God: because it is inherent in the person of
Christ as in a subject. Now the answer of the Papist to the former question is
on this manner: The thing (says he) that makes us righteous before God, and
causes us to be accepted to life everlasting, is remission of sins, and the
habit of inward righteousness, or charity with the fruits thereof. We
condescend and grant that the habit of righteousness, which we call
sanctification is an excellent gift of God: and has his reward of God: and is
the matter of our justification before men: because it serves to declare us to
be reconciled to God, and to be justified: yet we deny it to be the thing,
which makes us of sinners to become righteous or just before God.

And this is the first point of our disagreement in the matter of
justification: which must be marked: because if there were no more points of
difference between us, this one alone were sufficient to keep us from uniting
of our religions: for hereby the church of Rome does race the very foundation.

Now let us see by what reasons we justify our doctrine: and secondly answer
the contrary objections.

Our Reasons.
Reason I. That very thing which must be our righteousness before God, must
satisfy the justice of the law, which says, do these things and thou shall
live. Now there is nothing can satisfy the justice of the law but the
righteousness or obedience of Christ for us. If any allege civil justice it
is nothing: for Christ says, Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you cannot enter into the kingdom
of heaven. What? shall we say that works do make us just? that can not be:
for all men's works are defective in respect of the justice of the law. Shall
we say our sanctification, whereby we are renewed to the image of God in
righteousness and true holiness? that also is imperfect and cannot satisfy
Gods justice required in the law: as Isai has said of himself and the
people, all our righteousness is as a menstruous cloth. To have a clear
conscience before God is a principal part of inward righteousness; and of it
Paul in his own person says thus, I am privy to nothing by my self, yet am
I not justified thereby, 2. Cor. 4. 4. Therefore nothing can procure unto us an
absolution and acceptance to life everlasting, but Christ's imputed
righteousness. And this will appear, if we do consider, how we must come one
day before Gods judgment seat, there to be judged in the rigor of justice:
for when we must bring some thing that may countervaile the justice of God: not
having only acceptance in mercy, but also approbation in justice: God being
not only merciful, but also a just judge.

II. Reason. 2. Cor. 5. 21. He which knew no sin, was made sin for us, that
we might be made the righteousness of God which is in him. Whence I reason thus.
As Christ was made sin for us, so are we made the righteousness of God in
him: but Christ was made sin, or, a sinner by imputation of our sins, he
being in himself most holy; therefore a sinner is made righteous before God,
in that Christ's righteonsnes is imputed and applied unto him. Now if any shall
say, that man is justified by righteousness infused; then by like reason, I say
Christ was made sin for us by infusion of sin, which to say is blasphemy.
And the exposition of this place by S. Hierome is not to be despised. Christ
(says he) being offered for our sins, took the name of sin that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him, NOT OURS NOR IN US. If this
righteousness of God be neither ours nor in us, the^ it can be no inherent
righteousness, but must needs be righteousness imputed. And Chrysostom. on this place
says, It is called Gods righteousness, because it is not of works, and because
it must be VVITHOVT ALL STAIN or want: and that cannot be inherent
righteousness. Anselme says, he is made sin as we are made justice: not ours
but gods, not in us but in him: as he is made sin not his own but ours: not
in him self, but in us.

Reason III. Romans 5. 19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so
by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous: mark here is a
comparison between the first and second Adam. And hence I reason thus. As by
the disobedience of the first Adam men were made sinners: so by the obedience
of the second Adam, are we made righteous. Now we are not only made sinners by
propagation of natural corruption, but by imputation. For Adams first sin
was the eating of the forbidden fruit: which very act is no personal offense,
but is imputed to all his posterity, in whom we have all sinned. The Iren.
lib. 5. cap. 17. Chrysostom. homil. ad Neoph.
Fathers call this very sin Adams handwriting, making us debtors unto God.
And therefore in like manner the obedience of Christ is made the righteousness
of every believer, not by infusion but by imputation.

IV. Reason. A satisfaction made for the want of that justice or obedience
which the law requires at our hands, is accepted of God as the justice it
self. But Christ's obedience is a satisfaction made for the want of that
justice or obedience which the law requires, as the Papists themselves avouch.
Therefore this satisfaction is our justice. And me thinks, the Papists upon
this consideration have little cause to dissent from us. For if they make
Christ's obedience their satisfaction, why should they not fully close hands
with us, and make it their justice also.

V. Reason. The consent of the ancient Church. Bernard says, epist. 190. The
JUSTICE OF ANOTHER is assigned unto man: who wanted his own, man was indebted
and man made payment. The SATISFACTION OF ONE IS IMPVTED to all. And, why may
not justice be from an other as well as guiltines is from an other. And in
Cant. sermon. 25. It suffices me, for all righteousness to have him alone
merciful to me, against whom I have sinned. And, Not to sin is Gods
justice, MAN'S JUSTICE is the MERCIFVLNES OF GOD. And sermon. 61. Shall I sing
mine own righteousness, Lord I will remember thy righteousness alone: for IT IS
MINE ALSO: in that even thou art made unto me righteousness of God. What, shall
I fear least that one be not sufficient for us both? it is not a short cloak
that cannot cover two: it will cover both thee and me largely being both a
large and eternal justice. August. on psalm. 22. He prays for our faults, and
has made our faults his faults, that he might make HIS JUSTICE OUR JUSTICE.

Objections of Papists.
Objections of the Papists proouing inherent righteousness to be the matter of
our justice before God, are these. I. Object. It is absurd, that one man should
be made righteous by the righteousness of an other: for it is as much as if one
man were made wise by the wisdom of another. Ans. It is true, that no man can
be made righteous by the personal righteousness of an other, because it
pertaines only to one man. And because the wisdom that is in one man, is his
altogether wholly, it cannot be the wisdom of another; no more then the health
and life of one body, can be the health of an other. But it is otherwise with
the righteousness of Christ: it is his indeed, because it is inherent in him
as in a subject: it is not his alone, but his and ours together by the tenor
of the Covenant of grace. Christ as he is a Mediator is given to every
believer as really and truly, as land is given from man to man: and with him
are given all things that concern salvation; they being made ours by Gods
free gift: among which, is Christ his righteousness. By it therefore, as being a
thing of our own, we may be justified before God, and accepted to life
everlasting.

II. Object. If a sinner be justified by Christ his righteousness, then every
believer shall be as righteous as Christ: and that can not be. Ans. The
proposition is false: for Christ his righteousness is not applied to us
according as it is in Christ; neither according to the same measure, nor the
same manner. For his obedience in fulfilling the law, is above Adams
righteousness, yea above the righteousness of all Angels. For they were all but
creatures, and their obedience the obedience of creatures: but Christ his
obedience is the obedience or righteousness of God; so termed Romans 1. 17, 18.
2. Cor. 5. 21. not only because God accepted of it, but because it was in that
person which is very God. When Christ obeyed, God obeyed: and when he suffered,
God suffered: not because the godhead suffered or performed any obedience, but
because the person which according to one nature is God, performed obedience
and suffered. And by this means his righteousness is of infinite value, price,
merit, and efficacy. Hence also it comes to pass, that this obedience of
Christ serves not only for the justifying of some one person (as namely for
himself.
Adams did) but of all and every one of the elect: yea it is sufficient to
justify many thousand worlds. Now to come to the point, this righteousness
that is in Christ, in this largenes and measure; is pertaining to us in a more
narow skantling* because it is only received by faith as any one star
partakes in the whole light of the Sun with the rest of the stars; so
farforth as the said light makes it to shine.
so farforth, as it serves to justify any particular believer. But they urge
the reason further, saying: If Christ his righteousness be the righteousness of
every believer, then every man should be a Savior: which is absurd. Ans. I
answer as before, and yet more plainly thus: Christ his righteousness is imputed
to the person of this or that man, not as it is the price of redemption for all
mankind, but as it is the price of redemption for one particular man: as for
example, Christ his righteousness is imputed to Peter, not as it is the price of
redemption for all, but as it is the price of redemption for Peter. And
therefore Christ his righteousness, is not applied to any one sinner in that
largeness and measure, in which it is in the person of Christ: but only so
farforth as it serves to satisfy the law for the said sinner, and to make his
person accepted of God as righteous, and no further.

III. Object. If we be made righteous by Christ his righteousness truly, then
Christ is a sinner truly by our sins: but Christ is not indeed a sinner by
our sins. Ans. We may with reverence to his majesty in good manner say, that
Christ was a sinner, and that truly: not by any infusion of sin into his most
holy person; but because our sins were laid on him: thus says the holy
Ghost, he which knew no sin was made sin for us, and he was counted with
sinners, Isa 53. 13. yet so, as even then in himself he was without blot, yea
more holy then all men and angels. On this manner said Chrysostom 2. Cor. 3.
God permitted Christ to be condemned as a sinner. Again, He made the just one
to be A SINNER, that he might make sinners just.

IV. Object. If a man be made righteous by imputation, then God judges sinners
to be righteous: but God judges no sinner to be righteous, for it is
abomination to the Lord. Ans. When God justifies a sinner by Christ his
righteousness, at the same time, he cease in regard of guiltines to be a
sinner: and to whom god imputes righteousness them he sanctifies at the very
same instant by his holy Spirit; giving also unto original corruption his
deadly wound.

V. Object. That which Adam never lost, was never given by Christ: but he never
lost imputed righteousness: therefore it was never given unto him. Ans. The
proposition is not true: for saving faith, that was never lost by Adam, is
given to us in Christ: and Adam never had this privilege, that after the first
grace should follow the we have and posse and velle: he had no more, but posse
si vellet, and he wanted velle quod posset. August. de corrept. and great. cap.
11.
second; and thereupon being left to himself, he fell from God: and yet this
mercy is vouchsafed to all believers, that after their first conversion God
will still confirm the^ with new grace: and by this means, they persevere
unto the end. And whereas they say, that Adam had not imputed righteousness: I
answer, that he had the same for substance, though not for the manner of
applying by imputation.

VI. Object. Justification is eternal: but the imputation of Christ his
righteousness is not eternal, for it cease in the end of this life:
therefore it is not that which justifies a sinner. Ansvv. The imputation of
Christ's righteousness is everlasting: for he that is esteemed righteous in this
life by Christ his righteousness, is accepted as righteous for ever: and the
remission of sins granted in this life, is for ever continued. And though
sanctification be perfect in the world to come, yet shall it not justify: for
we must conceive it no otherwise after this life, but as a fruit springing from
the imputed righteousness of Christ, without which it could not be. And a good
child will not cast away the first garment, because his father gives him a
second. And what if inward righteousness be perfect in the end of this life,
shall we therefore make it the matter of our justification? God forbid. For the
righteousness whereby sinners are justified, must be had in the time of this
life, before the pangs of death.

II. Difference about the manner of justification.
All, both Papists and Protestants agree, that a sinner is justified by faith.
This agreement is only in word, and the difference between us is great
indeed. And it may be reduced to these three heads. First, the Papist saying
that a man is justified by faith: understands a general or a Catholic
faith, whereby a man believes the arcicles of religion to be true. But we hold
that the faith which justifies, is a particular faith whereby we apply to our
selves the promises of righteousness and life everlasting by Christ. And that
our opinion is the truth: I have proved before: but I will add a reason or
twain.

I. Reason. The faith whereby we live, is that faith whereby we are justified:
but the faith whereby we live spiritually, is a particular faith whereby we
apply Christ unto our selves, as Paul says, Gal. 2. 20 I live, that is,
spiritually, by the faith of the son of God: which faith he shows to be a
particular faith in Christ, in the very words following, who has LOVED ME and
given himself FOR ME, particularly: and in this manner of believing Paul was
and is an example to all that are to be saved, 1. Tim. 1. 16. and Phil. 3. 15.

II. Reason. That which we are to ask of God in prayer, we must believe it
shall be given us, as we ask it: but in prayer we are to ask the pardon of
our own sins, and the merit of Christ's righteousness for our selves:
therefore we must believe the same particularly. The proposition is a rule of
Gods word, requiring, that in every petition we bring a particular faith,
whereby we believe, that the thing lawfully asked, shall be given accordingly.
Mark. 11. 24. The minor is also evident, neither can it be denied: for we are
taught by Christ himself to pray on this manner, Forgive us our debts: and to
it we say, Amen, that is, that our petitions shall without all doubt be
granted unto us. Aug. sermon. de Temp. 182.

And here note, that the Church of Rome in the doctrine of justification by
faith cuts off the principal part and property thereof. For in justifying
faith two things are required: first Knowledge revealed in the word touching
the means of salvation: secondly an Applying of things known unto our selves,
which some call affiance. Now the first, they acknowledge, but the second,
which is the very substance and principal part thereof, they deny.

III. Reason. The judgment of the ancient Church. de verbis Dei. sermon. 7.
August. I demand now, do thou believe in Christ, O sinner? Thou say, I
believe. What beleevest thou? that all THY SINS may freely be pardoned by
him. THOU HAVE THAT WHICH THOU HAVE BEELEEVED. Sermon. 1, de Annunc.
Bern. The Apostle thinks that a man is justified freely by faith. If thou
beleeuest that thy sins cannot be remitted but by him alone against whom
they were committed: but go further and believe this too, that by him THY
SINS ARE FORGIVEN THE^. This is the testimony which the holy Ghost gives in
the heart, saying: thy sins are forgiven thee. Sermon. de Natal.
Cyprian. God promises thee immortality, when thou go out of this world,
and DO THOU DOUBT? This is indeed not to know God, and this is for a
member of the church in the house of faith not to have faith. If we believe in
Christ, let us believe his words and promises, and we shall never die, and
shall come to Christ with IOYFVL SECVRITIE. with him to reign for ever.

The II. difference touching faith in the act of justification, is this. The
Papist says, we are justified by faith, because it disposes a sinner to his
justification after this manner: By faith (says he) the mind of man is
enlightened in the knowledge of the law and gospel: knowledge stirs up a
fear of hell with a consideration of the promise of happiness, as also the love
and fear of God, and hope of life eternal. Now when the heart is thus
prepared, God infuseth the habit of charity and other virtues, whereby a
sinner is justified before God. We say otherwise, that faith justifies because
it is a supernatural Instrument created by God in the heart of man at his
conversion, whereby he apprehends and receives Christ's righteousness for his
justification.

In this their doctrine is a twofold error: I. that they make faith which
justifies, to go before justification it self, both for order of nature as
also for time: whereas by the word of God, at the very instant, when any man
believes first, he is then justified and sanctified. For he that believes,
eats and drinks the body and blood of Christ, and is already passed from
death to life, John 6. 54. The second is, that faith being nothing else with
them but an illumination of the mind, stirs up the will; which being
moved and helped, causes in the heart many spiritual motions: and thereby
disposes man to his future justification. But this indeed is as much as if we
should say, that dead men only helped, can prepare themselves to their future
resurrection. For we are all by nature dead in sin, and therefore must not
only be enlightened in mind, but also renewed in will, before we can so much
as will or desire that which is good. Now we (as I have said) teach otherwise:
that faith justifies as it is an instrument to apprehend and apply Christ with
his obedience; which is the matter of our justification. This is the truth, I
prove it thus. In the Covenant of grace* two things must be considered; the
substance thereof, and the condition. The substance of the covenant is, that
righteousness and life everlasting is given to Gods Church and people by Christ.
The condition is, that we for our parts, are by faith to receive the foresaid
benefits: and this condition is by grace as well as the substance. Now the^,
that we may attain to salvation by Christ, he must be given unto us really, as
he is propounded in the tenor of the foresaid covenant. And for the giving of
Christ, God has appointed special ordinances, as the preaching of the word,
and the administration of the sacraments. The word preached is the power of God
to salvation to every one that believes: and the end of the sacraments is to
communicate Christ with all his benefits to them that come to be partakers
thereof: as is most plainly to be seen in the supper of the Lord, in which
the giving of bread and wine to the several communicantes, is a pledge and
sign of Gods particular giving of Christ's body and blood with all his merits,
unto them. And this giving on Gods part cannot be effectual without receiving
on our parts: and therefore faith must needs be an instrument or hand to
receive that which God gives, that we may find comfort by this giving.

The III. difference concerning faith, is this: the Papist says, that a man is
justified by faith; yet not by faith alone, but also by other virtues, as hope,
love, the fear of God, etc. The reasons which are brought to maintain their
opinion are of no moment:

I. Reason. Luke 7. 47. Many sins are forgiue^her, Particula non causalis:
sed illatiua vel ratio na lis.
BECASE she loved much. Whence they gather that the woman here spoken of, was
justified and had the pardon of sins by love. Ans. In this text, love is not
made an impulsive cause to move God to pardon her sins, but only a sign to
show and manifest that God had already pardoned them. Like to this is the place
of John, who says, 1. Ioh. 3. 14. We are translated from death to life,
BECAUSE we love the brethren: where love is no cause of the change, but a sign
and consequent thereof.

II. Reason. Gal. 5. 6. Neither circumcision, nor uncircumcision avails any
thing, but FAITH THAT VVOEK^TH BY LOVE. Hence they gather that faith does
instifie together with love. Ans. The property of true faith is, to apprehend
and receive something unto it self: and love, that goes always with faith, as
a fruit and an inseparable companion thereof, is of another nature. For it
does not receive in, but as it were give out it self in all the duties of the
first and second table toward God and man: and this thing faith by it self
cannot do: and therefore Paul says that faith works by love. The hand has
a property to reach out it self, to lay hold of any thing: and to receive a
gift: but the hand has no property to cut a piece of wood of it self
without saw or knife, or some like instrument; and yet by help of them, it can
either divide or cut. Even so it is the nature of faith, to go out of it self
and to receive Christ into the heart: as for the duties of the first and second
table, faith cannot of it self bring them forth; no more then the hand can
divide or cut: yet join love to faith, and then can it practice duties
commanded concerning God and man. And this I take to be the meaning of this
text, which speaks not of justification by faith, but only of the practice
of common duties, which faith puts in execution by the help of love.

III. Reason. Faith is never alone, therefore it does not instifie alone. Ans.
The reason is naught, and they might as well dispute thus. The eye is never
alone from the head, and therefore it sees not alone; which is absurd. And
though in regard of substance the eye be never alone, yet in regard of seeing,
it is alone: and so though faith subsist not without love and hope and other
graces of God, yet in regard of the act of justification it is aloue without
them all.

IV. Reason. If faith alone do justify, then we are saved by faith alone: but
we are not saved by faith alone: and therefore not justified by faith alone.
Ans. The proposition is false: for more things are requisite to the maine end
then to the subordinate means. And the assumption is false: for we are saved
by faith alone, if we speak of faith as it is an Instrument apprehending
Christ for our salvation.

V. Reason. We are saved by hope: therefore not by faith alone. Ans. We are
saved by hope, not because it is any cause of our salvation. Paul's meaning is
only this; that we have not salvation as yet in possession, but wait
patiently for it, in time to come to be possessed of us, expecting the time of
our full deliverance: that is all, that can justly be gathered hence.

Now the doctrine which we teach on the contrary is, That a sinner is
justified before God by faith: yea, BY FAITH ALONE. The meaning is, that
nothing within man, and nothing that man can do either by nature or by grace
concurreth to the act of justification before God, as any cause thereof, either
efficient, material, formal, or final, but faith alone. All other gifts and
graces, as hope, love, the fear of God, are necessary to salvation, as signs
thereof, and conseque^ts of faith. Nothing in man concurrs as any cause to this
work but by faith alone. And faith it self is no principal but only an
isntrumental cause by we receive, apprehend, and apply Christ and his
righteousness for our justification.

Reason I. John. 3. 14. 15. As Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, so
must the son of man be lift up: that whosoever believes in him should not
perish but have eternal life. In these words Christ makes a comparison on
this manner: when any one of the Israelites were stung to death by fiery
serpents: his cure was not by any physic surgery, but only by the casting of
his eye up to the brazen serpent, which Moses haderected by Gods commandment:
even so in the cure of our souls, when we are stung to death by sin, there
is nothing required within us for our recovery, but only that we cast up and
fix the eye of our faith on Christ and his righteousness.

Reason II. The Exclusive forms of speech used in scripture prove thus much.
We are justified freely, not of the law, not by the law, wiihout the law,
without works, not of works, not according to works, not of us, not by the
works of the law but by faith. Gal, 2. 16. Alboasting excluded: only
believe. Luc. 8. 50. These distinctions, whereby works and the law are excluded
in the work of justification, do include thus much: that faith alone does
justify.

Reason III. Very reason may teach thus much: for no gift in man is apt and fit
as a spiritual hand to receive and apply Christ and his righteousness unto a
sinner, but faith. Indeed love, hope, the fear of God and repentance, have
their several uses in men, but none serve for this end to apprehende Christ
and his merits; none of them all have this receiving property: and therefore
there is nothing in man, that justifies as a cause but faith alone.

Reason IV. The judgment of the ancient Church. Ambr. on Romans 4. They are
blessed to whom VVITHOVT ANY LABOUR OR WORK DONE, iniquities are remitted
and sin covered: NO WORKS OF REPENTANCE required of them, but ONLY THAT
THEY BELIEVE. and cap. 3. Neither working any thing, nor requiting the like,
are they justified by FAITH ALONE through the gift of God. And, 1. Cor. 1. This
is appointed of god that whosoever believes in Christ, shall be saved without
any work BY FAITH ALONE, freely receiving remission of sins. de verbis D^^^.
ser. 40.
Augustine, There is ONE propitiation for all sins, to believe in Christ.
Hesyc* on Levit. lib. 1. c. 2. Grace which is of mercy is APPREHENDED BY FAITH
ALONE, and not of works. Bern. supra Cant. sermon. 22.
Whosoever is pricked for his sins and thirsts after righteousness, let him
believe in thee, who justifies the sinner, and being justified by FAITH
ALONE, he shall have peace with God. Chrysostom. on Gal. 3. They said, he which
rests on faith alone, is cursed: but Paul shows, that he is blessed which
rests ON FAITH ALONE. Basil. de humil. Let man acknovvledge himself to want
true justice, and that he is justified ONLY BY EAITH in Christ. Origin. on c.
3. Romans We think that a man is justified by faith without the works of the
law: and he says that justification by faith alone suffices, so as a man
only believing may be justified. And, Therefore it lies upon us --, to search
who was justified by faith without works. And for an example, I think upon
the thief who being crucified with Christ cried unto him, Lord remember me
when thou come into thy kingdom: and there is no other good work of his
mentioned in the Gospel: but for this alone faith, Jesus says unto him, This
night thou shall be with me in Paradise.

III. Difference.
The third difference about justification is concerning this point, namely how
farforth good works are required thereto.

The doctrine of the Church of Rome is, that there be two kinds of
justification: the first and the second, as I have said. The first is, when
one of an evil man is made a good man: and in this, works are wholly
excluded, it being wholly of grace. The second is, when a man of a just man is
made more just. And this they will have to proceed from works of grace: for
(say they) as a man when he is once borne can by eating and drinking make
himself a bigger man, though he could not at the first make himself a man:
even so a sinner having his first justification, may afterward by grace make
himself more just. Therefore they hold these two things: I. That good works
are meritorious causes of the second justification, which they term Actual:
II. that good works are means to increase the first justification, which they
call Habitual.

Now let us see how farreforth we must join with them in this point. Our
consent therefore stands in three conclusions.

I. That good works done by them that are justified do please God, and are
approved of him, and therefore have a reward.

II. Good works are necessary to salvation two ways: first, not as causes
thereof, either conseruant, adiuvant, or procreant: but only as consequents of
faith: in, that they are inseparable companions and fruits of that faith, which
is indeed necessary to salvation. Secondly they are necessary as marks in a
way, and as the way it self directing us unto eternal life.

III. We hold and believe, that the righteous man, is in some sort justified by
works: for so the holy Ghost speaks plainly and truly, Iam. 2. 21. that
Abraham was justified by works.

Thus far we join with them: and the very difference is this. They say, we
are justified by works, as by causes thereof: we say, that we are justified by
works as by signs and fruits of our justification before God, and no
otherwise: and in this sense must the place of S. James be understood, that
Abraham was justified, that is, declared and made manifest to be just indeed
by his obedience, and that even before God. Now that our doctrine is the
truth, it will appear by reasons on both parts.

Our reasons.
I. Romans 3. 28. We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the
works of the law. Some answer, that ceremonial works be excluded here:
some, that moral works: some, works going before faith. But let them devise
what they can for themselves: the truth is, that Paul excludes all works
whatsoever, as by the very text will appear. For v. 24. he says, We are
justified FREELY by his grace: that is, by the mere gift of God: giving us to
understand, that a sinner in his justification is merely passive, that is,
doing nothing on his part whereby God should accept him to life everlasting.
and v. 27. he says, justification by faith excludes all boasting: and
therefore all kind of works are thereby excluded; and specially such as are
most of all the matter of boasting, that is, good works. For if a sinner,
after that he is justified by the merit of Christ, were justified more by his
own works, then might he have some matter of boasting in himself. And that
we may not doubt of Paul's meaning, consider and read Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. By grace
(says he) you are saved through faith: and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God: not of works least any man should boast himself. Here Paul
excludes all and every work, and directly works of grace themselves: as
appears by the reason following, For we are his workmanship CREATED in
Christ Jesus UNTO GOOD WORKS: WHICH GOD HAS ORDAINED that we should walk
in them. Now let the Papists tell me, what be the works which God has
prepared for men to walk in, and to which they are regenerate, unless they be
the most excellent works of grace: and let them mark, how Paul excludes them
wholly from the work of justification and salvation.

II. Gal. 5. 3. If ye be circumcised, ye are bound to the whole law, and ye
are abolished from Christ. Here Paul disputes against such men as would be
saved partly by Christ, and partly by the works of the law: hence I reason
thus. If a man will be justified by works he is bound to fulfill the whole
law, according to the rigor thereof: that is Paul's ground. I now assume: no
man can fulfill the law according to the rigor thereof: for the lives and
works of most righteous men are imperfect, and stained with sin: and
therefore they are taught every day, to say on this manner; forgive us our
debts. Again our knowledge is imperfect, and therefore our faith, repentance,
and sanctification is answerable. And lastly the regenerate man is partly flesh
and partly spirit: and therefore his best works are partly from the flesh, and
in part only spiritual. Thus then for any man to be bound to the rigor of
the whole law, is as much as if he were bound to his own damnation.

III. Election to salvation is of grace without works: therefore the
justification of a sinner is of grace alone without works. For it is a certain
rule, that the cause of a cause is the cause of a thing caused. Now grace
without works is the cause of election, which election is the cause of our
justification: and therefore grace without works is the cause of our
justification.

IIII. A man must first be fully justified before he can do a good work: for
the person must first please God before his works can please him. But the
person of a sinner cannot please God till he be perfectly justified: and
therefore till he be justified, he can not do so much as one good work. And
thus good works cannot be any meritorious causes of justification, after which
they are both for time, and order of nature. In a word, whereas they make two
distinct iustifications: we acknowledge that there be degrees of
sanctification, yet so as justification is only one, standing in remission of
sins and Gods acceptance of us to life everlasting by Christ; and this
justification has no degrees but is perfect at the very first.

Objections of Papists.
Psalm. 7. 8. Judge me according to my righteousness. Hence they reason thus,
if David be judged according to his righteousness then may he be justified
thereby, but David desires to be judged according to his righteousness: and
therefore he was justified thereby. Ans. There be two kinds of righteousness,
one of the person, the other of the cause or action. The righteousness of a man's
person, is whereby it is accepted into the favor of God into life eternal.
The righteousness of the action or cause is, when the action or cause is judged
of God to be good and just. Now David in this psalm, speaks only of the
righteousness of the action, or innocence of his cause, in that he was falsely
charged to have sought the kingdom. In like manner it is said of Phineas,
Psalm. 166. 31. that his fact in killing Zimri and Cosbie, was imputed to him
for righteousness: not because it was a satisfaction to the law, the rigor
whereof could not be fulfilled in that one work; but because God accepted of
it as a just work, and as a token of his righteousness and zeal for Gods glory.

II. Object. The Scripture says in sundry places, that men are blessed which
do good works. Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed is the man that is upright in heart, and
walks in the law of the Lord. Ans. The man is blessed that endeavors to
keep Gods commandments. Yet is he not blessed simply, because he does so; but
because he is in Christ, by whom he does so: and his obedience to the law of
God is a sign thereof.

III. Object. When man confesses his sins and humbles himself by prayer
and fasting, Gods wrath is pacified and stayed: therefore prayer and fasting
are causes of justification before God. Ans. Indeed men that truly humble
themselves by prayer and fasting, do appease the wrath of God: yet not
properly by these actions, but by their faith expressed and testified in them,
whereby they apprehend that which appeaseth Gods wrath, even the merits of
Christ, in whom the father is well pleased; and for whose sake alone he is
well pleased with us.

IV. Object. Sundry persons in Scripture are commended for perfection: as Noe,
and Abraham, Zachary, and Elizabeth: and Christ bids us all be perfect; and
where there is any perfection of works, there also works may justify. Ansvv.
There be two kinds of perfection: perfection in parts, and perfection in
degrees. Perfection in part is, when being regenerate, and having the seeds
of all necessary virtues, we endeavor accordingly to obey God, not in some
few, but in all and every part of the law: as Josias turned unto God according
to all the law of Moses. Perfection in degrees is, when a man keeps every
commandment of God, and that according to the rigor thereof, in the very
highest degree. Now then whereas we are commanded to be perfected, and have
examples of the same perfection in Scripture: both commandments and examples
must be understood of perfection in parts, and not of perfection in degrees,
which cannot be attained unto in this life; though we for our parts, must
daily strive to come as near unto it, as possibly we can.

V. Object. 2. Cor. 4. 17. Our moment any afflictions work unto us a greater
measure of glory: now if afflictions work our salvation, then works also do
the same. Ansvv. Afflictions work salvation, not as causes procuring it, but
as means directing us thereto. And thus always must we esteem of works, in
the matter of our salvation, as of a certain way, or a mark therein, directing
us to glory, not causing and procuring it: as Bernard says they are, VIAREGNI
NON CAVSA ^Lib. de great. and lib. arbit.
regnandi. The way to the kingdom, not the cause of reigning there.

VI. Object. We are justified by the same thing whereby we are judged: but we
are judged by our good works: therefore justified also. Ans. The proposition
is false: for indgement is an act of God, declaring a man to be just that is
already just: and justification is an other distinct act of God, whereby he
makes him to be just, that is by nature unjust. And therefore in equity the
last judgment is to proceed by works: because they are the fittest means to
make trial of every man's cause, and serve fitly to declare whom God has
justified in this life.

VII. Object. Wicked men are condemned for evil works: therefore righteous
men are justified by good works. Ans. The reason holds not: for there is
great difference between evil and good works. An evil work is perfectly
evil, and so deserves damnation* but there is no good work of any man that is
perfectly good: and therefore cannot justify.

VIII. Object. To believe in Christ is a work, and by it we are justified: and
if one work do justify, why may we not be justified by all the works of the
law. Ans. Faith must be considered two ways: first, as a work, quality, or
virtue: secondly as an Instrument, or an hand reaching out it self to receive
Christ's merit. And we are justified by faith, not as it is a work, virtue, or
quality; but as it is an instrument to receive and apply that thing whereby we
are justified. And therefore it is a figurative speech to say, We are justified
by faith. Faith considered by it self makes no man righteous: neither does
the action of faith which is to apprehend justify; but the object of faith,
which is Christ's obedience apprehended.

These are the principal reasons commonly used* which as we see, are of no
moment. To conclude therefore we hold: that works concur to justification,
and that we are justified thereby as by signs and effects, not as causes: for
both the beginning, middle, and accomplishment of our justification is only in
Christ: and hereupon John says, If any man (being already justified) sin,
we have an Advocate with the father, Jesus Christ and he is the propitiation
for our sins. And to make our good works means or causes of our
justification, is to make every man a Savior to himself.

The U. point. Of merits.
By merit, we understand any thing or any work, whereby Gods favor and life
everlasting is procured; and that for the dignity and excellency of the work
or thing done: or, a good work done, binding him that receives is to repay
the like.

Our Consent.
Touching merits, we consent in two conclusions with them. The first
conclusion, that merits are so far forth necessary, that without them there
can be no salvation.

The second, that Christ our Mediator and Redeemer, is the root and fountain
of all merit.

The dissent or difference.
The popish Church places merits within man, making two sorts thereof: the
merit of the person, and the merit of the work. The merit of the person, is
a dignity in the person, whereby it is worthy of life everlasting. And this
(as they say) is to be found in Infants dying after baptism, who though they
want good works, yet are they not void of this kind of merit, for which
they receive the kingdom of heaven. The merit of the work, is a dignity or
excellency in the work, whereby it is made fit and enabled to deserve life
everlasting for the doer. And works (as they teach) are meritorious two ways:
first, by covenant, because God has made a promise of reward unto them:
secondly, by their own dignity, for Christ has merited, that our works
might merit. And this is the substance of their doctrine. From it we dissent in
these points.

I. We renounce all personal merits, that is, all merits within the person of
any mere man. II. And we renonuce al merit of works, that is, all merit of any
work done by any mere man whatsoever. And the true merit whereby we look to
attain the favor of God, and life everlasting, is to be found in the person
of Christ alone: who is the storehouse of all our merits: whose prerogative it
is, to be the person alone in who^ God is well pleased. Gods favor is of
infinite dignity, and no creature is able to do a work that may countervayle
the favor of God, save Christ alone; who by reason of the dignity of his
person, being not a mere man but Godman, or Man-God, he can do such works
as ate of endless dignity every way answerable to the favor of God: and
therefore sufficient to merit the same for us. And though a merit or
meritorious work agree only to the person of Christ, yet is it made ours by
imputation. For as his righteousness is made ours, so are his merits depending
thereon: but his righteousness is made ours by imputation, as I have showed.
Hence arises an other point, namely that as Christ's righteousness is made ours
really by imputation to make us righteous: so we by the merit of his
righteousness imputed to us, do merit and deserve life everlasting. And this is
our doctrine. In a word, the Papist maintains the merits of his own works:
but we renounce them all, and rest only on the merit of Christ. And that our
doctrine is truth, and theirs falshoode, I will make manifest by sundry
reasons; and then answer their arguments to the contrary.

Our reasons.
The first shall be taken from the properties and conditions that must be in a
work meritorious, and they are four. I. A man must do it of himself, and by
himself: for if it be done by another, the merit does not properly belong to
the doer. II. A man must do it of his own freewill and pleasure, not of due
debt; for when we do that which we are bound to do, we do no more but our
duty. III. The work must be done to the profit of an other, who thereupon
must be bound to repay the like. IV. The reward and the work must be in
proportion equal, for if the reward be more then the work, it is not a reward
of desert, but a gift of good will. Hence follows a notable conclusion: That
Christ's manhood considered a part from his godhead, cannot merit at Gods hand:
though it be more excellent every way then all both men and angels. For being
thus considered, it does nothing of it self, but by grace received from the
godhead; though it also be without measure. Secondly Christ's manhood is a
creature, and in that regard bound to do whatsoever it does. Thirdly, Christ
as man cannot give any thing to god, but that which he received from God:
therefore cannot the manhood properly by it self merit, but only as it is
personally united unto the godhead of the Son. And if this be so, then much
less can any mere man, or any angel merit: yea it is a madness to think, that
either our actions or persons should be capable of any merit whereby we might
attain to life eternal.

Reason II. Exodus 20 8. And SHOW MERCY upon thousands in them that love me,
and keep my commandments. Hence I reason thus: where reward is given upon
mercy, there is no merit: but reward is given of mercy to them that fulfill
the law: therefore no merit. What can we any way deserve, when our full
recompense must be of mercy? And this appears further by Adam: if he had
stood to this day, he could not by his continual and perfect obedience, have
procured a further increase of favor at Gods hand, but should only have
continued that happy estate in which he was first created.

Reason III. Scripture directly condemns merit of works. Romans 6. 23. The
wages of sin is death: but THE GIFT OF GOD IS eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord. The proportion of the argument required that S. Paul should
have said: The reward of good works is eternal life, if life everlasting
could be deserved, which cannot: because it is a free gift. Again, Tit. 3. 5.
We are saved not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according
to his mercy he saved us. And Ephesians. 2. v. 8, 10. By grace you are saved
through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: not of works
which God has prepared that we should walk in them. If any works be crowned,
it is certain that the sufferings of Martyrs shall be rewarded: now of them Paul
says, Romans 8. 18. The sufferings of this life are NOT WORTHY of the glory to
come. Where then is the value and dignity of other works? To this purpose
`Ambr. says, The just man though he be tormented in the brazen bull is still
just, because he justifies God, and says he suffers LESS THEN HIS SINS
DESERVE.

Reason IV. Whosoever will merit, must fulfill the whole law: but none can
keep the whole law: For if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, 1.
Ioh. 1. And he that sins against one commandment is guilty of the whole
law. And what can he merit, that is guilty of the breach of the whole law?

Reason V. We are taught to pray on this manner, Give us this day our daily
bread. Wherein we acknowledge every morsel of bread to be the mere gift of God
without desert; and therefore must we much more acknowledge life eternal to be
every way the gift of God. It must needs therefore be a satanicall insolency
for any man to imagine, that he can by his works merit eternal life, who
cannot merit bread.

Reason VI. Consent of the ancient Church. De interpollatione David. 4. v^l.
ps. 72.
Bernard, Those which we call our merits, are the way to the kingdom, and not
THE CAUSE OF REIGNING. August. Manuali. cap. 22. All my hope is in the death of
my Lord. His death is my merit --: my MERIT IS THE PASSION OF THE LORD. I shall
not be void of merits, so long as Gods mercies are not wanting. Basil. on
psalm. 114. Eternal rest is reserved for them, which have striuen lavvfully in
this life: not FOR THE MERITS of their doings, but upon the grace of the most
bountiful God, in which they trusted. August. on ps. 120. He crowns thee,
because he crowns his own gifts, not thy merits. And, psalm. 142. Lord thou will quicken me in thy justice, not in mine: not because I have deserved it,
but because thou have compassion.

Objections of Papists.
Object. I. In sundry places of Scripture, promise of reward is made to them
that believe and do good works: therefore our works do merit; for a reward
and merit be relatiues. Ans. Reward is twofold: of debt, and of mercy. Life
everlasting is not a reward of debt but of mercy, given of the good will of
God, without any thing done of man. Secondly, the kingdom of heaven is
properly an inheritance given of a father to a child, and therefore it is
called a reward not properly, but by a figure or by resemblance. For as a
workman having ended his labor, receives his wages; so after men have lead
their lives and finished their course in keeping faith and good conscience, as
dutiful children; God gives them eternal life. And herupon it is termed a
reward. Thirdly, if I should grant that life everlasting is a deserved reward,
it is not for our works, but for Christ's merit imputed to us, causing us
thereby to merit: and thus the relation stands directly between the Reward and
Christ's Merit applied unto us.

Object. II. Christ by his death merited that our works should merit life
everlasting. Answ. That is false: all we find in Scripture is, that Christ by
his merit procured pardon of sin, imputation of righteousness, and life
everlasting: and it is no where said in the word of God, that Christ did
merit, that our works should merit: it is a dotage of their own devising. He
died not for our good works to make them able to satisfy Gods anger: but for
our sins, that they might be pardoned. Thus much says the Scripture, and no
more. And in that Christ did sufficiently merit life eternal for us, by his
own death: it is a sufficient proof that he never intended to give us power
of meriting the same: unless we suppose that at some time he gives more then is
needful. Again, Christ in the office of mediation as he is a King, Priest,
and Prophet, admits no deputy or fellow. For he is a most perfect
Mediator, doing all things by himself, without the help of any. And the
ministers that dispense the word are not his deputies, but reasonable and
voluntary instruments, which he uses. But if men by works can merit increase
of grace and happiness for themselves, then has Christ partners in the work of
redemption: men doing that by him, which he does of himself, in procuring
their salvation. Nay, if this might stand, that Christ did merit, that our
works should merit, then Christ should merit that our stained righteousness
being for this cause not capable of merit, should nevertheless merit. I call it
stained; because we are partly flesh and partly spirit: and therefore in our
selves deserving the curse of the law, though we be regenerate. Again, for one
good work we do, we have many evil, the offense whereof defaceth the merit of
our best deeds, and makes them too light in the balance of the law.

Object. III. Our works merit by bargain or covenant, because God has
promised to reward them. Ans. The word of God sets down two covenants: one
legal, the other evangelical. In the legal covenant life everlasting is
promised to works, for that is the condition of the law; do these things and
thou shall live. But on this manner can no man merit life everlasting, because
none is able to do all that the law requires; whether we respect the manner,
or the measure of obedience. In the evangelical covenant, the promises that
are made are not made to any work or virtue in man, but to the worker: not for
any merit of his own person or work, but for the person and merit of Christ.
For example, it is a promise of the Gospel, Be faithful unto death, and I
will give thee the crown of life. Revelat. 2. 10. Here the promise is not
made to the virtue of fidelity, but to the faithful person; whose fidelity
is but a token that he is in Christ: for the merit of whose obedience god
promises the crown of life: and therefore Christ says further: I come
quickly and will give to every man according to his works, mark, he says
not to the work or for the work, but to the worker according to his works.
And thus the bo^d of al other promises of the Gospel, in which god willingly
binds himself to reward our works, do not directly concern us, but have
respect to the person, and obedience of Christ, for whose sake alone God binds
himself as debtor unto us, and gives the recompense or reward, according to
the measure of our faith testified by our works. And therefore it cannot be
truly gathered: that works do merit by any promise or covenant, passed on
Gods part to man. Some may say, if works merit not why are they mentioned in
the promises? I answer, not because they merit, but because they are tokens
that the doer of the work is is in Christ, for whose merit the promise shall
be accomplished.

Object. VI. Good works are perfect and without fault, for they are the works
of the holy ghost, who cannot sin: therefore they merit. Ans. If works did
proceed only and immediately from the holy ghost, there could not be any fault
in them: but our works come from the holy ghost, in and by the will and
understanding of man: and by this means they are tainted with sin: as water
in the fountain is both clear and sweet, yet the streams there of passing
through the filthy channel, are defiled thereby. Again they reason thus; That
which we are bound to do has no fault in it; but we are bound to do good
works: therefore they are perfect. Ans. The proposition must be expounded:
that which we are bound to do, in it self, according to the intention of the
commander, has no fault: or, that which we are bound to do according as we
are bound to do it, has no fault, yet in regard of the intention of the doer,
or in regard of our manner of doing, it may be faulty.

Object. V. Christ says Revel. 3. 4. that the faithful in the Church of
Sardis shall walk with him in white: for they are worthy: therefore believers
merit. Ans. Every believer is worthy to walk with Christ: yet not worthy in
himself, but in Christ, to whom he is united, and made bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh. And by reason of this conjunction `it is, that men are said
to be worthy', because they are enriched with Christ's merits and righteousness.

Object. VII. 2. Tim. 4. 8. Everlasting life is termed a crown, and a crown
of righteousness to be given of a just judge: therefore man for his part by his
works deserves the same. Ans. Everlasting life is called a crown only in
resemblance. For as he which runs a race, must continue and run to the
end, and then be crowned: even so must we continue to walk in good works unto
the end, and then receive eternal life. And it is called a crown of
righteousness, not because it belongs to any man by due and desert; but because
God has bound himself by a promise to give it, in performing whereof he is
termed just: and by virtue of this promise, it is obtained and no otherwise.
These are the principal objections, by which we may judge what the rest are.
And thus we see what is the truth, namely that merit is necessary to
salvation; yet neither merit of man's work, or person, but the merit of Christ
imputed to us, whereby we being in him do procure and deserve the favor of
God and life eternal.

The sixth point. Of satisfaction.
Our consent.
Conclus. I. First, we acknowledge and hold Civil or Politic satisfaction:
that is, a recompense for injuries, and damages offered any way to our
neighbors. This Zacheus practiced, when at his conversion he restored
fourfold, things gotten by forged cauillation. Again by civil satisfaction
I understand, the imposition of fines, mulcts, and penalties upon offenders,
and the inflicting of death upon malefactors. For all these are satisfactions
to the law, and societies of men when they are wronged. All these we maintain
as necessary, for neither Church, nor common wealth can well be without them:
considering they are notable means to uphold civil peace; and otherwhiles
they are fruits of true faith, as the satisfuction of Zacheus was.

Conclus. II. We acknowledge canonical or Ecclesiastical satisfaction: and
that is, when any having given offense to the church of God or any part
thereof, do make an open public testimony of their repentance. Mirian for
murmuring aganst Moses, was stricken with leprosy, and afterward by his prayer
she was cleansed, and yet for all that she must go seven days out of the tent
and congregation, that she might make a kind of satisfaction to the people
for her trespass. And in the old testament, sackcloth and ashes were signs of
their satisfaction.

Conclus. III. We hold that no man can be saved, unless, he make a perfect
satisfaction to the justice of God for all his sins: because God is infinite
in justice, and therefore will either exact an everlasting punishment, or
satisfaction for the same.

The dissent or difference
The points of our difference and dissent are these. The Church of Rome
teaches and believes, that Christ by his death has made a satisfaction for
all the sins of men, and for the eternal punishment of them all: yet so, as
they themselves must satisfy the justice of God for the temporal punishment
of their offenses, either on earth or in purgatory. We teach and believe, that
Christ by his death and passion has made a perfect and all-sufficient
satisfaction to the justice of God for all the sins of men, and for the whole
punishment thereof both eternal and temporal. Thus we differ, and herein we
for our parts must for ever stand at difference with the^ so as if there were
no more points of variance but this one, it should be sufficient to keep us
always from uniting our religions, and cause us to obey the voice of Christ,
Come out of her my people. For as in the former points, so in this also, the
Papists err, not in circumstance, but in the very foundation and life of
religion.

Our reasons.
I. A satisfaction that is made imperfect either directly or by consequent, is
indeed no satisfaction at all. But the Papists make Christ's satisfaction
imperfect, in that they do add a supply by humane satisfactions: and thus much
a learned schoolman, Biel in plain words confessed. Although (says he) the
passion Super. lib. 3. did. 19. concl. 5.
of Christ be the principal merit, for which grace is conferred, the opening
of the kingdom and glory: yet IS IT NEVER THE ALONE AND TOTAL MERITORIOVS
CAUSE: it is manifest, because always with the merit of Christ, there
concurreth some work, as the merit of congruitie or condignitie of him that
receives grace or glory, if he be of years and have the use of reason: or of
some other for him, if he want reason. For that which admitts a supply by an
other, is imperfect in it self. Therefore humane satisfactions cannot stand.
Learned Papists make answer, that Christ's satisfaction and man's may stand well
together. For (say they) Christ's satisfactions is sufficient in it self to
answer the justice of God for all sin and punishment: but it is not
sufficient to this or that man till it be applied: and it must be applied by
our satisfaction made to God for the temporal punishment of our sins. But I
say again, that man's satisfaction can be no means to apply the satisfaction
of Christ: and I prove it thus. The means of applying Gods blessings and
graces unto man are twofold: some respect God himself, and some respect man.
Those which respect God, are such whereby God on his part does offer and convay
his mercies in Christ unto man: of this sort are the preaching of the word,
baptism, and the Lords supper, and these are as it were the hand of God
whereby he reaches down and gives unto us Christ with all his benefits. The
other means of applying on man's part, are those whereby the said benefits
are received. Of this sort there is only one, namely faith, whereby we believe
that Christ with all his benefits belong unto us. And this is the hand of man
whereby he receives Christ as he is offered, or exhibited by God in the word
and sacraments. As for other means beside these, in Scripture we find none.
Foolish therefore is the answer of the Papist, that make men's satisfactions
means to apply the satisfaction of Christ unto us: for by humane
satisfactions, Christ's is neither offered on Gods part, nor yet received on
man's part: let them prove it if they can. Others, not content with this their
former answer, say; that our satisfactions do nothing derogate from the
satisfaction of Christ: because our works have their dignity and merit from
Christ's satisfaction: he meriting that our works should satisfy Gods justice
for temporal punishments. But this is also absurd and false, as the former
was. For if Christ did satisfy that man might satisfy, then Christ does make
every believer to be a Christ, a Jesus, a Redeemer, and a Priest in the same
order with his own self. But to make sinful man his own redeemer, though it
be but from temporal punishments, is a doctrine of devils. For the holy Ghost
teaches that the priesthood of Christ is incommunicable, and Hebr. 7. 24.
cannot pass from him to any other. Now to make satisfaction for sin or any
part of the punishment thereof, is a duty, or a part of Christ his priesthood,
and therefore to make satisfaction is a work that cannot pass from his person
to the person of any man. Again, if Christ by his satisfaction give power to
man to satisfy, then man does satisfy by Christ, and Christ beside his own
satisfaction upon the cross, must daily satisfy in man, to the end of the
world: but this cannot be, for Christ upon the cross, when death was upon him,
said, It is finished, that is, I have fully satisfied for all the sins of
mankind, both in respect of the fault and punishment. As for Christ's burial
and resurrection which followed his death, they served not to satisfy but to
confirm and ratify the same. Again Paul says, 2. Cor. 5. 12. He that knew
no sin was made sin for us, that is, the punishment of sin for us; but if
the Church of Rome say true, that Christ does daily satisfy, then Paul spoke
too short, and should have said further, that Christ was made sin for us,
and in us too: and that God was not only in Christ but also in us reconciling
the world to himself. But Paul never knew this learning: and therefore let
them turn themselves which way they will, by putting a supplement to Christ's
satisfaction, they do indeed annihillate the same.

Reason II. In sundry places of Scripture, especially in the Epistles of Paul:
we are are said to be redeemed, justified, and saved Freely: which word freely,
does import that we are justified and saved without any thing done on out part
or by our selves in the matter of our salvation: and if this be so, then can we
do nothing at all that may satisfy the justice of God for the least
punishment of our sins. If we satisfy in our own persons we are not saved
freely: and if we be saved freely, we make no satisfaction at all.

Reason III. We pray daily, forgive us our sins: now to plead pardon, and to
satisfy for our sins be contrary: and for all things, for which we can make
satisfaction, we need not crave a pardon; but we are taught in the foresaid
petition wholly and only to use the plea of pardon for our sins, and
therefore we acknowledge that we cannot make any satisfaction at all.

Reason IV. The judgment of the ancient Church. Tertul. de Baptism. Guiltines
being taken away, the PUNISHMENT IS ALSO TAKEN AWAY. Sermon. 37. de verbis
Apost.
August. Christ, by taking upon him the punishment and not the fault, has done
away both the fault and THE PUNISHMENT. And Tom. 10. hom. 5. he says, when we
are gone out of this world, there will remain no compunction or satisfaction.
Some new Editions have foisted in the word [ aliqua] and so have turned the
sense on this manner: There will remain no compunction or some satisfaction.
But this is flat against Augustines meaning who says alitle before, that
when the way is ended there is no compounding of our cause with any. Chrysostom.
proem. in Esa. Say not to me, I have sinned: how shall I be freed from so many
sins? Thou can not: but thy God can. Yea, and he will so blot out thy
sins that there shall REMAIN NO PRINT OF THEM: which thing befalls not the
body, for when it is healed there remains a skarre: but God as soon as he
exempts thee Luc. 22. Petrinegat.
from punishment, he gives thee justice. Ambrose says, I read of Peter's
tears, but I read De bono mer
not OF HIS SATISFACTION. Again, Let us adore Christ that he may say unto us,
fear not thy sins of this world, nor the waves of bodily sufferings: I have
remission of sins. Hierome says in Psalm. 31. The sin that is covered is
not seen, the sin that is not seen is not imputed: that which is NOT
IMPVTED, IS NOT PVNISHED. Chrysostom in Matthew. hom. 44. Among all men, some
endure punishment in this life and the life to come: others in this life alone:
others alone in the life to come: others neither in this life nor the life to
come. There alone, as Dives, who was not lord so much as of one drop of
water. Here alone, as the incestuous man among the Corinthians. Neither here
nor there, as the Apostles and Prophets, as also Job and the rest of this
kind: for they endured NO SVFFERINGS FOR PUNISHMENT, but that they might be
known to be conquerours in the fight.

Objections of Papists.
I. Object. Levit. 4. Moses according to Gods commandment prescribed several
sacrifices for several persons; and they were means of satisfaction for the
temporal punishments of their daily sins. Ans. Those sacrifices were only
signs and types of Christ's satisfaction to be offered to his father in his
alone sacrifice upon the cross: and whosoever offered any sacrifice in the
old testament, did thus and no otherwise esteem of it, but as a type and
figure of better things. Secondly, the said sacrifices were satisfactions to
the Church, whereby men did testify their repentance for their offenses, and
likewise their desire to be reconciled to God and men. And such kind of
satisfactions, we acknowledge.

II. Object. Men, whose sins are all pardoned, have afterward sundry crosses
and afflictions laid upon them, unto the end of their days: therefore in all
likelihoode they make satisfaction to God for temporal punishments. As for
example, the Israelites for murmuring against the Lord in the wilderness were
barred all from the land of promise: and the like befell Moses and Aaron for
not glorifying God, as they should have done at the waters of strife. Ans. Man
must be considered in a twofold estate, as he is under the law, and as he is
under grace. In the first estate, all afflictions are curses or legal
punishments, be they little or great: but to them that are in the second estate
and believe in Christ, though the same afflictions remain, yet do they change
their habit or condition, and are the actions of a Father serving to be
trialls, corrections, preuentings, admonitions. 1. Cor. 11. 32. When we are
judged, we are nurtered of the Lord and Heb. 12. 7. If we endure chastisement,
God offers himself unto you as children. and Chrysostom. says, 1. Cor. hom.
28. When we are corrected of the Lord, it is more for our admonition then
damnation: more for a medicine then for a punishment: more for a correction
then for a penalty. And whereas God denied the believing Israelites, with
Moses and Aaron to enter into the land of Canaan, it cannot be proved that it
was a punishment or penalty of the law upon them. The scripture says no more
but that it was an admonition to all men in all ages following, to take heed of
like offenses, as Paul writes, All these things came unto them for ensamples,
and were written for our admonition, 1. Corinthians. 10. 11.

Object. III. David was punished after his repentance for his adultery, for
the child died, and he was plagued in his own kind, in the incest of Absolon:
and when he had numbered the people he was yet punished in the death of his
people after his own repentance. Ans. I answer as before that the hand of God
was upon David after his repentance: but yet the judgments which befell him
were not curses unto him properly, but corrections for his sins, and trialls
of his faith, and means to prevent further sin, and to renew both his faith
and repentance: as also they served to admonish others in like case; for David
was a public person and his sins were offensive, both within the Church of
God and without.

Object. IV. The Prophets of God, when the people are threatened with the
plague, famine, sword, captivity, etc. exhort them to repent and to humble
themselves in sackcloth and ashes; and thereby they turned away the wrath of
God that was then coming forth against them. Therefore by temporal
humiliation, men may escape the temporal punishments of the Lord. Ans. Famine,
sword, banishment, the plague, and other judgments sent on Gods people, were
not properly punishments of sin but only the corrections of a father whereby
he humbled them that they might repent: or thus, they were punishments te^ding
to correction, not serving for satisfaction. And the punishments of God are
turned from them, not because they satisfy the justice of God in their own
sufferings, but because by faith they lay houlde on the satisfaction of the
Mesias, and testify the same by their humiliation and repentance.

Object. V. Dan. 4. 24. Daniel gives this counsel to Nabuchadnezar, redeem
thy sins by justice and thine iniquities by alms deeds. Behold (say they)
alms deeds are made a means to satisfy for man's iniquities. Ans. The word
which they translate to redeem, (as the most learned in the Chalde tongue with
one consent avouch) does properly signify to break off; as if the Prophet
should say: O King, thou art a mighty Monarch, and to enlarge thy kingdom
thou have used much injustice and cruelty, therefore now repent of thine
iniquity, and break off these thy sins, testify they repentance by doing
justice, and give alms to the poor whom thou have oppressed. Therefore here
is nothing spoken of satisfaction for sin, but only of testification of
repentance by the fruits thereof.

Object. VI. Math. 3. 2. Do penance; and bring forth fruits worthy of penance,
which (say they) are works of satisfaction enjoined by the priest. Ans. This
text is absurd: for the word (...), signifies thus much, change your minds
from sin to God, and testify it by good works, that is, by doing the duties
of the moral law; which must be done, not because they are means to satisfy
Gods justice for man's sin, but because they are fruits of that faith and
repentance which lies in the heart.

Object. VII. 2. Cor. 7. 10. Paul sets down sundry fruits of repentance:
whereof the last is revenge, whereby repe^tant persons punish themselves,
thereby to satisfy Gods justice for the temporal punishment of their sins.
Ans. A repentant sinner must take revenge of himself, and that is only to use
all means which serve to subdue the corruption of his nature, to bridle carnal
affections, and to mortify sin: and these kind of actions are restrainments
properly, and not punishments: and are directed against the sin and not
against the person.

Lastly, they make three works of satisfaction, prayer, fasting, and alms
deeds. For the first, it is mere foolishnes to think, that man by prayer can
satisfy for his sins. It is all one as if they had said, that a beggar by
asking of alms should deserve his alms: or, that a debtor by requesting his
creditour to pardon his debt, should thereby pay his debt. Secondly, fasting is
a thing indifferent, of the same nature with eating and drinking, and of it
self conferreth nothing to the obtainement of the kingdom of heaven, no more
then eating and drinking does. Thirdly and lastly alms deeds cannot be works
of satisfaction for sins. For when we give them as we ought, we do but our
duty, whereunto we are bound. And we may as well say, that a man by paying one
debt, may discharge another: as to say that by doing his duty he may satisfy
Gods justice for the punishment of his sins. These we confess be fruits of
faith, but yet are they no works of satisfaction: but the only and
all-sufficient satisfaction made to Gods justice for our sins, is to be found
in the person of Christ, being procured by the merit of his death, and his
obedience. And thus our doctrine touching satisfaction is cleared: and it is to
be learned carefully of our common people, because the opinion of humane
satisfaction is natural and sticks fast in the heart of natural men. Hereupon
when any have sinned, and feel touch of conscience any way, their manner is,
then to perform some outward humiliation and repentance, thinking thereby to
stop the mouth of conscience, and by doing some ceremonial duties to appease
the wrath of God for their sins. Yea, many think to satisfy Gods justice by
repeating the Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments, so foolish
are they in this kind.

The seventh point. Of Traditions.
Traditions, are doctrines delivered from hand to hand, either by word of
mouth, or by writing, beside the written word of God.

Our consent.
Conclus. I. We hold that the very word of God, has been delivered by
tradition. For first God revealed his will to Adam by word of mouth: and
renewed the same unto the Patriarchs, not by writing, but by speech, by
dreams, and other inspirations: and thus the word of God went from man to man
for the space of two thousand and four hundred years, unto the time of Moses,
who was the first pen-ma^ of holy scripture, For as touching the prophecy of
Enoch, we commonly hold it was not penned by Enoch, but by some Jew under his
name. And for the space of this time, men worshipped God and held the articles
of their faith by tradition, not from men but immediately from God himself. And
the history of the new testament (as some say) for eighty years, as some
others think, for the space of twenty years and more, went from hand to hand
by tradition, till penned by the Apostles, or being penned by others was
approoved by them.

Conclus. II. We hold that the Prophets, our Savior Christ, and his Apostles,
spoke and did many things good and true which were not written in the
scriptures: but came either to us, or to our ancetours only by tradition. As
2. Tim. 3. 20. it is said, that Iannes and Iambres were the Magitians that
withstood Moses: now in the books of the old testament we shall not find them
once named, and therefore it is like, that the Apostle had their names by
tradition, or by some writings then extant among the Jews. So Hebr. 12. 21.
the author of the Epistle records of Moses, that when he saw a terrible
sight in Mount Sinai, he said, I tremble and am afraid: which words are not
to be found in all the books of the old testament. In the Epistle of Jude
mention is made, that the devil strove with Michaell the Archangel about the
body of Moses: which point (as also the former) considering it is not to be
found in holy writ, it seems the Apostle had it by tradition from the Jews.
That the Prophet Isai was killed with a fullers clubbe is received for truth,
but yet not recorded in Scripture: and so likewise that the virgin Marie lived
and died a virgin. And in Ecclesiastical writers many worthy sayings of the
Apostles and other holy men are recorded, and received of us for truth, which
nevertheless are not set down in the books of the old or new Testament. And
many things we hold for truth not written in the word, if they be not against
the word.

Conclus. III. We hold that the Church of God has power to prescribe
ordinances rules, or traditions, touching time and place of Gods worship, and
touching order and comelines to be used in the same: and in this regard, Paul,
1. Cor. 11. 2. commends the Church of Corinth for keeping his traditions, and
Act. 15. the Council at Jerusalem decreed that the Churches of the Gentiles
should abstain from blood, and from things strangled. This decree is termed a
tradition, and it was in force among them so long as the offense of the Jews
remained. And this kind of traditions whether made by general Councels or
particular Synods, we have care to maintain and observe; these caueats being
remembered: first that they prescribe nothing childish or absurd to be done:
secondly that they be not imposed as any parts of Gods worship: thirdly, that
they be severed from superstition or opinion of merit: lastly that the Church
of God be not burdened with the multitude of them. And thus much we hold
touching Traditions.

The difference.
Papists teach, that beside the written word, there be certain unwritten
traditions, which must be believed as profitable and necessary to salvation.
And these they say are two fold; Apostolical, namely such as were delivered by
the Apostles and not written; and Ecclesiastical, which the Church decrees as
occasion is offered. We hold that the Scriptures are most perfect, containing
in them all doctrines needful to salvation, whether they concern faith or
manners: and therefore we acknowledge no such traditions beside the written
word, which shall be necessary to salvation; so as he which believes them
not, cannot be saved.

Our reasons.
Testimony I. Deutr. 4. 2. Thou shall not add to the words that I command
thee, nor take any thing there from: therefore the written word is sufficient
for all doctrines pertaining to salvation. If it be said that this commandment
is spoken as well of the unwritten as of the written word, I answer: that
Moses speaks of the written word only: for these very words are a certain
preface which he set before a long co^mentatie made of the written law, for
this end to make the people more attentive, and obedient.

Testimony II. Isai 8. 20. To the law and to the testimony. If they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Here the
Prophet teaches what must be done in cases of difficulty. Men must not run
to the wizard or southsaier, but to the law and testimony, and here he
commends the written word as sufficient to resolve all doubts and scruples in
conscience whatsoever.

Testimony III. John, 20. 31. These things were written that ye might believe
that Jesus is the Christ, and in believing might have everlasting life. Here is
set down the full end of the Gospel, and of the whole written word: which is
to bring men to faith and consequently to salvation: and therefore the whole
scripture alone is suffient to this end without traditions. If it be said,
that this place must be understood of Christ's miracles only: I answer, that
miracles without the doctrine of Christ and knowledge of his sufferings, can
bring no man to life everlasting, and therefore the place must be understood of
the doctrine of Christ and not of his miracles alone, as Paul teaches, Gal. ^.
1: 8. If we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you any thing BESIDE THAT which
we have preached, let him be accursed. And to this effect he blames them that
taught but a diverse doctrine to that which he had taught, 1. Tim. 1. 3.

Testimony IIII. 2. Tim. 3. 16, 17. The whole Scripture is given by
inspiration of God and is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to
instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made
perfect unto every good work. In these words be contained two arguments, to
prove the sufficiency of Scripture without unwritten verities. The first: that
which is profitable to these four uses; namely, to teach all necessary truth,
to confute all errors, to correct faults in manners, and to instruct in
righteousness, that is, to inform all men in all good duties; that is
sufficient to salvation. But Scripture serves for all these uses: and
therefore it is sufficient: and unwritten traditions are superfluous. The
second: that which can make the man of God, that is, Prophets, and Apostles,
and the ministers of the word, perfect in all the duties of their callings:
that same word is sufficient to make all other men perfect in all good works.
But Gods word is able to make the man of God perfect. Therefore it is
sufficient to prescribe the true and perfect way to eternal life, without the
help of unwritten traditions.

V. The judgment of the Church. Tertull. de resur. carnis.
says, Take from heretics the opinions which they maintain with the
heathen, that they may defend their questions by SCRIPTVRE ALONE, and they
cannot stand. Again, We need no curiosity after Christ Jesus, nor
inquisition after the Gospel. When we believe it, we desire to BELIEVE NOTHING
BESIDE: for this we first believe that there is NOTHING MORE which we may
believe. Hierome on Matthew. 23. writing of an opinion that John Baptist was
killed, because he foretold the coming of Christ, says thus: This, because
it has not authority from Scriptures, may as easily be contemned as
approved. In which words, there is a conclusion with a minor, and the mayor
is to be supplied by the rules of logic thus. That which has not authority
from Scriptures, may as easily be contemned as approved: but this opinion is
so: therefore. Behold a notable argument against all unwritten traditions.
Augustine book 2. c. 9. de doct. Christ. In those things which are plainly
set down in Scripture, are found ALL THOSE POINTS WHICH CONTAIN FAITH AND
MANNERS of living well. Vicentius Lirinen. says, the Canon of the Scripture is
perfect, and fully sufficient to it self FOR ALL THINGS.

Beside these testimonies, other reasons there be that serve to prove this
point. I. The practice of Christ and his Apostles, who for the confirmation of
the doctrine which they taught, used always the testimony of Scripture,
neither can it be proved, that they ever confirmed any doctrine by tradition.
Act. 26. 22. I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and great,
saying, NONE OTHER THINGS THEN THOSE which the Prophets and Moses did say
should come. And by this we are given to understand, that we must always have
recourse to the written word, as being sufficient to instruct us in mattes of
salvation. II. If the believing of unwritten traditions were necessary to
salvation, then we must as well believe the writings of the ancient Fathers as
well as the writings of the Apostles, because Apostolical traditions are not
else where to be found but in their books. And we may not believe their
sayings as the word of God, because they often err being subject to error:
and for this cause their authority, when they speak of traditions, may be
suspected: and we may not always believe them upon their word.

Objections for Traditions.
First they allege, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. where the Apostle biddes that Church
keep the ordinances which he taught them either by word or letter. Hence they
gather, that beside the written word, there be unwritten traditions, that are
indeed necessary to be kept and obeyed. Ans. It is very likely, that this
Epistle to the Thessalonians was the first that ever Paul writ to any Church,
though in order it have not the first place; and therefore at the time when
this Epistle was penned, it might well fall out, that some things needful to
salvation were delivered by word of mouth, not being as yet written by any
Apostle. Yet the same things were afterward set down in writing, either in the
second epistle or in the epistles of Paul.

Object. II. That, Scripture is Scripture, is a point to be believed, but that
is a tradition unwritten; and therefore one tradition there is not written,
that we are to believe. Answ. That the books of the old and new Testament are
Scripture, it is to be gathered and believed not upon bare tradition, but from
the very books themselves, on this manner. Let a man that is endued with the
spirit of discerning, read the several books, withal let him consider the
professed author thereof which is God himself, and the matter therein
contained, which is a most divine and absolute truth full of piety: the manner
and form of speech, which is full of majesty in the simplicity of words. The
end whereat they wholly aim, which is the honor and glory of God alone, etc.
and he shall be resolved that Scripture is Scripture, even by the Scripture it
self. Yea, and by this means he may discern any part of Scripture, from the
writings of men whatsoever. Thus then scripture proves it self to be
scripture: and yet we despise not the universal consent or tradition of the
Church in this case: which though it do not persuade the conscience, yet is it
a notable inducement to move us to reverence, and regard the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles. It will be said, where is it written that scripture is
scripture? I answer, not in any one particular place or book of scripture, but
in every line and page of the whole bible to him that can read with the spirit
of discerning, and can discern the voice of the true pastor, as the sheep of
Christ can do.

Object. III Some books of the canon of the scripture are lost, as the book
of the wars of God. Number. 21. 14. The book of the just. Joshua. 10, 13. the
books of Cronicles of the kings of Israel and Judah. 1. King. 14. 19. the books
of certain prophets, Nathan, Gad, Iddo, Ahiah, and Semiah: and therefore the
matter of these books must come to us by tradition. Ans. Though it be granted
that some books of Canonical scripture be lost: yet the scripture still
remains sufficient because the matter of those books (so farforth as it was
necessary to salvation) is contained in these books of scripture that are now
extant. Again, I take it to be a truth (though some think otherwise) that no
part of the Canon is lost: for Paul says, what soever things were written
aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures, etc. Romans 15. 4. Where he takes it for granted,
that the whole canon of holy Scripture was then extant. For if he had thought,
that some books of scripture had been lost, he would have said: whatsoever was
written and is now extant, was written for our learning and comfort. For books
that are lost serve neither for learning nor comfort. Again to hold that any*
books of scripture should be lost, calls into question Gods providence, and
the fidelity of the Church, who has the books of God in keeping, and is
therefore called the pillar and ground of truth. And touching the books before
mentioned, I answer thus: The book of the wars of God, Number. 21. 14. might
be some short bill or narration of things done among the Israelites, which in
the days of Moses went from hand to hand. For sometime a book in scripture,
signifies a roll or Catalogue, as the first chapter of Matthew, which
contains the genealogy of our Savior Christ, is called the book of the
generation of Jesus Christ. Again, the book of the just, and the books of
Chronicles, which are said to be lost, were but as the Chronicles of England
are with us; even politic records of the acts and euentes of things, in the
kingdom of Judah and Israel: out of which the Prophets gathered things
necessary to be known; and placed them in holy scripture. As for the books
of Iddo, Ahiah, Semiah, Gad, and Nathan, they are contained in the books of
the Kings and Chronicles, and in the books of Samuel, which were not written
by him alone, but by sundry prophets, 1. Chr. 29. 29. as also was the book of
Judges. As for the books of Solomon which are lost, they did not concern
religion and matters of salvation, but were concerning matters of philosophy
and such like things.

Object. IV. Moses in Mount Sina, beside the written law, received from God a
more secret doctrine, which he never writ, but delivered by tradition or word
of mouth to the Prophets after him: and this the Jews have now set down in
their Cabala. Ans. This indeed is the opinion of some of the Jews, whom in
effect and substance sundry Papists follow: but we take it for no better then
a Jewish dotage. For if Moses had known any secret doctrine beside the written
law, he would never have given this commandment of the said law, thou shall
not add any thing thereto.

Object. V. Heb. 5. 12. Gods word is of two sorts milk and strong me at. By
milk we must understand the word of God written wherein God speaks plainly
to the capacity of the rudest: but strong meat is unwritten traditions, a
doctrine not to be delivered unto all, but to those that grow to perfection.
Ansvv. We must know, that one and the same word of God is milk and strong
meat, in regard of the manner of handling and propounding of it. For being
delivered generally and plainly, to the capacity of the simplest, it is milk;
but being handled particularly and largely, and so fitted for men of more
understanding, it is strong meat. As for example: the doctrine of the
creation, of man's fall, and redemption by Christ, when it is taught ouerly and
plainly, it is milk: but when the depth of the same is thoroughly opened, it
is strong meat. And therefore it is a conceit of man's brain, to imagine that
some unwritten word is meant by strong meat.

Object. VI. Sundry places of Scripture be doubtful: and every religion has
his several exposition of them, as the Papists have theirs, and the
Protestants theirs. Now then, seeing there can be but one truth, when question
is of the interpretation of scripture, recourse must be had to the tradition of
the Church, that the true sense may be determined Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 1.
and 2.
and the question ended. Ans. It is not so: but in doubtful places Scripture
it self is sufficient to declare his own meaning; first by the analogy of
faith, which is the sum of religion gathered out of the clearest places of
scripture: secondly, by the circumstances of the place and the nature and
signification of the words; thirdly by conference of place with place. By
these and like helps contained in scripture, we may judge which is the truest
meaning of any place. Scripture it self is the text and the best gloss. And
the scripture is falsely termed the matter of strife, it being not so of it
self, but by the abuse of man.

And thus much for our dissent concerning traditions, wherein we must not be
wavering but steadfast, because notwithstanding our renouncing of popery; yet
popish inclinations and dispositions be rise among us. Our common people
maruelously affect humane traditions: yea man's nature is inclined more to be
pleased with them, then with the word of God. The feast of the nativity of our
Savior Christ, is only a custom and tradition of the Church, and yet men are
commonly more careful to keep it then the Lords day, the keeping whereof
stands by the moral law. Positive laws are not sufficient to restrain us
from buying and selling on the sabbath: yet within the twelve days no man
keeps market. Again see the truth of this in our affection to the ministry
of the word: let the preacher allege Peter and Paul, the people count it but
common stuff, such as any man can bring: but let men come and allege
Ambrose, Austine, and the rest of the fathers: oh, he is the man, he is alone
for them. Again, let any man be in danger any way, and straight he sends to
the wise man or wizzard: Gods word is not sufficient to comfort and direct him.
All this argues that popery denied with the mouth, abides still in the heart:
and therefore we must learn to reverence the written word by ascribing unto it
all manner of perfection.

The eight point. Of vows.
Our consent.
Touching vows this must be known, that we do not condemn them altogether,
but only labor to restore the purity of doctrine touching this point, which
by the Church of Rome from time to time has bin corrupted and defaced: We hold
therefore that a vow is a promise made to God touching some duties to be
performed unto him: and it is two fold, general, or special. The general vow
is that which concerns all believers: and it is made in the covenant both of
the law, and of the Gospel. I will here only speak of the vow which is
made in the covenant of the Gospel, in which there be two actions: one of God,
the other of man. God in mercy one his part promises to men the remission of
sins and life everlasting* and man again for his part promises to believe
in Christ, and to obey God in all his commandments. All men ever made this
vow unto God, as the Jews in circumcision: which also they renewed so often as
they received the Passover: and in the new testament all that are baptized
do the like. And in baptism this vow is called the stipulation of a good
conscience, whereby we purpose to renounce our selves, to believe in Christ, and
to bring forth the fruits of true repentance: and it ought to be renewed so often
as we are partakers of the supper of the Lord. This vow is necessary and must
be kept as a part of the true worship of God; because it is a promise, wherein
we vow to perform all duties commanded of God either in the law or in the
Gospel. It may be demanded, considering we are bound to obedience, how we
bind our selves in baptism thereto. Ans. Though we be already bound partly
by nature and partly by the written word, yet may we renew the same bond in a
vow, and he that is bound may further bind himself, so it be for this end,
to help his dulnes for want of zeal, and to make himself more forward in
duties of love to men and the worship of God: to this end David swear to keep
the law of God, psalm. 119. 116. though he were bound unto it by nature and by
the written law it self.

The special vow is that, which does not reach to the person of all
believers, but only concerns some special men upon some special occasions.
And this kind of vow is twofold. The first, is the vow of a ceremonial duty
in the way of service to God: and it was in practice in the Church of the Jews
under the old Testament: examples hereof are two especially, the first was the
vow of the Nazarites, whereto no kind of men were bound by Gods commandment,
but they bound themselves: God only prescribing the manner and order of
keeping the same with rites pertaining thereto, as abstinence from wine, the
not cutting of their hair, and such like. The second example is of the Jews,
when of their own accords they vowed to give God house or land, sheep, or
oxen, or any like things, for the maintenance of the legal worship: and of
this also God prescribes certain rules, Levit. 27. Now these vows were part
of the Jewish pedagogue or ceremonial law, wherein God trained up the Jews in
the old testament: and being observed of them they were parts of Gods worship:
but now under the gospel they are not: being all abolished with the
ceremonial law, to which Christ put an end at his death upon the cross. It
is true Paul made a vow, and since kept the same, in the time of the new
Testament, Act. 18. yet not as a part of Gods worship; but as a thing
indifferent for the time: wherein he only condescended to the weakness of the
Jews, that by this means he might bring them the better unto Christ. And
whereas Christ is called a Nazarite, Math. 2. 23. we may not think he was of
that very order, because he did not obstain from wine: but he was so termed
because he was the verity and accomplishment of this order. For by it was
signified that Gods church was a peculiar people severed or chosen out of the
world, and that Christ in respect of holiness was also separated sro^ all
sinners. And the words in S. Matthew, he shall be called a Nazarite, are borrowed
from the book of Judges, cap. 13. where they are properly spoken of Sampson,
and in type or figure of Christ. For as Sampson saved Israel by his death, so
did Christ save his Church. And as Sampson killed his enemies more by death
then by life, so did Christ. It is plain therefore that this kind of vow
binds not us: for there are no more ccremonies to be kept under the gospel
for parts of Gods worship, but the outward rites of Baptism and the Lords
Supper. Vows concerning meats, drinks, attire, touching, tasting, times,
places, days were proper to the Jews.

The second kind of special vow is that whereby a man promises freely to
perform some outward and bodily exercise, for some good end: and this vow
also (if it be made accordingly) is lawefull, and belongs both to the Church of
the old and new testament. In the old we have the example of the Rekabites.
Ier. 35. who by the appointment of Ionadab their father abstained from strong
drink, and wine, from planting vineyardes and orchardes: whereby Ionadab
intended only to break them before hand, and to acquaint them with their
future condition and state, that they should be strangers in a foreign land;
that so they might prepare themselves to endure hardness in the time to come.
And now in the new testament we have warrant in like manner to vow: as if a
man by drinking of wine or strong drink, find himself prone to drunkenness,
he may vow with himself to drink no more wine nor strong drink for so long
time, as he feels the driuking thereof will stir up his infirmity, and
minister occasion of sinning. Of this kind also are the vows in which we
purpose and promise to God, to keep set times of fasting, to task our selves
in prayer and reading of holy scriptures, and to give set alms for special
causes known to our selves, and to do sundry like duties. And that we be not
deceived in making such vows, certain rules must be remembered: I. that the vow
be agreeable to Gods will and word: for if it be otherwise, the making as also
the keeping thereof is sin. Vows must not be the bonds of iniquity. II. It
must so be made, that it may stand with christian liberty. For we may not make
such things necessary in conscience, which God has made free. Now christian
liberty allows unto us the free use of all things indifferent, so it be out of
the case of offense. Hence it follows that vows must be made and kept or not
kept, so far forth as in conscience they may stand or not stand with our
liberty purchased by Christ. III. The vow must be made with consent of
superiors, if we be under government. Thus among the Jews the vow of a
daughter might not stand, unless the consent of parents came thereunto. IIII. It
must be in the power and ability of the maker thereof, to do or not to do. A
vow made of a thing impossible, is no vow. V. It must be agreeable to the
calling of him that makes it: that is, both to his general calling as he is a
Christian, and to that particular calling wherein he lives. If it be against
either one or both, it is unlawful. VI. It must be made with deliberation.
Rash vows be not lawful, though the things vowed may be done lawfully. VII.
The end must be good, which is to preserve and exercise the gifts of faith,
prayer, repentance, obedience, and other virtues of the mind: as also to
testify our tha^kfulnes unto God for blessings received. These are the
principal rules which must be observed in making of vows: and herewithall must
be remembered that vows made on this manner, are by themselves no part of Gods
worship, but only helps and furtherances thereunto: and thus are we to
esteem of all the vows of the new Testament. And thus much of special vows,
and of our consent herein.

The dissent or difference.
The points of difference between us touching vows are especially three. I.
The Church of Rome teaches that in the new testament we are as much bound to
make vows, as was the Church of the Jews, and that even in external
exercises. We say no: considering the ceremonial law is now abolished: and we
have only two ceremonies by commandment to be observed, baptism, and the
supper of the Lord. Again we are not so much bound to make or keep vows as
the Jews were; because they had a commandment so to do, and we have none at
all. But they allege to the contrary the Prophet Esaias, cap. 19. 20. who
speaking of the time of the gospel, says, the Egyptians shall know the Lord,
and shall vow unto him and keep it. I answer two ways: first, that the
Prophet in this place expresses and signifies the spiritual worship of the
new testament by ceremonial worship then used: as he does also in the last
chapter where he calls the minsters of the new testament Priests and
Levites. Secondly, we grant, the Church of the new testament makes vows unto
God, but they are of moral and euangelical duties: which must not be left
undone and if vowing will indeed further the^, it is not to be neglected. And
therefore so often as we come to the Lords Table, we in heart renew the vow and
promise of obedience. And though vows be made of things and actions
indifferent, yet are they not any parts of Gods worships which is the point to
be proved.

Again they allege. Psalm. 75. 11. Vow unto God and perform it. And they
say that this commandment binds all men. Ans. That commandment first binds
the Jews to the making of ceremonial vows. Again David here speaks of the
vowing of praise and thanksgiving unto God: and so he expoundes himself,
Psalm. 56. 12. My vows are upon me, I will offer praises unto God; and this vow
indeed concerns al men because it respects a moral duty, which is to set
forth the praise of God.

II. Point of difference. They also hold that vows made even of things not
commanded, as meats, drinks, attire, etc. are parts of Gods worship, yea
that they tend to a state of perfection, in that the keeping of them brings
man to an higher estate then the keeping of the law can do. We flatly say,
no: holding that lawefull vows be certain adminicul^ cultus diun^.
stays and props of Gods worship, and not the worship it self. For Paul says
plainly 1. Tim. 4. 8. Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is
profitable for much. Again, as Gods kingdom is, so must his worship be: and
Gods kingdom stands not in outward things, as in eating, drinking, and such
like actions: and therefore his worship stands not in outward things.

III. Point of difference. They maintain such vows to be made, as are not
agreeable to the rules before named: and herein also we are to dissent from
them. The first and principal is, the vow of continency, whereby a man
promises to God to keep chastity always in single life, that is, out of the
estate of wedlock. This kind of vow is flat against the word of God: and
therefore unlawful. For Paul says, 1. Cor. 7. 9. If they can not continue let
them marry. 1. Tim. 4. 1. It is a doctrine of devils to forbid to marry. Heb.
13. 4. Marriage is honor able among all, and the bed undefiled. Again, this
vow is not in the power of himself that voweth: for continency is the gift
of God, who gives it not unto all, but to whom he will and when he will, and
as long as he will. They allege, that in the want of continency, fasting and
prayer obtain it. Ansvv. It is not so: Gods gifts be of two sorts some are
common to all believers, as the gift of faith, repentance and the fear of God,
etc. others are peculiar to some only, as the gift of continence, 1. Corinthians.
7. 7. I would that all men were as I my self am, but every man has his proper
gift of God, one this way, an other that way. Now, if we fast and pray for the
increase of the common gifts of God, as faith, repentance, and all such as are
needful to salvation, we may obtain them in some measure, but the like can
not be said of particular gifts. The child of God may pray for health or
wealth, and not obtain either of them in this world; because it is not the
will of God to vouchsafe these blessings to all me^: and Paul prayed three
times to be delivered from a temptation, and yet obtained not his suite. And so
may we likewise pray for chastity in single estate, and yet never obtain it:
because, it may be, it is the will of God to save us without it. This vow
therefore we abhor as a thing that has heretofore and does still bring forth
innumerable abominations in the world. Yet here mark in what manner we do
it. First of all, though we mislike the vow; yet we like and commend single
life. Marriage indeed is better in two respects: first because God has
ordained it to be a remedy of continency to all such persons as cannot
contain: secondly because it is the seminary both of church and common
wealth; and it brings forth a *seed of God for the enlarging of his kingdom.
Yet single life in them that have the gift of continency, is in some respects
to be preferred. First because it brings liberty in persequution. Thus Paul
says, 1. Cor. 7. 26. I suppose it to be good for the present necessity for a
man so to be. Secondly, because it frees men from the common cares,
molestations, and distractions that be in the family, v. 2. 28. Such shall have
trouble in the flesh, but I spare you. Thirdly because single parties do
commonly with more bodily ease and liberty worship God; it being still
presupposed, that they have the gift of continency. v. 34. The unmarried woman
cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and
spirit.

Again though we mislike the vow, yet we hold and teach, that men or women
being assured that they have the gift of continency, may constantly resolve
and purpose with themselves to live and lead a single life, 1. Cor. 7. 38. He
that stands firm in his own heart that he has no need, but has power of
his own will, and has so DECREED IN HIS HEART that he will keep his virgin,
he does well. And we embrace the saying of Theoderet. on 1. Tim. c. 4. For he
does not (says he) blame single life or continency, but he accuses them that
by LAW INACTED COMPEL men to follow these. And men made themselves chaste for
the kingdom of heaven. Math. 19. 12. not by vow, but by a purpose of heart,
which is far less then a vow, and may be changed upon occasion, whereas a
vow cannot, unless it do evidently appear to be unlawful.

Thirdly, for such persons as are able to contain, to live single for the
ends before named, indeed we hold it to be no counsel of perfection, yet do
we not deny it to be a Counsel of expedience, or outward ease; according to
that which Paul says, v. 25. I give mine advise --, and 35. I speak this for
your commodity not to entangle you in a snare.

Lastly, we think that if any having the gift of continency, do make a vow
to live single and yet afterward marry (the said gift remaining) they have
sinned. Yet not because they are married but because their vow is broken. And
thus said Augustine of widows that married afrer their vow. lib. de bono
viduit. cap. 9.

The second is the vow of poverty and monastical life, in which men bestow
all they have on the poor: and give themselves wholly and only to prayer and
fasting. This vow is against the will of God, Act. 20. 35. It is a more
blessed thing to give the^ to receive. Prove. 28. 7. Give me neither riches nor
poverty. Deuteronomy. 28. 22. Poverty is numbered among the curses of the law; none
whereof are to be vowed. And it is the rule of the holy Ghost, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
He that will not labor, namely in some special and warrantable calling, must
not eat. And v. 12. I exhort that they work with quietness and eat their own
bread. Now when as men live apart from others, giving themselves only to
prayer and fasting, they live in no calling. And it is against the general
vow made in baptism, because it freeth men from sundry duties of the moral
law, and changes the proper end of man's life. For every man must have two
callings. The first is the general calling of a christian, by virtue of which
he performs worship unto God, and duties of love to men. The second is a
particular calling, wherein according to his gift he must do service to men in
some function, partaining either to the Church or common wealth whereof he is a
member. And the first of these twain must be performed in the second: and the
second in and with the first. The end of man's life is, not only to serve God
by the duties of the first table, but by serving of man in the duties of the
second table of serve God. And therefore the love of our neighbor is called
the fulfilling of the whole law, Romans 13. 10. because the law of god is
practiced not apart; but in and with the love of our neighbor. This being so,
it is manifest that vowed poverty in monkish life makes many unprofitable
members both of Church and common wealth.

And though we mislike this vow also, yet we do it, holding these conclusions.
I. that a man may forsake all his goods upon special calling; as the Apostles
did, when they were sent to preach the gospel through the whole world. Secondly
goods may be forsaken, yea wife, children, parents, brethren, and all, in the
case of confession, that is when a man for the religion of Christ is
persequuted and constrained to forsake all he has. For then the second table
gives place to the duties of the first. Mark. 10. 29. II. That, for the time of
peesequution, men may withdraw themselves (just occasion offered) and go
apart to wildernesses or like places, Heb. 11. 37. yet for the time of peace I
see no cause of solitary life. If it be alleged that men go apart for
contemplation and spiritual exercises, I say again that Gods grace may as well
be exercised in the family as in the cloister. The family is indeed as it were
a school of God, in which they that have but a spark of grace may learn and
exercise many virtues, the acknwoledgement of God, invocation, the fear of
God, love, bountifulness, patience, meekenes, faithfulness, etc. Nay here be
more occasions of doing or taking good, then be or can be in a cloister. III.
That, we condemn not the old and ancient Monks, though we like not every
thing in them. For they lived not like idle-bellies, but in the Zozom lib. 1.
cap. 13.
sweat of their own brows, as they ought to do: and many of them were
married: Epiph. bar. 78.
and in their meat, drink, apparel, rule, vow, and August. de mon. Eccl. l.
1. c. 31. and de opere Monach. cap. 17
whole course of life, differed from the Monks of this time; even as heaven
from earth.

The third vow is of regular obedience, whereby men give themselves to keep
some devised rule or order, standing most commonly in the observation of
exercises in outward things, as meats and drinks, and apparel, etc. This vow
is against christian liberty, whereby is granted a free use of all things
indifferent, so it be without the case of offense. Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast in the
liberty wherein Christ has made you free. Coloss. 2. 16. Let no man judge
you in meat and drink. To conclude, whereas the Papists magnify these their
vows, and yet make no such account of the vow in baptism: we for our parts
must be contrary to them, not only in judgment, but also in practice: and we
ought to have special care to make good the vows we have plight to God
according to his commandment. In our creation we made vow of obedience: and
being received into the covenant of grace, we vowed to believe in Christ, and
to bring forth fruits of new obedience, and this vow is renewed as often as we
come to the Lords table: our duty therefore is, to perform them also to God,
as David says, Vow unto God and keep it: and if we keep them not, all turns
to our shame and confusion. Men stand much on the keeping of that word which
they have passed to me^, and it is taken for a point of much honesty, as it is
indeed. Now then, if there be such care to keep touch with men, much more
should we have care to keep covenant with God.

The ninth point. Of Images.
Our consent.
Conclusion I. We acknowledge the civil use of images as freely and truly as
the Church of Rome does. By civil use I understand, that use which is made of
them in the common societies of men, out of the appointed places of the solemn
worship of God. And this to be lawful, it appears: because the arts of
painting and grauing are the ordinance of God: and to be skillful in them is
the gift of God, as the example of Bezaleel, and Aholiab declare, Exodus 35. 30.
This use of Images may be in sundry things. I. In the adorning and setting
forth of buildings: thus Solomon beautified his throne with the image of lions.
And the Lord commanded his temple to be adorned with the images of palm trees,
of pomegranats, of bulls, cherubes, and such like. II. It serves for the
distinction of coins: according to the practice of Emperors and princes of
all nations. When Christ was asked, Matthew. 22. whether it was lawful to give
tribute to Caesar or no? he called for a penie and said, whose image or super
scription is this, they said, Cesars: he then said, give to Caesar the things
that are Cesars; not condemning but approving the stamp or image upon his
coin. And though the Jews were forbidden to make images in way of
representation, or worship of the true god: yet the Sycle of the sanctuary,
which they used, specially after the time of Moses, was stamped with the image
of the Almond tree, and the po^te of Manna. III. Images serve to keep in
memory friends deceased whom we reverence. And it is like, that hence came
one occasion of the images that are now in use in the Roman Church. For in the
days after the Apostles men used privately to keep the pictures of their
friends departed: and this practice after crept into the open congregation; and
at last, superstition getting head, images began to be worshipped.

Conclus. II. We hold the historical use of images to be good and lawful: and
that is, to represent to the eye the acts of histories, whether they be
humane, or divine: and thus we think the histories of the Bible may be painted
in private places.

Conclus. III. In one case it is lawful to make an image to testify the
presence or the effects of the majesty of God, namely when God himself gives
any special commandment so to do. In this case Moses made and erected a
brazen serpent, to be a type, sign, or image to represent Christ crucified.
Ioh. 3. 14. And the Cherubs over the mercy seat served to represent the
majesty of God, to who^ the angels are subject. And in the second
commandment it is not simply said, Thou shall not make a graven image: but
with limitation, Thou shall not make to thy self, that is, on thine own head
upon thine own will and pleasure.

IV. The right images of the new testament, which we hold and acknowledge, are
the doctrine and preaching of the gospel, and all things that by the word of
God pertaines thereto. Gal. 3. Who has be witched you that ye should not obey
the truth to whom Jesus Christ was before DECSRIBED IN YOUR SIGHT AND AMONG
YOU CRVCIFIED. Hence it follows, that the preaching of the word, is as a most
excellent picture in which Christ with his benefits are lively represented
unto us. And we dissent not from Origin. contra Cells. lib. 8. who says, We
have no images framed by any base workmen, but such as are brought forth and
framed by the word of God, namely patterns of virtue, and frames resembling
Christians. He means that Christians themselves are the images of Christians.

The difference.
Our dissent from them touching images stands in three points: I. The Church of
Rome holds it lawful for them to make images to resemble God, though not in
respect of his divine nature; yet in respect of some properties and actions. We
on the contrary, hold it unlawful for us to make any image, any way to
represent the true God: or, to make an image of any thing in way of religion,
to worship God, much less the creature thereby. For the second commandment
says plainly, Exodus 20. 4. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image,
or the likeness of anything in heaven, etc. The Papists say the commandment is
meant of the images of false Gods. But, will they nill they, it must be
understood of the images of the true Jehovah: and it forbids us so says Roman
Catech. on 2. Com.
to resemble God, either in his nature, properties, or works, or to use any
resemblance of him for any sacred use; as to help the memory, when we are
about to worship God. Thus much the holy Ghost who is the best expounder of
himself, teaches most plainly, Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16. Thou saw no image at all
(either of false or true god) and therefore thou shall not make any likeness of
any thing. And again the Prophet Esaias, chap. 40. 18. reproouing idolaters,
asks to whom they will liken God, or, what similitude will they set upon
him. And v. 21. Know ye nothing? have you not heard? has it not bin TOLD you
FROM THE BEGINNING? as if he should say, have ye forgotten the second
commandment, that God gave unto your fathers? And thus he flatly reprooues
all them that resemble the true God in images. But they say further, that by
images in the second commandment are meant idols, that is (say they) such
things as men worship for gods. Ans. If it were so, we should confound the
first and second commandments. For the first, Thou shall have no other gods
before my face, forbids all false gods, which man wickedly frames unto
himself, by giving his heart and the principal affections thereof, to them:
and therefore idols also are ^here forbidden, when they are esteemed as gods.
And the distinction they make that an Image is the representation of true
things, an Idol of things supposed, is false. Tertullian de Idol. ^. 3.
says, that every form or representation is to be termed an Idol. And
Isidore Etym. l. 8.
says, that the heathen used the names of image and idol indifferently in one
and the same signification. And S. Steven in his apology, Act. 7. 41. calls
the golden calfe an Idol. Hierome on Isa. 37.
says, that idols are images of dead men. Ancient Divines accord with all
this which I have said. Lactantius says, Inst. lib. 2. cap. 19. Where images
are for religions sake, there is no religion. The Council of Elibera, can. 36.
decreed, that nothing should be painted on the walls of Churches, which is
adored of the people. contra Celsum. lib. 7.
Origin. We suffer not any to worship Jesus at altars, images, and temples:
BECAUSE IT IS WRITTEN, Thou shall have none other Gods. And Epiphanius says,
It is against the Epist. ad Ioh. Hierus.
authority of the Scriptures to see the image of Christ, or of any Saints
hanging in the Church. In the seventh Council of Constantinople these words
of Epiphanius are cited against the Encratitae. Be mindful beloved children
not to bring images into the Church, nor set them in the places where the
Saints are buried, BUT ALVVAIES CARRY GOD IN YOUR HE ARTS: neither let them
be suffered in any common house: for it is not meet that a Christian should be
occupied by the eyes but by the meditation of the mind.

Arguments of the Papists.
The reasons which they use to defend their opinions are these. I. In Salomons
temple were erected Cherubins, which were Images of angels, on the Mercieseat
where God was worshipped: and thereby was resembled the majesty of God,
therefore it is lawefull to make images to resemble God. Ansvv. They were
erected by special commandment from God. who prescribed the very form of
them and the place where they must be set: and thereby Moses had a warrant to
make them; otherwise he had sinned: let them show the like warrant for their
images if they can. Secondly the Cherubins were placed in the holy of holies in
the most inward place of the Temple, and consequently were removed from the
sight of the people, who only heard of them: and none but the high priest saw
them, and that but once a year. And the Cherubins without the veil though
they were to be seen, yet were they not to be worship ped. Exo. 20. 4.
Therefore they serve nothing at all to justify the images of the Church of Rome.

Object. II. God appeared in the form of a man to Abraham, Genesis 18. 1* ^3. and
to Daniel, who saw the ancient of days sitting on a throne, Dan. 9. Now as
God appeared, so may he be resembled: therefore (say they) it is lawful to
resemble God in the form of a man or any like image in which he showed
himself to men. Ans. In this reason the proposition is false, for God may
appear in whatsoever form it pleases his majesty; yet does it not follow,
that man should therefore resemble God in those forms: man having no libcrtie
to resemble him in any form at all: unless he be commanded so to do. Again,
when God appeared in the form of a man, that form was a sign of Gods
presence only for the time when God appeared and no longer: as the bread and
wine in the sacrament are signs of Christ's body and blood, not for ever but
for the time of administration: for afterward they become again, as common
bread and wine. And when the Holy Ghost appeared in the likeness of a dove, that
likeness was a sign of his presence no longer then the holy Ghost so
appeared. And therefore he that would in these forms represent the Trinity,
does geeatly dishonor God, and do that for which he has no warrant.

Object. III. Man is the image of God, but it is lawful to paint a man, and
therefore to make the image of God. Ans. A very cavil: for first a man cannot
be painted, as he is the image of God, which stands in the spiritual gifts of
righteousness and true holiness. Again, the image of a man may be painted for
civil or historical use, but to paint any man for this end to represent God,
or in the way of religion, that we may the better remember and worship God, it
is unlawful. Other reasons which they use, are of small moment, and therefore
I omit them.

II. Differ. They teach and maintain, that images of God and of Saints may be
worshipped with religious worship, specially the crucifixe. For Thomas of
Watering f Sum. part 3. quest. ^5. art. 3.
says, Seeing the cross does represent Christ, who died upon acrosse, and is
to be worshipped with divine honor: it follows that the cross is to be
worshipped so too. We on the contrary, hold they may not. Our principal
ground is the second commandment, which contains two parts: the first
forbids the making of images to resemble the true God: the second forbids
the worshipping of them, or God in them; in these words. Thou shall not bow
down to them. Now, there can be no worship done to any thing less then the
bending of the knee. Again the brazen serpent was a type or Image of Christ
crucified. Ioh. 3. 14. appointed by God himself: yet when the people burned
incense to it, 2. King. 18. 4. Hezekias brake it in pieces, and is therefore
commended. And when the devil bad our Savior Christ, but to bow down the
knee unto him, and he would give him the whole world: Christ reiects his offer,
saying, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve,
Math. 4. 10. Again it is lawful for one man to worship another with civil
worship, but to worship man with religious honor is unlawful. For all
religious worship is prescribed in the first table: and the honor due to man
is only prescribed in the second table and the first commandment thereof,
Honor thy father; which honor is therefore civil and not religious. Now the
meanest man that can be, is a more excellent image of God, then all the images
of God or of Saints that are devised by men. de morib. Ecles cap. 35. lib. 9.
epist. 9.
Augustine, and long after him Gregory, in plain terms denies images to be
adored.

The Papists defend their opinions by these reasons. I. Psalm. 99. 5. Cast down
your selves before his foot stool. Ans. The words are thus to be read: Bow at
his foot stool; that is, at the Arc and Mercyseat, for there he has made a
promise of his presence: the words therefore say not, bovv to the Arc, but to
God at the Arc.

Object. II. Exodus 3. 5. God said to Moses, Stand a far off and put off thy
shoes, for the place is holy. Now if holy places must be reverenced, then much
more holy images, as the cross of Christ, and such like. Ansvv. God commanded
the cermony of putting off the shoes, that he might thereby strike Moses with
a religious reverence, not of the place but of his own majesty, whose
presence made the place holy. Let them show the like warrant for images.

III. Object. It is lawful to kneel down to a chair of estate in the
absence of the king or Queen: therefore much more to the images of God and of
Saints in heaven glorified, being absent from us. Ans. To kneel to the chair
of estate, is no more but a civil testimony, or sign of civil reverence, by
which all good subjects when occasion is offered, show their loyalty and
subjection to their lawful princes. And this kneeling being on this manner,
and to no other end, has sufficient warrant in the word of God. But kneeling
to the image of any Saint departed, is religious and consequently more then
civil worship, as the Papists themselves confess. The argument then proves
nothing, unless they will keep themselves to one and the same kind of worship.

III. Differ. The Papists also teach, that God may be lawfully worshipped in
images, in which he has appeared unto mem: as the Father, in the image of an
old man: the Son in the image of a man crucified: and the Holy Ghost in the
likeness of a dove, etc. But we hold it unlawful to worship God in, by, or at
any image: for this is the thing which (as I have proved before) the second
commandment forbids. And the fact of the Israelites, Exodus 32. in
worshipping the golden calfe is condemned as flat idolatry; albeit they
worshipped not the calfe but God in the calfe: for v. 5. Aaron says, To
morrovve shall be the solemnity of Jehovah: whereby he does give us to
understand, that the calfe was but a sign of Jehovah whom they worshipped.
Object. It seems the Israelites worshipped the calfe. For Aaron faith, verse.
4. These be thy Gods (O Israel) that brought thee out of Egypt. Ansvv. Aarons
meaning is nothing else, but that the golden calfe, was a sign of the presence
of the true God. And the name of the thing signified is given to the sign, as
upon a stage he is called ad Simplic. lib. 2. q. 3.
a King that representes the King. And Augustine says, that images are wont to
be called by the names of things whereofthey are images, as the counterfeit of
Samuel is called Samuel. And we must not esteem them all as mad men to
think that a calfe made of their earings, being but one or two days old,
should be the God that brought them out of Egypt with a mighty hand many days
before.

And these are the points of difference touching Images* wherein we must stand
at varience for ever with the Church of Rome. For they err in the foundation
of religion, making indeed an idol of the true God, and worshipping an other
Christ then we do, under new terms, maintaining the Idolatry of the heathen.
And therefore have we departed from them: and so must we still do because they
are Idolaters; as I have proved.

The X. point. Of real presence.
Our consent.
I. We hold and believe a presence of Christ's body and blood in the
Sacrament of the Lords supper: and that no fained, but a true and real
presence: which must be considered two ways; first in respect of the signs,
secondly in respect of the communicants. For the first, we hold and teach, that
Christ's body and blood, are truly present with the bread and wine, being
signs in the sacrament: but how? not in respect of place, of coexistence: but
by sacramental relation, on this manner. When a word is uttered, the sound
comes to the ear; and at the same instant, the thing signified comes to the
mind; and thus by relation the word and the thing spoken of, are both present
together. Even so at the Lords table bread and wine must not be considered
barely, as substances and creatures, but as outward signs in relation to the
body and blood of Christ: and this relation, arising from the very institution
of the Sacrament, stands in this, that when the elements of bread and wine are
present to the hand and to the mouth of the receiver; at the very same time the
body and blood of Christ are presented to the mind: thus and no otherwise is
Christ truly present with the signs. The second presence is in respect of the
communicants, to whose believing hearts he is also really present. It will be
said, what kind of presence is this? Ans. Such as the communion in the
sacrament is, such is the presence: and by the communion must we judge of the
presence. Now the communion is on this manner: God the father, according to
the tenor of the Evangelical covenant, gives Christ in this sacrament as
really and truly, as any thing can be given to man, not by part and peecemeale
(as we say) but whole Christ God and man, on this sort. In Christ there be two
natures, the godhead, and manhood. The godhead is not given in regard of
substance, or essence: but only in regard of efficacy, merits, and operation
conveyed thence to the manhood. And further, in this sacrament Christ's whole
manhood is given both body and soul, in this order. First of all is given the
very manhood in respect of substance, and that really: secondly the merits
and benefits thereof, as namely, the satisfaction performed by and in the
manhood, to the justice of God. And thus the entire manhood with the benefits
thereof, are given wholly and jointly together. For the two distinct signs of
bread and wine signify not two distinct giuings of the body apart and the
blood apart: but the full and perfect nourishment of our souls. Again the
benefits of Christ's manhood are diversely given, some by imputation, which is,
an action of God accepting that which is done by Christ as done by us: and thus
it has pleased God to give the passion of Christ and his obedience. Some
again are given by a kind of propagation, which I cannot fitly express in
terms, but I resemble it thus. As one candle is lighted by an other, and one
torch or candlelight is conuaied to twenty candles: even so the inherent
righteousness of every believer, is derived from the storehouse of righteousness
which is in the manhood of Christ: for the righteousness of all the members, is
but the fruit thereof, even as the natural corruption in all mankind, is but
a fruit of that original sin which was in Adam. Thus we see how God for his
part gives Christ, and that really. To proceed, when God gives Christ, he
gives withal at the same time the spirit of Christ, which spirit creates in
the heart of the receiver the instrument of true faith, by which the heart does
really receive Christ given of God, by resting upon the promise, which God has
made that he will give Christ and his righteousness to every true believer.
Now then, when God gives Christ with his benefits, and man for his part by
faith receives the same as they are given, there rises that union which is
between every good receiver and Christ himself. Which union is not forged,
but a real, true, and near conjunction; nearer then which, none is or can be:
because it is made by a solemn giving and receiving that passes between God
and man: as also by the bond of one and the same spirit. To come then to the
point, considering there is a real union, and consequently a real communion
between us and Christ, (as I have proved) there must needs be such a kind
of presence wherein Christ is truly and really present to the heart of him that
receives the sacrament in faith. And thus far do we consent with the Romish
Church touching real presence.

The dissent.
We differ not touching the presence it self, but only in the manner of
presence. For though we hold a real presence of Christ's body and blood in
the sacrament, yet do we not take it to be local, bodily, or substantial,
but spiritual and mystical; to the signs by sacramental relation, and to
the communicants by faith alone. On the contrary the Church of Rome maintains
transubstantiation, that is, a local, bodily, and substantial presence of
Christ's body and blood, by a change and conversion of the bread and wine
into the said body and blood.

Our reasons.
I. This corporal presence ouerturnes sundry articles of faith. For we
believe that the body of Christ was made of the pure substance of the virgin
Marie, and that but once, namely when he was conceived by the holy Ghost, and
borne. But this cannot stand, if the body of Christ be made of bread and his
blood of wine, as they must needs be, if there be no succession or
annihilation but a real conversion of substances in the sacrament: unless we
must believe contrarieties, that his body was made of the substance of the
Virgin, and not of the Virgin; made once and not once but often. Again, if his
body and blood be under the forms of bread and wine, then is he not as yet
ascended into heaven, but remains still among us. Neither can he be said to
come from heaven at the day of judgment: for he that must come thence to judge
the quick and dead, must be absent from the earth. And this was the ancient
faith. Augustine says, that Christ according Tract. 1. in Job.
to his majesty and providence and grace is present with us to the end of the
world: but according to his ASSVMED FLESH HE IS NOT always with us. Cyril
says, He is ABSENT IN Lib. 9. in. cap. 21.
BODY and present in virtue, whereby all things are governed. Vigilius says,
That he is Contra ^^tich. lib. 1. and 4.
gone from us according to his humanity: he has left us in his humanity: in
the form of a servant absent from us: when his flesh was on earth, it was not
in heaven: being on earth, he was not in heaven: and being now in heaven, he
is not on earth. Fulgentius says, One Lib. 2. ad Thrasi mundum.
and the same Christ, according to his humane substance, was absent from heaven
when he was on earth: and LEFT THE EARTH when he ascended into heaven.

Reason II. This bodily presence ouerturnes the nature of a true body, whose
common nature or essential property it is, to have length, breadth, and
thicknes, which being taken away a body is no more a body. And by reason of
these three dimensions, a body can occupy but one place at once, as cap. de
categor. quant.
Aristotle said, the property of a body is to be seated in some place, so as
a man may say where it is. They therefore that hold the body of Christ to be
in many places at once, do make it no body at all: but rather a spirit, and
that infinite. They allege that God is almighty; that is true indeed, but
in this and like matters we must not dispute what God can do, but what he will
do. And I say further because God is omnipotent, therefore there be some things
which he cannot do, as for him to deny himself, to lie, and to make the
parts of a contradiction to be both true at the same time. To come to the
point, if God should make the very body of Christ to be in many places at once,
he should make it to be no body while it remains a body: and to be
circumscribed in some one place and not circumscribed, because it is in many
places at the same time: to be visible in heaven and invisible in the
sacrament; and thus should he make contradictions to be true: which to do is
against his nature, and argues rather impotencie then power. Augustine says to
this purpose. De Symb. ad Catech. l. 1. cap. 1.
If he could lie, deceive, be deceived, deal unjustly, he should not be
omnipotent. And, Therefore he is omnipotent, because he can not do these
things. Again, He is called domnipotent by doing that which he will, and not
by doing that which he will not: which if it should be fall him, he should not
be omnipotent.

Reason III. Transubstantiation ouerturnes the very Supper of the Lord. For in
every sacrament there must be a sign, a thing signified, and a proportion or
relation between them both. But popish real presence takes all away: for when
the bread is really turned into Christ's body, and the wine into his blood,
then the sign is abolished, and there remains nothing but the outward forms
or appearance of bread and wine. Again, it abolisheth the ends of the
sacrament, whereof one is to remember Christ till his coming again, who
being present in the sacrament bodily, needs not to be remembered: because
helps of remembrance are of things absent. Another end is to nourish the
soul unto eternal life: but by transubstantiation the principal feeding is of
the body and not of the soul, which is only fed with spiritual food* for
though the body may be bettered by the food of the soul, yet ca^ not the soul
be fed with bodily food.

Reason IV. In the sacrament the body of Christ is received as it was
crucified: and his blood, as it was shed upon the cross: but now at this
time Christ's body crucified, remains still as a body, but not as a body
crucified: because the act of crucifying is ceased. Therefore it is faith
alone, that makes Christ crucified to be present unto us in the sacrament.
Again, that blood which ran out of the feet and hands and side of Christ upon
the cross, was not gathered up again and put into the veins: nay, the
collection was needelesse, because after the resurrection, he lived no more a
natural but a spiritual life: and none knows what is become of this blood.
The Papist therefore cannot say it is present under the form of wine locally:
and we may better say it is received spiritually by faith, whose property is to
give a being to things which are not.

Reason V. 1. Cor. 10. 3. The fathers of the old testament did eat the same
spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of the
rock which was Christ. Now they could not eat his body which was crucified,
or drink his blood shed bodily, but by faith: because then his body and
blood were not in nature. The Papists make answer, that the fathers did eat the
same meat, and drink the same spiritual drink with themselves, not with us.
But their answer is against the text. For the Apostles intent is to prove,
that the Jews were every way equal to the Corinthians, because they did eat
the same spiritual meat, and drank the same spiritual drink with the
Corinthians; otherwise his reason proves not the point which he has in hand,
namely that the Israelites were nothing inferior to the Corinthians.

Reason VI. And it is said, the sabbath was made for man: and not man for the
sabbath: so it may be said, that the sacrament of the Lords supper was made
for man, and not man for it: and therefore man is more excellent the^ the
sacrament. But if the signs of bread and wine be really turned into the body
and blood of Christ, then is the sacrament infinitely better then man; who in
his best estate is only joined to Christ, and made a member of his mystical
body: whereas the bread and wine are made very Christ. But the sacrament or
outward elements indeed are not better then man: the end being always
better then the thing ordained to the end. It remains therefore that Christ's
presence is not corporal but spiritual. Again in the supper of the Lord,
every believer receives whole Christ, God and man, though not the godhead: now
by this carnal eating, we receive not whole Christ, but only a part of his
manhood: and therefore in the sacrament there is no carnal eating, and
consequently no bodily presence.

Reason VII. The judgment of the ancient Church. Theodoret says, The same
Dialog. 1. immutab.
Christ, who called his natural body food and bread, who also called him
self a vine, he vouch safed the visible signs the name of his own body, NOT
CHANGING NATVRE, but putting grace to nature; whereby he means same dialog.
consecration. And, The mystical signs after sanctification loose not their
proper nature. For they REMAIN IN THEIR FIRST NATVRE, and keep their first
figure and form; and as before, may be touched and seen: and that which they
are made, is understood, believed, adored. Gelasius says, Bread and wine Lib.
de duob. not. Christ.
pass into the substance of the body and blood of Christ, yet so as the
SVBSTANCE OR NATVRE OF BREAD AND WINE CEASE NOT. And they are turned into
the divine substance, yet the bread and wine REMAIN STILL IN THE PROPERTY OF
THEIR NATVRE. Lumbard says, If it be asked what conversion Lib. 4. did. 11.
this is, whether formal, or substantial, or of an other kind, I am not
able to define. And that the Fathers held not transubstantiation, I prove it
by sundry reasons. First, they used in former times Hesych. lib. 2. c. 8. in
Leviticum.
to burn with fire that which remained after the administration of the Lords
supper. Secondly by the sacramental union of the bread and wine with the body
and blood of Christ, they used to confirm the personal union of the manhood
of Theodore^. dialog. 2.
Christ with the godhead against heretics: which argument they would not have
used, if they had believed a popish real presence. Thirdly it was a custom in
Constantinople, that if many parts of the sacrament remained after the
administration thereof was ended, that young children should be sent for from
the school to eat them; who nevertheless Euang lib. 4. Niceph. l. 17. c. 25.
were barred the Lords table. And this argues plainly that the Church in
those days, took the bread after the administration was ended, for common
bread. Again, it was once an order in the Roman church, that the wine should
be consecrated by dipping Amala. 2. lib. de off. ecc^es c. 12. and 15.
into it bread, which had bin consecrated. But this order cannot stand with the
real presence, in which the bread is turned both into the body and blood.
Nicholaus Cabasilas says, After he has used some speech to the people, he
erects their minds, Lib. de expos. L^^urg. c. 26.
and lifts their thoughts from earth, and says, Sursum corda, Let us lift up
our hearts, let us THINK ON THINGS ABOVE, and not on things that are upon the
earth. They consent and say, that they lift up their hearts thither, where is
their treasure, and where Christ sits at the right hand of his father.

Objections of Papists.
I. Their first reason is, Ioh. 6. 55. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed: therefore (say they) Christ's body must be eaten with the mouth,
and his blood drunk accordingly. Ans. The chapter must be understood of a
spiritual eating of Christ: his body is meat indeed but spiritual meat,
and his blood spiritual drink, to be received not by the mouth, but by
faith. This is the very point that Christ here intendes to prove, namely that
to believe in him is to eat his flesh and to drink his blood are all one.
Again, this chapter must not be vnderstoood of that special eating of Christ
in the sacrament: for it is said generally, v. 53. Except ye eat the flesh of
Christ and drink his blood, ye have no life in you: and if these very words
(which are the substance of the chapter) must be understood of a sacramental
eating, no man before the coming of Christ was saved: for none did bodily eat
or drink his body or blood; considering it was not then existing in nature,
but only was present to the believing heart by faith.

II. Object. An other argument is taken from the words of the institution.
This is my body. Ans. These words must not be understood properly but by a
figure: his body being put for the sign and seal of his body. It is
objected, that when any make their last wills and testaments, they speak as
plainly as they ca^: now in this supper Christ ratifies his last will and
testament; and therefore he spoke plainly, without any figure. Ans. Christ
here speaks plainly and by a figure also: for it has bin always the usual
manner of the Lord in speaking of sacraments, to give the name of the thing
signified to the sign: as Genesis 17. 10. circumcision is called the covenant of
God* and in the next v. in way of exposition, the sign of the covenant. and
Exodus 12. 11. the paschal lamb is called the Angels passing by or over the
houses of the Israelites; whereas indeed it was but a sign thereof; and 1.
Cor. 10. 4. The rock was Christ 1. Cor. 5. 7. The Passover was Christ. And the
like phrase is to be found in the institution of this sacrament concerning the
cup, which the Papists themselves confess to be figurative: when it is said,
Luke 22. This cup is the new testament in my blood, that is, a sign, seal,
and pleadge thereof. Again the time when these words were spoken must be
considered, and it was before the passion of Christ, whereas yet his body was
not crucified nor his blood shed: and consequently neither of the^ could be
received in bodily manner, but by faith alone. Again, Christ was not only the
author, but the minister of this sacrament at the time of institution thereof:
and if the bread had been truly turned into his body, and the wine into his
blood, Christ with his own hands should have taken his own body and blood,
and have given it to his disciples: nay, which is more, he should with his own
hands, have taken his own flesh and drunken his own blood, and have eaten
himself. For Christ himself did eat the bread and drink the wine, that he
might with his own person consecrate his last supper, as he had consecrated
baptism before. And if these words should be properly understood, every man
must be a manslaier in his eating of Christ. Lastly by means of popish real
presence, it comes to pass, that our bodies should be nourished by naked
qualities without any substance, which in all philosophy, is false and
erroneous. To help this and the like absurdities, some Papists make nine
wonders in the sacrament. The first, that Ioh. de Com. bis comp. Theolog. lib.
6. cap. 14.
Christ's body is in the Eucharist in as large a quantity as he was upon the
cross, and is now in heaven, and yet exceedes not the quantity of the bread.
The second, that there be accidents without a subject. The third, that bread is
turned into the body of Christ, and yet is not the matter of the body, nor
resolved to nothing. The fourth, that the body increases not by consecration
of many hosts, and is not diminished by often receiving. The fifth, that the
body of Christ is under many consecrated hosts. The sixth, that when the host
is divided, the body of Christ is not divided, but under every part thereof is
whole Christ. The seventh, that when the priest holds the host in his hand,
the body of Christ is not felt by it self nor seen, but the forms of bread
and wine. The eight, that when the forms of bread and wine cease, the body
and blood of Christ cease also to be there. The ninth, that the accidents of
bread and wine have the same effects with the bread and wine it self, which
are to nourish and fill. On this manner it shall be easy for any man to defend
the most absurd opinion that is or can be, if he may have liberty to answer
the arguments alleged to the contrary by wonders.

To conclude, seeing there is a real communion in the sacrament between
Christ and every believing heart, our duty therefore is, to bestow our hearts
on Christ, endeavoring to love him, and to rejoice in him, and to long after
him above all things: all our affiance must be in him, and with him; we being
now on earth must have our conversation in heaven. And this is the true real
presence, which the ancient Church of God has commended unto us: for in all
these liturgies these words were used, and are yet extant in the popish mass,
Lift up your hearts: we lift them up unto the Lord. By which words the
communicants were admonished to direct their minds and their faith to Christ
sitting at the right hand of God. Thus said Augustine, If we celebrate Sermon
de Ascens. 1.
the ascension of the Lord with devotion: let us ascend with him, and lift up
our hearts. Again, they which are already risen with Christ in faith and
hope are invited Sermon. 14. 2. fer. p^sc^.
to the great table of heaven, to the table of Angels, WHERE IS THE BREAD.

The eleventh point. Of the sacrifice in the Lords Supper, which the Papists
call the sacrifice of the Mass.
Touching this point, first I will set down what must be understood by the
name Sacrifice. A sacrifice is taken properly, or improperly. Properly it is a
sacred or solemn action, in which man offers and consecrateth some outward
bodily thing unto God for this end, to please and honor him thereby. Thus all the sacrifices of the old testament, and the oblation of Christ upon the cross
in the new Testament are sacrifices. Improperly, that is, only by the way of
resemblance, the duties of the moral law are called sacrifices. And in
handling this question, I understand a sacrifice both properly and improperly
by way of resemblance.

Our consent.
Our consent I propound in two conclusions. Conclus. I. That the supper of the
Lord is a sacrifice, and may truly be so called as it has bin in former ages;
and that in three respects. I. Because it is a memorial of the real sacrifice
of Christ upon the cross, and contains withal a thanksgiving to God for the
same, which thanksgiving is the sacrifice and calves of our lips. Hebr. 13. 15.
II. Because every communicant does there present himself body and soul a
living, holy, and acceptable sacrifice unto God. For as in this sacrament God
gives unto us Christ, with his benefits; so we answerable give up our selves
unto God as servants to walk in the practice of all dutiful obedience. III. It
is called a sacrifice in respect of that which was joined with the sacrament,
namely the Alms given to the poor as a testimony of our thankefulnes unto
God. And in this regard also, the ancient Fathers have called the sacrament, an
unbloody sacrifice: and the table, an altar; and the ministers priests: and
the whole action an oblation not to God but to the congregation, and not by the
priest alone but by the people. A Canon of a certain Council says, We decree
Council. Ma^iscon. 2. c. 4.
that every Lords day the oblation of the altar be offered of every man and
woman both for bread and wine. And Augustine says, that Epist. 122.
women offer a sacrifice at the altar of the Lord, that it might be offered by
the priest to God. And usually in ancient writers the communion of the whole
body of the congregation is called the sacrifice or oblation.

Conclus. II. That the very body of Christ is offered in the Lords Supper.
For as we take the bread to be the body of Christ sacramentally by resemblance
and no otherwise: so the breaking of bread is sacramentally the sacrificing or
offering of Christ upon the cross. And thus the fathers have termed the
Eucharist an immolation of Christ, because it is a co^memoration of his
sacrifice upon the cross. Aug. Epist. 23. Neither does he lie which says
Christ was offered. For if sacraments had not the resembla^ce of things whereof
they are sacraments, they should in no wise be sacraments: but from a
resemblance, they often take their names. Again Christ is sacrificed in the
last supper, in regard of the faith of the co^mmunicants, which makes a thing
past and done as present. Augustine Lib. 2. quaest. vet. and Nov. Test. Ad Romans
says, When we believe in Christ, he is offered for us daily. And, Christ is
then slain for every one, when he believes that he is slain for him* Ambrose
says, Christ is sacrificed Lib. 2 de Virg.
daily in the minds of believers, as upon an altar. Hierome says, He is
always offered Ad Damas.
to the believers.

II. The difference.
They make the Eucharist to be a real, external, or bodily sacrifice offered
unto God: holding and teaching, that the minister is a priest properly: and
that in this sacrament he offers Christ's body and blood to God the father
really and properly under the forms of bread and wine. We acknowledge no
real, outward, or bodily sacrifice for the remission of sins, but only
Christ's oblation on the cross once offered. Here is the maine difference
between us, touching this point: and it is of that weight and moment, that
they stiffely maintaining their opinion (as they do) can be no Church of God.
For this point raseth the foundation to the very bottom. And that it may the
better appear that we avouch the truth, first I will confirm our doctrine by
scripture, and secondly confute the reasons which they bring for themselves.

III. Our reasons.
Reason. I. Heb. 9. v. 15. and 26: and cap. 10. v. 10. The holy ghost says,
Christ offered himself but once. Therefore not often: and thus there can be no
real or bodily offering of his body and blood in the sacrament of his supper:
the text is plain. The Papists answer thus. The sacrifice of Christ (say they)
is one for substance, yet in regard of the manner of offering it is either
bloody or unbloody, and the holy ghost speaks only of the bloody sacrifice
of Christ: which was indeed offered but once. Ans. But the author of this
epistle takes it for granted, that the sacrifice of Christ is only one, and
that bloody sacrifice. For he says, Heb. 9. v. 25. Christ did not offer
himself often, as the high priests did. and v. 26. For the^ he must have often
suffered since the foundation of the world: but now in the end he has appeared
once to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. and v. 22. VVITHOVT
SHEDDING OF BLOOD is NO remission of sin. By these words it is plain, that
the scripture never knew the two fold manner of sacrificing of Christ. And
every distinction in Divinity not founded in the written word, is but a
forgerie of man's brain. And if this distinction be good, how shall the reason
of the Apostle stand* He did not offer himself but once, because he suffered
but once.

Reason II. The Romish Church holds that the sacrifice in the Lords Supper is
all one for substance, with the sacrifice which he offered on the cross: if
that be so, then the sacrifice in the Eucharist, must either be a continuance
of that sacrifice which was begun on the cross, or else an iteration or
repetition of it. Now let them choose of these twain which they will: if they
say it is a continuance of the sacrifice on the cross, Christ being but the
beginner and the Priest the finisher thereof, they make it imperfect: for to
continue a thing till it be accomplished, is to bring perfection unto it: but
Christ's sacrifice on the cross was then fully perfected, as by his own
testimony appears, when he said, consummatum est, it is finished. Again, if
they say, it is a repetition of Christ's sacrifice, thus also they make it
imperfect, for that is the reason, which the holy ghost uses, to prove that
the sacrifices of the old testament were imperfect, because they were repeated.

Reason III. A real and outward sacrifice in a sacrament, is against the
nature of a sacrament and especially the supper of the Lord: for one end
thereof is to keep in memory the sacrifice of Christ. Now every remembrance
must be of a thing absent past and done: and if Christ be daily and really
sacrificed, the sacrament is no fit memorial of his sacrifice. Again the
principal end for which the sacrament was ordained, is that God might give
and we receive Christ with his benefits: and therefore to give and take, to eat
and drink are here the principal actions. Now in a real sacrifice God does not
give Christ and the priest receive him of God; but contrariwise he gives and
offers Christ unto God, and God receives some thing of us. To help the matter
they say, that this sacrifice serves not properly to make any satisfaction to
God, but rather to apply unto us the satisfaction of Christ being already
made. But this answer still makes against the nature of a sacrament, in which
God gives Christ unto us: whereas in a sacrifice God receives from man, and man
gives something to god: a sacrifice therefore is no fit means to apply any
thing unto us, that is given of God.

Reason IV. Heb. 7. 24. 25. The Holy Ghost makes a difference between Christ
the high priest of the new testament, and all Leuiticall priests in this, that
they were many, one succeeding another: but he is only one, having an eternal
priesthood, which cannot pass from him to any other. Now if this difference
be good, then Christ alone in his own very person must be the priest of the
new testament, and no other with, or, under him: otherwise in the new testament
their should be more priests in number then in the old. If they say, that the
whole action remains in the person of Christ, and that the priest is but an
instrument under him (as they say) I say again it is false; because the whole
oblatio^ is acted or done by the priest himself; and he which does all, is
more then a bare instrument.

Reason V. If the priest do offer to God Christ's real body and blood for the
pardon of our sins, then man is become a mediator between God and Christ.
Now the Church of Rome says, that the priest in his mass is a priest
properly, and his sacrifice a real sacrifice differing only in the manner of
offering from the sacrifice of Christ upon the cross: and in the very Canon of
the mass they insinuate thus much, when they request God to accept their
gifts and offerings, namely Christ himself offered, as he did the sacrifices
of Abel and Noe. Now it is absurd, to think that any creature should be a
mediator between Christ and God. Therefore Christ cannot possibly be offered
by any creature unto God.

Reason VI. The judgment of the ancient Church. A certain Counsel held at
Tolet. Council. 12. c. 5.
Toledo in Spain reprooueth the Ministers that they offered sacrifice often
the same day without the holy communion. The words of the Canon are these.
Relation is made unto us that certain priests do not so many times receive
the grace of the holy communion, as they offer sacrifices in one day: but in
one day, if they offer many sacrifices to God, in ALL THE OBLATIONS, THEY
SVSPEND THEMSELVES FROM THE COMMUNION --. Here mark, that the sacrifices in
ancient Masses were nothing else but forms of divine service; because none
did communicate, no not the priest himself. And in an other Counsel the name
of the Mass is put only for a Mileue^ Cap. 12.
form of prayer. It has pleased us, that prayers, supplications, Masses,
which shall be allowed in the Council --, be used. And in this sense it is taken
when speech is used of Council Tolet 4. c. 12. etc* Jacob. de consecr. dip^*
the making or compounding of Masses: for the sacrifice propitiatory of the
body and blood of Christ admits no composition. Abbat Paschasius says,
because we sin daily d Lib. de corpor. and sang* dom. cap. 9.
Christ is sacrificed for us MYSTICALLY, and his Passion is given in mystery.
These his words are against the real sacrifice: but yet he expounds himself
more plainly, cap. 10. The blood is drunk IN MYSTERY SPIRITVALLY: and, it is
all SPIRITVAL which we eat. and c. 12. The priest --, distributes to every one
not as much as the outward sight gives, but as much as FAITH RECEIVES. c. 13.
The FVL similitude is outwardly, and the immaculate flesh of the lamb is FAITH
INWARDLY --, that the truth be not wanting to the sacrament, and it be not
ridiculous to Pagans that we drink the blood of a killed man. c. 6. One eats
the flesh of Christ spiritually and drinks his blood, another seems to
receive not so much as a mor sell of bread from the hand of the priest: his
reason is, because they come unprepared. Now then considering in all these
places he makes no receiving but spiritual, neither does he make any sacrifice
but spiritual.

IV. Objections of Papists.
I. Genesis 14. v. 18. When Abraham was coming from the slaughter of the Kings,
Melchizedek met him, and brought forth bread and wine; and he was a priest of
the most high God. Now this bread and wine (say they) he brought forth to offer
for a sacrifice; because it is said he was a priest of the most high God: and
they reason thus. Christ was a priest after the order of Melchizedek: therefore
as Melchizedek offered bread and wine, so Christ under the forms of bread and
wine offers himself in sacrifice unto God. Ans. Melchizedek was no type of
Christ in regard of the act of sacrificing, but in regard of his person, and
things pertaining thereto, which are all fully expounded, Hebr. 7. the sum
whereof is this. I. Melchizedek was both king and priest: so was Christ. II. He
was a prince of peace and righteousness: so was Christ. III. He had neither
father nor mother: because the Scripture in setting down his history makes no
mention either of beginning or ending of his days: and so Christ had neither
father nor mother: no father, as he was man; no mother, as he was God. IV.
Melchizedek being greater then Abraham blessed him, and Christ by virtue of
his priesthood blesses, that is, justifies and sanctifies all those that be
of the faith of Abraham. In these things only stands the resemblance and not
in the offering of bread and wine. Again the end of bringing forth the bread
and wine, was not to make a sacrisice, but to refresh Abraham and his servants,
that came from the slaughter of the Kings. And he is called here a priest of
the most high God, not in regard of any sacrifice; but in consideration of his
blessing of Abraham, as the order of the words teaches, And he was the priest
of the most high God, and therefore he blessed him. Thirdly, though it were
granted, that he brought forth bread and wine to offer in sacrifice, yet will
it not follow, that in the sacrament Christ himself is to be offered unto God
under the naked forms of bread and wine. Melchizedeks bread and wine were
absurd types of no-bread and no-wine, or, of forms of bread and wine in the
Sacrament.

II. Object. The paschall lamb was both a sacrifice and a sacrament: now the
Eucharist comes in room thereof. Ansvv. The paschal lamb was a sacrament, but
no sacrifice. Indeed Christ says to his disciples, Go and prepare a place to
sacrifice the Passover in, Mark. 14. 12. but the words to offer, or to
sacrifice, do often signify no more but to kill. As when Jacob and Laban made
a covenant; it is said, Jacob sacrificed beasts, and called his brethren to
eat bread, Genesis 31. 54. which words, must not be understood of killing for
sacrifice, but of killing for a feast: because he could not in a good
conscience inuit them to his sacrifice, that were out of the covenant, being
(as they were) of another religion: secondly, it may be called a sacrifice,
because it was killed after the manner of a sacrifice. Thirdly, when Saul
sought his fathers asses, and asked for the Seer, a maid bids him go up in
have: for (says she) there is an offering of the people this day in the high
place, 1. Sam. 9. 12. where the feast that was kept in Rama, is called a
sacrifice; in all likelihood because at the beginning thereof, the priest
offered a sacrifice to God: and so Deutr. 16. 2.
the Passover may be called a sacrifice, because sacrifices were offered
within the compass of the appointed feast or solemnity of the passover: and
yet the thing it self was no more a sacrifice then the feast in Rama was.
Again, if it were granted that the Passover was both, it will not make much
against us: for the supper of the Lord succeedes the Passover only in regard
of the maine end thereof, which is the increase of our communion with Christ.

III. Object. Malac. I. II. The prophet foretells of a clean sacrifice that
shall be in the new testament: and that (say they) is the sacrifice of the
Mass. Ans. This place must be understood of a spiritual sacrifice, as we
shall plainly perceive if we compare it with 1. Tim. 2. 8. where the meaning
of the prophet is fitly expounded. I will (says Paul) that men pray in all
places, LIFTING UP PVRE HANDS, without wrath or doubting. And this is the
clean sacrifice of the Gentiles. Thus Justin Martyr says, That supplications
and Dialog. eum Triph.
thanksgiuings are the ONLY perfect sacrifices pleasing God, and that
Christians have learned to OFFER THEM ALONE. And Tertullian Ad Scapu, lam.
says, We sacrifice for the health of the Emperor --: as God has commanded
with pure prayer. And Ireneus says, that this Lib. 4. c. 3^.
clean offering to be offered in every place, is the prayers of the Saints.

Object. IV. Hebr. 13. 10. We have an altar, whereof they may not eat, which
serve in the tabernacle. Now (say they) if we have an altar then we must
needs have a priest: and also a real sacrifice. Ans. Here is meant not a
bodily, but a spiritual altar; because the altar is opposed to the material
Tabernacle: and what is meant thereby is expressed in the next verse, in which
he proves that we have an altar. The bodies of the beasts, whose blood was
brought into the holy place by the high priest for sin, were burnt without
the camp; so Christ Jesus, that he might sanctify the people with his own
blood, suffered without the gate. Now lay the reason or proof to the thing
that is proved, and we must needs understand Christ himself, who was both
the altar, the priest, and the sacrifice.

Object. V. Lastly, they say, where alteration is both of law and covenant:
there must needs be a new priest and a new sacrifice. But in the new testament
there is alteration both of law and covenant: and therefore there is both new
priest and new sacrifice. Ans. Al may be granted: in the new testament, there
is both new priest and sacrifice: yet not any popish priest, but only Christ
himself both God and man. The sacrifice also is Christ as he is man: and the
altar, Christ as he is God, who in the new testament offered himself a
sacrifice to his Father for the sins of the world. For though he were the
lamb of God slain from the beginning of the world, in regard of the purpose
of God, in regard of the value of his merit, and in regard of faith which
makes things to come as present, yet was he not actually offered till the
fulness of time came; and once offering of himself, he remains a priest for
ever, and al other priests beside him, are superfluous: his one offering once
offered, being all-sufficient.

The twelfth point. Of fasting.
Our consent.
Our consent may be set down in three conclusions. I. We do not condemn
fasting, but maintain three sorts thereof: to wit, a moral, civil, and a
religious fast. The first being moral, is a practice of sobriety or
temperance, when as in the use of meats and drinks, the appetite is
restrained, that it do not exceed moderation. And this must be used of all
Christians in the whole course of their lives. The second being civil, is
when upon some particular and politic considerations, men abstain from
certain meats: as in this our commonwealth the Law inioynes us to abstain
from flesh-meat at certain seasons of the year, for these special ends; to
preserve the breed of cattle, and to maintain the calling of the fisherman.
The third, namely a religious fast, is when the duties of religion, as the
exercise of prayer and humilatio^ are practiced in fasting. And I do now
specially entreat of this kind.

Conclus. II. We join with them in the alloweance of the principal and right
ends of a religious fast, and they are three. The first is, that thereby the
mind may become attentive in meditation of the duties of godliness to be
performed. The second is, that the rebellion of the flesh may be subdued: for
the flesh pampered becomes an instrument of licentiousnes. The third, and (as I
take it) the chief end of a religious fast is, to profess our guiltiness,
and to testify our humiliation before God for our sins: and for this end in
the feast of Nineve, the very beast was made to abstain.

Conclus. III. We yield unto them, that fasting is an help and furtherance to
the worship of God: yea and a good work also if it be used in a good manner.
For though fasting in it self being a thing indifferent, as eating and
drinking are: is not to be termed a good work, yet being applied, and
considered in relation to the right ends before spoken of, and practiced
accordingly; it is a work allowed of God, and highly to be esteemed of all the
servants and people of God.

The difference or dissent.
Our dissent from the Church of Rome in the doctrine of fasting stands in
three things. I. They appoint and prescribe set times of fasting, as necessary
to be kept: but we hold and teach that to prescribe the time of a religious
fast, is in the liberty of the Church and the governors thereof as special
occasion shall be offered. When the disciples of John asked Christ, why they
and the Pharisees fast often, but his disciples fasted not, he answered, Can the
children of the marriage chamber mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them:
but the days will come when the bridgrome shall be taken away from them, and
THEN SHALL THEY FAST. Math. 9. 15. where he gives them to understand, that they
must fast, as occasions of mourning are offered. Where also I gather, that a
set time of fasting is no more to be enjoined then a set time of mourning. It
was the Epist. 86.
opinion of Augustine, that neither Christ Contra Psychicos.
nor his Apostles, appointed any times of fasting: and Tertullian says, that
they of his time fasted of their own accords freely, without law or
commandment, as occasions and times served. And Eusebius says, that Montanus
Hist. l. 5. c. 17.
was the first that made laws of fasting. It is objected, that there is a set
time of fasting prescribed, Lev. 16. 29. Ans. This set and prescribed fast was
commanded of God as a part of the legal worship, which had his end in the
death of Christ: therefore it does not justify a set time of fasting in the
new testament, where God has left man to his own liberty, without giving the
like commandment. It is again alleged, that Zachary, 7. 5. there were set
times appointed for the celebration of religious fasts unto the Lord, the fifth
and the seventh months. Ans. They were appointed upon occasion of the present
afflictions of the Church in Babylon, and they ceased upon their deliverance.
The like upon like occasion may we appoint. It is further objected, that some
Churches of the Protestants observe set times of fasting, Ansvv. In some
Churches there be set days and times of fasting, not upon necessity or for
conscience or religions sake, but for politic or civil regardes: whereas in
the Romish Church it is held a mortal sin, to defer the set time of
fasting till the next day following.

Secondly we dissent from the Church of Rome touching the manner of keeping a
fast. For the best learned among them allow the drinking of wine, water:
electuaries, and d Navar c. 21 number. 27.
that Molan. tract. 3. c. 11.
often within the compass of their appointed fast: yea they allow the eating
of one meal on a fasting day at noon tide, and upon a reasonable cause, one
hour before: the time of fasting not yet ended. But this practice Iud. 20. 26.
2. Sam. 1. 12.
indeed is absurd, and contrary to the practice of the old testament: yea it
does frustrate the end of fasting. For the bodyly abstinence is an outward
means and sign whereby we acknowledge our guiltines and unworthiness of any of
the blessings of God. Again they prescribe a difference of meats, as
white-meat only to be used on their fasting days, and that of necessity and
for conscience sake in most cases. But we hold this distinction of meats both
to be foolish and wicked. Foolish: because in such meats as they prescribe,
there is as much filling and delight, as in any other meats; as namely in
fish, fruits, wine, etc. which they permit. And its against the end of a
religious fast to use any refreshing at all; so far as necessity of health
and comelines will permit. Thus the Church in times past used to abstain not
only from meat and drink, but from all delights whatsoever, even from soft
apparel and sweet ointments. Joel 2. 15. -- Sanctify a fast --: let the
BRIDGROME GO FORTH OF HIS CHAMBER, and the bride out of her bride chamber.
Dan. 10. 3. I eat no PLEASANT bread, neither came FLESH NOR WINE within my
mouth, neither did I ANOINT my self at all, till three weeks of days were
fulfilled. 1. Cor. 7. 5. Defraud not one an other, EXCEPT it be with consent
for a time, that ye may give your selves to FASTING and prayer.

Again, we hold this practice to be wicked, because it takes away the
liberty of Christians: by which, unto the pure all things are pure. And the
Apostle, Gal. 5. bids us to standfast in this liberty, which the Church of
Rome would thus abolish. For the better understanding of this, let us consider
how the Lord himself has from the beginning kept in his own hands as a
master in his own house; the disposition of his creatures for the use of man,
that he might depend on him and his word for temporal blessings. In the first
age, he appointed unto him for meat every herb of the earth bearing seed, and
every tree wherein there is the fruit of a tree bearing seed. Genesis 1. 18. And
as for flesh, whether God gave unto him liberty to eat or not to eat, we
hold it uncertain. After the flood the Lord renewed his grant of the use of the
creatures, and gave his people liberty to eat the flesh of living creatures:
yet so as he made some things unclean: and forbad the eating of them: among
the rest, Act. 10. 6. 1. Tim. 4.
the eating of blood. But since the coming of Christ he has enlarged his
word, and given liberty to all both Jews and Gentiles, to eat of all kinds
of flesh. This word of his, we rest upon; holding it a doctrine of devils, for
men to command an abstinence from meats, for conscience sake; which the Lord
himself has created to be received with thanksgiving. Socrates a Christian
historiographer says, that the Apostles left it Trib. hist. lib. 9. cap. 38.
free to every one to use what kind of meat they would on fasting days, and
other times. Spiridion in lent dressed swines flesh, and set Hist. trip. l. 1.
c. 10. ^.
it before a stranger, eating himself and bidding the stranger also to eat:
who refusing and professing him self to be a Christian, therefore (says he)
the rather must thou do it: for to the pure all things are pure, as the word
of God teaches us.

But they object Ier. 35. where Ionadab commanded the Rechabites to abstain
from wine: which commandment they obeyed, and are commended for doing well in
obeying of it* therefore (say they) some kind of meats may lawefully be
forbidden. Ans. Ionadab gave this commandment not in way of religion, or
merit, but for other wise and politic regardes. For he enjoined his
posterity not to drink wine, not to build houses, not to sow seed, or plant
vineyards, or to have any in possession: but to live in tents to the end they
might be prepared to bear the calamities, that should be fall them in time to
come. But the Popish abstinence from certain meats, has respect to
conscience and religion; and therefore is of another kind, and can have no
warrant thence.

II. Object. Dan. 10. 3. Daniel being in heaviness for three weeks of days,
abstained from flesh: and his example is our warrant. Ans. It was the manner of
holy men in ancient times, when they fasted many days together of their own
accordes freely to abstain from sundry things, and thus Daniel abstained from
flesh. But the Popish abstinence from flesh is not free, but stands by
commandment, and the omitting of it, is mortal sin. Again, if they will
follow Daniell in abstaining from flesh, why do they not also abstain from
all pleasant bread and wine: yea from ointments: and why will they eat any
thing in the time of their fast; whereas Tract. 3. c. 11. council S.
they cannot show that Daniel eat any thing at all till evening. And Molanus
has noted that our ancetours abstained from wine and dainties, and that some
of them ate nothing for two or three days together.

Thirdly they allege the diet of John Baptist: whose meat was Locusts and
wild honey; and of Timothy, who abstained from wine. Ans. Their kind of diet,
and that abstinence which they used, was only for temperance sake; not for
conscience, or, to merit any thing thereby: let them prove the contrary if
they can.

Thirdly and lastly, we dissent from them touching certain ends of fasting.
For they make abstinence it self in a person fitly prepared, to be a part of
the worship of God: but we take it to be a thing indifferent in it self: and
therefore no part of Gods worship: Mark. 7. 6.
and yet withal, being well used, we esteem it as a proppe or furtherance of
the worship, in that we are made the fitter by it to worship God. And hereupon
some of the more learned sort of them say, Not the work of fasting done, but
the devotion of the worker, is to be reputed the service of God. Again, they
say, that fasting in, or, with devotion, is a work of satisfaction to Gods
justice for the temporal punishment of our sins. Wherein we take they do
blasphemously derogat from Christ our Savior, who is the whole and perfect
satisfaction for sin; both in respect of fault and punishment. Here they
allege the example of the Ninevites, and Achabs fasting, whereby they turned
away the judgments of God denounced against them by his Prophets. We answer,
that Gods wrath was appeased toward the Ninevites not by their fasting but by
faith laying hold on Gods mercy in Christ, and thereby staying his judgment.
Mat. 12. 41.
Their fasting was only a sign of their repentance: their repentance a fruit
and sign of their faith, whereby they believed the preaching of Jonas, As for
Ahabs humiliatio^ it is nothing to the purpose: for it was in hypocrisy: if
they get any thing thereby, let the^ take it to themselves. To conclude, we for
our parts do not condemn this exercise of fasting, but the abuse of it: and
it were to be wished, that fasting were more used of all Christians in all
places: considering the Lord does daily give us new and special occasions of
public and private fasting.

The thirteenth point. Of the state of perfection.
Our consent.
Our consent I will set down in two conclusions. I. All true believers have a
state of true perfection in this life. Math. 5. 48. Be you perfect as your
father in heaven is perfect. Genesis 6. 9. Noah was a just and perfect man in his
time, and walked with God. Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me and be perfect. And
sundry kings of Judah are said to walk uprightly before God with a perfect
heart, as David, Josias, Hezekias, etc. And Paul accounts himself with the
rest of the faithful to be perfect, saying, Let us all that are perfect, be
thus minded, Phil. 3. 15. Now this perfection has two parts. The first is the
imputation of Christ's perfect obedience, which is the ground and fountain of
all our perfection whatsoever. Heb. 10. 14. By one offering, that is, by his
obedience in his death and passion, has he consecrated, or made perfect, for
ever them that believe. The second part of Christian perfection is synceritie,
or, vprightnes, standing in two things. The first is, to acknowledge our
imperfection and unworthiness in respect of our selves: and hereupon, though
Paul had said he was Phil. 3. 13. and 15.
perfect, yet he adds further, that he did account of himself, not as though
he had attained to perfection: but did forget the good things behind, and
indeauoured himself to that which was before. Here therefore it must be
remembered, that the perfection whereof I speak, may stand with sundry wants
and imperfections. It is said of Asa 2. Chr. 15. 17.
that his heart was perfect with God all his days, and yet he pulled not
down the high places: and being diseased in his feet he put and 16. 12.
his trust in the Physicians and not in the Lord. Secondly this vprightnes
stands in a constant purpose, endeavor, and care to keep not some few, but
all and every commandment of the law of God, as David says psalm. 119. 6.
Then should I not be confounded, when I have respect to AL THY COMMANDMENTS.
And this endeavor is a fruit of perfection, in that it proceeds from a man
regenerate. For, as all men through Adams fall, have in them by nature the
seeds of all sin; none excepted, no not the sin against the holy Ghost: so
by grace of regeneration through Christ, all the faithful have in them
likewise the seeds of all virtues needful to salvation: and hereupon they
both can and do endeavor to yield perfect obedience unto God, according to
the whole law. And they may be termed perfect, as a child is called a perfect
man: though it want perfection of age and stature and reason; yet has it
perfection of parts: because it has all and every part and faculty both of
body and soul, that is required to a perfect man.

Conclus. II. There be certain works of supererogation: that is, such works as
are not only answerable to the law, and thereupon deserve life everlasting:
but go beyond the law, and merit more then the law by it self can make any
man to merit. But where may we find these works? not in the person of any
mere man, or angel, nor in all men and angels: but only in the person of
Christ God and man: whose works are not only answerable to the perfection of
the law, but go far beyond the same. For first the obedience of his life
considered alone by it self, was answerable even to the rigor of the law:
and therefore the sufferings of his death and passion, were more then the law
could require at his hand: considering it requires no punishment of him, that
is a doer of all things contained therein. Secondly, the very rigor of the
law requires obedience only of them that are mere men: but the obedience of
Christ was the obedience of a person that was both God and man. Thirdly, the
law requires personal obedience, that is, that every man fulfill the law for
himself, and it speaks of no more. Now the obedience which Christ performed,
was not for himself alone, but it serves also for all the elect: and
considering it was the obedience of God (as Paul signified when he said, feed
the Church of God, which HE purchased WITH HIS BLOOD) it was sufficient for
many thousand worlds: and by reason the law requires no obedience of him that
is God; this obedience therefore may truly be termed a work of
supererrogation. This one we acknowledge, and beside this we dare acknowledge
none. And thus far we agree with the Church of Rome, in the doctrine of the
estate of perfection; and further we dare not go.

The difference.
The Papists hold (as the writings of the learned among them teach) that a man
being in the state of grace, may not only keep all the commandments of the
law, and thereby deserve his own salvation: but also go beyond the law and
do works of supererrogation which the law requires not: as to perform the
vow of single life, and the vow of regular obedience, etc. And by this means
(they say) men deserve a greater degree of glory then the law can afoard. Of
perfection they make two kinds: one they call necessary perfection, which is
the fulfilling of the law in every commandment, whereby eternal life is
deserved. The second, is profitable perfection, when men do not only such
things as the law requires, but over and besides, they make certain vows, and
perform certain other duties which the law inioynes not; for the doing
whereof they shall be rewarded with a greater measure of glory, then the law
designeth. This they make plain by comparison: Two soldiers fight in the field
under one and the same captain: the one only keeps his standing, and thereby
deserves his pay: the other in keeping of his place, does also win the
enemies standard; or do some other notable exploit: now this man besides his
pay deserves some greater reward. And thus (say they) it is with all true
Catholics in the state of grace: they that keep the law shall have life
eternal: but they that do more then the law, as works of supererrogation,
shall be crowned with greater glory. This is their doctrine. But we on the
contrary teach, that albeit we are to strive to a perfection as much as we
can, yet no man can fulfill the law of God in this life: much less do works
of supererrogation: for the confirmation whereof, these reasons may be used. I.
In the moral law two things are commanded. First the love of God and man.
Secondly, the manner of this love, now the manner of loving God is to love him
with all our heart and strength. Luc. 10. 27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, AND
WITH ALL THY THOUGHT, etc. As Bernard said, the measure of loving God, is to
love him without measure, and that is to love him with the greatest perfection
of love that can befall a creature. Hence it follows that in loving God, no
man can possibly do more then the law requires: and therefore the
performance of all vows whatsoever, and all like duties, comes short of the
intention or scope of the law.

II. Reason. The compass of the law is large, and comprehends in it more
then the mind of man can at the first conceive: for every commandment has
two parts, the negative and the affirmative. In the negative is forbidden not
only the capital sin named, as murder, theft, adultery, etc. but all
sins of the same kind, with all occasions and prouocations thereto. And in
the affirmative is commanded not only the contrary virtues, as the love of
God, and the love of our neighbors honor, life, chastity, goods, good name,
but the use of all helps and means, whereby he said the virtues may be
preserved: furthered, and practiced. Thus has our Savior Christ himself
expounded the law, Math. chap. 5. and 6. upon this plain ground I conclude,
that all duties pertaining to life and manners, come within the list of some
moral commandment. And that the Papists making, their works of
supererogation means to further the love of God and man, must needs bring them
under the compass of the law. Under which, if they be, they can not possibly
go beyond the same.

Reason III. Luc. 17. 20. When ye have done all those things that are commanded
us we are unprofitable servants* we have done that which was our duty to do.
The Papists answer that we are unprofitable to God but not to our selves: but
this shift of theirs is beside the very intent of the place. For a servant in
doing his duty is unprofitable even to himself, and does not so much as
deserve thanks at his masters hand, as Christ says, v. 9. Does he thank that
servant. Secondly they answer, that we are unprofitable servants in doing
things commanded: yet when we do things prescribed in the way of counsel, we
may profit our selves, and merit thereby. But this answer does not stand with
reason* For things commanded, in that they are commanded, are more excellent
then things left to our liberty; because the will and commandment of God
gives excellency and goodness unto them. Again counsels are thought to be
ha^der then the commandments of the law: and if men can not profit themselves
by obedience of moral precepts, which are more easy; much less shall they be
able to profit themselves by counsels which are of greater difficulty.

Reason IV. If it be not in the ability and power of man to keep the law,
then much less is he able to do any work that is beyond and above all the
law requires: but no man is able to fulfill the law, and therefore no man is
able to supererrogate. Here the Papists deny the proposition: for (say they)
though we keep not the law, yet we may do things of counsel above the law,
and thereby merit. But by their leaves, they speak absurdly: for in common
reason. if a man fail in the less, he cannot but fail in the greater. Now
(as I have said) in popish doctrine, it is easier to obey the moral law then
to perform the counsels of perfection.

Objections of Papists.
I. Isaie. 56. 4. The Lord says, unto Eunuchs that keep his sabbath and
choose the thing that pleases him, will he give a place and a name better
then the sons and daughters. Now (say they) an Eunuch is one that lives a
single life, and keeps the vow of chastity, and hereupon he is said to
deserve a greater measure of glory. Ans. If the words be well considered, they
prove nothing less: for honor is promised to Eunuchs, not because they make
and perform the vow of single life, but because (as the text says) they
observe the Lords Sabbath, and chose the thing that pleases God, and keep
his covenant, which is to believe the word of God and to obey the commandments
of the moral law.

Object. II. Mat. 16. 12. Christ says, There are some which have made
themselves chaste for the kingdom of heaven: therefore the vow of single life
is warrantable, and is a work of special glory in heaven. Ans. The meaning
of this text is, that some having received the gift of continency, do
willingly content themselves with single estate, that they may with more
liberty without distraction further the good estate of the Church of God, or,
the kingdom of grace in themselves and others. This is all that can be
gathered out of this place: hence therefore cannot be gathered the merit of
everlasting glory by single life.

Object. III. Math. 9 21. Christ says to the young man. If thou will be
perfect go sell that thou have and give to the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven. Therefore say they, a man by forsaking all may merit not
only heaven, but also treasure there, that is an exceeding measure of glory.
Ans. This young man being in likelihoode, a most strickt Pharise, thought to
merit eternal life by the works of the law, as his first question imporieth;
Good master, what shall I do to be saved: and therefore Christ goes about to
discover unto him the secret corruption of his heart* and hereupon the words
alleged are a commandment of trial not common to all, but special to him.
The like commandment gave the Lord to Abraham, saying, Abraham take thine
only son Isaac: and offer him upon the mountain which I shall show thee,
Genesis 12. 2.

IV. Object. 1. Cor. 7. 8. Paul says, It is good for all to be single as he
was: and v. 38. he says, it is better for virgins not to marry: and, this he
speaks hy permission not by commandment, v. 26. Ans. Here single life is not
preferred simply, but only in respect of the present necessity, because the
Church was then under persecution: and because such as live a single life, are
freed from the cares and distractions of the world.

V. Object. 1. Cor. 9. 15. 17. 18. Paul preached (...) that excelled in faith
in the times of the old and new testament. II. They are to be honored by
giving of thanks to God for them, and the benefits that God vouchsafed by them
unto his Church. Thus Paul says, that when the Churches heard of his
conversion, they glorified God for him, or, in him Gal. 1. 13. And the like is
to be done for the Saints departed. III. They are to be honored by an
imitation of their faith, humility, meekness, repentance, the fear of God,
and all good virtues wherein they excelled. For this cause the examples of godly
men in the old and new testament, are called a cloud of witnesses by allusion:
for as the cloud did guide the Israelites through the wilderness to the land of
Canaan: so the faithful now are to be guided to the heavenly Canaan by the
examples of good men, that have believed in God before us, and have walked the
strait way to life everlasting.

Concl. II. Again their TRVERELIQVES that is, their virtues and good examples
left to all posterity to be followed, we keep and respect with due reverence.
Yea if any man can show us the bodily relic of any true Saint: and prove it
so to be though we will not worship it, yet will we not despise it but keep it
as a monument, if it may conveniently be done without offense. And thus far
we consent with the church of Rome. Further we must not go.

The dissent.
Our difference stands in the manner of worshipping of Saints. The Papists make
two degrees of religious worship. The highest they call Latria whereby God
himself is worshipped* and that alone. The second lower then the former, is
called Doulia, whereby the Saints and Angels that be in the special favor of
God, and glorified with everlasting glory in heaven, are worshipped. This
worship they place in outward adoration, in bending of the knee, and bowing
of the body to them being in heaven: in invocation whereby they call upon
them: in dedication of Churches and houses of religion unto them: in sabbathes
and festival days: lastly in pilgrimages unto their relics and images. We
likewise distinguish adoration or worship: for it is either religious or
civil. Religious worship, is that which is done to him that is Lord of all
things, the searcher and trier of the heart, omnipotent, every where present,
able to hear and help them that call upon him every where, the author and
first cause of every good thing: and that simply for himself, because he is
absolute goodness it self. And this worship is due to God alone, being also
commanded in the first and second com mandements of the first table. Civil
worship is the honor done to men set above us by God himself, either in
respect of their excellent gifts, or in respect of their offices: and
authority whereby they govern others. The right end of this worship is to
testify and declare that we reverence the gifts of God, and that power which
he has placed in those that be his instruments. And this kind of worship is
commanded only in the second table and in the first commandment thereof
Honor thy father and mother. Upon this distinction we may judge, what honor
is due to every one. Honor is to be given to God, and to whom he commands.
He commands that inferiors should honor or worship their betters. Therefore
the unreasonable creatures, and among the rest images are not to be worshipped,
either with civil or religious worship: being indeed far baser then man
himself is. Again unclean spirits the enemies of God, must not be
worshipped: yea to honor them at all, is to dishonor God. Good angels,
because they excel men both in nature and gifts, when they appeared were
lawfully honored: yet so, as when the least signification of honor was given
that was proper to God, they refused it. And because they appear not now as in
former times, not so much as civil adoration in any bodily gesture is to be
done unto them. Lastly, governors and Magistrates have civil adoration as
their due: and it can not be omitted without offense. Thus Abraham worshipped
the Hittites, Genesis 23. and Joseph his brethren, Genesis 50. To come to the very
point: upon the former distinction, we deny against the Papists that any
civil worship in the bending of the knee or prostrating of the body, is to be
given to the Saints, they being absent from us; much less any religious
worship, as namely Invocation signified by any bodily adoration. For it is the
very honor of God himself; let them call it latria, or doulia, or by what
name they will.

Our reasons.
Reason I. All true invocation and prayer made according to the will of God,
must have a double foundation; a commandment, and a promise. A commandment,
to move us to pray: and a promise, to assure us that we shall be heard. For
all and every prayer must be made in faith* and without a commandment or
promise there is no faith. Upon this infallible ground I conclude, that we may
not pray to Saints departed: for in the Scripture there is no word, either
commanding us to pray unto them, or assuring us that we shall be heard when
we pray. Nay we are commanded, only to call upon God, Him only shall thou
serve, Matthew. 4. 10. And, How shall we call upon him in whom we have not
believed? Romans 10. 14. And we have no promise to be heard but for Christ's sake.
Therefore prayers made to Saints departed are unlawful. Answer is made, that
invocation of Saints, is warranted by miracles and revelations, which are
answerable to commandments and promises. Ansvv. But miracles and revelations
had an end before this kind of invocation took any place in the Church of
God: and that was about three hundred years after Christ. Again to judge of
any point of doctrine by miracles, is deceitful; unless three things
concur: the first is, doctrine of faith and piety to be confirmed: the
second is prayer unto God, that some thing may be done for the ratifying of the
said doctrine: the third is the manifest edification of the Church by the two
former. Where any of these three are wanting, miracles may be suspected:
because otherwhiles false prophets have their miracles to try me^ whether they
will cleave unto God or no. Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 3. Again, miracles are not done, or to
be don for them that believe, but for infidels that believe not: as Paul says,
1. Cor. 14. 22. Tongues are a sign not to them that believe, but to
unbelievers. And to this agree Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Isidore, who says,
Behold a sign is not necessary to believers which have already believed, but
to infidels that they may be converted. Lastly, our faith is to be confirmed
not by revelations and apparitions of dead men, but by the writings of the
Apostles and prophets, Luc. 16. 29.

Reason II. To pray unto Saints departed, to bow the knee unto them while
they are in heaven, is to ascribe that unto them which is proper to God
himself: namely, to know the heart, with the inward desires and motions
thereof: and to know the speeches and behauiours of all men in all places upon
earth at all times. The Papists answer, that Saints in heaven see and hear all
things upon earth, not by themselves (for that were to make them Gods) but in
God, and in the glass of the Trinity, in which they see men's prayers revealed
unto them. I answer first, that the Saints are still made more then creatures;
because they are said, to know the thoughts and all the doings of all men at
all times, which no created power can well comprehend at once. Secondly I
answer, that this glass, in which all things are said to be seen, is but a
forgerie of man's brain: and I prove it thus. The angels themselves, who see
further into God then men can do, never knew all things in God: which I
confirm on this manner. In the temple under the law, upon the arc were
placed two Cherubins, signifying the good angels of God: and they looked
downward upon the merciese at covering the arc, which was a figure of Christ;
and their looking downward figured their desire to see into the mystery of
Christ's incarnation, and our redemption by him; as Peter alluding, no doubt, to
this type in the old Testament says, 1. Pet. 1. 12. which things the angels
desired to behold and Paul says Ephesians. 3. 10. The manifold wisdom of God is
revealed by the Church unto principalities and powers in heavenly places, that
is, to the angels: but how and by what means? by the Church; and that two
ways, first by the Church, as by an example, in which the angels saw the
endless wisdom and mercy of God in the calling of the Gentiles. Secondly by
the Church, as it was founded and honored by the preaching of the Apostles.
For it seems that the Apostolical ministry in the new testament revealed
things touching Christ, which the angels never knew, before that time. Thus
Chrysostom upon occasion Prolog. in Job.
of this text of Paul says, that the Angels learned some things by the
preaching of John Baptist. Again, Christ says, that they know not the hour
of the last judgment, Math. 24. 23. much less do the saints know all things
in God. And hence it is that they are said to be under the altar, where they
cry: How long Lord, holy and true! will thou Rev. 6. 9.
not revenge our blood? as being ignorant of the day of their full
deliverance. And the Jews in affliction confess Abraham was ignorant of them
and their estate. Isa. 63. v. 16.

Reason III. Matthew. 4. 10. Christ refused so much as to bow the knee to Satan
upon this ground, because it was written thou shall worship the Lord thy God
and him only shall thou serve. Hence it was, that Peter would not suffer
Cornelius so much as to kneel unto him, though Cornelius intended not to
honor him as God. Therefore neither Saint nor Angel is to be honored so much
as with the bowing of the knee: if it carry but the least signification of
divine or religious honor.

Reason IV. The judgment of the ancient Church. August. We honor the Saints
de vera relig. c. 53.
with charity, and not BY SERVITVDE: neither do we erect Churches to them.
And, Let it NOT BE RELIGION for us to worship dead men. And, They are to be
honored for immitation, and not to be adored for religion. Epiphan. h^res. 79.
Neither Tecla nor any Saint is to be ADORED: for that ancient ERROVR may not
ouerrule us, that we should leave the living God, and adore things made by
him. Again, Let Marie be in honor; let the Father, Son, and holy Ghost be
adored: let NONE ADORE MARIE: I mean neither woman nor man. Again, Marie is
beautiful and holy and honored, yet NOT TO ADORATION. When Julian objected to
the Christians that they worshipped their Martyrs as God, Cyril Lib. 9. and 10.
graunts the memory and honor of them, but denies their adoration: and of
invocation, he makes no mention at all. Ambrose on Romans 1. Is any SO MAD that
he will give to the Earl the honor of the King --? yet these men do not
think them selves guilty, who give the honor of Gods name to a creature, and
leaving the Lord, ADORE THEIR FELLOVV SERVANTS, as though there were any thing
more reserved for God.

Objections of Papists.
I. Genesis 48. 16. Let the angel that kept me bless thy children. Here (say
they) it is a prayer made to angels. Ans. By the angel is meant Christ, who is
called the angel of the covenant, Malac. 3. 1. and the angel that guided Israel
in the wilderness, 1. Cor. 10. 9. compared with Exodus 23. 20.

Object. II. Exodus 23. 13. Moses prays that God would respect his people, for
Abraham's sake, and for Isaac and Israel his servants, which were not then
living. Ans. Moses prays God to be merciful to the people, not for the
intercession of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but for his covenants sake which he
had made with them, Psalm. 123. 10 11. Again by popish doctrine, the fathers
departed knew not the estate of men upon earth, neither did they pray for
the^: because then they were not in heaven but in Limbo patrum.

III. Object. One living man makes intercession to God for another: therefore
much more do the Saints in glory, that are filled with love pray to God for
us: and we pray to them no otherwise then we desire living men to pray for us.
Ans. The reason is naught: for we have a commandment, one living man to pray
for another, and to desire others to pray for us: but there is no warrant in
the word of God, for us to desire the prayers of men departed. Secondly there
is great difference between these two: To request our friend either by word of
mouth or by letter to pray for us: and by Invocation to request them that are
absent from us and departed this life to pray for us: for this is indeed a
worship, in which is given unto them a power to hear and help all that call
upon them, at what place or time soever, yea though they be not present in the
place in which they are worshipped: and consequently the seeing of the heart,
presence in all places, an infinite power to help all that pray unto them:
which things agree to no creature but God alone. Thirdly when one living man
requests an other to pray for him, he only makes him his companion and fellow
member in his prayer made in the name of one mediator Christ: but when men
invoke Saints in heaven, they being then absent, they make them more then
fellow members even mediators between Christ and them.

The XU. point. Of intercession of saints.
Our consent.
Our consent with them I will set down in two conclusions. Conclus. I. The
saints departed pray unto God, by giving thanks unto him for their own
redemption, and for the redemption of the whole Church of God upon earth, Rev.
5. 8. The four beasts and the four and twenty Elders fell down before the
lamb --, 9. and they song a new song, Thou art worthy to take the book and
to open the seals thereof: because thou wast killed and have redeemed us to
God --. 13. And all the creatures which are in heaven --, heard I saying,
Praise and honor and glory and power be unto him that sits upon the
throne and unto the Lamb for evermore.

II. Conclus. The Saints departed pray generally for the state of the whole
Church, Rev. 6. 9. And I savv under the Altar, the souls of them that were
killed for the word of God -- * and THEY CRIED, 10. How long Lord holy and
true! do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dvvell on the
earth? whereby we see they desire a final deliverance of the Church, and a
destruction of the enemies thereof; that they themselves with all the people of
God might be advanced to fullness of glory in body and soul. Yea the dumb
creatures, Romans 8. 23. are said to groan and sigh, waiting for the adoption
even the redemption of our bodies: much more then do the Saints in heaven
desire the same. And thus far we consent.

The dissent or difference.
They hold and teach, that the Saints in heaven, as the virgin Marie, Peter,
Paul, etc. do make intercession to God for particalar men, according to their
several wants: and that having received particular men's prayers, they present
them unto God. But this doctrine we flatly renounce upon these grounds and
reasons.

I. Isai 63. 16. The church says to God, doubtless thou art our father, though
ABRAHAM BE IGNORANT of us, and Israel KNOW US NOT. Now if Abraham knew not
his posterity: neither Marie, nor Peter, nor any other of the Saints departed
know us and our estate: and consequently they cannot make any particular
intercession for us. If they say that Abraham and Jacob were the^ in Limho,
which they will have to be a part of hell: what joy could Lazarus have in
Abraham's bosom, Luc. 16. 25. and with what comfort could Jacob say on his
death bed: O Lord I have waited for thy salvation. Genesis 46. 18.

II. Reason. 2. King. 22. 20. Huldah the prophetess tells Josias, he must be
gathered to his fathers, and put in his grave in peace, that his eyes may not
see all the evil which God would bring on this place. Therefore the Saints
departed see not the state of the Church on earth, much less do they know
the thoughts and prayers of men. This conclusion Augustine confirms at large.

III. Reason. No creature, Saint, or angel can be a mediator for us to God,
saving Christ alone, who is indeed the only Advocate of his church. For in a
true and sufficient Mediator there must be three properties. First of all, the
word of God must reveal and propound him unto the Church, that we may in
conscience be assured, that praying to him and to god in his name, we shall be
heard. Now there is no scripture that mentions either Saints or Angels as
mediator in our behalf, save Christ alone. Secondly, a mediator must be
perfectly just, so as no sin be found in him at all, 1. Ioh. 2. 1. If any man
sin we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ THE RIGHTEOUS. Now the
Saints in heaven, howsoever they be fully sanctified by Christ, yet in
themselves they were conceived and borne in sin: and therefore must needs
eternally stand before God by the mediation and merit of an other. Thirdly, a
mediator must be a propitiatour, that is, bring something to God, that may
appease and satisfy the wrath and justice of God for our sins: therefore
John adds, and he is a PROPITIATION for our sins. But neither Saint nor
Angel can satisfy for the least of our sins: Christ only is the
propitiation for them all. The virgin Marie and the rest of the Saints being
sinners, could not satisfy so much as for themselves.

IV. Reason. The judgment of the church. Augustine, All Christian men commend
each Lib. 3. contra Parmen. c. 3.
other in their prayers to God. And who PRAYS FOR ALL, and for whom NONE
PRAYS, he is that one and true mediator. And, This Tract. in Ioh. 22.
says thy Savior, thou have NO VVHITHER to go but to me, thou have NO WAY
to go BUT BY ME. Chrysostom, Thou have NO NEED OF De perfectu Euang.
PATRONS to God, or much discour se that thou should sooth others: but
though thou be alone and want a patron, and by thy self pray unto God, thou
shall obtain thy desire. And on the saying of John, If any sin, etc. Thy
prayers have no effect unless they be such as THE LORD COMMENDS unto thy
Father. And August. on the same place has these words, He being such a man
said not, ye have an Advocate, but if any sin we have: he said not ye
have, neither said he, YE HAVE ME.

Objections of Papists.
I. Rev. 5. 8, 9. The four and twenty Elders fall down before the lamb,
having every one harpes and golden vyals, full of odours which are the prayers
of the Saints. Hence the Papists gather, that the Saints in heaven receive the
prayers of men on earth, and offer them unto the Father. Ansvv. There by
prayers of the Saints, are meant their own prayers, in which they sing praises
to God and to the lamb, as the verses following plainly declare. And these
prayers are also presented unto God only from the hand of the angel, which is
Christ himself.

II. Object. Luc. 16. 27. Dives in hell prays cap. 8. v. 4.
for his brethren upon earth, much more do the Saints in heaven pray for us.
Ans. Out of a parable nothing can be gathered, but that which is agreeable to
the intent and scope thereof: for by the same reason it may as well be gathered
that the soul of Dives being in hell had a tongue. Again, if it were true
which they gather, we may gather also that the wicked in hell have compassion
and love to their brethren on earth, and a zeal to Gods glory: all which are
false.

III. Object. The angels in heaven know every man's estate: they know when any
sinner repents and rejoices thereat: and pray for particular men: therefore
the Saints in heaven do the like, for they are equal to the good angels, Luc.
20, 36. Ans. The place in Luke is to be understood of the estate of holy men at
the day of the last judgment: as appears, Matthew. 22. 30. where it is said,
that the servants of God in the resurrection are as the angels in heaven.
Secondly they are like the angels not in office and ministry, by which they
are ministering spirits for the good of men: but they are like the^ in glory.

Secondly we dissent from the Papists: because they are not content to say that
the Saints departed pray for us in particular; but they add further, that they
make intercession for us by their merits in heaven. New Jesuits deny this: but
let them hear Lumbard, Lib. 4. did. 45. p. 6.
I think (says he, speaking of one that is but of mean goodness) that he as
it were passing by the fire shall be saved by the MERITS and intercessions of
the heavenly Church; which does always make intercession for the faithful by
request and merit, till Christ shall be complete in his members. And the
Roman on second Command.
Catechism says as much. Saints are so much the more to be worshipped and
called upon; because they make prayers daily for the salvation of men: and God
for their merit and favor bestows many benefits upon us. We deny not, that
men upon earth have help and benefit by the faith and piety which the Saints
departed showed, when they were in this life. For God shows mercy on them that
keep his commandments to a thousand generations. And Augustine says, it was
good for the Jews, that they were loved of Moses, q. 149. super Exodus
whom God loved. But we utterly deny, that we are helped by merits of Saints
either living or departed. For Saints in glory have received the full reward of
all their merits; if they could merit: and therefore there is nothing further
that they can merit.

The sixteenth point. Of implicit, or infolded faith.
Our consent.
We hold that there is a kind of implicit or unexpressed faith; yea that the
faith of every man in some part of his life, as in the time of his first
conversion, and in the time of some grievous temptation or distress, is
implicit or infoulded. The Samaritans are said to believe, Ioh 4. 14. because
they took Christ for the Messiah, and thereupon were content to learn and obey
the glad tidings of salvation. And in the same place, v. 51. the Ruler with his
family is said to believe, who did no more but generally acknowledge that
Christ was the Messiah, and yielded himself to believe and obey his holy
doctrine; being moved thereunto by a miracle wrought upon his young son.
And Rahab Heb. 11. 13. is said to believe, yea she is commended for faith even
at the time when she received the spies. Now in the word of God we cannot
find, that she had any more but a confused, general, or infoulded faith,
whereby she believed that the God of the Hebrwes was the true God and his word
to be obeyed. And this faith (as it seems) was wrought by her by the report
and relation of the miracles done in the land of Egypt: whereby she was moved
to join her self unto the people of God and to believe as they did. By these
examples then it is manifest that in the very servants of God, there is and may
be for a time an implicit faith. For the better understanding of this point,
it is to be considered that faith may be infolded two ways: first in respect
of knowledge of things to be believed: secondly, in respect of the apprehension
of the object of faith, namely Christ and his benefits. Now faith is infolded
in respect of knowledge, when as sundry things that are necessary to salvation
are not as yet distinctly known. Though Christ commended the faith of his
disciples, for such a faith, against which the gates of hell should not
prevail; yet was it unexpressed or wrapped up in regard of sundry points of
religion: for first of all, Peter that made confession of Christ in the name of
the rest, was at that time ignorant of the particular means whereby his
redemption should be wrought. For after this, he went about to dissuade his
master from the suffering of death at Jerusalem, whereupon Christ sharply
rebuked him, saying, Come behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me.
Again, they were all ignorant of Christ's resurrection, till certain women who
first saw him after he was risen again, had told them: and they by experience
in the person of Christ had learned the truth. Thirdly, they were ignorant of
the ascension: for they dreamed of an earthly kingdom, at the very time when
he was about to ascend: saying, Will thou at this time restore the kingdom to
Israel? Act. 1. 6. And after Christ's ascension, Peter knew nothing of the
breaking down of the partition wall between the Jews and Gentiles, till God
had better schooled him in a vision, Acts 10. 14. And no doubt, we have
ordinary examples of this Implicit faith in sundry persons among us. For some
there be, which are dull and hard both for understanding and memory, and
thereupon make no such proceedings in knowledge as many others do: and yet for
good affection and conscience in their doings, so far as they know, they come
not short of any; having withal a continual care to increase in knowledge,
and to walk in obedience according to that which they know. And such persons
though they be ignorant in many things, yet have they a meaning of true faith:
and that which is wanting in knowledge is supplied in affection: and in some
respects they are to be preferred before many that have the glibbe tongue, and
the brain swimming with knowledge. To this purpose Melancthon said well, We
must (...). phil. (...). de g^ad. delict.
acknowledge the great mercy of God, who puts a difference betvveene sins
of ignorance, and such as are done vvittingly; and forgiues manifold ignorances
to them, that know but the foundation and be teachable; as may be seen by the
Apostles, in whom there was much want of understanding before the resurrection
of Christ. But, as has bin said, he requires that we be teachable, and he
will not have us to be hardened in our sluggishnes and dulnes. As it is said,
psalm. 1. he meditateth in his law day and night.

The second kind of implicit faith, is in regard of Apprehension; when as a
man can not say distinctly and certainly, I believe the pardon of my sins, but
I do unfeignedly desire to believe the pardon of them all: and I desire to
repent. This case befalls many of Gods children, when they are touched in
conscience for their sins. But where men are displeased with themselves for
their offenses, and do withal constantly from the heart desire to believe,
and to be reconciled to God; there is faith and many other graces of God
infolded: as in the little and tender budde, is infolded the leaf, the
blossom, and the fruit. For though a desire to repent and to believe, be not
faith and repentance in nature, yet in Gods acceptance it is, God accepting
the will for the deed. Isai 42. v. 3. Christ will not quench the smoking
flax, which as yet by reason of weakness gives neither light nor heat.
Christ says, Math. 6. 6. Blessed are they that HVNGER AND THIRST after
righteousness: for they shall be satisfied: where by persons hungring and
thirsting are meant al such, as feel with grief their own want of
righteousness, and withal desire to be justified and sanctified. Romans 8. 26.
God hears and regards the very groans and sighs of his servants: yea, though
they be unspeakable by reason they are oftentimes little, weak, and confused;
yet God has respect unto the^, because they are the work of his own spirit.
Thus when we see that in a touched heart desiring to believe, there is an
infolded faith. And this is the faith which many of the true servants of God
have: and our salvation stands not so much in our apprehending of Christ, as
in Christ's comprehending of us: and therefore Paul says, Philip. 3. 12. he
follows, namely after perfection, if that he might comprehend that, for
whose sake he is comprehended of Christ. Now if any shall say, that without a
lively faith in Christ none can be saved; I answer, that God accepts the desire
to believe for lively faith, in the time of temptation, and in the time of our
first conversion, as I have said. Put case, a man that never yet repented,
falls into some grievous sickness, and then begins to be touched in conscience
for his sins, and to be truly humbled: hereupon he is exhorted to believe his
own reconciliation with God in Christ, and the pardon of his own sins. And
as he is exhorted, so he endeavors according to the measure of grace
received, to believe; yet after much stri^ing he cannot resolve himself, that
he does distinctly and certainly believe the pardon of his own sins: only
this he can say, that he does heartily desire to believe: this he wishes above
all things in the world: and he esteems all things as dung for Christ: and
thus he dies. I demand now, what shall we say of him? surely, we may say
nothing, but that he died the child of God, and is undoubtedly saved. For
howsoever it were an happy thing if men could come to that fullness of faith
which was in Abraham, and many servants of God: yet certain it is, that God in
sundry cases accepts of this desire to believe, for ttue faith indeed. And
look as it is in nature, so is it in grace: in nature some die when they are
children, some in old age, and some in full strength, and yet all die men: so
again, some die babes in Christ, some of more perfect faith: and yet the
weakest having the seeds of grace, is the child of God: and faith in his
infancy is faith. All this while, it must be remembered I say not, there is a
true faith without all apprehension, but without a Distinct apprehe^sion for
some space of time: for this very desire by faith to apprehend Christ and his
merits, is a kind of apprehension. And thus we see the kinds of implicit or
infolded faith.

This doctrine is to be learned for two causes: first of all it serves to
rectify the consciences of weak ones, that they be not deceived touching
their estare. For if we think that no faith can save, but a full persuasion,
such as the faith of Abraham was, many truly bearing the name of Christ must be
put out of the role of the children of God. We are therefore to know that
there is a growth in grace, as in nature: and there be differences and degrees
of true faith, and the least of them al is this Infolded faith. This in effect
is the doctrine of master Calvin: that, when we begin by faith to know
somewhat, and Just. lib. 3. c. 2. 9* 5.
have a desire to learn more, this may be termed an unexpressed faith.
Secondly this point of doctrine serves to rectify and in part to expound
suudrie catechismes, in that they seem to propound faith unto men at so high a
reach, as few can attain unto it: defining it to be a certain and full
persuasion of Gods love and favor in Christ: whereas, though every faith be
for his nature a certain persuasion yet only the strong faith is the full
persuasion. Therefore faith is not only in general terms to be defined, but
also the degrees and measures thereof are to be expounded, that weak ones to
their comfort may be truly informed of their estate. And though we teach there
is a kind of implicit faith, which is the beginning of true and lively faith:
yet none must hereupon take an occasion to content themselves therewith, but
labor to increase and go on from faith to faith: and so indeed will every one
do that has any beginnings of true faith, be they never so little. And he
which thinks he has a desire to believe, and contents himself therewith: has
indeed no true desire to believe.

The difference.
The pillars of the Romish Church lays down this ground: that faith in his
own nature, is not a knowledge of things to be believed: but a reverent assent
unto them whether they be known or unknown. Hereupon they build: that if a
man know some necessary points of religion, as the doctrine of the godhead,
of the trinity, of Christ's incarnation, and of our redemption, etc. it is
needelesse to know the rest by a particular or distinct knowledge, and it
suffiseth to give his consent to the church, and to believe as the pastors
believe. Behold a ruinous building upon a rotten foundation: for faith
contains a knowledge of things to be believed, and knowledge is of the nature
of faith: and nothing is believed that is not known. Isai 53. 11. The
knowledge of my righteous servant, shall justify many. and Ioh. 17. 2. This is
eternal life, to know the eternal God, and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ. In these places, by knowledge is meant faith grounded upon knowledge,
whereby we know and are assured that Christ and his benefits belong unto us.
Secondly this kind of assent is the mother of ignorance. For when me^ shall be
taught, that for sundry points of religion they may believe as the Church
believes Mol. tract. 3. c. 27. conclus. 15.
that the study of the Scriptures is not to be required of them: yea that to
their good they may be barred the reading of them, so be it they know some
principal things contained in the articles of says, that ^onaue^tura and
Durande.
common believers are not bound expressly to believe all the articles of the
Apostles Creed: Bann^s. ^. q. 2 art. 7. ascribes this opinion to Gul.
Parisiensis, and to Altisiodoransis.
that it suffiseth them to believe the articles by an implicit faith: by
believing as the Church believes, few or none will have care to profit in
knowledge. And yet Gods commandment is that we should grow in knowledge and
that his word should dwell plenteously in us, Col. 3. 16. Again, the Papists
say, that the devotion of the ignorant, is often service better accepted then
that which is done upon Rhem. Test. on 1. Cor. 14
knowledge. Such (say they) as pray in latin, pray with as great consolation
of spirit, with as little tediousnes, with as great devotion and affection,
and oftentimes more then the other, and always more then any scismaticke
Molam* tract 5. c. 30. con. 12.
or heretic in his own language. To conclude, they teach that some articles
of faith are believed generally of the whole Church only by a simple or
implicit says, which afterward by the Authority of a general Counsel are
propounded to be believed of the Church by express faith. Rofsensis against
Luther gives an example of Cantra a^^er. Iu^. (...). 8.
this, when he confesses that Purgatory was little known at the first, but
was made known partly by Scripture and partly by revelation in process of
time. This implicit says touching articles of religion we reject; holding
that all things concerning faith and manners necessary to salvation, are
plainly expressed in Scripture, and accordingly to be believed.

The seventeenth point. Of Purgatory.
Our consent.
We hold a Christian Purgatory, according as the word of God has set down
the same unto us. And first of all by this Purgatory we understand the
afflictions of Gods children here on earth, Ier. 3. The people afflicted say,
thou have sent a fire into our bones. Psalm. 65. 12. We have gone through water
and fire, Malach. 3. 3. The children of Levi must be purified in a purging fire
of affliction. 1. Pet. 1. 7. Afflictions are called the fiery trial whereby
men are cleansed from their corruptions, as gold from the dross by the fire.
Secondly, the blood of Christ is a purgatory of our sins, 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
Christ's blood PVRGETH us from all our sins. Hebr. 9. 14. It PVRGETH our
consciences from dead works. And Christ baptiseth with the holy Ghost and
with fire; because our inward washing is by the blood of Christ: and the holy
Ghost is as fire to consume and abolish the inward corruption of nature. To
this effect says Origin. in Levit. l. 9. apud Cyril.
Without doubt, we shall feel the unquenchable fire, unless we shall now
entreat the Lord to send down from heaven a purgatory fire unto us, whereby
vvorldly desires may be utterly consumed in our minds. de Act. Falic. c. 21.
August. Suppose the mercy of God is thy purgatory.

The difference or dissent.
We differ from the Papists touching purgatory in two things. And first of
all, for the place. They hold it to be a part of hell, into which an entrance
is made only after this life: we for our parts deny it, as having no warrant
in the word of God; which mentions only two places for men after this life,
heaven and hell, with the two-folde condition thereof, joy and torment. Luke
16. 25, 26. Ioh. 3. 36. Apoc. 22. 14, 15. and 21. 7, 8. Matthew. 8. 11. Nay we
find the contrary, Rev. 14. 13. they that die in the Lord are said to rest
from their labors: which cannot be true, if any of them go to purgatory. And
to cut off all cauills, it is further said, their works, that is, the reward of
their works, follow them, even at the heels, as an Acoluth or servant does his
master. Augustine says well, After this life Homi. 50. iom. 10.
there remains no compunction or SATISFACTION. And, Here is all remission of
sin: Enchir. c. 115
here be temptations that move us to sin: lastly here is the evil from
which we desire to be delivered: but there is NONE OF AL THESE. And, We are not
here without sin, but we de verbis Apost. sermon. 31.
shall GO HENCE VVITHOVT SIN. Cyril says, They which are once dead can add
nothing Lib. 3. in Es.
to the things which they have done, but shall REMAIN AS THEY WERE LFFT, and
wait for the time of the last judgment. Chrysostom, After the end of this
life, ad pop. Anti* och. bo^. 22.
there be NO OCCASIONS of merits.

Secondly, we differ from them touching the means of purgation. They say, that
men are purged by suffering of pains in purgatory, whereby they satisfy for
their venial sins, and for the temporal punishment of their mortal sins.
We teach the contrary, holding that nothing can free us from the least
punishment of the smallest sin, but the sufferings of Christ, and purge us
from the least taint of corruption, saving the blood of Christ. Indede they
say, that our sufferings in themselves considered, do not purge, and satisfy,
but as they are made meritorious by the sufferings of Christ: but to this I
oppose one text of scripture, Hebr. 1. 3. where it is said, that Christ has
purged our sins BY HIMSELF: where the last clause cuts the throat of all
humane satisfactions and merits: and it gives us to understand, that
whatsoever thing purges us from our sins, is not to be found in us but in
Christ alone: otherwise it should have bin said, that Christ purges the
sins of men by themselves, as well as by himself: and he should merit by his
death, that we should become our own Saviors in part.

To this place I may well refer prayer for the dead: of which I will propound
two conclusions affirmative, and one negative. Conclus. I. We hold that
Christian charity is to extend it self to the very dead; and it must show it
self in their honest burial, in the preservation of their good names, in the
help and relief of their posterity, as time and occasion shall be offered.
Ruth. 1. 8. Ioh. 19. 23.

II. Conclus. We pray further in general manner for the faithful departed,
that God would hasten their joyful resurrection, and the full accomplishment
of their happiness, both for the body and soul: and thus much we ask in
saying, Thy kingdom come, that is, not only the kingdom of grace, but also
the kingdom of glory in heaven. Thus far we come; but nearer the gates of
Babylon we dare not approach.

III. Conclus. To pray for particular men departed: and to pray for their
deliverance out of purgatory, we think it unlawful: because we have neither
promise nor commandment so to do.

The eighteenth point. Of the supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical.
Our consent.
Touching the point of supremacy Ecclesiastical, I will set down how near
we may come to the Roman Church in two conclusions. Conclus. I. For the
founding of the primitive Church, the ministry of the word was distinguished
by degrees not only of order but also of power, and Peter was called to the
highest degree. Ephesians. 4. verse. 11. Christ ascended up on high and gave gifts
unto men, for the good of his Church: as some to be Apostles, some Prophets,
some Evangelists, some Pastors and Doctors. Now, howsoever one Apostle, be not
above another, or one Evangelist above another, or one pastor above another:
yet an Apostle was above an Evangelist: and an Evangelist above all pastors
and teachers. And Peter was by calling an Apostle, and therefore above all
Evangelists and Pastors: having the highest room in the ministry of the new
Testament, both for order and authority.

Conclus. II. Among the twelve Apostles Peter had a threefold privilege or
prerogative. I. The prerogative of authority. II. Of primacie. III. Of
principality. For the first, by the privilege of authority, I mean a
pre-eminence in regard of estimation, whereby he was had in reverence above the
rest of the twelve Apostles, for Cephas with James and John are called pillars,
and seemed to be great. Gal. 2. v. 6, 9. Again he had the pre-eminence of
primacie, because he was the first named, as the forman of the quest. Math. 10.
2. The name of the twelve Apostles are these, THE FIRST IS Simon called Peter.
Thirdly he had the pre-eminence of principality among the twelve, because in
regard of the measure of grace, he excelled the rest: for when Christ asked his
disciples whom they said he was; Peter as being of greatest ability and
zeal answered for them all. Math. 16. 16. I use this clause, among the twelve,
because Paul excelled Peter every way, in learning, zeal, understanding, as
far as Peter excelled the rest. And thus near we come to popish supremacy.

The difference.
The Church of Rome gives to Peter a supremacy under Christ above all causes
and persons: that is, full power to govern and order the catholic Church upon
the whole earth both for doctrine and regiment. This supremacy stands (as they
teach) in a power, or, judgment, to determine of the true sense of all places
of Scripture: to determine all causes of faith: to assemble general counsels:
to ratify the decrees of the said councels: to excommunicate any man upon
earth, that lives within the Church, even princes and nations: properly to
absolve and forgive sins: to decide causes brought to him by appeal from all
the parts of the earth: lastly to make laws that shall bind the conscience.
This fulness of power with one consent is ascribed to Peter, and the Bishops of
Rome that follow him in a supposed succession. Now we hold on the contrary,
that neither Peter nor any Bishop of Rome has any supremacy over the
Catholic Church: but that all supremacy under Christ, is pertaining to kings
and princes within their dominions. And that this our doctrine is good and
theirs false and forged, I will make it manifest by sundry reasons.

I. Christ must be considered of us as a king two ways. First as he is God:
and so is he an absolute king over all things in heaven and earth, with the
Father and the holy Ghost by the right of creation. Secondly he is a king as he
is redeemer of mankind: and by the right of redemprion he is a sovereign king
over the whole Church, and that in special manner. Now as Christ is God with
the Father and the holy Ghost, he has his deputies on earth to govern the
world: as namely kings and princes, who are therefore in scriptures called
gods. But as Christ is Mediator, and consequently a king over his redeemed
ones, he has neither fellow, nor deputy. No fellow: for then he should be an
imperfect mediator. No deputy: for no creature is capable of this office to
do in the room and stead of Christ that which he himself does: because every
work of the Mediator is a compound work, arising of the effects of two
natures concurring in one and the same action, namely the godhead and the
manhood: and therefore to the effecting of the said work there is required an
infinite power, which far exceedes the strength of any created nature.
Again, Heb. 7. 24. Christ is said to have a priesthood which cannot pass from
his person to any other: whence it follows, that neither his kingly nor his
prophetical office can pass from him to any creature, either in whole or in
part: because the three offices of mediation in this regard be equal. Nay, it
is a needless thing for Christ to have a deputy, to put in exequution any
part of his mediatourship: considering a deputy only serves to supply the
absence of the principal: whereas Christ is always present with his Church by
his word and spirit: for where two or three be gathered together in his name:
he is in the midst among them. It may be said, that the ministers in the
work of the ministry are deputies of Christ I answer, that they are no
deputies but active instruments. For in the preaching of the word there be two
actions: the first is the uttering or propounding of it to the ear: the second
is, the inward operation of the Holy Ghost in the heart: which indeed is the
principal and belongs to Christ alone: the action of speaking in the minister
being only isntrumental. Thus likewise the church of God in cutting off any
member by excommunication, is no more but an instrument performing a ministry
in the name of Christ, and that is to testify and pronounce whom Christ
himself has cut off from the kingdom of heaven: whom he also will have for
this cause, to be severed from the company of his own people till he repent.
And so it is in all ecclesiastical actions: Christ has no deputy, but only
instruments: the whole entire actio^ being personal in respect of Christ. This
one conclusion over throws not only the Popes supremacy, but also many other
points of popery.

Reason II. All the Apostles in regard of power and authority were equal: for
the commission apostolical both for right and exequution was given equally to
them all, as the very words import: Math. 28. v. 19. Go teach all nations
baptizing them, etc. and the promise, I will give to thee the k^^es of the
kingdom of heaven, is not private to Peter, but is made in his person to the
rest, according as his confession was in the name of in Mar. 16.
the rest. Thus says Theophylact. They have the power of committing and
binding that receive in Psalm. 38.
the gift of a bishop as Peter. And Ambr. says, What is said to Peter, is said
to the Apostles. Therefore Peter had no supremacy over the rest of the Apostles
in respect of right to the commission: which they say belo^ged to him only,
and the execution thereof to the rest. But let all be granted, that Peter was
in commission above the rest, for the time of his life: yet hence may not any
superiority be gathered for the Bishopps of Rome: because the authority of
the Apostles was personal, and consequently ceased with them: without being
conveyed to any other: because the Lord did not vouchsafe the like honor to
any after them. For first of all, it was the privilege of the Apostles to be
called immediately, and to see the Lord Jesus. Secondly, they had power to give
the gift of the holy ghost by the imposition of hands. Thirdly, they had such
a measure of the assistance of the spirit, that in their public sermons and in
writing of the word, they could not err: and these things were all denied to
those that followed after them. And that their authority ceased in their
persons, it stands with reason also, because it was given in so ample a manner
for the founding of the Church of the new Testament* which being once founded,
it was needful only that there should be pastors and teachers for the
building of it up unto the end of the world.

Reason III. When the sons of Zebedeus sued unto Christ for the greatest
rooms of honor in his kingdom (deeming he should be an earthly king) Christ
answers them again, ye know that the Lords of the Gentiles have dominion and
they that are great exercise authority over them: but it shall not be so with
you. Bernard applies these very words to Pope Eugenius on this De consider.
ad Eugen. lib. 2.
manner. It is plain, says he, that here dominion is forbidden the Apostles.
Go to then: dare if you will, to take upon you ruling an Apostleship, or in
your Apostleship rule or dominion: if you will have both alike, you shall loose
both. Otherwise you must not think your self exempted from the number of
them, of whom the Lord complains thus: they have reigned but not of me:
they have been and I have not known them.

Reason IV. Ephesians. 4. mention is made of gifts which Christ gave to his Church
after his ascension, whereby some were Apostles, some prophets, some
Evangelists, some pastors and teachers. Now if there had been an office in
which men as deputies of Christ should have governed the whole Church to the
end of the world, the calling might here have been named fitly with a gift
thereto pertaining; and Paul (no doubt) would not here have concealed it, where
he mentions callings of lesser importance.

Reason V. The Popes supremacy was judged by sentences of Scripture and
condemned long before it was manifest in the world: the spirit of prophecy
foreseeing and foretelling the state of things to come. 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 3, 4.
The man of sin (which is that Antichrist) shall exalt himself above all that
is called God, etc. Now this whole chapter with all the circumstances thereof,
most fitly agrees to the sea of Rome and the Head thereof: and the thing which
then stayed the revealing of the man of sin, verse. 6. is of most expounded to
be the Roman Emperor. I will allege one testimony in the room of many.
Chrysostom says on this place, As long as the Empire shall be had in awe, no
man shall straightly submit himself to Antichrist: but after that the Empire
shall be dissolved, Antichrist shall invade the state of the Empire standing
void: and shall labor to pull unto himself the Empire both of man and God.
And this we find now in experience to be true: for the Sea of Rome never
flourished, till the Empire decayed, and the seat thereof was removed from the
city of Rome. Again Rev. 13. mention is made of two beasts, one coming out
of the sea, whom the Papists confess to be the heathenish Roman Emperor:
the second coming out of the earth; which does all that the first beast could
do before him: and this fitly agrees to the Popes of Rome, who do and have
done all things that the Emperor did or could do, and that in his vety sight.

Reason VI. The judgment of the ancient Church. Cyprian says, Doubtless the
De simplicit. Praelat.
same were the rest of the Apostles that Peter was: endued with EQVAL
fellowshippe both of honor and of POWER; but a beginning is made of unity,
that the Church may appear to be one. Gregory says, If one be called
universal In Registro lib. 6. c 118.
Bishop, the universal Church GOES TO DECAY. And chap. 144. I say boldly,
that whosoever calls or desires to call himself universal priest, in his
pride is a FORERVNNER OF ANTICHRIST. And, Behold, in the Lib. 7. cap. 30
preface of the Epistle which ye directed unto me, you caused to be set a
PROVVD TITLE, calling me universal Pope. Bernard. Consider ad Eugen. l. 3
that thou art not a lord of Bishops, but one of them. Churches are MAIMED, in
that the Roman Bishop draws all power to himself. Again Gregory himself
being Pope says to the Emperor I which AM SVBIECT TO YOUR COMMANDMENT --;
have every way discharged that which was due, in that I have performed mine
allegiance to the Emperor, and have not concealed what I thought on Gods
behalf. And Pope Leo the fourth after Gregorre 200. years, acknowledged the
Emperor Lotharius for his sovereign prince, and professed obedience without
C* de capitulis. did. 10.
gainsaying, to his Imperial commandments.

To conclude, whereas they say that there is a double head of the Church, one
imperial which is Christ alone, the other ministerial, which is the Pope,
governing the whole Church under Christ, I answer, this distinction robs
Christ of his honor, because in setting up their ministerial head, they are
feign to borrow of Christ things proper unto him, as the privilege to forgive
sins Alen. book of priesthood.
properly, and the power to govern the whole earth, by making of laws that
shall as truly bind conscience as the laws of God, etc.

The nineteenth point, Of the efficacy of the sacraments.
Our consent.
Conclus. I. We teach and believe that the sacraments are signs to represent
Christ with his benefits unto us.

Conclus. II. We teach further, that the sacraments are indeed instruments,
whereby God offers and gives the foresaid benefits unto us. Thus far we
consent with the Roman Church.

The difference.
The difference between us stands in sundry points. First of all, the best
learned among them teach, that sacraments are physical instruments, that is,
true and proper isntrumental Bellarmin. (...) Sacr. l. 2* 6*
causes, having force and efficacy in them to produce and give grace. They use
to express their meaning by these comparisons. When the scriuener takes the
pen into his hand and writes, the action of writing comes from the pen,
moved by the hand of the writer: and in cutting of wood or stone, the division
comes from the saw, moved by the hand of the workman: even so the grace (say
they) that is given by God, is conferred by the sacrament it self. Now we for
our parts hold, that Sacraments are not physical but mere voluntary
instruments. Voluntary, because it is the will and appointment of God, to use
them as certain outward means of grace. Instruments: because when we use them
aright according to the institution, God then answerably conferres grace from
himself. In this respect only take we them for instruments and no otherwise.

The second difference is this: They teach that the very action of the Minister
dispensing the sacrament, as it is a work done gives grace immediately, if the
party be prepared: as the very washing or sp^inkling of water in baptism, and
the giving of bread in the Lords supper: even as the orderly moving of the
pen upon the paper by the hand of the writer causes writing. We hold the
contrary: namely that no action in the dispensation of a Sacrament conferreth
grace as it is a work done, that is, by the efficacy and force of the very
sacramental action it self, though ordained of God: but for two other ways.
First by the signification thereof. For God testifies unto us his will and good
pleasure partly by the word of promise, and partly by the sacrament: the signs
representing to the eyes that which the word does to the ears: being also
types and certain images of the very same things, that are promised in the word
and no other. Yea the elements are not general and confused, but particular
signs to the several communicants, and by the virtues of the Institution: for
when the faithful receive the signs from God by the hands of the Minister,
it is as much as if God himself with his own mouth should speak unto them
severally, and by name promise to them remission of sins. And things said to
men particularly, do more affect, and more take away doubting, then if they
were generally spoken to an whole company. Therefore signs of graces are as
it were an applying and binding of the promise of salvation to every particular
believer: and by this means, the oftener they are received, the more they help
our infirmity, and confirm our assurance of mercy.

Again the sacrament conferres grace in that the sign thereof confirms faith
as a pledge, by reason it has a promise annexed to it. For when God commaundes
us to receive the signs in faith, and withal promises to the receivers to
give the thing signified, he binds himself, as it were in bond unto us, to
stand to his own word; even as men bind themselves in obligations putting to
their hands and seals, so as they cannot go back. And when the signs are
thus used as pledges, and that often: they greatly increase the grace of God:
as a token sent from one friend to another, renews and confirms the persuasion
of love.

These are the two principal ways whereby the sacraments are said to confer
grace namely in respect of their signification, and as they are pledges of Gods
favor unto us. And the very point here to be considered is, in what order and
manner they confirm. And the manner is this. The signs and visible elements
affect the senses outward and inward: the senses convey their object to the
mind: the mind directed by the holy Ghost reasons on this manner, out of
the promise annexed to the sacramen^. He that uses the elements aright, shall
receive grace thereby: but I use the elements aright in faith and repentance,
says the mind of the believer: therefore shall I receive from God increase of
grace. Thus then, faith is confirmed not by the work done, but by a kind of
reasoning caused in the mind, the argument or proof whereof is borrowed from
the elements, being signs and pledges of Gods mercy.

The third difference. The Papists teach, that in the sacrament by the work
done, the very grace of justification is conferred. We say no: because a man of
years must first believe and be justified, before he can be a meet partaker
of any sacrament. And the grace that is conferred, is only the increase of our
faith, hope, sanctification, etc.

Our reasons.
Reason I. The word preached and the sacraments differ in the manner of giving
Christ and his benefits unto us: because in the word the spirit of God teaches
us by a voice convaied to the mind by the bodily cares; but in the sacraments
annexed to the word, by certain sensible and bodily signed viewed by the eye.
Aug. lib. 19. contra Faust. cap. 16.
Sacraments are nothing but visible words and promises. Otherwise for the
giving it self they differ not. Christ himself says, that in the very word,
is eaten his own flesh, which he was to give for the life of the world: and
what can be said more of the Lords supper. Augustine says, that believers
Sermon. ad infant. ad al^ar. de Sacr.
are partakers of the body and blood of Christ in baptism: and Hierome to
Edibia, that in baptism we eat and drink the body and blood of Christ. If
thus much may be said of baptism, why may it not also be said of the word
preached. Again Hierome upon Ecclesiastes says, It is profitable to be filled
with cap. 3.
the body of Christ and drink his blood, not only in mystery but in
knowledge of holy Scripture. Now upon this it follows, that seeing the work
done in the word preached conferres not grace, neither does the work don in the
sacrament confer any grace.

Reason II. Math. 3. II. I baptize you with water to repentance: but he that
comes after me is stronger then I, -- he shall baptize you with the holy
Ghost and with fire. Hence it is manifest, that grace in the sacrament
proceeds not from any action in the sacrament: for John, though he do not
disioyne himself and his action from Christ, and the action of his spirit: yet
does he distinguish them plainly in number, persons, and effect. To this
purpose Paul, who had said of the Galatians, that he traueled of them and
beget them by the Gospel, says of himself that he is not 1. Cor. 7. 3.
any thing, not only as he was a man, but as he was a faithful Apostle:
thereby excluding the whole Evangelical ministry whereof the sacrament is a
part, from the least part of divine operation, or, efficacy in conferring of
grace.

Reason III. The blessed Angels, nay the very flesh of the son of God has
not any quickening virtue from it self: but all this efficacy or virtue is in
and from the godhead of the son: who, by means of the flesh apprehended by
faith, deriueth heavenly and spiritual life from himself to the members. Now
if there be no efficacy in the flesh of Christ, but by reason of the
hypotasticall union: how shall bodily actions about bodily elements confer
grace immediately.

Reason IV. Paul, Romans 4. stands much upon this, to prove that justification
by says is not conferred by the sacraments. And from the circumstance of time
he gathers that Abraham was first justified, and then afterward receive
circumcision, the sign and seal of this righteousness. Now we know that the
general condition of all sacraments is one and the same, and that baptism
succeeded circumcision. And what can be more plain then the example of
Cornelius, Act. 10. who before Peter came unto him, had the commendation of the
fear of God, and was endued with the spirit of prayer: and afterward when
Peter by preaching opened more fully the way of the Lord, he and the rest
received the holy Ghost. And after all this they were baptized. Now if they
received the holy Ghost before baptism, then they received remission of
sins, and were justified before baptism.

V. Reason. The judgment of the church. Basil. If there be any grace in the
water, it is Lib. de Sp. sanct. c. 15.
not from the nature of the water, but from THE PRESENCE OF THE SRIRITE.
Hierome says, Man gives water but God gives the in Esa. 14.
holy Ghost. Augustine said, Water touches the body and washes the heart:
but he shows his meaning elsewhere. There is one water (says he) of the
Sacrament, an other of the Tract. 6. in epist. Ioh.
Spirit: the water of the sacrament is visible, the water of the Spirit
invisible. That vvasheth the body AND SIGNIFIES what is done in the soul. By
this the soul is purged and sealed.

Object. Remission of sins, regeneration, and salvation is ascribed to the
sacrament of baptism, Act. 22. 21. Ephesians. 5. Gal. 3. 27. Tit. 2. Ans. Salvation
and remission of sins is ascribed to baptism and the Lords supper, as to the
word; which is the power of God to salvation to all that believe: and that, as
they are instruments of the holy Ghost to signify, seal, and exhibit to the
believing mind the foresaid benefits: but indeed the proper instrument
whereby salvation is apprehended is faith, and sacraments are but proppes of
faith furthering salvation two ways: first because by their signification they
help to nourish and preserve faith: secondly because they seal grace and
salvation to us: yea God gives grace and salvation when we use them well: so be
it, we believe the word of promise made to the sacrament, whereof also they are
seals. And thus we keep the middle way, neither giving too much nor too
little to the sacraments.

The XX. point. Of saving faith: or, the way to life.
Our consent.
Conclus. I. They teach it to be the property of faith, to believe the whole
word of God, and especially the redemption of mankind by Christ.

Conclus. II. They avouch that they believe and look to be saved by Christ and
by CHRIST ALONE, and by the MERE MERCY of God in Christ.

Conclus. III. Thirdly, the most learned among the^ hold and confess, that the
obedience of Christ is imputed unto them for the satisfaction of the law, and
for their reconciliation with God.

Conclus. IV. They avouch that they put their whole trust and confidence in
Christ, and in the mere mercy of God, for their salvation.

Conclus. V. Lastly they hold that every man must apply the promise of life
everlasting by Christ, unto himself: and this they grant we are bound to
do. And in these five points do they and we agree, at least in show of
words.

By the auouching of these 5. Conclusions, Papists may easily escape the hands
of many magistrates. And unless the mystery of popish doctrine be well known,
any common man may easily be deceived, and take such for good protestants that
are but popish priests. To this end therefore that we may the better discern
their guile, I will show wherein they fail in each of their conclusions, and
wherein they differ from us.

The difference.
Touching the first conclusion, they believe indeed all the written word of
God, and more then all: for they also believe the books Apocriphal, which
antiquity for many hundred years has excluded from the cano^: yea they
believe vnwritte^ traditions received (as they say) from Councils, the writings
of the Fathers, and the determinations of the Church: making them also of
equal credit with the written word of God, given by inspiration of the
spirit. Now we for our parts despise not the Apocripha, as namely the books
of the Macchabees, Ecclesiasticus and the rest, but we reverence them in all
convenient manner, preferring them before any other books of men, in that they
have bin approved by an universal consent of the Church: yet we think them
not meet to be received into the Canon of holy scripture, and therefore not to
be believed, but as they are consenting with the written word. And for this our
doing we have direction from Athanasius, Origin, Hierome, and the Council of
Laodicea. As for unwritten Traditions they come not within the compass of our
faith, neither can they: because they come unto us by the hands of men, that
may deceive and be deceived. And we hold and believe, that the right Canon of
the books of the old and new Testament, contains in it sufficient direction
for the Church of God to life everlasting, both for faith an manners. Here then
is the point of difference, that they make the object of faith larger then it
should be, or can be: and we keep our selves to the written word; believing
nothing to salvation out of it.

In the second conclusion, touching salvation by Christ alone, there is a
manifest deceit: because they craftily include and couch their own works under
the name of Christ. For (say they) works done by men regenerate, are not their
own, but Christ's in them; and as they are the works of Christ; they save, and
no otherwise. But we for our parts look to be saved only by such works as
Christ himself did in his own person: and not by any work at all done by him
in us. For all works done, are in the matter of justification and salvation,
opposed to the grace of Christ: Romans 11. 6. Election is of grace not of works:
if it be of works, it is no more of grace. Again whereas they teach that we
are ^aued by the works of Christ, which he works in us, and makes us to
work; it is flat against the word. For Paul says, We are not saved by such
works as God has ordained that men regenerate should walk in. Ephesians. 2. 10. And
he says further, that he counted ALL THINGS even after his conversion loss
unto him, that he might be found in Christ, not having his own
righteousness which is of the law. Phil. 3. 8. Again Heb. 1. 3. Christ washed
away our sins by himself: which last words exclude the merit of all works
done by Christ within man. Thus indeed the Papists ouerturne all, that which
in word they seem to hold touching their justification and salvation. We
confess with them that good works in us are the works of Christ: yet are
they not Christ's alone, but ours also, in that they proceed from Christ by the
mind and will of man: as water from the fountain by the channel. And look
as the chanel defiled, defiles the water, that is without defilement in the
fountain: even so the mind and will of man defiled by the remnants of sin,
defile the works, which as they come from Christ, are undefiled. Hence it is
that the works of grace which we do by Christ, or, Christ in us, are
defective: and must be severed from Christ in the act of justification, or,
salvation.

The third conclusion is touching the imputation of Christ's obedience, which
some of the most learned among them acknowledge: and the difference between us
stands on this manner. They hold that Christ's obedience is imputed only to
make satisfaction for sin, and not to justify us before God. We hold and
believe that the obedience of Christ is imputed to us, even for our
righteousness before God. Paul says, 1. Cor. 1. 30. Christ is made unto us of
God, wisdom, RIGHTEOUSNESS, SANCTIFICATION, and redemption. Hence I reason
thus. If Christ be both our sanctification, and our righteousness: then he is
not only unto us inherent righteousness, but also righteousness imputed. But he
is not only our sanctification (which the Papists themselves expound of
inherent or habitual righteousness) but also our righteousness: for thus by Paul
are they distinguished. Therefore he is unto us both inherent and imputed
righteousness. And very reason teaches thus much. For in the end of the world
at the bar of Gods judgment, we must bring some kind of righteousness for
our justification, that may stand in the rigor of the law according to which
we are to be judged. But our inherent righteousness is imperfect and stained
with manifold defects and shall be as long as we live in this world, as
experience tells us: and consequently it is not suitable to the justice of the
law: and if we go out of our selves we shall find no righteousness serving
for our turns either in men or Angels, that may or can procure our absolution
before God and acceptance to life everlasting. We must therefore have
recourse to the person of Christ, and his obedience imputed unto us, must serve
not only to be a satisfaction to God for all our sins, but also for our
perfect justification: in that God is content to accept of it for our
righteousness, as if it were inherent in us, or performed by us.

Touching the fourth conclusion, they hold it the safest and surest course to
put their trust and confidence in the mercy of God alone for their salvation:
yet they condescend, that men may also Bellar. l. 5. ^. 7. de iustif.
put there confidence in the merit of their own works, and in the merits also
of other men, so it be in sobriety. But this doctrine quite marres the
conclusion: because by teaching that men are to put confidence in the creature,
they ouerturue all confidence in the Creator. For in the very first
commandment, we are taught to make choice of the true God for our God, which
thing we do when we give to God our hearts: and we give our hearts to God, when
we put our whole confidence in him for the salvation of our souls. Now then
to put confidence in men, or, in works, is to make them our Gods. The true and
ancient form of making confession was on this manner: I believe in God the
Father, In Jesus Christ, and In the holy Ghost, without mention making of any
confidence in works or creatures: the ancient Church never knew any such
confession or confidence. Cyprian De duplici Martyr.
says, He believes not in god, who puts not affiance concerning his
salvation in God alone. And indeed the Papists themselves when death comes,
forsake the confidence of their merits, and fly to the mere mercy of God in
Christ. And for a confirmation of this I allege the testimony of one
Vlinbergius Lib. de causis cur Evang. p. 436.
of Colen, who writes thus. There was a book found in the vestrie of a
certain parish of Colen, written in the Dutch tongue in the year of our Lord
1475. which the Priests used in visiting of the sick. And in it these
questions be found. Supposed to be questions of Anselme.
Do thou believe that thou can not be saved but by the death of Christ? The
sick person ansvvered, Yea. Then it is said unto him, Go too then, while
breath remains in thee, put thy confidence in this DEATH ALONE: have affiance
in nothing else* commit thy self wholy to this death: with it alone cover
thy self: dive thy self in every part into this death; in every part pearse
thy self with it: infold thy self in this death. And if the Lord will judge
thee, say: Lord, I put the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me and thy
judgment, and BY NO OTHER MEANS I contend with thee. And if he shall say unto
thee, that thou art a sinner; say, Lord the death of my Lord Jesus Christ, I
put between thee and my sins. If he shall say unto thee, that thou have
deserved damnation, say: Lord, I oppose the death of our Lord Jesus Christ
between thee and my evil merits, and I OFFER HIS MERIT FOR THE MERIT WHICH I
SHOULD HAVE, AND HAVE NOT. If he shall say, that he is angry with thee, say:
Lord, I oppose the death of our Lord Jesus Christ betvveene me and thine anger.
Here we see, what Papists do, and have done in the time of death. And that
which they hold and practice, when they are dying; they should hold and
practice every day while they are living.

In the last co^clusio^ they teach that we must not only believe in general
but also apply unto our selves the promises of life everlasting. But they
differ from us in the very manner of applying. They teach that the promise is
to be applied, not by faith assuring us of our own salvation; but only by
hope, in likelihood coniecturall. We hold that we are bound in duty to apply
the promise of life by faith without making doubt thereof, and by hope to
continue the certentie after the apprehension made by faith. We do not teach
that all and every man living within the precincts of the Church, professing
the name of Christ, is certain of his salvation, and that by faith: but that he
ought so to be, and must endeavor to attain thereto. And here is a great
point in the mystery of iniquity, to be considered: for by this uncertain
application of the promise of salvation, and this wavering hope they ouerturne
half the doctrine of the gospel. For it inioynes two things: first to believe
the promises thereof to be true in themselves: secondly to believe, and by faith
to apply them unto our selves. And this latter part, without which the former
is void of comfort, is quite ouerturned. The reasons which they allege
against our doctrine, I have answered before: now therefore I let them pass.

To conclude, though in colored terms they seem to agree with us in
doctrine concerning faith; yet indeed they deny and abolish the substance
thereof, namely, the particular and and certain application of Christ crucified
and his benefits, unto our selves. Again they fail in that they cut off the
principal duty and office of true saving faith, which is to apprehend and to
apply the blessing promised.

The XXI. point. Of Repentance.
Our consent.
Conclus. I. That, repentance is the conversion of a sinner. There is a twofold
conversion, passive, and active: passive, is an action of God whereby he
conuerteth man being as yet unconverted. Active is an action whereby man being
once turned of God, turns himself: and of this latter must this conclusion be
understood. For the first conversion, considering it is a work of God turning
us unto himself, is not the repentance whereof the Scripture speaks so often,
but it is called by the name of regeneration: and repentance, whereby we being
first turned of God do turn our selves, and do good works, is the fruit
thereof.

Conclus. II. That, repentance stands specially for practice, in contrition of
heart, confession of mouth, and satisfaction in work or deed. Touching
contrition there be two kinds thereof; Legal, and Euangelical. Legal contrition
is nothing but a remorse of conscience for sin in regard of the wrath and
judgment of God, and it is no grace of God at all; nor any part, or, cause of
repentance: but only an occasion thereof, and that by the mercy of God: for
of it self, it is the sting of the law and the very entrance into the pit of
hell. Euangelical contrition is, when a repentant sinner is grieved for his
sins, not so much for fear of hell, or, any other punishment; as because he
has offended and displeased so good and merciful a God. This contrition is
caused by the ministry of the Gospel, and in the practice of repentance it
is always necessary, and goes before as the beginning thereof. Secondly we
hold, and maintain that confession is to be made, and that in sundry
respects: first to God, both publicly in the congregation, and also privately
in our secret and private prayers. Secondly to the Church, when any person has
openly offended the congregation by any crime, and is therefore excommunicate.
Thirdly to our private neighbor, when we have upon any occasion offended and
wronged him, Mat. 5. 23. If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, go first and be
reconciled to him: now reconciliation presupposes confession. Lastly in all
true repentance, we hold and acknowledge there must be satisction made; first
to God, and that is when we entreat him in our supplications to acecpt the
death and passion of Christ, as a full, perfect, and sufficient satisfaction
for all our sins. Secondly it is to be made unto the Church, after
excommunication for public offenses; and it stands in duties of humiliatio^
that fitly serve to testify the truth of our repentance. Thirdly satisfaction
is to be made to our neighbor: because if he be wronged, he must have
recompense and restitution made, Luc. 19. 8. and there repentance may justly be
suspected, where no satisfaction is made, if it lie in our power.

Conclus. III. That in repentance we are to bring forth outward fruits worthy
amendment of life: for repentance it self is in the heart, and therefore must
be testified in all manner of good works; whereof the principal is, to
endeavor day by day by Gods grace to leave and renounce all and every sin,
and in all things to do the will of God. And here let it be remembered, that
we are not patrones of licentiousnes and enemies of good works. For though we
exclude them from the act of our justification and salvation: yet we maintain
a profitable and necessary use of them in the life of every Christian man.
This use is threefold, in respect of God, of man, of our selves. Works are to
be done in respect of God, that his commandments may be obeyed, 1. Ioh. 5. 12.
that his will may be done, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. that we may show our selves to be
obedient children to God our father, 1. Pet. 1. 14. that we may show our
selves thankful for our redemption by Christ, Tit. 2. 14. that we might not
grieve the spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 30. but walk according to the same, Gal. 5.
22. that God, by our good works may be glorified. Math. 5. 16. that we may be
good followers of God. Ephesians. 5. v. 1. Again, works are to be done in regard of
men: that our neighbor may be helped in worldly things, Luc. 6. 38. that he
may be won by our example to godliness, 1. Pet. 3. 14. that we may prevent in
our selves the giving of any offense, 1. Cor. 10. 32. that by doing good, we
may stop the mouths of our adversaries. Thirdly and lastly, they have use in
respect of our selves: that we may show our selves to be new creatures, 2. Cor.
5. 17. that we may walk as the children of light, Ephesians. 5. 8. that we have some
assurance of our faith, and of our salvation, 2. Pet. 1. 8, 10. that we may
discern dead and counterfeit faith, from true faith. I am. 2. 17. that faith
and the gifts of God may be exercised and continued unto the end, 2. Tim. 1.
6. that the punishments of sin both temporal and eternal may be prevented,
psalm. 89. 32. that the reward may be obtained, which God freely in mercy has
promised to men for their good works. Gal. 6. 9.

The difference.
We dissent not from the Church of Rome in the doctrine of repentance it self:
but in the damnable abuses thereof, which are of two sorts, general and
special. General are these which concern repentance wholly considered: and
they are these. The first is that they place the beginning of repentance partly
in themselves, and partly in the holy Ghost, or, in the power of their natural
freewill being helped by the holy ghost: whereas Paul indeed ascribes this
work, wholly unto God. 2. Tim. 2. 15. Proouing if God at any time will give
them repentance. And men that are not weak but dead in trespasses and sins,
can not do any thing, that may further their conversion, though they be helped
never so: no more then dead men in their graves, can rise from thence. The
second abuse is, that they take penance, or rather repentance for that public
discipline and order of correction that was used against notorious offenders in
the open congregation. For the scripture sets down but one repentance, and
that common to all men without exception: and to be practiced in every part of
our lives for the necessa^ie mortification of sin: whereas open
ecclesiastical correction pertained not to all and every man within the
compass of the Church, but to them alone that gave any open offense. The third
abuse is, that they make repentance to be not only a virtue, but also a
sacrament: whereas for the space of a thousand years after Christ, and upward,
it was not reckned among the sacraments: yea it seems that Lumbard was one of
the first that called it a sacrament: and the schoolmen after him disputed of
the matter and form of this sacrament: not able any of them certainly to
define, what should be the outward element. The fourth abuse is touching the
effect and efficacy of repentance, for they make it a meritorious cause of
remission of sins and of life everlasting flat against the word of God. Paul
says notably. Romans 4. 24. We are justified freely by his grace through the
redemption which is in Christ Jesus whom God has sent to be a reconciliation
by faith in his blood. In these words these forms of speech, redemption in
Christ, reconciliation in his blood, by faith, freely by grace, must be
observed and considered: for they show plainly that no part of satifaction or
redemption is wrought in us, or, by us: but out of us only in the person of
Christ. And therefore we esteem of repentance only as a fruit of faith: and
the effect, or, efficacy of it, is to testify remission of our sins, and
our reconciliation before God. It will be said that remission of sins and
life enerlasting are promised to repentance. Ans. It is not to the work of
repentance, but to the person which repents, and that not for his own merits
or work of repentance, but for the merits of Christ, which he applies to
himself by faith. And thus are we to understand the promises of the gospel, in
which works are mentioned: presupposing always in them the reconciliation of
the person with God, to whom the promise is made. Thus we see wherefore we
dissent from the Roman Church touching the doctrine of repentance.

Special abuses, do concern Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction. The
first abuse concerning contrition is, that they teach it must be sufficient and
perfect. They use now to help the matter by a distinction: saying that the
sorrow in contrition, must be in the highest degree in respect appretiativenon
intensive.
of value and estimation, and not in respect of intention. Yet the opinion of
qu 2 de paenit ar. 2. and quodlib. 5. ar. 3.
Adrian was otherwise, that in true repentance a man should be grieved
according to all his endeavor. And the Roman Catechism says as much, that
the sorrow conceived of our sins, must be so cap. de Sacr. paeni^.
great, that NONE CAN BE CONCEIVED TO BE GREATER: that we must be contrite in
the same manner we love God, and that is with all our heart and strength in a
most VEHEMENT SORROVVE: and that the hatred of sin must be not only the
greatest but also MOST VEHEMENT and perfect, so as it may exclude all sloth and
slacknes. Indeed afterward it follows, that true contrition may be effectual
though it be imperfect: but how can this stand, if they will not only commend
but also prescribe and avouch, that contrition must be most perfect and
vehememt. We therefore only teach, that God requires not so much the measure,
as the truth of any grace: and that it is a degree of unfeigned contrition to
be grieved, because we cannot be grieved for our sins as we should. The
second abuse is, that they ascribe to their contrition the merit of congruitie.
But this cannot stand with the all-sufficient merit of Christ. And an ancient
Conncell says, God inspires into us first of all the faith and love of
himself, NO MERITS GOIN^ BFORE, that we may faithfully require the sacrament
of baptism, and after baptism do the things that please him. And we for our
parts hold, that God requires contrition at our hands, not to merit remission
of sins: but that we may acknowledge our own unworthiness, and be humbled in
the sight of God, and distrust all our own merits: and further, that we may
make the more account of the benefits of Christ, whereby we are received into
the favor of God: lastly, that we might more carefully avoid all sins in
time to come, whereby so many pains and terrors of conscience are procured.
And we acknowledge no co^trition at all to be meritorious, save that of Christ:
whereby he was broken for our iniquities. The third abuse is, that they make
imperfect contrition or attrition arising of the fear of hell, to be good and
profitable: and to it they apply the saying of the Prophet, The fear of God
is the beginning of vvisdome. But servile fear of it self is the fruit of
the law, which is the ministry of death and condemnation: and consequently
it is the way to eternal destruction, if God leave men to themselves: and if it
turn to the good of any, it is only by accident: because God in mercy makes
it to be an occasion going before, of grace to be given: otherwise remorse of
conscience for sin is no beginning of repentance, or the restrainment of any
sin: but rather is and that properly the beginning of unspeakable horrors of
conscience, and everlasting death, unless God show mercy. And yet this fear
of punishment, if it be tempered and delaied with other graces and gifts of God
in holy men: it is not unprofitable: in who^ there is not only a sorrow for
punishment, but also and that much more for the offense. And such a kind of
fear, or, sorrow is commanded, Malac. 1. 6. If I be a father, where is my
fear? if I be a Lord, where is my fear? And Chrysostom says, that the fear
of hell in the heart of a just man, is a strong man armed against thieves and
robbers, to drive them from the house. And Ambr. says, that Martyrs in the
time of their sufferings, confirmed themselves against the cruelty of
persecuters by setting the fear of hell before their eyeis.

Abuses touching Confession are these. The first is, that they use a form of
confession of their sins unto God, uttered in an unknown language, being
therefore foolish and ridiculous, withal requiring the aid and intercession
of dead men and such as be absent: whereas, there is but one Mediator between
God and man the man Jesus Christ. The second is, that they in practice make
confession of their sins not only to God but to the Saints departed: in that
they make prayer to them, in which they ask their intercession for the pardon
of their sins: and this is, not only to match them with God in seeing and
knowing the heart, but also to give a part of his divine worship unto them. The
third and principal abuse is, that they have corrupted Canonical confession
by turning it into a private auricular confession: binding all men in
conscience by a law made, to confess all their mortal sins, withal
circumstances that change the kind of the sin (as far as possibly they can
remember) once every year at the least, and that to a priest, unless it be in
the case of extreme necessity. But in the word of God there is no warrant for
this confession, nor in the writings of Orthodoxe antiquity for the space of
many hundred years after Christ as one of their own side avouches. And the
commandment of the holy Ghost; confess one for an other, and pray one for an
other, Beatus Rhe^anus on Tertullib* de paenis.
Iam. 5. 17. binds as well the priest to make confession unto us, as any of us
to the priest. And whereas it is said, Math 3. that many were baptized
confessing their sins: and Act. 19. 18. Many that believed came and confessed
and showed their works, the confession was voluntary and not constrained: it
was also general and not particular of all and every sin, with the
necessary circumstances thereof. And in this liberty of confession the Church
remained 1200. years till the Council of Lateran; in which the law of
auricular confession was first inacted: being a notable invention serving to
discover the secrets of men, and to enrich that covetous and ambitious See,
with the revenues of the world. It was not known to Augustine Conf^ss. lib.
10. c. 3.
when he said, What have I to do with men that they should hear my
confessions, as though they should heal all my diseases: nor to Chrysostom,
when he says, I do not compel De deinat hom. 5. ^om. 5.
thee to confess thy sins to others. And, If thou be ashamed to confess
them to any man, Hom. 2. in psalm. 50.
because thou have sinned; say them daily in thine own mind. I do not bid
thee confess them to thy fellow servant, that he should mock thee: confess
them to God that cures them.

The abuse of satisfaction is, that they have turned canonical satisfaction
which was made to the congregation by open offenders, into a satisfaction of
the justice of God for the temporal punishment of there sins. Behold here a
most horrible profanation of the whole Gospel, and specially of the
satisfaction of Christ, which of it self without any supply is sufficient
every way for the remission both of fault and punishment. But of this point I
have spoken before.

Hitherto I have handled and proved by induction of sundry particulars, that
we are to make a seperatio^ from the present church of Rome, in respect of the
foundation and substance of true religion. Many more things might be added to
this uery purpose, but here I conclude this first point: adding only this one
caveat, that we make separation from the Roman religion without hatred of the
persons that are maintainers of it. Nay we join in affection more with them,
then they with us. They die with us not for their religion ( Deuteronomy. 13. 5.
though they deserve it) but for the treasons which they intend and enterprise:
we are ready to do the duties of love unto them enjoined us in the word: we
reverence the good gifts of God in many of them; we pray for them, wishing
their repentance and eternal salvation.

Now I mean to proceed, and to touch briefly other points of doctrine
contained in this portion of Scripture, which I have now in hand. In the second
place therefore out of this commandment, Go out of her my people, I gather
that the true Church of God is and has bin in the present Roman church, as
corn in the heap of chafe. Though Popery reigned and ouerspread the face of
the earth for many hundred years; yet in the midst thereof, God reserved a
people unto himself, that truly worshipped him: and to this effect the holy
Ghost says that the dragon, which is the devil caused the woman, that is, the
Church to fly into the wilderness, where he sought to destroy her but could
not, and she still retains a REMNANT OF HER Rev. 12. 17.
SEED which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus
Christ. Now this which I speak of the Church of Rome, cannot be said in like
manner of the congregations of Turks and other infidels, that the hidden
Church of God is preserved among them: because there is no means of salvation
at all: whereas the church of Rome has the Scriptures, though in a strange
language; and baptism for the outward form: which helps God in all ages
preserved, that his elect might be gathered out of the midst of Babylon. This
serves to stop the mouths of Papists, which demand of us, where our church was
fourscore years ago, before the days of Luther: whereby they would insinuate
to the world, that our church and religion is green or new: but they are
answered out of this very text, that our Church has ever been since the days
of the Apostles, and that in the very midst of the papacy. It has bin
always a Church, and did not first begin to be in Luthers time: but only then
began to show it self, as having bin hid by an universal Apostasy, for many
hundred years together. Again we have here occasion to consider the dealing
of God with his own Church and people. He will have them for external
society to be mixed with their enemies, and that for special purpose; namely,
to exercise the humility and patience of his few servants. When Elias saw
Idolatry spread over all Israel, he went a part into the wilderness, and in
grief desired to die. And David cried out: Woe is me that I am constrained to
dvvell in Mesheck, and to have my habitation in the tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120.
5. And just Lot must have his righteous soul vexed with seeing and hea^ing the
abominations of Sodom.

Thirdly by this commandment we are taught, what opinion to carry of the
present Church of Rome. It is often demanded, whether it be a Church or no;
and the answer may hence be formed on this manner. If by this Church be
understood a state or regiment of the people, whereof the Pope is head: and
the members are all such as do acknowledge him to be their head, and do
believe the doctrine established in the Council of Trent, we take it to be no
Church of God. Because Babylon, which I have proved to be the Church of Rome,
is here opposed to the Church or people of God: and because we are commanded to
come out of it* whereas we may not wholly forsake any people till they forsake
Christ. Some will happily say, the Church of Rome has the Scriptures and the
Sacrament of baptism. I answer first of all; they have indeed the books of
holy Scripture among them: but by the rest of their doctrine they overthrow
the true sense thereof in the foundation, as I have proved before. And though
they have the outward form of baptism, yet they ouerturne the inward
baptism, which is the substance of all, standing in the justification and
sanctification of a sinner. Again I answer, that they have the word and
baptism, not for themselves but for the true Church of God among them: like as
the lantern holds the candle, not for it self but for others. Secondly, it
may be and is alleged, that if the Pope be Antichrist, he then sittes in the
temple, that is, the Church of God, and by this means the Roman Church shall
be the true Church. Ans. He sittes in the temple of God, but mark further how:
AS GOD, that 2 Thessalonians. 2. verse* 4.
is, not as a member but as a manifest usurper: like as the thief sittes in
the true man's house. For the popish Church and Gods Church are mingled like
chafe and corn in one heap: and the Church of Rome may be said to be in the
Church of God: and the church of God in the church of Rome; as we say the wheat
is among the chafe, and the chafe in the wheat. Again he is said to sit in
the t^mple of God; because the Roman Church, though falsely, takes unto it
self the title of the true Catholic church. Some go about to delaie and
qualify the matter, by comparing this Church to a man lying sick full of
soars, having also his throat cut, yet so as body and soul are joined
together, and life is remaining still. But all things well considered, it is
rather like a dead carcass, and is void of all spiritual life; as the popish
errors in the foundation do manifest. Indeed a known harlot may afterward
remain a wife and be so termed: yet after the bill of diuorcement is given,
she cease^h to be a wife, though she can show her marriage ring: now the
church has received the bill of her diuorcement in the written word, namely 2 Thessalonians. 2. and Rev. 13. 11, 12, etc.

Furthermore in this commandment we may see a lively portraiture of the state
of all mankind. Here we see two sorts of men: some are pertaining to Babylon,
a people running on to their destruction: some again are a people of God
severed from Babylon, and reserved to life everlasting. If any ask the cause
of this distinction; I answer, it is the very will of God vouchsafing mercy to
some, and forsaking others by withdrawing his mercy from them, for the better
declaration of his justice. Thus says the Lord, Romans 11. 4. I HAVE RESERVED
seven thousand that never bowed the knee to Baal: and the prophet Isai says,
Unless the Lord had reserved are^nant, we had been as Sodom and Gomorrha. By
this distinction we are taught, above all things to seek to be of the number
of Gods people, and to labor for assurance of this in our own consciences.
For if all should be saved, less care would suffice: but this mercy is not
common to all: and therefore the more to be thought upon.

Lastly, here I note the special care that God has over his own children. He
first gives them warning to depart, before he begin to execute his judgment
upon his enemies, with whom they live; that they might not be partakers of
their sins or punishments. Thus, before God would punish Jerusalem, an angel
is sent to mark the^ in the Ex^^h. 9.
forehead that mourned for the abominatio^s of the people. And in the
destruction of the first born of Egypt, the angel passed over the houses of the
Jews, that had their posts sprin kled with the blood of the paschal lamb: and
this passing over be^okneth safety and preservation in the common destruction
to those that have their hearts sprinkled with the blood of Christ. This
blessing of protection should move us all, to beco^ true and hearty servants of
God. Men usually become members of those societies and corporations, where they
may enjoy many freedoms and privileges. Well, behold; in the society of the
Saints of God, which is the true church, there is the freedo^ from danger in
all common destructions, and from eternal vengeance at the last day. When
Hester had procured safety for the Jews, and liberty to revenge themselves
upon their enemies: it is said, that many of the people of the land became
Jews. Even so, considering Christ has procured freedom from hell, death, and
damnation for all that believe in him; we should labor above all things to
become new creatures, joining our selves always to the true Church of God.

Hitherto I have spoken of the commandment: now follows the reason thereof
drawn from the end, that they be not partakers of her sins: and that they
receive not of her plagues. Here I might stand long to show what be the
sins of the Church of Rome: but I will only name the principal. The first
sin is Atheism: and that I prove on this manner. Atheism is twofold, open,
colored. Open Atheism is, when men both in word and deed deny God and his
Word. Colored Atheism is not so manifest: and it has two degrees. The first
is, when men acknowledge God the creator and governor of heaven and earth,
and yet deny the father, son, and holy ghost. Thus the Ephesians before they
received the gospel, Ephesians. 2. 12.
are said to be without God whom in their natural judgment they
acknowledged: because they denied Christ, and consequently worshipped an Idol
of their own brain, in that they worshipped God out of Christ. And in this
respect though the Samaritans worshipped the God of Abraham, yet our Savior
Christ says, they worshipped Ioh. 5. 46.
they knevv not what. And the Psalmist Psalm. 96. 3.
says of all the Gentiles that their Gods are Idols. In this degree of
Atheism are placed Turks and Jews at this day: the Anti-Trinitaries, and
Arians, and all that conceive and worship God out of the trinity. The second
degree is, when men do rightly acknowledge the unity of the god head in the
Trinity of persons: yet so, as by other necessary consequents partly of their
doctrine, and partly of the service of God: they ouerturne that which they have
well maintained. And thus I say, that the very religion of the church of Rome
is a kind of Atheism. For whereas it makes the merit of the works of men to
concur with the grace of God, it overthrows the grace of God. Romans 11. In
word, they acknowledge the infinite instice and mercy of God: but by
consequent both are denied. How can that be infinite justice, which may any
way be appeased by humane satisfactio^s? And how shall Gods mercy be infinite,
when we by our own satisfactions must add a supply to the satisfaction 1.
Ioh. 2. 23.
of Christ? Again, He that has not the Son, has not the Father: and he
that has neither Father nor Son, denies God. Now the present Roman religion
has not the Son, that is, Jesus Christ, God and man, the Mediator of
mankind: but has transformed him into a Fained Christ. And I show it thus.
For one Jesus Christ, in all things like unto us in his Humanity, sin only
excepted; they have framed a Christ, to whom they ascribed two kinds of
existing: one natural, whereby he is visible, touchable, and circumscribed in
heaven: the other not only above, but also against nature; by which, he is
substantially according to his flesh in the hands of every priest, in every
host, and in the mouth of every communicant, invisible, vntouchable,
uncircumcised. And thus in effect they abolish his manhood. Yea they disgrade
him of his offices. For one Jesus Christ, the only king, lawgiuer, and head of
the Church; they join unto him the Pope not only as a Vicar but also as a
Fellow: in that they give unto him power to make laws binding conscience, to
resolve and determine infallibly the sense of holy scripture, properly to
pardon sin both in respect of fault and temporal punishment, to have
authority over the whole earth and a part of hell: to depose kings, to whom
under Christ every soul is to be subject, to absolve subjects from the oath of
allegia^ce, etc. For one Jesus Christ the only real priest of the new
Testament, they join many secondarie priests unto him, which offer Christ
daily in the mass for the sins of the quick and the dead. For one Jesus
Christ the allsufficient Mediator of intercession, they have added many
fellows unto him to make request for us, namely as many Saints as be in the
Popes Calendar. Lastly for the only merits of Christ, in whom alone the
Father is well pleased, they have devised a Treasury of the Church containing
beside the merits of Christ, the overplus of the merits of saints to be
dispensed to men, at the discretion of the Pope. And thus we see, that Christ,
and consequently God himself to be worshipped in Christ, is transformed into a
fantasy or Idol of man's conceit. Again there is always a proportion
between the worship of God, and our persuasion of him: and men in giving unto
God any worship, have respect to his nature, that both may be suitable, and he
well pleased. Let us then see what manner of worship the Roman religion
affords. It is for the greatest part mere willworship, without any allowance
or commandment from God, as Durande in his Rationale in effect acknowledges.
It is a carnal service standing of innumerable bodily rises and ceremonies,
borrowed partly from the Jews, and partly from the heathen: it is divided
between God and some of his creatures; in that they are worshipped both with
one kind of worship: let them paint it as they can. Thus then, if by their
manner of worshipping God, we may judge how they conceive of him, as we may:
they have plainly turned the true God into a fantasy of their own. For God is
no otherwise to be co^ceined the^ he has revealed himself in his creatures
and word, and specially in Christ: who is the ingraue^ image of the person of
the father.

The second sin is Idolatry: and that as gros^e as was ever among the
heathen. And it is to be seen in two things. First that they worship the
Saints with religious worship, which without exception is proper to God. Yea
they transform some of them into detestable idols, making them in truth
mediators of redemption, specially the virgin Marie, whom they call a Lady,
a goddess, a queen whom Bellar. lib. 1. de sanct. c. 16. Missali and
Br^uiari^ refor.
Christ her son obeys in heaven a mediatresse: or life, hope, the medicine
of the diseased: and they pray unto her thus: Prepare thou glory for us:
defend us from our enemies, and in the hour of death receive us, loose the
bon^s of the guilty, bring light to the blind, drive away all devils --.
^HEVV THY SELF TO BE A MOTHER, let him receive the prayers. Again their
idolatry is manifest, in that they worship God in, at, before images: having
no commandment so to do, but the contrary. They allege that they use and
worship images only in a remembrance of God. But this is all one, as if an
unchaste wife should receive many lovers in to her house in the absence of her
husband: and being reproved, should answer: that they were the friends of her
husband, and that she kept them only in remembrance of him. Thirdly, their
Idolatry exceedes the Idolatry of the heathen, in that they worship a
Breadengod, or, Christ in and under the forms of bread and wine. And if Christ
according to his humanity be absent from the earth, as I have proved, the
popish Host is as abominable an Idol as ever was.

The third sin is the maintenance of adultery. And that is manifest: first
of all, in the Toleration of the Stews flat against the commandment of God.
Deuteronomy. 23. 17. There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel: neither shall
there be a whore keeper of the sons of Israel. And this toleration is an
occasion of uncleanness to many young men and women, that otherwise would
abstain from all such kind of filthiness. And what an abomination is this,
when brother and brother, father and son, nephew and uncle, shall come to one
and the same harlot, one before or after the other. Secondly, their Law beyond
the fourth degree allows the marriage of any persons: Greg cap. 9 de co^sang.
and by this means, they sometime allow incest. For in the unequal
collateral line, the person next the common stock is a father or mother to
the brothers or sisters posterity, as for example.

John
1 Nicholas Anne 2 Thomas 3 Jews 4 Roger 5 Anthony 6 James
Here Anne and Nicholas are brother and sister, and Anne is distant from James
six degrees, he being her niece a far of^: and the marriage between them is
allowed by the church of Rome, they not being within the compass of four
degrees: which nevertheless is against the law of nature. For Anne being the
sister of Nicholas, is in stead of a mother to all that are begotten of
Nicholas, even to James and James posterity. Yet thus much I grant, that the
daughter of Anne may lawfully marie James or Anthony, the case being altered:
because they are not one to an other as parents and children.

The fourth sin is Magic, sorcerie, or witchcraft, in the consecration of
the host in which they make their Breaden-god: in exorcismes over holy bread,
holy water and salt; in the casting out or driving away of devils, Molan.
tract. 2. c. 4. con. 3.
by the sign of the cross, by solemn coniurations, by holy water, by the
ringing of bells, by lighting tapers, by relics, and such like. For these
things have not their supposed force, either by creation, or by any institution
of God in his holy word: and therefore if any thing be done by them, it is
from the secret operation of the devil himself.

The fifth sin is, that in their doctrine they maintain perjury: because
they teach with one consent, that a Papist examined may answer Molan. tract. 2.
c. 7 con. 1 prop 6 idem communiter ^mnes.
doubtfully against the direct intention of the examiner: framing an other
meaning unto himself in the ambiguitie of his words. As for example, when a man
is asked, whether he said or heard Mass in such a place: though he did, they
affirm, he may say, No; and swear unto it: because he was not there, to
reveal it to the examiner: whereas in the very law of nature; he that takes
an oath, should swear according to the intention of him that has power to
minister an oath: and that in truth, justice, judgment. Let them clear their
doctrine from all defense of perjury, if they can.

The sixth sin is, that they reuerse many of Gods comma^dements, making that
no sin which Gods word makes a sin. Thus they teach, that if any man steal
some little thing, Molan tract. 2. c. 9. con. 1. prop. 5. idem caetera.
that is thought not to cause any notable hurt, it is no mortal sin: that,
the officious lie, and the lie made in sport are venial sins: that, to pray
for our enemies in particular is no precept but a counsel: and that none is
bound to salute his enemy in the way of friendship, flat against the rule of
Christ, Matthew. 5. 47. where the word (...), signifies all manner of duty and
courtesy: that, rash judgment, though consent come thereto is regularly but a
venial sin: that, it is lawful other whiles to feign holiness that, the
painting of the face is ordinarily but a venial sin: that, it is not
lavvfull to forbid begging: whereas the Lord forbad there should be any Deuteronomy.
15.
beggar in Israel. Again, they teach that Greg. de V^l. tom. 3. dis. 1. 9. 13.
and Caietane.
men in their choler, when they are chiding, and swear, vvounds and blood,
are not indeed blasphemers.

Lastly their writers use manifest lying, to justify their doctrine. They
plead falsely that all antiquity is on their side; whereas it is as much
against them as for them: and as much for us as them. Again their manner has
bin and is still to prove their opinions by forged and counterfeit writings of
men, some whereof I will name.

1 Saint James Liturgy. 2 The Canons of the Apostles. 3 The books of
Dionysius Ariopagita, and namely De Hier archia Ecclesiastica. 4 The Decret all
Epistles of the Popes. 5 Pope Clements works. 6 Some of the Epistles of
Ignatius. 7 Origens book of repentance. His homelies in diversos sanctos.
Commentaries on Job: and book of Lamentation. 8 Chrysostomes Liturgy. 9
Basils liturgy and his Ascetica. 10 Augustines book de 8. quest. Dul^itij. A
book of true and false repentance. Ser* de festo commemorationis animarum.
book de dogm. Ecclesiast. Sermon ad fratres in Heremo. Sermon of Peter's
chair. Book of visiting the sick, etc. 11 Justin Martyrs Questions and Answ.
12 Athanasius epistle to Pope Foelix. 13 Bernards sermons of the Lords Supper.
14 Hieromes epistle ad Demetriadem sauouring of Pelagius. 15 Tertullian de
Monogamia. 16 Cyprian de Chrismate and de ablutione pe^um. 17 In the Council of
Sardica the 3, 4, and 5, canons are forged. 18 In the Council of Nice all save
20. are forged. 19 Certain Roman Councels under Sylvester are forged. For he
was at this time dead, and therefore could not confirm them. Sozom. lib. 2.
20 To the sixth canon of the Council of Nice are patched these words, That the
Roman Church has always had the supremacy. 21 Lastly, I will not omit that
Pope Sozimus, Bonifacius, ana Coelestinus falsified the canons of the council
of Nice, to prove appeals from all places to Rome; so as the Bishops of
Afric were forced to send for the true copies of the said Council from
Constantinople and the Churches of Greece.
I might here rehearse many other sins which with the former call for
vengeance upon the Roman Church, but it shall suffice to have named a few of
the principal.

Now in this reason, our Savior Christ prescribes another maine duty to his
own people: and that is, to be careful to eschew all the sins of the
Church of Rome, that they may withal escape her deserved plagues and
punishments. And from this prescribed duty I observe two things. The first is,
that every good servant of God, must carefully avoid contracts of marriage
with professed Papists, that is* with such as hold the Pope for their head, and
believe the doctrine of the Council of Trent. For in such matches men hardly
keep faith and good conscience, and hardly avoid communication with the
sins of the Roman Church. A further ground of this doctrine I thus propound.
In Gods word there is mentioned a double league between man and man, country
and country. The first is the league of concord, when one kingdom binds it
self to live in peace with an other, for the maintenance of traficke without
disturbance: and this kind of league may stand between Gods church and the
enemies thereof. The second is the league of amity: which is when men, people,
or countries bind themselves to defend each other in all causes: and to make
the wars of the one, the wars of the other: and this league may not be made
with those that be enemies of God. Iehosaphat, otherwise a good king, made this
kind of league with Ahab: and is therefore reproved by the prophet, saying,
would thou help the wicked and love them that hate the Lord? 2. Chron. 19.
2. Now the marriages of protestants with Papists are private leagues of amity,
between person and person: and therefore not to be allowed. Again, Malac.
cap. 2. verse. 11. the Lord says, Judah has defiled the holiness of the Lord
which he loved, and has married the daughters of a strange god: where is
flatly condemned marriages made with the people of a false god: now the
Papists by the consequents of their doctrine and religion, turn the true
Iehova into an idol of their own brain, as I have showed: and the true Christ
revealed in the written word into a fained Christ made of bread. Yet if such a
marriage be once made and finished it may not be dissolved. For such parties
sin not simply in that they marry, but because they marry not in the Lord,
being of diverse religions. The fault is not in the substance of marriage but
in the manner of making it: and for this cause, the Apostle commands the
believing party, not to forsake or refuse the unbelieving party, being a
very infidel (which no papist is) if he or she will abide. 1. Cor. 7. 13.

The second thing is, that every servant of God must take heed how he trauells
into such countries where popish religion is stablished, least he partakes in
the sins and punishments thereof. Indeed to go upon embassage to any place,
or to travel for this end, that we may perform the necessary duties for our
special or general callings, is not unlawful: but to travel out of the
precincts of the church only for pleasures sake and to see strange fashions,
has no warrant. And hence it is, that many men which go forth in good order
well minded, come home with crased consciences. The best traueler of all is he,
that living at home or abroad, can go out of himself, and depart from his own
sins and corruptions by true repentance.

FINIS.
An advertisment to all favorers of the Roman religion, showing that the said
religion is against the Catholic principles and grounds of the Catechism.
GReat is the number of them that embrace the religion of the present church of
Rome, being deceived by the glorious titles of Universality, Antiquity,
Succession. And no doubt, though so^e be wilfully blinded, yet many devoted
this way, never saw any other truth. Now of them and the rest I desire this
favor, that they will but way and ponder with themselves this one thing, which
I will now offer to their considerations, and that is, That the Roman
religion now stablished by the council of Trent, is in the principal points
thereof, against the very grounds of the Catechism, that have been agreed
upon ever since the days of the Apostles, by all Churches. These grounds are
four: the first is the Apostles Creed: the second is the decalogue or ten
commandments: the third is the form of prayer called the Lords prayer: the
fourth is the Institution of the two Sacraments baptism and the Lords supper.
1. Cor. 11. 23.

That I may in some order manifest this which I say, I will begin with the
Symbol or Creed. And first of all it must be considered, that some of the
principal doctrines believed in the Church of Rome are, that the Pope or
Bishop of Rome is the vicar of Christ, and the head of the Catholic church:
that there is a fire of purgatory after this life: that images of God and
Saints are to be placed in Churches and worshipped: that prayer is to be made
to Saints departed and their intercession to be required: that there is a
propitiatory sacrifice daily offered in the mass for the sins of the quick
and the dead. These points are of that moment, that without them the Roman
religion cannot stand: and in the council of Trent the curse Anathema is
pronounced upon all such as deny these or any of them. And yet mark: the
Apostles creed which has bin thought to contain all necessary points in
religion to be believed: and has therefore been called the Kay and rule of
faith: this creed I say, has not any of these points: nor the Expositions made
thereof by the ancient fathers, nor any other creed or confession of faith made
by any council or Church for the space of many hundred years. This a plain
proof to any indifferent man, that these be new articles of faith never known
in the Apostolic Church: and that the fathers and Counsels could not find
any such articles of faith in the books of the old and new Testement. Answer
is made: that all these points of doctrine are believed under the articles, I
believe the Catholic Church: the meaning whereof, they will have to be this, I
believe all things which the catholic Church holds and teaches to be
believed. If this be as they say, we must needs believe in the Church: that
is, put our confidence in the Church, for the manifestation and the certentie
of all doctrines necessary to salvation: and thus the eternal truth of God
the Creator, shall depend on the determination of the creature; and the written
word of God in this respect is made insufficient; as though it had not plainly
revealed all points of doctrine, pertaining to salvation. And the ancient
Churches have bin far ouerseene, that did not propounde the former points to
be believed as articles of faith, but left them to these latter times.

2. In this Creed, to believe in God, and to believe the church, are
distinguished. To be leeue in, is pertaining to the Creator: to believe, to
the creature: as Ruffinus has noted, Ruff. in Sym.
when he says, that by this proposition in, the Creator is distinguished from
the creature, and things pertaining to God from things pertaining to men. And
Augustine says, It must be known that we must believe Ser. 131. de tempore.
the Church, and NOT BELIEVE IN THE CHVRCH: because the church is not God, but
the house of God Hence it follows, that we must not believe in the Saints, nor
put our confidence Rhem. Test. on Romans 10. 14. Eusebius. Emiss. hom. 2. ae Symb.
in our works, as the learned Papists teach. Therefore Eusebius says, We
ought of right to believe Peter and Paul, but to believe in Peter and Paul,
that is, to give to the servants the houour of the Lord, we ought not. And
Cyprian says, He does not believe in God which does not place in him alone the
trust of his whole felicity.

3. The article, conceived by the holy ghost, Cypr. de dup* Martyr.
is ouerturned by the transubstantiation of bread and wine in the mass, into
the body and blood of Christ. For here we are taught to confess the true and
perpetual incarnation of Christ, beginning in his conception, and never ending
afterward: and we acknowledge the truth of his manhood, and that his body
has the essential properties of a true body, standing of flesh and bone:
having quantity, figure, dimensions, namely length, breadth, thicknes: having
part out of part, as head out of feet, and feet out of head, being also
circumscribed, visible, touchable: in a word, it has all things in it, which
by order of creation, belong to a body. It will be said, that the body of
Christ may remain a true body and yet be altered in respect of some
qualities, as namely circumscription. But I say again, that local
circumscription can no way be severed from a body, it remaining a body. For
to be circumscribed in place, is an essential property of every quantity:
and quantity is the common essence of every body. And therefore a body in
respect of his quantity must needs be circumscribed in one place. This was
the judgment of Leo, when he said. The body of Christ is Epist. 70.
by no means out of the truth of our body. And Augustine, when he said:
ONLY God Tract 31. in Ioh.
in Christ so comes, that he does not depart; so returns, that he does not
leave us: but man according to body is in place, and goes out of the same
place, and when he shall come unto an other place, HE IS NOT IN THAT PLACE
WHENCE HE COMES. To help the matter, they use to distinguish thus. Christ's
body in respect of the t^talitate essentia, non t^lalitate quantitatis.
whole essence thereof may be in many places; but not in respect of the whole
quantity, whereby it is only in one place. But as I have said, they speak
contraries: for quantity (by all learning) is the essence of a body, without
which a body can not be.

4 In the Creed we confess that Christ is ascended into heaven, and there
after his ascension sits at the right hand of his Father, and that according to
his manhood. Hence I conclude, that Christ's body is not really and locally in
the Sacrament, and in every Host, which the priest consecrateth. This argument
was good when Vigilius against Lib. 4.
Eutyches said, When it (the flesh) was on earth, it was not in heaven: and
because it is now in heaven, it is not on earth: and he adds afterward that
this is the Catholic faith and confession. And it was good when Fulgenti^s ad
Thr^^
said, According to his humane substance he was absent from earth, when he
was in heaven, and he left the earth, when he ascended into heaven. And, The
same in seperable Christ, according to his whole manhood LEAVING THE EARTH,
locally ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand, and according to the
same whole manhood, he is to come to judgment. And it was good, when Cyril
said, No man doubts but that when he ascended into heaven, though he be always
present by the power of his spirit, HE WAS ABSENT IN Cyril. lib. 9. in Job.
RESPECT OF THE PRESENCE O^ HIS FLESH. And it was good, when Augustine said,
According to the flesh, which the Word assumed, he ascended into heaven, HE IS
NOT HERE, there he sits at the right hand of the father: and he is here
according to the presence of his majesty. And, He went as he was man, and he
abode as he was God: he went by that whereby he was in one place: he abode by
that whereby he was every where.

5 Again, in that we believe the Catholic church, it follows that the
Catholic church is invisible: because things seen are not believed* And the
answer commonly used, that we believe the holiness of the Church, will not serve
the turn. For the words are plain, and in them we make confession that we
believe not only the holiness of the church, but also the church it self.

6 Lastly the articles, Remission of sins, Resurrection of the body, and
Life everlasting, contain a confession of special faith. For the meaning of
them is thus much: I believe the remission of mine own sins, and the
resurrection of mine own body to life everlasting: and that by the judgment
of learned Antiquity. Augustine says, If thou Symb ad Catech. lib. 4. c. 7.
and lib. 2. cap. 10.
also believe that thou shall rise again and ascend into heaven (because thou
art sure of so great a patron) thou art certain of so great a gift. And, Make
not Christ less, who brings thee to the kingdom of heaven, for remission of
sins. Without this faith, if any come to baptism, he shuts the gate of
mercy against himself. And, Whosoever faithfully believes, and holds this
profession of his faith (in which all his sins are forgiven him) let him
prepare his will to the will of God, Sermon. 115. de Temp.
and not fear his passage by death. And, The whole Sacrament of baptism
stands in this, that we believe the resurrection of the body and remission of
sins to be given us of God. And, He gave these kaies to the Church --, that
whosoever in his Church, should not believe de Doctr. Christ. l. 1* cap. 18.
his sins to be forgiven, they should not be forgiven unto him: and whosoever
believed* and turned from them abiding in the lap of the said Church, at length
shall be healed by faith and amendment of life. And, That Sermon. 123. de Temp.
which thou have heard to be fulfilled in the glorious resurrection of Christ,
believe that the very same shall be fulfilled in thee, in the last judgment
and the resurrection of thy flesh, shall restore thee for all eternity. For
unless thou shall believe that thou art to be repaired by death, thou can
not come to the reward of life eternal. And in ancient time the article of
the resurrection has been rehearsed Ruffin. in Symb. August. de Symb lib. 1.
c. 6. ad Catechu* and En^^i. c. 44.
on this manner, The resurrection of THIS FLESH: and the last applied unto it,
TO EVERLASTING LIFE. Hence then two maine opinions of the church of Rome are
quite overthrown, one that we cannot by special faith be certain of the
remission of our sins, and the salvation of our souls: the other, that a man
truly justified may fall away and be damned. Now this cannot be, if the
practice of the ancient Church be good, which has taught us to believe
everlasting life jointly without remission of sins.

To come unto the decalogue, first of all it is a rule in expounding the
several commandments, that where any vice is forbidden, there the contrary
virtue is commanded, and all virtues of the same kind, with all their causes,
occasions, furtherances. This rule is granted of all: and hence it follows,
that counsels of perfection, if they have in them any furtherance of virtue,
are enjoined in and by the law, and therefore prescribe no state of perfection
beyond the scope of the law.

Secondly the commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image,
etc. has two several parts. The first forbiddes the making of carved or
graven images: the second forbids the adoration of them. Now the first part is
notably expounded by Moses, Deutr. 4. 16. Take good heed unto your selves,
that ye corrupt not your selves and make you a graven image or representation
of any figure in the likeness of male or female. Mark the reason of this
prohibition in the same place: for (says he) ye savv no image in the day the
Lord spoke unto you in Horeb. and v. 15. Ye heard the voice of the words but
savv no similitude save a voice. Now the reason being understood of the image
of God himself: the prohibition must needs be so understood. Again there is
no question; that God directs his commandment against a sin in speculation,
but against some common and wicked practice of the Jews, and that was to
represent God himself in likenesses and bodily forms. Esai 40. 18. And that
was also the practice of the Gentiles, that were far more gross in this
kind then the Jews. Romans 1. 23. This then is plain to any indifferent man,
that the first part of the commandment forbids the making of graven images or
likenesses of the true Iehova: and thus the Roman Catechism understands the
words. As for the second part, it must be understood according to the meaning
of the first: and therefore it forbids us, to bow down to any image of God.
Hence then it follows, that to worship God or Saints in, or, at images, and to
worship images with religious worship is abominable idolatry. And common
reason might teach us thus much. For they that adore and worship the true God
in images, do bind the presence of God, his operation, grace, and his hearing
of us, to certain things, places, signs, to which he has not bound himself,
either by commandment or promise: and that is, otherwise to worship God, and
to seek for his blessings, then he has commanded himself to be worshipped,
or promised to hear us. Upon this ground, is plainly overthrown the excuse
which they make, that they worship not images but God and Saints in images:
for neither God nor the Saints do acknowledge this kind of honor, but they
abhor it. Whence it follows necessarily, that they worship nothing beside
the image, or, the devise of their own brain, in which they feign to them
selves such a God as will be worshipped, and receive our prayers at images. It
will be said, that the Papists do no otherwise tie the worship and invocation
of God to images, then God tied himself to the sanctuary and the temple of
Solomon. And I say again, it was the will of God that he would show his
presence, and be worshipped at the Sanctuary, and the Jews had the warrant of
Gods word for it: but we have no like warrant, either by promise or
commandment to tie Gods presence to an image or crucifix. Again, reason yet
further may discover their idolatry. They, which worship they know not what,
worship an idol: but the Papists worship they know not what: I prove it thus.
To the co^secratio^ of the host, there is required the intention of the priest,
at the lest vertually, as they say, and if this be true, it follows that none
of the^ can come to the Mass, or pray in faith, but he must always doubt of
that which is lifted up by the hands of the priest in the mass: whether it be
bread or the body and blood of Christ. For none can have any certe^ty of the
intention of the priest in consecrating this bread and this wine: but rather
may have a just occasion of doubting by reason of the common ignorance and
loosenes of life in such persons.

Thirdly the commandment touching the Sabbath, gives a liberty to work six
days in the ordinary affairs of our callings: and this liberty cannot be
repealed by any creature. The Church of Rome therefore erreth, in that it
prescribes set and ordinary ^^stiuall days, not only to God but also to
Saints: inioyning them as straightly and with as much solemnity to be observed,
as the Sabbath of the Lord.

Fourthly, the third commandment, or (as they say) the fourth, inioynes
children to obey father and mother in all things, specially in matters of
moment, as in their marriage and choice of their callings: and that even to
death: and yet the Church of Rome against the intent of this commandment,
allows that clandestine marriages, and the vow of religion shall be in force,
though they be without, and against the consent of wise and careful parents.

Fifthly, the last commandment of lust, forbids the first motions to sin,
that are before consent. I prove it thus. Lusting is forbidden in the former
commandments as well as in the last, yea lusting that is joined with consent:
as in the commandment, thou shall not commit adultery, is forbidden lusting
after our neighbors wife; and in the next, lusting after our neighbors goods,
etc. Now if the last commandment also forbid no more but lust with consent, it
is confounded with the rest: and by this means there shall not be ten distinct
words, or, commandments: which to say is absurd: it remains therefore that the
lust here forbidden goes before consent. Again, the Philosophers knew that
lust with consent was evil, even by the light of nature: but Paul a learned
Pharise and therefore more then a philosopher, knew not Lust to be sin, that
is forbidden in this commandment, Romans 7. Lust therefore that is forbidden
here, is without consent. Wicked then is the doctrine of the Roman Church
teaching, that in every mortal sin is required an act commanded Molan ^^act.
c. 27. con. 4.
of the will: and hence they say many thoughts against faith and unclean
imaginations are no sins.

6 Lastly, the words of the second commandment. And show mercy to thousands on
them that love me and keep my commandments, overthrows all humane merits.
For if the reward be given of mercy to them that keep the law, it is not
given for the merit of the work done.

To come to the third part of the Catechism: the Lords prayer is a most
absolute and perfect form of prayer. For which cause it was called of
Tertullian, the Breuiarie of the Gospel: and Caelestinus says, the law of
praying is the law of believing and the law of vvorking. Now in this prayer
we are taught to direct our prayers to God alone, Our father, etc* and that
only in the name and mediation of Christ. For God is our father only by
Christ. It is needles therefore, to use any invocation of Saints, or to make
them our Mediators of intercession unto God: and it is sufficient, if we pray
only unto God in the name of Christ alone.

2. In the fourth petition, we say thus, Give us our daily bread. In which
words, we acknowledge that every morsel of bread is the mere gift of God.
What madness then is it, for us to think that we should merit the kingdom of
heaven by works, that can not merit so much as bread?

3 In the next petition, Forgive us our debts, four opinions of the Roman
religion are directly overthrown, The first is concerning humane
Satisfactions. For the child of God is here after his conversion taught, to
humble himself day by day, and to pray for the pardon of his daily sins:
now to make satisfaction and to sue for pardon be contrary. The second opinion
here overthrown, is touching merits. For we do acknowledge our selves to be
debtors unto God, yea bankrupts: and that beside the maine sum of many
thousand talents, we daily increase the debt: therefore we can not possiby
merit any of the blessings of God. It is mere madness to think, that they
which cannot pay their debts, but rather increase them day by day, should
deserve or purchase any of the goods of the creditors, or the pardon of their
debts: and if any favor be showed them, it comes of merre goodwill without the
least desert. In a word, this must be thought upon, that, if al we can do,
will not keep us from increasing the maine sum of our debt, much less shall
we be able by any merit to diminnish the same. By good right therefore do all
the servants of God cast down themselves and pray, Forgive us our debts. The
3. opinion is that punishment may be retained, the fault being wholly remitted:
but this cannot stand, for here sin is called our debt: because by nature we
owe unto God obedience, and for the defect of this payment, we further owe unto
him the forfiture of punishment. Sin then is called our debt in respect of
the punnishment. And therefore when we pray for the pardon of sin, we require
the pardon not only of fault, but of the whole punishment. And when a debt is
pardoned, it is absurd to think that the least payment should remain. The
fourth opinion is that a man in this life may fulfill the law, whereas in this
place every servant of God is taught to ask a daily pardon for the breach of
the law. Answer is made, that our daily sins are venial and not against the
law but beside the law. But this which they say is against the petition: for
a debt that comes by forfiture is against the bond or obligation. Now every
sin is a debt causing the forfiture of punishment: and therefore is not
beside, but directly against the law.

4. In this clause, as we forgive our debtors, it is taken for granted, that we
may certainly know that we are in love and charity with me^* when w^ make
reconciliation: why then may not we know certainly that we repent and believe
and are reconciled to God: which all Roman Catholics deny.

5. In the last words, and lead us not into temptation, we pray not, that God
should free us from temptation (for it is other whiles good to be tempted,
Psalm. 26. 1.) But that we be not left to the malice of Satan, and held captive
of the temptation, for here to be bed into temptation, and to be delivered, are
opposed. Now hence I gather, that he which is the child of God truly justified
and sanctied, shall never fall wholly and finally from the grace of God: and I
conclude on this manner. That which we ask according to the will of God, shall
be granted, 1. Ioh. 5. but this the child of God asks, that he might never
be wholly forsaken of his father, and left captive in temptation. This
therefore shall be granted.

6 This clause Amen, signifies a special faith touching all the former
petitions, that they shall be granted: and therefore a special faith
concerning remission of sins: which the Roman Church denies.

To come to the last place, to the Institution of the sacrament of the Lords
Supper. 1. Cor. 11. v, 23. In which first of all the Real presence is by many
circumstances overthrown. Out of the words, he took and brake, it is plain
that, that which Christ took was not his body: because he cannot be said with
his own hands to have taken, held, and broken himself, but the very bread.
Again Christ said not: under the form of bread, or in bread: but This, that
is, bread is my body. 3. Bread was not given for us but only the body Christ:
and in the first institution, the body of Christ was not the^ really given to
death. 4. The cup, is the new testament by a figure: why may not the bread be
the body of Christ by a figure also? 5. Christ did eat the supper, but not
himself. 6. We are bidden to do it, till he come: Christ then is not bodily
present. 7. Christ bids the bread to be eaten in a remembrance of him: but
signs of remembrance are of things absent. 8. If the Popish real presence be
granted, then the body and blood of Christ are either severed or joined
together. If severed, then Christ is still crucified If joined together, then
the bread is both the body and blood of Christ: whereas the institution says
the bread is the body, and the wine is the blood.

2 Again, here is condemned the administration of the sacrament under one
only kind. For the commandment of Christ is, drink ye all of this, Math, 26.
27. And this commandment is rehearsed to the Church of Corinth in these
words, do this as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me. v. 25. And no
power can rehearse this commandment: because it was established by the
sovereign head of the Church.

These few lines, as also the former treatise, I offer to the vewe and reeding
of them, that favor the Roman religion: willing them with patience to
consider this one thing, that their religion, if it were Catholic and
Apostolic (as they pretend) it could not be contrary so much as in one point,
to the grounds of all Catechismes, that have been used in all Churches,
confessing the name of Christ, ever since the Apostles days. And whereas it
crosses the said grounds in sundry points of doctrine, (as I have proved) it
is a plain argument that the present Roman religion, is degenerate. I write
not this dispising or hating their persons for their religion, but wishing
unfeignedly their conversion in this world, and their salvation in the world to
come.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
Page 235. l. 20. I say, that Christ obaied the law for him self, not because
he did by his obedience merit his own glory: but because he was to be a
perfect and pure high priest, not only in nature but also in life: and as he
was a creature, he was to be conformable to the law.

Faults to be amended thus.
Page 1. l. 1. for 3. read 4. p. 9. l. 2. read Apostolic. p. 19. l. 17. read
forms. and l. 23. read endeavor. p. 39. l. last, read, too. p. 48. l. 18.
read, or. p. 55. l. 2. read, holy. p. 126. l. 2. read, be. p. 138. l. 13. read,
pertaining. p. 142. l. 23. read, matters. p. 161. l. 5. read, contain. and l.
last, read, chastity. p. 168. l. 5. read, persecution. p. 187. l. 7. read,
men. p. 192. l. last. read, cannot. p. 222. l. 5. read, right. p. 260. l. 9.
read, particular. p. 265. l. 14. read, I think. p. 284. l. 2. read, deputies.

Faults escaped in the places of Scripture.
Page 1. v. 3. pro 4. p. 4. c. 18. pro 17. p. 6. c. 18. pro 17. p. 7. v. 18.
pro 8. p. 19. v. 5. pro 7. p. 22. v 2. pro 1. p. 43. v. 20. pro 28, and 29. p.
50. v. 21. pro 22. p. 52. v. 36. pro 63. p 75. v. 13. pro 12. p. 127. v. 12.
pro 21. p. 135. v. 20. pro 8. p. 139. c. 8. v. 1. pro c. 1. v. 8. p. 164. v.
38. pro 37. p. 227. v. 18. pro 29.


