LECTVRES UPON THE THREE FIRST CHAPTERS OF THE REVELATION: PREACHED IN
CAMbridge Anno Dom. 1595. by Master William Perkins, and now published for the
benefit of this Church, by Robert Hill Bachelor in Divinity. To which is
added an excellent Sermon, penned at the request of that noble and wise
Councellor, AMBROSE, Earl of Warwick: in which is proved that Rome is
Babylon, and that Babylon is fallen.

Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: for they rest from their labors,
and their works follow them.

REV. 13. 13. LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to
be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Swan. 1604.

To the right Worshipful Sir Edward Montagu, Sir Walter Montagu, Sir Henry
Montagu, and Sir Charles Montagu Knights, M. James Montagu, Doctor of
Divinity, Deane of his Majesty's Chapel, and M. Sidney Montagu Esquire, the
Lady Susan Sandys, and the Lady Theodosia Capel, children of that right
worthy and religious Sir Edward Montagu of Bowghton in the County of
Northhampton Knight, and of the Lady Elizabeth his worthy wife, sister to the
right Honorable Sir John Harington, Baron of Exton: and father to the virtuous
Lady the Countess of Bedford: Grace and Peace.
RIGHT Worshipful, as the Patriarch Jacob had Genesis 42. 13.
twelve sons, so Christ the Messiah had Mat. 10. 1.
twelve disciples: but as Joseph was beloved above Genesis 37. 3.
all those sons: so John was beloved above John 21.
all the disciples* Joseph was apparelled better then the rest, and John was
inspired far better then the rest. Genesis 41. 38.
Had it not been for Joseph Egypt had wanted her food temporal, and had it not
been for John, the Church had wanted her food eternal. Genesis 41. 25.
The future state of Egypt was revealed to Joseph, and the future state of the
Church was revealed to John. The one was Genesis 37. 4.
exiled, because his father loved him; and the other exiled, because his
Master loved him. The place of his exile was into the Revel. 1. 9.
Island of Pathmos, being before by Traian put into a vessel of Fasciculus
temporum.
scalding oil. But that God who showed his visions to Genesis 22. 12.
Abraham in the mount, Genesis 28.
to Jacob in the field, Genesis 40.
to Joseph in the stocks, Exodus 3.
to Moses in Midian, Ier. 38. 14.
to Jeremy in the prison, Dan. 2.
to Daniel in Babylon, Act. 10.
and to the Apostle Peter in the house of a Tanner, even he shows his visions
to John in his exile.

He is not bound to persons, he can advance whom he list, he is not bounden to
place, he can reveal where he list. For persons, he can prefer Genesis 4.
Abel before Cain, Mat. 1.
Jacob before Esau, 1. Sam. 16.
David before Eliab, Act. 1.
Matthias before Judas. He can make Exodus 2. 10.
Moses a Courtier, Job. 1. 1.
Job a Potentate, Act. 7.
Samuel a Judge, 2. Sam. 2. 1.
David a King, Pro. 1. 1.
Solomon a Sovereign, 1. Ki. 19. 19.
Elysha a plowman, Amos 1. 1.
Amos a Neatheard, Jer. 1. 1.
Jeremy a Priest, Dan. 1. 6.
Daniel a Prince, Isay 1. 1.
Isaiah of the blood Royal, Math. 9. 9.
Matthew a Publicane, Mat. 4 18.
Peter a Fisher, Act. 18. 2. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi.
and Paul a Tent-maker, to be penners and preachers of the word of God. For
place, as no time can prescribe against the King of a nation, so no place can
prescribe against this King of all nations. Ioh. 5.
The wind blows where it lists, and the Spirit works where it lists.

It pleased Christ, who is called in this Revelation, Revel. cap. 1. 5.
that faithful witness, that first begotten of the dead, Verse. 8.
that Prince of the kings of the earth, Verse. 18.
Alpha and Omega, the first and last, Verse. 16.
he that has the keys of hell and of death, Verse. 14.
which has that sharp sword, Verse. 15.
his eyes like fire, Chap. 2. 1.
his feet like brass, Chap. 3. 1.
the seven Spirits of God, the seven Stars in his hand, Verse. 7.
the key of David, who is called here Verse. 14.
Amen, the beginning of the creatures of God; and in Daniel, he that Dan. 2. 22.
reuealeth secrets, it pleased this Christ to reveal secrets to John. Not by
dream as to Gea. 28.
Jacob, or apparition as to Exodus 3.
Moses, or by voice as Genesis 3.
to Adam; but partly by vision, and partly by voice as he did when he turned
Act. 9.
Saul into Paul. This John was Legatus a latere, that Ambassador who leaned
on his Lords breast. John's Gospel, John's* Revelation.
He writes Christ's history, there he shows his love to Christ: he writes
the Churches history, there Christ shows his love to him: especially in
this, that he will do nothing, which he does not reveal to his Amos 3. 7.
servant this Prophet. For the Church in his time, we may see how it stood, in
the three first Chapters: and what condition it should have for the time to
come, it is plainly set down in the rest of this book. The contents of the
whole Revelation.
If we respect the general estate of the Church, after John had described the
authors of this Revelation, which are God the Father, chap. 4. and Christ his
Son, chap. 5. he comes to the works of God, which are predictions, cha. 6.
obsignations, chap. 7. indignations, chap. 8. 9. Predictions of things to come,
obsignations of such as must be saved, and indignation on things to be
destroyed. And for the more particular estate of the Church, having (chap. 10.)
showed his warrant to write, he comes to her actions: first, in her Prophets:
secondly, in her body. In her Prophets, their fighting, falling, rising, chap.
11. In her body, comparing her to a woman clothed with the Sun, chap. 12.
and describing her by her combats, conquests, triumphs: her combats defensive,
chap. 13. and offensive in Christ, by words, chap. 14. threatenings, chap. 15.
and judgments, chap. 16. her victories gotten against that The Church of Rome.
whore, chap. 17. and 18. the The Roman Empire.
Beast, chap. 19. and the The devil.
Dragon, chap. 20. And all that glory which she shall have in the kingdom of
God, is under the type of Jerusalem most comfortably set down, chap. 21. 22.

The things in this book were (I grant) very dark to them that lived in the
days of John, as the Prophecy of Daniel was to them who lived in the time of
Daniel. But as that Prophecy being fulfilled, we can now tell what was
foretold in it: so many things being fulfilled which were foretold in this
book, we may easily see what is meant by it: and the posterity to come shall
better understand this book then we do, because it may be, all things are not
yet fulfilled. Neither is this book like the cities of the Number. 13.
Anakims, or the Genesis 3.
tree of knowledge which may not be reached to: for Revel. 1. 3.
blessed is he that reads the words of this book. But to come to these three
Chapters written by John surnamed the Divine, and expounded by one a most
worthy Divine. The first Chapter is a Proeme or Preface to the book: the two
latter are Epistles dedicating this book. The dedication is made to Reu. 2. 1.
seven several Churches, and by name to the Ministers which are called Angels.
In the word of God Ministers have many excellent titles given them, (though now
they are scarcely graced with titles) they are called Genesis 20.
Prophets, 1. Sam. 9. 9.
Seers, 2. Pet. 1. 13.
Remembrancers, Isa. 58* 1.
Trumpets, Ez 3. 1.
Watchmen, Cor. 3.
Husbandmen, Luke 12. 24.
Stewards, Pro 9. 4.
Maidens, Ezec. 47.
Fishers, Mat. 23. 24.
Leaders, 1. Pet. 5. 1.
Elders, Mar. 9. 50.
Salt, Dan. 12. 2.
Stars, 1. Cor. 11 10
Angels and Exec. 34. 2.
Shepherds. Prophets to teach, Seers to foretell, Remembrancers to put in
mind, Trumpets to sound, Watchmen to admonish, Husbandmen to plow up, Stewards
to distribute, Maidens to keep pure the doctrine of truth, Fishers to catch
men, Leaders to go before, Elders to govern, Salt to season, Stars to give
light, Angels to declare, and Shepherds to feed: to feed (I say) soundly by
doctrine, liberally by charity, and religiously by life. By doctrine: for
Sacerdos sine doctrina, est nauis sine velis, a Priest without knowledge, is a
ship without sails. By liberality: for Naz. in era. de pauper.
Nihil habet homo adeo diuinum quam benefacere, man is in nothing more like
God, then in doing good. By life: for cuius vita despicitur, eius oration
contemnitur: his words are not esteemed, whose life is not approved. And that
it may be said of them as it was of Origin: Quale habuit verbu^, talem habuit
vitam: as his words were, so were his works. They must not be barren like
mount 2. Sam. 1. 21.
Gilboah, but 1. Sa. 1. 24.
weaned as Samuel was, before they be offered unto the Lord. They must be pure
water if they will cleanse others, and more then whetstones, if they will
sharpen others. They must be in Genesis 19.
integrity Abraham's, Number. 12. 3.
in meekness Moses, Exodus 4. 14.
in knowledge Arons, 2. Cor. 11. 23.
in pains Paul's, 1. Sam. 12.
and in praying Samuels, and remember, that as Augustine said: Manus pauperu^
sunt gazophylaciu^ Christi. The hands of the poor are the treasury of Christ.
I need not speak much of the duty of a Minister: for every one will teach him
his duty, that will not be ranged within any duty himself.

These Churches were then like 1. Chr. 12. 14.
David's Worthies, excellent above all the Churches of the world: but because
they lost their first Revel. 2. 4.
love, Verse. 10.
were not faithful to the death, Verse. 14.
maintained the doctrine of Balaam, Verse 20.
suffered women to teach, Cap. 3. 1.
bare a name only to live, Verse. 8.
had but a little strength, Verse. 16.
were neither hot nor cold, and Cap. 2. 21.
repented not as they should have done, of all their sins, they are reprehended
by John, threatened by Christ, and the Candlestick of the Gospel is now taken
away from them. Iam seges est vbi Troia fuit. Now Mahomet rages, where Messiah
did reign. Are they reprehended? let us hearken: are they threatened? let us
fear: are they fallen? let us labor to continue. Seneca.
From John's reprehension we see, that (as one said) hereof our Elders have
complained, hereof do we complain, and hereof they which live after us will
complain, that men wax worse, and live not according to the doctrine of Gods
word. From Christ's threatening we see, that God is merciful, Deuteronomy. 20. 10.
who first offers peace before he fight against us* that we being forewarned,
might be forearmed. And by the woeful downfall of these seven Churches, let 1.
Cor. 10. 12.
us that stand take heed that we fall not: for if God spared not the 2. Pet. 2.
old world who despised Noah, the Sodomites who vexed Lot, Mat 23. 38.
Jerusalem which abused the Prophets, Orosius says that these cities for this
cause, fell by an earthquake.
Colossa, Hierapolis, and Laodicea, who rejected Paul, and these Asian
Churches who did not grow in righteousness as they did in riches, how shall we
escape Heb. 2. 3.
if we neglect so great salvation? and for this cause these Sermons are most
worthy to be considered of in this present age. O then let us now Romans 13.
consider this season: Romans 12. 11.
redeem the opportunity, Heb. 3 and Psalm. 95.
not harden our hearts, but regard the time of our present visitation. As the
day opens and shuts with the Sun, so salvation opens and shuts with
the Gospel. Heb. 3. 13.
Whilst it is called to day let us hear his voice: Prou. 10. 5.
He that labors in Summer is the son of Wisdom, but he that sleeps in
harvest is the son of confusion.

All things in the world do take their time, the bird to build her nest, the
husbandman to sow his seed, the mariner to go to sea, the gardener to set his
trees, the sick patient to take physic, the cook to season meats, and the
dresser of the vineyard to gather his fruit. It will be too late to build in
Summer, to sow in harvest, to go to sea when the ship is lanched, to transplant
trees when they are old, to take physic when we are dying, to season meats
when they are unsavory, and when winter is come to gather fruit. The Mat. 25.
10.
five foolish virgins came too late, Dives Luke 16.
in hell repents too late, the time present is only ours. Is the fig tree
fruitless? it shall hear that sentence, Luke 13. Solum tempus presens est
nostrum. Seneca.
Never fruit grow on thee any more. Eccl. 18. 18.
Get thee then righteousness before thou come to judgment: use Physic
before thou be sick, and whilst thou may yet sin, show thy conversion, as
the wise man exhorts every man. But alas, whereunto shall I liken this
generation? we are like the Ephesians, we have Apoc. 2.
lost our first love; or the Laodiceans, we are Apoc. 3.
neither hot nor cold: or the twilight, neither day nor night: or the Autumn,
neither fair nor foul: or one sick of an ague, one day well another ill: or
a man in a Lethargy, neither alive nor dead: or Hermaphroditus, neither male
nor female: or to those creatures called (...), which live in water or on land:
or the Lioness, which the oftener she breeds; the fewer cubs she bears: or
the Mariner, who is only good in a storm: or the Marigold, that shuts and
opens with the Sun: or the Mermaides, which are half flesh half fish. I
would to God we were either hot or cold: that as the hotest regions bring
forth sweetest spices, so most zealous people might be most fruitful in good
works: that as the Sun in the heaven is swiftest at her setting, so the
sons of God might be best at their ending. But is it so? no: the more we are
taught, the more ignorant are many; and the older we are, the colder in
religion. We have indeed many of us, as it was said of Aristogiton, Marte^, or
rather religionem in lingua, religion in tongue: but when trial is made of us,
every Plutarch. in Phocion.
Phocion can epsy our halting: and then with Theatrum Philos. lib. 5. cap. 30.
Archilochus we think it better clypeum abjicere quam interire, even to cast
off all religion, then to undergo the least disgrace for religion.

Treatise of Apostacy. c. 2.
The Moon desiring to be apparelled as the rest of the Planets, answer was
made her, that her diverse chaunges could admit no kind of habit. And we
desiring to be attired with the robes of Christians, it is to be feared, that
since we tread Apoc. 12. 1. that is, all earthly vanities.
not the Moon under our feet, we shall never be clothed as the Church was,
with the Apoc. 12. 1. that is, Christ the Sun of righteousness.
Sun. Who is wise, Hos. 14. 10.
and he shall understand these things; and prudent, and he shall know them. Let
us therefore labor to 2. Pet. 3. 19.
grow in grace, to abound in knowledge, to be full of good works, and to
overcome all the underminers of our future salvation. Then shall we See Reu.
ca. 2. 13.
eat of the tree of life, not be hurt of the second death, taste of the hidden
Manna, have power over nations, be clothed in white, made pillars in Gods
temple, and sit with Christ Jesus in the throne of his Father. And though the
1. Sam. 22. 7.
son of Ishai cannot make us Captains of thousands, yet that Son of David
will Gal. 3. 27.
make us the sons of God. That we may do so, we must believe the Gospel, put
on Christ Jesus, and be renewed by repentance. The first is necessary, the
second comely, the third profitable. To come to the first: it is necessary we
should believe: for he that Joh. 3. 18.
believes not, is condemned already, he is condemned in the counsel of God,
in the ministry of the word, and in his own conscience, and he shall be
condemned in the day of judgment; for Joh. 3. 38.
the wrath of God abides upon him. The more I consider the fruits of faith,
the more I see the necessity of faith. Ephesians. 2. 8.
Through it we are saved: Romans 5. 1.
by it we are justified: Hab. 2. 4.
in it we live. We are saved from Satan, justified before God, and live in the
Church. In the Church? nay, by it we live in heaven: for Ioh. 3. 16.
he that believes in the Son of God, has everlasting life. Faith is that
which Act. 15. 9.
purifieth the heart, makes the whole man to Psalm. 119. 32.
run the ways of Gods commandments, Romans 5. 2.
gives entrance to grace, Heb. 10 3.
access to God in prayer, Heb. 11.
made the Elders well reported of, and each Christian to 2. Cor. 1. 24.
stand to the profession of Christ. It is that Ephesians. 3. 17.
hand by which we must apprehend Christ: that Ephesians. 6. 16.
shield by which we resist all the fiery darts of the devil: and that Mat. 8.
13.
means by which we do good to others. Gal. 3. 7.
By faith we receive the spirit: Romans 8. 1.
are members of Christ: Col 3. 12.
we are risen with him: Ephesians. 3 17.
he dwells in our hearts: Joh. 6 35.
we feed on him continually: 1. Pet. 5. 8.
resist Satan: Ioh. 1. 13.
are the children of God: Heb. 4. 2.
and the word which we hear becomes profitable. And what shall I say? faith
is of such a quality, that it Colos. 2. 7.
unites us to Christ, 2. Cor. 13. 5. Romans 8.
makes us certain of our salvation, 1. Ti. 3. 13.
bold in our profession, ministers Phil. 3. 28.
true joy, Mat 15. 28.
gives temporal blessings, Luke 17. 19.
sanctifies our gifts, and makes us refuse the Heb. 11. 24
pleasures of this present world. In a word, no sin can condemn him who has
this true faith, and no virtue can save him who wants it.

To come to the second, which is Christ, the object of faith. The most comely
garment that ever we can wear, it is to be covered with the Romans 13. 13
robes of Christ's righteousness. Genesis 27. 15.
Jacob was blessed by Esaus garments; and we are blessed by Christ's garments.
What we see through a green glass, seems all to be green: and what God
sees thorough Christ it is al amiable. We must put on this aparel, not as the
Church in the Canticles: Cant. 5. 3. How Christ is to be put on.
I have put off my clothes, how shall I put them on again? or as a gown, that
we cast off when we come to our home: but we must so put him on, that we never
put him off again. We must put him on by imputation, imitation, infusion, and
profession: by imputation of his righteousness, imitation of his virtues,
infusion of his Spirit, and profession of his name. Thus we must labor to get
Christ: for what though a man could command the earth with Alexander, the
Exodus 14.
sea with Moses, the 2. Kin. 1.
fire with Eliah, and the Jos. 10.
Sun with Iosuah? What though he were as rich as 1. King. 4.
Solomon, as wise as 2. Sa. 16. 23
Achitophel, as strong as Iud. 16.
Sampson, as swift as 2. Sa. 18. 19.
Ahimaaz, as beautiful as 2. Sam. 18.
Absolon, as fortunate as Theatrum Philos. lib. 2. cap. 33.
Metellus, and descended as Phil 3. 8.
Paul was of the blood royal of Princes, yet having not Christ he has nothing.
Yea say a man had the abstinence of Aristydes, the innocence of Phocion, the
holiness of Socrates, the alms deeds of Cimon, the moderation of Camillus,
the honesty, justice, and faithfulness of both Catoes, all these out of
Christ, were but Augustine.
splendida peccata, and to be esteemed as Phil. 3. 10.
dung in regard of Christ. For have him and have all things, want him and want
all things: he is in, at, and after death advantage. I come to the last, it is
profitable to repent: for if we Ier. 4. 1. Reasons of repentance.
turn to the Lord, he will turn to us: and that we may turn, consider his
Romans 2.
mercies in forgiving, his Genesis 39. 9.
benefits in giving, his Romans 2. 5.
patience in forbearing, and his Isa. 26. 9.
judgments in punishing. Act. 17. 30.
The word preached, 1. Pet. 4. 3.
sins committed, and that Luk 13. 24.
few shall be saved: Eccles. 12. 1
the shortness of life, Psalm. 90. 12.
the uncertainty of life, Heb 9. 26.
and the certainty of death: 1. Cor. 2. 9.
the joys of heaven, Mat. 25. 46.
the torments of hell, the Luke 15. 10.
comfort of the elect, and that else we can have no Eccles. 41. 1
comfort in death: Jer. 7.
pray we cannot unless we repent, and Luke 13. 2.
perish we shall unless we repent: but blessed shall we be if we do repent.
But manum de tabula Magister adest: this discourse following will teach us
these things: and it am I bold to present to your Worships. John sent his
Revelation to many Churches, and I present his Epistles to many worthy
personages: Act. 2. 40.
and to whom may I better present them the^ to you. John was a disciple full of
love, and you are breethre^ full of love. The Preacher of these Lectures was
well known to many, but to none better then to many of you, especially to
those who were in my time worthy members of that most worthy Christ's college.
College with him. And the rather I do it, that times to come may rejoice in
the Lord, that from one honorable root have issued so many profitable branches
to the Church. (...): Menander.
You are six brethren as pillars of your house, there were three sisters as
fruitful vines of the same: The Lady Wray.
one is not, but is with the Lord, and her I knew a Lady of admirable virtues:
the other two are, and long may they be so. You are all brethren by nature of
one venture, nation of one country, grace of one spirit, affection of one
heart, fortune in great favor, and of one hope by your holy behavior. And 1.
These. 4. 9.
concerning brotherly love, I need not to write unto you: for you are taught of
God to love one another. Your Which had eighty sons. Plutarke.
Scilurus at his death need not teach you concord, by giving to each of you a
sheafe of arrows, which cannot well be broken whilst they are conjoined: for
you by your amity make your selves invincible. If Theatrum Philos. page 294
Chilo the Lacedaemonian died for joy to see one son crowned at Olympus, and
Aul. Gel. lib. 3. Not. At.
Diagoras Rhodius did the like, when his three children got the garland at a
wrestling: and Genesis 45. 28.
Jacob so rejoiced to hear of his one Joseph, to be advanced greatly in the
kingdom of Egypt: how might that happy father of yours rejoice, to see at one
time, one son sitting as high Sheriff of the shire, another preaching before
the Judges of Assize, and the third pleading as Councellor at the bar, and
all the rest of great expectation in the kingdom? Thus Pro. 10. 1.
wise sons are a joy to their parents, and all may Psalm. 133. 1.
behold how good and comely a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity. Aristotle could say, Lib. 10. Ethni.
that parents were not blessed, unless they were after their death blessed in
their children. And surely it is no small part of a fathers blessedness, to
see his children like to flourish when he is gone. Nay of all monuments that
parents can leave behind them, there is none (as one says) like to a virtuous
son. But all parents are not so blessed. Genes 4.
Adams two sons could not agree in one field, Genesis 21. 9.
Abraham's in one house, Genesis 25. Fratrum gratia rarum.
Isaaks in one womb, 2. King. 1.
David's in one palace, nor those Luke 12. 13.
two brethren in the division of an inheritance. And though concord amongst
brethren (especially such as must divide the inheritance) be very rare, yet do
you, even in this, most comfortably agree. You are not as Simeon and Leui,
Romulus and Remus, Eteocles and Polynices, Atreus and Thyestes, Aeta and
Perseus: but as Castor and Pollux, David and Jonathan, Joseph and Benjamin; and
(as a true friend is described to be) (...).
one soul in two bodies. It seems that as Agrippa the brother of Augustus
was beholding to Salust for that one sentence: Small things increase by
concord, but perish through discord, so you have all learned the same lesson:
as being persuaded, that as the members of a body being once dismembered, they
cannot possibly be joined again: so if natural brethren be once unnaturally
disioyned, no glue will conioyne them fast again. It were infinite to show
examples of brotherly love and hatred, See French Academ page 542. etc.
and others have eased me of this pains. Now that good God, who has brought
you from one root, placed you in one country, advanced you to like credit,
and given you one heart, give you also one inheritance in the kingdom of
heaven. Thus right worshipful I am bold to speak unto you, and the world
knows I speak the truth, and the Lord knows I desire not to flatter. Go on
therefore I beseech you, continue in love, be settled in the truth, and labor
to honor him who thus honors you. Be not carried away with the (...)
show of this world, but think religion the best nobility, and that as (...)
Prudentius said: Generosa Christi secta nobilitat viros,
Cui quisquis seruit, ille vere est nobilis.
He noble is that comes of Christ his race:
Who serves this Lord, he surely is not base.
And this made Theodosius more to thank God, Hist. Eccles.
that he was a Christian then a king; considering that he must lose the one, he
could not lose the other. Now as to one of you I am bounden in particular, M.
Dector Montagu.
and by him, being a Minister, the despised Ministry is not a little graced: so
for him I pray, that he may be an Genesis 20.
Abraham to our Abimelech, a 2. Sam. 12.
Nathan to our David, a 2. Kin. 11.
Iehoida to our Ioash, Ier. 38.
an Ebedmelech to Jeremiah, an 2. King. 4. 1.
Elisha to the widow of this Prophet deceased, a light in the Court, a trumpet
in the Church, and that Esther 5. 2.
Ahashuerosh may long hold out his golden scepter unto him: that by his means
Dictu^ regis, deest regibus qui verum dicat.
great men may not want such as will tell them the truth: no Plu. in vita Alex.
reports, that Jupiters Priests called Alexander by the name of Jupiters son.
earthly Alexander accounted a son of Jupiter, and that no man may be more
respected then a good (...). page 42.
Pastor: and that he may ever remember that saying of wise Solomon: Prou. 22. 11
He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the King shall be
his friend. His Cyrus will not be spoken to verbis bissinis in silken words, to
his Alexander he needs not speak (...), either sweet words or no words. For
if one Antiochus might be surnamed holy, and another good Prince called the
Good King: much more may he, whose religious knowledge surpasses all the
Princes that have been of this nation: and whose humility is such, that he
will have his son to remember, (...). page 95. Odictum vere regium.
that he dissereth not in stuff, but in use from the rest of his people, and
that by Gods ordinance. I am the bolder for that one to make choice of you all
in the dedication of this book: no man knew, loved, conuersed with, and
respected this Author more then he. He resorted to him in his health, visited
him in sickness, and preached a learned Sermon for him at his death.
Concerning this author, as he said of Carthage, I had rather be silent then say
little, and his worthy labors do speak enough for him, by name that his
Problema Theologicum.
Posthume, dedicated to his excellent Majesty, by Master Samuel Ward, Fellow
of Immanuel College.
an excellent Divine. In a word therefore, whatsoever this man did, he desired
to profit others by it: he thought (as it is written Author vitae Ber. lib. 2.
cap. 4. and 7.
of Bernard in his life) that he was not his own man, but deputed to the
service of others. He was never idle, but as Hieron. ad Marcellam.
Hierome reports of Ambrose, and Bernard of himself, he did either read, or
meditate, or pray, or confer, or counsel, or comfort, or write, or preach.
And thus (as the Aliis inseruiens meipsam consum^.
Emblem is of a faithful Teacher) he, like a wax candle, in giving light to
others, in a short time extinguished himself. Yet in this short time of his,
what art was he not a master of? what virtue was he not endued with? He was a
complet Divine, and has this blessing in the Church, that no man's writings are
read of all sorts, and in all countries with greater grace and profit then
his. He was peaceable in the Church, patient of wrongs, and free from ambition.
For as Jerome said of Nepotian, aurum calcans, schedulas consectabatur: he
regarded not his purse, but followed his book, and as Bernard said, he lived
in terra auri sine auro, in a kingdom of gold without gold. An excellent gift
he had to define properly, divide exactly, dispute subtly, answer directly,
speak pithily, and write iudicially: and how he preached, if these Sermons do
give a testimony, what witness had they who often heard him themselves? I
have published of his now two Discourses, and I only did it, that these his
labors might not perish: I have no benefit by them but exceeding great
pains. And since I understand that his other labors are in the hands of his
friends, to make benefit for his children, I will ease my self of the like
labor, and be a means that they may have the benefit of the future impressions
of this book: the which, how faithfully I have published, I appeal to the
godly and indifferent Reader, and I hope no honest minded man will be hired to
calumniate it. Thus as one desirous to be serviceable in my calling, profitable
to the Church, not forgetful of my friend, and to testify the happiness of
your house, which was in your fathers time, and is now (as it is said of
Aurelian the Emperors,) Referta piis and Ecclesia Dei, replenished with the
godly, and a Church of God, and withal to leave a monument of my duty to you
all, I have as you see, published this exposition of seven Epistles under your
eight names, nothing doubting but it will be as welcome to you, as by your
countenance it may be profitable to the Church. The God of heaven give you all
that blessing of blessings, Epist. ad Iulianum.
which (if Jerome say true) few men have, that you may transire a deliciis ad
delicias, go on from grace to grace, and be a long time happy in this life,
and for ever happy in the life to come. London:

Saint Martins in the fields, from my worshipful friend Master Oldisworths
house, 2. Tim. 1. 16.
by which family (as Paul was by the house of Onesiphorus) in the time of this
late (and I wish I may say) the last visitation, I have received no small
refreshing. March 12. 1604.

Your Worships to command, Robert Hill: Fellow of S. John's College in
Cambridge.

LECTVRES UPON THE THREE FIRST CHAPters of the Revelation.
REVEL. 1. 1.. The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him.
MY purpose in choosing this text, is to speak of the three first Chapters of
this book: namely, the seven several Epistles written to the Churches in
Asia, which contain sundry uses and instructions fit for our time and age.

Before we come to the matter, Question.
we must consider of one question, which is, whether this present book of the
Revelation be canonical or not: for some have heretofore, and some now do call
the authority of it in question. Answer.
But we hold, that it is canonical, of equal authority with other canonical
Scriptures. Our arguments and reasons be these. The first is, because the
doctrine contained in this book is Apostolical, as any which diligently
reads the book may perceive. Secondly, because the style and manner of opening
and expounding the prophecy contained in it, is Apostolical, that is, plain,
simple and easy, if we consider that it is a prophecy. Thirdly, because this
book has been approved generally of all Churches, refused of no one Church in
any age since John wrote it: and it was never called into question but of some
particular man, never of any whole Church. Fourthly, the things foretold in
this book, came to pass as they were foretold. As among the rest (in one for
all) may appear, by that sign John saw in the thirteenth Chapter: two beasts
came, one out of the sea, the second out of the earth; the first signifying the
Roman Empire: the second the Roman apostaticall Church: which both are come
to pass in this last age.

Now follow the reasons which some allege to prove it not canonical: Reasons
why not Canonical answered. 1. Reason.
but they be all of no force. First S. John he names him self in this book,
where he never named himself once in all his Gospel, no not then when he had
just occasion to name him self, but sought to avoid it: therefore they
conclude, that it is not his book, but written by some other, and published in
his name.

The reason is not good. Answer.
For there is great difference between an history and a prophecy. S. John in
his history does not name himself; for there is no necessary reason, why one
in an history of another man should name himself. But in a prophecy, as this
book is, it is more requisite he should mention his own name. And so did
other Prophets, as Jeremiah mentions his name in his book at least an
hundred times: so Esaias and Daniel in every Chapter mention their names. Then
seeing they do it so often, it is no marvel if S. John in his book repeat
his name: yet he does it but five times in the whole book.

Ans. The difference of the style rises from the difference of the matter,
seeing there he writes an history, here he pens a Prophecy. Again, here he
writes not his own words, but those which he received from Christ by particular
revelation.

Ans. It cannot be proved that it was ever refused of any general Church, but
of some private man. Now the disallowing of any private man, cannot make a
whole book to be rejected: for then the Epistle to the Hebrews, and James his
Epistle should not be canonical, which be received of all Churches.

Now come to the words, which contain two parts. First, a Preface. Secondly, a
Vision. The Preface first contains an entrance to his matter, from the first
to the ninth verse: the vision, from the ninth to the end of the chapter. The
Preface has two parts: First, the title of the book: Secondly, the
inscription. The title in the three first verses: the inscription, from the
fourth to the ninth verse. The title in these words: The revelation of Jesus
Christ, etc. A revelation is nothing else but a manifestation or discovery of
things secret in respect of men, for the common good of the Church: and so this
word is taken here.

Revelations from God in the Scriptures were of three kinds: first, by dreams:
secondly, by vision: thirdly, by created voice of God face to face: as we may
see Number 12. 6. 8. 4. partly by vision, partly, by voice. Now this was not by
dream: for he received these things not by dream, vision, or voice alone, but
by vision from Christ, and by voice from God: so then it is mixed, partly
received by vision, partly by voice uttered from God.

In these three first verses, the Revelation is described by seven arguments:
first, by the author, Jesus Christ: secondly, the end: thirdly, the persons to
whom it was directed: fourthly, the matter: fifthly, the instrument: sixthly, the
manner of delivering it: seventhly, the fruit of the revelation. The first
argument by which it pleases the holy Ghost to describe this revelation, is
the author, vz. Jesus Christ, he is the author of it, it comes from him. It is
called his revelation, in these respects: first, not to exclude the Father and
the holy Ghost, but to show the special office of Christ: for the peculiar
office belonging to the second person, is to reveal, and to publish, and to
manifest the will of God the Father to the Church: and for that cause he is
called the Angel of the covenant, Mat. 3. 1.
the doctor of the Church, the wisdom of the Father, because his office is to
reveal the will of his Father to man. Secondly, it is called the revelation of
Jesus Christ, to teach us to put difference between this revelation and all
satanicall revelations: for as God has his true revelations, so Satan his ape
has his counterfeit revelations, and delivers them in show like to Gods, but
they differ much. First, the devils revelations be for the most part ambiguous
and doubtful, that a man cannot tell how to take the speech and phrase he
gives them in: but the revelations of God, (and that in this book) are
certain, and in plain terms delivered. Secondly, the devils revelations be
between him and his instruments, wicked and bad men: these in this and other
books, be to the godly, to his children and servants: as here to John and the
Church. Thirdly, the devils tend to maintain idolatry, errors and
wickedness, Deuteronomy. 13. these to maintain true Apostolical doctrine, and the
true worship of God.

Thirdly, it is called Christ's revelation, to show that Christ now ascending
into heaven, and entered into his kingly office, does still rule, order, and
govern his Church: and for that cause it is not called the revelation of God
the Father, or of the holy Ghost, but of Jesus Christ, because he guides and
gouernes the Church.

Seeing Christ Jesus now ascended into heaven, Use.
entered into his kingly office, does give his Church revelations: we see his
constant care of his church in this last age of the world. For as in the first
age he gave doctrine necessary for salvation and that time, and after he gave
his Church Prophecies: so in the new Testament he published the doctrine of the
Prophets plainly, and also the doctrine of faith and repentance by the
Apostles; and now after all these, being ascended up into heaven, he has no
less care of his Church: for he has given it now in this last age a notable
Prophecy, and revelation by John.

Which God gave unto him. These words be added, to show how he came by this
revelation, and whence he had it: he had it given him of the Father, and these
words explane the former, to show, that Christ was the author of it, God gave
him, that is, God the father, not the whole Trinity. For where this name God,
is opposed to Christ, there it signifies the first person, namely, God the
Father, and the first person is often called by this name alone, God, because
he is first in order, and the fountain of the Deity. For Christ receives his
divine nature, and Godhead from the Father by communication, the holy Ghost
from them both, the Father receives it from none.

God gave to him. Question. Answer.
How can it be given to Christ, seeing he was God, and had all things? Ans. We
conceive of Christ's 2. ways: first, as he is God: secondly, as he is Mediator
and head of the Church, and so he is both God and man. As he is God, the Father
gives him nothing, seeing he is by nature the same with the Father in all
things, save in propriety of persons. Secondly, he is conceived as the
Mediator, not God simply, but God-man, or God made man: and so he is said to
receive of the Father in respect of his manhood, as he is God-man, or God
incarnate. So he says: All power is given me of the Father. Mat. 28. that is,
as he is Mediator and God incarnate, and head of his Church. Phil. 2. God gave
him a name, etc. not as he was simply God, but as he was Mediator and in his
manhood: so here the revelation was given him not as he was God simply, but as
he was head of the Church, Mediator and God incarnate.

Neither can any say hence, Christ shall be inferior to the Father in regard
of his Godhead: for he receives it from the Father as he is God-man, not simply
God: and as he is man and Mediator, he is inferior to the Father, and
confesses that in that respect, God the Father is greater then all. And Paul
says, God the Father is the head of Christ. 1. Cor. 3. 11. 6. 3. Ioh. 10. 29.
as Christ is the head of the Church, God-man. Nay, as Christ sits at his
Fathers right hand, he is inferior to him, not as God, but as Mediator: and
look as he receives all power of the Father, so must he restore it again, as
he is head of the Church.

Now follows the means how he gave Christ this reuelalation. He gave it to
Christ, and made him Lord of it, so that he made this his royalty and
privilege: for Christ being king of his Church, and this book of revelation
being part of his law to the Church, he is king also of this book as part of
his law and royalty. Again, they were revealed to Christ before they were
revealed to any creature, man or Angel, and that as he was man: for his manhood
being united to his Godhead, he could not but know them ere any man or Angel
knew them, as he was man.

First, Use.
we observe that this book of Canonical Scripture is Christ's, he is Lord of
it, and the right of it belongs to him alone. For as the laws of a land belong
to a Prince and to none else, so these laws, the books of this Scripture they
be Christ's, as his royalty and privilege: for God gave them to him and to
none but him only, and he sent his Angels to reveal it to the Church. Now that
which is said of this book, may be said of all the books of Scripture: that
as the royalty and interest of this belongs only to Christ, being given to
him alone, so the same follows of all other.

Then hence I gather: no man in the world has authority above these laws,
above this book: for this is Christ's privilege, nor of any other by
proportion. For these be Christ's laws, al must be subject to them, none must
be above them: for then it should follow, that they were given to men as well
as to Christ Jesus. Hence it follows, that if all be subject to these laws,
then no man has authority to dispense with the Scriptures, or the Gospel of
Christ: for that is to make men to have royalty, interest, and title into
these Scriptures. Monarchs and Princes have great authority in their
jurisdictions, but they must all be in subjection to these laws of Christ: for
they be indeed great, and have authority over their subjects: yea more, over
all causes, yet only those which be the causes of men: they have no authority
in causes of God, as the Scriptures and the Sacraments.

Seeing these books be Christ's royalty, Use. 2.
and he alone has sovereign interest in the Church authority, we note, that
he alone can expound Scripture without help of Scripture; he alone can give
the true sense of Scripture. Indeed men can give the sense of Scripture by
Scripture: for they have a ministry here, and by Scripture they expound
Scripture: but Christ alone without Scripture can give the true sense of
Scripture.

This condemns the popish doctrine, which gives the Church absolute power and
authority to expound and determine of Scripture without help of the
Scripture: for that is to take Christ his royalty and privilege, and to give
it to men: but Christ alone has absolute authority to determine of his own
laws: men indeed in the Church have a ministerial judgment by help of the
Scriptures.

We see the excellency of all the Scriptures, Use. 3.
which is the same with this book. Now this book, it is the gift of God to
Christ Jesus his son, yea a most excellent gift: now this is not affirmed by
any writings of men, though never so excellent.

This should teach us, to reverence the Scriptures more then any men's writings
whatsoever. Then this shows the blindness of this age, which delight only in
the hearing and reading the writings of men, contemning the word of God. And
yet the writings of men be sinful and erroneous, every way imperfect: the
writings of God, holy, certain, and every way absolute, being given to the
Son as he is king, priest and Prophet.

To show to his servants concerning this testament shortly to be done. In these
words be 3. arguments for the description of this Revelation: First, the end,
vz. to show it: secondly, the persons, his servants: thirdly, the matter of it,
vz. things shortly to be revealed. The end of this revelation was to manifest
and declare to his servants, to wit, the Church of God (his servants and
children) to publish to them those things which should shortly be fulfilled,
and this is the maine drift of this Revelation.

Hence then we note, Use 1.
that the Papists err, who say, that lay men should not have the word, but
bar them the reading of the Scriptures: but the holy Ghost says, this
revelation was to reveal things to come, not only to the Clergy, nor to the
doctors of the Church, but to his servants: if so, then to the lay man as well
as the Clergy: unless they will say, he is none of his servants. Then this I
gather: if that this book, being most hard, must be learned of the lay man,
then those books which be not so hard must be learned and read, and much more
those which be more easy, as the history of the Gospel, the Epistles, etc.
Secondly, the persons are the servants of Christ: this book then of
Revelation, belongs not to all men indifferently, but it is written for the
servants of Christ: that is, such as repent of their sins, believe truly in
Christ, and show their faith by the fruits thereof in their lives. And so the
Lord says, he will reveal his secrets to his servants the Prophets: Psalm. 25.
12.
and the Lord will not keep back but reveal to Abraham the things he was to
bring upon Sodom and Gomorrha. Mal. 3.
Then seeing those to who^ the Lord shows his will, Genesis 18.
to whom he declares this book and others, they must be his servants: we must
not content our selves only to hear the word, and receive the Sacraments: but
we must seek to be his servants, we must repent truly, believe in Christ, and
show this faith in obedience, and then the Lord will more and more daily
acquaint us with his will. And the cause why we hear the word daily and never
profit, but be as ignorant and blind as before: the cause is, because we be not
his servants: we be bare hearers, never practice that we hear in faith and
obedience, we repent not, neither live a new life by repentance in new
obedience. For else if the Lord see any which is his true servant he approues
of him: he likes of him, and acquaints him daily with his will and word,
increases his knowledge and obedience.

Secondly, Use. 2.
seeing that this revelation is written for the servants of Jesus Christ: I
observe that Christ is true God: the reason is, because they be called his
servants, that is, Christ's. The reason stands thus, he which is Lord of the
Church and the members thereof, and also of Angels, (as it follows after) he
is true God: but Christ is Lord of men and Angels, ergo he is true God.

His servants: not to all men, to the whole world and every singular man, but
to his servants. Hereby we see the opinion of those which hold, God would have
all to be saved, and calls all men, is false. For if he called all effectually,
then he would offer all the means, to wit, the word of God, that so they might
be called: but he writes it not to all but to his servants; now, that which is
true of this book, is true of the whole Scripture. The Lord showed his word to
Jacob, not to all the world; not to all nations as to him. Psalm. 147. 19. 20.
he showed to Jacob, that is, his true members, his servants and true Christians.

Now follows the matter which is the fourth argument of the description of
this revelation, vz. Things which shortly must come to pass: and in this, the
matter of this book is distinguished from all other books of the Scripture,
which speak generally of things either present or now past; but this speaks
of things to come.

The matter of this book is described by two arguments: first, these things be
necessary, they must be done. Secondly, by the circumstance of time, shortly
or quickly.

First, the matter is things to come, which must be done: so speaks the holy
Ghost in many places of the word. As Christ says, showing the necessity:
Offenses must come: so Paul says: There must be heresies. Act. 14. We must,
through many tribulations enter into heaven, etc. So to Timothy: they which be
godly must suffer afflictions. Showing in all these places, that things which
are to come, must necessarily come to pass.

But this doctrine agrees not with man's reason, Objection.
though it be the will of God: for men will say; If all things come to pass
necessarily, then it takes away man's free will: for necessity and free will
can not stand together. Answer.
Answer. They may. Indeed constraint and man's will can not stand: but man's will
and unchangeable necessity may stand both together. As I show thus. In God
there is absolute free will, yet he does many things of necessity: as he
wills that which is good necessarily; for he can not possibly will that which
is evil, but wills that which is good most freely. So Christ he died
necessarily: he could not but die; for he died in regard of Gods counsel: and
yet he died most willingly, and gave himself most freely to die when he
suffered death: ergo these two, man's free will and unchangeable necessity,
though not constraint, may stand together.

Men will object again, If things come to pass by necessity, then it is in
vain to use any means, as to hear the word, receive the sacraments: for
Gods will must come to pass, do we what we will do. Answer. These men must
consider, that as God has appointed what things must come to pass, so he has
appointed the means how they must come to pass. Then seeing the Lord has
appointed as well the means as the end, we should by this necessity rather
be induced to use the means, then not to use them.

To make this more plain: we must know, there is a double necessity; one is
absolute, another is but in part. I call that absolute necessity, which can
not be otherwise possibly. As that God lives, it cannot be otherwise; he is
omnipotent, he cannot but be so. There is a necessity which is not absolute
but in part: as when any thing done is necessary, because it depends on
necessary causes. As fire to burn, this is not absolutely necessary, but in
part, because it depends on that order which God set in things in the creation.
It is not absolute: for if God should change that order in the creation, then
it may be fire should cease to burn, Dan. 2.
as it did in the three children in the oven.

Now in this place where he says; These things must be done, it is not to be
meant of absolute necessity, but of that which is but in part: for they must
come to pass necessarily, only in regard of Gods decree. In them selves they
be contingent, necessary by the unchangeable decree of God. In regard of which
decree of God, all things which come to pass be necessary: yet can it not be
inferred; therefore man has no free will. For this necessity takes it not
away, neither the second causes, but rather disposes them, and inclines man's
free will.

Secondly, the matter is described by the time, shortly, or quickly. But how
can this be true, seeing things spoken of in this book came not to pass a
thousand years after, which is a long time? Ans. They may be said to come to
pass shortly, though a thousand years after, in two respects. First of God,
to whom a thousand years is but as one day. Secondly, in regard of men: for
though a thousand years seem a long time to men ere it be expired, yet when it
is once past, it seems but a short time.

Which must shortly come. He sets down these words for two causes. First to
terrify all carnal and careless men; for it foretells judgments and
destructions to those which live in their sins, which be enemies to the
Church of God; and so it strikes a terror into their hearts, seeing their
destruction comes shortly. And no doubt, if any carnal man could lay this to
his heart, that judgment must come quickly, it would rowze him, if he belonged
to Christ, or else would terrify his soul.

We here live still in our sins; Application.
though we hear the word daily we never repent of our sins. But if we which
be so careless, would consider, that destruction and judgment must come
shortly to those which be careless, it would stir us up to repentance if we
had any grace. Let these careless men, let these consider, that the hand of
God may be on them quickly, take hold on them ere they be aware. Let the young
man not run on in his sins, 2. Pet. 2. 3.
lest the Lord come ere he be prepared and provided. For the Lord will come
quickly, his judgments they make have and are not far off, they delay not.

Secondly, the holy Ghost sets down this circumstance of time, to arm the
servants of Christ, the true members of the Church, against all persecutions,
afflictions and calamities which might befall them. For the children of God
being afflicted and crossed, they might be impatient and discouraged: but lest
they should be so, the Lord here tells them, that his coming shall be
shortly, they shall not always bear the heavy burden of afflictions on
their shoulders, but for a while, a short time, and then the Lord will come and
ease them, deliver them, and comfort their troubled minds, lest they should be
swallowed up with grief.

It follows: Which he sent. That is, which revelation he sent and showed by
his Angel. These words are set down for two causes. First to show, that S.
John he opened and published this book not rashly, but by calling and warrant
from God. This teaches us what must be our duty in all our actions,
whatsoever we take in hand we must look we have our calling and warrant. This
was the Apostles practice, as here S. John's; he opened not this revelation
before he had special warrant. So must we look for our warrant in the word,
and till we have it we must not enterprise any thing.

If this duty were practiced, there would be more conscience in the service
and worship of God, more care and conscience in our dealings with men then
there is.

Secondly, he sets down these words, to get more reverence and greater
authority to this book, that it might more be accepted of: and therefore he
says it was sent by an Angel to the Church. And this is a very good reason
to get credit to it and reverence. For if an earthly Prince should write his
letter to his subject, and withal send it by one of his guard, no doubt the
subject would receive it most reverently. The Scriptures they be the epistle of
God, sent to his Church, not by any but by his Angel: then this should
procure a thousand times more reverence, seeing God sends his letter to his
Apostle S. John, and so to the Church by the hand of an Angel.

Now follows the fifth argument of the description of this revelation, which
is, the instruments of this revelation, whereby it is conveyed from God to the
Church: and these be two. First an Angel, Secondly, John the Apostle or
Evangelist.

The first instrument is an Angel, by whom he sent this Revelation, to convey
it to his Church. And so the Lord has used their ministry in other places of
the scriptures.

So when the Law was given, Act. 7.
it was by the hand of an Angel. Daniel had many of his dreams expounded by an
Angel. Dan 9. 21 and 8
And the seven visions in this book of the Revelation were showed to John by
an Angel. Yet we must take heed we gather not hence, that we may worship
them, or pray to them, because they be present about us and see our wants: but
before we pray to them, we must have a commandment from God, and a special
promise, that they can and will hear and help us, else we must not pray to
them.

The second instrument is John the Apostle and Evangelist, which penned one of
the Gospels, that Disciple whom Jesus loved, son to Zebedeus, kinsman to
Christ.

Now to procure credit and more reverence to his revelation, he describes
himself by two arguments. First, calling himself his servant John. Secondly,
by an effect, Which bare record, etc. First he calls him self the servant of
Christ, not the Disciple of Christ, not Christ his cousin or kinsman, which he
might have done, but he calls himself the servant of Christ. For he had learned
that which Christ speaks Mat. 12. 50. He which does the will of my Father, he
is my mother, sister and brother: not he which is kinsma^ or cousin, but in
this, to do his fathers will, stands the note of his kinsman. And in this, to be
the servant of Christ, stands the dignity of a Christian. Had not the blessed
Virgin Christ's mother been a servant of Christ, she had never bin saved by
Christ. Then by this we see, it is nothing to help a man to salvation to be
borne of great kindred, to come of Princes and noble blood, but to be the
servants of Christ, to do the will of Christ, this is to be allied and cousin to
Christ. And if we will be the servants of Christ, we must become new creatures,
we must leave off our old service, and as S. Paul says, he knew not Christ
in the flesh, but served him in the spirit. And we must not content our selves
to be his servants in the general calling of a Christian, but in our
particular callings. For S. John was his servant not only in believing in him,
and obeying him generally; but in believing and obeying him in the particular
calling of an Apostle. So Paul, Romans 1. 9.
he was the servant of Christ, not only generally, but in the special calling
of the Gospel, in preaching the same. This example of his and the Apostles
must be our direction, we must not content our selves with the general calling
of Christians, but serve Christ in our particular callings. It is not enough to
profess Christ in public assemblies, to hear the word, receive the
Sacraments, but in our particular callings we must serve him at home: as the
magistrate, not only in his general calling of Christianity, but in his
particular calling, as he is a magistrate: the Minister as he is a Minister:
the master of a family as he is a master: and so all men in their particular
callings must obey Christ. And if the master of a family come to the
assembly, hear the word, receive the Sacraments, yet in his family fail, and
perform not the duties of a master, he is but an hypocrite, he is no true
Christian, though men accept so of him; because he must be obedient to Christ
both in general and particular calling.

Now follows the second argument by which John is described, he bare record
of the word of God. Which John bare this record, partly by preaching, partly by
penning the Gospel of Christ.

And because the word of God has two parts, the Law and the Gospel, he shows
in the next words, that he means especially the Gospel of Christ, adding, Of
things done and said by Christ. And lest any man should call his testimony
into question, he says he testifies that whereof he was an eye witness: he
saw it, and therefore could not be deceived, and therefore his testimony was
true.

The end why he alleges these words, is to show that he is a faithful
penman of this book, that so it might have more reverence: for he which was
faithful in penning the Gospel of Christ, the same also is faithful in
penning this Prophecy of the Church.

By these words we may gather, Use.
that to testify the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles to be the truth of
God, is a true note of a true Prophet. And by these we may distinguish between
a true Prophet and a false; if they bring the doctrine of the Apostles and the
Prophets it is true, Deuteronomy. 13. If they work wonders, and their doctrine be to
draw men from the true God, they are false Prophets and must be put to death.
And our Savior Christ being asked of his authority, he alleges Luke 10. 1.
John's testimony, and confirms John's testimony to be true, asking them this
question, The baptism of John, was it from heaven or of men? showing that John
was a true Prophet, seeing his Baptism, that is, his doctrine was from heaven.

Hereby we see, the difference of a true Prophet and false alleged by the
Papists, is no true difference: for they say, If one can work miracles, he is
a true Prophet: whereas Deuteronomy. 13. false Prophets may do that. But the true
mark of a true Prophet is the doctrine delivered by the Prophets and Apostles:
and he which brings this, though he can not work a miracle, is a true Prophet.

Now follows the sixth argument, by which this revelation is described: which
is, in the manner of propounding and delivering of it to the Church. And this
manner and form of delivery of it stands in four degrees. First, God the
Father gives it to Christ the Mediator. Secondly, Christ the Mediator and
head of the Church, gives it to an Angel. Thirdly, the Angel conueyes it to
John the Apostle. Fourthly, John directed and assisted by the holy Ghost,
delivers it to the Churches.

Now as this particular book was, so no doubt all the whole Scriptures were
conveyed to the Church. Now in that the Lord has so conveyed his Scriptures to
man, we see his perpetual care and love of man, and of the members of his
Church. Also we see the great excellency and dignity, as also the perfection
of these books, seeing they were delivered to man by God, and by him he
delivers his will to his Church.

This shows the blasphemy and sin of the Church of Rome, who call the written
word of God, a dead letter, a dumb judge: they hold, that general Councels be
equal to the word; that the universal consent of the Church is above the
Scriptures, it gives life and sense to them, which otherwise they say of
themselves be but an inkie and dumb word. But we see they be far above all
these: for they be most absolute and perfect, and also most excellent, seeing
they being given of God the Father to Christ the mediator and head of the
Church, and by him conveyed to an Angel, who delivers them to John, and he
published them to the Church: these degrees of the delivery of the^ show they
be most excellent and perfect.

Blessed are they which hear, etc. Verse 3.
Here is the seventh and last argument of this description of the Revelation:
which is, by the fruit, effect, and the profit which comes of it, being heard
or read: and joined with marking and attention, it brings happiness.

Blessed. That is, blessedness which stands in the fellowship of God, and life
everlasting belongs to them, which hear and read this book, and mark it,
keep it in memory, remember the things contained in it, being a prophecy of
the estate of the Church, partly present, partly to come.

Blessed is he which reads. Here the holy Ghost sets down the proper end
of the Scriptures, and of this book particularly. For the end of this book,
and so of all other books of the Scriptures, is to bring men to happiness,
and felicity, and life everlasting. Ioh. 20. last: the Scriptures be to make
us believe in Christ, that so believing we might have eternal life. 1. Ioh. 1.
^. He declared to them the word of Christ, that by it they might have
fellowship with God the Father, Son and holy Ghost, which fellowship is true
happiness it self, Ioh. 5. 39. Search the scriptures, for in them you think
to have eternal life. And in this they differ from all other books and
writings of men. For men's writings, being penned either by the light of nature,
and so be thence erroneous, and miss of the end of happiness and everlasting
life: or else they be penned by them which have light by by the word; and so as
they agree with the word, they be grounded on the word, and have all their
truth from it.

Seeing the end of this book, Use 1.
as of the other books of scripture, is to bring men to happiness, we see the
opinion and practice of the Church of Rome is damnable, who bar the people of
God from reading and hearing the Scriptures in their vulgar tongue: for in
barring them of the means, they bar them of their salvation the end of them;
whereas S. John would by these words, Blessed, etc. draw men and allure them
to to read and delight in the Scriptures.

Ioh. 5. 39. even as we would search for gold, or some precious thing which we
would feign find, (so the word imports.) And he adds the reason: For in them
you think to have eternal life.

But some will say: I cannot read, I was never brought up in learning. S. John
cuts off this excuse in the next words: Blessed is he which reads or hears
the words of this prophecy. So that if he cannot read, yet if he hear and
keep it, he is blessed. Then those which can not read them, they must procure
others to read, they must hearken and hear diligently.

We must learn to carry in mind the distinction between the books of God
and writings of men. Gods word brings a man which keeps it to happiness: but
man's of them selves can not, unless they have light from the word of God.

And if this distinction were imprinted in our hearts, we should not be so
delighted either to hear or speak the words of God mixed with the words of
sinful men.

First, among the Jews it was not lawful to mingle cloth of diverse kinds:
then much less will the Lord suffer his word to be mingled with the sayings of
erroneous and sinful men, be they never so learned or ancient.

Secondly, here follows the right manner and way of hearing and reading the
Scriptures, which stands in two things. First, we must set down a certain end
why we read the Scriptures, which is, that we may attain to happiness,
fellowship with God, and life everlasting. And when this takes place: that we
set down this end, that we read and hear them with care and conscience to
practice them. Secondly, we must keep the^, remember the things we read or
hear. And this second point is principal, to hear and to read so, as we
keep those things we hear or read: and so as we make observation of that we
hear; so the words import. Here we see the cause, why we hear and read the
word daily, yet no profit comes thereby: the cause is, because we be only
hearers, we keep it not to make use of it in our lives.

That we may keep the word which we hear or read, it is so commended to us
in many places. Luke 2. 19. Mary is said to keep and to ponder all these
things in her heart. Psalm. 119. 8. David he hid the statutes of the Lord in his
heart. Luke 11. Blessed are they which hear the word and keep it. James 1.
21. We must keep the word, which is grafted in us: where it is compared to a
ciens or graffe, which is set into a stock: so the word is ingrafted into our
hearts, and there it must abide and bring forth fruit.

That we may keep this word, Rules to keep Gods word.
we must first learn the elements of Religion in the Catechism: both old and
young must learn them, for that is the beginning of all knowledge: and

That we may keep those things we hear or read, we must 1. Sam. 16. 6.
they must sanctify themselves: so we in receiving of the Lords supper, we
prepare our selves reverently. Now that we do in the Lords supper, we must do
in hearing the word, seeing there is no difference, but that that Supper is
only a visible word, the word preached is an audible word. When the people
received the law, Exodus 19.
the Lord commanded them to sanctify themselves three days before. So then
when we come to hear the word, which is the law expounded, we must sanctify
our selves, prepare our hearts to hear it. Rules for hearing Gods word*
This preparation stands in these things: 1. we must put out of our hearts all
by-thoughts, all cares and thoughts of worldly affairs, and we must set our
hearts to seek the Lord, Ezra 7. to look in the law, that we may know the
will of God revealed in his word; withal we must make our carnest prayers to
God, that he would open our eyes, that we may see his will, soften our hearts,
and make our ears attentive as Lidiaes were, and also give us grace to embrace
his word, and keep it.

When we are about to hear or read the word, we must have humble hearts, else
we cannot keep the word, nor believe the promises in the same. The Lord he
reueales his secrets to the humble in spirit, Psalm. 25. 11.
that is, which be humbled for their sins, troubled and touched with their
own infirmities, which have contite, broken and bruised hearts; but in the
proud heart, there is no keeping of the word, there is no hole in it for the
word to lie in, but it is wholly possessed and puffed up with self-love and
pride.

Luke 8. 15.
good hearts, such as are not purposed to live in sin, or any one sin, be
it never so little, but wholly purposed to serve the Lord: we must not come with
unchaste or wicked hearts, with minds to leave all sin, but yet to live in
some one sin.

Heb. 4. 2. The old Jews heard the word, but it profited them not, because
they mingled it not with faith in their hearts: where he compares them to a
vessel, in which there must be both the word and faith, and these must be
mingled together; it must be tempered by faith, and then it will be a word of
power, of life and salvation: and this is the only means to remember the
word, and to believe truly the judgments denounced against sin and sinners,
and promises pronounced for the true believers. But incredulity, is when we
except the curses against sin as not pertaining to us, and cannot apply the
promises of the Gospel. This is the proper cause of all ignorance and
oblivion; so that we must labor above all things for this true faith, to
believe the word, and then we shall well and easily remember it.

We must have hearing hearts: besides these ears of the body, Psalm. 40. 6, 7.
we may answer with David: I am ready to do thy will, O God.

Further, after we have read or heard the word, we must practice

Which are written in the book of this prophecy. The child of God must keep
and remember the whole word of God, yet it is his special duty to keep these
prophesies which are to come. So the Angel bids Daniel seal up the book of
the Prophecy till the time come, Dan. 12. 4.
that is, remember and keep it diligently. So Matthew 24. 15. When they shall
see the abomination of desolation, speaking of things to come, he would have
them to mark and remember what he says, Mat. 24. 25. Behold, I have told you
before: where he shows, that when any great things are to befall the Church,
then we must in these be most careful to remember them.

For the time is at hand. Here is a reason of the former words, Blessed is he
which reads, etc. Seeing the time of the accomplishing of this Prophecy is
at hand, and must shortly be fulfilled, therefore those be blessed which read
and keep this prophecy; and it is an answer to a secret objection. For they
might have said, We need not read this Prophecy, seeing it shall not be
fulfilled in our days; but he adds, The time is at hand, and so takes that
objection away.

Now seeing these words were in the first verse, and here repeated again, he
would teach us that they contain some weighty matter for us to be considered,
and to be earnestly thought of. Now S. John adds these words for two causes:
first, because the Church, though it cannot be overtaken with deadly sleep,
yet it may slumber, and be cast into some beginnings of sleep: as the five
wise virgins, though they slept not so carelessly as the other, yet they all
slept, not a deadly sleep, but a slumber: for in the Church there may be some
remnants of security. Cant. 5. 2. The Church sleeps, but so as she always
listens as awaken, being in a light slumber. Now least the Church should be
careless, sleeping and drowsy, the holy Ghost adds these words, The time of
the last judgment is at hand.

Secondly, he adds these words to confirm the Church, and all the true
members of Christ against afflictions: seeing by these words he foretells them,
that they be to last but a short time; the time of judgment is at hand, the
affliction cannot long endure. Then this should comfort those which suffer for
Christ his sake.

In this that Christ foretells the Church, Use.
that now in the last age the time is at hand; we must be assured that
whatsoever befalls the members of Christ, shall shortly befall them;
temtations, afflictions, the cross and calamity shall presently befall us, the
time of judgment is at hand, it will presently befall us. And if we had this
confidence, that the last judgment is at hand, it would make us do all in good
conscience, stay us from many sins: and the want of this is the cause of much
mischief: for so the bad servant thinking his master would defer his coming,
he smites and beats his fellow servants. And the old world lived in sin, and
would not believe the flood should come, though they were foretold of it, till
they were all swept away by water.

We then should lay this to our hearts: ever think the Lord is at the door, he
is presently to come to judgment. And we ought the rather to think of this;
for we have had ease, peace, and the Gospel flourishing this; 8 years with
all temporal blessings. Now the state of the Church, is now peace and now
trouble and persecution. Now then, seeing these crosses which must fall on the
Church, they be to be done presently, we cannot but look for affliction and
persecution after so long peace and preaching.

John to the seven Churches in Asia, Verse 4.
grace and peace, etc. In this fourth verse is the second part of this Chapter,
which is the inscription of this book; wherein is first the party which writes
it and dedicates it: secondly, the parties to who^ it is dedicated: first, the
party which dedicates it, is John: secondly, the parties to whom, the seven
Churches in Asia.

In the inscription are two parts, first, a dedication, secondly, a salutation,
contained from the fourth till the ninth verse. In the dedication, there be
first the party which dedicates it, secondly, the parties to whom it is
dedicated. The party which dedicates it is John, who here again in this fourth
verse repeates his name, yet so as he repeates no more but his bare name
without any titles of commendation: he repeats it again, to show and certify
every Reader of this book, that he was without all doubt the true penman of
the holy Ghost in writing this Revelation. But though he repeat his name, yet
he does not add any titles of honor, as he did in the first verse many titles
of praise and commendation. This he does to give us a true pattern of modesty
and humility, which is, never to speak in our own causes to our own praises,
but only in cases of necessity, when Gods glory may be advanced, and the
credit of our particular callings maintained. This Paul practiced, who often
humbles himself, and calls himself the least of all the Apostles, yea the
chief of all sinners: yet when the credit of his Apostleship came into
question, then he sets out himself, showing he was a true Apostle, and above
those which did falsely call themselves so. 2. Cor. 11. So may we, when the
glory of God, or the credit of our particular callings be in question, set out
our selves with titles of commendation.

The persons to whom he wrote, were the seven Churches in Asia: concerning
them, note two things, first, he calls them Churches, secondly, in Asia.

Why writes he to the Churches rather then to the Church, seeing there is but
one true Church? Ans. The Church may be considered, first, as it is the whole
company of the elect, and so it is but one: secondly, as it is parted and
diversely sundred into parts; as in one country there is one Church, or one part
of the Church is in one city or town, another part in some other And there may
be many Churches, seeing every congregation professing the Gospel of Christ,
is a Church, being a member of the true Catholic Church: as the sea is but
one, yet there be many parts of the sea, which lying against other countries,
are called by their names, as the English, French, Spanish, Italian sea. So the
particular Churches in particular countries, towns and cities, be Churches,
though not the Catholic Church, but members of it. Note first, the matter of
this book concerns the Church, seeing it is a prophetical history concerning
the estate of the Church, from the time of John to the end: and therefore it is
meet it should be dedicated to the Church. Secondly, it is dedicated to the
Church, seeing the true members of the Catholic Church be the pillars and
ground of truth: not that their authority is above the word, but because they
preserve the scriptures as a treasury from age to age. And they be pillars and
grounds of truth, because they give testimony to the truth of Gods word. 3.
Because they publish the truth of Gods word, in and by the ordinary ministry
of the word; and so the church being the pillar and ground of truth, it is fit
this book should be dedicated to it. Secondly, he writes it not to all
Churches, but makes choice of these seven Churches in Asia: first, because they
were then most famous, as the Chapters following, and histories of the Church
do show. Secondly, he says not, to the Churches of Jerusalem and of the Jews,
but of Asia, to show them that which was long before foretold was now
fulfilled; namely, that the Gentiles according as the Prophets foretold, should
be called: which now was verified, seeing the Gentiles dwelt in Asia.

Seeing John wrote and dedicated this book to the Churches in Asia many years
after Christ, Use.
and not to the Church of Rome: then we see that the Papists are deceived, who
would have their Church the mother Church, and all other Churches must rely on
theirs: but if that Church of Rome had been the mother, and most famous, no
doubt John would have dedicated it to her. But he does dedicate it to the
Churches in Asia, showing they were then more famous then Rome.

2 Now follows the salutation, The Salutation
Grace and peace etc. Salutation is of two forts, civil or religious: civil,
as that which men use ordinarily with one another: 2. religious, which is more
peculiar and proper to the Church: and so it is here a religious salutation.
And seeing the Apostles use it commonly in all their Epistles, may be called an
Apostolical salutation. They used this in all their Epistles, Grace and peace,
etc. which they did, because their ministry was of grace and peace, and they
made their salutation answerable to their ministry: for their Apostleship
stood in these two, to preach the word, and to pray for the people, that they
might have grace and peace. And the apostles use this phrase in manner of
blessing, for when their ministry stood in two actions, in preaching and
praying for the people, under the second action of praying, was contained this,
to bless the people: and so did the high Priests and Levites: Number. 6. 24.
as also Christ he used this: so Ministers to show their duty more fully, John
20. 21.
after they preach the word, they bless the people.

Grace be with you. Most excellent words: and contain in them the sum and
substance of the whole Gospel. Grace signifies two things, first, Gods favor
and good will, secondly, his graces. Here it signifies his favor, because in
this salutation grace is opposed to peace, which is a grace of God, so that it
cannot be meant of a grace of God: then by it is meant his good will and
favor, whereby he accepts of us for Christ his sake. S. John begins with Grace
first, and not with Peace, because grace is the ground of peace, and all
blessings and graces of God. We must first be in Gods favor, then we must
look to have prosperity and graces from God. Grace is the ground of all
blessings, as of our election, vocation, redemption, justification,
sanctification, of faith, repentance, and perseverance in faith and repentance:
nay it is all in all in the matter of our salvation. For this cause he begins
with it.

And peace. Peace is taken first for welfare and good success in things of
this world, by Gods blessing. Exodus 18. 7. Moses asks Iethro his father in law
of his peace, that is, of his welfare; and so it is partly taken in this place.

Secondly, it is taken for that unity and blessed concord we shall have in the
kingdom of God, and so it is especially taken here. And being thus taken, it
has six parts; first, when we have peace with God, which is, when we stand in
the favor of God, reconciled to him in Christ Jesus. Secondly, when we have
peace with Gods Angels, in that they guard us and carry us as a nurse does her
child in her arms, that we hurt not our feet at any stone: and when they
rejoice at our good estate. Psalm. 91. 11.

The third is peace with a man's self, when his conscience will not accuse him,
but excuse and clear him; as when our conscience is washed in the blood of
Christ, Phil. 4. 7. this peace passes all understanding.

The fourth is peace with the church. So Act. 4. 32. those which believed, were
all of one mind and heart, had peace with each other. So Esa. 11. 6. The wild
beast and the Lion, the Lamb and the Cockatrise and the young child shall lie
together.

Fifthly, this peace and favor of God, is with the enemies of God, so far as it
is for the good of the Church, and the glory of God. So Joseph had peace in
Pharaohs house. So Daniel had peace with the Kings Eunuchs: for though he was
free when the children were cast into the oven, yet he did not revolt; but
being favored, they saved him.

The sixth is peace with all Gods creatures, beasts, birds, all creatures in
heaven and earth. Ose. 2. 18. The Lord will make a covenant between us and all
his creatures. Psalm. 91. 13. The child of God he shall tread upon the lion and
serpent, and they shall not hurt him: for when a man is in Gods favor, what
creature dares to hurt him? nay all the creatures are ready and willing to serve
him.

Grace and peace. As though he had said, first you must be in the favor of
God, you must have unity and reconciliation with and in Christ, and then this
peace, welfare, prosperity in all good things as far as is necessary, yea
then concord and unity with God and all his creatures will follow.

Whereas the Apostle wishes them grace in the first place, Use.
he would teach us that this Gods favor is to be sought for above all things,
yea in the first place. Psalm. 4. 6. Many say, Who will show us any good? But
David he seeks this grace and favor of God, Lord lift up the light of thy
countenance upon me: let me be in thy favor. Psalm. 119. 57.
And often he says, the Lord he is his portion, inheritance, and his lot:
showing, to be in the love and favor of God, is to be preferred before all
things in the world. So must we seek first to be in Gods favor, make that our
chiefest care, seek it above all things: but we little practice this, because
we bring from our cradles natural presumption, which persuades us that we be
in the favor of God, that we have his love to us. But we must cast off this
natural presumption, and take a new course; and the first step to come to
grace, is to see that we want grace: we must see that we be lost sheep:
prodigal children in our selves, the very firebrarnds of hell: and this, to
see our own want of grace, is the first step to grace. The second step, is to
desire it when we see that we want it, to hunger and long for it. Thirdly, to
lay hold on it, to apprehend this favor and grace by true and lively faith, to
apply the promises of salvation by faith in Christ Jesus: and this is the last
step to get this grace.

Secondly, in that he sets down, first grace, secondly peace, here is the true
order of seeking for things and blessings in this life. First, for grace and
Gods favor: secondly, for peace and welfare: not first peace and welfare, but
first for grace. So Christ bids us, first to seek the kingdom of God, and the
rigteousnes thereof, and then when we are in Gods kingdom of grace, all things
needful shall be ministered to us.

This discouers the bad practice of most men, who begin at a wrong end: first,
with peace in their callings, to get honor, riches, pleasure or preferment,
never seeking first for grace and Gods favor: but if we would have peace, we
must first have grace.

But men, if God bless them in riches, health and wealth, they say, Oh, God
loves me: but alas, we deceive our selves; for we may have peace, yet want
grace: we may have this welfare, health, wealth, liberty, and yet want grace:
nay, the peace of the wicked is no blessing, but a curse. And though the Lord
give a man health, wealth, liberty, which be but common blessings, he may be
out of his grace and favor: seeing the Lord bestows these common blessings on
those which be his enemies. Psalm. 73. 12. But though the wicked have all these
common blessings, they be accursed. And though a man had grace, the favor and
true love of God, and had no other health, wealth nor liberty, yet he were
most happy and blessed.

From him which is, was, etc. Here he sets down the cause efficient and the
author of these two, Grace and Peace: the Author is God, distinguished into
three persons, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: the Father in these words,
which is, was, and is to come: the holy Ghost is noted in these words, And from
the seven spirits, which are before his throne: thirdly, the Son in the fifth
verse.

S. John in the first place describes the Father by his true nature, in these
words, Which is, was, and is to come; in which he alludes to that, Exo. 3. 14.
15. where Moses demands of God, if the people should ask who sent him, what
he should answer: the Lord tells him, say, I am, Ehjeh, Jehovah, has sent me:
where are two names to one end, namely, to express the nature of God. Now S.
John he expounds them here, where he says, He which is, which was, and is to
come.

Further, these two names, Ehjeh, Jehovah, be two such names as cannot be
translated fully in our English tongue, but are more significant in their
original Hebrew tongue: for they import thus much; Grace and peace be from him
which is in himself, and from himself, a most perfect and absolute substance,
which was, and which is to come; a most absolute perfect simple substance and
essence; so that he is a nature most simple, pure, and subsisting in and by
himself, 1. Cor. 8. 4. An idol is not so, it is nothing in and of it self,
but only in man's brain: it has no subsisting and being of it self by
nature, but by man's art: and thus the Lord differs from all false gods, seeing
he has his being in and from himself, not of or by any other thing. None
other has this property but God.



Seeing then we have all we have of God, our bodies, souls and all we enjoy,
we must in lieu of recompense, in thankfulness and obedience, give our selves,
souls and bodies to his service, to do his will and pleasure.

The Lord is most absolute and eternal every way, without

From him which is to come. That is, to judgment, to judge all his creatures,
especially men and Angels. That God, which is, was, which has his being of,
in, and from himself, he shall come to judgment. This must we remember and
think of, that he which is God of himself and by himself, which gives us
life and being, he shall judge us: and this will be a means to make us do our
duty in conscience. But many men flatter themselves, saying; God will not come
in my time to judgment: but though the Lord come not to general judgment in
this life, yet he will come in particular judgment by death in this life.
Thirdly, if we would always remember this, it would bridle out lives, and make
us keep a good conscience before God and all men. Act. 16. 24.

And from the seven spirits which are before his throne. Verse 4.
These words commonly are expounded of the Angels of God, which stand and
minister unto him: but it cannot be meant of them, for two causes. First, those
which are here called seven spirits, from these grace and peace come, but it
cannot come from the holy Angels, which attend to minister before the Lord.
Secondly, in this verse, which is a benediction or a salutation of John to the
Church, the seven spirits are set before Jesus Christ the second person of the
Trinity, which cannot be true of the Angels, who in no respect can be placed
before Christ: therefore it cannot be understood of the holy Angels. But for my
part I understand it thus, And from the seven spirits, etc. that is, from the
holy Ghost. This exposition is most agreeable to all the circumstances of the
text, and the holy Ghost is called the seven spirits: first, because, though he
be one in substance, yet he is seven, that is, many in gifts and operations:
and for this cause the spirit of God calls himself the seven spirits. Secondly,
he calls him so, because he sets down the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, as he
saw them in vision. Now S. John saw the holy Ghost in form of seven lights in
a vision, Reu. 4. 5.

Which are before the throne. This he speaks by comparison taken from earthly
kings, which fitting in their thrones, do there show their might and majesty
most. So S. John he saw God the Father sitting in a throne by vision, Reu. 4.
and Christ at his right hand, and before the throne the holy Ghost. Hence it
follows, not that he is inferior to the Father, and to the Son: but by this
comparison and kind of speech, S. John sets out the office of the holy Ghost,
which is, to be sent by the Father and Son to the Church, to enlighten the
members thereof, and to sanctify them.

Seeing that he ascribes grace and peace from God the father, Doct. 1.
and also from the seven spirits, that is, the holy Ghost: hence we note, the
holy Ghost is very God; for from whom grace and peace proceeds, he is perfect
and very God.

ergo we may pray to him for them.

There be some which doubt whether we may pray to the holy Ghost: but they may
as well doubt whether he be God or not: but they say we have no example. Ans. It
is false: for here we have an example; for though this grace and peace, etc. be
a blessing, yet in substance it is a prayer as though he had said, O Father,
Son and holy Ghost, let thy grace and peace be upon the Church.

Which are before the throne of the Father. Hence we note, the holy Ghost is a
substance, and a person subsisting, not a quality, as some Heretics hold,
confessing the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and denying the Godhead of
the holy Ghost. But here we see, for the holy Ghost, he is a substance and
person subsisting, standing before the throne of the Father, not a gift or
grace proceeding from God, but a person distinguished from the Father and the
Son: the Father he sits on the throne, the Son is on his right hand, the
holy Ghost distinguished from them both, stands before the throne.

And from Jesus Christ. Verse. 5.
That is, grace and peace from Jesus Christ. Where Christ Jesus is joined to
the Father and the holy Ghost, in bestowing grace and peace on his Church.

Ob. Why is Christ, the second person of the Trinity, placed after the holy
Ghost the third Person? Answ. For two causes. First, Christ is considered two
ways: first, as he is the Son of the Father: secondly, as he is the Mediator
of the Church. Now as he is the Son of the Father, he is the second Person in
Trinity, and so before the holy Ghost in order. Secondly, as he is Mediator;
and so he is after them both, the Father and the holy Ghost: Esa. 61. 1. The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, has sent me to preach. Where Christ is sent by
the holy Ghost to preach, as he is Mediator, and so as he is sent, in that
respect he is after the holy Ghost.

Secondly, he is placed after the holy Ghost, because the manner of them which
pen the Scriptures, is to set them in the last place of whom they mean to
speak last. So Mat. 1. he setting down the genealogy of Christ from Abraham,
though in all those there was none more excellent then Christ; yet he is in the
last place because of order: the Evangelist meaning to speak and treat of him,
he sets him in the last place, purposing still to continue his history of the
life and death of Christ. So here S. John he placed Christ in the last place,
because he purposed to continue his history in speaking of the death and
passion of Christ, and other things which concern him.

Now what says he of Christ? From this fifth till the ninth verse he describes
Christ, first, by his offices: secondly, by the execution of his offices. His
offices are three: first, he is set out by his prophetical office in these
words: which is that faithful witness: secondly, by his priestly office: the
first begotten of the dead: thirdly, by his kingly office: and that Prince of
the kings of the earth.

First, 1. Office.
his prophetical office. First, he is a witness. Secondly, a faithful
witness. Thirdly, that faithful witness. First, he is a witness, Esa. 55.
4. I gave him to be a witness to the nations. In that he is called a witness,
there are signified many duties of his prophetical office: as first, to
reveal the will of his Father: secondly, to certify the Church of the
certainty of the same: and in these two stand his whole office prophetical.

First, to reveal his Fathers will to the Church is his office: for there is
none which knows his Fathers will, but he which came from the bosom of the
Father, and he has declared it. Ioh. 1. 18. And he has not only declared his
Fathers will since he came in the flesh: but from the beginning he revealed the
will and word of God. When the Lord rained fire on Sodom Genesis 19. 24. there
Jehovah the Father rained down, by Jehovah the Son. So when the covenant was
made to our first parents, it was made in Christ the promised seed. It was
renewed to Abraham and the Patriarchs from the Father by the Son, as appeared
in the bush, Exodus 3.
where Jehovah appeared: but 1. Cor. 10. there he is called Christ. The
Prophets and the Apostles wrote as they were inspired by Christ, they were but
his instruments to speak and write that he put into them by the holy Ghost.
The matter, and the style and phrase of the Scripture, all came from Christ.
Nay, when any particular man comes to understand the Scriptures, this is by the
working of Christ: he opens their eyes. Luke 24.
He gave the disciples understanding as they went to Emaus, to understand the
Scriptures.

The second duty of Christ, 2. Duty.
is to certify men of his Fathers will, and that in conscience of the
certainty of his Fathers will. This certification is general or particular.
When he certifieth men, that the word written or spoken by man out of the word,
is the word of God, neither nature nor learning can do this, but it is proper
to Christ's Prophetical office: and for this he says to his disciples, Ioh. 15.
he will send them the comforter which shall lead them into all truth.

Here we must know, first, by what means he assures us: secondly, the
principal cause of this assurance. The means, is the word it self. The
principal cause, is the operation of the holy Ghost.

By this, 1. Point.
three points are resolved. First, the Papists ask, how a man can come to
know, Objection.
that the Scriptures read and taught be the word of God? Answer.
Answ. We must here have recourse to the word, and to the faithful witness,
and desire of him his spirit, and so we shall be able to discern, and judge of
it: for no natural man can do it, no natural man can discern the things of
God: but he which is enlightened by the Spirit of God, he can.

Secondly, a man must have Christ his testimony of Scripture, which is the
Scriptures themselves: for in them he sets down this testimony of the
Scriptures.

But if Christ's testimony be set down of the Scriptures, Question.
why do not all men know it?

Unless a man have a natural faculty of seeing, Answer.
he cannot discern the Sun though it shine: so unless a man have grace from
Christ to judge of the Scriptures, he cannot judge of the^: but if any have the
spirit of discerning, then if he read and mark the phrase and manner of
writing, the style and authority of the Scriptures, he shall see then in every
line a testimony of them given by Christ.

How can a man know the true religion, 2. Point.
seeing the Turk, Papist, Question.
Jew, and Protestant have their religions, and dye in them? I answer, Answer.
for to know which is true of these, we must have recourse to the faithful
witness Christ, and what he says is true religion, that we must hold for true
religion. Now Christ he gives testimony of them in the Scriptures, and the
Scriptures be as a letter sent from heaven to the Church, showing and
testifiing which is true religion: not that of the Jew, Turk, or Papist, but
of the Christian.

Sundry men hold diverse opinion in matters of religion, 3. Point.
as the Jew, Question.
Turk, Papist, and Christian: which is the true opinion? how is it known?
Answer.
Answ. Still we must have recourse to the witness of truth, the faithful
witness, and Prophet of the Church: and he is the judge of these
controversies. Now in the Scriptures if we mark them, we shall see his
judgment, which of these is true. But if there be diverse opinions of
Scriptures, what must be judge? In this diversity of opinions, yea of the
Scriptures themselves, we must still have recourse to the Scriptures and if we
note the circumstances, the manner of writing: if we confer Scripture with
Scripture, we shall easily find out the true sense and meaning: for the Lord
sets out in them his judgment plainly and fully.

The second certificate is particular, belonging to the Prophetical office of
Christ: which is, to certify men in particular, that the promise of the
Gospel belongs to them, as to Peter, John, etc. that he is the child of God,
and that everlasting life belongs to any child in particular: and this is done
especially by the word, not read, but preached, being joined with the working
of the Spirit. Romans 8. We have the spirit of Christ, which testifies with our
spirit we be the sons of God. Now if this be the duty of Christ, to certify
men in particular, that everlasting life belongs to me, or to any particular
man, then their doctrine is damnable who deny this, seeing it is the proper
office of the prophetical office of Christ. And in this he differs from al
other Prophets and Apostles which be witnesses: for they can witness only
outwardly to the ear, but he can speak and testify to the conscience:
neither can any of them certify any man particularly, though their ministry
tend to that end.

Christ is not only a witness, but a faithful witness: first, because he
testifies not his own will, but his which sent him: namely, his Fathers.
Secondly, he testifies all his Fathers will, neither adding nor detracting from
it. Thirdly, because he teaches it as he received it sincerely, in the same
manner in which he received it, not altering, changing, or deprauing his
Fathers will.

That faithful witness. The Lord has sundry faithful witnesses, as the
Prophets, Apostles, the Church, nay, the Sun and Moon, Psalm. 89. verse. 37.
but Christ alone is that faithful witness, whereby he is distinguished from all
other witnesses: for he is above all other, his witness is authentical,
sufficient of it self, and needs no confirmation. The witness of the Apostles
and Prophets, be not authentical and certain, but as they consent with
Christ's witness. Secondly, he is that witness, because he is the Lord of that
house whereof he gives witness, namely the Church, but the Apostles and
Prophets are but servants.

Thirdly, Christ his witness is inward, it assures and speaks to the
conscience: but the witness of men, as of the Prophets and Apostles, is outward
only; it comes to the ears, it never binds and assures the conscience: so
that for that prerogative he is above all witnesses, and here called, THAT
faithful witness.

1. Whereas Christ the Doctor and Prophet of the Church, Use. 1.
is called a faithful witness, we learn, that all Ministers must be
faithful witnesses: for every Minister of the Gospel when he preaches out of
Gods word, he is in the room of Christ, speaks that which Christ should
speak, therefore he must be like Christ, a faithful witness.

2. Now that they may be faithful witnesses, they must deliver the testimony of
Christ above all other things, and before all testimonies of man, in the office
of their ministry. So, it was meat and drink to Christ to teach his Fathers
will. So Abraham his eldest servant showed his fidelity, in that he would not
eat or drink till he had done his masters message, Genesis 24. 33. So the
Ministers must have care, first to teach the will of God above all things:
secondly, they must testify all the will of God concerning matters of
salvation. As among men, we count him a faithful witness which testifies all the
truth, and no more but the truth: so they be faithful Ministers, which
testify the whole will of God in things belonging to salvation, neither adding
nor detracting. So Paul cleared himself, Act. 20. 26, 27
that he was free from all men's blood, seeing he delivered the whole will of
God, in matters necessary for salvation, and kept nothing back.

3. He must neither add nor take away, much less in any case deprave the word
of God: and this is the true mark of a faithful witness.

In the Church of Rome a man may hear things concerning moral virtues handled
soundly: but come to faith and repentance, matters of salvation, they take away
one part and add another to the Scriptures: they hold the Creed in word, yet
in deed they deny the same, as by their doctrine it will appear.

4. The true witness must deliver the testimony of Christ, in that manner he
receives it: namely, in a spiritual manner, in a plain easy manner, in a
familiar kind of speech: that the conscience of every hearer may be moved. When
we seek to obscure the word, we do corrupt the same: and as trades men and
huxters, we cannot be content to declare the word in a plain, easy, familiar
speech, but as they set out their wares with sterching, blowing, spicing, etc.
so we set a gloze on the word, and make merchandise of it. 2. Cor. 2. 17.

This is a common sin in this age: for we teach the word but in an humane
manner. Men speak and preach the word but only to show their own wit,
learning, reading and gifts: but he which delivers not the word in that manner
he ought, and wherein he receives it, he is a false witness.

Christ he is a faithful witness, and that faithful witness: then we see
the damnable practice of most men now adays, for they hear the word
continually preached, and read the same: yet the Prophet cries out, Isa. 53. 1.
Who has believed our sayings? None fear the threatenings of the law, none
believe the promises of the Gospel. What an heavy and horrible thing is this,
that we should not believe the promises of salvation, nor fear the threats of
the law for our sins: seeing it is the doctrine preached and confirmed by the
testimony of Christ Jesus, the true and faithful witness of the Fathers will
to man? This is to make Christ a liar, to make him a false Prophet, and give
him the lie.

By the consideration of this, that Christ Jesus is the faithful witness, that
the doctrine delivered out of his word, is confirmed by his testimony: must we
take heed that we fear and tremble at the threats of the law, that we believe
assuredly the promises of the Gospel: for they which will not believe, have
their portion in the lake of fire and brimstone, Revel. 21. 8.

Again, seeing Christ Jesus is that faithful witness, which gives
testimony to men's consciences in particular of their salvation, this teaches
us to believe the promises of the Gospel, that they belong to each of us in
particular, as to John, Peter, etc. and every true member of Christ: for he is
the true and faithful witness, he alone gives testimony to men's
consciences. Now though it be against all sense, yet we must believe him,
seeing he is true: and if we do not, we make him a false witness, giving him the
lie.

Then it is no presumption (as the Papists say) to believe our election and
salvation in particular: Use
nay, it is an horrible sin not to believe it: seeing Christ a most faithful
witness, testifies the same to our consciences by his holy Spirit. Nay, for
this end to persuade every man in particular, he appointed his Sacraments,
bread and wine in the Supper, and water in Baptism, that every one might
particularly receive the^, and particularly be assured of the same. For in that
he offers them, he does, as if he should say, I offer you in them life
everlasting. Then to doubt of this, that we may assuredly persuade our selves
in particular, of our own salvation, is to call into question, whether Christ
be a true witness, a true and faithful Prophet or not.

And the first begotten of the dead. Verse. 5.
Here in these words is contained the second office of Christ: namely, his
Priestly office.

The first begotten of the dead: He alludeth in these words to the estate of
the families among the Jews: for as among them, he which was first borne, and
eldest of the family, had many privileges and preheminences, as of the
Lordshippe of the Priesthood, of double portion, etc. so Christ which is
compared to the eldest and first borne, he has his privileges: yea even
Christ crucified, he has his prerogatives among the dead, above all that are
dead. So Paul calls him the first and beginning of the dead: and after
expounds it, that he might in all things have the pre-eminence. Colos. 1. 18.

The second privilege is, that Christ being dead, was the first which rose
from death to life: for none rose from death to life before him.

Ob. Lazarus, Moses and Elias in the mount, they had their bodies restored the^
again: yea Lazarus rose to life again before Christ. Answ. Moses and Elias
received their bodies again, Lazarus also lived again, but these returned
again to their former misery; as Lazarus he rose from death to die again: so
Moses and Elias took to them their bodies again, not to enter into eternal
happiness, but to their former misery: but Christ he rose from death to
eternal happiness, and rose not to die any more, but his resurrection is the
first step to eternal life and felicity.

The second privilege which he has above all the dead, The second privilege.
is, that he by his own power, and by the virtue of his Godhead raised his
manhood. But all that rise to life, save Christ, they are raised by virtue of
his resurrection, not by their own power. None can raise themselves, but by
the virtue of that mystical union between Christ the head, and us the
members. For as the first fruits being offered to the Lord, they sanctified
all the rest: so Christ Jesus the first fruits of the dead, did by his
resurrection, sanctify and make acceptable all our resurrections.

In this is a notable comfort for all Gods children, Use.
against the immoderate fear of death: for if John had said, Christ is the
first borne among the living, it had been a great comfort: for then had he
showed that we be his family on earth; that the company of his children on
earth is his family, and he is the head of them, he our elder brother. But in
that he says, the first begotten of the dead, here is an excellent comfort:
for the Lord shows thereby, that he has special regard even of the dead of
his family: for the company of his members which be dead they be his family,
and in this family, Christ is numbered as the elder brother. And in that
respect he has a double right: first, of a King: secondly, of a Priest. Of a
King, in making the dead to obey his voice, and to rise from the dead at his
commandment. Secondly, of a Priest, to offer himself an acceptable sacrifice
to his father: and also by his death to sanctify and perfume the death of the
godly, so that their death is to them no death. For as the first fruits
sanctified the rest of the corn, so Christ the first fruits of the dead, he
sanctifies the death of al his children: so that death sanctified by his death
is no curse to the godly, the grave is not a prison, but a pleasant chamber of
rest.

And Prince of the kings of the earth. The third title and office of Christ.
Here is the third, namely, the kingly office of our Savior Christ. He is
called a Prince of the kings of the earth, in two respects: first, as he is
God, the Son of God, and so King together with the Father and the holy Ghost,
governing all things by his divine power, being equal to them, Secondly, as he
is Mediator, as he is God and man in two natures, he is called a Prince of
kings. So Mat. 28. All power is given me of the Father, not as he is God, but
as he is God and man the Mediator, or Godincarnate. So the Lord gave him a name
at which every knee should bow, Phil. 2. 6.
even as he is Mediator. And of these two, I take it, he means the second
sense here, where he calls Christ a Prince of the kings of the earth, in regard
as he is God and man, or God incarnate the Mediator.

Now Christ being a King, he must needs have a kingdom, which cannot stand in
the might and policy of man, as earthly kingdoms do: but it is spiritual,
it stands in the heart and consciences of men: his laws they bind the soul
and conscience to obedience. And this is his privilege, which can be given to
no creature, man or Angel, to rule and reign spiritually in the heart and
conscience.

This spiritual kingdom of Christ is exercised in the consciences and souls
of men by the word of Christ, not by dint of sword, or force of arms: but he
is a King which carries his sword in his mouth, even his word, by which he
rules and raigns in our hearts: he rules with the rod of his mouth. Esa. 11.
that is, by his word, by which he speaks to men's consciences.

Prince of the Kings of the earth. So is Christ in two respects. First, because
he (and he alone) can and is able to give laws to bind the consciences of men,
yea of the greatest Monarch in the world: none so high which is not subject to
his laws. Secondly, he is called King of the Princes of the earth, because he
has sovereign power over all Kings and Potentates, to save and to destroy:
for not only has he power to make a law to bind their consciences, but also
if they keep it, to save them; if they break his law, he has power to
destroy them, be they what they may be. He has the key of heaven to open and
to shut, none can control him. Revel 3. 7. He can if he will, lead them to
life and save them, or else leave them to their own mind, and so destroy them.

Seeing our Savior Christ is a Prince of the greatest monarks of the world,
Use. 1.
and is far above them: we must then with all fear and trembling reverence
his high Majesty. We reverence Kings on earth, showing great dutifulness to
them: then what reverence ow we to him which is Prince and Lord of all the
kings of the earth? We cannot conceive what reverence we owe unto him, which is
placed in the throne of all majesty: we must show our reverence to this
Prince, by hearing his word with trembling and believing hearts, reverently and
with conscience: we must not dare to take his high name into our mouths
without great reverence: the very Kings must show reverence unto this King of
kings. But the common practice of men does show what little reverence we have of
Christ: for we have his name in our mouths at every word, to profane the
same, to talk of it in jesting: and without all reverence we toss it in our
mouths like a tenice ball.

Seeing he is King of Kings, Use. 2.
we must give him absolute obedience. Princes must be obeyed so far as they
obey him, but he must be obeyed without exception absolutely, and not only
absolutely, but willingly must he be obeyed, and without compulsion, freely,
yea personally, perpetually, and in all his commandments.

Men they will say they believe in Christ, as he is their Savior, but that is
not enough, we must believe in him as he is the King of Princes. That we
therefore may believe in him, as he is King of Kings, we must do him absolute
obedience, do his will in all things: and unless we believe in him so, we
cannot believe in him, no not as he is a Savior: for these two go together. Now
this duty and obedience we owe to him, must be done to him as we learn out of
his word, read and preached in the Church.

Seeing he is King of kings, Use. 3.
al princes, kings, and pote^tates must do him service: for they be all
inferior and subject to him. Psalm. 2. the three last verses: Be wise now, O ye
Kings: be learned ye Judges of the earth. Kiss the son, etc. that is, inwardly
reverence, and outwardly obey him. This their subjection must be showed to
Christ their King, in the government of their kingdoms, for they must make
and frame their laws after the laws of Christ Jesus, they must make laws,
exercise judgment, keep Courts, Assizes, begin and end, and continue war,
by his commandments. And seeing all Kings are in subjection to Christ, as
their subjects be to them, they must therefore be guided and directed in all
the matters of their kingdoms by the counsel of Christ: so David says, Thy
laws, O Lord, are my counselors. Psalm. 119. 24.

If Christ be sovereign King, Use. 4.
and above all other Kings, then all other must plant and set up in their
kingdoms the religion of Christ, else how can they show they be Christ's
subjects: then it follows, that they may not be of what religion they list.
Luke 14. 23.
And this is showed in the parable of the marriage; for when the supper was
ready, he sent his servants to compel them to his supper: which may be
understood of the magistrate, whose duty is to compel men to the true Religion
and profession of the Gospel of Christ.

Seeing Christ is King of Kings, Use 5.
and no man has this privilege but he: hence we learn, that Kings on earth,
they in their dominions are sovereign kings, over all persons and causes,
because as he is King of Kings absolutely, so they are under him kings, and
have supremacy in their kingdoms. Then we see the presumption and arrogance of
the Pope and sea of Rome, who would be supreme head of the whole earth, and
King of all Kings, to put Christ out of his office, and sit in his room over
al at his pleasure.

Seeing Christ is King of all Kings, Use. 6.
we must not be discouraged when we be called to suffer any affliction or
cross, seeing that though the tyrants and Kings of the earth rage and bend
their force to hurt us, yet we have a King above them all, who can stay and
bridle them, and if he please, confound and bruise them in pieces: they cannot
do any thing but that which he permits them to do, for he rules and reigns in
the midst of all these, where they are the thickest, and would do most malice,
and can do to them as pleases him.

Now follows the second part of Christ's description by his execution of his
offices, which consist in four works: the first contained in these words,
Unto him which loved us: the second in these, Which washed us in his blood: the
other two, in the two last verses which follow.

Which loved us. That is, the Churches of Asia, and by proportion all other
Churches, being parts of the true Church.

The love of Christ has three degrees: Three degrees of Christ's love.
the first is called a general love, whereby he loves all his creatures, as
they be his





This third degree has two parts: for it is taken first for the purpose of his
decree to love: secondly, for the action or declaration of his love. Romans 9. 13.
For the first, as I have loved Jacob and hated Esau: that is, I have purposed
to love the one and hate the other. Secondly, for the declaration of his
purpose to love. Thirdly, for the action and for the declaration of his love
and special favor in special benefits. 1. Ioh. 3. 1. Behold what singular
love God has showed on us: nothing the declaration of his purpose to love us,
in giving his son for us. So in this verse is meant Gods special love, or the
declaration of his purpose to love us in special benefits.

Now whereas S. John places this in the first place of all the benefits of
Christ, Use 1.
That he loved us, he would teach us, that this love is the very ground of man's
redemption, the very cause of Gods liking and favor to man. Then there is no
foreseen faith: away with foreseen works: for he loved us first, and that
alone is the cause and ground of our election and salvation.

But it may be objected: Objection.
The love of God, as also of man, respects the goodness of things loved: so we
love a thing because it is good, and when it is evil we hate it.

There is great difference between the love of the creature and the Creator.
Answer.
The creature loves the thing, because he sees it is good: but God the
Creator, he first loves the creature: and hence it comes, that it is good,
because he loves it.

2. Whereas S. John and all the Churches of Asia, as other true Churches, do
believe and are assured that Christ loves them, (for that S. John takes for
granted) this should move all men to have this care, to labor above all
things to be rooted and grounded in love, seeing he places that in the first
place. This we do when we are assured in heart and conscience by the working of
Gods spirit, Ephesians. 3. 17. 18, 19.
that he loves us in Christ: so that he which takes away the assurance of Gods
love to us in Christ, takes away the very ground of our salvation.

Now that we may have this love of God, we must in all our duties to God and
man, draw near to God, keeping a good conscience before God and all men: and
so if we love God, he will come to us, stay and dwell in us. And if we would
have his love to be plentifully shed in our hearts, then we must draw near to
him by love, Romans 5. 5.
and he will draw near to us: for he loving us first, if we increase in that
love to him, then will he double his love to us.

And washed us from our sins in his blood. Here is the second benefit and
action of Christ to his Church, which is, first the remission of sins:
secondly, the mortification of sins.

Washed, Here he shows, that the sins of men are as filthy spots in their
souls: and after he confesses the vile estate of the Church and every member
thereof, in that he says, they were so washed, For washing presupposes
filthiness before, and a corrupted estate: and so should we by their example
learn to consider our own estate, how that our souls and bodies be spotted
and defiled with sins original and actual. So did David Psalm. 51. most
sensibly and excellently feel his own wants, and see his miserable estate,
when he desired the Lord to wash him thoroughly: confessing thereby his soul and
body was foul, stained and polluted with sin: and adds thoroughly, not once
and so enough, bnt wash me again and again, thoroughly till I be clean, and
cleanse me, rince, bathe, swill me in the blood of Christ, to be purged and
cleansed from all my sins.

In which words he shows his exceeding feeling of his own miseries, how foully
he was defiled: so should we labor to see how the spots of sin are deeply
stuck in our souls; they be fast set, so that one washing will not serve, but
we must be rinced, bathed and cleansed by the blood of Christ: for it is not
the hand of any man or Angel which can wash away these spots, nor any thing
they can give us, but only Christ Jesus, whose finger alone dipped in his own
blood can wash away our spots of sin.

The consideration whereof, should make us consider our wretched estate, and
often to repent us of our sins, to take heed of sin, which stains us so. We
must labor to have our hearts purged and cleansed by the blood of Christ; and
till we have them so purged, neither our faith, obedience, love, or any thing
we do is acceptable to God.

The first part of this benefit of Christ, contains the remission of our
sins, the taking away of the punishment and the guilt due to them: the second
part, is the mortification of sin.

Which has washed us from all, etc. He adds these words, to show that if any
believe truly, he has pardon of all his sins, without any restraint or
limitation of these or those sins.

By his blood. Objection.
How can blood wash away filthiness? nay, it rather defiles a man. Answ. This
washing stands not in the substance of the blood, but in the merit thereof: for
the blood of Christ shed is lost, and God knows what is become of it,
whatsoever the Papists say; but the merit of it washes away sins.

Object. But why does Christ's blood, rather then any other man's blood, as
Peter, John, etc? Answ. Because that blood was the blood of God, (not of the
Godhead) but of him who was both God and man; for these two natures being
united together, make but one person: and so it may be called the blood of God,
as Paul says, God redeemed us by his blood, that is Christ, God and man,
God-man, or God incarnate: and so it being the blood of God, is more
meritorious then the blood of any creature whatsoever. Besides I answer: Christ
was appointed by God to be a public person, to be surety for all mankind: but
no man can be so, to be in the room of the whole company of mankind. Then
damnable is the doctrine of the Papists, who hold, the blood of Martyrs can
merit for other: for seeing they be but private men, they cannot profit any
other.

By blood we must understand the passion of Christ, being a part for the whole;
and withal we must remember his fulfilling of the law: for in his suffering he
fulfilled the whole law, and in fulfilling the law he suffered, and these two
cannot be severed: so that this contains the whole obedience of Christ, partly
in suffering, partly in fulfilling the law.

S. John adds these words, and sets down these two blessings, to draw men to
love and like this book, to make them read and take delight in it. Now all of
us will say, God loves me, and has pardoned my sins in Christ: then we should
show our love again to him, in taking delight in hearing and reading the word
of God, set down in this or any other book of Scripture. And if we persuade
our selves God has loved us, we must then offer up to him in sign of love
again, our selves, souls and bodies, to serve him, to do him obedience, Romans
12. in regard of recompense to his mercies and love shed out and showed unto us.

And made us Kings and Priests to God and his Father, even his Father. In these
words is set down the third action, work and benefit of Christ bestowed on
his Church: he has made every true member of it a King and a Priest. Better to
understand these words, we must consider in them four points: first, the
dignity and excellency of all true believers and members of Christ, Kings and
Priests. Secondly, when they be made, namely, has made, speaking in the time
past: noting that true believers are Kings and Priests. Thirdly, the manner how,
we are not created such, neither borne to be such, but he has made us such.
Fourthly, to whom, to God, even the father. First, our dignity, and the
excellency of all true believers and members of Christ, has two heads: first,
Kings: secondly, Priests.

They are called kings, not in regard of an earthly kingdom: for the condition
of most believers on earth is base; but in regard of a spiritual kingdom, and
in respect of the kingdom of heaven: for the Lord he gives them this title and
interest to be Kings, to have right to the kingdom of heaven in Christ. So our
Savior Christ speaks to his Disciples: Luke 12. 31.
Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom.
The members of Christ are said to have interest and title to the kingdom of
heaven, in these respects: first, because by Christ they be Lords and
conquerors of all these enemies, sin, Satan, the world, death, hell, and our
own flesh. Secondly, because in and by Christ they are partakers of the
kingdom of heaven, they have interest into it, and right to the kingdom of
happiness: for they receive of Christ grace for grace, glory for glory,
felicity and happiness, for glory, happiness and felicity. Thirdly, because
they be made Lords of all creatures (except good Angels and the Church). 1.
Cor. 3. 21. God is all in all to them: all things are theirs, they Gods; and we
have interest to all his creatures in heaven and earth by Christ.

Ob. But if Christ be King and al his members, how do they differ? Answ. In two
points: first, Christ he is the son of God by nature, therefore a King by
nature, and so his inheritance belongs to him by nature; but the members of
Christ are the sons of God by adoption in his Son, so that our right to that
kingdom is not by nature but by adoption. Secondly, Christ he is King over all
creatures whatsoever, over the Angels and the Church, and he is absolute King
over all, and has his regiment in the hearts and consciences of men, and can
by his word bind them: but his members they be not universal kings, for they
have not superiority above good Angels and the Church, neither are they
absolute kings as he is: neither by themselves, but by Christ Jesus, and as
they participate with Christ in his kingdom.

The second part of our dignity stands in this, that we be Priests: in that we
be consecrated and set apart by Christ to the worship and service of God here
in this life, to serve him in spirit and truth, and in the life to come,
eternally to serve and praise him.

Christ he is Priest, so are we, but yet there is difference. First, Christ he
is an external and real Priest of the new Testament, which offers up a true,
real and external sacrifice to God the Father for us: we are not real and
external Priests, but spiritual, offering up spiritual sacrifice. And Christ
has this privilege, to offer up a real, corporal and substantial sacrifice
in the new testament: we do not so. When any member of Christ gives an alms,
he offers a sacrifice to God, not a corporal sacrifice, but spiritual every
way. Again, note this, that our Savior Christ he is a perfect Priest, and
offers up a perfect sacrifice; but we being imperfect, do offer up an imperfect
sacrifice, tainted and blemished with sin, but accepted as perfect for the
worthiness of Christ's sacrifice.

Secondly, we be Kings and Prists in this life: for, as in the entrance into an
earthly kingdom there be degrees, as first, to give one title to it: secondly,
to give him possession of it, which is more then to give one title only: so
Gods children they have the right given them of the kingdom of heaven in this
life: and as in the giving of possession of a kingdom, there be two degrees:
first, the beginning of the possession: secondly, the full enjoying and perfect
possession: so we have the beginning of the possession of the kingdom of
heaven in this life: Romans 14. 27.
which stands in righteousness, joy and peace: and they which have these, have
the kingdom of God begun in them.

The second part and degree is after this life, which is the full fruition and
possession of the kingdom of heaven: but in all the true members of Christ it
is begun here, and accomplished there. And as we be kings in this world, so
we must be Priests too, in offering spiritual sacrifice to God, and
dedicating and consecrating our selves to his service.

Has made us. True believers be Kings and Priests, not by nature, neither
borne such, nor by creation, or birth, or blood are they such, or by any other
privilege they have from man. How then? As earthly Kings and Priests were made
in the old Testament, so are spiritual Kings and Priests in the new: the King
was elected and ordained by a solemn calling: so the Priest by a solemn
election: so are the Kings and Priests which be spiritual, by a divine
calling. In which calling, note two things. First, Christ gives his members
right to his own kingdom, to be Kings and Priests; yet not so, that they can
execute the regiment sustained by Christ, and do the office of a King and
Priest as it is done by Christ, but because they belong to them in part, and
they have the benefit of them both redounding to them wholly.

And this right they have, is brought to pass in the covenant of grace. For
the Lord in it promises, that he for his part will give to the true believers
in Christ Jesus, his Son with all his benefits, as he gives them this, to be
kings and priests. For every thing which belo^gs to Christ as he is head of the
Church, belongs to his servants as members, and he imparts it to them in some
sort.

Secondly, in the appointing of kings, they must be anointed, so must we be
anointed, Psalm. 45. Christ was anointed above his fellows: but yet his
members they are also anointed: he in greater measure, his members in less
measure, yet by the same oil with him, which is the unction of the holy Ghost.
We have received the anointing of Christ. 1. John 2. 7. And the Lord he bids
the wicked not to touch his anointed, meaning not only his servants, Psalm.
105. 15.
Abraham, Isaac, and the Patriarchs, but his true members. We have the same
spirit Christ had in his manhood, though not in the same measure. And the Lord
he gives us these gifts of the spirit signified by this oil, to this end, that
we may be fit kings and priests. So that first he gives us right to a kingdom:
and then, he gives us gifts to discharge our duty.

4. To whom has he made us kings and priests? to God, and the Father, even his
Father. Now men might have said: If all his members be kings, then all may live
as they list. But he adds, they be kings, but to God: showing, that the
interest they have given to them to the kingdom of heaven, it is given the^,
that they may be kings and priests to Gods glory, to his worship and service,
and to show, that all the interest belongs to God absolutely, to us by him in
Christ.

Lastly, he adds God and his Father, which expounds the former word God, for
it is not taken for his nature absolutely, but for the first Person, God even
his Father. Which shows, that they must not live as they list: for they be
made kings to the honor and service of God the Father, who is here named
alone, not because he is above the Son and holy Ghost, for they be equal;
but because he is the first person in order, and the fountain of the Deity:
from it, it is derived to the Son and holy Ghost.

Now after the meaning of the words, follow the uses. First, whereas all the
true members of Christ be kings and priests in this life, we are taught how we
must carry our selves: namely, as enemies to them which be of the kingdom of
Satan, sin, the world and the flesh: we must be deadly and sworn enemies to
them, we must have no concord nor amity with them. For if we be kings of the
kingdom of grace, then we must be enemies to them which belong to the kingdom
of darkness: Ephesians. 5. 6.
there must be no fellowship between light and darkness. Now that we may so
carry our selves as enemies, we must first have care to keep guard to defend
our selves as kings against all our enemies, sin, Satan, our own flesh, and
the inticements of the world. As Kings protect their kingdoms, so must we
stand on our guard, defend our souls and bodies, and every faculty and part
of them, our wills, affections, thoughts and inclinations, 1. Ioh. 5. 18. He
which is borne of God keeps himself, (as with watch and ward) that sin or
Satan touch him not.

2 We must make war and enter combat against Satan, sin, our own flesh, all
our spiritual enemies, the corruptions of our nature, and all the inticements
of the world. We must make no truce with them, because they will never be
reconciled, so long as we have interest into the kingdom of heaven.

3 We must labor to kill and destroy these our enemies, as much as possibly we
can, by that power we have from Christ our head: we must kill and crucify the
corruption of our own hearts, that is, our own sins. We must like a valiant
king, seek to have the blood of these enemies, and seek to conquer and
vanquish Satan, his power and might, the world and our own corruption.

4 If we be kings in this life, Use. 2.
we must become Lords and rule over our selves: our souls and bodies must be
brought into subjection and order: for in this, that we be kings of our selves,
we show especially that we be kings in this life. We must not have rule of the
whole world, but be ruling and maistering our own corruptions and affections,
bringing them into subjection and order: herein stands our kingdom in this
world.

If a man were Prince over the whole earth, and yet could not rule himself, he
were but a poor Prince, nay he were no Prince indeed: but though a man had not
so much as a foot of ground in this world, and could rule and master
himself, his thoughts and affections, this man were a valiant king.

1. Cor. 6. 2.
but we must be judges in this world, and we must not judge other men, but we
must be our own judges. Wherefore as judges summon, arraigne, condemn, etc.
so must we summon and arraigne, yea judge and examine our selves, call our
selves to account, and as guilty persons condemn our selves, acknowledging we
be worthy to be cast into eternal damnation with the Devil and his Angels: and
withal plead for pardon, approach to the throne of grace and forgiveness: and
in these we show our selves upright judges, and and by this means we shall be
freed from the judgment to come. 1. Cor. 10. 31.






this should be an inducement to all backward persons, to move them and stir
them forward to christian religion, and not to account of it as preciseness,
seeing that by it we come to have right and interest to the kingdom of heaven,
to be Lords of all creatures. For why should we not esteem of the Gospel as a
most precious jewel, seeing that we which are vassalles of Satan and
firebrarnds of hell (as all men are by nature) become the members of Christ,
yea Kings and Priests to God? And seeing this is effected by the ministry of
the Gospel, this should move us to embrace it, to love and like it, seeing it
brings us such an excellent benefit, and not to misname it as we do, by
reproachful terms. Yea verily, the consideration of this, should make the
Ministers of the word to take all pains to preach the word, seeing by it they
make men to become of vassalles of Satan the true members of Christ, and heirs
of the kingdom of heaven. In this world for a man to consecrate and establish
one in a kingdom, it is a thing of great honor: is it not of greater honor,
to consecrate one to become king of heaven and earth, to be heir of the
kingdom of heaven? Now that this is done in the ministry of the Gospel, when
by the word preached we are converted, made to believe in Christ, and to repent
of our sins: this I say should stir and prick forward the Ministers of the
word, to labor to win men to Christ, and to make them kings and priests to God
his father.

There also is matter of comfort to the godly: for seeing they be Kings and
Priests in the kingdom of Christ, if a man be in the cross and affliction,
which is a great grief, yet let him know to his comfort, that though he be so
handled, and it appears not what he shall be, yet he is a king, and that he
shall be and is heir to the kingdom of heaven. If a man be in sickness, he
must consider it is but Gods messenger to call him out of this world, to the
possession of a kingdom. If a man be in the trouble and vexation of mind, and
of his own conscience: if he be tormented fearfully with his sins, yet he
must be content, the Lord will give him a happy issue; he must know he is a
king, and therefore shall one day have conquest over sin, Satan and his own
corruption, yea over all his enemies whatsoever. If a man be in the heat of
persecution, so that he is turmoiled and tossed from post to pillar, then flesh
and blood cannot brook it* yet he is a king: though he in persecution be
killed and put to death, even then let him consider he is a most valiant
conqueror. Romans 8. 37. In the pang of death when nature must needs be
dissolved, and soul and body separated, then we must remember that we be kings
in Christ, and so we shall not fear death, but know it is but a way and easy
passage to the full possession of our kingdom. Thus much in that we are kings.

In that all the members of Christ be priests, Uses that were Priests.
not earthly but spiritual, and offer to God spiritual sacrifices: first, we
are hence The Priests lips must keep knowledge, Mal. 2. 7. So must we be
teachers of others, Col. 3. 18. We all ought to be able to teach the will of
God, that so the Gospel of Christ may be spread abroad. And as this belongs to
al men, so especially to governors, they must especially show themselves
priests to their charges. Abraham did it, Genesis 18. David did it, Pro. 4. and
Bathshebath did it, Prouer. 31. and all must do it, that desire an holy
generation to succeed after them. We teach other things, why not Religion?

2 Seeing we be priests, Use 2.
we must pray for others, not only for our selves but for all men, 1. Tim. 2.
1.
especially the members of Christ, The Priest in the old Testament must pray
and make request, Ephesians. 6. 18.
not only for himself alone, but for the people also. Moses is commended for
prayer, especially when he prayed for the Israelites, 2. King. 2. 12.
and stood before the Lord in the gap. Exodus 32. Eliah is called the horseman
and chariots of Israel: 2. Chro. 30. 18.
and Hezechiah beseeches the Lord to be good to his people. And so when any
man in the word is commended for prayer, it is for that he prayed for the
people. So did David in the Psalms. So did Christ make this his special duty.
John 17.

We must offer spiritual sacrifice to God, Use 3.
that is, dedicate our selves, our souls and bodies, and all that is in us,
our wit, learning, knowledge, or any gift of body or mind, we must consecrate
it to Gods service. That we may do all this to his glory, we must look that all
we take in hand be begun in faith, do proceed from a good heart, and be
directed to a good end, to Gods glory principally: and if we do it in faith and
obedience, then it will please him.

We must be full of blessings; Use 4.
we may have nothing to do with cursed speaking. As the Priests in the old
Testament, their duty was to bless the people: so we must speak nothing but
blessed and gracious speeches, take heed of all cursed speaking, of swearing
and forswearing: we must be blessed and gracious speakers to all men, friend,
fo, or any.

We must have God our portion: Use 5.
for the Levites had no portion in the land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 10. 19.
but dwelt in tents, and the Lord was their portion. Psalm. 119. 57.
So we being Priests to God, we must be content with any estate in this world,
for God is our portion: we must not seek too much to have any inheritance on
earth, for Gods favor in Christ that is our portion, and this will suffice.

To him be glory. In these words is a praising and thanksgiving to God, for the
three former benefits of Christ bestowed on the Church.

In that S. John before he come to the end of his description of Christ should
interrtupt himself, Use 1.
to give God thanks for his benefits: we see that the consideration of Gods
benefits bestowed on us, should be a means to stir us up to praise the Lord:
we should be carried away with this affection of thanksgiving, as S. John was.
Use 2.
And in these words of this holy man we do see what is the true form of giving
thanks to God, namely, to give him and ascribe to him, all glory, power, and
absolute dominion for evermore. But alas it is too too manifest, that man's
corrupt nature will not do this, but denies it, and taking this from God,
bestows it on creatures, yea on our own selves. And it is a matter of grace,
to know this, and to confess that all glory and dominion belongs to God, and
to give him his due. So Christ he teaches us to ascribe all power, glory,
might and dominion to God, when we say in the Lords prayer, For thine is the
kingdom, power and glory: that is, it is due to thee O Lord, not to any
creature whatsoever.

Amen. So be it, let it be so, that thou may have all glory and dominion, he
adds this, to show his fervent desire of Gods glory: and therefore he doubles
and repeates it: for he had said that before, but not content with it, he
shows his feruencie, and repeates the same again so should we not freeze or
be cold in our desire of Gods glory, but be fervent and earnest, doubling and
repeating the same.

Behold he comes in the clouds, etc. Verse. 7.
In the fifth and sixth verses are contained a large description of Christ,
partly by his offices: partly, by the execution of his offices, which are
these. First, he is a faithful witness. Secondly, he is the first begotten of
the dead. Thirdly, he is Prince of the kings of the earth. Secondly, the
execution of his offices, which stands in fou^e actions: first, he loves the
Church: secondly, he washes away the spots of it in his blood: thirdly, made
us kings and priests to God the Father: and of these three actions in the
former verses. The fourth action, is his second coming to judgment, to judge
both quick and dead. In this seventh verse is a narration, or large
declaration of the second coming of Christ to judgment.

In the words consider first this note of attention: Behold: secondly, S. John
propounds Christ his coming it self: thirdly, the manner of it, in the clouds:
and that is amplified, that it shall be open, every eye shall see it: fourthly,
the effect of his coming, all tribes of the earth shall wail. S. John
concludes it with two notes of asseueration: Even so, Amen, to confirm the
second coming of Christ to all people.

Behold. First, S. John he begins with a note of attention, behold. The
spirit of God is accustomed, when any thing especially is worth our marking, to
prefixe before it this note of attention. Behold; or such like. Then this
teaches us one special duty, which is, often and every day earnestly and
seriously to consider of the second coming of Christ to judgment. The which
consideration is a special means to begin and to continue the conversion of
a sinner. So Mat. 3. 7. when the Scribes and Pharisees, obstinate enemies, came
to the baptism of S. John, he uses this as a means to make them to turn and
believe in Christ, saying; O generation of vipers, who has forewarned you,
Mat. 3 7.
that you should fly from the vengeance to come? So Act. 3. 19. Peter uses
this argument, to bring the Jews to repentance: because the day of refreshing
is at hand. Act. 17. 30. 31. Paul persuades the Athenians to repentance,
because there is a day of judgment appointed, etc. Now all these are to win
men to repentance, by the consideration of this one point, even the day of
judgment; and this makes John to say, Behold.

Secondly, this word may serve to strike our hearts with a fear and reverence
of Christ, when we consider that he shall come to judgment. So often as we
consider of his coming, so often we should have our hearts lively touched with
awe and reverence to him. We stand in awe and reverence to Magistrates, when we
consider that they have authority to attach, apprehend, and to bring us to
their Courts and assizes: how much more should this work an awe and reverence,
when we consider that Christ Jesus shall come and apprehend, and attach each of
us before his bar of judgment?

Secondly, he propounds the coming of Christ himself, He comes: that is,
Christ shall descend from the highest heaven in his manhood, to that place
where the clouds be, to the earth locally. In that he says not, shall come,
but in the present time, he comes: first, he shows it is a thing not far
off, but present: secondly, that it is certain, even as though he now came:
thirdly, he would have us consider of the coming of Christ, not as a thing to
come far off, but present. This S. John learned, and so should we by his
example learn, that it is present, and persuade our selves so: and therefore
we should often think and consider of the coming of Christ, seeing it is of so
great use. Hence then our duty is, to do that every day, which we would do in
the day of judgment: seeing it is always present, we must do, think, and
speak that which we would do that day. He which can do so, he is an happy man.

Now that a man may come to do this, we must daily consider of that coming of
Christ, not as a thing to be delayed or far off, but as a thing present: we
must every day call our selves to a reckoning and account, persuade our selves
this may be the last day, and so to carry our selves every day, as we would in
the last day. Now if we were so persuaded, then we should see less
wickednesses in our life, we would repent, and seek to be reconciled to God in
Christ, we should be more faithful, and see more grace daily in our lives. And
the cause of the want of faith and repentance, and of grace, it is the want of
this persuasion, that we should carry our selves every day, as we would in the
last day, even in faith and repentance.

In that he says, Doctrine.
He comes: Hence we gather, he is absent in bodily presence in regard of his
manhood, he is not here, but in heaven till the day of judgment: for if Christ
were always bodily present, he could not be said to come, but only to
manifest himself, being before present. Then the opinion of the Papists, which
hold the body of Christ is present in or about the bread of the Sacrament, is
most false and frivolous.

He proceeds and sets out the manner of Christ's coming, The third point
the manner.
in two things: first, that he comes in the clouds: secondly, that his coming
is open and visible to every eye.

With clouds. Psalm. 18. and 97.
Here S. John speaks after the manner of the ancient Prophets, who to set out
God in his majesty and glory, say, he comes with clouds, rides on the wings
of the wind: as though he had said, he comes in exceeding majesty and glory.
These words are added, to make a distinction between the first and second
coming of Christ. His first coming was in humility, borne of a poor virgin,
entertained in a stable and in an Inn: but his second coming is with glory,
majesty and dominion in the clouds. And the reason is, because he came first
to be a redemption, and a Savior, and therefore in the state of a servant: but
his second coming is, to be a judge of all men, yea of his enemies, and
therefore in this coming, he comes with all might, majesty, and glory.

The use of this consideration is set down in the 97. Psalm: Use.
to make the very mountains to tremble, to confound the wicked and ungodly,
and to comfort the godly in that day.

Secondly, it is not secret, but in open appearance, every eye shall see him:
he shall come in majesty and glory, not secretly, but in visible show to all
the world: all men shall see him with their own eyes, all I say which were
since the world began to his coming.

In these words he sets down three points: first, that all men shall see him:
secondly, that all men being raised again, shall have life and motion, and
their senses restored to them as before they died: thirdly, that all men, none
excepted, shall come and stand before the tribunal seat of Christ.

This is a comfort to Gods children, Use 1.
in that they being dead and rotten in their graves, shall rise, and receive
their life and motion, and see Christ their Savior and Judge of all men. If a
man should lie down to sleep, and be told that when he rose he should see his
dead father and mother, or his dearest friends: this would be a notable comfort
to him, that so he should enjoy them again: but this should be a far greater
comfort to us, that we which lie dead and rotten in the grave, shall be raised,
and enjoy not our parents and friends, but Christ Jesus the son of God, which
is our frind above all friends, who shall give us not only life and motion,
but eternal life with his own majesty. Job 19.
This was Jobs comfort, that though he died, yet he believed he should see his
redeemer with his eyes: and this should be our comfort against the fear of
death and the last judgment.

It shall be a terror to the wicked, Use 2.
and to all impenitent sinners, who shall (will they nil they) be brought to the
bar of Christ's judgment seat, and then look on him who is their Judge,
whom they had in their life contemned. And this consideration may serve to move
us to repentance, which have not begun to repent, and to labor to become the
members of Christ. We think when we die all is done, there is no harm to
follow: but though we lie rotting in our graves a thousand or two thousand
years, yet we shall rise: and if we repented not, we shall hear the sentence
of condemnation, and look upon our Judge with our own eyes. Then it is best
for us now in the time of grace while we live here, to prepare, that we need
not fear to come to appear and behold this Judge. No doubt if we were
persuaded that we should thus appear, it would move us to repent.

Every eye shall see him. Then here we see, that all men with their own eyes
shall look on him, and those who wanted them in this life, shall have them
restored. It is granted of all Divines that the elect have all their senses
and other defects restored: and it is to be added, that the wicked too they
shall have all their powers, senses and faculties of soul and body restored,
the deaf shall hear, the blind shall see this Judge: but this can be no glory
to them, seeing it is to increase their punishment: for the more senses they
have, they have the more punishment, because we judge of things by sense.

Even of those which pierced him. This is added, first to show that we shall be
freed. No power or wisdom of any man or monarch can free us from appearing:
for if any could escape, then the Jews and Gentiles who prevailed most against
Christ, in that they put him to death: but none of these can escape his
judgment, for even they which pierced him, they shall see this Judge, and be
summoned before his majesty: for though they had power to kill him, yet none
of them shall have power to absent themselves from before his bar.

2 To show the case of all wicked men, namely, that such woe and misery befalls
them as they never dreamed of. The Jews and Gentiles they crucified Christ,
and put him to a temporal death, but they never dreamed he should condemn
them to eternal death.

3 To show the rufull and woeful estate of all impenitent sinners: for these
men shall have their greatest enemy to be their judge, who will show rigor
upon them, and justice without all mercy: and this is meant not only of the Jew
which pierced him, but of all impenitent sinners, because all such do by their
sins, as swords and spears wound him at the heart, Zach. 12. 10.
as the soldiers did. These be as bad as the Jews which pierced Christ: as
Judas which betrayed Christ, and as the soldiers which goared his sides.

Out of these words some gather, that the body of Christ has still the wounds
and scarres which here he had given him, the print of the nails in his hands
and in his feet, and that these shall be seen in Christ at the last day, and
say, that it is no infirmity to Christ to have these, but rather an increase
of his glory: but this cannot be gathered hence: for though it be said, They
shall see him whom they pierced, yet not as he was pierced. And because they
shall see him, shall they see his wounds? Many shall see Kings and Queens whom
they crowned in this world, ergo as Kings and Queens? So we shall see our
fathers and mothers, therefore as fathers and mothers? so many shall see Christ
therefore as he was wounded and pierced? It is no good collection nor opinion.

And all the tribes of the earth shall wail for him. That is, before or over
him. Here is the fruit and effect of his coming, especially in the wicked.

All the tribes of the earth. S. John he speaks here of the world, as it was
in the condition and division of the land of Canaan: for before that time it
was not divided into tribes. So Math. 25. sets out the judgment of the
whole world, by the separation of the sheep from the goats: noting that they
which repented not, of what tribe soever, of what estate or condition, shall
wail and mourn.

And he adds a reason of this, for him, before him, or over him: that is, they
shall wail and lament with exceeding lamentation, because they believed not his
word, but contemned his doctrine, and therefore now they want all help to free
them from the punishment of their unbelief, and contempt of the Gospel.

If they shall mourn because they did not believe and receive the doctrine of
Christ, Use.
and for that have no way to escape, then it is our duty to labor above all
things to be reconciled to God in Christ, to get our sins pardoned, to
believe and embrace the word of God: for unless we believe, and be reconciled
when the last day comes, there is no hope of help, no way to escape, no time
of grace to repent. If the door be once shut, we must stand without, there is
nothing then but horror of conscience for us: it will be a day to us to make
our eyes start out of our heads, a day of all woe and misery. Then it is great
wisdom so to spend the time of grace, in this life especially, that we may get
the pardon of our sins, reconciliation with God in Christ, to receive and
believe his will and word: which if we do, we shall have no cause at all to
wail and mourn, but be glad, and rejoice. Then we must take heed the Devil
steal not out of our hearts this one lesson, which is most necessary, which he
will most labor for to do.

See what an evil conscience is: it lies asleep here, while a man lives it
never troubles him, but in this last day when he shall see his Judge with his
eyes, then it will stir, it will torment him, it will attach, accuse and
condemn him, it will lay to his charge his sins, his contempt of Christ and
his word, his unbelief in the time of grace, it will be as a thousand
witnesses to condemn him. This should cause all men to labor to get a good
conscience, washed and purged in the blood of Christ, which will not lay to our
charge any one sin, but assure us we be in the favor of God, which will not
make us fear, but look up to our redeemer, and to rejoice in him. We must
take heed when our conscience lies asleep and accuses not, no not at death,
for it will then deceive us: but search and examine our hearts and consciences,
and seek to have them washed and bathed in the blood of Christ.

Lastly he confirms this doctrine of the second coming of Christ, by a
double note of asseueratio^, Eue^ so, Amen. One of these is taken from the
Ebrewes Amen: the second from the Grecians (...). Even as we avouch a thing,
first by a simple and bare affirmation or negation: secondly, by an earnest
asseueration: thirdly, by an oath. Now in that S. John uses these two kinds of
assuring in this weighty matter of Christ's second coming, we see our duty: we
must not use the like at any time or thing, but only in matters of weight and
moment: so S. John here, he shall come, and that certainly, undoubtedly it
shall be so. Then the practice of the^ is wicked, which use these words in
matters of no weight, at every word, and much more which bind every word with
an oath which is far more. Yea though our Savior often uses these words of
asseueration, yet only in matters of weight and moment, and when the hearers
were to be certified of the truth of a thing which was of importance.

2 He would by this show, that the coming of Christ is certain and most
undoubted: and to make us out of all doubt, he adds these two words of
asseueratio^, Eue^ so, Ame^: most certainly it will come, then we should often
think of this matter, for in our nature there is a corruption, which
persuades us that the coming of Christ is not yet: that we shall not be
summoned either by general or particular judgment: therefore as the wicked
servant, we defer the coming of Christ. To take away this corruption, he
says, he comes, yea certainly, undoubtedly he comes, and that out of hand.

Thirdly, to show a special note and mark of Gods child: for he does not
only asseuere, but withal desires and longs for the coming of Christ: Lord
let it be so, Amen, let it even be so. They long for and desire Christ his
coming to judgment: but the wicked could wish with all their hearts, that it
might never be. 2. Tim. 4. 8.
The godly they know, that when Christ shall come, then they shall have that
crown of immortality and glory, which he has prepared for all which desire
his coming. But the wicked, and they which are not reconciled to God in Christ
nor assured of their own salvation, they cannot for their life once wish and
desire the coming of Christ. So that by this one note we may judge of our own
estates, whether we belong to Christ or not: for if we desire and long for his
second coming to judgment, Revel. 22. 20.
if we wish he would come quickly, then it is a certain token and sign, we be
reconciled to God in Christ, that we belong to him. But if as yet we feel not
this longing and hungring desire in us, then we must suspect our selves, and
labor to feel it every day: Reu. 6. 10.
for it is the desire of the Saints, and of all the true children of God.

After that S. John had described Christ at large here in this eighth verse,
Verse. 8.
he brings him in speaking of himself by a figure. I am Alpha and Omega,
says the Lord.

The end and scope of this eighth verse is, to confirm the former description
of Christ. The reason is thus framed: He which is the beginning and the end of
all, he is sufficient to be a King, Priest, and Prophet, and is both able and
willing to bestow all blessings on his Church. This first part of the argument
is omitted: the second part is contained in this eighth verse: But I am the
beginning and the end, etc. I am sufficient, etc.

In this eighth verse are three points concerning Christ: Three points.
first, he is the beginning and the end: I am alpha and omega: secondly, he is,
was, and is to come: thirdly, he is almighty, omnipotent.

1 The first point is, 1. Point.
that Christ is the beginning and the end, which he expresses by a comparison
taken from the Greek alphabet, or the A. B. C. of the Grecians: for as in
their Greek alphabet, (...) is the first letter, and (...) the last: so I,
says Christ, am the beginning of all things, and the end of all: as those
letters in the Greek alphabet, so am I in all things the first and last.

Out of this, that Christ borrows this comparison from the Greek alphabet,
the Papists gather, that the word may be read and delivered to the people in an
unknown tongue, because Christ here uses an unknown tongue, to those whom he
gave this vision. But though the unlearned, and unlettered English man, knows
not what (...) and (...) is: yet the Church to who^ this book was written,
being the Grecians, knew what they meant generally. Again, though the spirit
of God uses a strange word in one place, we may not follow that in the whole
word of God, in the whole service and worship of God, as the Papists do.

Christ is said to be the beginning and the end: first, because he is the very
first of all things: there was nothing before he was, he had a being, when all
other creatures were not but begun to be, then was he the same that he is
now: he had his being and subsisting before all creatures: and for this says
S. John, chap. 1. verse 1. In the beginning was the word: that is, the Son of
God, he had his being and subsisting when all other creatures wanted it, and
began to be.

This proves the eternity of Christ, because he had his being before any
creature was created, he was a substance and essence begotten of the Father
before all worlds, not created as other creatures are, or made of any other.

Secondly, he is called the beginning, because he gives a beginning to all
creatures: for all things which were created, were created by him, and had
their being from him. So that he is the true beginning of all things. Coloss.
1. 16. All things are from him, he is the beginning of all: and all are for
him, he is the end of all.

Seeing Christ gives a being to all things, Use 1.
then we when we are to begin any business in word or deed, we must begin it
with invocation on the name of Christ: for Christ he gives the beginning and
proceeding to all things. Then we which have our beginnings of him, must not
dare to begin anything without invocation on his name.

Secondly, the same Christ he is the end of all things for two causes: first,
because he is the last of all things, and after him is nothing in subsisting
and being: nay if all creatures were left to themselves, they would all come to
nothing: and yet though all should come to nothing, Christ would remain the
same he was for ever: namely, the eternal Son and word of the Father. In
that some creatures are become eternal, this is not of themselves, but by
Christ, he gives them eternal being and durance, and if they were left to
themselves, they would come to nothing as well as others.

This then should make us with full purpose of heart to cleave to Christ, Use.
if we would enjoy eternal happiness: for without him, and unless we have it
from him, we cannot but come to an end.

Secondly, he is the end, because all things were made to serve him. Coloss. 1.
16. For him were all things created.

Which is, 2. Point.
was, and is to come. These words were expounded in the fourth verse, where the
very same are affirmed of the Father. The sense is, that Christ is a substance
and essence, or being, subsisting in, by, and from himself, and such a
substance shall be for ever.

Hence we learn two things: Use 1.
first, that the second person in the Trinity is consubstantiall with the
Father, of one and the same substance and nature with him. And the reason is,
because there can be but one only substance, essence, and being, which can be
in and by it self, and from it self alone: there cannot be two or more, but
only one. As there cannot be two eternals, or two infinits, two omnipotents
and absolute Lords which have nothing one of another. Now in the fourth verse
it is said of the Father, that he is a substance of, in, by, and from himself
alone: and here of the Son is rehearsed the same. Then they, seeing there can
be but one such essence, must needs be all one: and the Son must needs be
the same substance, nature, and essence with the Father: not like him, or
diverse from him, but the self same in substance and nature: that is, their
Godhead is consubstantiall, etc. They be indeed two distinct persons, yet but
one substance and divine essence in the Godhead, which S. John intimates,
affirming the same words of both.

Hence we learn, Christ is (...).
that Christ is God of himself: for in the same respect the Father is God, he
is God: and as the Father is,



The Almighty. The third point
As there is in God, so is there in Christ a double power: first, a potentiall:
secondly an actual power. Potentiall is that whereby he can do many things more
then he will do; as he could raise children to Abraham of the stones, but he
would not: he could have delivered Christ from death, but he would not. It is
not taken for this power here principally, but rather for the second, namely,
his actual power, whereby he brings to pass without let and impediment,
whatsoever he decrees, wills, or promises. So he is called Almighty here,
because he brings to pass actually, whatsoever he promises to his in his
word, without let and stop.

Seeing he is thus Almighty, Use. 1.
hence come two comforts to his children: first, that whatsoever he has
promised his church in Christ, shall be brought to pass effectually, without
stop and let, as assuredly as he promised it. Now since he promises in the
Gospel to all penitent sinners remission of sins, mortification,
justification, and life everlasting; every one of them in their time shall be
done. Every true believer shall have pardon of his sins, mortification,
sanctification, and eternal life, because he which promised is almighty, able
and willing to do all he promised.

This is a comfort to all true believers: for all men and Angels cannot give
one of these: but Christ he is omnipotent, he can and will give them all.

2 He will and can give his Church sufficient security and ease from all her
enemies: he can defend and guard her against all their fury and malice; he is
above them, and can bridle their might, when and how he pleases.

This then affoords us two duties. First, in the cross and tribulation to
humble our selves under the hand of God. For it is the Lord which corrects
us, he is able to do what he list, and more then he will.

Secondly, this should make us to perform hearty obedience in our general
and particular callings, to walk uprightly before him, seeing he is almighty,
and sees whether we walk sincerely or not: if we do not, he is able to punish
us. Genesis 17. it is the argument of God to persuade Abraham to walk uprightly,
because he is almighty, able to correct and destroy those which refuse to obey
him.

Thus far of the two first parts of this Chapter, the Inscription, and the
Titles of this book.

I John, Verse 9. The third part of this chapter.
etc. Here follows the third part of this Chapter, which contains a vision,
from this ninth verse to the end of the third Chapter.

In this vision, two things are to be noted: first, the circumstances:
secondly, the parts. The circumstances in the ninth and tenth verses: the parts
from thence, to the end of the third Chapter.

The circumstances of this vision are 4. the first, touching the person to whom
this vision befell, John: the second, the place where, in Pathmos: the third,
the manner how it is propounded: it was delivered to him, being ravished in the
spirit: the fourth, the time when, on the Lords day.

The first circumstance is the person to whom this vision befell, 1.
Circumstance
John. He does this to show, that it was given him of the Lord: for as the Lord
has his visions and revelations, so the Devil has his: but they be
distinguished by the persons to whom they be given. God gives his visions not
to all men, but to those which are most fit for them, such as be most holy men
for life, endued with exceeding gifts of God, as knowledge, wisdom,
constancy, zeal, piety, and religion. So in the old Testament he delivered
the^ to his Prophets, not to all, but his servants, men of singular gifts and
graces, and of exceeding holiness and piety. Indeed the Lord revealed some
particular things to wicked men, as to Balaam, but they never knew them
comfortably. It is a property belonging to the servants of God to have a
vision revealed, and to know the same.

Now both these befell S. John, he was a man of exceeding holiness of life,
(for Christ loved him) and of singular and rare gifts. Now the devil makes no
such choice, but his visions befall men which are heretics, wicked, notorious
sinners, and they have no rare and special gifts as the other: so that by this
a man may distinguish them, by the persons to whom they befall. Then we must
esteem of it as a singular gift of God given to his own Apostle S. John.

After the description of Christ, Verse 9.
John describes himself by many modest terms: 1. Title.
first, Your brother, that is, of them being members all of the mystical body
Christ Jesus: for the church of God is a family, God the Father is head and
householder, Jesus Christ is the elder brother, we all are fellow brethren in
and by Christ, being by him the adopted sons of God, and brethren to each
other.

By this title first he sets out his humility and great modesty: Use. 1.
for he was a man at that time above all men which lived, in regard of his
gifts and holiness of life: he was the last Apostle, and had apostolical
authority, being a most true professor, yet he calls himself a brother to
all true believers, makes himself but equal with them, though they were
far inferior to him. And so should we esteem better of all our brethren,
then of our selves, and make our selves inferior to them.

Secondly, by this title we see he had his heart full of brotherly love to all
the members of the church of Christ: so we are bound to love all men, as they
be of the same flesh with us; but those which be of the same faith and
religion, to these especially should we show our love and affection. It is good
reason, that they which have the same head Christ, the same God, the same
faith, hope, Romans 12.
religion, and redemption by Jesus Christ, should be so affected to one
another: and being linked by all these, should have a more near love, then is
between man and man. But in this world, Isay. 66. 5.
as Esaias says, men hate their brethren, even for the profession of the same
religion, whereby they think to be saved. If they live with more conscience
then others, then they revile, speak ill of, and hate them for the name of
Christ.

The second title: Companion or fellow partner, compartner in tribulations, in
the kingdom and in patience. He was partner with them in tribulations for two
causes: first, because at that time when he wrote this vision, the whole Church
was in persecution and tribulation, under that cruel tyrant Domitian, about
fourscore or an hundred years after Christ: and so he fled to Pathmos at that
time, and being mindful of the afflictions of the Church, whereof he was a
member, he calls himself a partner with them in affliction.

By which he shows our estate, that it is to be under the cross, to live in
affliction; not to be companions of peace and ease, but partakers of affliction
and tribulation: and therefore those which will be Christ's Disciples and follow
him, they must deny themselves, and take up their cross daily; and because of
this estate the Church in this world is called the militant Church. Now seeing
the state of the Church is in tribulation: Use.
we in this land and Church, which have had peace and quietness so long without
persecution, we must know that it is given us, that now in the time of peace we
might prepare our selves against the day of trial and persecution: for seeing
the estate of the Church is to be under affliction and persecution, we are
bound to look for it, and know that the Lord will come and try his Church: for
it must increase and grow by trial. The Lord has sent laborers into his
harvest a long time, which have gathered much wheat into the Lords barn. Now
there must come a day when the Lord will take his fan and sieve into his hands,
and will with the fan and sieve of persecution try the wheat and winnow the
corn from the chafe, that it may appear who are his true children. Then
stands it us in hand, to take heed we be found good corn and not chafe, that
we may abide the sieve, that we prove not light corn, blown about with the
wind, and fit to be cast into the fire to be burnt.

He calls himself their fellow partner in affliction, because his pitiful heart
was moved with compassion to all his fellow members and partners in affliction,
when he remembered their persecution and affliction they suffered under the
cruel tyrant Dominitian. Now look what was in him, the same affection should
be in us, our hearts should be pitiful, full of compassion for the poor
afflicted members of Christ: seeing they be our fellow members, we should have
a fellow feeling with them, and show our compassion in pitying them. If the
foot be pricked, the head stoopes, the eye beholds and looks on it, the
finger pulls it out, the hand applies the plaster, the other foot is ready to
run for help, the tongue to ask for counsel, and all the members are ready to
afford their mutual help in pity and fellow feeling: so when any members
of the Church suffer affliction, be pricked with persecution for Christ's cause,
then should we, as fellow members of one body, be ready to do all the help we
can to them, especially in showing our fellow-feeling with them.

In the kingdom of Christ. That is, the kingdom of heaven. In that he sets
first afliction, then adds a kingdom, he shows that the afflictions and
cross for Christ's sake, is the ready way to the kingdom of heaven: it is the
way which is beaten and trodden by the Prophets, Apostles and the Saints of God:
as the Apostle says, Act 14. 21.
Through manifold tribulations we must enter into heaven. And this momentany
affliction causes to us an infinite weight of glory: 2. Cor. 4. 18.
not that it deserves or effects it, but that it is the pathway to heaven.

Then we must not think it strange when it befalls us, Use.
for it is the means to bring wandering sheep out of the way, into the ready
and beaten way to heaven; nay it is rather to be thought strange when we have
no affliction: Heb. 12. 8.
for then we be gone out of the way, seeing the Lord afflicts every child which
is his.

In patience. A virtue whereby we are made able to persevere in affliction, to
go on suffering till we come to heaven. Afflictions are the beaten way, heaven
is our joyful end, patience is the means to make us persevere and go on till
we come to our iourneys end. Romans 15. 4. Hope to come to heaven is obtained by
patience, which makes a believer to go on suffering till he come to life
eternal. There is much fruit in the good ground, but not obtained without
patience: and the true believer lives by hope in this life, yet cannot come to
heaven without patience. James 5. 9.

Now because men will say, Patience is a hard matter, and so are discouraged;
therefore to set an edge on their desire, he adds it is the kingdom and
patience of Christ: first, because he commands it: secondly, patience comes
from the spirit of Christ: thirdly, because as he suffers in his members, it
is called his patience, for their misery and suffering is his: when his members
suffer, he suffers. And this is a singular comfort to al suffering the
cross, that they have Christ their fellow sufferer, he takes part with them,
puts under his shoulder, he is content to suffer with them. And in these three
stands the communion of Saints in suffering tribulation. The first step to
this fellowship and communion of Saints, is to bear and be in tribulation, and
he which is not come to that, is not yet in the communion of Saints. Then
secondly, he must patiently bear them, persevere without grudging or repining:
then follows the last, which is the end of all, the enjoying of the kingdom
of heaven.

Which was in the I Will called Pathmos. In these words is the second
circumstance, namely, the place where this vision was given to John, namely, in
the I Will Pathmos: an Island, and one of those which the Geographers call
Sporades, lying on the left side of the Churches of Asia, near to the East
Churches by the sea, commonly called the Egean sea: this Island was a small,
base, and poor Island, little or never a whit inhabited.

S. John had his vision, not at Jerusalem, at Antioch, or Rome, but in Pathmos,
a base, poor, and little inhabited Island. By which we see, that in the new
Testament there is no respect of one place above another, in regard of Gods
presence and our fellowship with him: he does as well give John this vision in
Pathmos, as to others his Prophets and Apostles in Jerusalem. In the old
Testament there was regard of places: as the Lord showed his presence, and tied
his worship especially to his tabernacle and temple at Jerusalem; there was the
place where he would be worshipped, Dan. 6.
which Daniel in his prophecy shows: for being in captivity, he in his
chamber opens the window which was toward the temple at Jerusalem. But now
in the new Testament that regard of place is abolished. 1. Tim. 2. 8. Pray
every where, lifting up pure hands in regard of Gods worship and presence; in
all the duties of Religion we must do the like.

Then away with Popish pilgrimage, Use.
to churches and chapels of Saints, or to their relics, for this is mere
superstition: for God is present every where, and a man may have fellowship
with him in one place as well as another. Also, this may serve to correct our
false conceit we have of our churches and chapels; for we come into our common
houses wherein we dwell, and never humble our selves, we think in these places
we need not: but if we come into the Church never so often, we then fall down
and humble our hearts in prayer: the reason is, because we think that God is
more present there, and we should sooner be heard there then in our houses, and
that they be more holy. But in the new Testament now, all such diversity of
place is abolished, in regard of Gods service and presence. Indeed Churches
must be maintained, because in them the people may more conveniently meet
together to serve God: but we must not think but that common houses are as holy
as they for Gods service: only for decency sake, when we that are many may
assemble together in one place, they be more holy then any dwelling house, for
that time when the word is preached, and prayer made in them.

In this circumstance of place note two things, first, by what means S. John
came thither: secondly, to what end, and for what cause. First, he came thither
by banishment: the Emperor Domitian exiled him: secondly, he came for the word
of God.

He came and abode in Pathmos, being banished for the Gospels sake. In this
banishment consider first that S. John was a most worthy Apostle, endued with
rare gifts, a singular maintainer of the Gospel, and a famous founder of the
Church of God, and chief guide thereof in those days, and for this cause most
hated of the cruel persecutor Domitian, and of the Romans: yet whereas many
other of the true Christians were put to the sword, S. John is not, he escapes
and was banished. The cause of this was Gods special providence, by which he
had reserved him for the benefit of the Church, that he might receive this
revelation, and commit it to the Church to the perpetual good of all his
children. And so though Domitian was a cruel tyrant, yet he could not kill
him, but God ouer-ruled him, that he did but banish him into this Island,
wherein he received these visions, and penned them for the good of the Church.

By this we see the great care and providence of God that he has over his
Church, Doctr. 1.
that he does bridle and overrule the minds and might of cruel Emperors,
that they cannot but do all that they do to the glory of God, though they intend
the contrary. For Domitian intended only the hurt of John, yet see, by his
banishment into that I Will, he had fit place to receive these visions for the
good of the Church. So in the death of Christ, the Jews and Gentiles, and all
men banded themselves together to put Christ to death, and the devil he
labored to stir them on to practice their intended malice: yet the
providence of God directs and orders this their malice and wicked practice
to the redemption of mankind. So Joseph's brethren intended no such deliverance
as God wrought by him, in selling their brother. This consideration should
comfort all Gods children, etc.

When we are oppressed and persecuted by tyrants for Christ's sake, Doctr. 2.
we must make no resistance, offer no violence, but suffer all things without
resisting, for the Christians weapons are only prayers and tears: Arma
Christianorum, preces and lachrimae.
and S. John often in this book adds after the foretelling of persecution,
Here is the patience of Saints, showing that must be the complet armor against
all out enemies.

Seeing he came into this Island not of his own accord, Use 1.
but by violence and constraint, he thought it not a good and happy kind of
life. For if he had come into this place, being little or not inhabited, he
could not do this duty of his Apostleship: he could not have founded the
Church. This then confuteth the Monkish life, which is no life of holy
perfection, (as they call it) but of great superstition. S. John would not have
left all company of men, but that he was compelled to leave the^: then the
life of those which voluntarily leave all company of men, living in cloisters
and secret places, cannot be a life of perfection, but of all imperfection: man
is borne to do good to others.

Seeing S. John was banished, Use 2.
and here received his visions, we see that those which honor God, he will
honor them. For S. John was banished, then which what could they do more to
hurt him? Yet then, because it was for Gods cause, God does most honor him, in
revealing to him these visions. So when Joseph was sold of his brethren, and
most dishonored of them, then God exalted him. The same may be said of Daniel,
who when he was most dishonored of men, then the Lord exalted him above all
other men: and the same is true of all Gods children, 1. Sam. 2.
they which honor him, he will honor them.

2 The cause for which he came into this Isle: For the word of God: that is,
because he was by calling a publisher and preacher of the word of God, for
which cause he was banished. By which we may note, that all natural men (as
Domitian and the Romans were, and all men are by nature) hate all that
profess God, hate his word, they cannot abide it. For S. John a most worthy
Apostle, a famous man for gifts, a singular preacher of the word of God: yet
for this very cause is hunted, nay banished, not for his own cause, but for
the word of God. This has been seen in all heathen Emperors, yea and all men
by nature hate the word: yet though they hate it in their hearts, the same word
it wins them, and has taken place in them to convert them, and to make them
to love it: which shows, that the word taught by the Prophets and Apostles,
is indeed the true word of God, not the invention of man. For if the word which
is hated of all men by nature, had not some divine power in it, it could never
make such me^ to love it by grace, which hate it by nature. For no word of man
can make a man which hates the same to love it, but only the word of God.

Seeing John was banished for Gods word, Use.
all Ministers are to cast their accounts, to make a reckoning that they may
and must suffer persecution, nay, banishment for the word of God. For that
which the principal founders and chief builders of the Church have suffered,
that cannot be avoided of them which are ordinary Ministers. Christ he
acquainted his disciples with this, and tells them, that they are even
accursed, when all men speak well of them. Luke 6. 26. They must not seek to
have all think well of them, but rather fear if all men like of them, they
are accursed.

And witness bearing. That is, for the testimony of the history and doctrine
of the Gospel: the sum whereof is, that Jesus Christ the son of Mary is
our Redeemer, to procure to us righteousness and life everlasting. Now he
adds after the other, this of the Gospel, as a doctrine how to come to life
everlasting and righteousness in Jesus Christ: to show, for what part of the
word we are most hated and persecuted, not so much for the law as for the
Gospel: because the law is partly natural, the Gospel is above nature: as, to
believe that God made his covenant with our first parents, Genesis 3.
that the seed of the woman should bruise the serpents head. Now the Gospel is
the glad tidings, in which there is declared, that the promised seed is come,
and therefore the devil he hates this part most of all, and labors man to
hinder the course of the Gospel, rather then of the law. So three hundred
years after Christ, he labored by might and maine to extinguish the Gospel,
to keep men in ignorance of the Messiah: but when he could not prevail by
force and might, he used sophistry and deceit, and brought in heresies to
obscure the truth of the Gospel, and to overthrow the natures, offices and
benefits of Christ.

Then we are bound to do the contrary: Use.
seeing he labors to extinguish it, we must labor to maintain and defend
it, we must labor as much to know it, as he does to keep us in ignorance,
that so we may obey and believe it.

And I was ravished on the Lords day, Verse. 10.
etc. In this tenth verse are two circumstances: the first, which is the third
in number, is the manner of receiving this vision, and giving of it to John,
namely, in a trance: the second or fourth, the time, on that Lords day, or
that day of the Lord.

I was in the spirit. Here we see he received this vision in a trance. I was in
the spirit: that is, I was by the mighty and extraordinary work of the
spirit of God cast into a trance. This appears by comparing this Prophecy
with other, as with that of Ezechiel, who when he received any vision, was cast
into a trance by Gods spirit.

To understand this, consider two things: first, what a trance is: secondly,
the end of it. A trance is an extraordinary work or action of Gods spirit,
ergo, not of the constellation and temperature of the stars, nor from the
constitution of man's body, or imaginations of men, but wrought by the holy
Ghost. Secondly, it is not every work, but an extraordinary work, above the
order of nature, a powerful and mighty work of the holy Ghost: wherein the
whole man both in body and mind is altered, and for that cause S. John says:
I was in the spirit.

This action consists in two actions: one of the mind, and the other of the
body. In procuring a trance, the spirit of God casts a man into a dead
sleep, whereby all the senses both inward and outward are benumbed. So Genesis
15. 12. when God renewed the covenant with Abraham, he cast him into a trance,
that is, into a dead sleep: the senses all were benumbed, only the mind and
soul working.

The other action of the holy Ghost is on the mind, to draw it from fellowship
with the body and all the senses, to have fellowship with God, that so the
spirit of God may enlighten it with light and knowledge of things which are to
revealed to it. And so we see in other ecstasies and traunces: Act. 10.
as that of Peter, his mind was drawn from the fellowship with the body, and
was in fellowship with God.

Then a trance is a mighty and powerful work of the holy Ghost, What a
trance is.
both in body and mind: whereby both the mind is drawn from fellowship with
the body, and unto the fellowship of God; and also enlightened with light and
knowledge of God, to understand things to be revealed. Now follows the end of
a trance.

The cause why men are cast into trances in receiving any visions, is, that (as
S. John here) they might know, that the things delivered were not invented of
themselves, but given of God. For in John, his body and all his senses were
benumbed; he neither heard, saw, nor felt, but they were asleep, and therefore
the vision must needs be from God.

Secondly, that they might take the deeper impression in his and their mind:
for when the mind is freed from fellowship with the body, not hindered by any
fantasies of the senses, they being all asleep and quiet, then the mind has
best opportunity to attend and mark, to know and understand, and also to
imprint deeper in memory things revealed.

Here we see the great care of God, Doctrine.
who would not have his children to receive these visions by senses
imperfectly: but that they might thoroughly understand, know, believe, and carry
the^ away in faithful memory, he delivered them in ecstasies and trances, the
mind then being no whit hindered with fellowship of the body, but freed from
the same. The like care had he of his Prophets: that they might certainly
know, constantly believe, and faithfully remember those visions, he would not
have their minds troubled with the fellowship of the body, or of the senses
inward or outward.

And there is good reason of this: for they which must teach a thing to other,
to make them know and understand, to believe and remember the same, it is
reason they should understand and hold it themselves, and keep it well in
memory.

This seeing the Lord did, Use.
to make them to understand more thoroughly, to believe more constantly, and to
carry away more faithfully, this teaches Ministers, that they must have also
the through understanding and knowledge of the word, believe it constantly, and
remember it carefully. Now we must not look for and expect trances, as they
had, but we must come to this by continual study in the word, which is the
ordinary means to come to that knowledge: it is the means by which all men,
Preachers, students and hearers do know. Then we should seek to be cunning in
the text of Scripture, to understand the proper sense of it, to be good text
men, to understand, believe, and remember it.

Then this is a fault of those which in studying of divinity, Use.
will rather read ancient writings of men, nay the base writings of of wicked
and heretical Friars, then of the holy word of God.

In that he received this vision and will of God in a trance, and had it so
made fully known unto him: we see, that though he was endued with singular
gifts, yet the Lord adds more knowledge to his former: so that we see that
saying justified, To him which has shall be given. S. John being so careful
to do his duty of an Apostle, the Lord reuealeth his will to him in most full
manner. Even so all that have care to know the will and word of God, though
their knowledge be small at the first, yet the Lord will help them, add daily
to their knowledge and increase it. So we see why many hear the word, but
increase not, but wax worse, or stand at a stay: the reason is, because they
labor not to have their knowledge increased; for if they did, then to him
which has, he should have more added.

Nay contrarily, when we be negligent to hear and to know the will and word of
God, we have a spirit indeed, but not Gods, but the spirit of slumber, of
blindness and ignorance: so that we see and see not, hear and understand not.
Esaias 29. 10.

On the Lords day. Verse 10.
In these words is the fourth circumstance, namely, the time when this vision
was granted to S. John. This day which here is called the Lords day, among the
Jews was the first day of the week, called by us Sunday.

It is called the Lords day for two causes: first, because on this day Christ
rose from death to life: for Christ was buried the even of the Jews Sabbath
which is our friday, and he rested in the grave their whole Sabbath, which is
our saturday, and rose the first day of the week early in the morning, which
is our Sunday: and for this cause first it is called, the Lords day.

2 It is called the Lords day, because this first day, to the believing Jews,
was to them in stead of their Sabbath, in which day they worshipped God
solemnly: it was the day appointed to his service among them, and for this
cause especially it is called the Lords day.

To understand how it is called the Lords day, we must know three points:
first, who changed this day from the Jews Sabbath: secondly, for what cause:
thirdly, whether the Church have now in the new Testament power to change the
Sabbath day to any other day then this seventh day. The changer and appointer
of this Sabbath of the new testament was Christ himself, though it be commonly
thought that the Church in the new testament and Christian Emperors changed it.
My reasons are these: 1. That which the Apostles delivered and enjoined the
Church, that they received from Christ, either by voice or instinct, for they
delivered nothing of their own head: but they delivered this, and enjoined
this Sabath to the Church, although they received it from Christ. That they
enjoined this day of rest and Sabbath to the Church, it appears 1. Cor. 16.
1. For Paul ordained that the collection for the poor should be on the first
day of the week, he ordained it, and left it not to the choice of the Church,
but appointed it by authority Apostolical from Christ. Now the day of
collecting for the poor (as appears in the histories of the Church) was the
Sabbath day: when the people were assembled, then they used to make their
collection: for before that collection there went the word preached, and the
sacrament of the Lords supper: and this was the custom of the Church many
years after Christ, first to have the word preached and the sacraments
administered, then to gather for the poor: and for this cause the Lords supper
is called a sacrifice, or a mass, not as the Papists use it, but because in it
we offer, not to the Lord, Masse^ mittendo.
but to the poor, which was sent them, and so gave the name to that sacrament
to be called the mass. By which it appears, that they appointed by
Apostolical authority the first day of the week to be the Sabbath of the new
Testament, which here is called the Lords day. A second reason is this. The
Apostles kept this day for the Sabbath of the new testament, Act. 20. 7. and it
cannot be proved that they observed any other day for the Sabbath, but only in
one case, when they lived among the Jews, when they kept their old Sabbath. A
third reason, is, John 20. 19. 26. That same day which Christ rose from death
being the first day of the week, he appeared to his Disciples to instruct
them; and the eight day after, he appeared again the first day of the week,
instructing them in matters belonging to the kingdom of heaven. Now it is more
then likely Christ would celebrate and keep that day for a Sabbath wherein he
rose, and the eight day after appeared to instruct his Disciples.

Now the Sabbath of the Jews was changed for two causes: first, to maintain
the liberty of the Church of the new Testament, whereof this was a great part,
that they were freed from the ceremonies of the Jews: for here when this day
was changed, the Church was no more tied to the Jews Sabbath day, neither had
any such regard after of days and times.

Secondly, that there might be a more fit time for the remembrance of the work
of redemption: for as God in the old Testament appointed the seventh day to be
a day of rest, to remember the first creation: so there should be a day to
celebrate this work, which is a wonderful creation, in which we are made new
men, so that there is now a new heaven, and new earth, as Isay speaks, chap.
66.

Nay this is a more glorious work then that, seeing in that creation Adam was
the head, in this Christ Jesus he is the head. In that Adam was the chief, in
this Christ. In that Heuah was given to Adam, in this we to Christ, his Church
to him. In that, Adam had an earthly paradise, in this redemption we have a
spiritual kingdom. In that, Gods mercy only, in this both his mercy and
justice in punishing of Chirst, and giving us forgiveness, appeared. In that,
God showed his wisdom and goodness but in part, but herein this he showed it
fully. In that, he made man of nothing, but now he made him of worse then
nothing, and better then ever he was. Therefore seeing this day of our
redemption is far passing that, and the Lord appointed a day for the
remembrance thereof, much more should there be one for the remembrance of this:
now there is no day fitter then that day wherein Christ Jesus rose from death
to life, to remember his resurrection.

But may the Church now in the new Testament change the Sabbath to any other
day, Objection.
as to tuesday, wednesday, etc. Answ. It cannot, I think: because times and
seasons belong to God, he alone can dispose of the^, Act. 1. 6. the church has
not knowledge of times and seasons, much less of the ordering and disposing of
them: for that which the Father keeps in his own bosom, the Church cannot
know, but the Father alone so keeps times and seasons, therefore the church
cannot know them. And as the church of the Jews had not power to change their
Sabbath, no more has the Church in the new Testament, to change their Sabbaths.

Ob. But the Jews had authority to appoint feasts: therefore they could
appoint Sabbath days. Hest. 9. 17. they for their deliverance appoint a day of
rest, of rejoicing. So 1. Maccab. 4. 8. Answer.
They appointed indeed solemn days for rejoicing, and solemn feasts for
special deliverance, but they appointed not any day for a sabath and rest, for
the whole service of God. Some hold that the Church has power to alter it,
nay, to make any day the Sabbath, or if it could be conveniently, two days in
a week, but they have no warrant out of the word.

If this day, Use.
the Lords day, be a day to remember the death, resurrection and merits of
Christ, we see three sorts of men here reproved: first them which make this day
a day of pleasure, pastime and delight. For most young men and servants employ
this day wholly on their own delights and pleasures, making it a day of carnal
rejoicing, spending it in eating, drinking, carding, dicing, riot and excess,
so that they turn this Lords day set apart to his worship, into a day to offer
sacrifice to the devil. The second sort is of them which live more ciuilly then
the former, yet they think they may do their own business, and take journeys
on this day; and that upon this false ground, that a man may as well and with as
honest and good an heart serve God in his own business at home, as they which
go to Church. But by this they make the Lords day appointed to his service,
their own day, to do their own work, and not his. The third sort is, of
those which keep the Sabbath only at morning and evening Prayer, but as for
the rest of the day, they may spend it how they will, on their own pleasures
and pastimes, or their own business: and of this sort are many in the world,
who come to the Church but only so far as the law of the Land inioynes them;
and these men part stakes with God, they give him one part and that the lesser,
and bestow the other on their own business or pleasure: whereas it is the
Lords day, not in part but in whole, and so they break the fourth
commandment.

Then on the contrary, our duty is to keep this day a Sabbath to the Lord, as
we are commanded in the fourth commandment: 1. we must rest from all our
sins: secondly, from all the works of our callings, and employ it wholly on
the service of God, sanctifying this day of rest to the worship of God from the
morning to the evening.

Now there is a double sanctifying of the Sabbath, first public in the
congregation, when we come to the Church to pray and give thanks, and there to
hear the word and receive the sacraments: secondly, private, when men in their
own private houses at home sanctify it, in meditating, reading, and thinking
of the word, in praying privately, and giving thanks for benefits: we must not
employ that day in our own business. If the Officer should take our servant
from our works, and set him about the common good, we would be grieved. And if
we take the day appointed to Gods service, and bestow it on our own affairs:
shall not the Lord be offended?

And the cause why we hear the word publicly and never profit, is, because we
sanctify the sabbath only publicly and not privately: so that unless we
meditate, read the word, pray, and sanctify the sabbath at home, we may hear
and read the word publicly, but without all increase of grace, faith,
knowledge and repentance: but if we perform neither, it is not possible to get
any grace, seeing this day is set apart for that end. Now to proceed.

The reason why the Lord he gave John these visions, rather on this day then
another, is, because though John was absent in body from the Church, yet he was
present in spirit, in praying for it at this time: for being absent, he would
show his presence in such duties as he could perform in that solitary place,
as fasting, prayer, etc. Now when he was thus occupied, the Lord reuealeth his
will to him concerning the estate of the Church to the end of the world.

Seeing John being in the Isle of Pathmos, Use.
a desert place, yet he kept the Sabbath in all such duties as he could
perform: hence we see, that they which are absent from the Church, as in
prison, sick of some great disease, or on the sea, yet they must keep the
Sabbath, they must pray, fast, and call on the name of God, etc.

In that he received the vision then, Use 2.
when he was exercised in praying and fasting, here is a comfort for the
children of God, that when men draw near to God, he draws near to them,
Iam. 4. John a worthy Apostle being in banishment, he draws near to God in
fasting and prayer, and the Lord he draws nigh to him, and reuealeth his will
to him: so if we draw near to God by faith and repentance, by prayer and
invocation of his name, then he will draw near to us. But if we draw our
selves back from him, he draws back from us. This then should move us above
all things to seek to draw as near him as can be: then he will come and show
his goodness to us. And the cause why we are so little acquainted with his
goodness, is, because we will not be acquainted with him.

Now in the second place follows, after the fourth circumstance, the parts of
the vision, which be two: first, an entrance into the vision: secondly, the
representation of Christ as he is King and Priest to his Church, which is the
substance and chief thing in this vision. The entrance is in these words: And
I heard a great voice behind me, till the end of the eleventh verse: The vision
or the representation of Christ, from the twelfth to the end of the third
Chapter.

The beginning and entrance into the vision, is a preparation, whereby the holy
Ghost makes S. John more fit to receive and mark things to be revealed, which
may be heard and seen.

The means to prepare John, is a voice: And I heard a voice. The like to this
we have commonly in the old Testament, where the Lord revealing his will, does
send a voice before, to prepare his servants to receive his will. So when he
would give the covenant to Adam Genesis 3. he prepares him to receive, and
lets him hear a voice in the garden which made him afraid, and to hide
himself: after the Lord speaks to him face to face, and gives the covenant
to him. So when the Lord would give the law to Moses in the mount, Exodus 19. 6.
first he sent a voice in a mighty thunder, lightning, and sound of a trumpet:
after he declared the law to him. 1. Sam. 3. When the Lord would speak to
Samuel, he sends a voice to him three times, and after he speaks to him
plainly, and calls him by his name. So commonly in the old Testament, when
the Lord will declare his will to his Prophets, he prepares them by a voice.
So to Cornelius, Act. 10. etc.

Seeing the Lord deals thus with this most famous Apostle, Use.
when he received his will by extraordinary revelation, being first prepared:
then much more we which are sinful men, which have not the thousandth part of
those graces he had, of knowledge, faith, and obedience, but are so far short
in ordinary gifts, we must much more be prepared, that our understanding and
memory may be made fit to hear, know and remember Gods will and word declared
to us. And the cause why we increase not in faith, repentance, and knowledge
after long hearing the word, is, because we come unprepared, without looking
that our understanding and memory by all good means may be prepared to receive
the word.

The voice is described by the place, Behind me. Not before him, but behind
him, to stir up attention in him: for men most mark those things which come
as of a sudden behind them: so this coming suddenly behind him, drew him to
more earnest attention.

A great voice. Thirdly, it is like the sound of a trumpet, not only a great
voice, but full of power and majesty, as the sound of a trumpet. Now he
utters these to stir up more attention in him: for if he should hear an
ordinary voice, or a small voice, it would not perhaps have stirred him: but
being a great, powerful, sudden, and a strange voice, it could not but make
him very attentive.

Seeing he uses all these means of attention in John, a worthy Apostle, then
much more must we use all good means to stir up attention in us, seeing we
in all gifts are a thousand times inferior to the least Apostle: seeing we be
dull and heavy, and our senses not so sharp as they should be, we must stir
up our selves, seek to be attentive to that which which is spoken: Act. 16.
and as Lydia did, we must employ all our diligence to make us atte^tiue. And
the cause why the word is preached without fruit, is, because we hear it
without attention, and have no affection to it. Now that we may do this, we
must beware of two enemies of attention: the first, are by-thoughts, when a man
brings his body, but his mind goes about his farms, or worldly riches,
about a journey, or bargain, or some worldly affairs. Luke 8.
These by-thoughts are thorns in our hearts, which choke the good seed of the
word, that it cannot prosper and grow: for men which are troubled with them,
cannot see how one point depends and hangs on another, but their memory
and understanding is hindered.

The second enemy is dullness and heaviness of body and soul, which is
showed in this, that we come heavy and sleepie to hear the word, and spend
that time which we should employ in hearing, in heaviness and sleeping. But if
we will have the word fruitful to us, we must shake off this drowsinesse, be
affected with joy and gladness, and hear the word with greediness. If a man
should come heavy and sleepie into the presence of the King, especially he
being to tell him of great matters, or the giving of him some great benefit, he
would take it for disloyalty and contempt of his Majesty. The cause why the
word has no better effect in us, but that after long preaching and teaching,
we be as blind and ignorant as ever we were, is, because we come not prepared:
contrarily, if we come prepared, the Lord increases our faith, knowledge,
obedience, etc.

Saying, I am Alpha and Omega. Verse. 11.
Before he described the voice which he heard, as a means of this preparation,
by the place. Secondly, the quality, A great voice like the sound of a
trumpet. In these words he proceeds further to describe this voice in this
eleventh verse, and sets down the substance and matter of this voice which
he heard: which stands in two things. The first, a testimony, in these
words: I am Alpha and Omega, etc. The second, a commandment, to write all
these words, etc.

1 The testimony in substance is in the eighth verse before. In which words of
Christ, is, as before, a comparison: namely, as Alpha and Omega are the first
and the last letters in the Greek Alphabet: so I, Christ the Son of God, am
the first and last of all things; because before me there was nothing, neither
after me shall there be any thing in being and subsisting.

These words prove the Godhead and eternity of Christ the second person. The
end why Christ alleges them, is, to certify him, that these things he was
about to show him came from God, and therefore he brings his own testimony:
namely, I which speak unto thee am God, therefore the things I deliver unto
thee are from God, even from Jesus Christ the second person in the Trinity,
Use. 1.
which am God equal to my Father.

In this testimony of Christ, note a singular care of God in respect of his
Church: he is careful not only to reveal his will to his Church, but withal
to certify his Church of the truth of the same. As here he tells John, that
they come from God, to certify his soul and conscience in the truth of the
same: so he reuealeth not only his will, but withal assures men of the truth
thereof. Act. 10. Peter has a vision, and withal the Lord assures him of the
truth of that vision. And when Christ preached his Fathers will, he wrought
many miracles, which were as s^ales to confirm the same, Use. 2.
that it came from God.

Seeing the Lord he does not only declare his will, but withal assures men of
the certainetie and truth of his will: this first confuteth the Papists, who
teach, that the word of God is certain in it self: but to us it is not
certain till we hear the testimony of the Church, which makes the Scripture
which is uncertain to us, though certain in it self, to be certain to us.
But we must here know and learn, that the Lord does not only reveal his will
to his children, but withal uses means to certify men's hearts of the truth
thereof, and so the word of God is most sure not only in it self, but even to
men, though the testimony of the Church should never speak word of the same.

^. This confutes all carnal men. There be many which will be of no Religion,
because there is (as they think) no certainty in Religion: seeing men's
opinions in matters of Religion be so diverse, that one cannot tell who speaks
the truth. Indeed we differ in many points of religion; and so many men, so
many diverse opinions: yet the true members of Christ they differ not in the
fundamental points of Religion. And though all the world should differ in
opinion, yet it follows not there should be no Religion: but the doctrine
taught by the Prophets and Apostles should stand sure, and be the true Religion
of God for ever: and the Lord can make men out of it to learn his will, and
assure them of the certainty of Religion.

Now follows the commandment: That which thou see, write in a book, etc.
This has two parts: first, S. John must write the things he receives:
secondly, he must send them to the seven famous Churches of Asia. Now the Lord
commands John to write these things in a book, and he must set down that
which he received of God, to send it to the seven Churches of Asia: because he
being now in banishment, and could not come to them and be present with them to
instruct them, therefore he must write these in a book, that so they might be
helped by them. Secondly, he must not only write them in a book, but send them
to these seven Churches: first, that they might be confirmed and strengthened
in the matters of faith, now in the cruel time of their persecution: secondly,
that they might keep these books for the Church of God which is the pillar and
ground of truth: first, because it publishes the word: secondly, because she
keeps the same from time to time, and also gives testimony of the truth of
the same. So then, that these Churches might keep, publish, and give testimony
of these things, he must send them written to them.

Hence we learn, Use.
that the word of God written, is an excellent help for the church of God, to
edify the same: else he would never have commanded John to send this book to
the seven Churches in Asia.

This confutes first the Papists, who hold that the written word is but a dead
and inky letter, a nose of wax to be turned any way* secondly, the Anabaptists
who look for revelations, contemn the written word: but seeing the Lord bids
him send it to the seven Churches in Asia, he shows it is an excellent means
to edify the Church.

We may learn, Use. 2.
that the reading of this book, as of other Scripture, is Gods ordinance,
whether it be public or private, and that they must be so used as Gods
ordinance with reverence and good conscience. Indeed the word preached is the
ordinary means to begin faith, and to work repentance: but the reading of
them publicly and privately, has his proper use to confirm our faith, yea to
increase knowledge, faith and repentance in us.

Write, and send it to the seven Churches, etc. Here is the third point,
namely, that a man in the cross and persecution may be the dear child of God.
S. John a famous Apostle and dear servant of God, yet he is in banishment, and
continues a long time from all company of men; yet God reuealeth his will to
him, and makes him the penman of this book, which he gives to none but them
which be his servants. Then a man may be and continue in banishment, yet be the
dear servant of God. We reason, if a man be in the cross and persecution, and
continue in the same, he is surely out of Gods favor, but we see the contrary
in John.

In the end of the verse he sets down the names of these seven Churches in
particular; and these seven places were seven most famous cities in Asia, in
which were planted seven most excellent Churches of all those parts of the
world, and for that cause here are named one by one.

Then I turned back. Verse 12.
Here is his preparation or entrance into the vision. When I heard a voice
behind me being loud and great, I turned to see him which delivered it to me.
In the preparation we must consider, first the means to move John to
attention, namely a voice: secondly the end, to make him attentive, and to
inioyne him his duty, namely, to write, and to send it to the Churches.

Now follows the second part of his preparation, which is, that he turned
back when he heard this loud and great voice, to see who it was which gave the
voice.

By this practice of S. John, we may learn our duty: for as he deals with
the man which gives the voice, so must we deal with God. S. John hears a
voice, and then he turns back to see who it is: so must we do with the Lord;
we are all by nature ready to turn from God, and run from him as fast as we
can by our sins. Now when the Lord speaks to us by the preaching of the
word, when we are running on in another way. we must turn to him, turn our
hearts to his ways, confess our sins to him, that so turning to him we may
have fellowship with God. For unless S. John had turned to see the vision and
him which spoke, he had not seen it: so unless we turn to God speaking in
the ministry of his word, and that in time whilst he speaks to us, we can
have no fellowship with him, though we hear the word never so much.

Now follows the second part of the vision, which is the representation of
Christ his majesty and magnificence, as he is a Prophet, King and Priest of his
Church, and it is set out by a large description of Christ from this twelfth
verse to the end of the third chapter: In which description S. John shows
what he received touching Christ, partly by hearing, partly by seeing. And
herein he describes Christ, first by his place, In the midst of the seven
candlestickes: secondly, by his form and figure, Like to the son of man.

First, he describes Christ by the place, I saw seven golden candlestickes,
and in the midst one like, etc. These seven candlesticks here seen of John
in a vision, are the seven Churches in Asia. Now as the Church of God is
compared to a candlestick, as Christ expounds it in the twentieth verse: so
the particular Churches are here called candlestickes, for their resemblance
which they have with candlestickes: for as their property is to bear and hold
forth the candle and lamp: even so the Churches of God bear up and hold forth,
and publish the light of the Gospel to the whole world, partly by preaching
and maintaining it, partly by professing the faith.

^ Seeing every Church is a candlestick (and not a candle) to bear up and
hold forth the lamp and light of the word, Use,
because they have no light of themselves, but only can bear up and hold
forth the light, and are but the instruments of the light, the true light
being Christ himself; then they cannot give light to men's consciences and
hearts, but all that they can do, is to bear the candle, and hold out the
light, by instructing and preaching the word, and by their profession of
religion.

In that they are compared to candlestickes, Use. 2.
we learn that all the true members of Christ are candles, burning and shining
lights, placed in the shafts of this candlestick. For though the Ministers
must especially be blazing lamps to the people, as John Baptist was, Ioh. 5.
35. yet also are all true members of Christ these blazing candles to hold
forth this light, and show forth the doctrine of light to the world. Phil. 2.
15. 16. Every man in his calling must be a shining candle, and a burning lamp.
Now that he may be such a one, he must first have knowledge of the will and
word of God himself, then as a blazing candle, send forth the same to others,
by teaching and instructing, by godly life and conversation. We all profess we
be members of Christ, and members of the true Church, then we must carry and
hold forth these burning lights, having light in our selves to send it out to
others, by teaching them in our calling, and living godly, and giving good
example, and so shine to the world.

To induce us to this, to carry our selves as burning lamps: first, it is the
commandment of God, Phil. 2. 15. Every man in his calling must be a blazing
light in the middle of a perverse nation: we must carry our selves free from
all sin, send out our light to all men. For a second reason, mark the fruit
and the effect which follows this carrying of our selves as shining lights.
When a man is endued with knowledge of Gods will and word, and sends out this
light by instructing others, and in a godly example, he wins many men to the
kingdom of heaven. A man if he have one to hold him out a candle in winter,
that he may see his way to go whither he would, he takes this as a great
benefit: how much more is this, to light the way to a blind man even to the
kingdom of heaven? But on the contrary, when men be dim and dark candles,
and live not in the Church as blazing lights, but in sin, ignorance, and
looseness of life, hence great hurt and danger comes to men with whom they
live. For when a man knows the will of God, and yet lives in sin, he gives
a false direction, and so many follow him even to the pit of hell: and by his
bad example, he draws men as much as in him lies, A Similie.
to eternal destruction. In haven towns, if a man remove the night mark, and
the candle set to direct the ships, he does as much as in him lies to sink
all the ships: for they having wrong direction, run on rocks and sands,
because they go to the light which is not in the right place, and so they miss
the channel, and light on rocks and perish. So men in this world, they sail
as on the sea, to heaven: now if we by our wicked life remove the mark and
give wrong direction, they must needs miss the right way, and so come to a
false haven, not heaven but hell. And so then, seeing either by our godly life
we draw men to heaven, or by our bad life we carry them to hell, it is our
duty to labor by life and doctrine to give good direction.

The third reason to move us to be burning lights, is the judgment of God: for
he which lives in the Church, and yet shines not in teaching others by his
good example, he incurreth the judgment of God. In the temple the lights and
candles belonged to the Priest who dressed and trimmed them, and for that
purpose he had snuffers and such instruments: now in the Church every man is a
candle, standing in the church as in a stick: Christ Jesus he is the trimmer
and dresser of them, he stands in the midst of them, he has his snuffers in
his hands, he trimmeth them and dresseth these candles. Now if after three or
four times dressing and snuffing of this candle, still it burns dim and will
not shine out, he will either remove it out of the stick, or else he will take
and tread it under his feet. So those which in the Church do not send out a
shining light, the Lord he dresseth and snuffeth them, but if they still burn
dimmely, cast not a clear light in instructing others, and leaving good
example, the Lord will cast them out of their places, put them under his foot,
and clean extinguish them. In regard of this danger, every man in his shaft
and place, the Minister in his, the unlettered man in his, must teach others,
give good example, else the issue will be this, the Lord will come in judgment
and stamp it out, and extinguish that light. Nay, very reason requires this
at our hands, seeing we be all lights of this candlestick of the Church, that
we should send out light. In winter time we hang out lights, that by them men
might be directed to help them in their journey: and shall we be so careful
to help men in temporal light, and not much more careful to help them in
light toward the kingdom of God? Let then all ignorant and loose livers, as
there be many among us, let them now begin to shine: for they stand in the
place of good lights, they be in the candlestick: they must cease from
ignorance and looseness of life, and begin to burn and cast light as good
candles, both by doctrine and good example.

If a man should bring a candle in a stick to us, and we should go about to
light it twice or thrice, and it would not take light, we would in anger cast
it down: so Christ if he use means to light these ignorant and loose-liuing
persons many times, if they refuse to be lighted, he in his displeasure will
cast them down out of the candlestick, and not suffer them to take the place
of a good candle, but rather tread and stamp them under foot.

In the Church of God there be many ignorant persons, many which continue in
their ignorance and rebellion, and so continue in sin: but a small number of
good blazing lamps. Many hold the place of good lights, but are dark, dim,
and give no light, let these fear Gods judgments. Would any be true candles,
burning and blazing lights? let them first get knowledge in the word and will
of God, furnish and replenish their hearts with knowledge, and after practice
the same faithfully in obedience, in leading a godly life, shining to other in
holy example, exhorting and instructing them, that so shining forth clearly
and chearefully, Christ standing in the midst of the lights, may like and
allow of them. For unless we shine thus in this candlestick, to wit, the
Church of God, where we have our places, we shall never have light, nor joy in
the kingdom of heaven: but if we do, we shall then shine as the Sun, clear
and fair for evermore.

Golden candlestickes. That is, made of gold: so called for two causes. The
Church of God is compared to a candlestick of gold: first, because as gold is
most excellent of all metals: so the Church of God is the most excellent of
all societies and companies of men. All companies and societies of men, in the
family, town, city, kingdom, commonweales, they be all the ordinance of
God, and excellent in their kinds: but the Church of God is above all these, it
is most excellent, no society comes near it: first, because in the Church
there is salvation to be had and obtained, but in none of these societies of
men it is to be had, as they be societies of men, but as they be Churches, or
true members of the Church.

2 It is a most excellent society, because this is the end of all other
societies, they be all ordained to maintain this, as the chief, and this even
the Church of God, is the end of them all.

3 The Church it beautifieth and adorneth all other societies, because herein
is their honor and preferment, in that they be either Churches, or members of
the true Church.

Seeing the Church is the chief and most excellent society in this world,
Use. 1.
we must above all things have special care to become members of this
society. Men have care and labor to become members of those towns which be
in corporations, and have freedoms above other: then much more should we
labor to be members of that society which is most excellent, to be true
members of the Church of God.

Seeing this is the chief society, Use 2.
and all referred to maintain the Church of God, it must be our special care
to maintain that Church, every man in his calling, as the King, Prince, and
Magistrates, the Ministers in their callings, yea every man in his particular
calling must seek to preserve this society.

Seeing this society adorneth the other, Use. 3.
and gives them their beauty, we should labor to bring all societies to
this. Men in families must seek to make their family a Church, or a member of
the true Church: they which rule a town, to make it a true member of the
Church, and to make it an ecclesiastical society: so Kings to make their
kingdom a Church, and member ber of the Catholic Church, because al other
societies without the Church, are but as places without light, and without the
candlestick to hold up: and without this light, they be in darkness and the
shadow of death. It is compared to a golden stick, because it is most precious
to God, none so dear, none so near to God, as this society of the Church.
Christ therefore to express how dear it is, says it is a seal to his hand,
and a sign on his right arm. Can. 8. 6. Zachary calls the Church the apple of
Gods eye, showing it is most dear in Gods sight, as precious as the apple of
the eye, which is most tender to us. Psalm. 45. it is compared to the Queen in
a vesture of gold: nay, no society is so precious and dear to Christ as this,
seeing he has shed his own heart blood, even the blood of God, to redeem his
Church.

In the midst of the seven golden candlestickes. Christ is in the midst of
them, that is, he is present with his Church continually in all times: he has
continual care of it, to gather his Church, and being gathered, to preserve it
and defend it from all her enemies.

Seeing Christ is in the midst of his Church present to gather and defend it:
Use. 1.
then the supremacy of the Church of Rome, whereby they will have one head of
all the Churches on earth, is needless: for Christ is present, gathering and
defending his Church at all times: then there needs no general Vicar. In the
presence of a king, they of a commission cease, though they were assigned
before: and if any should be so impudent as to take on him the office of a king
in his presence, all men would condemn him: so though Christ had given this
office to the Pope, yet seeing he is present at all times in his Church, to
gather and defend it, the general government of the Pope is needless, and it
is extreme arrogance to take on him the office of Christ in his presence.

Seeing Christ is in the midst of his Church, Use. 2.
we must do as Enoch, Genesis 5. 22. walk with or before Christ: when we take any
thing in hand, do any thing in word or deed, we must do all in Christ's
presence. We must do all we do, that we may have approbation of Christ, for he
is in the midst of his Church, to look to it, to defend it, he sees what we
do; therefore do all that he may like of it, and approve it. That we may do so,
we must have direction for that we do out of his word: and if we be able to
walk before Christ, we shall be able to do many duties to him, and be
unblameable in this wicked world.

The second argument whereby Christ is described, is his form and shape Like
the son of man. Hence some gather, that it is not Christ, but some Angel which
is described; but they are deceived, for he is called (...) and (...), the
first and the last, and he that was first dead then alive, which belongs to
Christ alone. Like the son of man, but more significant it is in the
original, Like a son of man: if it be translated, The son of man, then
Christ must be understood: but in the original it is, A son of man,
according to the phrase of the old Testament, where when they would signify
one that was a man, they called him, A son of man, that is, man like a man in
form and shape.

Christ is said to be like a son of man, not that he appeared to John in his
manhood, for that was in heaven, but in a likeness, appearance and resemblance
of his manhood: and as he does not appear here, so in no place after his
ascension he appears in his true manhood. Stephen saw the son of man stand
at the right hand of God, Act. 7. but that was in heaven: and Paul heard him
speak, Act. 9. and being ravished, 1. Cor. 13. but then also he was in heaven.

And this Christ does to a special end, to show that whereas men much regard
and esteem his bodily presence, as his Apostles and friends did, who had too
great a desire of it, we must not seek to have earthly familiarity with him,
but we must lift up our hearts by faith, and so have spiritual familiarity
and acquaintance with him. John 20.
And so he bids Mary, touch me not, being not yet glorified, to check her
too much desire of his bodily presence: but he would have her and us to lift up
our hearts by faith, and have spiritual familiarity and acquaintance with him
in heaven.

Then hence, the defense of consubstantiation and real presence of the body of
Chirst is in the sacrament, is but needless, seeing it is sufficient Christ is
present in spirit, not bodily any more, but we must lift up our hearts to
heaven, and there for ever live and rest in him.

The Papists gather of this, in that Christ appeared after his ascension in the
appearance and form of a man, that they may make the image of Christ, who
being God appeared in the form of a man. Secondly the Father, who is figured
by an old man, Dan. 9. and the holy Ghost in the form of a Dove, they hold
they may picture the^, not in any form but in that they appeared. Answer. It
is not unlawful for us to have the pictures of the Father, Son and holy
Ghost as they appeared in form, as Christ in a man, the Father in an old man,
the holy Ghost in a Dove, to illustrate and set out the history: but we deny
and hold it unlawful to have any of them, or the picture of Christ (if it were
to be had) to religious uses, to put us in remembrance of Christ, to worship
God, in, or at, or by it: for thus to worship God is flat against the second
commandment.

Clothed with a garment down to the feet. In these words following, is
described the garment and attire wherein Christ appeared to John. The first
part of his attire, is a long robe or garment down to the feet. He appeared in
this kind of garment, first to show he was the high Priest of the new testament
after his ascension, to do the the office of the high Priest, because this was
one of the garments which the high Priest used when he offered sacrifice. So
Christ having offered himself on the cross, he is still high Priest for us,
to make intercession for us to his father. Secondly, he appeared in this kind
of attire, to show he is the Prince and King of peace, because this long robe
and garment is in all nations, where it is used, a sign of peace: so Christ
having this garment, is not a King of war but of peace. Esaias. 9. Thirdly, to
show he excelled in wisdom and counsel: for this garment in all nations
which use it, was given to them which excel in wisdom and counsel: so
Christ here is clothed with this long stole and robe, to show that he excels
in the spirit of wisdom and counsel, because the spirit of wisdom is in him
without measure. Esaias 9. 6. Col. 2.

Hence for the attire of our body, Use.
we learn that it must be suitable and answerable to those good things which be
or ought to be in our hearts, as this garment of Christ, to show he was high
Priest: secondly, that he was King of peace: lastly, that he excelled in
wisdom and counsel. So our attire should be such, which may signify the
virtues which be in us, as our knowledge, obedience, sobriety, temperancy,
humility, and all the good gifts and graces of God: we must not only show out
the graces of our hearts by word, but even our attire must set out what they
be. And as we must be candles, in teaching and instructing in life and
conversation: so we must shine and show forth the virtues of our heart by our
attire. But alas our practice is contrary, for our apparel is now suitable to
all our corruption and vices of our hearts, to set out our pride, to preach to
the world our lightness and looseness of life, the vanity and folly of our
heart: so that if a man see one go, though he never be acquainted with him,
never spoke to him, yet he may know his fondness, folly, looseness of life,
pride and corruption of his heart by his apparel.

The second part of his attire, is, that he was girded about with a golden
girdle about the breasts: which is to show, that Christ was ready prepared to
do all the offices of a Mediator for us: for the girding up of the body, the
binding of men's apparel to them, is a sign of diligence and care to do ones
duty; as the not girding of the clothes, but to leave the^ loose, is a sign
of negligence and carelessness. Then seeing Christ is girded up, it shows he
is ready prepared to do the office of a Mediator to all men: and so Christ
whilst he was on the earth he showed this, he saved all the poor sinners
which came to him; and since his resurrection he is not negligent, but ready
prepared, girded to do the office of a Mediator to all true penitent sinners.

This must be a singular comfort to all which have any spark of grace, that
Christ he is ready to attend on them, to do the office of a Mediator for them.
When we be in affliction and cross, he is ready prepared at our elbowes to
deliver us and comfort us: when we be ready to die, he is not far off, but
stands by us, ready to carry our souls to heaven; in all things he is ready to
all the works of a Mediator, to help us in all the works of our salvation.
Christ he is not like Pharaohs Butler, who promised Joseph to remember him,
being promoted to honor out of prison, but after being exalted in Pharaohs
house, forgot him, Genesis 40. But Christ he is still now as ready as ever he was
in earth to help us, and to do all the works of a Mediator for us.

Then we must imitate Christ, Use.
and have our loins girded up. Luke 12. we must be prepared and made ready to
do all our duties, to call upon the name of God, to give him thanks, to renew
our faith and repentance daily: yea every day make our selves ready to die or
to live, and to be always ready to do all the works concerning our
salvation, and at all times to carry our selves so, as we be ready to enter
into heaven at any time. But we never think of this, we are ready to no good
thing, we never think of death till it knock at the door. Oh let us labor to
become good followers of Christ, having our loins girded up, ready prepared
to all good works.

About the paps: not the belly, but breast. Some think (and not unfitly) to
show, that his thoughts and affections which came from the heart, they be most
perfect, ranged in, not subject to any sin, but guided by the spirit, which
with full measure dwells in him bodily.

And his head as white as wool. Now S. John describes Christ by the parts of
his body: first, his head is as white as wool or snow, which is to show the
eternity of Christ: for though as he was man he had a beginning; yet as he is
God, he is eternal: he is the ancient of days, Dan. 9. and when all things
began, he was before.

Seeing our Savior Christ uses this hoarinesse and whitenes of the old gray
head, Use
to set out his eternity and euer-being, he would show the excellency and
honor of aged men, of the old gray headed man, which other younger want: and
for this, he compares the old gray head to almond trees which are always
white. Eccles. 12. 5. and Prou. 16. 31. it is compared to a silver crown, not
made by man, but made and placed by the hand of God on the aged man's head. This
excellency of the hoarie head is in this, that he bears in his person the
image of Gods eternity, before all younger men: he stands in the room of
God, to show Gods eternity to men: namely, in this old and white head of his.

Now seeing the aged man has this excellency above young men, he must be
reverenced: young men must rise to him. Leuit. 19. and we must in their hoarie
head learn the image of Gods eternity. They which be such, which in regard of
their age have this excellency above others, they must excel others in
knowledge and experience, in wisdom and holiness, 1. Ioh. 2. 13. I write to
you fathers, which know the father which has been from the beginning: showing,
he takes it for granted, that aged men which be fathers, should have knowledge
in the will of God. Secondly, they must exceed others in holiness of life. God
is holy, they bear his image, therefore they must (seeing they bear his image
above others) go before young men in holiness. And therefore Solomon, Prou. 16.
31. compares old age to a silver crown joined with righteousness, which,
when they be joined together, old age indeed is a glorious ornament. Then men
must take heed that old age be no disgrace unto them, nor dishonor, but an
ornament and commendation. But alas, miserable is our days, when young men
excel old, in knowledge and wisdom, in godliness of life and conversation,
and other gifts of the Spirit: but it should not be so, but as the aged must go
before them in preferment and excellency, so they should go before them in
wisdom, knowledge, experience and godliness. And if in these which wear the
silver crown on their heads, there be found sins abounding, and looseness
of life, it is much more dishonor in them then the younger, though in neither
commendable. And it is not enough for old men to say, their memory, conceit
and knowledge fail them: for this shows they have lived a bad and loose
life, and misspent their younger age: but they must labor, that with their
silver crown on their head, they may have a silver life in heart and hand.

And his eyes were as a flame of fire. S. John goes on to describe Christ in
vision by the parts of his body: now in handling these parts, though no man
can set down certainly what the holy Ghost intends in every point, yet we
must consider what is most probable in the word of God. And his eyes, etc. He
adds these, to signify two things: first, to show that our Mediator is of a
most piercing, sharp, and quick sight, so that he beholds all things in
earth, even the secrets of our hearts, for he has fiery and piercing eyes:
and as fire enters and pierces all metals, so Christ by his fiery eye
pierces into the substance and secrets of the hearts. Now it is necessary
that the head of the Church should be so sharp of sight, that he might behold
the whole Church, see all the enterprises of the devil, and the estate of all
his children.

Seeing Christ is of so piercing and fiery a sight, Use. 1.
that he sees the very secrets and thoughts of our hearts, we must have care
not only of our words and actions, but of ordering our thoughts and
affections: for Christ pierces into our hearts and sees them: therefore we
must look they be in order that he may approve them. It is true, thoughts and
inward affections, with men bear no action, because men know not the heart and
affections: but it is not so with God, he sees the least inclination and
purpose of our hearts, and he keeps court of judgment, not only for words
and actions, but for thoughts and affections. Therefore men must take heed they
be well ordered, and so of Christ approved, that for the^ they be not condemned.

Christ he sees our hearts and our very inclinations: Use. 2.
then we must in matters of religion be indeed that we seem to be: for though
we can bleare men's eyes with outward profession, and they can go no further:
yet the Lord he has fiery and piercing eyes, and sees our hearts, and how we
be but hypocrites if we be not indeed that we seem outwardly to be. Yet men
must stay and suspend their rash judgment, and not for the professing of
religion judge men to be hypocrites: for God alone searches their hearts.

Secondly, he is thus described, to show, he is full of anger and judgment,
and ready to take vengeance of his enemies: that is, of them which will not
give themselves, and turn to him by repentance, in obeying his will and word.
For though Christ be a Redeemer and Savior, yet he is also a judge, and in
indignation will execute his judgment on his enemies, even upon all that
refuse to have him to rule over them: as he says, Those mine enemies which
would not have me to rule over them, Luk 19. 27.
bring them that I may kill them.

This may serve to awake many drowsy and secure professors: for men now in
this barren age live in sin and ignorance, never think of the duties of
faith and repentance, take pleasure in sin; it is meat and drink to them to
live in security: not one of a thousand turns to God by hearty repentance.
Let these know, that though they live closely in sin, yet Christ beholds
them, not as a Redeemer, but as a Judge, with fiery and piercing eyes, ready
to execute judgment on them for their sins. They then must consider their
own estate in time, and turn to God, lest that they going on in their sins,
and snorting in security, Christ come unawares, and cut them off in his anger:
for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God.

And his feet like to fine brass. Verse. 15:
The word signifies brass, which is shining, for substance durable and pure,
the very choice and excellentest kind of brass. This he adds, to signify
the invincible power of Christ, that he is able to encounter, nay, has
already encountered with sin and Satan, wounded them, and bruised their heads
to powder: for his feet are strong and durable, he is of power to overcome his
enemies, to tread them underfoot, and grind them to powder: and not only in
his own person, but in his members, he is most powerful.

Seeing he has brazen feet, Use.
strong and durable to overcome his enemies and tread them underfoot, this is a
singular comfort to the children of God, who if they be exercised with any
temptation of Satan, or with any affliction and grief, they must not be
discouraged, but seek to Christ their head, he will in us (as he has before
in his own person) bruise the serpents head, and break it to powder. Let us
then put our cause to Christ, and let him have the whole ordering and
dispensation of it: so, if sin and corruption hang on us, vex and oppress us,
we must fly to him, make him acquainted with it, seek help from him, and we
shall doubtless find it weakened and wounded, nay bruised to pieces, by his
help. If we see the terrors of death, we must not fear too much: for Christ
is strong, and able to overcome death, nay he encountered with sin and Satan
on the cross, overcame him there, and went down with him to his own den
and cabine, and there vanquished death: so that he has subdued and brought him
under foot, and made him his footstool.



Burning as in a furnace. The feet of God as of men, in the Scriptures often
signify his or their ways: so here the feet of Christ signify his ways or
works. Burning as in a furnace: this shows the perfection of Christ's ways,
they be vncorrupt: even as brass purified in the fire, so be they, most pure,
most unspotted, without all dross; all his ways, his counsels and works,
either of creation or preservation, all are without fault. The way of God is
vncorrupt, the word of the Lord is tried in the fire: he is a shield to all
that trust in him. Psalm. 18. 30.

Seeing all his ways are pure and most holy, Use.
we must speak and think of them with reverence, even of his secret
judgments whereof we know no cause nor reason; we must reverence them, and
aknowledge that they are pure of themselves. In matters of Religion there is a
learned ignorance, whereof this is not the least point, to content our selves
with his ways, and not curiously to search into those things which he has not
revealed in his word: but though they be against reason to man, acknowledge
them as holy and true, with reverence, for all Christ's ways be holy. The blind
man cannot judge of the light, because he sees it not: no more can blind man
(such as all be) judge of works hidden with God.

The Lord bids Abimelech give Sarah to Abraham, else he will punish him and all
his: Genesis 20.
what reason is this in man's sight? nay it seems cruelty, to punish his
servants for him. So Achan he sinned, Ios. 7. and the people are plagued. David
sinned, 2. Sam. 12. the child died: and he sinned again, 2. Sam. 24. the
people is plagued. What reason can man give of these? These seem al contrary
to reason in man's judgment; but we must reverence the counsels of God, as
good, pure, and holy, though we see no cause at all of them. The Lord has
determined to save some, to cast off other some: now this seems cruelty to
man: nay some hold it an action of cruelty, that the Lord should withhold his
mercy from one, and show it to another. But they sin, seeing it is the
doctrine of Gods word, that he in his good will and pleasure, has determined
to save some, to reject other for his own pleasure: though we see no reason at
all of this, we must reverence it, and hold it the truth of Gods most holy
counsel.

And his voice as the sound of many waters. This he adds for two causes:
first, to show the loudness and greatness of his voice, because this voice of
Christ in his word has gone through the whole world: for the doctrine of
Christ has been sounded in all parts of the world. Secondly, to show the
power, force and efficacy of this voice in the ears of his creatures. Christ
before all things were, but spoke the word, and at his word all things were
made. Lazarus lay rotting in his grave, yet he heard the voice of Christ, as of
a thousand trumpets sounding in his ears, and rose up: nay the bodies of men
being dead six thousand years, even those shall hear the voice of Christ,
being a loud and great voice, a powerful and effectnall voice.

Seeing this voice of Christ is so loud and powerful a voice that the dead are
able to hear it: Use. 1.
this shows the security and deadness of those men, which though they hear
it daily sounding and crying in their ears, as the noise of many waters, yet
they will not, as did the dead body of Lazarus, hear and stand up, and come
forth of their graves of sin, but still snort in security and rot in their
sins. This argues our great drowsines, that the dead which have layne six
thousand years, shall at this voice rise and awake, and we hearing it both
loud and powerful, and public in our ears, will not put up our head nor our
heart, not seek to get one foot out of the grave of sin and security.

And he had. Verse. 16.
Here S. John describes him by his parts, and the properties of every part. In
his right hand seven stars: that is, seven Angels, seven Ministers of the
seven churches of Asia. The Ministers are compared to stars: first, because
as stars send out light to men on earth; so the Ministers ought to give light
to men, even spiritual light, by doctrine taught by them, and by conversation
of life among them. Secondly, they be compared to stars, because as the stars
have their continual abode in heaven, never descend down: so the Ministers of
the word especially should have their conversation in heaven. It is the duty
of all, but more specially of the Ministers, in regard of their callings: first
by seeking their own salvation: secondly, by seeking the salvation of others:
by which two they must have their conversation in heaven, though they have
their bodies in earth: thirdly, because they shall be honored of God in
heaven, as the stars: for Dan. 12. they which do their duty, they shall
shine like stars in the firmament.

They be in Christ's right hand: that is, all regiment and government in
matters of the Church belongs to Christ, he alone has the whole disposition
and ordering of the ministry: seeing he alone is head of the Church, and the
Ministers they be in his right hand: he rules and reigns in his church, he
cares for it and looks to it.

Seeing these stars be in Christ's right hand: Use. 1.
this shows that the choosing and furnishing of the ministers of the word,
belongs to Christ, Ephesians. 4. he gives them their gifts and places: then we ought
in this last age to pray the Lord to send out laborers into his harvest, that
so his children might be gathered, and an end made of these miserable days.

He holds these seven stars in his right hand. Whereby we see, he gives them
defense and protection, so long as they be faithful in their callings. He
carries them in his right hand: and though they have sundry discouragements,
yet seeing Christ he orders their ministry, and disposes of it, if they be
faithful, nothing should hinder their course, nothing should cut them off from
their duty, neither the want of obedience in them to whom they preach and
labor, not seeing that fruit they should; nor the injuries of the enemies of
their profession; nor any thing else.

right hand: this shows the excellency of this calling of the ministry. Idle
men esteem it most base, and accept of it as of a mean calling, and so
discourage many: but in the sight of God it is an high and holy calling, he
carries them in his right hand, defends them and protects them. Now what
greater glory can there be, then that they should be so honored, to be borne
and carried in the right hand of the King of heaven and earth, though wicked men
dishonor them, esteem so basely of the^? This should stir those who have good
gifts, to get this high and holy calling, thus to be honored of Christ.

They must be unblameable: Use. 4.
for seeing Christ carries them in his right hand, he will hold nothing but
that which is holy and pure, as he is; but if it be defiled, sinful and
wicked, he will take it out of his right hand, put it under his brazen foot,
and grind it to pieces: and the more he had honored them, the more will he
dishonor them. By the same reason, the hearers are bound to profit, else they
must drink of the same cup: for if the ministers be punished for not
preaching, then they for not hearing.

And out of his mouth, etc. In these words he describes him by the two last
parts of his body, his mouth and his face, And in his mouth was a two edged
sword, etc. By this two edged sword, is meant the doctrine of the law and the
Gospel, uttered and propounded by the Prophets and Apostles: and this two edged
sword is described, Heb. 4. 12. It is mighty in operation, etc.

The doctrine of the law and the Gospel is compared to a two edged sword;
because as a sword with a double edge enters not only into the flesh, but to
the bones, yea even to the marrow: so the word preached it enters into the
heart deeply, to the dividing of the spirits; yea it enters to the very
bottom of the heart, it searches every nooke and corner which is most secret.

The word has a double operation, one in the wicked, another in the godly. In
the wicked this sharp two edged sword of the word, it wounds them at the heart
with a deadly wound, and so by the same wound brings them to eternal death.
Esa. 11. 4. He shall with his breath, that is the sword of his word, slay the
wicked. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
This is that sword that has and will kill Antichrist.

Ob. But how comes it, that the word of God should wound or kill any? how
should it slay a wicked and unrepentant sinner?

Answ. We must know there be three degrees of spiritual death: The first is,
the separation of body and soul, when the body is laid in the grave, the
soul conveyed to the place of torments. The second is, when a sinner in this
life by the word is wounded and smitten, and so receives in his heart a deadly
wound. The third degree is at the end of this life, at the last judgment, when
soul and body shall go into hell fire: for even a sinner receives his deadly
wound in this life, which is the first step to hell and eternal death in the
life to come.

In the inflicting and giving of this wound, there be three actions of Christ
required, which he works in the hearts of the wicked by the doctrine of the
law and the Gospel. The first is, to reveal to them their sins, all their
pride, rebellion, hypocrisy, the damnable corruptions of their hearts, and all
their sins against the first and second Table. 1. Cor. 14. 24. 25. If in the
Church all prophecy, there come in one which believes not, he is rebuked of
all, because they judge him an hypocrite, and so the secrets and corruptions of
his heart are laid open and discovered by the word preached. The second action
of Christ is this, he after reuealeth to them the wrath and curse of God
against sin, his indignation against the breakers of the law: and for this
cause the law is called the killing law, because it shows judgment without
mercy for the transgressions of the law. Thirdly, Christ by the word preached
sharpeneth the sting of conscience, makes it awake, and terrifieth a man when
he hears or remembers the word, and the curse denounced against sinners. So
Felix when Paul preached to him of justice and temperancie, he fainted and
trembled, the word was a two edged sword of the spirit to wound his conscience
with terror and fear. So Dan. 5. Beltashar seeing but an hand writing, he
quaketh for fear, the word of God came into his mind, and made his conscience
accuse him, and his knees smote together for fear.

So then by this we see how Christ kills the wicked, by revealing their
sins, showing the wrath and anger of God against sin and sinners which
repent not, and the curse of the law: and also by sharpning the sting of
conscience, to wound them and strike them at the heart; and so they by this
have the first wound of eternal death. Though the Lord may in mercy recover
them of this wound, yet of themselves they be in the estate of death; and
unless they repent, they are in the first step to eternal death. For those
horrors and fears which come into a man's heart in regard of Gods wrath and
judgments, severed from grace, are no grace, but the first wound to eternal
death, unless the Lord give grace.

Seeing Christ carries the two edged sword of the Spirit in his mouth, Use. 2.
whereby he wounds his enemies with a deadly wound at the heart: then when we
see any which comes to hear the word, and after rebelleth, stormeth, and
rages against the same, being wounded in conscience therewith, we must not be
displeased with it, but pity his case, seeing he is wounded at the heart with
a deadly wound: and he in this case is in the first step to eternal death,
unless the Lord recover him of this wound.

In those Churches and places where the word has been for the word either
quickens or kills.

Seeing the word without grace kills, we must not content our selves with it,
but seek to feel the work of the Spirit, peace of conscience, and
reformation of life by the word. Let us then by a lively faith labor to apply
Christ by the word, to lay hold on him and his righteousness, so that we can
say, we live not, but Christ in us. But this word has another action in the
elect children of God, which though it be manifold, yet all tend to further and
procure their salvation. The first work of it in these, is to wound deeply,
and to kill the corruption of man's nature in his heart, with a deadly wound,
that it never recover again. Yet though it wound a man, it kills not the
person, as in the wicked, but only the corruption of his heart, and quickens
the person to Christ, kills him in regard of rebellion and unbelief. We are
sacrifices to be offered to God, therefore we must be killed, not in our bodies
and souls, but in our corruptions, affections and rebellions. That we may be
killed, the two edged sword of the Spirit is required, which gives our
corruption the deadly wound, and cutteth up the root. Since the second action
after our conversion and change is this, the word of God must cut and pare the
remnants of our corruption, by lessening and weakening of it daily. Ioh. 15. As
the husbandman cutteth, loppeth and pareth off all branches that bear no
fruit: so the word of God cutteth and pareth away the remnants of corruptions
in our hearts, that so our hearts may bring forth more fruit. Thirdly, the
word of God serves to keep his people and children in awe and subjection, and
therefore Christ holds the scepter of the word in his mouth, that though the
wicked will not be kept in awe, yet his elect may tremble and fear at the
lifting up of the same. Amongst men if many be fighting, let the Magistrate but
hold up the sword of Justice, every man yields and puts his sword into his
sheath: and shall not we much more cease from sin, and fear, when Christ the
King of heaven and earth, holds out the scepter of his word? And if any
refuse to be subject, and to obey the Magistrate, he is counted a rebel: if
men refuse to obey the scepter of Christ, shall they not be so accounted?

So then by these actions we see the power of the word, it kills corruptions
in our hearts, pareth it and the remnants of it, and it keeps men in awe and
subjection. Yet it differs in the wicked, and in the godly: in the wicked, it
makes them fear, and wounds them to death, destroying both soul and body:
in the godly, it wounds them indeed, not in their persons, but in the
corruptions of their hearts. It makes us fit to encounter with the devil, and
to vanquish him in all his temptations if it be used with knowledge.

Seeing the word of God serves to kill our corruptions, Use. 1.
we when we hear the word, must receive and believe the same, not only when
it is delivered in general, but applied in particular: though it touch us and
wound our hearts, we must suffer it, and rejoice in it: for that is the first
step to health, to have our corruptions ripped up and touched. When the sword
of the spirit enters to our hearts, it will ransacke every nooke and secret
corner: then we must rejoice in this blessing of God, suffer it gladly, seeing
it is the only means to come to life. If one be sick of a Fistula, he will
suffer the Surgeon to rippe and lance him, to search every part of the
wound: and shall not we suffer the Physician of the word to display, to lay
open, to ransacke and search the corruption of our hearts, seeing that is the
only way to recover health. For we cannot live to God till we die to our
selves and to our sins: we cannot p^ssibly die to our sins, till our
corruptions be destroyed, and all our sins killed and wounded to death.

In his mouth. Other Kings carry their scepter in their hands, but he in his
mouth, to show, that no doctrine must be received of us, unless it proceed
from his mouth: for he received his Fathers will, delivers it to his Church,
to his Prophets, and Apostles, and they to us.

And his face shone, etc. For as the Sun is to the world, so is Christ to his
Church. Now as the Sun performs two duties to men, so does Christ: the first
is, to give light and drive away darkness, to take away the night, and bring
the day: so Christ he is the Sun of righteousness. Malach. 3. He gives the
light of knowledge to his servants, he sends the light of the word which can
dispel darkness, and enlighten his people in the knowledge of his will and word.

Then are we bound to labor above al things for knowledge of his will and
word. Use. 1.
First, when the day dawneth, we set open our doors and windows, to receive
the light and comfort of the same: now Christ is in the midst of his Church, he
sends light, he shines clearly, being the Son of righteousness: then we
must open the doors of our hearts, and the windows of our souls and
consciences, to receive his light and comfort into us.

2. Pet. 1. end.


The action of the Sun is to warm and comfort dead and cold bodies, and to
revive them: as we see in the spring time, it reuiues those creatures which
before were as dead with cold: so Christ gives not only light but life, he
gives spiritual comfort to bodies frozen for cold, he comforts them and
reuiues them by his spiritual heat, and for this is called the Sun of
righteousness, comforting our cold and frozen hearts in sin and iniquity.

Then we must labor above all things, Use.
to be partakers of this spiritual life and comfort, which comes by the
spiritual heat of Christ. As men will in winter go into the Sun, to feel
the heat of the beams: so must we come out of our sins, get into the
sunshine of Christ, that his beams may stream upon us plenteously, to have
life conveyed to our benumbed and dead consciences. We will seek to have
honor, riches, preferments, and pleasures of this life, but Psa. 44. we should
desire the Sun of righteousness to shine on us with the beams of mercy, to
have him quicken our dead hearts with the heat of his holy spirit.

That we may have this spiritual life, we must die our selves ere we ca^ live
to the Lord: we must first be killed ere we be made alive. If we would live to
God, we must suffer the two edged sword to pierce to the heart, to cut up and
cut off all our corruptions, to suffer it to enter into us, to ransack our
rebellious hearts, and to be thrust to the hilts, that so it may divide between
the spirit and the flesh, pare off all the rotten flesh of corruption in us: for
when we are killed to our selves, and discouraged in regard of our own sins, we
are most fit to be made alive to God. A body which is almost dead for cold, is
the most capable of heat: and when we are thus cast down in regard of our
sins, then we must labor to have the comfortable beams of Christ to shine in
our hearts, to warm and to quicken us, and his favorable countenance to shine
on us: which if we have, though we have neither honor, riches nor preferment,
yet we have enough: and if we want that heat, all things else are nothing.

The third work or action of the sun is to discover all things. Use.
In the night nothing appears, all have one form; but when the Sun comes
with his light, all things appear, and a man may in the beams see the very
motes: so Christ the chief sun sees all things, and he will discover all:
nothing so secret which is hid from him, nothing so close which his eye sees
not: he knows, and he can and will discover all men's actions, yea their
secret thoughts.

Seeing Christ knows all our thoughts, Use.
so as he can make the^ manifest and open: note, that though we may live so as
men cannot judge of our hypocrisy, yet Christ sees our dealings: and as the
sun is manifest to our eye, so our actions are clear to his eye. This should
make us take heed to all our ways and works, that we do or think nothing but
as in his presence; for we cannot blind his eyes, but he sees it even as
clearly as we see the light of the sun. If men of occupations would consider
this, that all their actions are clear to Christ, they would not commit so
much cruelty and injustice; there would not be so many sins practiced of us
daily as there are.

And when I saw him, Verse. 17. 18.
I fell at his feet as dead. In these seventeenth and eighteenth verses, John
proceeds to describe our savior Christ as God gave him a vision, by other
arguments, that is, by his actions. The first action is contained in these
seventeenth and 18. verses, which is a confirmation of S. John, being greatly
afraid: and this confirmation is the whole matter and substance of these two
verses. In this note two things: first, the occasion: secondly, the means. The
occasion moving Christ to confirm S. John, in the second part of the
seventeenth verse: the means, in the end of the seventeenth verse and in the
eighteenth. The occasion was an exceeding fear of death, which made John as
dead, as appears by Christ's comforting of him.

In this fear note 3 things* first, the cause: secondly, the effect of it:
thirdly, the kind of fear. The cause in these words, And when I saw him, etc.
which was the appearance of Christ to John in his majesty and glory, which
made John exceedingly fear.

S. John seeing the majesty and glory of Christ, he is exceedingly afraid and
astonished as a dead man. We all by nature since the fall of Adam are fearful
sinners. Before he fell he walked and talked with God face to face, but after
his fall he fled and hid himself, he could not brook his presence, because he
had sinned: and since his fall, man's frailty and weakness is such, that he
cannot abide the presence and majesty of God: but as Manoah Judge. 13. 22.
seeing an Angel of God, said, We shall surely die, because we have seen God:
showing that the presence of God, of his majesty, is terrible to sinful man:
even so it is with all men.

Now seeing we have lost our first estate, we must labor continually to have
the image of Satan abolished in us, and the image of God daily renewed: we must
become new creatures, and seek above all things to have our former fellowship
with God which we lost in Adam: for in this fellowship with God stands all true
happiness and joy eternal.

Seeing it feared John that he was as dead, Use 1.
we see that the feeling of the presence of God, of his majesty and glory, it
is a singular means to humble man, to cast him down, and make him know he is
nothing in himself. So soon as John perceived and saw the presence of Christ,
he was as dead, and fell at his feet. So Abraham, the more he perceived the
glory of God, the more he humbled himself, confessing he was dust and ashes.
And Peter Luke 5. 8, 9, 10. seeing but a glimmering of Christ's majesty and
might, he bids him depart from him, he was a sinner. So Esa. 6. 2. the Angels
cover themselves with their wings, with three they covered their face, and with
3. their feet, as fearing and not able to behold his majesty, as confessing
they be nothing but sin in themselves.

We see the great goodness of God in the ministry of his word,

Seeing it astonished S. John, we see that even holy and righteous men cannot
abide the presence of Christ his majesty and glory: much less can the works
of righteous men stand before his just judgment, or answer to his justice: for
the person must be first accepted before the work can be accepted: now if a
righteous man cannot abide the presence of Christ, no more can his work. Then
damnable is the doctrine of the Church of Rome, who will have men to stand at
Gods bar, and bring their works as part of their justification, but our works
be but in part holy* no more then we be our selves but in part just.

Now follows the effect of this fear in S. John's body: 2* Point.
He fell at his feet as dead. It was not a small but a great fear, which
astonished his senses, made him as a dead man. Physicians say, that the mind
follows the constitution and temperature of the body, but we may here as
truly say, the body follows the temperature and constitution of the mind: for
the mind can work that on the body, which other diseases can work: it can
cast men into a swound, make the body cold, and many other things which
diseases work in the body. So Ahab being grieved, and fearing he could not get
Naboths vineyard, was sick and almost dead. So then affections of love, and
fear, and hatred, etc. can change and kill the body: therefore the body
follows the te^perature and constitution of the mind. Again, we see diseases
are not always to be cured by art and physic: but often when physic cannot
help, the body is cured by ordering and composing the affections of the heart,
seeing these can order and dispose the body, and change it as their nature is.

The^ in the next place follows the kind of fear: I fell at his feet as dead,
etc. showing it was a godly and religious reverence in the heart of John: for
this kind of prostrating the body, is a sign of godly reverence and religious
fear.

We must learn by this example, Use.
to cast down our selves in the presence of Christ as John did, and to lie
prostrate at his feet. Ob. But some may say: Christ is not present, we cannot
now fall at his feet, seeing he is in heaven. Answ. Though Christ be now in
heaven, yet he has his footstool on earth, and his feet may be said to be
here on earth. For the mercy seat, that was a sign of Gods presence, though
that be taken away, God has yet his footstool on earth. Psalm. 99. 5. For
wheresoever the Church of God is assembled to pray unto him, there is Christ
truly present, and there is his footstool, and there should we cast down our
selves, our souls and bodies to Christ, he being there present. Now though S.
John's fear be a godly fear, yet it is stained with sin: for it is joined with
immoderate fear of death. Then we see, that the most holy affections of
righteous men, they have their imperfections, they be stained with sin,
because they be sanctified but in part, and in part be corrupt. And there is no
man which has true filial fear, but he has withal a servile fear of hell
and damnation.

The means follow whereby Christ confirms John. Then he laid his right hand.
In this note two things: first, when he uses this means: secondly, the means
it self. The time when, Then, that is, after Christ by his presence had
smitten him, cast him down, and laid him as dead: then he uses means of
confirmation and comfort. And this is Gods practice, first, to humble a man and
cast him down, break him and bruise him to powder: then he having made him
pliable and fit to receive grace, after confirms and comfort him in the
matter of salvation: secondly, a man must be wounded, then have oil powered in,
and he must be a lost sheep, after Christ will bring him home again. And this
is the cause why so few profit by the word preached and by the Sacraments,
because they be not first humbled and cast down, and made fit to receive
Christ comfortably offering himself in the Gospel. Now follow the means
themselves, which are two: the first, a sign, Then he laid his right hand,
etc. secondly, his word, saying, Fear not, etc.

There is not one of them used a part, neither the sign, nor the word alone:
but he uses both means, more to confirm and comfort S. John. So the Lord
dealt with Moses. Exodus 3. 12. he first gives him the word, I will be with
thee to comfort thee: and not only that, but the sign, he must offer
sacrifice to God as a sign. Esa. 7. 4.
So to Ahaz, though a wicked king, he gives him his word to comfort and
confirm him: and verse. 11. he bids him ask a sign of him. So Christ
preached the Gospel, there is his word, and confirms the same by miracles.
Now he gives us promises of eternal life; and not only that, but adds
signs and seals to confirm them: namely, his Sacraments. By this we see that
Christ has exceeding care of his children and of his Church.

Seeing he uses al means to confirm them and to comfort them he gives them
not only his word, which might be sufficient, Use. 1.
but for our weakness he adds signs to confirm us, condescending thus to
our capacity, to take from us all doubtings, and to give us assurance, even
out of the manner of using the means: as here first he uses the sign: 2. the
word: then he puts his hand on John to assure him of his protection, and
after bids him not to fear. By this order we see, that the very assurance
of Gods presence and protection, is a present remedy against all fear of
death and desperation. If a man be assured of Gods presence, aid, and help,
he needs not to fear. So Moses being afraid to go before the people, the
Lord to comfort him (Exodus 3.) tells him he will be with him: and David
considering God protected him, says: Psalm. 23. He would not fear though he
were in the shadow of death. Then it is our duty to labor to have the
assurance of Gods protection and assistance, which will stay us against all
immoderate fear of death.

Now after this he adds reasons to confirm his own words to John, when his
word might have served alone. The first reason is in the end of the 17. verse:
I am the first and the last. He is the first, because nothing was or can be
before him; and the last, because nothing is or can be after Christ. And he
adds these two phrases, to show his Godhead and eternity, and that Christ
alone has in his hands the beginning and end of all things: all things have
their beginnings of him, he of nothing: but he gives the beginning to all
things, and he alone puts the end to all things. Now seeing he has power to
give beginning and end, therefore he can preserve his servants from death, he
can keep them from condemnation. And he having power to begin and end all
things, can give and begin his promises, can end and accomplish the same at his
pleasure.

And am alive (or he that lives) but was dead. Verse. 18.
In these words is the second reason, which Christ alleges, to prove his
former words, and to make John not to fear death too much. The reason
consists in a distinction, thus: Although I was dead yet now I am he which
lives, I have power of death, of hell, etc. This distinction has three parts:
first, though I was dead, yet now I live: secondly, I live for ever: thirdly, I
have power of death, and the keys of hell, etc.

And I am he which lives. Here life is ascribed to Christ in a special manner:
that is, he lives not as all other creatures live, but in a more peculiar
manner of living. Christ uses this phrase I am he that lives: first, to show
he has life in himself: secondly, that he gives life to others.

First, he has sufficient life in, of, and from himself: which appears
thus: life is twofold, uncreated or created: uncreated, as the life of God
which is infinite, eternal, in and of it self sufficient. Now Christ as he is
God he lives by this uncreated life, which is all one with his Godhead.
Secondly, there is a created life, which is twofold: first, natural preserved
by meat and drink: secondly, spiritual, which is by immediate fellowship
with God, when we live by the immediate operation of Gods spirit, not by meat
and drink. And Christ he lives this spiritual life, so that he lives,
first, by an uncreated life as he is God: secondly, he lives a spiritual
life, his body and soul being sustained in the second person of the Trinity:
therefore he has in himself most absolute and perfect life. And he gives
life to others two ways: first, as he is God, and so he gives life to all men
good and bad: he is the author life in all things which live. Act. 17.
In him we live, move, and have our being: he gives life and he preserves the
same. Secondly, he gives spiritual life to his Church and children as he is
redeemer of mankind: he lives that we might live by him. Ioh. 14. 19. and as
he died not for himself alone, so he lives not for himself alone, but for
us, that we by him might have spiritual life: as appears Colos. 3. Our life
is hid with God in Christ. And for this cause, though Christ be in heaven, yet
we eat his body and drink his blood really in a spiritual manner, and they
be the spiritual nourishment of our souls. We live by the spiritual life of
Christ; and that for these two causes: first, because he has sufficient life
in himself: and secondly, because he gives life to others: therefore he
says, I am he which lives.

Seeing Christ gives this spiritual life, Use.
we must seek it at him, and labor that we may say, that we live not, but
Christ in us, and that our life is hid in Christ: for Christ he lives
spiritually, that he might bring spiritual life to us: then we must labor to
have this. We can be content to seek far and near, to take exceeding pains
to get gain, to maintain this our momentanie and earthly life, which is but
as grass, yea as a fleeting shadow, and as a span: and shall we not be much
more careful to get spiritual life which lasts for ever? But the practice
of men is clean contrary, not one of a thousand labors for spiritual
life, but all are bewitched with the over greedy desire of things of this
life, etc. The reason of this is, because men's hearts are not touched with the
burden of sin, and the curse of God on us for sin, and therefore it is,
that no man seeks to be delivered from sin, to have this spiritual life
with Christ our head. This we may see in that woman John 4. Christ tells her,
he is the bread of life; she begins to cavil with him, but when he touches
her special sin, then she hearkeneth to him: so if the Ministers tell the
people of matters of salvation, unless they first cast them down, and make
them see their sins, they will but quarrel and cavil at it and the doctrine
of the Gospel. Christ is the water, nay the well of life: now we must be
thirsty and parched with thirst, and then we will seek for water: and we must
not only lightly taste, but seek to be dipped and diued in this fountain, to
have our souls sowsed and soaked in this water: and if we could know that
Christ lived in us and we in him by spiritual life, it would be a present
remedy against all persecutions.

And behold I live for ever, Verse. 18.
Amen. Here follows the second part of the distinction: namely, Though I was
dead, yet now I live for ever: which second part of the distinction is
propounded with two notes: the first of certainty, Amen, to assure us that
that which Christ avouches before of himself, is vnfalliblie true: the second
note is of attention, Behold. This serves to stir up attention in John (and in
us) to a serious and due consideration of that part of the distinction, I live
for ever: therefore Christ says, Behold.

Behold I live. Here note two things: first, in regard of what nature Christ
lives for ever: 2. to what end. He lives for ever as he is the Mediator of
the church: ergo, in regard of both natures, as he is God and man. In regard of
his Godhead he lives for ever by the uncreated or essential life of God,
which is all one with his Godhead, which is for ever, of it self, not by any
other. Secondly, he lives for ever in respect of his manhood, for after he
ascended into heaven, there he lives in glory with the Father and holy Ghost:
because in the manhood of Christ dwells the power of the Godhead bodily,
Colos. 2. The second thing is, why he lives for ever: namely, that he might
give eternal life to his Church, and all his true members. God gives us
eternal life by his Son, 1. Ioh. 5. 11. and this is the ground of all joy:
this, that Christ lives to give us eternal life, is the foundation of the
Church, and the ground of our happiness. We must then consider of Christ as a
root: he lives not for himself, (as a root does not live for it self) but
to give life to all the branches and true members of the Church. And we must
consider of the manhood of Christ, as a common treasury or storehouse of
eternal happiness: therefore John 6. Christ says: My flesh is meat indeed,
and he which eats his flesh and drinks his blood shall live for ever:
showing, that his flesh and manhood has power to give life and quicken his
true members: yet not as considered in it self, but as the same is joined with
the Godhead, and is the manhood of God, and the flesh of God: for it has all
this power from God,

The means whereby he gives eternal life, is, the mystical conjunction
between him and his members. First, God the father gives Christ to the Church
and every true member of the same, as he has promised to give him. Now he
gives him as he is Mediator of the Church, even whole Christ, yet the Godhead
of Christ is not given of the Father, but only by the operation thereof in the
manhood, whereby the manhood is made able to satisfy Gods justice: but the
manhood of Christ that, is really given, his very substance, his flesh and
blood is really given to every believer, and the benefits of the manhood also
are truly given us, as righteousness and life eternal, as really as lands or
goods are given to men. Now to whom Christ is given, with him God gives the
Spirit of Christ: for Christ and his Spirit come together: and this Spirit
creates in the heart of a man the instrument of faith, by which Christ given
of God is received of us: and we by faith apprehend his body and blood, and
the merits thereof. And we receive not Christ in imagination, or in our brain,
but even as God the Father gives him, in the word and Sacraments really and
truly.

And as the spirit of Christ creates in us faith, so it knitteth us also to
Christ our head really, though mystically: now from this mystical conjunction
between Christ the head and us the members, proceeds eternal life, thus.
First, he which is joined and knit to Christ in this life, and receives him,
he begins by this conjunction to live an eternal life, in dying to all his
sins, and to live to God, to live as Christ lives, a spiritual life. And this
I may call the first benefit of our spiritual union with Christ. Secondly, man
thus united shall rise to glory in his body. And so the second fruit of this
mystical conjunction with Christ, is the resurrection of the body: for this
conjunction with Christ after it is begun, it is perpetual, it is never
broken: so that though a man lie in his grave many thousand years, yet he is
the^ united to Christ, is in the grave a member of Christ, and by virtue of
this mystical union he shall be raised at the last day. As we see the sap of
trees in winter time is in the root, and the branches seem to die: but in the
spring, when the heat of the Sun comes, then it creeps out into the
branches, and they bud and bring forth fruit: so man has his winter time in
the grave, but in the last day because he is joined to Christ the root, he
shall have his Summer, and be raised by the power of this mystical union.
Thirdly, man so united shall live ever: therefore the third benefit is
eternal life and happiness. By this mystical union we shall have eternal
felicity and everlasting life in heaven, there we must possess it, but it
comes from this mystical union with Christ our head. In this life it is
begun, and is never broken, in regard of the root and ground thereof, but
lasts for ever, and by it Christ conueyeth eternal life to us.

In these words, Behold, I live for ever, Amen, is the ground of two maine
articles of our belief: namely, of the rising of the body: and of life
everlasting: for Christ he lives for ever, to give life to us for ever; and
this is the ground of our joy: as to Job, I know my Redeemer lives, etc. Now
does Christ live to give us life in heaven? Job 19.
then we must have our conversation in heaven, for where Christ is there should
be our conversation, because he is the foundation and ground of eternal life
to us. Now that our conversation may be in heaven, we must often and seriously
consider of this eternal life purchased to us by Christ: and for this cause he
says, Behold I live: and withal as we must consider of it, we must have our
affections set on him, our joy, rejoicing and affiance; because Christ lives
that he might keep eternal life for us. We use to have most care to preserve
that part wherein life is preserved: so seeing Christ is the foundation of our
life, and the author of it, we should have most care of him.

Now follows the third part of the distinction, though I was dead, yet I have
the keys of hell and death. In these words we must not imagine hell to be a
bodily place, kept with lock and key as our houses be. Nay, it cannot be
proved out of the Scriptures that it is a bodily place, or the punishment of
hell in regard of our soul and conscience is bodily, seeing it is the sense
and feeling of Gods wrath and vengeance in body and soul, therefore it is
rather spiritual. But Christ here borrows a comparison from earthly
stewards, who when they have any thing committed to them, and have the keys
put into their hands, this shows they have power and authority of al. So
Christ has the keys of hell and death, that is, power over hell and death,
and dominion of them both. As if he had said, Though I once was dead in the
grave, yet now I have power and dominion over hell and death, and have
vanquished them both.

Seeing Christ alone has power over hell and death, Use. 1.
no creature else properly has authority to forgive sin, but only Christ;
for he which can forgive sin, must have power over hell and death: but he can
take away death the punishment of sin, and hell the reward of it: ergo he alone
can forgive sin. Then we see the Priesthood of the church of Rome is full of
blasphemy, who hold, that man called thereunto, can properly forgive sin;
not only pronounce sin to be forgiven, as the reformed churches hold, and
which they deny, but properly to forgive sin.

Seeing Christ has power over hell and death, we must reverence

This is a comfort to the godly, which cleave to Christ, that

Write these things. In these words he describes Christ by a second action:
for after he had comforted S. John, now he gives him a commandment, which
commandment was given in the eleventh verse before, and here repeated to John
again. First, because Christ intended by this to show John his especial care
of his Church, that he is now still a provident and careful head of his
Church, and therefore says not once, Write these things, but the second time,
that the Church of God might understand in all ages to come, that it is
necessary me^ should know the estate of the Church: for else he would not have
repeated it again, if it had not been very necessary. It is necessary for men
to know, that the estate of the church is to be in troubles, that they might
the better prepare themselves to bear the^. Thirdly, he does it, that S. John
might be more assured certainly of his calling to write and pen this book.
Fourthly, that the Church in all ages might be fully assured and without doubt,
that this book is a book of God, and part of holy Scripture, not invented by
man, but revealed by God to John, for the good of the Church.

Object. But though Christ revealed his will aright, John might mistake it, and
err in penning. Answ. S. John penned this book both for matter and manner, as
Christ gave it to him: for this we must know, that there is a difference
between Apostles and Prophets in the old and new Testament, and Ministers of
the Gospel; for they were called immediately by God and Christ, and had
special assistance of the spirit of God: which appears by those promises
they have made to the^ by God: as Christ says, He which receives you,
receives me, etc. Luke 10. 16. And, It is not you which speak, but the spirit
of my Father, therefore fear not. And John 14. The holy Ghost shall lead you
into all truth: which though some apply it to all Ministers, yet if we mark the
place, it can agree to none but the Apostles. And they meeting at Jerusalem,
concluded as it seemed good to the holy Ghost and to them: so that we see they
could not err, though they were but men. But it is not so with the Ministers
of the word, they may and do err often. Now S. John being a faithful Apostle,
he received this of Christ without error, and so penned it.

In this commandment of Christ is a plain division of this whole book,
Write the things thou have seen: that is, this vision I have offered to thee,
and the things thou saw. In the second place he sets down the present
estate of the church. Thirdly the things to come, that is, the future estate of
the church to the end of the world. So that this book contains two things in
it, first, the estate of the church in time present, secondly, in time to come
to the end of the world: the words of Christ make this division plainly.

If it be lawful to use divisions, Use.
then it is lawful to set down rules for direction of dividing aright: but
the first is lawful, ergo the second. Therefore the art of reasoning and
dividing, as also Rhetoric is not unlawful, as some would have it.

The mystery of the seven stars. Here is the third action of Christ, which is
the interpretation of the vision which he had showed to John, and he only
interprets the principal parts of it. Now Christ expounds this vision to John,
namely, because he was to show himself to be an holy man of God, namely a
Prophet. Now the principal thing in a Prophet, is to be able to expound
visions, either his own or any others, as we see in Daniel. Now that he might
show himself to be an absolute Prophet, in this book Christ does not only
show him the vision, but the intertation of it: he expounds it, that John might
be encouraged in penning and receiving the things in this book.

Now Christ expounds not the whole vision, but the two principal parts: what
is meant by the seven stars and seven candlestickes: namely, by the seven
stars seven Angels of the seven churches* by the candlestickes, we showed
before.

In this verse note why Christ expounds the two principal parts, and leaves
the rest vnexpounded. The reason is, first because Christ has given his church
power to expound visions and scripture. Now if he had expounded every part and
circumstance, then there had been no matter left to the church to exercise her
power. Secondly, to stir up to diligence and study of the scripture, both
Ministers and all members of the church: for if all were plain, then men would
be idle, never take pains to interpret the word: therefore Christ expounds the
chief, and leaves the circumstances and appurtenances for the church to
interpret. Thirdly, that men might daily grow in knowledge of the Scripture:
for if all were known at first, they would not study to increase in knowledge:
fourthly, to stir up invocation for grace, to understand Scripture. Now these
Ministers are called Angels, which be the Pastors and Ministers of the church.
Mat. 11. 10. John Baptist is called Christ's Angel, or messenger, or
Ambassador. By this we have direction to expound another place of Scripture,
where it is said, Women must be covered because of the Angels: that is, because
of the Ministers: for the covering of the head in the church of Corinth was a
sign of subjection and inferioritie, contrary to our use. Now, the women when
they come into the congregation before the Ministers, they must be covered, to
show their subjection and submission to the Gospel and doctrine delivered to
them.

Seeing Ministers be called Angels, Use.
that is, messengers and Ambassadors, they must behave themselves as
Ambassadors, they must have special care, first of the matter of the
embassage, secondly of the manner, that they deliver nothing but their Lords
mind, and in that very manner he would if he were present: and if they deliver
any thing else, or in any other manner, they shall be suspected of unfaithfulness.
Now if Christ were on earth, would he deliver his word partly in English, partly
in Latin, or use the authority of the fathers, and Philosophy, or of Poets?
And surely though me^ call this the learned way of preaching, yet it is not that
Christ commanded. Nay if this were admitted, it would bring in Barbarism, and
expel the Gospel out of this land, and bring in that misery which was among
the Schoolmen, when all things were brought to needless disputations.

The third thing is the phrase Christ uses, The seven stars are the seven
Angels, etc. Not that they signify the seven Angels, or the candlestickes
signify the seven Churches, but are so. Hence we see, that the exposition in
the sacrament, This is my body and blood, is warranted, and not to be
understood literally, as the Papists hold. For as it is absurd to hold, that
these were seven Angels indeed, because they are called so; so to hold the
bread is really transformed indeed into Christ's body: but being a sign (as it
is common in Scripture) is put for the thing signified, this bread is, that is,
represents my body, etc.

CHAP. II.
VERSE I. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, etc.
IN this second and third Chapters is set down the fourth action of Christ,
whereby John describes him: which is, that Christ in these two Chapters gives
him 7. particular commandments, to write seven Epistles to the seven Churches
of Asia. The first of these seven particular commandments is in this first
verse, Unto the Angel of the Church, etc. and after the commandment follows
the Epistle it self: These things, etc. to the eighth verse.

Unto the Angel. This word is two ways used: first, it signifies the
Minister or Pastor of the particular Church of Ephesus* and so it is taken
commonly and of the most. Secondly, it may signify a company of Ministers or
governors of the particular Church of Ephesus: Act. 20. 28.
as Paul bids the^ take heed to the flock, of which they were (...)
overseers: showing, there were many Ministers of the particular Church of
Ephesus. And so this word Angel, may signify the whole company of Ministers
of that Church: as we see in Scripture the naming of one man signifies a whole
multitude. God bids Moses send my son, etc. by which particular he notes
the whole body of the Israelites. So though Antichrist be not one particular
man, but the whole succession of Popes, 1 Thessalonians. 2.
yet Paul calls him that Antichrist, and that child of perdition and so it
skilleth not whether we take it for one man, or the whole multitude of
governors.

In this particular commandment are two points: first, the intent of Christ
was to write to the whole body of the Church of Ephesus, yet he directs his
letter not to them all, but to the Angel and Minister. That he intended to
write to the whole Church, it appears in the former Chapter, where he is
commanded to write to the Churches, and in the end of this, where he says, He
which has ears let him hear, what the Spirit writes to the Churches.

Now in that he directs his Epistle to the Angel and Minister, he intimates
to him his duty: first, that he must especially labor to teach the particular
contents of this Epistle to the Church of Ephesus: secondly, that he should not
only teach, but be a pattern and example to them of the things contained in
this Epistle. Secondly, he writes to the Angel of the church himself,
because he especially does great good or harm to the Church. If the minister
be good, there comes much good, if he be evil there comes much evil, as all
examples show. Now Christ writes for this cause to him, that he might be
diligent, and so the cause of good, not of evil.

The second point is, that Christ among all the seven Churches writes to the
Church of Ephesus: first, which is not, because it had authority above the
rest, but because it was in riches and estimation above the rest, and was the
mother city: for they were all candlestickes, and all golden candlestickes:
but because it excelled, all other cities in riches and estimation; for that he
directs his Epistle first to this Church. By which he shows, that those
Churches, towns, and people which excel either in riches and estimation, and
other temporal gifts, they must also excel in the graces of God. And so all
men in particular, as they excel in riches and estimation, they must excel
others in godliness and religion. So then, each town must (as it excels
other, in that it has a greater name, greater riches, or other temporal
blessings) go before other which want them. If they excel other in these, and
be inferior in godliness and religion, it is a shame for them before God and
man too.

The Epistle has three parts, (as all ordinary Epistles have) first, a
preface: secondly, a proposition: thirdly, a conclusion. The preface in the
first verse.

Now the preface or entrance is taken out of the former chapter. The end and
intent of it is, to draw the Church of Ephesus to reverence the admonition of
Christ: so that Christ propounds not that first, but makes an entrance to
prepare them to receive the same with reverence, and regard his admonition. The
third reason which he uses to do this, is thus framed: If I be he which
holds the seven stars in my right hand, that is, he which by my mighty
power, guide, bless, protect, and defend thee and thy Ministers: and if I
walk in the midst of the seven candlestickes, that is, am always present in
the midst of thy Church, to guide, bless and protect you, then ye should
receive and reverence mine admonition: but the first is true, ergo, my
admonition must be reverenced and obeyed, both of the Ministers and of the
people.

In this preface two things are to be learned: first, seeing Christ repeateth
that again which he taught in the former Chapter: he shows, this is a most
notable point to be learned and practiced of all men: which is, that Christ he
is present in his Church, and being present, by his special providence does
bless, guide, and protect it, both in Ministers and people. This must we
labor to learn, and to be certainly persuaded of, even of the special
presence and providence of Christ in his Church, in the special works of the
same. And without this, we cannot have sound religion: and this stands not in
a swimming knowledge in the brain, but in a sure persuasion of the same in the
heart. The second thing is, that this persuasion of the special presence and
providence of Christ in his Church, is the means to draw us to all duties of
our calling, seeing Christ makes this his reason to move them to obey his
admonition. So if we think and persuade our selves, that Christ is present in
the midst of his Church, and withal guides, blesses, and protecteth the
same, we cannot but be moved to walk as Enoch and Abraham did, with God even
as in his presence.

In this second verse is the second part of the Epistle, Verse. 2.
which is the proposition, which contains the very matter and substance of
the Epistle. This proposition has two parts: first, a commendation of this
Church, especially of the Ministers, in the second and third verses: secondly,
a rebuke or reprehension, in the fourth verse. First, the commendation is in
general, I know thy works. Secondly, in particular, for particular duties, in
the words following.

I know thy works. Some expound it of works of mercy, and liberality, but
that cannot stand. But when he says, I know thy works, that is, the dealings
and practices of the people and Ministers in their callings and affairs, I
know them, they are open and not hid from me: and not only know them, but with
approbation allow them: as in co^paring this with the fourth verse, where there
is an opposition: Though I know thy works, that is, allow them, yet I find
fault in some things with thee.

Whereas Christ he knows, Use.
that is, approves their works, ways, dealing, conversation and living, this
may be a remedy against all secret and hidden sins. The adulterer, thief,
and murderer wait for the night, when they think none see them, then they may
as they think practice any sin: so the tradesman he thinking no man sees
him, changes and counterfeiteth his wares, and blearing man's eye, thinks all
is well. And the cause why there is such fraud, deceit, guile, and injustice
among men is, because men think they can do it so, as none shall see them:
they say, God regards and sees not our dealing. Psalm. 94. 7. But if men
would consider, that though they can bleare the eye of man, yet they cannot
hide it from God, seeing they be always in his sight, this would make men make
conscience of many secret corruptions and sins in their hearts. Whereas this
knowledge is joined with approbation, Obiction.
and so Christ approves of their works, some may ask, How can God approve of
that which does not satisfy his law, as the best works of the most holy men
of God, being stained with sin, do not? Answer.
Answ. The Gospel reuealeth to us more then the law, being the second part of
the word. Now the Gospel tells us, that if a man will, and unfeignedly do his
endeavor, to please God, to obey his will, if a man do this in truth, the Lord
accepts the will for the deed. So Christ here he approves of their works
proceeding from a pure will and earnest endeavor, as perfect, taking the will
for the deed.

But seeing Christ approves their works, Objection.
the Papists may argue hence thus: If God approve thus of men, then they have
no sin: if they have none, then a man may fulfill the law in this life,
Answer.
and so be justified by works. Ans. Christ approves not their or our works
simply, but in part, as they be his works, proceeding from his spirit in our
hearts* but as they proceed from our corrupt will, and be fruits of our flesh,
he does not. Again, Christ approues them with pardon as they be pardoned, and
if they were not so approved, he could not approve them at all. Christ says, I
know your works, that is, as proceeding from my spirit, and as pardoned,
having the guilt taken from them.

Now I come to her commendation particularly, which is especially of the Angel
or minister, in whom the first thing commended is this, namely labor: which is
an excellent virtue, especially in the Ministers painfulnesse, diligence and
labor, in guiding and governing the church over which they are set: and this
virtue is worthy of commendation, as 1. Tim. 5. 17. he which rules well, is
worthy of double honor. And Paul matched and preferred himself before all
other Apostles, in this, that he labored more then they all.

Seeing our Savior Christ commends this labor of the ministry, Use 1.
we see it is a work of pains and diligence, if it be well done, and not of
ease and idleness, as men commonly esteem of it: else Christ would never
commend it above all other works in the ministry.

Seeing Christ commends the Ministers, Use 2.
in being painful and diligent in teaching and governing, the people must be
diligent in learning and obeying them. But men think, all is well if they come
and hear the word, though they take no pains to know and understand it, they
will not take pains to increase in the knowledge of Religion. And the want of
this pains and diligence in the people, is the cause why the word is heard
without profit. Men bestow all pains, care and diligence in worldly things,
and yet take no pains in the principal, namely, that which belongs to their
souls health* but if they would be commended of Christ, then they must use
diligence, take pains in hearing, learning, and obeying the word of God.

The Minister must labor to teach and to govern the people, ergo they must
labor to obey and keep a good conscience, and to practice religion. And as
Paul labored to keep a good conscience: so must all men learn to know and
understand the word, and then to obey and practice the same. Secondly, Christ
he commends their patience in bearing the cross, which usually follows the
Gospel: and this is worthy commendation, seeing it is more then many of the
Prophets performed. Ierem. 20. was exceeding impatient. Jonah being schooled in
the whales belly, yet after that, all things falling not out to his mind, he
was most impatient. But this Angel labored, and withal ioyed in the cross
and persecution. As he did, so must Ministers labor to publish the Gospel:
and because the cross accompanies the Gospel, they must be armed against
persecution, with patience they must endure all crosses, as Luke 8. 15. the
good ground brings forth frutie with patience. The practice of Religion and
patience must go together.

Now Christ joins these two, laboring in his calling, and patience,
together, and seuereth them not: first, because before the fall, man could do
all his duty without trouble, with ease and joy: but since the fall, we being
corrupted can do nothing but it is a trouble to us; and God set this mark on
our sins, that all our duties should be troublesome, and our callings should
have crosses and calamities joined with them. Secondly, because as the
Ministers labor to increase in the people knowledge, and to do their duties: so
the devil labors to hinder them and to stay them, therefore they must not
only labor, but be diligent to strive with patience. So Paul 1 Thessalonians. 2. he
would have come to the^, but Satan hindered him. Now as Christ joins these two
in the ministry, so in all callings these must go together, both in particular
callings of the church and of the common wealth. First, we must know the duties
of our callings: secondly, we must labor in patience to practice them with
diligence: and withal we must know, that in the doing of our duty there is
also joined affliction, therefore we must be armed with patience, to undergo
all crosses and afflictions in our callings: we must (though afflictions come)
obey the commandment of God, inioyning us travel and labor in our callings,
and rely on his promise, that he will bless us in our callings, if we labor
diligently and be patient in afflictions. We must not think we may leave our
particular callings because of troubles and afflictions, but we must faithfully
continue in them, and with patience endure afflictions, and then Christ shall
conmmend us, which is better then all the things in the world: his commendation
is better then any man can give. If he commend us, then we are happy, though
all men speak ill of us. But if we neglect and contemn our callings, and will
not go on because of afflictions, but leave them for want of patience, then
instead of commending, he will discommend and disgrace us: and then what will
it help us though all men speak well of us?

And thou can not bear, etc. Now follows the third particular work or
virtue, for which Christ commends the church of Ephesus. And how thou can not
bear them which be wicked. Here he commends her severity against wicked men,
that is, such as lived offensiuely in life or doctrine, maintained any manifest
heresy or error. The church of Ephesus could not bear such, but esteemed of
them as a burden which she could not bear, but sought to be disburthened of.

Hence we see, Use.
that it is necessary for wicked men to be severed from the church, and she
must be purged of them. So in all ages it was practiced, the Church sought to
be disburdened of wicked men, as when Cain had slain his brother, Genes. 4.
the Lord cast him out from his face, that is, that place where Adam and his
family assembled to worship God. So says Jeremy, the wicked must be taken
away. Ier. 15. If thou will turn and separate the wicked, and the vile, then
thou shall be as the Lords mouth. 1. Cor. 5. where the incestuous person must
be given unto Satan. All these places prove, that wicked men which be offensive
in life or doctrine, must be separate from the church, she must be purged of
them. It is necessary the church should be purged of these wicked men: first,
because they defile the worship of God, and infect it by their wickedness,
whereas they which worship him must be holy as he is holy. Secondly, least the
church be defiled and infected by their wicked doctrine and life, for they be
as sour leaven which will soon infect the whole mass of dough.

By this we see a manifest and common fault in our churches, Use.
wherein wicked men are not only suffered to live, but to receive the
sacraments, and hear the word preached, as though they were good: yea though
many of the^ want knowledge, be co^temners of the word and sacraments, many be
tainted with drunkenness and vices, which accompany that (...). But such as
want knowledge or be wicked men in life or doctrine, ought not to be suffered
to preach to the people, and receive the sacraments: therefore we must seek al
good means to disburthen the church of them. Secondly, seeing they sought to
be disburthened of them, we see Christ has given his church judicial power to
disburthen her self of wicked me^, to excommunicate and cast them out of the
church, from receiving the sacraments: she could not bear them, but sought to
be disburthened, which she would not unless Christ had given her power to do
it.

Object. But some hold, that wicked men must not be cast out of the church, but
must be suffered to live in the church, and prove it by Mark 13. 30. the tares
must be alone till the end. Answer. But here in the parable of the tares,
Christ speaks not of the church to be purged by Magistrates, but of the
universal purging in the last day, and that not by men, but by the Angels.

2. Object. Luke 14. 13. Christ bids them compel all in the high ways: now if
all must be compelled, then none must be exempted and cast out of the church.
Answ. Christ speaks not of compelling them to the sacraments, but only to
the preaching of the word* they must come and hear that; yet this proves not
that men wicked and offensive may not be suspended, barred, and excommunicated
in regard of the sacraments and seals of salvation, which must be given to
them only which have faith and repentance.

Quest. Seeing wicked men must be severed from the church, hence a question
arises: how far forth a man may converse with them, and keep company with
them which are offensive in life and doctrine?

Answ. Evil men must be considered, first, as they be members of a
commonwealth, town, or city: secondly, as they be members of a particular
church by tolleration. Now as they be members of a commonwealth, city or
town, we may converse with them in outward things and civil affairs, as
buying, selling, etc. we may make outward civil peace with them, though they
be wicked, as Paul bids us have peace with all men, as far as it may stand
with the honor of God and good of the Church, and society wherein we live. In
this civil society we may perform outward civil duty of love and civil
courtesy. Tit. 3. 2.

2 As a wicked man is a member of a particular Church, we may live in it with
him, for we may not because of him leave that Church, but still live and abide
in it. So Christ though the Jews and their Doctors were wicked men, in life
and doctrine hypocrites, yet he lived still among them: but so as we seeing
their wicked life, allow not of it, but be grieved with it, as the Sodomites
grieved the righteous heart of Lot. Nay, although they be admitted to the
supper of the Lord by the fault of the Minister, yet we must and may continue
among them in the Church. So did Christ, he lived among the Jews, communicated
among them in eating of the Passover, and received the Sacraments among them,
though they were corrupt in life and doctrine. And the reason is, because if
thy conscience be good, it cannot be defiled by another man's ill conscience.
Yet though we may do these things with them, yet two things are unlawful:
first, we must have no private or familiar company with them. (1. Cor. 5. the
tenth and eleventh verses.) Secondly, no special familiarity. We must not
bar them of general duties, but of special familiarity only. For by that
means a man does not only countenance their persons, but allows of their
sins.

This then condemns them which are of that nature, Use.
that they can fit and frame themselves to all companies, to the humors and
disposition of any company: but if there be any openly wicked in life or
doctrine, we must not keep any private company with him, show him no special
familiarity, but withdraw our selves from such, as burdens to us.

And have examined them. This sharp dealing of the Church of Ephesus has 2
parts: the first, is examination: the second, condemnation of the false
Apostles. The first part is the discovery of these false Apostles. The second,
the opposing of her self against them being discovered. The discovery of the
false Apostles teaches two points: first, that God has given to his Church,
and to the Ministers and members of it, special grace and wisdom, an
excellent gift of discerning. 1. Cor. 2. 15. 1. Cor. 11. Spiritual men, endued
with the Spirit of God, can discern of the Lords body and blood, between
bread and wine in the Sacrament, and common bread and wine. 2. Cor. 13. Prove
your selves: showing, that the Church and the members thereof, have power, and
the gift of wisdom to try whether they have faith or not. 1. Ioh. 5. Try the
spirits. And here she has power to discern of false Apostles: and by this
gift the Church of God differs from all other societies of men: no society
save the Church of God has this gift to judge between good and bad, truth and
error, true Apostles and false Apostles. Secondly, we gather hence, that the
Church of God can judge whether a Church be a true Church or not. Some men it
pleases to call this to question, nay, to deny that there is any Church in
England, but call it the synagogue of Satan, and say there is no ministry in
it, no word, no Sacraments. Now seeing the Church of God can judge of us in
England: and the churches in Germany, in Scotland, and other Evangelical and
reformed Churches, judge the Church of England a true Church: it is so, though
they deny it. For we must rather stand to the judgment of one or many
particular true churches, then of any one private, or of many men. Yea seeing
the church of God can judge of false Apostles, it has also power to judge of
Scriptures, to judge which books be canonical, which are not. And that which
the church of Rome says is false: that the Church indeed can judge, but as it
has authority from their Church. This Church of Ephesus had this power long
before Rome was in such name, nay, it was in this time of John of far greater
name then Rome, and more famous and excellent.

The second point: in what things this discovery of false Apostles consists:
in what this judicial action stands, which God has given to the Church. It
stands in two things: first, examination of false doctrine and false
teachers. Secondly, condemnation of the^ after examination. For the first, he
says, And have examined: for the second, and found them liars. To come to this
examination, the Church of Ephesus had a gift of examination, Qu^stion.
and did examine false Apostles and their doctrine. But how may a particular
Church examine a false Apostle and his doctrine? Answer.
To do this, the man or Church which would do it, must first prepare
themselves, and make them fit to examine: and in this preparation must have an
humble heart and lowly spirit: for God reuealeth not his will to proud men,
such as have high minds in their conceit. And in this humbling of himself, he
must clean renounce his own wit and reason, and in regard of himself become
a fool in his own reason, if he will be wise in the word of God. After this
preparation he must make prayers to God in his spirit, that the Lord would
reveal the thing to him, and that he would open his eyes by the means used,
to judge of truth and falsehood. Luke 11. Iam. 1. 5. In the next place he must
labor thoroughly to know and well to conceive of their false doctrines: he must
seek to understand them, their grounds, the differences between them and the
truth. For it is a foul fault to propound a man's error, and not in that
meaning he propounded it or gave it. They must further prove and try whether
the doctrine be of God or men. To do this, he must come to the word of God,
which must be judge in the matter, not a dumme letter, as the Papists hold, but
the true judge in all matters, and most sufficient. Esa. 8. 19. 20. Ioh. 5.
Search the Scriptures. Only the Lord must be judge in his own matters, he must
give sentence, and no Angel, Saint, or man. Now this he does in the written
word: therefore they must search whether such doctrines be contained in the
Scriptures, or can by necessary consequence be collected out of them. They
must after all this look to their lives: for it is not possible that a false
Apostle should lead a good life. We must look on his faith and repentance, and
the fruits of them: for though he may bleare the eyes of the world, yet if his
life be well sifted, it will appear by his faith and repentance he is but an
hypocrite; and therefore Mat. 7. Christ bids us try them by their fruits.
A bad tree cannot bring good fruit: but if a man try and taste them, though
they appear beautiful to the eye, yet we shall find them to be but
hypocritical. and this is a judgment of God upon such, that they shall be
descryed by this one mark, by their lives and conuersations.

If they teach false doctrine they have lives answerable, they cannot but live
accordingly. There was never any which was a famous heretic in the Church,
but his life was stained with monstrous sins, as the history of the Church
declares.

The second part of the discovery is, condemnation or sentence against them:
for after she had examined them, and finding them not that they seemed to be,
she pronounced them to be false Apostles and liars. Note; she calls them
liars, uses sharp speeches and yet sins not seeing Christ commends her:
so Ministers to show their hatred against vice, may use sharp speeches; not to
rail or taunt, but only to show our hatred and misliking of sin. So John
Baptist calls them a generation of vipers: Christ called Herod a Fox, Paul
the Galatians fools.

In that she calls them liars, Doctrine.
it shows three things: first, that they spoke falsely, and delivered that
which was untrue: secondly, that they sinned of knowledge: thirdly, that they
did it of malice, to hurt and deceive the Church: for these three be the
properties of a liar.

Again, here we see that which Paul (Act. 20.) foretold by the spirit of
Prophecy to be fulfilled, that among the Ephesians should arise liars on them,
which professed the Gospel with them.

Again, if men in the days of the Apostles (they being yet alive) durst so
take on the^ Apostolical authority, to call themselves Apostles and were none:
no marvel if the Pope of Rome durst six hundred years after them take this
upon him, and say, he is Peter's successor, to take on him Apostolical power,
to allow of those books for canonical which are not, and to make them* as pure
Scripture which are only Apocrypha.

And thou have suffered. In the former words were the first part, namely, of
her severity, for which Christ commended the church of Ephesus: now follows
the second part, which is, after their discovery to oppose her self against
false apostles: how, it will appear in the particulars. First, of the words,
Thou have suffered, or as well, thou have borne as a burden: for the word
signifies to be pressed down under a great burden. These burdens were troubles
which these false apostles caused after they were discovered: first, open
injuries and persecutions: secondly, the spreading of damnable and heretical
doctrines. The Ecclesiastical histories report, that these false apostles were
such, as Cerinthus, Ebeon, Marcion, and such like.

Now in these words we note, Use.
it is the will of God, that even the best church shall be troubled by false
Apostles, teaching heretical doctrine, and persecuting the church of God, and
so become great burdens to the church, and that the Lord suffers for weighty
causes: first, these false apostles must be, that the believers and true
imbracers of the Gospel might be stirred up more to embrace and love the same:
as Jude exhorts the true believers, To fight for their common faith; and the
more religion is oppressed, the more we should labor to maintain it.
Secondly, that professors might be proved and tried, whether they be true and
sound or not, 1. Cor. 11. 19. There must be heresies, etc. Thirdly, that God
may exercise his indgements on the wicked and hypocrites, for they be given up
to believe lies, and to receive their false doctrine, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.

Seeing the Lord suffers his best churches to be troubled with false
Apostles, Use 2.
and that for most weighty causes: we must not be offended, because we see
dissensions and scismes in the church; which proceed not by reason of the
Gospel, but from wicked, erroneous and heretical men: for the Lord will have
such to live in his church, to make his own servants to love him more, to try
who be sound professors, and to bring judgment on the wicked: these should not
make us discouraged, but more to love and embrace the Gospel.

Now after the dealing of these false apostles, is set down the dealing of the
church of Ephesus against them, in all things opposing her self against them.

Thou have suffered, and have patience. That is, thou have borne a burden by
manifold troubles and persecutions, and have patience to bear them. Object.
But how can troubles, persecutions, and patience stand together? for troubles
are against men's nature, and makes them fret, and be impatient against God and
man. Ans. These stand together, not by nature, but by grace. Romans 5. 4.
Tribulation brings patience. And they stand thus together: to him which truly
believes in Christ, God gives the spirit of meeknes, sheds his love in his
heart, and so in the midst of trouble gives him a special taste of his mercy.
And thus in the time of trouble, they which be most troubled, are withal most
patient: so trouble and patience may be together.

And have patience. Here is the first way, by which the church of Ephesus
opposed her self against false apostles and their dealings, which were double:
first, injuries and persecutions: secondly, false doctrines, heretical and
damnable teaching. Now by patience she opposed her self to both these. So the
only way to oppose our selves against persecutors, such as injury or wrong us,
is patience: whereby we stop their mouths, and if it be possible, overcome and
win them to Christ. This should be our means to oppose our selves against
wicked men, as well in life and manners, as in judgment and doctrine; not to
return injury for injury, and wrong for wrong, but to have patience; not that
we should bear their sins, but their wrongs.

And for my names sake have labored. Here is the second means how she opposed
her self against their spreading of damnable and heretical doctrine, which is
the second way how they were a burden to her. Have labored: that is, taken
much pains for my name, that is, my glory, and the Gospel of Christ: for
maintaining my glory and true Religon, thou have taken as great pains, as they
did to broach heresies: and so thou have opposed thy self against them.

Here then is our second way to oppose our selves against damnable heresies of
wicked men: Use.
we must labor to have the true word of God, to maintain the glory of God and
true Religion. Is this so? Then every man shall labor for the name and
Religion of Christ, both minister and people; for this labor is double, partly
of the minister, partly of the people. Concerning ministers: the ministers
first labor must be, by studying and reading the word, to furnish himself
with sufficient knowledge in the foundation and substance of the Gospel of
Christ. And for this cause S. John (Revelation 11.) must eat the book, that
is, by study and meditation, have it in his heart and mind, to digest it well.
Psalm. 2. 7. the Priests lips must preserve knowledge, and the people must seek
it at his mouth. Secondly, he must deliver the whole counsel of God,
concerning the matter of salvation to the people, and the whole doctrine of the
Gospel contained in the books of the Prophets and Apostles. So did Paul. Act.
20. He kept nothing back, but delivered the whole counsel of God. Thirdly, he
must be able to discover, and labor to discern false teachers to the people,
not only to know them, but make the church to know them. Tit. 1. he must
convince false teachers, and then discern and discover them, which he shall do
by two things: first, by conuincing and discrying their erroneous doctrine:
secondly, by reproving their wicked life. So Christ notes the erroneous
doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, in their misinterpreting the law:
secondly, their hypocritical life. So Paul in all his Epistles notes wicked
men's errors, and then their bad life. Fourthly, he must labor that the
doctrine delivered out of the Gospel, may edify and take fruit in men's
hearts, which is the end of all preaching and teaching. 1. Cor. 14. Fifthly, he
must labor to be a pattern and president in his own person, of that doctrine
which he teaches, that so they may have his example to follow, which is an
excellent means to make them obey the word: and the neglect of it is the cause
why many contemn the word. Sixthly, he must make petition to God, that his
particular church may hold, receive, and obey that doctrine he delivers. So
Paul in all his Epistles prays for them, that they may receive his doctrine.

Now as the minister, Use.
so the people also must labor for the name of Christ, every true member of
the church must labor to know and understand that doctrine which is delivered
out of the word. Christ bids us believe the Gospel and repent: therefore we must
first know it, and then we must believe it. Then we must do as Mary did, we
must leave other less matters, and sit at Christ's feet, to hear his gracious
words. Luke 11. further we must labor to have the same knowledge conveyed to
others: for if we believe truly, we cannot contain our selves, but we must
needs teach others. He which drinks of the well of life, out of his belly
shall flow full streams of running water, Ioh. 7. he cannot hold it in, but
will convey it to others. That this may be done, first the head of the family,
he must teach and instruct his family: for God has bound him in conscience to
spread abroad that knowledge he has, to convey it to his family: and though he
be not able, yet God requires he should be able to instruct them, that so a
particular and little church may be in his family. Again, every man must labor
to win his enemy, and those which are ignorant, to believe the word. The
Scribes and Pharisees compass sea and land to make one Proselite, and the
wicked labor to win men to do as they do, much more should we. Yea and every
man must labor to edify those which be fellow members with him of the same
church, in faith, hope, love, repentance, and such like: and as Jude says,
they must labor to save some. Lastly, to maintain the Religion of Christ
against all his enemies, to answer them and to stop their mouths. 1. Pet. 3.
15.

Seeing the maintaining of the name and religion of Christ is so excellent a
thing, Use.
we must above all things labor for it: to spread it abroad over the whole
earth, to defend it against all false teachers. So did the church of Ephesus
being persecuted and injured by false Apostles: and this is a most blessed
labor, to to defend Christ and his Religion, and with it the honor of God.

In the end of the verse he sets down the manner how she defended it:
namely, that she did not faint, but was constant, perseuered to the end. So we
have had the Gospel long time preached, we have defended it with hazard of
life and goods; we must not now leave off, but still continue: and this
exhortation is necessary, seeing the Lord, after so long peace, purposes to
try us by persecution, or false teachers. Then let us purpose to be constant to
the end, and not as some, who can change as religion changes, be of any
religion. To maintain religion is commended, but the principal thing for
which the church of Ephesus is commended, is perseverance.

Nevertheless, etc. In the fourth verse Christ sets down a direct and
severe reproof of this Church. I have something against thee. Here Christ
deals as a judge, calling the Church to an account, laying actions to her
charge: which actio^ is this, Thou have lost thy first love: that is, the
Church and people of Ephesus, the Angel and the people, have lost that love to
God, religion and man, which they had when they were first called: not that
they left it wholly, but because both people and Minister suffered their first
love to decay, that now it was not so fervent and plentiful as before.
Objection.
Ob. Christ commends her zeal against false Apostles. Answer.
Answ. It is true, she had now zeal and love, but in respect of that she had
first it was no zeal, nay it was cold and frozen, therefore he says: thou have
lost thy first love.

If God had something against this Church: Use.
then now he may justly have against all particular Churches in the world,
especially against us in this land, seeing we be in her estate. A great part
never had love of Christ, and many have fallen from their first love. That some
have fallen it is plain: many in Queen Mary's time were content to live in
persecution for the Gospel: but after when quietness came, they became plain
worldlings, as the history of the Church records. And in these days of peace
and plenty of the Gospel, such as twenty or seven and twenty years agone
were zealous professors, now become cold and frozen professors. Many I grant
are free from this sin, yet are they worse then these: for they never had the
love of Christ and religion, Mat. 24.
but are lovers of themselves, of this world, 2. Tim. 3.
honor, riches and pleasure. Now then if Christ had something against these
Churches for losing their love, much more may he have against us, who never had
true love of him. That men now adays be lovers of themselves, of this world,
and not of Christ, it appears, seeing most congregations and Churches after
this long time of hearing the Gospel preached, being daily taught, yet are not
bettered in opinion, judgment, life and obedience: but still remain ignorant,
which argues no love of God, nor of religion. For it is not possible that he
which loves God, and loves religion indeed, should continue from year to
year in ignorance, never profit in practice of religion, in bettering his
knowledge and obedience. And in that men live in their particular callings
without al love to God and religion, it argues they love not God: for if they
loved God, they must needs love their neighbors: these going together. But
men practice their callings with the love of themselves, of honor, riches, and
pleasure; no love to God, no love to religion. This should move us to stir up
our hearts to labor to get true love of God, of religion, and of our neighbor,
that Christ have no action against us. For if a King or a mighty man should
have an action against us, especially being just and good, it would make one
quake and tremble: but we have even the King of heaven and earth to deal with,
he has an action against us, then it is best to look about us. This Paul
urged to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4. 16.
that he would go beyond himself, and abound in fear, love and repentance.
Phil. 3. 13. he labored to that which was before, forgetting that which was
behind, that so he might come to perfection. He looked first on his wants, and
then by the^ took occasion to grow and increase in all spiritual graces. We
are in a way, we must walk to heaven, there is no standing, if we purpose to
come to the mark: we must be as young children, who first are children, little
in knowledge and strength, after are stronger, and lastly become tall men: so
must we daily grow till we become tall men in Christ, perfect and tall men in
knowledge of religion. And they which after long preaching be ignorant or make
no increase in religion, they be in a dangerous estate, and cannot possibly
come to the kingdom of heaven.

Have fallen from thy first love. Hence the Papists as also other Churches
gather, that a man may fall away wholly and finally: then this question must be
considered whether a man may wholly fall from grace. That we may answer to this,
we must know, grace is taken two ways: first, for that favor of God, whereby
it pleases his majesty to make us his children which truly believe in Christ:
and this is the fountain of all grace, love, and favor. Now if grace be taken
for this favor of God in Christ, the^ though the outward signs and sensible
feeling of Gods favor in Christ may be lost; yet grace, that is, Gods favor in
Christ, cannot be lost. A father by some offense of his child may not show
signs of favor to his son for a time, but rather his anger by words or
stripes: yet for all this he carries a fatherly mind to him, not purposing to
disinherit him. So when a true child of God sins, he then feels not the
favor of God, for he turns his countenance from him for a time, yet not so
that his favor is wholly lost, but he still keeps it toward us, not purposing
to disinherit us in Christ: but is still our father, and we his children.
Secondly, grace signifies not only Gods favor, but the gifts of grace, as
faith, hope, repentance, etc. which are bestowed on them which believe. Now
these graces be of two sorts, some necessary to salvation, without which we
cannot be saved: for without faith no man can be justified, sanctified, or
glorified. Now from true faith proceeds true hope and love, which three
graces be especially necessary to salvation, and especial graces of Gods
spirit. Secondly, there are other graces which be profitable and needful, yet
not necessary to salvation: as feeling of Gods favor, joy and alacrity in
invocation of Gods name, fear, joy, etc. and these are not so necessary, but
that a man which has them not may be saved. Now then the three first, faith,
hope, love cannot be lost finally or wholly, being necessary to salvation; but
the other may: faith indeed may be weakened and wounded, but never lost wholly,
but in part and for a time; and so it is said here of the Church of Ephesus.

First, that grace cannot be lost wholly and finally, these reasons prove,
Math. 16. 16. Christ promised Peter, and in him the whole Church, that the
gates of hell should never prevail against him: for when he says, they shall
not prevail, the meaning is, they shall show very much strength, but shall not
overcome or prevail against the Church. Though she may be foiled, yet never
overcome. The second reason is, if it were possible he should deceive the elect
of God. Mat. 24. 24. Christ takes it for granted, that they which believe,
which are truly justified and sanctified, cannot fall finally, and so loose
their faith. Thirdly, Ioh. 10. 28. Christ says, his sheep shall never perish.
But they answer: that so long as they remain the sheep of Christ, they shall
not perish: but Christ cutteth off that objection, saying, no man takes them
out of his hand, they shall not be able by their natural corruption to fall,
nor any man can take the^ out of my hands. The fourth reason, is Ioh. 3. 36. He
that believes has eternal life: they say, hops: but he which has it in
hope truly, he cannot loose it, seeing hope cannot make a man ashamed, Romans 5.
6. and hope is grounded on faith, Heb. 11. 1. Romans 8. 30. whom God
predestinateth, he calls, justifies, sanctifies, and glorifieth. Now if he
which believes shall be justified and glorified, then he cannot fall away: for
he which falls finally, shall never be glorified. Fifthly, in the end of the
chapter, he says, nothing can sever him and the church of the Romans from the
love of Christ, ergo not fall finally: for then they may be severed. Sixthly,
Romans 11. 29. Gods gifts of salvation are without repentance, that is, the
peculiar gifts of his spirit necessary to salvation, are without repentance.
They say, God for his part repents not, but man reiects that grace whereof God
repented not: but this makes Gods will subject to the will of his creature, and
makes man to rule God, to obey man's will: seeing they make man's will to rule
Gods will; man wills a thing, God wills it not, yet man's will must stand, which
is absurd. A seventh reason, 1. Ioh. 3. 9. he which is borne of God sins
not, or cannot sin, because the seed of Gods word is in him. Now in the first
chapter he says, that he which says he has no sin, lies. John then
means here, that he which truly believes, sins not, that is, sin rules
not in him with whole consent, but in part. And man being partly flesh and
partly spirit, as he is regenerate, sin proceeds not from him but as he is
flesh. They answer: so long as he abides borne of God: but when he cease to
be borne of God, he sins then with full consent: but he cuts of that cauil
and says, Neither can sin, seeing the seed of the word working by the spirit
of God, makeh him continue that he cannot so sin. Eighthly, If a man may fall
wholly and finally, then he must be clean cut off from Christ: for he must
first be clean cut from Christ, have no conjunction with him, before he can
loose grace wholly. Now if a man should be so often cut from Christ, as he
loses grace, then he should be often cut off, and often reunited to Christ:
and if he should be so often reunited to Christ, the^ he should be so often
baptized, for baptism is the sacrament of incision and ingraffing into Christ:
but that is absurd, that baptism should be any more then once administered:
ergo a man is but once ingrafted, but once united to Christ; and so cannot be
reunited, and never fall. The last reason, We pray, Lead us not into
temptation: that is, suffer not Satan and sin wholly to prevail, and to
conquer us. Now in every petition there are two things, first a commandment
to pray: secondly, a promise that we shall be heard: therefore seeing there is a
promise in the word that no true child of God shall be wholly conquered of
sin or Satan, no true child of God can finally fall away.

Against these reasons are brought diverse arguments, and they are of three
sorts: first, testimonies of scripture: secondly, examples: thirdly, equity.
For scriptures they allege these places. First (Exodus 32. 33.) Moses prays
to God that he may be blotted out of the book of life: therefore he which is the
true child of God may perish finally. Answ. His petition must be understood
with condition; if it be possible: and so Christ; let this cup pass if it be
possible: else Moses should pray for that he knew was not possible, and so
against his own knowledge: for he knew it could not be that one private man
should die for the people, or suffer eternal punishment for them. Again, Moses
in that petition does principally show his zeal and earnest love he bare to
Gods glory and the good of the people, in that he neglected his own life, and
desired that rather then God should want his glory, and they perish, he should
rather die (if it were possible) eternally. So Paul desired to be accursed that
the Jews might be saved. Romans 9. 3.
Again they urge, If the righteous turn from his righteousness, he shall die,
ergo a righteous man may perish. To these words I answer, Phil. 3. 9.
there is a double righteousness, one of the outward action, another of the
person: the first is, when a man keeps the whole law outwardly, in respect of
men: the second, in that a man's person is righteous by Christ's righteousness
before God. A man may have the first, and yet be an hypocrite, and so it is
meant here of the first not of the second, by which man is in deed righteous
before God. Ans. 2. It must be understood of them which esteemed themselves
righteous, they pleaded that their fathers sinned, and they were punished: so
that they pretended they were just, but were not so indeed. Another place is
Luke 8. 13. there be some which believed for a time. Ans. There are three kinds
of faith, as also of believers, historical, temporal, and true saving faith:
in the first is knowledge and assent to the word, yet no great joy or
rejoicing: in the second is also joined joy and rejoicing to the assent with
approbation: but in saving faith there is also apprehension of the promise of
God to our selves, which is not in the other.

Now as of faith, so of believers there be three kinds: one, which knows the
word, and gives assent to it, yet has no great love or liking of it: the
second, he loves it, rejoices in it, but apprehends not the promise: but
the third, he believes, loves, and apprehends the promise. Now the two
first may fall away, but the last cannot fall away: and Luke is to be
understood of the two first, not of the last. But they object and say, there is
but one God, and one faith, therefore all faith is one. Phil. 4. Answ. That is,
there is but one faith, one doctrine of salvation, and one religion: so faith
is used in the word, and so it must be here understood. Secondly, they prove it
by examples, as first of Adam: secondly, of David. Adam he had grace
sufficient, yet he in his innocence fell from God, therefore much more we
which have not so much grace as he had. Ans. Though he had greater measure of
grace, yet we have more certain and sure privileges of grace then he had:
first, he had his grace by creation, we by redemption, which is greater then
creation: secondly, he had the first grace not the second: but we have the
first grace and the second too by promise, which preserves us in the first
grace, Phil. 1. 6. 2. These. 1. The Lord is faithful to establish us, and to
keep us from evil. God gives the first grace to believe and repent, and the
second to make us to continue in the same. They object, David fell from grace
by two great sins: one of adultery, the other of pride. Answ. He fell
grievously, and the graces of God were sore decayed, weakened and wounded in
him, not clean extinguished: for then he should have conte^ned God, his word
and religion, and despaired of mercy, which he did not. This shows, he had
the remnants of grace in his heart still, though weakened and wounded. Ob. 1.
But he prays God to create in him a new heart. Psalm. 51. therefore he had
clean lost grace. Answ. David speaks there as he felt himself, not as he
was in respect of God, for he felt in his conscience much trouble, and Gods
wrath against him. 2. Ob. But he repented not of a whole year. Now, no
repentance, no pardon; and no pardon, no grace. Answ. The gift of repentance
was in him when he fell, and after, but the practice of it showed it self not
till that time that the Prophet came to him, he wanted not repentance simply,
but new repentance in practice for that fact. Their third argument is from
equity of nature and common reason: a child of God may become the member of an
harlot, now one cannot be the member of God and of the devil, therefore a man
may fall finally. Ans. There be three sorts of members, a dead, a decayed, and
a lively member: the first is as a leg of wood or brass: the second, as an
arm or leg taken with a palsy: the third, a moving and lively member, as an
hand sound and ready to move. So in Christ there is a dead member, which is
only in show, not in deed: secondly a member decayed, dying but not dead, as a
man by sin taken with a spiritual palsy which can not feel grace flowing from
Christ: thirdly, a lively member which feels and lives in Christ. Now a
lively member of Christ, can not be the member of an harlot: but a decayed
member, which is in the midst between dead and alive, that is the member of
Christ and the member of an harlot; but being not dead but dying, shall be
quickened again: so a man is made the member of Christ spiritually, but the
member of an harlot by carnal manner. They say further, if that men be so
certain of their salvation that they cannot fall away, then this shows there
is no need of the word, no need of preaching and exhortation. Ans. Though a man
be certain he cannot fall away, yet preaching and exhorting have their use,
not only to work grace, but also to make men constant in grace, and to
persevere to the end: and though a man be certain of his salvation, yet he
must use the means. Paul (Act. 28.) he knew that not one in the ship should
perish yet there must not one go out of the ship. Esaias (38) tells Hezechiah he
should recover, but he must use the means, and so he did. But say they, this
doctrine maintains gross security, to teach that men are sure they cannot
fall. Ans. There is a double security, one of the flesh, when a man gives
himself to the pleasures and profits of this world, having no care or
conscience of his own salvation: secondly, there is a security of faith, when
one relieth wholly on Christ in the matter of salvation. Now seeing that
doctrine maintains security, not of the flesh, but a spiritual security of
faith and peace of conscience, it is not to be disliked, for it is a man's
chief felicity, when a man in life and death relieth wholly on Christ. Thus
the answer to the question, is, that a true believer cannot loose faith, nor
fall away from grace wholly or finally, but in part, and for a time.

Seeing this decaying of love was in this famous Church founded and preserved
by the Apostles, Use 1.
then much more is it rife in our Church, seeing we have not the like measure
of grace that they had: then we must look to our selves, see how we decay in
love to God, and to our neighbor; if we do, then we shall find that after long
profession we have decayed much in love. And if we can excuse our selves, yet
take heed of it: for seeing this famous Church was subject to it, it cannot be
but we are. As we see water which is once hot, if it be cooled, it will be more
cold, and freeze harder then that which was ^euer warm: so he which has bin
endued and inflamed with the love of God and his neighbor, and after waxes
cold, he will be worse then he which never had that heat. The Hawke while she
is fit to catch the prey, and lively to fly well, she is set on the hand of
the King and Nobleman; but if she be old or dead, then she is cast off, or to
the dunghill: so when we love God and our neighbor, with alacrity and
cheerfulness, then we are on Gods right hand, in his favor and love; but if
we die and decay in love, then we are in the ready way to be cast off, and cast
away. Our love to God is like a little fire or flame: then we must not quench it
and cast water on it, for that puts it out: so our sins they be as water, nay
every sin we commit it as a dish of water cast on the little fire of our love,
and by it we do what we ca^ to put out the fire of Gods grace: but we must do
as the Priests did, who kept the fire on the altar, never let it out, but fed
it continually: so we must cherish and preserve this fire, and carry wood to
this fire daily: secondly, we must stir up the grace of God daily in us, as
we would lift up fire and blow it. Thirdly, that it may increase, we must
exercise the works of faith, love, obedience, repentane, and godliness. For
without these our love to God and man, will soon decay and wax cold.

2 Remember therefore whence thou art fallen. In these words Christ as a
faithful Pastor of our souls, prescribes a most sovereign remedy against
the former vice, namely, decay in love.

Now out of this, that Christ rebukes not the Church of Ephesus, but withal
gives a sovereign salve for that sore, we learn that the doctrine of the law
whereby sin is reproved, is to be taught; but withal the Gospel must be
preached, seeing in it alone the remedy is to be had. Then must we imitate
Christ: that is, preach the law in precepts and threatenings: and then the
Gospel, seeing the law shows only the wound, the Gospel the remedy.

The general use of this remedy stands in answering to two questions: Use.
the first question is: A man is called effectually to believe and to profess
the Gospel: but after his conversion, by the devil, the world, or his own
corruption, he sins and wounds his conscience, how shall he recover his
own estate? Ans. He must remember from whence he is fallen, and do his first
works. The second question is: A man has lived in ignorance, after his own
lust, never called effectually, but now he is touched in conscience for his
wicked life, how shall such an one be reconciled to God, and escape his
judgments? Ans. He must (says Christ) remember from whence he is fallen by
his first father Adam, and by his own sins: secondly, he must repent of his
sins past: and lastly, he must do his first works, to which he was bound by
the law of nature, and by the moral law of God.

Now in particular of the remedy. It contains three parts: the first,
Remember whence thou art fallen: the second, And repent, and do thy first
works: and in the end is a reason to move them to do these duties: or else I
will remove thy candlestick. The first part, remember: that is, remember,
examine thy self thoroughly, that thou may see thy decay in thy love: and
after that think on it often, and ponder it in thy heart. So that these words
inioyne them two duties: the first, to examine themselves: the second, to
consider of their estate.

1 Examine: that is, enter into a diligent search of thine own heart, search
thine own particular wants, especially this one want, thy decay in love.
Secondly, she must after examination, often think of her own wants, and often
lay them to her own heart.

Hence we see it is a dangerous thing for any Christian, Use. 1.
not to know his estate, not to be acquainted with his own wants: Ier. 8. he
blames the people for this sin: none among them said so much as What have I
done, none examined or considered his own estate and wants. In the days of
Noah they knew nothing till the flood came on them, they never looked to their
own estate, or regarded and considered Gods judgments, or their own sins
and wants. And in our time this sin is too common, not one of a thousand
examineth his life, considers his own wants and sins: nay, now if a man
turn his eye to see his own sins, why then this is a means to work
melancholy in a man: and so most men fly this, which is so necessary a
discipline.

We see it is a special duty of them which live in the church, Use 2.
to be acquainted with their own estate, to know and often consider their own
wants and sins: Zach. 2. When he begins to preach repentance, he bids
them search themselves, or fan and winnow themselves, as a man would search
for a little thing in an heap of chafe. Then we must search our selves
diligently and narrowly, yea the least thing in us, as Zachary bids his
auditors. And after that we find wants in our hearts, we must consider of them
seriously: for no man can repent truly till he know his own estate thoroughly:
then we must often consider it, and be well acquainted with it. Psalm. 119.
verse. 59. I considered my ways: that is, I entered into my self, and finding
mine own wants, then I turned me to thee.

And here we see the very cause why so few repent truly, because they remember
not whence they be fallen, and know not their own estate. The second part is,
Repent: first, when thou art well acquainted with thine own estate, and
know thy wants and sins; then in the second place repent.

In handling of this duty, note five points: the first, what repentance is:
the second, how it must be practiced: the third, who commands it: the
fourth, who must practice it: the fifth, for what end. Repentance is first
properly for the place of it, in the mind of man: for it is, after some folly,
ouerslip, or error, to be better advised, which is proper to the mind, and
therefore repentance is properly of the mind. Again, it is a change in the
mind, as of an evil mind to become good, a turning from sin to grace, from
all sin to God. Act. 26. 20. Now this turning from sin to God stands in a
purpose and resolution, whereby a man by Gods grace purposes to turn from all
sin, to serve the Lord and cleave to him, in obeying his commandments.
First then there must be a purpose in the mind, from which proceeds a turning
of the whole man, in will, affections and action: which is the principal thing
in repentance, namely the turning of the whole man from evil actions and
affections, to renewed affections and renewed actions.

By this we see, that the common description of repentance is not good, in that
they say it stands in contrition, which is, sorrow and remorce for sin,
which is no part of repentance, but may be a cause of repentance: godly sorrow
indeed causes repentance, but is nothing of the nature of it. 2. Cor. 7. 9. 10.

Or else. That is, if you will not practice that remedy: to wit, renew your
former love and repentance: I will come against thee: or as the words be in the
original: I will come to thee shortly. The Lord comes to a people two ways,
in mercy, or judgment: in mercy he comes, when he testifies his presence
to them by showing mercy: as when Christ in spirit came to the old world, and
preached to them (as Peter says) an hundred and twenty years. 1. Pet. 3. 19.
Secondly, he comes in judgment when he testifies his presence in judgment.
So in the second Commandment: I will visit the sins of the fathers: that
is, I will come and inquire of the fathers sins, whether they be in their
children, and will punish them. So here if the Church of Ephesus repent not, he
will come to her, to testify his presence in judgment, not mercy.

Out of this first general threatening, Use. 1.
we may learn this one thing, when any people or Church live in any one sin,
or decay in love to God, his word and religion: he then prepares himself to
come to them in judgment. Amos 4. 12. he will punish them, because they
returned not to the Lord, but lay in their sins: therefore he bids them
prepare themselves to meet him. This we must apply to our selves, our Church
and people: for the sins of the Church of Ephesus be our sins; we have
decayed in our first love, since we heard the word first, we for the most part
want love to God and to man: and besides these sins we lie in many fearful
sins. Atheism now abounds in judgment and in practice, contempt of the
worship of God, neglect and contempt of true religion, cruelty, oppression,
and want of mercy: yet for all this, what man is it that prepares to meet
the Lord? So that he may justly say, we do decay in love: that, it is most true
of us, that the Lord has been long coming to us for these sins in judgment,
in plagues and punishments: and so is he coming at this day, it hangs over
our heads, and if we continue still in sin, he will surely come.

Thus then seeing the Lord has been long coming to us, he would have us to
repent: if we will not, no doubt he will come and that shortly, and remove his
Gospel, he will come in judgments and punishments to destroy us.

I will remove thy candlestick. Here he shows in what particular judgment
he will come to the^: namely, to remove her candlestick. In the former Chapter
he compares the Church to a candlestick: then when he says he will remove
the candlestick, he means his word and Gospel: take the ministry of the
word from her, and so make her become of a Church, no Church: and having
removed the Gospel, will in stead of it, send ignorance and blindness.

If thou repent not: that is, if thou continue still in thy sin. In this second
threatening note three things: first, concerning the minister: secondly, the
Church and people: thirdly, every private man. First, concerning the minister,
if he decay in love to God, his word and religion, if he continue and lie in
his sins, or any one sin, that is a means to deprive him of his office and
calling, and of his gifts (for this is especially directed to the Angel) Ier.
15. end. The Prophet failing in his duty, partly by fear, partly by want of
patience: then the Lord he becomes a Prophet to Jeremy, tells him, that unless
he return to the Lord and repent, the Lord would make him no Prophet: so that
in him he speaks to all Ministers, that if they would have their callings and
gifts to remain, they must not live in any one sin, decay in love to God or
religion, for then their callings and gifts shall be taken from them. As
repentance is necessary for all men, so especially for Ministers, they must
especially renew it, seeing that is the only means to continue their callings
and gifts. The second thing is, concerning a church or people: if any church or
people decay in love to God or his word: or lie in any one sin, they then
procure the Lord to remove his candlestick, to take from them his word, the
Gospel and true religion. Ose. 9. 7. The Prophet is a fool, the man of spirits
is mad: a heavy judgment, whereof comes this? He says, for the sins of the
people the Prophet, is ignorant, and becomes mad. If this be so, then we have
all cause to fear, that our sins have deserved the Gospel should be taken
from us: for in most men there is great decay in love, seeing religion is hated
and contemned of most men. Therefore we must needs fear, and the Lord for this
must needs remove his word, take his Gospel away, if we meet him not with
repentance, for he in justice gives men to believe lies, when as they will not
receive his truth and Gospel, being so long among them. Our duty then is to
seek to prevent this judgment, by hearty and true repentance. The third
point, concerns every private man: so little knowledge especially in ancient
folk, because they loose their love. Heb. 4. 12. First, we are deceived by
sin: secondly, our heart is hardened: thirdly, we call into question religion,
4. we set our selves against religion, and so fall from it, so that, decay in
grace is the first cause of apostasy. Then if we would increase in knowledge
and religion, we must seek to be cleansed from sin, not live and die in any
one sin, neither decay in love, knowledge, or affection to religion.

Some gather hence that a man may fall finally and wholly: for if a whole
church may, much more one man: but the reason is not good, for there is great
difference between one man and a whole church, for a church stands of a mixed
company good and bad, sheep and goats, corn and chafe, wheat and tares. Now
in the Church the wicked may fall and become false professors, as inded these
were, and yet the true believers remain still. Now hence it follows not, that
a private man truly converted may fall.

Now follows the condition of both the threatenings, Except you amend: that
is, I come in judgment to you; and take away the Gospel unless you repent.
Now we must mark that all threatenings in the old testament are with condition.
So in Jonah, Yet forty days and Niniue shall perish, that is, unless they
repent: and so are the threatenings in the new Testament with the same condition.

The will of God, or his good pleasure, is one alone, and no more, what
distinction soever men use. Now his will is partly secret, and partly revealed:
his secret will is of those things which he has not revealed in his word, or
by any work and experience to man: revealed, is of those things he has
revealed in his word, or else taught men by experience or event. Now the
revealed will is with condition always: but the secret will is not, but by it he
wills all things, good things absolutely, and permits evil. And to make
this will subject to condition, were to bind God to his creature, but his
revealed will is with condition, as here in this place.

Object. Why does God give his revealed will with condition? Answ. Because he
reuealeth in mercy so much to man as is necessary to salvation, and no more:
and therefore he reuealeth it in that manner as may be most fit for his
salvation. Now when he propounds his will with condition, that is best, for it
keeps men more in awe, and seems better for their salvation then if it were
with without condition.

Now mark, Christ he repeates this condition in the beginning and end of this
verse, that he will come to them, and he will punish them unless they repent
and amend. The reason is, to show that when men lie in sin, or decay to God
and religion, then it is most necessary to repent: and it is so necessary that
there is no other way to stay God from removing the Gospel, then repentance.
Is this true? then it stands us in hand, every man in his own person, and in
his family, and in the Church publicly, to meet him with repentance: and so
we must think of it, in that Christ doubles the condition.

But this thou have that thou hate the works of the Nicolaitanes. Verse. 6.
In these words is a second reason, to prove that (in the second verse) for
which Christ commended her, that she could not abide them which were evil:
first, because she examined them which receive false teachers: secondly, she
hated their works. To come to the words, Nicolaitanes were a sect of
heretics, who held opinion, first that fornication and adultery were no
sins: secondly, that a man might keep company with idolaters in sacrificing
in the temple: and according to these two opinions, they practiced fornication,
adultery and idolatry. These were so called of one Nicolas, chosen of the
Apostles to be a Deacon, Act. 6. who for a while professed the Gospel, but
after fell away, and became head and chief of this sect of heretics.

But: this note shows that these words have reference to the words of rebuke
before, as if he should say, though this decay of love be thy fault, yet I
commend thee for this one virtue, etc.

Here note our duty, we must not (which is a common sin) be so ready to
blase our brethre^s faults, to speak of them, paint them out in their colors
as we are: but we should as well commend their virtues, and not obscure them:
for Christ, though he found fault, yet finding this virtue commends her, so
should we.

Thou hate. Here note this point: that it is not sufficient for a man to have
good gifts and graces, for he may have them and be no member of Christ, but be
in danger to be cut off from Christ. So was Iehu, he had great zeal. So Judas
had many good gifts no doubt being an Apostle, yet fell from Christ. So the
Ephesians had an hatred of the sins of the Nicolaitans, yet were in danger to
be cut off from Christ. Then we must labor for that which is the maine point
of all, which if we have, we cannot fall, which is, true, hearty, and unfeigned
repentance, daily and renewed repentance, for daily and new sins.

Thou hate the works. Here see our duty, we must labor to know the sins
and heresies of our times, and when we know them, we must hate them; for which
Christ commends them, and and will commend us if we do the like.

The works of the Nicolaitanes: not their persons. So then we must moderate
our hatred, it must be for the sins of men: we must hate their sins, not
their persons, whether they be friends or foes.

Object. But David he hated men's persons, he prayed for the destruction of his
enemies, both soul and body. Answ. He did it being an extraordinary Prophet,
and it was no doubt revealed to him, that his enemies were obstinate, and would
not repent, and so prophecieth by special and extraordinary instinct: for
every imprecation in the scripture is as a prophecy. But we which want that
extraordinary instinct, must keep us within this compass, that we hate only
their sins, and not their persons.

The works of the Nicolaitanes: in whom note the joining of two sins
together, adultery and idolatry; for adultery is the punishment of idolatry,
and idolatry is the punishment of adultrie: the one being carnal fornication,
the other spiritual, and the punishment of adultery: and so in all heretical
churches the Lord he sends these together in judgment, to punish spiritual
adultery with temporal fornication. If a church become idolatrous, then he
gives them over to commit fornication and uncleanness. So among the
Israelites, and in the Romish church falling to idolatry, they abound also
with adultery and fornication.

Thou hate their works. Here we may learn one lesson, for we see many men
seeing such diversity of opinion in matters of religion, they will be of no
church, they will be of no religion. But seeing in the best Churches planted
and guided by the Apostles, even in their days, there were such heresies, as
these Nicolaitans held, no marvel if there be schisms and heresies in our
days: yet these should not make us leave the church, but seek to be of the
true religion, and stand faster to it.

Which I also hate. Christ having now commended her, would have her to go on:
and to encourage her therein, he sets his example for them to follow: thou
hate their works, that is well done, do so still: for so do I. And here we
see Christ requires that we should be of the same mind, judgment, will, and
affection that he is of: and there is good cause why we should, seeing he is
the head, we the members; we are bone of his bone, flesh of his flesh. Now then
we must see that there be a conformity between the head and the members, we
must hate that he hates, love that he loves, and so show that we be true
Christians and members of Christ. Ob. Christ he hates wicked men, why then
suffers he them to live, and destroys the^ not, or take them out of his
Church? Answ. He suffers them for just cause: for he can bring good out of
evil, light out of darkness, he can turn that which is most wicked in it
self to his glory, and the benefit of his Church and children, and the
destruction of his enemies. Then no marvel though he suffer them which he
hates.

Let him which has an ear hear what the Spirit says, etc. In this verse
Christ infers this conclusion upon the former words. It contains in it two
parts: the first, a commandment: the second, a promise. A commandment: Let
him that has ears, etc. A promise, in the end of the verse: For to him will I
give of the tree, etc. and this conclusion serves to stir up the Church of
Ephesus, to consider of the former things Christ taught her.

In the commandment is three things: the first, who be commanded, He which
has an ear: secondly, what is commanded: namely, to hear: thirdly, the thing
which must be heard: What the Spirit says.

The parties commanded to hear are described; they which have an ear: that
is, which can hear. Mat. 13. Christ expounds it, he which has an ear to
hear: that is, an hearing ear: he must hear, and give attention to the word.

By this we see, there be two kinds of hearers: one is a deaf hearer, not
having an hearing ear; as those which bring outwa^d and bodily ears to the
word, but not the ears of the heart: for their hearts are not affected with the
word, they cannot obey that they hear. Secondly, there is an hearing hearer,
who not only hears with the outward ear of the body, but he has his heart
pierced and touched, has new ears made by Gods spirit: this is he which
brings both the ears, his head, and heart to the word, who is affected with
it, applies it to his own heart, and believes the word heard. Such an ear
had David: the Lord God bored his ear, and made him new ears, even ears of
heart: Mine ears have thou opened. And when the Lord spoke to him: having new
ears, he answers the Lord, Lo I come, Esa. 6.
his heart heard the Lord. Such ears had Isaiah, Send me. Such had Lydia, Act.
17.
her ears were opened, and she became attentive to Paul's words: the Lord gave
her new ears.

Seeing Christ makes this distinction of hearers on earth, then grace is not
universal: saving grace is not given to every particular man, that he, if he
will, may hear and have salvation: for there must be some deaf hearers as
well as hearing hearers. Then all cannot hear, nor have eternal life, seeing
all cannot come to faith and repentance by hearing. Nay though God admit all
into the Church, yet he gives not grace to every one to hear, so that he
becomes a profitable hearer, to believe and repent by hearing. Mat. 13. It is
given to you to know, not to others: noting that some only have the spirit of
God to hear, to know his will, and become obedient to the same.

Seeing the commandment is given to hearing hearers, we must labor to become
such, to become good hearers, not to bring only the ears of the body to the
word: but the ears of the heart, not only ears of our body which we have by
creation, but the ears of our souls which we have by regeneration: and never
think our selves well, till we (...) that hearing of the heart, to believe and
obey that we hear, and can affect the same, and be changed and turned by it.
Josiah heard the law, and that not with bodily ears, but with his heart, so
that he turned to the Lord accordingly. David (Psalm. 26.) God bids him
seek him: he having his ears bored anew, makes answer: Lord, I will seek
thy face. Take heed then of deaf ears, when we hear the word daily, not
profiting by it, are not changed in life: for this deaf ear is a fearful
judgment of God, that men hearing, should not hear nor obey, and be bettered
by that they hear. And yet this is our common hearing: for the most part we
come, bring our bodily ear to the word, but our hearts hearken not, they obey
not that we hear: but we remain as blind and ignorant, and as full of sin
as ever, and that after long hearing. Which shows we are indeed deaf hearers.

The second point is the duty commanded: namely, to hear. Hearing in the word
of God, is not only listening with the bodily ears, but to be attentive to
the word, and with attention to add faith, repentance, conversion and
obedience to it: for we if we be good hearers, then we must hear so as we be
changed from the corruption of the old man, and learn to believe in Christ.
Ephesians. 4. 21. and as much as we practice and obey, so much we learn: for we
hear no further then we obey. Then seeing we must so hear the word, we must
suffer our selves to be changed and altered, labor to obey the word, and to
be changed by it. And except we thus hear, the word is not to us the savor of
life, but of death: and as the good hearing is the ready means to salvation,
so the deaf hearing, is to destruction.

The third point which is commanded by God: namely, that which the Spirit
speaks. The thing which we must hear with attention, faith and obedience, is
repentance for our wants and sins: for of that Christ spoke before. Then this
is a most necessary thing, for men to consider their own wants and sins,
and the judgment of God for them: for else Christ would not have added these
words, for the conclusion of the Epistle: who having showed the^ their wants,
and the remedy, and the judgment of God for (...) sins, he adds this
caveat, which shows the necessity of these things.

Then it stands us upon to consider our own personal wants, Use.
our sins, and the wrath of God against them: for, the omitting of this duty
is the bringing of Gods judgment upon us; and the practice of it is the
preventing and turning away of Gods judgments. And as private men of their
personal sins, so must countries and cities in general, remember their
wants, and sins, and do their first works. In the end of the verse, are two
reasons to move them to hear: the first, because the things spoken, are spoken
by the Spirit, that is, the holy Ghost, the third person in Trinity: the
second, because he speaks not to one or two, but to all the Churches in one.
Ob. But how can the Spirit speak these words, seeing Christ speaks them?
Ans. Both may stand: for all outward actions of the persons in Trinity are
common to them all: and seeing this, to teach the Church, is an outward action,
it belongs to all three: and that the Father does, the Son does; and what
the Son does, the holy Ghost and the Father do, in outward actions. Secondly,
Christ after his ascension teaches not bodily, but by his spirit: for Christ
being at his Fathers right hand, sends his comforter to lead us into all
truth. Now seeing the holy Ghost speaks in the Scripture, and he teaches us,
we see how the church of Rome sins, in that they will have a judge which
must speak: for Christ he being in heaven, and the Scriptures being not able
to speak, but are as a dumme judge: therefore the Church, that is, men in the
Church, they must be judge of Scriptures. But we see that the holy Ghost
speaks in the Scriptures, and Christ he is judge alone of them. The Church is
an instrument only, and cannot give sentence of them, but they be of
themselves sufficient to take away any doubt whatsoever.

2 Faith is no part of repentance, but a cause of it: for they be 2 distinct
parts of Christianity: the first, a sermon, believe and repent, where
repentance follows faith, as a fruit of it. Thirdly, obedience is no part of
repentance, but a cause thereof: ergo repentance stands not in these three
properties: neither is all one with regeneration, for this goes before them:
for godly sorrow is the cause of repentance, but regeneration is before godly
sorrow, ergo before repentance too. The second point is, how we must practice
repentance: this stands in two things: first true humiliation: secondly, true
reformation of life. Humiliation stands in confessing our sins, miseries and
wants, and in condemning our selves for them, and in hearty prayer to God for
pardon. Reformation is the changing of our bad actions to good, and if need
require to make satisfaction to men. David (Psalm. 32.) first humbled himself,
secondly he prayed for pardon, and withal promises reformation of life.
Manasses fell from God, but he prayed to God, and humbled himself. 2. Cron. 33.
12. So the prodigal son. And David in all these Psalms of repentance humbles
himself. Psalm. 32. 38. 51. 130. 143. 77. And so must we do, if we truly repent.

Then we see the damnable doctrine of the Papists, which make repentance stand
in contrition, and confession of sins to a Priest, satisfaction: for a man may
do all these, and yet be a reprobate. So did Judas, he had contrition,
confessed his sin, made satisfaction, and yet his repentance was not true
repentance. Another abuse is, that they make contrition a part of repentance,
which is indeed no grace, but may be a cause of grace. Besides, to confess all
sins to a priest, is a gibbet to a man's conscience, and more then God
himself requires. Last of all, to teach that a man must satisfy Gods
justice, is to overthrow the satisfaction of Christ.

The third point is, Who commands this? It is Christ. Now some out of these
words gather, that God gives sufficient grace to every man, to repent if they
will: for (say they) if he command repentance, and yet some cannot, then he but
mockes them, and it is as if we should bid one, bound hand and foot, to rise
and walk. Ans. The Lord gives not that commandment to every particular man,
but to the Church, or to some people which shall become a Church; and then he
does it to gather the elect. Now in the Church there be elect and reprobate:
now this commandment to repent, is given to the elect directly, but to the
reprobate by consequence, as they be among the elect in the church. And this
commandment is given to both, for diverse ends: first to the elect, to show
them what they ought to do, not their ability what they can do: secondly, that
it may be an outward means to bring them to repentance: for when he gives them
this commandment, he is present by his spirit. Phil. 2. 12. he bids them work
out their salvation: but adds, God gives the will and the deed: showing that
God giving that commandment, is present by his spirit, to work in them
ability to perform it. Now the wicked being in the Church have the same
commandment, not directly, neither to those ends, but first to keep them in
outward civil order, secondly to make them without excuse. But whereas they
reason thus: If Christ command all to repent, then all have sufficient grace to
repent: but the first is true, ergo. Ans. The first part is false, unless it be
restrained thus, if he command to this very end, that they should repent and
practice it: for he gives commandment to some, not that they may do it, but
as to Pharaoh, to harden their hearts. For the second part, that he gives
commandment to all; the meaning is, he gives it only to the elect directly,
because he gives them his spirit to obey it, but to the wicked by consequence,
as they be mingled in the Church with his own children.

The fourth point is, who must repent, namely, the Angel and whole Church of
Ephesus. Ob. But they had repented before, how then does he bid the^ repent
again? Ans. There are two degrees of repentance: one is the beginning, the
other is the renewing of it. In the practice of which two, stands the whole
life of a Christian: first, to begin to repent when he is truly called: and
secondly, in continuing and renewing it daily as he often falls. If we have
begun by Gods grace, we must not stay there, but go on and be renewed every day.
There is no man but he shall see in him self daily new sins, slips, and wants,
for which he must have renewed repentance.

Then seeing we daily increase our sins, Use.
we must take heed we lie not or continue in sin, without this repentance: for
we are not so much condemned for sin, as for lying in sin: this, if a man
repent, brings not condemation, but lying in sin does: then above all things
take heed of this, and let us daily labor to know our sins, to be acquainted
with our wants, to humble our selves and pray for pardon. 2. Cor. 5. 20. I
beseech you (says Paul) be reconciled to God: they were reconciled before, for
they were justified and sanctified: but he would have them to labor to be more
assured of their justification, and to have a more full and sensible feeling of
it, and that because their apprehension by reason of their weakness is but sin
all. The like must be had of us.

The fifth point, is why or for what cause, namely, for their decay in love
especially, and other wants: Christ prescribes to the^ repentance, not that
they had none at all. And so Christ preaches to us by his Ministers, to repent
of this decay in love: if we have had love and feel it now decayed, we must
repent: if we have not, then we must labor to have it. And Christ (we see)
gives a large commandment, not for drunkenness, whooredome, theft, or such
gross sins; but even for their decay in love, want of knowledge, faith, fear,
etc.

The common people be of the Pharisees and Iusticiaries mind, that they need no
repentance, seeing they live ciuilly, not tainted with horrible and gross
sins: but we must repent for other sins, as want of knowledge, love, obedience,
etc, otherwise we cannot truly repent. Now if we must repent of al sins, much
more of notorious sins, as of Atheism, which now abounds and spreads abroad:
of pride in apparel, contempt of the Gospel, which increases in all places:
for want of mercy, for cruelty, and for those sins which can sooner remove
the candlestick from us.

Now the remedy is, to do their first works, to return to their first love,
to God, his word, and to man. This is in the last place, seeing this repentance
never perishes or decays, but must be ever renewed.

So then he would have us also to remember what good thoughts, affections, and
actions we have had, to get them again, and never loose them after. We must
remember to do our first works, which the Lord granted to us at our first
calling, them we must labor to do again.

Or else I will come against thee shortly. Verse 5.
Whenas our Savior Christ had rebuked the church of Ephesus for decay in love,
and set down the remedy, first to remember whence she was fallen, secondly to
repent, thirdly to do her first works: in these words he lays down a reason
to move her to use the remedy, especially to repent; if she will not, then he
will come against her shortly. This contains three parts: first a general
threatening or co^minatio^; or else I will come to thee: secondly, a particular
threatening, and will remove thy candlestick: thirdly, a condition of the two
threatenings, except you repent. Because he speaks to all Churches, this
shows our duty in reading or hearing the word, that we apply all that is
spoken, of one man, or to one Church, to our selves: when we see any virtues
commended, we must imitate them, or vices discommended, we must search our
selves whether we be clean of them.

The promise, To him which overcomes, etc. has two parts, first to whom it
is made, namely, to him which overcomes: secondly, what is promised, I will
give him of the tree of life, namely eternal happiness.

The party to whom, is he which prevails against all his spiritual enemies,
the devil, the world, hell, death, and his own flesh.

That we may overcome these, three things are necessary: first a man must be
borne anew, become a new creature in Christ. 1. John. 5. for when a man is
borne anew, he is free from sin, and overcomes all his enemies. Secondly,
he must have true faith, by virtue whereof he must deny himself, and wholly
rely on Christ, 1. John 5. We overcome the world by our faith: for he which
truly believes in Christ, he is partaker of Christ, of his victory over death,
hell, sin and the devil, and has his natural corruption abolished and
weakened. Thirdly, that we stand against all our enemies with faith and good
conscience to the end. And he which has these three, he is able to resist al
these his enemies.

To them which overcome. Ergo it is false, that the promise of the Gospel
belongs to all men without exception, that God offers life and salvation to
all, unless they will reject it: for salvation is promised only unto them
which are borne anew, which have faith in Christ, denying themselves, and they
which stand out against all their enemies, by faith and good conscience to the
end of their days. Is this so? is the promise made only to conquerers? we
must then labor to be conquerers, to overcome all our spiritual enemies: but
to live in sin, to be the servants of Satan, that is, slavery and hell it
self: and for a man to say in truth of heart, that he has overcome all these
his enemies, this is freedom and happiness. And though a man be never so
great among men, yet if he be the vassal of sin an Satan, he is out of the
favor of God, and most miserable. Secondly, the thing promised, is life
eternal, which is set out by two circumstances: first, by the cause of it: I
will give: secondly, what, to eat of the tree of life. In which words is an
opposition between Adam and Christ: for Adam by his sin deprived himself of
the tree of life, but Christ has set open the tree of life, that we may have
free access to it. Adam he lost an earthly paradise, Christ has prepared an
heavenly paradise. The tree of life stood in the midst of the garden, whereof
Adam did eat. It was called the tree of life, first, because it was a
sacrament, that is, a sign and pledge to him of eternal life, if he had
continued in his estate. Secondly, because this tree had a virtue in it from
God, to preserve Adam for ever from death and old age, and to make him
continually to live, if he stood. This tree of life was a true figure of Christ
the Redeemer and Savior: for as that tree had virtue in it from God to
preserve Adams life, so that he should have lived for ever, and be kept from
old age: so Christ Jesus the Mediator and Redeemer, he lives, not only as he
is God, but as he is man, and not for himself alone, but to convey quickening
virtue to all which believe in him, and are partakers of his merits by a true
faith.

To eat of the tree. To eat signifies sometime to believe, as Ioh. 6. 50.
but it cannot be so here, seeing we cannot in heaven believe in Christ: but to
eat of that tree, is to have immediate fellowship and communion in heaven with
Christ for ever. For Christ shall be to us a tree of eternal life for ever,
yea all in all to every one of us. In this first point of the promise, note two
things: the first, wherein consists eternal life, namely, in immediate
fellowship and communion with Christ in heaven for ever: and this is our true
felicity, to eat of the tree of life, to partake with Christ in heaven, who
shall be to his all in all, that is, all happiness that heart can wish.
Therefore it stands not in outward means, as meat drink, apparel, sleep,
respiration, recreation, etc. but in the eating of the tree of life, that is,
in the immediate fellowship with Christ Jesus for ever.

Secondly, the place of this tree is, the midst of paradise: where Christ
puts a difference between the tree of life in the earthly paradise, and this
in the heavenly paradise. He says in paradise, that is, in the third or
highest heaven, a place of joy and pleasure, where the Lord especially shows
his glory, and where he provides happiness for his children. There are
indeed three heavens: one where we live and breath, and where the clouds be:
the second, where the stars be: the third is the place where the Lord shows
his presence, and where he will have his children be. Of this Paul speaks,
when he was rapt up to the third heaven, 2. Cor. 12. It is called Paradise,
because it is a place of pleasure, for so the word signifies. Of God: that is,
most excellent, and most infinite. For so Genesis 30. 8. Rahell wrestled with Leah
with wrestlings of God, that is, excellent or great wrestlings. So in the
Psalms, to show how huge and high the hills were, David calls them the
hills of God, the mountains of God, that is, excellent or huge mountains. So
here he calls it the paradise of God, to show, it is a place most excellent,
full of pleasure and joy. This place is set out at large, Reu. 22.

Then seeing this is so excellent a place, we should labor above all things to
come thither, to weane our minds from earthly paradise, which is but a prison,
and lift our heads up to heaven, set our hearts and minds on things above.
Phil. 3. Verse. 8.

And to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, write. From this eighth verse to
the twelfth, is the second Epistle or letter, to another Church of Asia,
namely, to the Church of Smyrna. And before this second Epistle, is a second
particular commandment to John for the writing of it, in these words, And to
the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, write: which particular commandment is
prefixed before the Epistle, to assure them and every Church, that S. John had
sufficient calling to write the same, and that he did it not of himself. And
so should all they which come to speak or write the word of God, have a
sufficient calling, that so the Church may receive their doctrine, and without
doubt believe the same as the true word of God. So the Ministers of the Gospel
must have their calling: for if the Apostles of Christ, which were of more
excellent gifts had it, then, such which be but ordinary men. This
commandment and the meaning of it, is in the first verse of this Chapter.

After the particular commandment is the Epistle it self, standing of three
parts: first, a Preface: secondly, a Proposition: thirdly, a Conclusion. The
preface or entrance is in the eighth verse, and contains a preparation to the
matter of the Epistle to be delivered. In the preface he shows in whose name
it is to be delivered: namely, in Christ's: He which is, and was, which is the
first and last. This he does for two causes: first, to stir the Church of
Smyrna to a religious care, and receiving of the same as the pure word of God:
secondly, because no commandment concerning religion and Gods service, is to
be propounded in the name of any creature, but only in the name of God and
Christ. Now this Epistle being concerning religion and Gods worship, he
propounds it in Christ his name alone. And Christ in this preface is
described by two notable arguments: first, that he is first and last: secondly,
that he was dead but is alive: but these words are expounded in the first
Chapter, where he says, he is first and last, that is, he is everlasting God,
which has neither beginning nor end, before all creatures and after all. He was
dead but now lives, that is, being God, took upon him our nature, became
subject to death, and rose to give everlasting life to us. In which words note
two points of doctrine: first, Dictrine 1.
that Christ is a person consisting of two natures: namely, his Godhead and
manhood: for as he is said to be first and last, he must be God: and as he was
dead but now is alive, he is man: and as the body and soul make one man, so
the Godhead and manhood of Christ, concur to make one Christ. The second
point of doctrine is a comfort, or the foundation of all joy and comfort to the
Church of God: first, that he is God, ergo he is able: secondly, he is man,
ergo he is willing to help, to deliver his Church from all miseries, or else
ease them: for he is first and last, ergo true God, ergo able to help:
Secondly, he was dead but lives, therefore willing (seeing he came to take our
nature upon him) to be subject to death, and to rise again to give to us
eternal life. So then, this is the scope and end of these words, to comfort
the Church in misery: and hence is the very fountain of all comfort in this
life. If the Lord lay any cross on thee, as persecution, tribulation, misery
or calamity, then consider these two things: Christ is God able to help, he
is man willing to deliver thee. And this may be a proppe to stay and hold us
up, that we sink not in persecutions or crosses.

I know thy works. After the Preface, follows the Epistle it self,
containing the matter and contents to be delivered to the Church of Smyrna, in
the ninth and tenth verses. The Epistle has two parts: first, a commendation
of the Church: secondly, counsel for her concerning time to come. The
commendation is in the ninth verse, I know thy works. In these words as there
is a commendation of her, there is also a comfort: for he does not only
commend her, but comfort her being in misery. I know thy works. We heard
these words before expounded: I know, that is, I see thy works, ways,
dealing, the course and tenor of thy life, I know and approve of the same, it
likes and pleases me well.

In that Christ says, he knows her works, here is a notable property of
Christ, that he sees all Churches, he beholds all men's actions, he sees
their words, works, affections and actions. As he spoke to the Church of
Ephesus before, so now to the Church of Smyrna, to show them, that he is
always present in the midst of the Church, he sees and beholds all her
dealings. And this consideration is most necessary, and the ground of all
grace and religion, when a man is persuaded that Christ sees his heart,
hears every word, beholds all his actions, and marketh all his words. David
139. Psalm: The Lord beholds all my secrets, there is not a word in my
tongue, but he knows it. So should we persuade our selves: and this would make
us make conscience of all our words, our thoughts, our actions, of all we do or
say; nay, where this is wanting, there is no true grace, no faith, no
conscience: for if a man were persuaded that Christ sees his works, beholds
and marks them, he durst not for his life sin as he does.

And thy tribulation. Here he ioynes works and tribulation together, where we
may gather, that tribulation must needs go with works, and with the grace of
God: where grace is, there must be tribulations: where God gives grace, he
adds tribulation, first to humble them, secondly to try them, thirdly to
prevent other sins which they should else commit.

I know thy tribulation. This then is added to comfort the Church: as if he
should say, It is true, thou art in tribulation, but it comes not by chance,
but from God my father: I know it, I see and behold it, and have care of it to
do thee good, Psalm. 113. This knowledge is joined with his providence over his.
This I say is spoken to comfort us: if we be in tribulation, we must then
consider whence it comes, namely, from God, he knows, and sees, and cares
for it: this will ease us of much grief, and make us patient. So we having had
long peace, must look for tribulation; which when it comes, the only way to
arm us with patience, is to consider that God both sees it and knows it,
and is and will be a stay and prop to uphold us, that we faint not in misery.
After he sets out two sorts or parts of tribulation: first, poverty:
secondly, reproach. The first is poverty, namely, want of temporal blessings*
necessary to maintain this present life.

Now seeing that famous Church was so afflicted with poverty: Use.
we learn, that true Religion will not free a man from affliction and from
poverty: then let no man think because he believes in Christ, he shall be
rich. Object. But God promises the favors and blessings of this and the other
life to his servants. Ans. He promises indeed, but the blessings concerning
the kingdom of heaven without exception, and temporal blessings with
condition, if they be for our good and his glory, else he will send want and
poverty, even to his dearest servants.

I know thy poverty: This is added to comfort her, for that her estate in
earthly things was weak; yet Christ knows it, he cares and prouides for her,
and will if it be for her good, free her or else give her patience.

Object. But how can her works and poverty stand together, seeing she could
not give to the poor that wanted? Answ. All good works stand not in giving
large alms to the poor, but the works of our calling done in faith and good
conscience, they be good works, though the other have their place, if they be
done as they should: for though works in our calling be most mean, yet it is a
good work to God. It is not the matter of the work, but the manner of doing it
makes a good work, namely, if it proceed from an honest heart, and be done to
Gods glory.

Yet thou art rich. Here Christ intends to comfort her, that though she wanted
and was in poverty, yet she was rich in Christ, she had riches in God, Luke 12.
21. And this in two respects, first when we are reconciled to God in Christ,
and have assurance of the pardon of our sins in him. 2. Cor. 8. 9. Secondly,
when we have grace from God to do good works. 1. Tim. 6. 18. That we may be
rich in good works, we must lay up a good foundation in heaven, for Gods
graces they be true riches.

The poor man, Use.
to whom God denies riches in this world, he seeing his estate, must labor to
have riches in heaven, which are true riches indeed. This is to be reconciled
to God in Christ, to have Gods graces, whereby he can do the works of his
calling, in faith and a good conscience. Again, the men of this world, if they
would be truly rich, they must labor to be reconciled to God in Christ: but
they content themselves with their own riches, and never seek for true riches
indeed, but are choked with the desire of temporal riches. But all men labor
to get earthly riches, honor and temporal blessings, and esteem not to be
rich in God; which is mere madness.

The second part of her tribulation, is her reproach, And thy blasphemy, that
is, the slander, reuilings and repoches of the Church of Smyrna. This was not
only in respect of God, but of their profession and religion: for they did
revile and slander them for their profession.

Where we see, 2. King. 24.
that they which serve God, they must look for slanders, 1. Cor. 4.
reuiling, reprochings. He which desires to live well, to worship and serve
God, he must look for these: nay if he have them not, he must suspect himself,
for Christ calls them cursed whom all men speak well of: which though it be
a great grief, yet Christ comforts them, he knows it, sees it, and will in
due time remedy it: he sees every slander, defamation and reproach; which
should make us patient to endure these blasphemies.

The persons which blasphemed her, They which say they be Jews, but be not:
but are the synagogue of Satan. That is, as in other cities of Asia and Europe,
there were assemblies of Jews, that had their abode and synagogues, so in
Smyrna had they assemblies and a synagogue, persuading themselves they had a
true church, but that the other had not, and therefore slandered them for their
religion, and their Christ, whom these professed, they denied. They were Jews
by birth, coming of the tribe of Judah, yet not true Jews in profession and
worship of God, but a synagogue of Satan. And so they which reproach religion,
which revile the worshippers of God, they be Jews by birth, but they are not
Jews indeed, but enemies to God, to religion, and to the^ which profess it.
Now concerning these, let us examine first what they were in their own opinion:
secondly in Christ's opinion.

Which say they be Jews. They coming of the tribe of Judah, they thought they
were true worshippers of God, as Abraham, Isac, and Jacob were: but Christ he
says, they be the synagogue of Satan. And as the Jews (enemies to God and
religion) seem to themselves to be true professors: so all the wicked bless
them selves in their sins, think all is well they do, as we may see Psalm.
10. they overthrow the truth of God by damnable heresies, yet persuade
themselves they hold the truth, for which they will die: yea witches, men and
women, will say they abhor the devil, they will not have any thing to do with
him: but that by good Angels, and some special gift of God, they excel other
men, and are able to work wonders. And so the carnal Protestant, he sins and
says God is merciful, and so makes Christ his packe-horse. But we must learn
by their example to suspect our selves, to cast down our pride and conceit of
our selves, and not think too highly of our own goodness, but to suspect our
selves for many sins. We may not say we are Jews when we are not.

The second point is, Christ's judgment of them, he says they seemed to be
Jews, but were not, but indeed the synagogue of Satan, that is, a company and
assembly of men which seemed to serve God, but worshipped the devil.

Object. But they were Gods chosen people, whom he chose out of all nations to
serve him: how then could they be the synagogue of Satan? Answ. There is a
double election: first special and particular, whereby God in his eternal
counsel chooses one to salvation: the second is more general, whereby he
admits men into the outward Church, to be partakers of the outward signs and
privileges of the covenant, as the sacraments, etc. The Jews they had the
general calling, but not the particular election, Romans 9. and so might fall
from the Church of God to be a synagogue of Satan: for having only the general
election, they might renounce the word and sacraments, but the particular
election is immutable. Now let us see when they became thus the synagogue of
Satan: it was not at that time when they put Christ to death: for though many
of the^ did it of knowledge, yet very many of ignorance. And after that Christ
was ascended, Peter preaching to them, tells them, that the promise belonged to
them, and to their children. It was not then at this time, but when the
Apostles had labored by many arguments, to prove that Christ was the Messiah,
and they would not believe, still remaining in their wickedness, then they
became of the church of God a synagoue of Satan: for when they would not hear
Paul, but threatened and rejected him, then he left them, and preached to the
Gentiles, and then the Jews became of a Church no Church: for the holding of
an heresy makes a church to become no Church: but when a Church holds error
in principal points of religion, and is openly convicted by public
authority and judgment, and still remains so, then it cease to be a Church,
and not before, though it be reproved by a private man, for that is not
sufficient. So the Church of the Galatians holding justification by works, yet
ceased not to be a Church till it was convicted publicly by authority
Apostolical. And by this we see what we may judge of the Papists, Libertines,
Family of love, etc. which being convicted by public judgment of the Church
of God, are no true Churches: for they hold such heresies, as be condemned in
the word, and have bin convicted long agone of them. I come to the cause why
they fell, namely, their unbelief. Romans 11. Ob. But they hold the Scriptures,
and defend Moses, and the law. Answ. Though they hold the letter, yet they
corrupt the sense, and where any thing is spoken of Christ, they seek to
overthrow it, and so taking away the subject and matter of the Scripture which
is Christ, they overthrow all: for he which worshippeth God not in, but out of
Christ, he worshippeth not God but an Idol. So the Papists hold the Scriptures
in word, but in deed deny them, seeing they take away Christ, in spoiling him
of his merit and intercession: for take away his offices, and then you shall
have an half Christ. This their example should be ever in our eyes, seeing
these Jews, Gods own chosen people, who^ he chose out of the whole world to
serve him, they fell for want of faith, and became the synagogue of Satan, to
worship the devil; then we must take heed we be not proud, because we have the
word and Sacraments, and seem to be the people of God: but suspect our selves,
take heed we maintain faith in a good conscience, and show it in repentance
and obedience, lest we be cut off as they were.

Fear none of those things which thou must suffer. Verse. 10.
In this tenth verse is another part of the proposition. But seeing Christ
comfort the Church of Smyrna, and gives her counsel, and rebukes her not,
as the Church of Ephesus, hence some gather, that a man may fulfill the whole
law, and live without sin: but they be deceived: for Christ abstaineth here
to rebuke the church, not because there was no just cause of reprehension in
her: but because he saw that the Church did truly believe and repent, and
decayed not in love, as the church of Ephesus had done. Secondly, he does it,
because God accepts of the will and endeavor of them which believe and
repent, as of the deed: he takes their labor and endeavor to obey him, as
perfect obedience at their hands. And for these two causes, Christ he
commends and comfort her, gives her counsel, and rebukes her not; not
that she wanted just cause of rebuke.

Seeing that this Church was so accepted of Christ, that he would not rebuke
her, but commends and counsels her, we see it is good and necessary for
Gods Church to be in affliction sometime: for this church of Smyrna was in
affliction, and so was kept from many sins, which otherwise she would have
fallen into. So for all other churches and children of God, it is necessary to
be in affliction sometimes.

But fear not. Here is Christ's counsel, which has three parts: first, a
precept: Fear not, etc. secondly, a Prophecy, Behold: thirdly, a precept
again: Be thou faithful. The first precept is: Fear not. This commandment
may seem to be contrary to other places of Scripture, as when he bids us
work out our salvation with fear and trembling; and, where Paul bids us
not be high minded, but fear. Answ. There be three kinds of fear: the first,
natural: the second, of grace: the third, of unbelief. The first, which is in
all men by nature, is a declining or avoiding of death: seeing al things by
nature seek to preserve themselves: and this natural fear was in Christ, who
feared death, as it was the separation of the soul and body, though it was no
sin in him, but an infirmity. Secondly, fear is from grace. Mal. 1. says
the Lord: If I be your Father, where is my fear? Which is a reverence to God
in regard of his mercy and judgment; and this is no sin but a virtue. The
third, is from unbelief, when men for fear of persecution or other hurt,
forsake God and his religion; more fearing the persons of men, then the
majesty of God. Now Christ speaks not of the two first, but of the last
only: namely, a distrustful fear, when for fear of persecution or affliction,
we forsake God and religion; that fear which draws men from God to death and
damnation, if they repent not. Fear not. Here Christ shows the sin of
every man by nature: namely, to fear man more then God, to be more afraid of
the face and countenance of men, then of the power and might of the everliving
God: which is not only in sinners, but in the regenerate in some part, who do
not consider of God as he is indeed, a mighty Judge taking vengeance on
sinners.

In this Christ shows the means to arm our selves against all such fear of
perils, persecution, or danger: namely, Christian fortitude and courage: which
is a gift of God proceeding from true faith, whereby we are made able to lay
aside all fear of danger, and to undergo all persecutions, afflictions and
dangers for the maintaining of faith and a good conscience. This Christ often
prescribes, and armeth his children with this christian fortitude, as the
Prophets and Apostles in the old and new Testament, and now every child of God
and every Church. And it were to be wished, that Ministers now in our days
could say to all Gods children, Fear not* but alas now they must change their
voice, and cry with the Prophet, Howl and lament in sack cloth and ashes, for
your destruction is at hand. And surely there is cause why, if one look and
view the body of our people: as Osea says, there is no knowledge of God in
the land, every man seeks to follow his own ways, none cleaves to the
Lord, seeks to know and obey him. Besides, they are altogether carnal,
fleshly, dead and drowned with the cares of this life, none affecting things
belonging to eternal life: but all men's hearts are possessed with pleasures,
profits and preferments of this world. Nay all men in general lie in a dead
sleep, there is no sense or feeling in them: a spiritual slumber has wrapped
all men's hearts in security and ignorance, never thinking or considering of
the judgment to come, never dreaming of the evil day, though God preach daily
by his judgment to them. Again, the contempt of the word and Gospel, the
profanation of the Sabbath, want of mercy and love, the cruelty which
abounds in all men, oppression, whoredoms, fornications, these be the sins
of the people now in our days rife in every place; these are common sins,
calling for vengeance, which will come undoubtedly, unless we repent: so that
Christ cannot speak to us, as to this Church, but in a contrary voice, But
though this be the common estate of most men, yet Christ he has a remnant, who
lament and mourn for the sins of the land, who are grieved with the
abominations of the world: and these need not fear, but they must take to
them Christian fortitude and courage, lay aside al fear of danger, and of all that man can do, and boldly undergo all crosses and afflictions, even to death,
to maintain faith and a good conscience to the end. That they may do this, let
them first consider, that they which fear distrustfully, must have a miserable
portion, in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Reu. 21. 8.
therefore for fear of this reward, let us go on fearing nothing.

2 They must consider Gods presence: he is by them, ready to protect and
defend them, his Angels pitch their tents about them, Psalm. 34. 12. 2. King.
6. Elishahs servant seeing in Dothan an huge army, which beset him and his
master, he says, Be not afraid, for they which be with us, be more then
these against us. He was fully persuaded of Gods presence and protection, and
that Gods Angels would defend and guard him: so should al men in danger, they
must believe and persuade themselves God is present, he has his Angels
pitching their tents to defend and protect his children.

3 Gods children must consider in peril, that it is an honorable thing to
suffer for Christ's sake, and it is a happy thing to suffer for the Gospel of
Christ. Paul he accounted it his chief honor, nay he rejoiced in nothing so
much as in his sufferings for Christ's sake. Then if suffering the cross for
Christ's sake be such an honorable thing, we must lay aside all fear, and by
Gods grace arm our selves with Christian fortitude and courage, to undergo all
crosses and afflictions whatsoever. But those which are not touched with the
present day of misery, nor have not this perfect fortitude, they must lament
and howl, lest the evil day take them unprovided.

The next part of Christ's counsel is, a prediction or prophecy of the
afflictions which this Church must suffer. But before he propounds the
afflictions, he sets a word of attention: Behold. By which he teaches them,
and in them, us: that it is our duty often to think and consider of the time
of affliction before hand, to meditate of Gods judgments and corrections
before they come, lest we perish in them. For Christ (Luke 19.) he came to
Jerusalem, and wept over it, and foretold the judgments to come: and the cause
was, because she knew not the day of her visitation: because she would not
think of her judgment and affliction to come, therefore Christ forotels and
shows her final destruction. Let us take heed, lest it fall out with us as it
did with them.

It shall come to pass. By this Christ shows he is true God. For he which can
foretell all future things in particular, though they be contingent, he is God,
for that is proper to God: but Christ foretells their particular affliction to
come, ergo he is God.

Ob. But the Physician can foretell the death of his patient, the Astronomer
the eclipse of the Moon to come. Answ. They do so, but by means: the
Physician foretells by the causes and signs he sees in the party, by which
death is in ^ort present: so the Astronomer by the natural course of the
heavens, can foretell an eclipse by the courses and signs of it, in which the
eclipse is present: but without these signs and causes they cannot simply: but
Christ without any sign or cause simply foretells this affliction in
particular, to come to the Church of Smyrna.

Christ describes the affliction, first by the cause, namely the devil:
secondly, the persons, some of you: thirdly, the kind, imprisonment: fourthly,
the end, to try you: fifthly, the time, ten days. For the first, the cause,
it is the devil. Ob. But how can he afflict them, seeing he is a spirit and
deals not with the bodies of men? Ans. He is indeed a spirit, and rules in
the air, he is the god of this world, he rules in the hearts of wicked men,
he rules, guides, and governs in them, directs their thoughts, wills,
affections, so as he stirs them up, moves and caries them to persecute the
children of God, to cast them in prison. Now in that the devil is the author
of persecution, we see of what spirit those be which persecute the Church,
namely, men inspired by the devil, moved and ruled by him, notorious wicked
wretches, which have Satan for their king and ruler. 1. Tim. 2.
For this cause Paul says, he was the chief of sinners, seeing he was carried
by him to persecute the church of God. Let then all men take heed of this: for
he which persecutes the Church for religion, in word or action, he in that
action is the vassal of Satan, led and ruled by the devil: and the devil in
that action uses him as his instrument: Satan is the chief and principal
agent, he is his slave to do his will, and is as a soldier under his band.
Again, learn we to take pity on all such persons, seeing they be possessed
by the devil, led and moved by him, yea even to pray for our persecutors.
Furthermore, the weapons we must have to defend our selves in persecution, are
not temporal but spiritual: seeing our enemy is a spirit, we must use
invocation and prayer, fasting and humbling our selves, by which we show our
faith, repentance and obedience to God. By this weapon of prayer, Elias is
called the chariot and horsemen of Israel: this is a most excellent weapon. And
if the Lord should send a foreign enemy among us, then is indeed the soldier
to be used, but our principal weapon must be prayer, that must be our chariot
and horsemen: the devil fears not the sword or gun, but this spiritual
weapon will overthrow him. I proceed to the second point, their affliction is
described by the persons, some of you, not all, but some of them: thirdly, by
the kind of affliction, imprisonment, he shall not kill or destroy you, but
imprison you: and some of you, not all of you. Fourthly, the end, to try you,
that your hope, faith, patience, and other graces, may be made known to your
selves and other.

In all these we note, that Gods providence is the first and general cause
above all causes, ouerruling, ordering, and disposing them. In this providence
he uses two instruments* good, as good Angels and regenerate men; and he
works in and by these in all things; and in these there is a good order, no
disorder. The second kind of instruments be bad, as wicked Angels, devils and
wicked men, which though they be wicked in themselves, yet God can use them
well: and in these is nothing but disorder, and the Lord he works by them but
not in them, and permits their disorder and sins, to show by them his justice
and power. These wicked instruments (in themselves) the Lord uses well and to
good ends: for his providence is above them, it restraines them, keeps in
their malice, bridles them that they cannot show their malice to the full, but
be bridled and kept short, being ouermastred by his providence. So here the
devil he afflicts them, yet not all, but some of them, and he destroys not,
but only imprisoneth them; and not always, but for a short time.

The second action of Gods providence, using wicked instruments, is, that the
Lord turns all to the good of his children. The devil in afflicting them
purposes their destruction, but the Lord turns it to their good, to prove
them, and try the virtues and graces of their hearts, as their faith, hope,
love, patience, etc. so that the Lord does not only restrain their malice,
but turns all things to the good of his people. Use. 1.
Now we should often think of this providence of God, and for ever bless his
name for the same, seeing he ouerrules the wicked instruments, he restraines
their malice, he uses them for the good of his children: and considering of
this, it should make us to renounce our selves, to commit our selves to his
protection, make his providence our sure defense and safeguard in all our
temptations.

And seeing the end of their affliction is to try them, Use 2.
we must al first labor to have the power of godliness, not only in outward
show and formal profession, but to feel the power of it truly in our hearts:
for the Lord will try us as gold in the fire, the Lord will cast us into the
fire of affliction, to prove us whether we be pure gold, whether we have pure
faith, unfeigned repentance, and a good conscience or not: these will abide the
fire and not burn, when formal show of godliness will.

2. Seeing afflictions are to try us, we must rejoice, and think tribulation
a great blessing. I am. 1. Think it exceeding joy to fall into temptations:
for by affliction our graces are made manifest to our selves and to the world.
The fifth circumstance is the time, for ten days. Some understand by this a
long time, as Genesis 31. 41 Laban changed Jacobs wages ten times, that is, many
times: but it is not so here, for Christ speaks that to comfort them: now what
comfort were this, to be long in affliction? Others think that by ten days,
ten years is meant, and that because it is often in scripture so used, seeing
there is a week of years as well as of days: but that cannot be proved, that
they were in persecution so long and no longer. Then, I take it, by ten days
is meant a very short time, a little space of time, and this is most suitable to
all the circumstances of the text, and the purpose of Christ, which was to
comfort the Church: as if he had said, Think not thy affliction to be long,
for it is but for ten days, a short time.

In which words note two things: first, that the afflictions of Gods Church are
for a certain time, a time decreed and set down by God, that cannot be
shortened or made longer. So the Lord told Abraham, that the Israelites should
be in captivity and affliction 430. years, and so it came to pass, for they
were in affliction, especially in the land of Egypt 430. years: but so soon
as that time was expired, the same night were they delivered. So Daniel for the
space of threescore and ten years captivity, prayed not to the Lord for
deliverance, for he knew the time was certain and could not be changed, and
therefore was patient: but when that time drew to an end, then he prayed for
deliverance, and the Lord heard his prayer. This should teach us in affliction
to be patient, and to seek to arm our selves with patience: seeing the time
of our affliction is certain, and cannot be made shorter or longer, we cannot
be delivered till the whole time be expired. Secondly, note that the
afflictions of Gods Church and children be but for ten days, a very short
space of time, in respect of eternal life: and this is a notable comfort to
any in the cross and persecution, seeing the Lord will put an end to it, it
shall be but for ten days, a short time, as Paul teaches, 2. Cor. 4. 17. But
yet there is more to be noted in these words, every word containing an argument
of comfort for the Church: for first the author of afflictions is the devil,
he causes them: now fear not him, for he is Gods enemy, therefore thou being
his enemy, have God for thy friend, and then what can he do to thee to hurt
thee: for they which have him their enemy, their cause is good.

Secondly, he shall not afflict all the whole Church, but some of you, a few of
them: the Lord restraines his malice, he cannot do his will. Thirdly, he cannot
kill or destroy them, but only afflict their bodies. Fourthly, he shall not do
that to their destruction, as he would, but the Lord turns it to try them for
their good. So this affliction it shall not last always, but for ten days, a
very short time, why then should you fear? Let not fear overcome your hearts,
be not discouraged, but take Christ's fortitude and courage, lay aside all
fear, and undergo manfully al danger, to keep faith and a good conscience to
the end.

The third part of Christ's counsel is another precept, which contains a most
blessed and heavenly counsel: be thou faithful.

The children of God ought to be faithful, in regard of God, and that
fidelity they owe to him, first, by promise made to him in baptism; for in
that Sacrament God promises to his child, Christ with all his benefits, and
the child of God promises and makes this stipulation to God, that he will
renounce himself, and in death and life rely only on Christ. Now when a man
keeps this promise made in baptism, and performs this condition to God and
stipulation, then he is faithful to God; and when he breaks it, then he is
unfaithful. 1. Pet. 3. 21. Secondly, the Lord he gives his servants many
graces, as faith, hope, love, repentance, etc. these he commits to man, to
see how he will use or abuse them. 1. Tim. 6. 20. we must labor to keep them,
to use them well: and this if we do to Gods glory and to our own good, then
we be faithful to God, else not: as if a man commit a thing to be kept by
another, if he loose it, or keep it not well, he is not faithful to him.

Be faithful. As if he had said: Thou have made a promise in baptism, to
keep faith and a good conscience: and thou have had many graces, promising to
use them well, to keep them in life and death, and be faithful in
persecutions and afflictions: keep faith and a good conscience, and then thou
artfaithfull. Against this duty three sorts of men offend: first, they which
though they have made a covenant in baptism to serve the Lord, to keep faith
and a good conscience, yet live in ignorance and security, never seeking to
know the Lord, to understand his will, or to obey him: yet these will brag of
their good meanings, though they have no care at all to please God, no care to
keep their covenant made with God, and their stipulation in baptism to him.
Secondly, they which for a good while have had faith and a good conscience, and
have come to serve the Lord, yet after long time fall away, being entangled
with the world, with the profits and sins thereof, and so leave all and come
to break faith and a good conscience: both these are unfaithful servants, and
their reward (if the Lord dealt in justice with them) is destruction: and yet
all men in a manner be of these two sorts, they either live in ignorance, or
fall away after a long time. The third sort are they which profess a long
time, live in faith and good conscience, and be earnest professors, yet in time
of trial and persecution, they will leave all profession of religion to save
themselves. Then seeing all these offend, we must labor to know God, to obey
him, to keep his graces bestowed on us to the end, to live and die in his
service, and to lose our life rather then any one grace which God bestows
upon us.

And I will give thee the crown of life. Here is a reason to move the^ to go on
in persecution, to be faithful to the end. Hence the Papists gather, that a man
may merit heaven, seeing there is promised a crown of life. Ans. It is called
a crown of life by resemblance: for as men in a race, first run, and after
they obtain the crown at the end of their race: so men must first in this
world live godly, run and finish their course, after that, they have their
crown in heaven. I answer again; this reward is not of the work, but the
promise is made to the workers, not to the martyredome, but to the martyr,
which has by suffering death showed his faith in Christ: it is not made to the
passion or suffering, but to the person suffering, and not for his suffering,
but to him as he is in Christ, and declared to be so by his suffering death. So
then, that promise is not made to the work, but to the worker, and not for his
work, but for the worthiness of Christ, in whom he is a true member of the
Church.

The use then is, Use.
that if we keep this promise in Baptism, made before God, his Angels, and
the Church, we shall have the reward of all, which is the crown of life in the
kingdom of heaven, promised to such as be faithful to the end.

Let him which has an ear, Verse 11.
hear. In these words are the conclusion, or last part of the Epistle. Now in
these three verses for the most part is a rehearsal of those things which
Christ delivered before, in this and in the former Chapter.

Now seeing Christ the head and Doctor of his Church is most perfect in his
doctrines, both for matter and manner of delivering the same, seeing he
repeateth again and again the same things, and seeing Peter put them often in
mind of their common salvation, hence we note, that Ministers may often repeat
the same doctrine: not only the same matter, but in the same manner and words.
So did Christ the head Doctor of the Church, so may we or any preacher preach
the same sermon again in manner and matter, not for to ease our selves, but for
the good and benefit of the Church: as Christ seven times repeateth the same
doctrine to the good of the Church, and common benefit of all. The hearers
then if they find the Preacher shall deliver the same doctrine again, or
often, they must not find fault, for then they might as well find fault with
Christ himself, who not once or twice, but often repeated the same words.

In this eleventh verse is a conclusion of the Ep^stle to the Church of Smyrna,
and it has two parts: first, a commandment: secondly, a promise. In the
commandment, first what is commanded: secondly, to who^. The duty commanded,
is to hear. There are two kinds of hearing good, and bad. Here he requires
good hearing, with faith and obedience, not naked and bare outward hearing.
Then we see the true knowledge of the Gospel stands in hearing with faith
and obedience: for we know no more then we believe and obey: if we believe and
obey nothing, we hear and know nothing with sound hearing to salvation. The
second thing is, to whom the commandment is given, to them which have ears
to hear: for some are deaf, some be lively and hearing hearers. They are
deaf, which hear only with outward and bodily ears, not affected in heart,
nor changed in life by the word: they are good hearing hearers, which are
touched and affected by the word, changed and renewed in life by the same,
having not only outward ears of the head, but inward, bored by Gods spirit in
the heart.

Hence we learn two things: Use.
first, that election is not general and universal of every particular man:
for there is, was, and shall be ever some deaf hearers. Secondly, we learn
our duty, that we must not only hear the word, and lend our outward ears,
but withal join faith, obedience, and conversion in life, so hear that we be
changed in life, and turned to God, else our hearing is fruitless, nay to
damnation. The third thing is, what they must hear: What the Spirit says:
namely, that which is before in the former words delivered by Christ. The
principal things be these: first, that the Lord sees and regards the
tribulations and afflictions of his Church: secondly, that Gods Church and
people being to suffer the cross and afflictions, must forethinke of it, and
consider of it before it come; and withal must arm themselves with Christian
courage and fortitude, not to fear too much. Thirdly, they must be faithful
to God in regard of their promise and covenant in baptism, in keeping faith
and good conscience, and in defense of true religion even to death. So that
they must hear these three: the first, concerning Gods providence, seeing and
regarding his church: the second, concerning Christian fortitude* and courage
in afflictions: the third, our faithfulness and constancy in defense of faith
and a good conscience, maintaining of true religion to the end. These three are
the things they should hear and consider: and so we must consider and learn
the same. To excite them and us to these three things, to hear and know the
three duties, he gives two reasons: first, because the Spirit speaks: the
second is, the persons to whom he spoke, not to one, but all Churches, directly
to them of Smyrna, and in them to all churches, to all of us, no man is
excepted but must hear him.

The second part of the conclusion is a promise: He which euercometh shall not
be hurt. That we may ouercom, two things are required: first, to renounce and
go out of our selves: secondly, to cast all our hope, trust and affiance in
Christ: which when we do, then we have saving faith, and this ouercometh all
our enemies. The second thing is, to keep faith and a good conscience, to
defend true religion, to the end of our days, against all enemies.

And shall not be hurt of the second death: that is, eternal death: for the
first death is, when the body and soul are separated in this life: the
second, when both body and soul are separated from God for ever. In which
separation (Reu. 21.) consists the destruction of a man, even the suffering
of the fire of the eternal lake. It is then as if he said: though he shall
suffer the first death, yet he shall not be hurt of the second, he shall escape
that fire and lake for ever. This is a most comfortable and happy promise to
escape the lake of hell. Here note, first to whom this promise is made, to them
which overcome, to them which renounce themselves, put their trust and affiance
only in Christ, and labor to keep faith and a good conscience to the end.
Then if we would overcome, it is not enough to know, to teach, or hear of
religion: but true profession is joined with fighting against all the enemies
of the same with christian courage, let none of them reign over us, but fight
till we overcome and get victory over them all, then we overcome indeed, and
then to us is made this promise. Alas it is nothing to know or approve
religion, and yet to live in sin, and to let the devil, the world, and
ourflesh reign over us. Then we must never content our selves with bare
profession, but labor to say in our hearts, that we are conquerers of hell,
death, etc. by grace of Christ in us; and then we have a blessed promise of
freedom from the second death, and of eternal happiness: we shall not fear
the fire of hell, the burning lake. Furthermore, in these words is answered a
question, which many a man's heart makes, but few in the truth of heart can
answer. How may I escape the burning lake, how can I fly and avoid the second
death? Ans. Thou must in this life turn truly to God, from all thy evil
ways, renounce thy self, believe and put thine assurance in Christ, and
withal endeavor to keep faith and a good conscience to the end, and then thou
shall escape the second death, the fiery lake of hell shall not hurt thee; though
thou shall taste of the first, yet thou shall not see the second death.

Would any have his soul escape this burning lake, have his silly soul free
from the torments of hell? let him turn to God, renounce himself, put his
trust and confidence in Christ, never turn to his former sins, and withal
take heed to maintain and keep faith, a good conscience, and maintain pure
and true religion to the end, and then he shall be free from the burning lake.

Further, we see by these words, that of the two deaths, the second is the
worse, and most properly death: for the first is but a preparation to the
second: the second is the cruel death and destruction of body and soul. This
is yet the madness of men, that they fear the pangs of the first and not of the
second, never think of the burning lake: like children, which fear shadows,
and never fear fire or water, but suffer themselves to be drowned or burned.

And to the Angel which is at Pergamus. Verse* 12.
In these words is the third particular commandment of Christ to John, for
the penning and publishing of this third Epistle to the Church of Pergamus. By
the Angel of this Church, is meant either the Minister and Pastor, or company
of the Ministers and governors of the same. So often in the word, one is put
for a multitude. This particular commandment is given to John by Christ, to
assure him of his calling to pen this book and Epistle: secondly, to assure
the Church of the authority of the book, seeing it is delivered by Christ
himself.

The Epistle has three parts: first, a preface: secondly, a proposition:
thirdly, a conclusion. The Preface in these words, Thus says he with has that
sharp, etc. the proposition in the thirteenth verse, the conclusion in the
seventeenth verse.

Thus says he. Here he shows in whose name he wrote this Epistle, to wit,
Christ's: who is described, that he is not only a Prophet and Priest, but a
King, in governing and guiding his Church, for he has a sword in his hand,
which is described, first that it has to edges. Secondly, it is sharp,
meaning by it the word of God, so as not only the doctrine of the law, but the
promises of the Gospel are of the like power. Hebr. 4. 12.

Christ is thus set out to comfort the Church of Pergamus, for by this Christ
signifies three things: first, that he by power of the word kills sin,
wounds it at the heart, he kills and slays the corruption of our nature so
deadly that it cannot recover again: secondly, that he will strengthen and
maintain the church and the members of the same by this sword, against al
their enemies, for he will not only hurt the enemies, but defend his by his
sword.

Object. How does he wound them by the word? Answ. The word must be known and
believed of us. Now when we know and believe the law, and the threats thereof,
and the points and promises of the Gospel: then if afflictions come, faith by
which we believe them, makes us that we are comforted, and armeth us against
all afflictions and persecutions, so that nothing can hurt us: but if we
believe it not, then the word is to us as a sword in a sheath, not drawn out,
nor used to defend or drive back our enemies; but being believed, it is
powerful, no might of man or any Prince is comparable. Thirdly, Christ
destroys and kills all our enemies, all the adversaries of the Church, and
this is the principal end of this sword: for Christ speaks these words to
comfort his Church in persecutions, and for this he is said to have a sharp
two edged sword, for he kills and slays the enemies of his Church, partly
in this life, but deadly in the life to come. In this life, the word serves to
convince them of hypocrisy, unbelief, heresies, and superstition; for Christ
he abolished them with the breath of his mouth, that is, this sword, 2 Thessalonians.
2. Secondly, when they be touched by the preaching of this word with
desperations; for when the law and Gospel is preached to them, it wounds them
to the heart, by revealing all their cursed dealings, their unbelief and
hypocrisy, and sets the conscience on the rack, and stirs it up, which is
fit of it self to accuse them when it has revealed their sins: then it
smites them with fear and horror, and makes their conscience more fit to
accuse and terrify them; and then though they run on in sin, yet they have a
deadly wound of desperation, and this increases in this life and slays in
the next, for it clean cuts them off, when Christ shall say, Go ye cursed:
this smites them stark dead, casting them into eternal destruction for ever.

We must labor to have the word of God work powerfully in us. Use. 1.
to take place in our hearts by faith, not only to show our sins, and Gods
wrath against the same, but withal to wound them, slay and kill them, and at
the first to wound deadly: for only to have our sins detected, and our
consciences terrified, this is the way to desperation, and the first wound to
death, but we must go further, have our corrupt hearts ripped up, wounded,
crucified, have them reformed, and this is the way to wound our souls, and the
end why Christ has the two edged sword.

The second part is the proposition, containing two parts: first a
commendation: secondly, a rebuke. The commendation in the thirteenth verse: I
know thy works. In these words he commends this Church, first in general*
secondly in particular: generally in these words, I know thy works: that is,
thy ways and doings, thy counsels, affairs, and withal I approve them, as
Psalm. 1. 6. The Lord knows the righteous, that is, he approues them.

I know thy works. Christ he begins with these words in this and every of these
Epistles, to teach us one especial thing; that the fear of God is the chief
thing to be learned, the beginning of all religion; and for this cause he
begins thus, I know thy works, three or four times.

I know: showing by this, that wheresoever we be, we are in the presence of
Christ, he sees all our works, he hears and knows all we do, we cannot go
out of his presence: and to settle this deeply in our hearts, that he is
present always, seeing and beholding us, he repeates this seven times, in the
beginning of every Epistle. Then this should teach us both Minister and people,
to labor to have this persuasion in our hearts, that Christ is present, sees
and beholds all we do, when we take any thing in hand, he stands at our
elbowes, looks on us whether we do well or ill: then we must labor to have
this persuasion in our hearts, that we can say, now I do this or that, my
Savior Jesus Christ, my Lord and redeemer, he beholds me, looks on me, sees
all my dealings, therefore I will behave my self well. And the Preacher may
spend himself in speaking, and to no purpose, till God give grace, to teach
the people this one point, which is the beginning and ground of all religion
and fear of God: for men may have knowledge, and speak much of the words of
religion, yet they cannot be true Christians, till they have learned this one
point, to be so persuaded as they can say in their heart, Christ sees and
beholds me: and till we can do that, we shall make conscience of no sin.

2 The particular, first commendation, And where thou dwell: though thou
dwell in a place where the devil has set his throne, a place most incommodious
and unfit, yet thou obseruest and keep my name and religion: thus he
commends her for her constancy in religion.

Throne. That is, any place where superstition, idolatry and wickedness is
practiced without controlment, and from whence wickedness is conveyed to other
places: for the devil is the god of this world. 2. Cor. 4. 4. and he has his
kingdom, throne and seat placed, where he can practice sin and wickedness,
where iniquity is maintained, the Gospel despised, and from whence he
conueyeth his devilish wickedness to other places. Such a place was Pergamus,
a city wherein sin did abound without controlment, religion despised, and
from whence wickedness was conveyed to many other cities, towns, and places.
Here we may note the devils policy, who has his kingdom here on earth like
to God; here he places his thrones as a Prince, and makes choice to have the
fittest place where he may rule and reign, and practice wickedness without
controlment, and from whence he may convey it to other places; he has ever
had, has now, and will have his thrones. He had in old time the high places,
the groves, and such places where the people committed idolatry. Among the
Gentiles there were Oracles to erect his thrones: for in them he gave answers,
and so conveyed his wickedness to many. In later days he had every church and
chapel his throne, when Images, Saints Roodes, and such like were erected, to
which all men from all parts of the land came to worship. In schools of
learning he had his thrones, when nothing was taught but superstition and
errors. And now in our times he has his thrones, and officers to attend on the
same, as wisemen, and these are a special means to erect his throne: for unto
these come men from far and near, so that he conueyeth his iniquity to
many, seeing many seek to them, and so do him homage. So dicing and brothell
houses, seeing in them iniquity is practiced, in them is his throne. In
families where they live in ignorance, in sin and wickedness, in blaspheming
and drunkenness, or any one sin, there is his throne: and so many thrones as
families, where they live by any unjust dealing.

Then it is necessary, Use.
seeing the devil has his throne, the Lord should have his opposite to this:
as, when men have thrones of justice both civil and ecclesiastical: civil,
to repress all injustice and wickedness, to punish vice, to reward virtue:
and ecclesiastical, to punish and reprehend those sins, which civil justice
cannot.

The devil cunningly and pollitickly chooses Pergamus not a base town or
village, but a huge city, whence many kings proceeded, where there was a
famous and great king, and where was much people. So he chose Babylon a city
of confusion and abomination. So he has chosen Rome which is become of a
famous Church, the throne of Satan. So Jerusalem the city of God, the temple
of God, first began to be a den of thieves, and then the city fell to
wickedness: so the devil gets Gods temple, and the holy city to be his
throne. And in our time he gets the great cities, and shire towns for his
throne: for in the^ is greater ignorance, and the Gospel more contemned, then
in small villages, in which after little preaching it is willingly embraced. Now
the cause of this is, because the devil labors especially to have his
throne where he may do the most harm, and convey his doctrine to more places,
and live without controlment.

If this or any other shire town, Use.
or any great city live in sin, in ignorance, and contemn the Gospel, take
heed: for they shall become in time a den of thieves, and a synagogue of
Satan, he will have his throne there. Now then it is our duty to labor against
him, to have his throne plucked down, to have him defaced and cast out, have
our bodies and souls subject to Christ, renounce our selves, rely wholly on
Christ, forsake our own ways, never lend our ears to Satan, let him have no
footing in us, never suffer him to come to have his throne begun, but still
labor to have it razed and turned vpside down: and withal suffer Christ to
rule, suffer him alone to possess our hearts, that so the kingdom of Satan
being overthrown, the kingdom of Jesus Christ may be increased daily in us.
Whereas the Church of God is gathered out of that place, where the devil has
his kingdom erected, we note, that the Church of God is a company of men
derived and taken out of the Synagogue of Satan, the kingdom of the devil,
though it be a chosen people, yet it is picked out of the kingdom of the
devil, where he rules: Col. 1. 12. 13. for all men are by nature the vassals
of Satan, and subjects in his kingdom.

Then no man must stand of his gentilitie, Use 1.
and of his nobility and blood: but all our true joy must be in this, that we
are the members of the true Church of God: for what will it avail a man to
have a golden chain on his neck, and have his will and affections under the
slavery of the devil: or to be the son of a Prince, and yet to be out of
the true Church, and to be in the company of the wicked, a slave and vassal
of the devil? But our joy must be in this, that we are members of the Church
of God, and have right to the kingdom of heaven.

Sundry men think, Use 2.
a man may be saved by any religion, and most of the common people think, that
good meaning will save them: but a man may profess any religion, and have good
meaning, and yet not know one step to the kingdom of heaven, but remain the
vassal and slave of Satan. For a man may have outward civil justice, and
civil policy, and mean well, yet be the servant of the devil.

We see the children of God gain a privilege above all other: Use 3.
for in affliction and persecution, though they be cast into dangers, yet they
may assure themselves, seeing they be members of Gods church, they be freed
from the kingdom of the devil, and so from that place of darkness.

Seeing the preaching of the word gained a Church in the middle of the kingdom
of the devil, Use 4.
we see the word has a divine power: for there is no creature which has
greater power in earth then the devil, (except good Angels) yet the preaching
of the word draws one out of the kingdom of the devil, and gathers a Church
in the midst of his kingdom.

Seeing in Pergamus, Use 5.
where the throne of the devil was, Gods children were, we see that God will
have his servants to dwell in the middle of the wicked, and mingled with the
vassals of the devil: yet so, as he does this for good causes: first, that
their faith, obedience, and repentance, might be exercised: secondly, that so
they might be kept from many grievous sins, into which else they would fall. So
when the Lord brought the Israelites into the land of Canaan, he would not cast
all their enemies out at once; but they must be mingled, and dwell with the
Canaanites: for if they should destroy them at once, the wild beasts might have
destroyed the land: so the Church must be mingled with evil men, that the
godly may be exercised, and that they might be kept from more grievous sins.
Secondly, he will have his children to dwell with wicked and ungodly men, that
their godly life might shine as lights among them. Philip. 2. 17. and so to
win them to the Gospel: for a godly life is most effectual to win men to
Christ. Thirdly, that the Lord might show special tokens of his love and
favor to them, that when he brings his judgments on the wicked, yet he
defends them. Ezech. 9. 4. He marked them which mourned, that they might
escape the judgment which was brought on Jerusalem. Then if any man dwell
among such as contemn and hate religion, and the doctrine of the Gospel, let
them be contented, seeing it is Gods will they should dwell with the wicked,
and the Lord will have his Church on earth proved and exercised by them.

We see it is lawful for men to dwell with and by such wicked men: Use 6.
but they must not communicate with them in their sins, but abstain from
their wickedness: as Lot in Sodom, and Noah dwelt with the wicked men of the
old world: and the church of Pergamus in the place where the devils kingdom was
erected For (1. Cor. 7.) there is a question, whether a servant having a
master which is an infidel, may forsake him or not: the answer is made: he
must dwell with him; but so, that thereby he deny not the principal grounds of
religion, but keep a good conscience toward God in all things.

And hence we may see how to answer that old objection of the Papists: Where
was our Church fourscore years agone, before Luther preached, when the
doctrine of Antichrist was in all Europe? By the like I ask: Where was the
Church of Pergamus, when the kingdom of the devil was there? The holy Ghost
tells us, that in the same time when the devil had erected his throne
mightily in that place, yet there was the church of God. So when the man of
sin had spread his doctrine of wickedness in all Europe, yet there was a
Church amongst us, in this and other lands: as appears, in that ever there was
some, which both openly and privately oppugned his doctrine, by word and
writing in all ages: which shows, that though sin ruled in this church many
hundred years, yet the Lord had professors though not so visible as now it is,
when men may profess openly in every place without fear.

And kept my name. Though thou dwell in a place where the devil has erected
his throne, yet thou maintainest my name, and hold it fast, so that neither
fraud nor force of enemies can take it from thee.

My name: that is, my doctrine of the Gospel. Romans 9. Thou do constantly
hold and maintain it, and my religion: thou beleeuest the doctrine of
salvation which my servants have delivered to thee. So that in these words
Christ commends the church of Pergamus for constancy in maintaining the
doctrine of salvation.

We see it is not enough for us, Use.
to hold, believe, and maintain religion, but we must do it constantly, (so
the word signifi^s) we must hold the same fast against all adversaries, not
easily turned with any blast of men's doctrine, but so to hold religion, that no
enemy by force or fraud draw it from us. When (Math. 13.) the man found the
pearl, he sold all to buy the field. And if a man amongst us should find in
our field, by his cunning and skill, a golden mine, he would not tell it to any,
but go and sell all he had, and buy the ground, that so he might enrich himself.
So we, if we know the doctrine of salvation, we must labor to make it ours, to
have it made sure to us, to sell all we have, to loose life it self rather
then to forgo that precious pearl. 1. Tim. 3. 9. Faith is compared to a
precious jewel, which must be laid up in the treasury of a good conscience,
which cannot be broken into, but must be strong: in which storehouse and
treasury we must have true religion and faith locked, that nothing get it from
us, but loose all we have, even our life before we part with it: for if that be
sure, all is well; but if faith and religion be lost, all is gone; salvation is
lost, thy soul is perished.

Now for her further commendation, Christ sets out her constancy by two
arguments: first, that she held religion without denial: secondly, that she
held it in the time of bloody persecution. 1. The Church of Pergamus never
denied Religion, or revolted from faith in Christ: she did not as many men, who
hold, believe and maintain religion, yet in time of trial they will revolt.
In this we must imitate her, else we know not whether the Lord will give us
grace to repent: if he should not, we perish. Esaw sold his birthright for a
small thing, a few red pottage; but after he sought it with repentance and
tears, and could not get it. We must then hold religion, and not in time of
affliction and persecution revolt and deny it, lest the Lord give us no grace
to repent, which we know not whether he will or not.

And have not denied my faith: that is, mine own doctrine of the Gospel, and
true Religion. Religion is called Christ's: first, because Christ with the
Father and holy Ghost is author of it, all Religion which is good being from
above: secondly, because he revealed it from the bosom of his Father: thirdly,
because Christ is the matter of al religion; Christ is the whole subject of
religion in the old and new Testament, the end of the law, and the scope of the
Gospel.

The second argument, whereby Christ sets out her constancy, is, that she held
religion in the time of bloody persecution: when she was thus persecuted, she
was constant. When Antiphas was put to death. Who this Antiphas was, it is not
certainly known by any history, yet it is thought he was Pastor and Minister
of the Church of Pergamus, who opposed himself, and oppugned the doctrine and
idolatry of the heathen in that city. In these words are two points: first, he
commends this martyr Antiphas: when he says, That my servant, my faithful
servant Antiphas, he extols him to the Church of Pergamus. By this we see, that
it is lawful to honor and commend Martyrs which die for Christ's cause, and
that in two things: first, in giving them their due deserved honor and
commendation, as Christ did to Antiphas: secondly, by careful imitation of
their constancy and virtues, and conversation of life: for this cause Christ
commends this good Martyr, that the people of Pergamus might imitate him in his
constancy, not to honor him (as the Papists do) with divine honor and
invocation. Again, he says That my faithful Martyr, not commending him for
his death that he died, but for the cause: for not the death but the cause
makes a Martyr, for a man may die for heresy and erroneous opinion, and yet he
is no Martyr. But Antiphas he was a true Martyr, ergo Christ says, that my
servant, nay that my faithful servant Antiphas.

In the end of this verse, he sets down the authors of this death of
Antiphas: Some among you: some of Pergamus were the cause of his Martyrdom,
they were such in whom the devil ruled and reigned; and this he repeates, to
show that they which have contemned Christ's religion, though they pretend good
things, yet they be the slaves of the devil, he rules and reigns in them,
they be his holds and castles.

Object. But why did the devil dwell in the city of Pergamus, more then in
any other? Answ. Because many in this city were Gentiles, they hated and
conte^ned the Gospel, and so became the holds of the devil: we must then take
heed we never conte^ne the fame. For in a family where they live in ignorance,
in injustice, fraud and wickedness, there the devil rules, he has his throne,
that is, a stable for him to dwell in. Then masters of families, and parents
which govern families, must see they love and embrace religion, and teach it to
their family, else their houses be but the stables of Satan, his place to dwell
in.

Ob. But whether might not Antiphas being Minister and Pastor of that Church
have fled? Answ. Persecution is double, either directed against the person of
the Minister principally, or to the whole Church equally: if it be against his
person he may fly safely, if he get opportunity to preserve his life, and have
liberty of the Church to fly; but if it respect the whole Church, then
unless he have liberty granted by them, he must stay and take part with them
in their persecution. Now of this sort was Antiphas persecution, seeing he was
so called of God to suffer.

But I have a few things against thee. He commended her before, but here he
rebukes her; and this reproof is first generally propounded, then in more
particular: in general he tells them, that they wanted zeal, Thou bear with
them which, etc.

But I have. These words he spoke to the church of Ephesus before, and here
repeates them again, teaching the true members of the Church, to enter into
their own hearts, to search what is in them that Christ may have against them,
to call themselves to a strait reckoning, to consider all the things they have
done from their beginning to their end, and al their life narrowly to examine
themselves, to lay their sins before their eyes, without flattering or
favoring themselves, not after their own mind to judge of them, but to
examine them by the rule of Gods word; and in all their life look what things
there be for which Christ will come against them. For want of this, many men
being in the church perish, never consider their former life, how they have
lived, and for what sins Christ will come against them. If we would escape death
by Christ's heavy and strait sentence, and come to life, we must thus call our
selves to a reckoning, and simply lay all our sins in word, thought and deed
before our eyes, to think what we have deserved, and to condemn our selves:
then we shall prevent that judgment of Christ, he shall not need to enter into
sentence with us, if we have put all our sins in a book and reckoned already
for them. The practice of this duty, is the foundation of all religion, and the
beginning of all grace in the heart: but the want of this is the ruin of men's
souls, and the ready way to destroy them. And if this be wanting, the Minister
may speak and preach to little purpose.

Because thou have borne with them: that is, entertained them which are wicked.
Here the fault is in more particular, namely, want of zeal: they suffered men
which maintained damnable doctrine, and heretical opinions to be among them,
and dwell among them, such as held the doctrine of Balaam: so we see, though
they held religion, yet they did it coldly, not showing their fervent zeal
against such as maintained damnable doctrine. By this we see the Church may use
zeal in excommunicating and cutting off those which maintain damnable and
heretical doctrine: they may after due admonition excommunicate them, and cut
them off as pernicious members. 1. Tim. 2. Alexander and Hymineus were
excommunicated: and the church may follow Paul's example, to cut off such as
hold heresies in the fundamental points of religion. And seeing Christ was
offended for this their forbearing of those wicked men, we see, we must not
entertain such as hold such errors and damnable doctrine: but have indignation
against them, hate their opinions, and detest them. The Church must be
courageous to defend truth in religion, to stand against wicked heretics, to
excommunicate and thrust them out of the Church, if they remain obstinate.

Verse. 14. Thou have. That is, thou entertainest certain wicked men, and evil
persons, which maintain and teach Balaams doctrine, the doctrine of the false
Prophet. And as Christ reproved them here, so he might as well say to us in
this Church, that he has something against us, for want of zeal and severity
against sin and sinners: for though our Church does not hold and maintain,
but repel the false doctrine of the Church of Rome, of the Anabaptists, and
the Family of love: yet Christ may truly say, he has something against us,
for want of zeal against sinners and wicked men. For in our Church they
abound, there is abundance of Atheists and wicked men in the midst of us, which
are partakers of the word and Sacraments, and al outward privileges of the
Church: and these Atheists, though not in word, yet in life, deny God and
religion: they know not God, cannot distinguish between true religion, and the
heresies and damnable doctrine of the Papists: they think not reverently of
the word of God, nor of his Ministers and Ambassadors. Amongst us there be
abundance of Epicures, who give themselves to all licentiousness, to eat,
drink, and sport themselves: these love not the word, but being under the law
of the land, they will hear sometimes, once a year receive the Sacrament, and
this is all. There are also unmerciful and cruel men, oppressors, men which
in their private callings use all injustice, deceit, fraud, wrong, oppression,
with usury, and such horrible sins: these are suffered in the Church, and
these be the wise men of the world, we count them as politic and great men.
Now the suffering of these men amongst us, shows, that in our Church is great
want of zeal, feruencie and severity, for which Christ will come against us,
as to the Church of Pergamus.

The reason follows, and the confirmation of his rebuke, which is to move the
Church of Pergamus, to detest the doctrine of Balaam the false Prophet; and it
is taken from the effects of Balaam, that he gave wicked counsel to Balaak, to
cast a block in the way of the children of Israel, to make them eat of things
offered to idols, and commit fornication. It stands in a comparison or
similitude: As the false Prophet Balaam cast a stumbling block before the
Israelites, to move them to eat of things offered to Idols, and commit
fornication: so there are some among the Church of Pergamus, which labor to
move men to the same sins.

The first part of the similitude is in the first part of this verse: as Balaam
taught false doctrine, and gave ill counsel to Balaak, etc. In which we must
consider three things: first, what his false counsel was, and what an offense
is: secondly, the casting of offense before the Israelites: thirdly, the means
how. An offense properly is any thing, word, or deed, which is cast in a man's
way to make him stumble or fall, or go out of his way, as a stone, or piece of
wood, or such like thing: this is a scandal or stumbling block properly. Here
it is taken (by comparison) for any thing which hinders a man in the way to
salvation, which hinders or stops him, makes him fall, or go out of the
way.

Offense is double, either given or taken. Offense given, is any word or deed,
whereby a man is procured to sin: offense taken, is when a man takes
occasion to sin, or to be offended by that which is done well of another. So
when Christ did well, and preached the true doctrine of salvation, the Pharisees
were offended at his doctrine: he did well, they took occasion to be offended
at his well doing. Now one gives an offense, when he makes one offended, and
causes him (as much as he can) to sin. So Peter tells Christ, that the
things he spoke of should not come to him: Christ bids him, come behind him
Satan: where Peter gave an offense to Christ, though Christ did not sin; for
Christ took not the occasion which Peter yet offered. As for the giving of
offense, it is to cause a man to sin, or fall away from God by any thing. The
means are things either simply evil, or indifferent. By things in themselves
evil, as those which are directly against the word of God. Those things evil
in themselves, be either ill persuasions, or ill examples: for by these
offenses are often given: for evil persuasions and examples draw the better
sort often to sin, and are very dangerous means to make men offend. Again,
offenses be given by things indifferent, not evil in themselves, but when men
use them unseasonably and unfitly, out of time and place, and not before fit
persons. So Paul says, that if to eat should offend, he would never eat: 1.
Cor. 9. So here Balaam gives offense, they of Pergamus take it, to commit
sin, and to be stirred up to fall from God.

The means by which Balaam cast these offenses before the Israelites: namely,
by provoking them to eat of the meat offered to idols, and commit
fornication. Numb. 25. When Balaam had used many ways to curse them, and could
not prevail, he used new means, which was, to send out most wicked and
beautiful women, to inuit them to their idol banquets, and to fornication,
and they condescended to them.

Hence we gather, Use 1.
this is the peculiar note of a false Prophet, to draw men to offense, to cast
stumbling blocks before them in the way to salvation: for Balaam a false
Prophet is noted by this: and as Paul says, godliness and true religion is a
great mystery to salvation: so false teaching is a mystery tending to the
destruction of men's souls.

So that by this note, we may judge of all religions, both of the Jew, and the
Turk: but especially of the Papists, which most trouble us in this Church: for
all religions whose doctrine tends to stop or hinder men in the way to
salvation, they be the doctrines of devils. The Papists religion which our
ancient folk call the old religion, is a doctrine tending to destroy men, to
ouerturne the whole moral law of God, especially to maintain adultery and
idolatry. The first commandment is, thou shall have the true God only for
thy God. But the Papists make more then one, they make the creatures Gods, they
invoke Saints, which, what is it, but to make them Gods, to give them his
honor, seeing he alone is present every where, and sees the heart, and seeing
they say they can merit, which none can do formans sin, but only God, no not
Christ himself if he were not God? Nay, they make the wooden cross (not Christ
on the cross) to be God, in that they call it their hope: and so the virgin
Mary, calling her our Lady, putting hope in her, and saying, she can command
her Son in heaven, in the matter of salvation. The second Commandment they
in practice break, in making images of God the Father, like an old man, the
Son as he was on earth, and the holy Ghost in form of a dove, and with
religious worship, adore and worship Saints.

They err against the third commandment, teaching that a man may swear by
Saints: and the fourth, in that they make festiual days of men and saints to
be equal with the Sabbath of the Lord, and take away men's liberty of laboring
six days, to worship their saints. As for the fifth commandment, in this they
make subjects free from their lawful loyalty to their lawful Princes. In the
sixth, they make and appoint places to which murderers may fly and be safe, and
in keeping the word from lay men (as they call them) and so murder their
souls. In the seventh, they maintain stews and houses of professed adultery,
and hold that the uncle may marry his niece or his great niece. For the eight
commandment, they overthrow it, in that they make all things saleable, heaven,
hell, purgatory and all, which is manifest robbery. They wrong the ninth
commandment, in that they falsely make men's writings the canon of Gods word,
nay they maintain lying, seeing that they hold, a man being asked of a thing
he knows (as when one has confessed his sins another asks him, he may
though he know the same, say he knows not) that is, they know not them, to
tell them to you; but that is a slender excuse. For the tenth commandment,
they make concupiscence and lust to be no sin, and put out that commandment.
So that we see, this whole religion, which is called of old people, the old
religon, is clean new from the true religion, nay it is a doctrine of devils,
seeing it tends to lead men to destruction, and ouerturning of the whole law
of God.

To come to our own church; true it is, men slander our doctrine, saying it
is scandalous three ways: first, that we teach, God creates men to cast the
greatest number of them into hell and destroy them. First we answer: we hold,
that though the scripture speaks not of any certain number, yet the elect are
said to be a small number. Secondly, the end why God created men, was not to
destroy them, but to manifest his own glory in their due, just, and deserved
damnation and destruction: not that he created men to this end, to cast them to
hell. Secondly, they charge the doctrine of our church to be a blasphemous
doctrine, seeing we hold that God decreed man's fall, and so do make him the
author of sin. Answ. We say indeed, that God decreed man's fall, and permitted
him to sin, yet teach we not, that he is the author of sin: for his will is
double, general and particular: in his general will, he decreed to permit man
to sin and fall, yet so, as in respect of God it was good, though in respect of
man evil: for as he can draw out of darkness light, so out of evil he can
work good to himself. Secondly, there is his special will, by which he wills
and delights only in that which is good, and by this he hated man's fall. And
even as the Magistrate hates, and would not the death of the malefactor, yet he
wills it, in that he executes the same: so the Lord he in his general will willed
the permitting of man's fall, not as it was evil, but as it turned to his glory
and honor, and the good of the elect. Lastly, they charge our doctrine to be a
doctrine of security and carnal carelessness, in that we teach, men may be
certain of their salvation, and to persevere to the end: but seeing we withal
teach a man must use the means, daily pray, hear the word, receive the
sacraments, and perform all the duties of faith and religion to the end, we
teach no doctrine of carnal security, but a doctrine of pain and trouble,
which makes men not careless, but careful to come to hear, to be certain,
and to persevere; therefore they charge us wrongfully in all these.

Seeing it is so great a sin to give offense, we must take especial heed we
give no offense in our life, conversation, word, or deed, but so to carry our
selves, that we live vnspottedly: for if we give offense, we are Balaams
scholars, and tread in his path. Let us then in our callings so carry our selves
uprightly, that we give no offense: for woe to them by whom offenses come: nay
it were better they had a mil-stone tied to them, and they cast into the sea:
for that is to plunge our brothers soul, as much as in us lies, to the gulf
of hell. But we must rather labor to help him, to take from him al blocks of
offense; which if men would do, then our Church should flourish: but the want
of this, makes men bold to sin, and to run on by sin into hell. And as none
must give offense, so we must take heed we take no offense, or be allured to
sin by men's wicked either counsel or examples: nay we must cast off all things,
which may any way hinder us in the way to heaven: if our right eye or hand
offend, or any thing which is most dear and near us, we must cut it off: if
we do so, then Gods blessing is with us. The Israelites in the borders of the
Moabites, so long as they served the Lord, all curses could not hurt them, but
turned to their good: but after they took offense by the Moabitish women, to
be enticed by them, then they came to eat with them at their idol-feasts, and
commit fornication; and then the wrath of the Lord was upon them. The like may
be said of us.

Seeing they used these means, Use 4.
when they could not prevail by cursing, to send their fairest women to inuit
them to their banquets, to incite them to commit fornication: we see that
temptations drawn from the right hand, from profit and pleasure, are most
dangerous, and prevail most with men, to bring them to sin and to fall from
God. As a man that cannot win a city by force, yet by gold, by promises of
profit or pleasure, gets the gate open: so when the devil cannot prevail
with bitter and sharp temptations, then he uses those of the right hand, and
overthrows many. We must then take heed especially of these. For this cause
Job sacrificed daily for his children when they had been feasting, lest they
should then have sinned.

Verse. 15. Even so thou have those which maintain the doctrine of the
Nicolaitanes.

In these words is the second part of the comparison, in which two things:
first, what the Nicolaitanes were: secondly, how Christ was affected toward
them. First, what they were in the Church of Pergamus, is manifest in these
words: Even so, which is a word of resemblance and relation, that may thus be
described. They were a sect of men in the Church of Pergamus, which maintained
two damnable opinions according to the doctrine of Balaam: first, that it was
lawful to eat meat offered to idols, even in the idol temples: secondly,
that fornication was no sin, as we have showed before.

It may seem strange, that in the days of the Apostles, so soon after
Christ, there should be any such which held these damnable opinions: yet we see
there were such notorious heretics. Now that we favor not their opinions, we
must know the grounds of their errors. For the first error: that a man might
eat meat offered to idols, even in the very temples of idols, for is, they
might urge Christian liberty thus. Those things which be indifferent may be
lawfully used: but to eat meat offered to idols, is a thing indifferent,
ergo. Ans. If these meats be considered in themselves, they be indifferent, and
may lawfully be used: nay after they be offered to idols, if they be sold in
the market and bought, they may be eaten privately, so that we wound not any
weak Christian. But as they be prepared to be offered to idols, used in
idol-temples for the honor of them, we may not use them as prepared for the
idol, used and offered in the temple, and had in honor of them. Now the
Nicolaitans used them so, therefore unlawfully. Secondly, they might and did
allege (being professors of Christ outwardly) other places of scripture, as
that Paul says, An idol is nothing, ergo it is no sin to eat that which is
offered to them. Ans. An idol is nothing by nature, subsisting or being,
nothing which has any spark of the Godhead in it, but yet in man's brain it
is something, seeing in men's minds and imaginations they repute it as a God.
Thirdly, they might allege Naamans example, 2. King. 5. 18. who went into the
temple of Rimmon and kneeled down there. Ans. He kneeled not to the idol but
to the King, who was there, and leaned on his hand, so that he bowed down, not
with any divine worship to the idol, but with civil worship to the Kings
Majesty: and Naaman was in the temple, not to worship the idol, but to make
protestation that he would serve the God of Israel, and for that end carried as
much earth as two mules could bear, to offer sacrifice to the Lord. And if the
Nicolaitans had been so in the idol temples, to protest that they would worship
the true God, then they had not sinned. So if any come into a place, and be
present where Mass is said, with protestation to serve the Lord, he then
allows not of the same, but rather condemns them for it.

For the second opinion of these Nicolaitanes, that fornication was no sin,
they seemed so to prove it out of Genes. 19. 18. when the men of Sodom came to
Lots house, he offers them his daughters: now he would not have done it (say
they) if it had bin a sin. Ans. Lot seems to be faulty, and not to be excused
in that, though he thought to escape the greater sin by the lesser; but we must
not do evil that good may come thereof. Again, they might urge, that (Hos. 1.)
the Lord commanded Hosea to take a wife and children of fornication. Ans. 1.
Some say it was only in vision, not in deed. 2. Some answer, that he did it in
speech only, as he was a Prophet, because he prophesied to the people, that he
was as one that had such a wife and children, which both are safe answers, and
allowed. Other, more likely, say, it was a thing not in vision and word only,
but in deed and truth done. And surely seeing the Prophets name, the woman's
name, and her fathers name are set down, it seems to be a thing done indeed.
Neither does a thing in speech so much affect the people, as a deed and fact
done. And the best and most ancient interpreters, which were nearest the time
of Christ, interpret it a thing done indeed. But you may say, this was against
good manners, and contrary to Gods law, that the Prophet should take such a
wife. Ans. No: seeing God is above his law, and can dispense with it: as when
he bids Abraham kill his son, and he had not sinned if he had slain him: so
here Hosea he did not sin, having a particular and special commandment for
the same. Neither did he this to commit fornication, but to make of an harlot
an honest woman: and he is bidden to take the children of fornination, not that
he should beget any in fornication, but take her children which she had borne
in fornication. Again, Act. 15. The Apostle speaking of two things
indifferent, joins fornication to them. Ans. First, he does so, because the
Gentiles thought that it was no sin, but indifferent: and they are there
conjoined (though fornication be not a thing indifferent) because the Gentiles
offended the Jews by these three jointly together.

Now follows the affection of Christ: which things I also hate: that is, not
their persons, but their errors. Which thing I hate. First, he teaches us to
avoid and dislike the least honor or approbation which can be given to idols:
for these Nicolaitanes did not honor idols, or offer to them, but came into
their temples, and (invited by their friends) did eat of the meat offered to
them: yet Christ hates their dealing: showing, he would have us to do the like.
This also condemns the practice of the Church of Rome, who say, they worship
not idols, yet they kneel down to the images of Christ, and Saints, adore
them, light candles and tapers to them, offer to them, hang costly jewels about
their necks, cloth them with costly apparel, and so do indeed far more then
the Nicolaitanes did; therefore has Christ cause to hate them much more. This
also teaches men which travel, to take heed that they travel not without any
calling, to see news, out of the limits of the Church, as to Spain and
Italy: for then they being out of the bounds of the true Church, offer
themselves to occasions which may bring them to idolatry, though they hate
images: for being in idolatrous places, they must come into their temples, and
do as their manner is, offer to idols, and kneel down to them: which they
cannot without some approbation, whereas they should hate the least approbation
or liking of them. Then it is good for men which travel, to travel within the
Church, and not out, but by some special calling and necessity. Further, by
this, Christ would have us to hate all familiar society with idolaters. A man
may I grant live with Idolaters in a civil course of peace: but not to have a
special kind of familiarity and amity with them. Now as Christ hated their
idolatry, so did he their fornication, giving us example to hate fornication:
first, because our bodies are not our own: but the body of a faithful man or
woman is the body of Christ, he has bought it, therefore we must consecrate
and dedicate them to honor him, not Satan his enemy. Our body and soul is
the member of Christ, at least by profession: then we must not take the member
of Christ, and make it the member of an harlot. Our body and soul is the
house and temple of the holy Ghost, therefore we must keep them fair, pure
and clean, fit to entertain such a guest: but they which pollute themselves
with fornication, make them sties and stables for the devil.

Repent quickly. Verse. 16.
Having laid down the fault of the Church of Pergamus, and the errors of the
Nicolaitanes, here he shows the remedy to escape, and after the remedy,
adds two reasons to move the^ to practice the remedy: the first, concerning
the whole Church of Pergamus: the second, the Nicolaitans. In the remedy:
note, first what repentance is: secondly, why it is so often prescribed by
Christ to his Church: thirdly, to whom. To repent properly is to change the
mind from evil to good, from sin to God, thus, when by Gods grace a man has
this purpose in his heart, not to sin as before, but in all things wholly to do
the will of God for ever. But here repentance (as commonly in the Scripture) is
taken more largely, for all the duties which go with, or are in repentance: as
first, humiliation, confession of our sins, condemning our selves for them:
secondly, invocation for pardon of them: thirdly, reformation of life, when a
man purposes and indeuoreth in his life to do the will of God. But why does
Christ so often repeat and prescribe repentance to his Church? Ans. Not
because it is a means to procure or demerit salvation and reconciliation with
God: for only the death and passion of Christ and his merits alone can do
that: but he calls them often to this duty, because it is the most excellent
fruit of faith. Repentance of it self procures not Gods favor, but it is a
token of Gods favor procured in Christ. Secondly, because it is a path way
wherein all men must walk, which must have pardon of their sins and life
everlasting. But to whom does Christ prescribe repentance? Ans. First, to the
whole church of Pergamus: secondly, to the Nicolaitanes. As for the Church of
Pergamus, the Ministers and people thereof, Christ before had commended them
for worthy graces, and they had repentance before; yet Christ bids them repent
still. Now in that he prescribes repentance still to a repentant people, it
shows us, that the whole life of a Christian, is a continual practice of
repentance, a daily and perpetual repentance. When one has begun and
repented once, that is not enough; but as every day adds to our age, so every
day, for our new sins, we must have new repentance. 1. Cor. 5. Paul desired
them to labor to be reconciled to God. Now (1. Cor. 6.) they were reconciled
already, and had true repentance: noting that they must labor to have their
reconciliation more increased, in regard of the certainty of it, and their
daily offenses and sins. Now we must think, that what Christ spoke to the
Church of Pergamus, is spoken to us; and if we be in the like sin, we must
learn to perform the same duty, which they are commanded here. Christ
moreover prescribes this not only to the Church of Pergamus, but to the
Nicolaitanes, which held two damnable errors; and as they held them, no doubt
they lived accordingly, yet Christ bids them repent. Then great and grievous
sinners are not barred from Gods mercy if they will repent. Excellent is that
of Esaias: Our God is much, exceeding much in mercy. Psalm. 130. God is much in
mercy, plenteous in redemption, no man which is a grievous sinner, but God
offers him mercy, if he will repent and lay hold on it. Among us in this
Church are many ignorant and evil people: yet if these will repent, the Lord
offers his mercy; though they be as wicked as the Nicolaitanes, as Judas, or
Herod were, yet Christ offers his mercy and merit, if they will lay hold
on it. Then let all such wicked men break off their sins by repentance, of
their idolatry, blasphemy, fornication, and humble themselves with Job in
dust and ashes, and they shall find mercy. But we must not abuse Gods mercy
to presumption, but be sure, that though thy sins be as scarlet or crimson,
or as scarlet which can take no other color, yet there is mercy in store to
help thee, if thou repent. This doctrine may be taught to malefactors, not to
imbolden them in sin, but to assure them, that if they repent at any time,
the Lord will hear them: yea though a man fall often into the same sin
(which is dangerous) yet if he have grace to repent, Gods fountain of mercy
is not drawn dry, but still he has in store; only they must repent: for if
they look to have the merit of Christ, Christ looks to have their repentance.

Else I will come against thee shortly. Verse 16.
After the remedy follows a twofold reason, to enforce and set an edge on the
former doctrine: first, concerning the Church of Pergamus: secondly, concerning
the Nicolaitanes, holding and practicing of these two sins.

The first cause and reason, If not, I will come, etc. that is, if thou do not
repent for these sins, want of zeal, and other thy particular sins, I will
come to thee shortly, to punish and plague thee; for the Lord (as I have said)
he comes either in mercy, or in judgment. Now if they repent not, Christ
says he will come to them, not to help them, but to execute judgment on them,
to punish them. So Esaias. 30. 27.

Christ says not, I will, but I come to thee: expressing the time to come, by
the time present: to certify them, that if they repent not, he will most
surely come, as certainly as if he did now come to them.

In this threatening we see a general rule to be learned of all, that if any
Church or people will not repent, then the Lord will come to them in judgment
to punish them, as by sundry examples we may see the Lord has done. In our
Church and people, though some do repent, yet for the common body of the people
they do not, but they live in sin and ignorance, having no care to know Gods
will; and if they know it, yet no care to obey the same, but they for the most
part continue in their sins. Seeing their case is such, who could not out of
Gods word, in good conscience foretell and prophecy (by this general rule)
that God will come against them shortly, to take vengeance on them, and to
plague them? Though we may flatter our selves, and think all is well, yet we
must assure our selves he cannot but come, unless we repent. This should then
move us all to repent, to humble our selves, condemn our selves for our sins,
crave pardon, purpose newness of life, desire the Lord that he would in Christ
be reconciled to each of us, and promise and perform ever after new obedience.
If we do repent daily for new and particular sins, then we shall stay the
Lord, prevent his coming to punish us: but if we go on in sin, assure our
selves the Lord is true of his promise, he will come in judgment against us.

The second reason is directed to the Nicolaitans, With whom he will fight, that
is, be at enmity with them, and declare the same in waging battle with them,
seeing they hold these two gross and damnable ^^inions.

With the sword of my mouth. That is, the preaching and publilishing of the
word, the ministry and dispensation of the law and the Gospel among men. In
which words he still alludeth to the doing of Balaam; as in the doctrine, so in
the end and scope: for when Balaam cursed the children of Israel, the Angel
stood against him, to stay and hinder him that he should not go: he seeing the
Angel, fell down and worshipped the Angel, that is, the son of God Christ
Jesus: but after, seeing he would not be restrained, but went to curse the
people, he perished by the sword. Numb. 31. Even so Christ deals with the
Nicolaitanes, as he did with Balaam: seeing they went on still in wickedness, he
fights with them to reclaim them from their wicked ways, he withstands them
with the sword of his mouth, but if they will needs go on, then he fights, not
to reclaim them, but to slay them, as he did Balaam.

But I will fight against thee, not kill thee, for Christ he intended not at
the first to slay them, but to withstand them, and if it might be to reclaim
them: but after, if they would not be hindered and stayed, to destroy them, as
he did Balaam.

Seeing Christ comes against the wicked and impenitent, Use 1.
not to kill them, but to withstand and hinder them at the first: we see his
wonderful patience toward sinners and wicked men. So Genesis 6. the Lord striued
and wrestled with the old world one hundred and twenty years, that they might
repent, by the preaching of Noah: and Genes. 16. he bare with the Amorites,
till their sins were come to the full: and he bare with the Egyptians many
hundred years: nay the Jews after they had killed Christ, were not straight
way consumed, but the Lord: suffered them fifty years. So the Lord suffers
sinners, the blasphemer, adulterer, and cruel man to live, comes often to
them by his word, not to kill them at first, but to win and reclaim them.
And so every one of us feels his mercy, in that he might destroy and cast us
into hell, so soon as we be borne: yet he suffers us to live, some twenty,
thirty, or forty years, that we might have a time and space to repent, and
turn to Christ. Then it is our duty to take this occasion, to take this time
of Gods patience, not to let it slip, but haste to re^^ntance ere the time of
patience be ended. The old world had one hundred and twenty years of
patience, but neglecting it they perished, the time of mercy being ended.
Seeing they would not hear Noah, therefore they be now in prison, 1. Pet. 3. 20.
that is, in hell. Again, in that Christ says, he will come thus against the
Nicolaitanes, we see, that they which repent not, have God for their enemy to
fight against them, (and for this cause, sin is called rebellion against
God.) Now this is a most fearful thing, to have God man's enemy: let us then
repent, that we may have God a friend to us, as he was to Abraham, and as
Christ was to his disciples.

I will come to thee, and fight against thee. Here Christ shows he is the
true Pastor and Doctor of the Church, he can divide the word aright, give
promises to them to whom they belong, and threatenings to whom they belong: for
judgments and promises must not be propounded to all equally, but there must
be regard had of time, place, and persons. For judgments, some be temporal,
which must be threatened to the penitent: some eternal, and those to the
impenitent. So promises are to be made, not hand over head, but with respect,
condition, limitation, and restraint. To propound either promises or
threatenings otherwise, is not to divide the word aright.

With the sword of my mouth: that is, the ministry of the word, not to kill
them, but to resist and withstand them which repent not: and this is the chief
end and scope of the preaching of the word, to win men from their sins and
wicked ways; and if they will not repent, then to drown them in perdition and
to slay them. In this Church of England, and in this congregation, we have had
the Gospel this 36 years published and preached to us, the Lord has rebuked
us for our sins, and yet we still abide in them without repentance: the Lord
still comes against us with the sword of his mouth, still checkes us for our
sins, and controlleth the wicked idolater, Atheist, fornicator and cruel man,
he stands to fight against such, face to face, stands with his naked sword in
the ministry of the word, to reclaim them from their sins: if they will not,
to wound them to the heart, and to kill them. Now we hearing our sins reproved,
we should fear and tremble, fall down as Balaam did: and seeing the Lord in
the word preached, stands with his sword in his hand, ready to slay us if we
will not be stayed, we should be afraid. If we hear of an enemy to come against
us, how will every one quake for fear: shall we fear the shaking sword of a
mortal man, and not the bloody sword of the everliving God? Shall we resist him
and go on, though he fight against us? Alas it is not wisdom to strive with
God, for then he will hacke us to pieces: but we must hear him, and submit our
selves to his good will and pleasure: and if we will not, the same sword of God
shall be an instrument to pierce our hearts to death. Then when we hear the
Minister speaking to us, we must know that the Lord speaks to us, fights
against our sins, and not contemn him. Again, we see the word of God is
called the sword of Christ's mouth, not only because he once delivered it, but
because it daily proceeds from him in the preaching of the same by the
Ministers.

Then we see this is an excellent thing, that the Ministers of Christ lawfully
called, they be that mouth of Christ, from which his sword proceeds. So Paul
calls them the Ambassadors of Christ to deliver his word. 2. Cor. 5. 19.

Then they which be in the schools of the Prophets, Use.
and they also which be in the way to the same, must learn to think
reverently and highly of it, not contemn it, and think it a base calling: for
to be a Lawyer or Physician, has not this privilege, to be called the mouth
of Christ, as the Ministers have. Again, seeing they be the mouth of Christ,
Ministers must speak the word of Christ, as they are persuaded in conscience
Christ would speak the same if he were present. Even as Ambassadors, who
deliver their masters will, in that manner and those words which they think he
would himself: which if we did, then we should not have that humane kind of
preaching, partly in Greek, Latin, and English, mingled with testimonies and
sentences of men: for Christ would never preach so, neither did his Apostles or
Prophets use it. Furthermore, seeing the Minister lawfully called is the mouth
of Christ, we must take heed, that we seeing a mortal man, sinful like to us,
deliver the word, that we contemn it not for his sake, but receive the word as
it is indeed the power of God, though it come from a mortal man. So Paul
commends the Thessalonians, who received his doctrine as the word of the ever
living God. Besides, seeing Christ carries his Scepter in his mouth, not in his
hand, we see his kingdom is not of this world; not carnal but spiritual, he
governs and rules his Church and people by the sword of his mouth, the
eternal word of God, published and preached by sinful man like to us.

This shows the abuse of that sword, which the Pope, the Vicar of Christ,
chalengeth: for he will have both swords, civil and Ecclesiasticalls surely he
is not the Vicar, and in the room of Christ, for Christ was content only with
the spiritual sword.

Now follows the conclusion of the Epistle, containing two parts: the first a
commandment, Let him which has an ear hear: the second, a promise, To him
which ouercometh, will I give to eat of the Manna, etc. Of the first I have
spoken before. The end and scope of this commandment, is to stir up the
Church to attention, to mark the things propounded. The first special point
what is commanded to be heard, is, the word of God, which must not be heard
with a bare and simple hearing, but with knowledge, faith, belief, and
obedience in practice.

Seeing he commands this hearing to all men, we see it is the ordinance of
God, all men in the Church should frequent sermons, where this word of God is
propounded and taught by plain and simple men, that they may better learn
their duty. At a good time men will come to the Church, though they come not
half a year after: but the ordinance of Christ is, that men should daily at
all lawful occasions frequent sermons, and come to the congregation: and if we
be his sheep, we will hear his voice: Ioh. 10. and desire to hear his word,
taught by his mouth. Mat. 16. the word of God is called the key of the kingdom
of heaven: now as necessary it is to have the key to open heaven, as to have
his soul brought thither. Paul calls the doctrine of the Gospel, the word
of reconciliation, because the same by Gods grace reconcileth us to him, who
being his enemies, are made by it to be in his favor. Then we must come to
hear it daily, not at Christmas or such times alone, for this is to magnify
those days above the Lords day. But men corrupt and froward, say for
themselves: Tush, if God, or Christ, or his Apostles would preach to us, we would
come: but when men speak to us, being sinful and like our selves, we will
not. Ans. It is the will and ordinance of God, that his word should be
published and preached to man, by man like himself: for since Adams fall, man
could not abide to hear the Majesty of God: the Israelites seeing but a
glimmering of Gods glory, could not abide it, but said: Speak to us by Moses,
Exodus 19. And he will have his word preached by sinful man, to try man's
obedience and humility, how he will receive and obey the word of God delivered
by man. Again, he does it, to make love between man and man, when one man
speaks the word of God to another. Then are they presumptuous persons, who
dare oppose themselves against Gods most holy ordinance and will. Again,
others say they have the Bible, containing the Sermons of Christ, the Apostles
and Prophets, and who can make better Sermons then they? now seeing they have
these at hand, they need not come to the Church. But let these consider, that
as it is the ordinance and will of God to have the Bible, so will he have it
expounded by man in the Church, that me^ might understand it, and so make use
of it in their lives. As for some others, they will not come to the Church, but
having a journey, (as they say) they can serve God on their horse back, or in
the way, as well, and with as good a heart as the best in the Church: but let
these hear the word of God, by the wisest man, Solomon, Pro. 28. 16. He which
turns his ear from the law: that is, from hearing the word of God, his
prayers are abominable. And if he turn from God, God will turn from him: and
if men be weary of his word, God will be weary of their service, of all their
prayers, and other service where or whatsoever. Lastly, many think they have
knowledge enough, no man can teach them that they know not already. But the
preaching of the word serves not only to beget knowledge, but to increase the
same: and also to beget in man obedience to his knowledge: so that these,
though they seem to be the wisest, are most foolish: no man, no not the
greatest learned, but he has knowledge in part, and it may be increased: and
say, he get not more knowledge, yet he may by the word delivered by a plain
and simple man, be brought to obedience of that he knows. Another principal
duty commanded in the conclusion, is reading the word, both in public and
private, that so we may be prepared to hear and obey the same. So Christ (Luke
10. 26.) What read thou? he takes it for granted, that the young man could
read the law. Esaias. 5. 13. for want of Gods word and knowledge, the people of
God went into captivity. And yet we see among us many families which come to
church, hear the word, nay, receive the Sacraments, not knowing the thing
assured in them: neither having a Bible to read, nor procuring others if they
cannot: yet many have a Bible lying on their cupbord, but use it not. The
tables, cards, and dice, they be well used and worn, but the book of God
lies covered with dust. Many will have the book of Satutes, that they may
know their duty, but none cares to have the Statutes of God, to teach them to
range their unbridled affections within the compass of the same.

And to him which overcomes. Verse. 17.
Here is the second part of the conclusion: namely, the promise, which is the
same in substance with those annexed with the two former Epistles. In this
promise, note two points: first, to whom it is made: secondly, what is
promised. First, the persons to whom promise is made: namely, they which
overcome. To overcome (as before) is to believe, to put all our trust and
confidence in Christ alone, and to get victory against all our spiritual
enemies.

That we may overcome so, we must do two things: first, we must deny our
selves, and all that is in us, and put our whole confidence in Christ alone:
secondly, we must maintain true religion, and a good conscience in all things,
to our last end: and this is indeed to overcome all our spiritual enemies. Use
1.
Now seeing God makes this promise to them which overcome, we must labor to
come to this estate, that so we may be partakers of the promise.

The second point, is the thing promised: He will give him to eat of the
hidden Manna, etc. The thing promised is a threefold gift of God: first, to
eat of that Manna: secondly, he shall have a white stone: thirdly, a new name
written in the same white stone. Which three signify our election, vocation,
justification, sanctification and glorification; and to be the children of God.
To come to the first: to eat of the hidden Manna. Manna signifies properly
that food which God gave the children of Israel from heaven to feed them in
the wilderness, Psalm. 98. For the excellency of it, it is called the wheat
of heaven, and the food of strong men, or of Angels: in form, it was like
Coreander seed, white and sweet, Numb. 11. 7.
as Moses says, by which the Lord fed them in the wilderness forty years
from heaven, to teach them, man lives not by bread only, but by the word of
God. And this is thought of many to be the same white Manna sold in shops, but
I stand not on that, and it is to be doubted. But this Manna signifies another
food, 1. Cor. 10. it is the spiritual food which our fathers did eat:
namely, the food of our souls, that is, Christ the true Manna, and bread of
life which came from heaven. John 6. shows, that Christ is that food, and
spiritual meat of our souls, feeding us to eternal life. Ob. But how can
Christ the Son of God become our meat and food? Ans. By these conclusions:
first, Christ is food, not in respect of his doctrine, or his miracles, or in
regard of his death, passion or obedience alone, but in regard of himself, as
he is Christ, God and man. And here he is called the Lord of life, first, in
regard of himself, then in regard of his benefits. The second conclusion: he
is our food not as he lay in the cratch, or as he is now in heaven, but as he
died, was buried, rose, and suffered the pains of hell: dead Christ, crucified
Christ, he is our food of life; for from his death comes our life. The third
conclusion; Christ is food, not in regard of his Godhead or Deity, but in
regard of his manhood: I say, of his manhood, not simply in it self, but as it
is in the Godhead, subsisting by the Deity: as he is God and man, so is his
body and blood our food: yet Christ is not a bodily and sensible food to be
received with our hand, mouth, and into our stomach, but he is a spiritual
food, to be received only by the hand of faith into the stomach of our
souls, whereby they be fed to eternal life. And thus we eat him, when we
believe, and assure our selves, that he was dead, buried, and crucified for us
in particular.

Seeing Christ crucified is the bread of life, Use 1.
and the spiritual Manna whereon our souls must feed, we must long and hunger
after Christ spiritually, as truly and sensibly as we do after meat and
drink. We see when a man is famished, he will eat his own flesh, tear and
pull it off his arms to satisfy hunger. Now shall we thus pull our own
flesh, and shall we not spend all we have, to have this food of our souls? In
the hunger of the stomach be two things: first, there is a pain in the nether
part and bottom of the stomach, and from this there comes a strong and
hungry appetite, which lasts till the belly and appetite be filled and
satisfied. So we should feel a pain in our hearts, rising from the fear of
Gods wrath for our sins and offenses: and withal we must feel an hungring
and longing appetite to have this pain taken away, to have this appetite
satisfied, which is only by that food, of the body and blood of Christ.
Secondly, there is besides that pain, an appetite and longing after meat, and
an earnest desire to be satisfied: now, as the stomach longs after meat, so
should the stomach of our souls (feeling a pain) long, and have an earnest
appetite to be filled and satisfied in some sort, never quiet till we have got
the body and blood of Christ (which is the true food of our souls) to
satisfy our hungry appetite. But our case (for the most part) is miserable,
we have a dead flesh grown over our hearts, they be not touched with any pain
of our wants and miseries. But we must labor to see our hunger and want of
Christ: for as they which be thus hungry shall be fed, so they which be full,
shall be sent empty away. Oh, they be blessed which hunger after Christ, they
shall have the bread of life, and drink of the well of life. Ioh. 6.

Seeing Christ is the bread of life, Use 2.
the true Manna, signified by that in the wilderness: we see the madness of
most men in the world: who seek not for this spiritual Manna of the soul,
which is far better then that in the wilderness: but we like the Israelites
delight in onions and garlike, and the fleshpots of Egypt. And are not we as
profane as they, seeing we labor much to get earthly Manna, temporal food,
riches, pleasure, etc. but never seek to have Christ the food of our souls,
the bread of life. Yet these which do so, be the wise me^ of the world, we
count the^ of credit, and happiest me^: but they be indeed profane Esawes,
preferring this temporal food before Christ the food of eternal life. We must
then labor to detest this abominable profaneness, seeing it is the very
defacing of religion. But Christ shall take it in the highest disgrace, when he
sees us prefer bread which perishes, before this precious and eternal food
of our souls. And here in that Christ means by Manna, not corporal food, but
himself, his own body and blood (for that corporal food was but a sign of
this): we see the sign in the sacrament is put for the thing signified, Manna
for the body of Christ.

Christ adds the hidden Manna, to put a distinction between the earthly
Manna, which the Israelites, and all might see, feel, and eat, and Christ who
is the hidden Manna, and whom every one cannot see. It is called hidden, first
because no man by nature can have this food, no natural man can see, will, or
desire it: secondly, because God reuealeth not this spiritual food, namely
Christ, effectually to all men. Math. 11. 25. The wise and prudent cannot know
it, it is revealed only to Gods children.

Seeing Christ is the hidden Manna, Use.
we see the estate of men in the world, yea in the Church of God, they know not
Christ the true bread of life, they feel no want of this food because they
know it not: for a man cannot know truly what food is till he stand in need of
it, and feel the want of it: nay, not only the people, but Preachers, though
they know Christ in a mental knowledge, yet they know not him as they should,
they feel no want of Christ to be their Savior to deliver them from the wrath
of God, to feed their starued and famished souls, and to deliver them from the
gulf of hell.

Then we must not content our selves with knowledge swimming in the brain, but
labor to know our wants, to feel our misery, to seek to have Christ the food
of our souls, to deliver us from the misery and wretched estate we are in; by
it to labor to get but one drop of blood to satisfy our hungry and starued
souls. And as one which is starued with hunger would seek to have meat, so
we must have experimental knowledge, that we can say in conscience, I see and
feel how I want Christ to feed my soul.

Seeing Christ is the hidden Manna, God offers him not to all men in
general, for then he should not be hid as he is from many, therefore there is
no universal election, no universal grace offered effectually to all men in
particular.

The second gift is, a white stone: where Christ borrows a phrase of speech
from the Gentiles, to whom he wrote. The Gentiles used these stones in
judgment; for when men were judged, the Judges gave them either a white stone,
which was a token of absolution, or a black stone, which was a sign of
condemnation. Secondly, they used these stones, to try whether such a day or
such should be luckie (as they say) or unlucky: for if they took a white
stone out of their vessel, then it was a token of good luck; if a black, then
of bad. Now here it is used for the first.

Christ promises a white stone, Use.
that is, pardon and absolution from sins, and from the punishment of sin,
even eternal damnation. To them which overcome, believe, labor to maintain
and defend faith and a good conscience, let these go on to the end, for they
shall have this white stone. Now then, if any would know whether he have pardon
and absolution of his sins, here is the note and mark; if he believe in
Christ, labor to maintain faith and a good conscience, then he has this
white stone promised him. Then we must labor for these, that so the other may
be sealed to us.

The third gift is, A new name written in the same stone. This name is to be
Gods child: so the same Apostle expounds it, 1. John 3. Behold what great love
God shows us, even to be called his sons: this is the name he gives to
them which overcome, to be called his sons, and heirs with Christ.

Now seeing God gives this new name to his children, it must not be an idle
name: but the Lord gives with it a new condition, whereby we are made the
sons and heirs of God. So when Abram was new named Abraham, it was for a
special purpose; for then he began to be the father of the faithful. When
Jacob was called Israel, it was for a special end. So we having a new name,
must have a new condition, which is, to be called the sons and heirs of God
in Christ. Now this is a most excellent prerogative, for then we have Christ
our elder brother, and our fellow heir, God our father, the Angels to defend
and guide us, all things and means of this life to our benefit, Gods special
providence to guide us, and being Gods children, our sins are no sins, but a
means to come to felicity: and our death is no death, but a little door to
pass to life: this is the new condition God gives with our new name.

Written in the white stone: That is, in the pledge of absolution; for here the
white stone and new name go together: for look whom he absolueth, he gives a
new name and new condition: for he which has his sins pardoned, is a new
creature, a new man: the white stone and new name go together, and are written
in each other. Then men must have them both, and not as most do, say they hope
Christ is their Savior, he will pardon their sins, and yet continue in them,
and take occasion by that to sin: for Christ if he give the white stone, that
is, pardon of sin, he gives with it a new name, and a new condition of life.

Which no man knows. Some might object: Does he give men new names, why then
do we not call them by their names? Answ. He says, no man knows it but he
which has it, that is in that manner and certainty as he which receives it, for
no man can know or discern it: then men must not think strange though be be
not called by this new name. The world knows us not. 1. John. 3. 1.

Now in that he which has this new name, Use.
knows it, and sees that he is the child of God, and fellow-heire with
Christ, that he is called, justified, sanctified, and that none knows it but
he which has received it. This co^futes the Papists, who say, they know it,
but not certainly, but in hope, and by conjecture and probability. But we see
he knows it certainly, infallibly, without doubt, for he knows it better then
any other: other men know it by conjecture, but he knows it certainly.

No man knows this new name so certainly and infallibly, and from within, as
he which receives the same, for no man can determine of the faith, adoption or
calling of any, but himself: for that is proper to God to search the heart.
This must stay our censure and judgment, to judge men to be hypocrites, to
condemn either the better or bad sort of men, for we know not a man's heart,
his faith is but known to God and himself.

Object. How far may we judge of another state of salvation? Answ. We judge
of another man's estate, either certainly or not: certainly, as when one
judges, and sets down certainly and resolutely, that such men are elected to
salvation without all doubt: but this is proper to God, no man can know the
spirit of man but God and the man himself, and so far as it pleases him to
reveal the same to some of his children; as to David he revealed the damnation
and reiection of some, for which cause he prays for their destruction. Now
besides this, there is the judgment of charity, when we judge of another as
charity moves us: now charity makes a man judge the best. This charity
has two parts, first it is not to despair: secondly it is to judge of a man's
salvation undoubtedly, to be persuaded of it certainly. We must not despair,
though we see men live in sin. And we must judge certainly of men's salvation,
and without doubt that they be called effectually, in that they testify their
faith, by their obedience, not that we can set down certainly, but we must in
charity judge so of them. And this is charity in the highest degree, when we
judge that such a one is the child of God by the fruits of his faith.

Here again they of the Church of Rome are deceived, making the Church to have
this note and property to be visible, but not visibilitie: but election,
adoption, and faith are the principal marks of the Church. Now these cannot
be seen, only the fruits of them may.

And to the Angel. Here begins the fourth particular Epistle. The end and
scope of these words, is to certify the church of Thyatyra, that John had a
special commandment and calling from God, first, to write this Epistle:
secondly, to certify all Churches to the end of the world, that he had a
commandment and calling from God to write, not only this Epistle, but this
whole book: and for that cause this is seven times repeated, To the Angel,
etc.

The Epistle begins here: These things write, etc. and continues almost to
the end of this Chapter: in it note three parts: first, a Preface: secondly, a
Proposition: thirdly, a Conclusion. The preface or entrance in the eighteenth
verse, all which were in the former Chapter: verses 5. 14. 15. These things
says. In the preface: note first, in whose name it is written: namely in the
name of Christ. The cause why his name is in the Preface, is set down before.
Christ is described by three arguments: first, he is the Son of God: secondly,
his eyes are like a flame of fire: thirdly, his feet like fine brass. Christ
is here said to be the Son of God. In the former Chapter he was called the
son of man: here the Son of God. By God, he means not the Godhead as it
is absolutely or common to all the three persons: but by it is meant the
Father, who when he is conferred with any person in the Trinity, is called
God, not that he is more God, then the Son and holy Ghost; or that they be
not equal, but for order, in that he is the first person, and from him the
Godhead is communicated to the Son and holy Ghost. How Christ is called the
Son of God, we may know by these two rules: first, Christ is the Son of the
Father, not in respect of his Godhead, or as he is God, but in respect of his
person: and in respect of his person he is begotten of the Father before all
worlds. For the Godhead of Christ the Son, is not begotten, or begets not,
nor proceeds, but he has one and the same Godhead with the Father: therefore
it no more begets, or is begotten, or proceeding then his. The second rule,
Christ is the Son of the Father, not by creation, as the Angels and Adam, nor
by grace as true believers in Christ; but by nature, in that he is begotten of
the substance of the Father before all worlds. Because the Father communicated
to him from himself, his whole Godhead and nature: and by this communication of
the Godhead to his Son wholly, he is said to beget the Son, and he is said to
be begotten of the Father. The end why Christ is called the Son of God, is,
namely, to stir up in this Church of Thyatira, care and diligence, reverence
and attention in marking and obeying the things of this Epistle, seeing that he
which teaches them is the Son of God: teaching us in their example, when we
hear the word read or preached, we must have attention, diligent care and
fear, seeing it is the Son of God which speaks to us. When Pilate was
condemning Christ, and heard he was the Son of God, he was afraid. Shall an
heathen man which knew not God, fear to hear of Christ the Son of God: and
shall not we tremble to hear him speak to us himself? At the voice of Christ
the mountains melted, and the rocks claue asunder, and shall not our stony
and rockie hearts tremble to hear him speak to us out of his word?

His eyes were like a flame of fire. We must not take these words literally,
but as in the former Chapter: for Christ is set out as he appeared in vision to
John. By his fiery eye is meant, first, that in him is infinite wisdom, he
sees all things, he knows by his fiery and piercing eye, all things,
present, past, and to come. Secondly, it signifies his vigilancie and
watchfulness over his Church, and every particular member of the same, for
these two ends: first, to preserve and protect his own children, secondly to
take revenge and punishment on his enemies. Thirdly, by his fiery eye, is
signified his anger against sins and sinners. Christ is said to have fiery
eyes, to teach us, that he can discern secret and hidden sins: for in this
Chapter we find, that certain men in this Church were given to fornication and
idolatry, close and hidden sins. Now here he is said to have fiery eyes, to
show them, he sees these secret sins; he knows their hearts, much more
their sinful works, and will punish them.

Then by this we have a good remedy against all secret sins. Use.
The nature of man is, for shame, and fear of punishment, to abstain from
outward crimes: but being out of the company of men, he will break the
commandment of the first and second Table, without any care or conscience; and
this every man's conscience can best testify: that though he can abstain from
outward sins for shame and punishment, yet he will commit secret sins. But
these men should remember, that though they be out of the presence of men, yet
they stand in the presence of Christ, he sees them, his fiery eye pierces to
their inward thoughts and affections: and though they may bleare the eyes of
men, yet they cannot bleare this fiery eye of Christ. If every man would
remember this, the fornicator, blasphemer, or any sinner, it would be a good
means to bridle and stay the^ from committing sins, both open and hidden.

And his feet like fine brass. He is said to have brazen feet, to show his
strength and power, by which he overcame and bruised the head of the serpent on
the cross, and fully vanquished hell, death and sin by his death, and also
does subdue sin and Satan, and put them under not only his brazen foot, but
under the feet of his servants and members.

The end why he is said to have feet of brass here in this Epistle, is to
terrify certain wicked persons in this Church, as fornicators, and idolaters,
nay the whole Church of Thyatira, which by these wicked men, were in danger to
be drawn that way.

This then may be a remedy for all loose livers: Use 1.
namely, to consider of Christ's brazen feet, to think that Christ our Savior
is in the midst of the Church, walks there, and that he has a foot of
brass to trample and tread all his enemies to powder, and to destroy them. The
want of this, is the cause why men lie in sin, and heap sin upon sin
without care, or conscience, or any fear.

The second part of the Epistle is the Proposition, wherein is propounded the
substance and matter of the Epistle. It has two parts: first, a praise:
secondly, a dispraise or rebuke. The commendation, in the 19. verse: the
dispraise, in the 20. verse. First, she is commended generally, I know thy
works: secondly, particularly, for many duties and virtues.

I know thy works: that is, I see and allow thy works and ways. The end why
he alleges and repeateth these words, is to stir up the hearts of his
servants, to consider of his presence For Christ before has fiery eyes, and
here he says, I know thy works, to make this consideration, to sink more
deeply, and imprint it more thoroughly.

In the second part he commends her for many duties and virtues: first, love:
secondly, service: thirdly, patience: fourthly, faith and increase of
godliness. First, she is commended for love: that is, love to man, not to God,
for, for that she is commended after in the duties to God. But by love and
service is meant duties to man, performed by man to man. To know this love
better, note three points: first, what it is: secondly, the property of true
love to man: thirdly, how it must be practiced toward men. Love to man is a
gift of Gods spirit, whereby a man is well affected to his neighbor for Gods
sake. First, love is the gift of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 25. Secondly, it is a gift
whereby a man is well affected to his neighbor, that is, to rejoice at his
good, to defend, to seek and wish his good; yea, to be grieved with his hurt
and misery, and withal to have bowels of compassion to help him in his hurt
and misery. Thirdly, it must be to our neighbor, not by dwelling or
habitation, but to them which be our brethren in nature, have the same flesh
with us, and bear the same image of God. Then all men, as they be men, are our
neighbors, though they dwell at the worlds end, whether believer or infidel,
friend or foe, to these we must be well affected. Fourthly, it must be for Gods
sake: for God must first absolutely and principally be loved, and man for him:
so that our love to man is a fruit of our love to God, springing and descending
from it. As for the property of our love to man, it must be fervent, and that
in two things: first, if need require, every man is bound in the compass of
his calling, to lay down his life for his brother, and for his neighbor, 1.
Ioh. 3. 16. Secondly, it must be fervent toward our enemies: in the world
there is much hatred, malice and injuries. Now we must love those persons from
who^ these come, and love must be fervent, that these like water do not quench
it. And for the practice of our love to man, the rule is, that we love him as
our selves: as we love and wish well to our selves heartily, so must we love
and wish well to him. This is the law of nature, to do to another as we would
have him to do to us: yea this is the law of God; do to all men as you would
have them do to you. Is a man to sell? the devil offers him gain, if he will
lie. Now consider by thine own law, would thou have another to deceive thee
by lying? no surely: then deceive not thy neighor by false weights, wares, or
otherwise. By these three things we see for what this Church was commended.
This love were to be wished in us, but alas it waxes cold, every man is a
lover of himself, seeks his own good, no man his brothers: every man spends
his labor, wit, and his calling to help himself, no man to do good to others,
to help the common good, or the good of the Church, but to the hurt or
hindering of others: for men think they may make the best of their own, sell
as dear as they can: but we should employ all our callings, if we had true
love, not only to our own good, but the good of others, even the common good
of the town, country, or church. When men come to the Church, to hear the
word, to pray, to receive the sacrament, then they seem to show great love of
God, but look into their callings, there is no love of their brethren: which
shows they have no true but an outward love of God, seeing they love not
their neighbor, live by injustice, seeking to fley him, and draw out his very
blood by cruel dealing, by griping, pilling, and polling: now there cannot be
true love of God, where this love of our neighbor is wanting. 1. John 3. 21.

The second virtue for which this church is commended, is service. In this
place it is a virtue and work of love, whereby a Christian man becomes a
servant to every man for his good. This is commended and described, Heb. 6. 10.
Paul Gal. 6. commands us to do service one to another by love. 1. Cor. 13.
love seeks not her own, but the good of others. So Christ (John 13.)
commands his to be servants one to another, in those good things which God
gives us. As we must do them good in all we can, so one special duty here
mentioned, is to be ready to relieve (according our ability) the want of the
Church, for we must have first love and charity, then service as a branch
springing from love. Heb. 6. 10. which is when we are ready to bestow our goods
or gifts, which God gives us, to the good of the Church, especially the godly
in the Church. This were to be wished in England, but it is not, seeing the
richest sort bestow their goods in hawks, hounds, bears, bulls, dogs, and other
their pleasure and pastime: but when any comes to be bestowed on the poor,
then they be strait handed, all comes as hardly from the^ as a rib out of their
side. We see men can be content yearly to bestow much money in plays,
pastimes, and other delights, and that with zeal and earnestnes: but come to
the poor, our own flesh, to our brother, who bears the same image of God as
we do, here we stick, and from winter to winter suffer them to starve for want
of that which our dogs have. To move men to help the poor: first see how men
in the old testament were charged with offerings, first fruits, sacrifices,
and many other ceremonies: now these be ended; but instead of that altar, the
poor they be the altar, whereon we must offer our burnt offerings and our
sacrifices. Secondly, Esaias 58. 10. he which imparts his heart to the poor,
that is, seeing him in want, has his heart touched with the bowels of
compassion, and testifies his love in releeuing his want: this man has a
happy promise, his name shall not be put out, but shine for ever: and this is
true religion, to visit the fatherless and widow, to comfort and relieve them,
Iam. 1. Prou. 25. He which gives to the poor, lends to the Lord. Now the
Lord he comes in his person to borow, he makes the pore his stewards to gather
it in: will thou say him nay, to lend him of his own? thou will not. Would
thou have him stay, or send his steward away empty. Again, Christ comes in
their person, he asks an alms, he says in their person, I am hungry, naked,
fatherles and motherles, and in them he stands craving at our doors. Now if we
would escape that horrible sentence of condemnation, Away from me, etc. let us
not say him nay, or deny him. But if we will be liberal in any thing, and
bestow largely on any thing, bestow it on the poor, our own flesh, and so we
lend to God who is the best paymaster, and we give to Christ, who will not let
it be unrewarded.

Now follows the third particular virtue, for which Christ commends the
Church of Thyatira, which is faith, that is, fidelity, whereby we are
faithful to God, in keeping our promise made to him in baptism: wherein we
promise to renounce our selves, to believe in God, three persons, one true God,
to obey him all our life time: this is commanded, 1. Tim. 5. 12. Now it would
be wished, that our Church might be commended for this fidelity, but it
cannot: for though it be a common thing among us to swear by our faith, yet
there is little faith in our hearts, yea little care to keep this fidelity
promised in baptism: for some of us lie in ignorance, never knowing what
promise we have made to God; and such are many among us, young, old, high,
low, rich, and poor. Others they have no care of goodness, of heaven or
heavenly things, but of eating, drinking, sporting, in which they spend their
days, never thinking of Christ, or of their promise to him. A third sort, are
those which we account honest and wise men; but they come short indeed: for
these set their hearts on riches and the things of this world, spend their
strength and wit in the getting of them, and have their hearts glued to them.
They like Molds are ever in the earth. We call them (I say) honest men, but
indeed they deny God, forsake their first faith and fidelity to God in
baptism, and in stead of the true God, erect an idol, even their riches: and
of these we have great heaps. Then it stands us in hand, often to remember our
promise in baptism, to renounce our selves, and the things of this world, to
believe in Christ, to perform obedience to him in all our life: for if we go
on, and still deny our first faith, nothing belongs to us but condemnation.

The fourth virtue, is patience, whereof we have heard in this, and the former
chapter. Here mark how patienc is joined with love to men, faith to God, and
service to men and God. The reason is, because no good action can be done of
any man without patience: love and faith without it are nothing: for if a man
do his duty to man, he shall be sure to be hated: now without patience he
cease to do his duty. So if a man believe in God, and profess the same, the
world contemnes him: now without patience he cannot persevere constantly.
Patience is the effect of faith, Romans 15. faith brings forth hope: and Mat. 13.
the good ground brings forth fruit, but in patience. All that a man does, if it
be done acceptable to God, it must be joined with patience. Then we must in all
our gifts and graces join patience with our hope, faith, love, knowledge, etc.
2. Pet. 1. 6. No grace can show it self without this, a man cannot endure the
cross without it.

And thy works, Christ before had said the same: here he repeateth it again,
which is not idle: for no word in scripture is idle: but by this Christ shows
his exceeding approbation of the works of this Church of Thyatira, that they
were such as he liked of, not in a mean, but in exceeding great measure: the
cause why he liked them so, follows afterward.

Now seeing Christ repeates these words after four worthy virtues, he does it
to show us what things are required to a good work, namely faith, love,
service, patience, and fidelity: for to do a work to God, we must join these
four virtues: and therefore Christ adds these words both before and after
these virtues. First, faith is required, because in doing any actio^, every man
must show his fidelity to God, which we do, when before we do any work, we
search the word of God, whether it be commanded or forbidden there: for no
work we do can please God, unless we be persuaded out of the word that it is
lawful: nay, being not of faith, it is sin, Romans 14. Secondly, our works must
not proceed from faith alone, but from faith and love jointly together, for
faith works by love: and though a man do never so good things, if not in
love, it is nothing. 1. Cor. 13. Thirdly, a special service is required to God
and man: for all our works must be done in service to man: for the end of our
callings be to do service to man, and withal in doing service to man, to please
and serve God. Paul commands servants to please their masters in the Lord, as
serving him: so of all men it is understood, that they in doing the works of
their calling, must do them in service to men, and withal to serve God. Col.
3. 21. This overthrows the Papists fasting, praying, pilgrimage, hard attire,
and whipping themselves, to pray to Saints, and offer to them: for these come
not from faith and love, neither are they done in service to men, to do them
good in soul or body: for these neither benefit themselves nor other. Last of
all, patience is requisite that a man may have constancy and perseverance, for
no man can do a good work as he ought, but many will mock and jest at him; he
shall have many crosses by wicked men, even by Gods providence: now that he
might be constant, patience is necessary, that so (as the good ground) he may
bring forth fruit, but in patience. To apply this, every man in doing any
thing in his particular calling, must labor to show these four virtues: his
faith to God, love to man, his service to God and man, and have patience to
undergo all troubles which come by doing his duty. For if a man do the work
of his particular calling, be it never so base, yet it is as good a work to
God in it kind, as to preach the word, and to give alms.

The fifth virtue is, that her works were mo at last then at first. The Church
of Ephesus was discommended for her decay in love: but here Christ commends
this Church for increase in godliness and virtue. It were to be wished, that
our Church might be commended for this virtue; but alas it cannot: for the
body of our people are in number increased, but little in practice and
obedience. Heb. 5. They indeed in regard of the time might be teachers, having
so long heard the word: but yet they need to be taught even the principles of
religion: for though they hear daily, yet is there no knowledge, no increase
of zeal or of repentance, no going on in grace: 2. Tim. 3. they are ever
learning, yet never come to knowledge. This is a common fault in all estates,
men hear much, learn little, and practice less: nay we have a worse fault,
for many among us having heard good things, go backward, loose them, become
worse, or else stand at a stay. And this is our shame, that many places which
hear the wordlesse, go before us in knowledge, faith, obedience and
repentance. Then if we would avoid Gods wrath and discommendation, let us now
increase. It is not enough for old men to say they cannot: though their memory
fail, yet they must labor to have good and zealous affections. Young men must
employ their strength, and wit, and memory in this, to increase in grace, and
not to quench any grace, but to stir the^ up: for to him which has is given,
but from him which has not is taken away that he had. Then all must labor to
go on in grace, that the teacher may have comfort, and the hearers be freed
from shame and discommendation.

Notwithstanding I have something against thee. Verse. 20.
Here Christ after his high commendation, rebukes the Church of Thyatira:
first, the whole Church: secondly, a certain woman in the Church. The rebuke
concerning the whole Church is in the twentieth verse: in which is first, the
reproof it self: secondly, the reason of it.

Nevertheless. That is, though I have hitherto commended thee, yet thou have
something which I like not, but greatly dislike. Of this I have spoken before.

Secondly, the reason of the reproof. Because thou suffer the woman
Iesabell to teach: that is, because they suffered a certain woman, namely
Iesabel, in the assemblies to teach and seduce the people.

First, observe in these words, the great power and authority which this Church
had given her of God: for besides the power of preaching the word, and
administration of the Sacraments, she had power to appoint who should preach,
who should not: and further authority to restrain wicked men and women by her
severe government. The like power was in the Church of Ephesus; and so of al
Churches, in preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments, to
appoint who should preach, and who not, and also to restrain wicked men, that
they commit not what wickedness they will in the congregation. And this
authority has the Lord given to all Churches: nay, without this, no Church
can continue or stand. And it is not sufficient to have rule in the
congregation, but severe government, whereby wicked men may be kept in order:
and because this Church used not this power, therefore she is discommended. Now
in every Church where the word is preached, and Sacraments administered, there
they have the same power: yet we see how sin abounds, fornication, adultery,
blasphemy, usury, drunkenness, and all for want of this government, which
should repress such sins.

This Church sinned, first, in suffering a woman to teach: secondly, to seduce
the people of God. This word teach, signifies to teach publicly in the
assemblies. Then they sinned in suffering a woman, Iesabel, to teach publicly
in the open assemblies of men. For 1. Tim. 3. 8. I permit not a woman to teach:
1. Cor. 14. 34. they must keep silence. But it may objected, first, that
Deborah and Huldah were Prophetesses. Ans. They were extraordinary: and we may
not make an ordinary rule upon extraordinary actions. Secondly, 1. Cor. 11.
If a woman pray or prophecy. Ans. First, there were such in the infancy of
the Church, and were extraordinary. Secondly, they did sin, and as a fault
it is rebuked in the fourteenth Chapter, where he commands women to be
silent. Thirdly, women are said to pray, because they give assent to the
Minister praying, saying Amen, and to prophecy by singing Psalms, and reading
Scripture: for so much the word (Prophecy) signifies being taken largely. So
(1. Chron. 25.) Asaph is said to prophecy, when he sung with instruments of
music in the congregation.

Seeing Christ rebukes them for suffering a woman to teach in the
congregation: Use 1.
we see it is not warrantable, that she should administer the Sacrament of
Baptism, no not in the time of necessity: for the word and Sacraments go
together. Now Christ will not have a woman to preach the word, therefore not to
administer the Sacraments. And though women be forbidden to teach in the
congregation, yet they must teach at home. Solomon he learned many lessons of
his mother, who taught him at home. Prou. 31. So (2. Tim. 1. 5.) Timothy was
taught by his grandmother Lois, and Eunice his mother in the Scriptures. But
hence some gather, (without ground) that as a woman may not teach, so not
govern. But this cannot be proved out of the word, and it has no force. For
though a woman may not teach, and stand in Christ's stead in the congregation,
yet she may govern and stand in his stead in the Common wealth, be a Queen,
Duchess, Countess, etc. For there is special reason why she may not stand in
Christ's stead in the Church, seeing men only so stand in his stead: for Christ
took on him the person of a man, not of a woman: but that lets not, but she
may stand in his stead in the Commonwealth, if she come to it by succession,
seeing it is her patrimony and inheritance. And we have great cause to bless
almighty God for the government of a woman, more then any which ever yet ruled
over us. But it is said, the man is the woman's head, therefore he must bear
rule, not she: Ans. He is the head, that is, more excellent, as he is man, but
not in regard of any gifts: for a woman may pass a man in grace, and gifts of
God, and other respects, and so may have rule over the man, though he be more
excellent as he is man, she inferior as she is woman.

The second fault reproved in the Church of Thyatira is, the suffering of a
woman to teach and seduce. Then as to suffer a woman to teach openly in the
Church is a fault, so to suffer her to seduce is a fault likewise. Seeing
Christ reproves them for suffering her: we see it is not left to man's will to
teach and hold what he will, but men must be restrained, that they teach and
hold nothing which stands not with the word of God: they must reprove patrons
and defenders of sects, and schisms, and new doctrines: for which, our Church
is to be commended, which has laws for Papists, Protestants, and Recusants,
which is both lawful and commended by Christ.

To aggrauate these two faults, he describes her by her properties: first,
that she is called Iesabel: that is, one like Iesabel: secondly, by her action,
she called her self a Prophetess.

First, the woman Iesabel. But why does Christ call her so? First, because this
woman was like Iesabel, and did in her person revive the wicked manners and
opinions of Iesabel: for as Iesabel was an idolater, brought in idolatry, and
the worship of Baal among the Israelites: so this woman in the Church of
Thyatyra. Secondly, as she was given to fornication, so this woman was a
maintainer and teacher of the same. Thirdly, as Iesabel was a woman of
authority, and by her authority did countenance and defend her sins, false
religion and the worship of Baal: so this woman was also of great authority,
and by the same, taught and maintained her devilish opinions.

In this reason see the practice of the devil, who labors in ages
following, to renew and revive the vices and sins which were before, and
their errors. For as he had Iesabel in Ahabs time, who was a patron of
fornication and idolatry: so in the Apostles time he had this woman, who
renewed these opinions, another Iesabel like her. The end is to further his
kingdom: for the devil sees that these means most dishonor God, hurt his
kingdom, and most of all build his kingdom: and so he deals in all ages, to
revive the opinions, errors and scismes of old. So they which follow Machiauel,
imitate the doings of Achitophel. So the Papists revive the errors of the
Scribes and Pharisees: they which separate themselves from our Church, the
opinion of the Donatists: the Family of love, the error of the Vale^tinians.
The second reason is, because by this name he might draw the^ to dislike of
her, and not to follow her, but that she might be in as great disgrace as
Iesabel was in the old Testament. And this Christ does to teach us in reading
the books of the old and new Testament, if we read of any wiked men, that we
should dislike their vices and errors, take heed of them and avoid them: nay,
if we see them in us, we must dislike our selves for them: and contrarily, if
we read of a vetruous man or woman, we must imitate their virtues, like and
love them, and our selves for them, if we have the same.

The second argument whereby he describes her, is her action, Which calls her
self a Prophetess: that is, she does challenge to her self to be such a one
as taught the word by the instinct and help of Gods spirit, and that all she
taught was the word of Gods spirit. She taught fornication was no sin, and
that one might go into the Idol temple and eat of their offerings, and yet
she pretends all to be done and taught by Gods spirit, making him the teacher
and author of her errors.

Seeing wicked men and women father their errors on Gods spirit, Use.
we must labor to get the spirit of discerning, to know whether the spirit be
of God or not: and we must not be of no religion, because many teach false
doctrine, but rather labor to have the spirit of discerning, to try the
spirits which we hear. Again, when we are accused or slandered, we must be
content: for we see this woman taught false doctrine, and yet fathered it on
Gods spirit, which indeed was not of him but of the devil, and so made him the
author of errors. Now if the Lord be thus dealt withal, made the author of
lies by wicked men: shall not we be content, if we be slaundered, who by our
sins deserved the same? As she challenged her self to be a Prophetess, so
she proved her self to be one, namely, by her own testimony, and her own
word, she said she was one. Here Christ shows the note of a false Prophet,
namely, a man's own word and testimony; but a true Prophet has many tokens and
arguments, to prove him to be so. As in the Primitive Church they spoke sundry
tongues without study, often wrought miracles, as seals of a true Prophet.
Secondly, they held unity of doctrine, in integrity of life and conversation,
to confirm their callings. Thirdly, they had excellent gifts given them of
God, as zeal, courage, and constancy to maintain their callings, which were
extraordinary: but this woman had nothing, but her own word and bare testimony.

In the second place (the more to disgrace her and the church of Thyatira) her
teaching was described by the end, which was to deceive men. Here is another
mark of a false Prophet, to teach to seduce and draw men to some sin or
wickedness. The end of true teaching is godlynes; but of false, it is to draw
men to sin in life and conversation.

After he describes her seducing by two arguments: first, the persons, my
servants: secondly, the means, to make them commit fornication, and to eat of
things offered to idols. For the persons, my servants: this increases her
fault, seeing they were excellent me^, the servants of Christ. Hence arise two
questions: first, why some men be rather the servants of Christ then other
some: secondly, whether the servants of Christ can be seduced. For the first,
some say, God would have every man in the world his servant, and does what he
can to make them so; he calls them, redeemeth them, gives them grace to be
his children, reconcileth the^ to himself, so that they may if they will be
saved: now some will not for all this receive Gods grace, but contemn his
mercy though he call them, redeem them, and give them grace. But this is
against common sense, to make Gods will in subjection and man's will to rule, to
disgrace God and set man aloft, to make Gods will to be ordered by man's will.
But the reason why some are the servants of God, not al, is Gods good pleasure
in electing some, and rejecting others, for he electeth not all to grace and
glory, but some only, and these be his servants, by reason of his own good
will and pleasure. Act. 13. 48. As many as were ordained to life, that is,
elected and redeemed of Gods free will and pleasure, they believed.

The second question is, whether a servant of God can be seduced? Answ.
Servants be of two sorts: some are only in appearance, some in deed and truth.
Those be only in appearance which receive the word and outward seals, but not
the inward fruit: and these be in our Churches the greatest part: these may
fall away finally and wholly, as did the Galathians and many other. But those
which be in truth the servants of Christ, though they may fall in part, yet
they cannot fall wholly or finally, Mat. 16. the gates of hell shall strive, and
show their strength against that rock of faith, but shall not prevail. So we
pray, Lead us not into temptation, that is, let us never be wholly under the
power of Satan. Now what we pray for, that we have a promise in the word for
it: and true faith and a constant purpose to live in any on sin cannot stand
together; for faith purifieth the heart, and preserves it in life and death:
ergo a true believer cannot fall wholly or finally.

To come to the means of discerning them, it is by committing fornication, and
eating things offered to idols. She made the servants of God to sin by these
two sins and means; which shows she was a maintainer of the sect of the
Nicolaitanes, of whom I spoke before.

And I gave her space to repent. Verse. 21.
Christ reproved the Church of Thyatira before for suffering her: here he
reproves her for her obstinacy and hardness of heart, that she would not repent
of her sins.

Time to repent: That is, though her sins deserved present death, yet God
suffered her to live in the world a space of time, to see if she would repent.
Now in her example he teaches us how to use time whilst we live in the world,
namely, seeing it is given us of God to repent in, and so to come to salvation,
we must use it so, and repent while we have time. For that cause he lets some
live twenty or forty years: for there is no repentance before we come into
this world, or after we go out, therefore while we live in it we must repent:
then we must think of it earnestly, that we use it to repent in, that so we
may be reconciled to God received to mercy, and have the kingdom of heaven.

Then damnable is the practice of our days, when men live in eating, drinking,
sporting, carding, and dicing, in spending their strength and wit in getting
riches, never thinking of the true end why they live, which is to repent, and
come to salvation, but spend their time he gives them to repent other ways.
The Lord might cut them off as soon as they be borne, yet he suffers them to
live to see if they will repent: then if they run on in sin, they increase
their damnation, and do as a man should every day carry a faggot for ten years
to one heap, and be burned himself with them at the end.

I gave her: Namely, Christ gave her time to repent, no creature, no man or
Angel can dispose of the time of repentance, but only Christ Jesus, it is in
his power alone when one must repent or not.

Then seeing it is not in our power, it is best for us to repent without delay,
while it is called to day. The young man takes his swinge, because he is young,
as though he could repent in old age, or when he list: but he robs Christ of
his honor, for he alone can dispose of the time of repentance. Then take the
present, who knows when the Lord will cut him off, and then his estate is
miserable. We think a man may repent at the last gasp: but it is not good for
a man to defer, seeing he may die quietly by reason of the sickness, yet may
die out of Gods favor. But to whom gave Christ this time? To her: that is,
Iesabel, a wicked woman. Here we see the endless mercy of God in Christ Jesus,
he offers mercy to Iesabel, a lewd wicked fornicator, and idolater, a
blasphemous wretch, fathering her sins on the spirit of God, yet she has
mercy offered. So the Lord deals not in justice, to cut men off, but gives
grievous sinners time to repent. So did he to Manaesses, a wisard and idolater,
who humbling himself was received to mercy. Solomon an idolater, yet
repenting, was received to mercy, for he was a penman of the Scripture, ergo
an holy man. 2. Pet. 1. 20. Isay 1. The Jews a sinful people, as ill as they
which were in hell. The Sodomites and Gomorrheans, they had mercy offered if
they would repent, and though their sins were as red as crimson, yet God would
wash them as white as snow.

We may not hence take occasion to sin: but they which be grievous sinners
must not despair, if they can repent they shall have mercy.

Of her fornication. She had sundry sins, especially idolatry, which cannot
want company, for no sin goes alone. Christ calls her to repent for that
one sin of fornication, because that was the most principal sin, the head
sin of that woman: teaching us, that when we repent, we must begin with our
greatest sins, which most clog our conscience, and by which we offend most.
Again, he which can repent truly of one great sin, he repents of all: if he
hate the greater, he will hate the lesser.

Then we in repentance must begin at the greater sin, and repent in particular
for it: for confused repentance is not true; as to say, I am a sinner, etc. but
repentance in particular for particular sins, beginning at the head sin
which most troubles us, that is true repentance.

Seeing Christ says, he gave her time to repent: hence the Papists gather,
free will, namely to do good, and to repent, for else this admonition were in
vain. But it follows not, for God gave her time to repent, and commandment
to repent, for other ends: first, that then he may with the time give grace
also to repent, that so she and we may see what we should do, and withal see
our own want, that we are not able to do as we are commanded, and so to make
us inexcusable.

And she repented not. Here Iesabels sin is set down, namely impenitency,
and going on in her sins of fornication and idolatry: concerning which sins,
note two things, first, where impenitency is forbidden: secondly, how great a
sin it is. First, where it is forbidden. Ans. There are two parts of the word,
the law and the Gospel, and these two be severed and distinct, neither can be
mingled one with the other. Now the law commands things, which we in that
nature of man in which Adam was, could have fulfilled: but the Gospel
commands things above nature. The law cannot command repentance, seeing it
reuealeth not repentance: Romans 2.
but the Gospel commands it, and so by an Evangelical commandment this sin
is forbidden. As for the second part, how great this sin is, know we, that
when men live and go on in their sins, it is a great sin, seeing by it men
heap up sin and wrath to themselves. Some say it is a sin against the holy
Ghost; but it is untrue: for that is a blasphemy, so is not impenitency: that
is in this life, but impenitency properly is at death.

Hence the Papists gather again, that a man has free will: seeing he gave her
time to repent, but she would not. Ans. She had free will to sin, as all men
have, and so to be impenitent: but it follows not that she had free will to do
good, and to repent without Gods special grace.

That which Christ said of Iesabel, may be said of our Church, and most men
among us: he gives us long time to repent, ten, twenty, or thirty years; not
one of a hundred repents, we care not to hear the word, and receive the
sacraments: we will not turn to God truly, but lie in sin, in ignorance, in
contempt of the word, in profanation of the Sabbath, covetousness, adultery,
idleness, drinking, and eating; so that our lives tell plainly, not one of a
thousand turns to God truly.

Now Christ having reproved the Church and Iesabel, from the 22. to the 28.
verse, he gives special counsel to them both. The end of his counsel is, to
direct them how to avoid the judgment of God, both in this and the life to
come. The counsel of Christ has two parts: the first concerns the woman
Iesabel and her company: the second, the Church of Thyatira.

The counsel concerning her, is in the 22. and 23. verses: the sum of it is
to repent: thou Iesabel and thy company and disciples repent of your sins. This
is not expressed, but in stead thereof is the reason, verse. 22. 23. The reason
is this, If thou will not repent, I will punish thee with sundry judgments:
but thou would not be punished with sundry judgments, therefore repent.

Behold I will. This is the reason, in which note two parts: first, a
threatening: secondly, an exception, except they repent of their works.

Before the threatening Christ sets this note of attention. This should teach
her and us to consider seriously of judgments against sin and sinners in the
written word of God. Josias when the law was read, his heart melted, which was
at the threatenings of the law. 2. King. 24. So when Peter preached, the Jews
were pricked in heart, because he told them of the fearful judgment due to
them for killing the Lord of life. Act. 2. 37. So should we with Josias be
humbled at the serious consideration of Gods threatenings against sin, and be
moved to repent. And the cause why sin is so rife, is, because men think not
earnestly, or else regard not Gods judgments against sin and sinners.

The threatening has three parts, according to three estates. The first
concerning Iesabel: I will cast her into a bed. We may gather the meaning of
these words by those (2. Sam. 13. 5.) of Ionadab to Amnon, Ly down on thy bed,
and feign thy self sick. So here I I will cast her into a bed, that is, strike
her with some great sickness: the place, namely the bed, put for the sickness
which is in the man lying on the bed. Iesabel took pleasure in the bed by
fornication, who abusing the bed, the Lord to punish her in the bed
accordingly, gave her sickness in the same bed which she abused. Here is Gods
dealing with sinners, he punishes them in those things they have abused.
Iesabel abused the bed to fornication; the Lord punished her in the bed, with
some great disease and sickness. Dives abused his tongue and taste in Gods
creatures, and he is punished in them. Luke 16. he asked a drop of water to
cool his tongue. Gamesters take pleasure in abusing time, and spend it in
carding and dicing, their punishment it brings many judgments on them, they
come to ruin and misery. Ahab to get the vineyard, sheds blood, the Lord sheds
his, Iesabels, and his childrens: and they which live by the blood of the
poor, and draw it out of them, are punished with the like, for blood will have
blood, and the Lord will punish men in those sins wherein they took most
pleasure.

Then this should admonish us to take heed we abuse no creature of God, for the
Lord he will turn the same to our punishment.

I will cast her: That is, strike her with some grievous sickness. Here we see
the author of sickness, it is not by chance, but comes from the hand of God: if
men could learn this, they would make better use of sickness: if men could
say, the Lord has cast me on my bed, visited my body with sickness, he has
done it for some of my sins, to humble me, and make me repent; then they would
find in their recovery a blessing, and live a new life. Esaias 38. Hezekiah when
he lay on his death bed, knew it came from the Lord, and therefore, hearing Esaias
say he must die, he turned him to the wall and wept, as for other things, so
especially for his sins, and craved pardon for them. So Jacob lying on his bed,
leaned on his staff, sat up and prayed for pardon of his sins, and to
testify his faith and hope to God. So should we in our sickness show our
faith and hope, and pray for pardon of sins committed against him.

The second part of the threatening, which concerns her disciples and
followers, which received her doctrine, and committed fornication with her: and
their punishment is to be cast into great affliction.

We see it is a great sin to commit fornication, and not a trick or slip of
youth, as we call it, seeing Christ assigns a great punishment to it. Again,
we see some causes why towns, cities, and countries be afflicted with much
famine, sword and pestilence: namely, because there be fornicators and
maintainers of errors and superstition: for God sends these judgments, as for
other sins, so for fornication. Sodom was destroyed for this sin. And even in
our time, we have plagues, famine, sword, many sicknesses, and that for this sin
among the rest. 1. Cor. 11. many were dead for this sin, lest they should come
defiled to the Lords table.

Now follows the exception: Except they repent. Here we see, all Gods
judgments and threatenings be with exception in the matter of salvation. And
seeing Christ ads this exception, unless they repent: we see men of years
condemned in the Church, not so much for sin, as living in sin without
repentance. Indeed the least sin makes a man subject to condemnation, but lying
in sin, that brings actual condemnation and the wrath of God upon us, so that
if man commit sin and lie in it, he casts his soul away.

To commit sin, is not that which kills us, but to lie in sin: for if a
man sin, and after repent, he shall have mercy at Gods hands. Secondly, it
is propounded in the midst of the threats: for they go before this exception,
and come after. Where we see, God mingleth his mercy with judgment, he
shows not all judgment, nor all mercy, but tempereth them together. Now, in
that the Lord will bring judgment on them unless they repent: we see that
repentance preuenteth temporal judgment. We have had long peace, and have
abused it to commit sin, now we must look for Gods judgments: and we see
the Spaniard as a weapon of God, now the Lord may justly bring him on us. The
best way to prevent this and al Gods judgments, is, for high and low, and all
estates to repent, and so the Lord will turn him away.

Of thy works: namely, fornication and idolatry. So we, if we will repent, we
must cease from our particular sins, as the drunkard from his drunkenness, and
to live soberly, etc. For to say, I am sorry, and in general to repent, as
many men do, is but to make show of repentance: but men must leave each sin,
and do the contrary virtue.

In the three and twentieth verse, is the third part of this threatening, I
will kill her child with death: that is, such as be of her family, and her
children in fornication, not them which follow her doctrine, but properly, for
they are reproved before. I will kill. It had been sufficient, to say so: but
he adds, I will kill with death: for the certainty, largeness, and fullness
of it, not sparing them. But the mother sinned, shall the child be punished for
her sake? Ans. In temporal and bodily punishments it may be so, not in
eternal punishments. Among men, if the father be a traitor, the Son is
punished, and bears the shame: then shall it not be equity with God to
punish the son for the fathers sin in bodily punishment? And though there
were no reason to us, yet we should think it good with God. But there is
reason sufficient, why the Lord should destroy cities, and commonwealths, and
families, which be linked together by the bond of society, and be members of
the same family. Now if one member sin, the other may be punished: as in the
body, if the stomach be sick, the head feels it: so when the father
sins, the son may be punished: when the husband, the wife: when the
Master, the servant: when the subject, the magistrate: because of the mutual
relation, and nigh bond of society between members of the same family,
city, or kingdom. Is this so? then parents had need to take heed how they
sin: for they sinning, may bring judgments and death on their family or
their children. Then are they cruel parents, which live in sin, not caring
for their children, but by their sins bring Gods judgments on them, and on
their families. Let then every man in the society where he lives, be careful
he sin not: for then he may bring Gods judgment on the place, especially, if
he be a special member: as Ahab on himself and his children, and David on the
whole people. Then all such as will not look to themselves, but live in sin,
should be banished out of all societies, unless they will repent and be new
men: seeing they do what they can to bring Gods judgments on that place where
they live.

Verse. 24. That all Churches may know, that I am he, which searches the heart
and reins. Christ having propounded his threatening, here he goes about to
make it take place in them: in Iesabell and her company, by removing of two
carnal conceits, whereby they might think to illude and avoid Christ's
threatenings. For first, they might have said, Our practices and sins be
secret, not known to men: therefore though God threaten, we shall escape the
judgments of God: but we are without the reach of them, they cannot take hold
of us. But Christ in the first words cutteth off this first conception: Though
you may persuade your selves you shall escape judgment, seeing your sins be
secret, yet I search the heart, and I will discover them to all Churches: they
shall know that I search the heart, that is, I see and know the most hidden and
secret thoughts and affections of the heart.

That all Churches. Christ will discover their sins, not to all the world, but
to all Churches: and this he speaks, to the end to terrify Iesabel and her
company. For as it is a great honor to be approved and esteemed of all
Churches, so it is a great disgrace and dishonor to be evil thought of by the
Churches of God. Mat. 18. That which is bound in earth by the church of God, is
bound in heaven by God himself: so by proportion those which be evil thought
of in Gods church, and in disgrace of it, they be in disgrace with God in
heaven.

Seeing Christ speaks this to terrify Iesabel and her company, Use. 1.
we must labor in all things to be approved and esteemed of the Church: though
we must approve our selves, as much as we can, to all, yet especially to the
Church of God, and avoid all things which may bring any disgrace or dishonor
to the Church: for as it is a great honor to be well esteemed of the Church, so
it is a great dishonor to be il esteemed. To. 16. 1. Cor. 1. the last verse,
Paul says: All the Churches salute you:, not that all Churches send
commendations by word of mouth: but, to confirm and comfort them, he says,
all true Churches planted by him, did approve of them: Act. 16. Paul approved
of Timothy, and received him to him, because he was commended and had the
approbation of the Churches and brethren at Lyconium and Lystra.. So must we
have the approbation of Gods Church, which is the approbation of God himself.
But what would Christ have all Churches to know? namely, that I search the
heart, etc. In which words, by heart and reins, is meant the same thing:
namely, by reins, is meant the thoughts and affections of men, and by heart is
meant so much, as it is plain in the old and new Testament. But how can these
signify thoughts and affections, seeing thoughts be in the brain, affections
in the heart, neither of them in the reins? Ans. By resemblance: for as the
reins be in the most secret and inward parts of the body: so thoughts be in
the most hidden part of man; namely, his soul. So thoughts are said to be in
the heart, because they have operation in the heart, though they be placed in
the brain. Search: that is, with such circumspection and diligence, as brings
the finding out of that we seek. By this is signified, that Christ sees not
only the outward actions, but the inward affections and motions, nothing, the
most secret, is hidden from him.

We see by this, Use.
Christ is not only man, but very God: for he which has the true property of
God is very God; Christ has, ergo. He which is God alone, can search the
heart, the thoughts, Ier. 7. 10. 11.
motions, and inclinations of the heart: but Christ can, therefore he is true
God, one person, consisting of two natures, the Godhead and manhood. Again,
seeing Christ discerns the heart, we must in all things take heed of
hypocrisy, especially in matters of religion, when we seem to be that
outwardly, which indeed we are not inwardly: but we must look that we be that
in truth, and in heart, which we would seem to the world: to be and draw nigh
to God with our souls, as we do with our bodies, lips, words, and actions. For
Christ is very God, sees and searches our hearts, thoughts and affections: he
looks not so much to the outward, as the inward serving of him; we must
worship him in spirit, seeing he is a Spirit. Besides, we must suspect our
selves for unknown sins: for such is the depth of our corruption, that we
cannot sound the bottom of it, neither can we thorougly see the pronenesse of
our nature to sin and corruption. Therefore we must suspect our selves, even
of all sins which we know not, and not excuse any sins. So did David
(Psalm. 19.) after earnest search; as though he had said: Lord, I have searched
my heart, but I cannot sufficiently know mine own corruptions, therefore, O
Lord, forgive me all mine unknown sins. And if we could thus suspect our
selves, we would better practice repentance, and live with greater care; but
ignorant persons, not able to search their corrupt hearts, they bless
themselves, and excuse themselves, nay, say they can keep the whole law. Now
Christ having cut off the first corrupt co^ceipt, preuenteth the second, whereby
they might hinder and avoid his judgment: for they might say, though the Lord
send judgments, yet we shall be safe, they shall not come nigh us. Thus they,
and every sinful man does say. Esa. 28. They in common judgment, make a
league with hell, saying Gods judgments shall not come nigh them. This is a
natural corruption of our hearts, that in common judgment we shall escape:
and every man likes this.

Now Christ to cut off this corrupt conceit, says: And will give: as if he
had said: you may flatter your selves, think when I send judgment you shall
escape: but I will give to every one (none excepted) according to his works:
therefore flatter your selves no more.

I will give. That is, I will reward, partly in this life, and partly at the
day of judgment: for it is meant especially of the last judgment. Romans 2.
Reu. 20. Hence the Papists gather, that men must be saved, not only by faith,
but works, seeing God will reward good works. Ans. 1. Their reason stands
thus: by that we are judged, by the very same thing we are saved: but we are
judged by works, therefore saved by works. The flat mayor is false: for we must
distinguish between judgment and justification. To judge, is to declare one
just by his signs, as his works: to justify, is to make a man just: in which
we consider nothing but Christ, and our faith applying him to us. So then we
are judged by works, but not justified neither saved by works. Answ. 2.
Christ says not, I will give for their works: but I will give them according
to their works, as their works be, not for them; where he makes works an
outward sign and rule, according to which he will frame his judgment, to
declare men just.

Seeing every man must be judged, Use.
that is, saved or condemned by his works, then good works are necessary to
salvation: for we must be judged by our works, and saved according to our
works, therefore they be necessary: not as causes either efficient or helping
any ways, but as fruits, effects, and signs of our faith, and marks in the
way to heaven, which must direct us to eternal life.

Seeing we shall be judged in this life, but especially in the last day, by our
works, we must labor to abound in good works; not to win heaven by them,
but to assure our selves we belong to Christ, and shall be truly united to him.
Now all good works, are either the works or duties of the moral law of God, or
else they be those works of our calling, both general as we be Christians, or
particular in that calling God places us, done in faith and love, to Gods
glory, the good of others, and in obedience to God. These be good works to
God, though the calling be never so base: for which we shall be rewarded, and
according to which we shall be judged and saved. Now contrarily, evil works
they be evident signs of comdemnation: and look how many evil works we do,
they be so many brands and marks of our souls, to show we be the children of
Satan.

Here we see there are degrees of glory in heaven, and of punishment in hell:
for he will reward every one according to his works. Then they which have
abounded in good works, they shall have greater measure of glory: the fewer
works, the lesser glory: so they which have committed greatest sins, they
shall have greatest measure of punishment; they which less, less punishment
in hell fire.

And unto you I say. Verse. 24.
In this four and twentieth verse, he comes to the second part of his
counsel to the Church and Angel of Thyatira: that is, the better sort of the
Church.

But before the counsel, he sets a preface: in which preface, note first,
who speaks: secondly, to whom: For the first, who speaks: namely, I. Where
Christ as doctor of the church challenges to himself all supremacy, and
sufficient authority over the Church: for all his Ministers come in his name,
not in their own: The Lord says, or Christ says. But Christ, he comes in his
own name: I say. Noting, he is the head Doctor and teacher of the Church, the
fountain and head of all doctrine delivered to it. This Christ says, to smite
a reverence in their hearts, seeing this counsel is not delivered to them by
any man or Angel, but by Christ himself, who delivered it to John. For the
second: to whom he gives counsel: namely, you: that is, generally: after he
expounds this you, namely, to the rest of the Church of Thyatira, to the
whole body and Angel of that Church, except Iesabel and her company. Where
note, Christ speaking to them, distinguishes between persons, namely, the
Church and her Angel, and Iesabel and her company: so sutably he gives his
doctrine to them. Now he being the Doctor of the Church, teaches his Ministers
what to do: namely, to distinguish between man and man, doctrine and doctrine:
not to deliver every part of the word to all men, but to divide it aright, to
give to every person, that which may be fit for him. But how must the word be
delivered to mixed congregations, where there be both weak and strong, Papists
and Protestants, despairing and impenitent auditors? Ans. We must imitate
Christ, we must distinguish between persons, and sutably direct our doctrine
to them. Impenitent and hard hearted sinners must have threatenings, with
exception of the penitent: hard hearted must have no comfort but judgment,
with limitation to them which despair, these co^forts with limitation of them
which be impenitent. Now what is meant by this, rest of them, Christ shows:
And to as many as receive not this learning. Where he gives two notes to know
these rest by. The first, they which had not this learning, which maintained
not the doctrine of Iesabel and her company. The second note: they which have
not known the deepnesse of Satan (as they call it:) that is, which have not
approved, liked, withstood, nor given their consent to that depth of Satan:
that is, that doctrine of Iesabel, which they call and esteem to be deep and
profound learning: which these (though they know it) yet do not with knowledge
approve it, which Iesabel and her company judged profound learning, beyond the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. Of the first note I have spoken before.
In the second note, we may mark a wicked practice of Iesabel and her
followers: they esteemed their own learning highly profound, but the doctrine
of the Prophets and Apostles, that was no such matter: an high conceit of her
own false doctrine, but a base opinion of true Apostolical doctrine: and this
opinion has been in many heretics. So the Jews hold, that God gave Moses two
doctrines: the first, was the written law, which was for the common people: the
second was a more secret doctrine, which Moses had by revelation, and so
conveyed it to the Jews, which they kept still in the Cabbala. So the Papists
think, the written word, but an inkie letter, a dead letter, or nose of wax:
but the common consent in the heart of all Chatholikes, that they take to be
the true word of God, contemning the written word in the Prophets and Apostles.
So the Anabaptists, they make the word of God written, to be milk for every
nouice, but the consent of the heart among themselves, that is the strong
meat. Nay, this opinion is in our Church: for we prefer the writings of men
before the word of God. For if a man expound a text by the word, gather
doctrines according to the laws of reason, this we call simple preaching: but
if any bring in the authority of men, as Saint Ambrose, Augustine, with Latin
or Greek, this we take to be a learned kind of preaching, which is nothing
else, but to magnify the writings of men, to think highly of them, but to
disgrace the word of God, think basely of it. Here Christ says, I grant it is
a profound learning, not of God, but of the devil. Where we see, Christ
alleging this saying of Iesabel, does it with a disgrace: he says, it is
deepnesse and profoundnesse, but of the devil: yea Christ says not, it is
profound indeed; but that it is Iesabels speech, as they say. Hence I gather,
that Christian men cannot safely play stage plays, and Comedies of heathen and
profane men, for these be full of profane and blasphemous oaths, and wicked
sayings, against God and the moral law. Now if Christ alleging but one word
of a wicked woman, did it not without disgrace of her: how can Christian men
not only speak, but by iesture act, heathen and profane Comedies?

As they speak. He adds these words: first, to show, that the words he
alleged before, were not his own, but Iesabels and her scholars. Secondly, to
show the proud and presumptuous mind of them, in that they call their own
heretical opinions, profound learning: which is a note of a false teacher, to
use swelling words, and great bragges: to make a fair show. Jude verse. 16. 2.
Pet. 2. But the doctrine of God is in humility both of spirit, and manner of
teaching. The Lord teaches his will to the contrite and humble man. Psalm. 25.
14.

Now follows Christ's counsel: Though I lay no other burden on you, yet I
will have you hold that still which I gave you, to the end. This distinction
contains two parts; Though I lay no other, etc. in the four and twentieth
verse: yet I will, etc. in the five and twentieth verse. In the first part,
Christ says, Though I have punished Iesabel, left her on a bed; punished her
children and family; yet I will lay no burden on thee, but only that I
reprove thee for the suffering of Iesabel.

This Christ speaks to comfort them, and all such as give themselves to
maintain sincerity of life and of doctrine, for these shall be saved from
common judgments, and have the Lords protection in common afflictions: though
I punish Iesabel and her company, yet when wicked men be punished in common
destruction, you which study to maintain sincerity of doctrine and life,
shall have Gods protection in common judgments.

Then it stands us in hand to imitate the^, Use. 1.
to labor to maintain sincerity in doctrine, to defend truth in life and
conversation, to make conscience of all sin. If we labor to obey the Lord in
all things, to keep sincere hearts, then in common judgments though Iesabel
and her company, yea all wicked persons be punished, it shall not touch us, we
shall find Gods mercy and protection, our punishment shall be only reproof
for some defectio^ in us. But if we maintain falsehood in doctrine, live
loosely, not making conscience of sin, then Gods judgments shall take hold of
us, and afflict us.

But that which you have already, Verse. 25.
hold fast till I come. After the preface follows the sum of the counsel of
Christ to the Angel and Church of Thyatira, which stands in a distinction,
though I will lay no burden on thee, yet I will have you hold fast, etc. the
first part is in the 24. verse, the second part in these words, as before I
said.

That which you have received. That is, that which my Apostles and Prophets
have taught you, that doctrine of salvation they have delivered you, hold that
fast with both hands, till I come to judgment at the last day. Before Christ
commended this Church for not approving the false doctrine of Iesabel, but here
he commands her to embrace the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles.

Hence we see, Christ would have this Church to embrace the doctrine taught by
his Apostles, to maintain that, and not to regard any other, but though an
Angel from heaven did preach any other doctrine, he should be accursed. Galat.
1.

By this we may judge of the maine religions which be in the world, Use.
namely, of the Turks, Jews, and Papists. The Papists magnify their religion
standing on unwritten traditions, but they cannot prove they be Apostolical,
ergo we must not regard them: no, nor doctrines which men say they have by
revelation, for we must only regard Apostolical doctrine. As for the Turks
religion, it was not the Apostles preaching, but crept in six hundred years
after them. And for the Jews, all their religion is against the Gospel. Then
good men in diverse countries should not be of diverse religions, but they should
embrace the doctrine taught by the Prophets and Apostles of Christ: neither
should men because of dissent in religion, be of no religion: for Christ
inioynes this Church to maintain the doctrine of the Apostles, though many
discented from it.

Hold fast to the end. Here not how long, not one or two days, but to the end,
and we must look to this, seeing Christ so straightly commands it, because
this is the foundation and mark of true religion, and the ready way to save
men's souls, to be constant to the end: and for this (2. Tim. 2.) Paul bids him
teach that he learned, that others might instruct them which follow, and so
convey it from age to age: and for this the Church is called the ground and
pillar of truth. And so the Lord (Ephesians. 4.) gives the Church Pastors: first,
such as by their teaching maintain purity in manners, and teachers which
maintain it in doctrine. Then this is the Churches duty, to continue purity
of religion to the end of the world. If the mark be set wrong in the haven, it
is enough to cast away all the ships: so if the purity of doctrine be corrupt,
which is the direction of our souls to heaven, then we shall make shipwreck
of our souls in hell. Then the Ministers must not only teach truly, but
labor to beat down false doctrine which poisons the doctrine of the Gospel.
And because men labor not to maintain the purity of religion and true
doctrine, the Lord (2 Thessalonians. 2.) gives them up to believe lies and fantasies
of men.

To him which ouercometh, etc. In these words is the last part, to wit, the
conclusion of the Epistle containing two parts: first, a promise: secondly, a
commandment. In the promise, note two things: first the parties to whom:
secondly, the benefits promised. The party to whom, to him which ouercometh:
whom here Christ describes to be, he which keeps his works, by his practice
of obedience.

He which keeps or observes. This is the form of obedience, namely the
observing of the works of Christ, which is not a keeping of them according to
the rigor of the law, but a constant purpose and endeavor to keep them: for
the children of God have this privilege, that their will and endeavor is
accepted of God for the deed in Christ Jesus. There are many which have little
knowledge, these must not be cast down, but if they have a desire and endeavor
to live according to the will of Christ, making conscience of sin, their
obedience is true obedience, and acceptable to Christ.

My works. Here is the matter of obedience, namely Christ's works: that is,
such works as Christ has ordained in his word by his spirit, and is the
author of in his members.

Christ calls these works his works, Use. 1.
therefore we must not think or speak, or do our words or works, but only
Christ's works, commanded and ordained in his word, and caused in us by his
spirit: which we do when we conform our works and wills, to his word and will.

We see no work is acceptable to God, Use. 2.
which is not ordered by Christ's word, though we think highly of it. Esaias. 6.
he reproves them for teaching the fear of God by men's commandment. This
condemns the Turks, Papists, and Jews religion, which are not works of
Christ but of sinful men, standing in praying to Saints, fasting, vowing,
Masses, etc.

My works: Not one or two works, but all my works: the creature must obey
Christ, not in some, but absolutely in all things* he will not pattstakes, but
will have all or none. David (Psalm. 119.) conformed himself to the whole law.
So Hezekiah he turned to all the law of Moses.

Unto the end. Use.
Here we see, Christ will have our obedience to be constant, etc. we must not
judge of obedience by one or two actions, but by the course of a man's life: if
his life has been good, with conscience of sin, then his obedience is good.
For say a man by reason of sickness, rage and rave at his death, yet if he
have lived well, and made conscience of sin, we must not judge of him by that
fit. Now the benefits promised are two: first, power to rule: secondly, the
morning star. I will give him power which I have received of my father. These
words must be referred to the words, not following but before. For the better
understanding of them, two questions are necessary: first, what is the power of
the Mediator: secondly, how far he conueyeth power to his servants. For the
first, the power of Christ as he is Mediator is great, and described by three
arguments: first, to rule over nations: here is the largeness of it, for
Christ has power over all men, all countries and kingdoms in the whole world
are in his hand. Secondly, it is sovereign and absolute, ruling and ouerruling
all creatures, ouerruled of none. This sovereignty stands in two things,
first, that he gives laws that bind the conscience, so that if men keep
them not, he has power to condemn them: nay he rules men's wills and
affections, he can make them obey him in spite of their hearts. Seconly, in
that he has this power of himself and from himself. Reu. 3. he has the keys
of heaven and hell. Psalm. 2. he can break them in pieces as a potters vessel.
Thirdly, he receives it from his father, as he is God he is equal to his
father, yet as he is Mediator, he receives it from him: thus is his power
general, sovereign, and absolute. To come to the second question. How far
this power is ours, and imparted to us. Answ. The general sovereign power of
Christ is not given to us, or to any creature, but to him who is God and man;
it is incommunicable to any creature, and proper to the person of Christ.

Then Christ speaks these words, not to show that his absolute and sovereign
power is given to us: but because his creatures have the benefit of it, the
full comfort and salvation of the elect comes from it, they have fruit of it,
in that they partake with him in his glory in heaven. Ephesians. 2. 7. 2. Cor. 6.
the Saints shall judge the world, that is, shall be witnesses and approuers of
Christ's sentence, not that they shall have power to give judgment, but they
shall be caught up first, and he giving sentence, they sitting by him shall
approve it. Secondly he gives us this power, because he by this inables his in
their own person to overcome sin, the world, and their own corruption.

By this we see our dignity, every servant of God has power over nations,
over the world, to rule and break them in pieces, to judge and condemn them.
Use.
Is this our privilege? then we had need to take heed of all sin, for we
cannot condemn other men of sin, and be guilty of sin our selves. For it is a
great disgrace for a Judge to condemn a malefactor of murder or theft, and be
guilty himself. So Christ, if we be full of sin, and make no conscience of
it, he will never let us sit to judge the world with himself. Then seeing we
are Kings, Judges, and have such privileges, we must look to our selves.
Again, this is our comfort in persecution, if thou be the child of God, thou
art a King, a Judge, though thou be now poor, abused and persecuted, yet the
time comes when thou shall judge and condemn thy persecutors, and be avenged
of them.

And rule the nations, as a shepherd rules his sheep: that is, to govern
and feed them, John 21. Feed my lambs, that is, feed and rule. Hence the
Papists gather, Peter was the general Bishop to guide and feed Christ's sheep,
that is the world: but then every Christian should be a Pope, for every one
has power to rule the nations over the whole world: but none will say, every
one should have so large authority: then it is not meant of supremacy.
Further, from this place the Papists gather, that Saints be patrons of
countries and kingdoms: secondly, that we may pray to Saints in heaven, for
(say they) they have rule of nations, ergo they know them and what they do. But
they abuse the text, for it is not said, any Christian shall rule over one
nation, but over all indefinitely: neither do they rule as Christ, but as
having benefit of his power. Again, both their collectio^s are bad, for by
nations, here is not meant any country or kingdom, but the wicked only, they
have rule over, not all nations simply, but wicked men and unbelievers.

And I will give him the morning star. Verse. 28.
Here is the second benefit promised by Christ to him which ouercometh, namely
the morning star, with all the benefits which come thereby. The morning
star is that star which rises before the Sun some time of the year, and
by heathen men is called Venus, which in deed is Christ himself. Reu. 22. 16.
Now Christ is called a star, first because he illuminates men's wills and
understandings in things belonging to salvation: secondly, to show that the
prophecy of Balaam (Number. 24.) is now in the new Testament fulfilled; for now
Christ has by his Apostles revealed himself plentifully to all nations.
Again, he is called the morning star, for special resemblance: for that
star rises not at midnight, or in the beginning of the night, but in the
morning, in the beginning of the day, and then shines brighter then all the
rest. So Christ the true morning star, came not in the beginning of the
world, or in the midst of it, but in the latter age, he came in the new
testament, and fullness of time, and now he reuealeth his will more fully then
ever in the old testament. 2. Pet. 1. 9. Christ then is called this morning
star, for in the old testament they had darkness and candle light, but now
Christ shines out brightly.

I will give him. Here is a promise of two benefits, first perfect illumination
and lightning, whereby all ignorance shall be dispelled after this life, and
men shall then so far know God as man's nature can comprehend. The second
benefit is the light of glory, not only of knowledge but perfect glory, for by
fellowship of this glory of Christ, we shall be made like Saints and Angels,
shining stars in the kingdom of heaven.

Seeing Christ is a star, Use. 1.
we see how they be deceived which live in sin and ignorance, without good
conscience, in pleasure and security, and yet they think they belong to
Christ, they have the true light: but such as live in blindness, never seeking
to know Gods will and obey him, these are in darkness, have no light in
Christ: for what fellowship is there betwixt light and darkness?

We must follow Peter's rule, Use. 2.
first labor to have this star to shine in our hearts, which is, when we use
means to have the beams of this Sun to shine on us, to get knowledge in the
mystery of our salvation by Christ, to have this Sun of righteousness to lighten
our minds, and withal to warm and refresh our dead souls, as the sun in the
spring reuiues all things which seemed dead. We must set open the doors of our
hearts, and entertain this comfortable light.

Seeing Christ is the morning star, not that shines in the night, but in the
morning, in the day time, we must labor to lead our lives in godliness and
sobriety, as children of the light. Romans 13. 12. and if we will not walk in
this light, it shall be taken from us, and we shall be cast into eternal
darkness.

Let him which has an ear. Here is the second part of the conclusion: but of
this often before.

CHAP. III.
VERSE 1. And to the Angel of the Church of Sardis, etc.
THIS is the fifth particular commandment to John: that he should write an
Epistle to that great and famous city of Sardis.

The Epistle has three parts: first, a Preface: secondly, body or substance:
thirdly, a conclusion. First, the Preface shows in whose name the Epistle was
written, to give it the more authority. It contains a lively description of
Christ in his kingly office, as he is the sovereign head of his Church, and
that in two royalties and privileges: first, in that he has the seven
spirits: secondly, the seven stars. For the first, I showed what it means,
chap. 1. verse. 4. namely, the holy Ghost, who is the author of all grace: so
that to have the seven spirits, is as much as to say, he had the holy Ghost.
Ob. All Gods servants have the holy Ghost, therefore that is no peculiar
privilege of Christ. Ans. True, but not in the same manner: for Christ had it
two ways: first, in regard of his Deity: secondly, of his humanity. First,
as he is God, he has in him the beginning of the holy Ghost: for the holy
Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son. Therefore Christ is said to
send the holy Ghost, and to work by him: and whatsoever he does in the Church,
he does it by him, and for that cause Christ is said to have the seven spirits.
Secondly, in regard of his manhood: because the holy Ghost has powered forth
into his manhood the perfection of all graces and gifts whatsoever, as he is
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows.

And this perfection stands in two things: first, in number: secondly, in
degree or measure. First, in number thus: Among Gods servants some have these
graces, some those; none have all: but Christ has all the graces which all men
and Angels have, and more too. Secondly, in degree: for the graces of Christ
are more in measure, then all the graces of all the Saints and servants of God
whatsoever: he has the fountain of all grace, and therefore he is said to
have the Spirit without measure. And for that cause also Christ is said to have
the seven spirits. This is spoken by occasion of the Church and people of
Sardis, which was a dead people, and therefore Christ was able to quicken them,
and to put life and spirit into them.

That no man can have fellowship with the Father, Use.
or the holy Ghost but by Christ, it is manifest by other places: No man can
come to the Father but by me: so there must be a participation with Christ,
before there can be any with the holy Ghost.

This serves for our instruction, because among the Papists there be many
great learned men, which have excellent gifts of nature, wit, memory, and
understanding: and though they have withal a reformed and civil life, yet
they want faith and regeneration. How comes this to pass? that such worthy
men having the common gifts of the spirit, want the special? The cause is
this: their Christ is a false Christ, yea an idol Christ: they profess the
want of saving faith, and all is, because they want Christ. Therefore no
marvel though you see the greatest learned there, mock and scoff at this
special grace of the assurance of our election. Again, many among us look to
be saved by Christ, and yet you shall see no grace, neither of knowledge, nor
faith, fear nor care to keep Gods commandments or a good conscience, no
spark of grace, and yet look to be saved by Christ. How can these stand
together? Though they say they have Christ, they deceive themselves: for they
have not the graces of the Spirit, and they have no grace, because they are not
in Christ: and by that they may know they are not in Christ, because they have
no grace. To conclude then, we must all be admonished to labor that we may be
united to Christ our head truly, to have fellowship with him, that in him we
may have fellowship with the Father and the holy Ghost. No grace of God to life
eternal will be bestowed upon us, till we have Christ himself. Therefore
first labor to be in Christ, and to be truly joined and united to him by the
bond of faith, that by this means we may have all graces distilling and
flowing into our hearts by Christ.

Now the second royaltieis, he has seven stars: that is, the Ministers and
Pastors of the seven Churches. Christ is said here to have them, because he is
the sovereign Lord over them: he is an absolute Lord over all. For he sets
them apart, and gives them whatsoever gifts they have: he appoints them
their offices, duties, and callings; so as he has rule over them, he
appoints, ordains, makes and preserves them. As he has in him the
fullness of spirit, so is he a Lord over his Ministers, he has power to save
if they obey; or to destroy, if they rebel. Ob. The Church makes Ministers.
Ans. The right of making Ministers and ordaining them, is Christ's royalty, and
belongs to him, the Church does but testify and declare who they be that
Christ makes Ministers, and approves them: therefore he says here, the seven
stars be his. Now the end of these words is to strike the heart of the
Minister which is secure and negligent, to make him know himself and his
place, that he may begin to have sound conscience of his duty. And this point
is an excellent motive to make them look to their duty: their gifts are not
their own, nay they themselves are not their own, but Christ's; and he is
their Lord. This very consideration cannot but be effectual to stir up all
pastors to regard their duties: for seeing they are Christ's, they must not do
their own will. We must renounce our selves in all things, and therefore
bethink our selves: our souls and our bodies, are not our own but Christ's.

Let this consideration draw us on to do, think, and speak nothing, but that
which Christ would: if he will have you live, be content, because he is the
Lord of your life; if to dye, be content, because you are his, and not your
own. So much for the Preface.

Now follows the second part of the Epistle containing two parts: first, a
reproof: secondly, a promise. The reproof in the first verse: I know thy
works: in which is contained a reproof, and withal a remedy in the next
words: I know. Here note the vice, and withal the reproof: the vice is
hypocrisy; for she pretended religion in outward show, but wanted it indeed.
Thou have a name: that is, the Churches about thee judge thee to live, that is,
to be borne anew, believe in Christ, and to have his spirit to guide thee: but
thou art dead in sins, and want newness of life and regeneration. The
like we may say of many great Churches: by name, the Romish Church, which
though it seem to live, yet in regard of spiritual life it is dead. It
pretends to be the true Church of Christ, but in truth it is dead in sin.
Yet some say, it is not dead, but diseased, full of sores and sicknesses; and
though the throat be cut, yet it breaths and pants: but the truth is, it is
stark dead and cold, it has no spiritual life at all. But some allege the
contrary, saying, it has the Sacraments in it; and where there is a
Sacrament, there is a Church: but they have Baptism, therefore a Church. Ans.
Baptism is not always a note of a true Church: for the Samaritanes had
circumcision, which was before Baptism, yet they were no people nor church of
God. Os. 1. 9. That there may be baptism and yet no church, it appears,
because there may be baptism without the preaching of the word. As the Papists
have baptism without the true preaching of the word: so they have the outward
Baptism, but deny the inward Baptism, which is justification by Christ, and
sanctification by his Spirit. Again I answer, it is a Sacrament, not to that
church of the Papists, but to the hidden church in popery: for the Lord ever
has his church among them, he keeps among them even 7. thousand which never
worshipped their idols. Now then, that Sacrament is reserved in that church,
not for the Papists, but for Gods children among them. By this we see Gods own
providence, to call them by those means, and for their sakes he reserueth the
word and Sacraments among them. But they say, Antichrist sits in the midst
of Gods temple: but Antichrist as we say, is in the Romish church: therefore
that is the temple of God. Ans. The true Church of God is among them, but it is
hidden. Now he sits in the midst of them, not as a member but as an usurper,
thief and deceiuer: for the Church of God is in their Church, as wheat among
chafe, and gold in dross. And the like may be said, though not in regard of
doctrine, yet in regard of life, of al our greatest towns in England, for the
body of them they seem to live, if we look on their outward service of God
and show, yet indeed they be dead, which appears by the common sins now in
prosperity, as pride inward and outward, fullness of bread, carelessness in
religion: though we have now the word plentifully preached, yet we seeming to
live are stark dead. Yet the Lord has his church amongst us, but the body of
our people though they have the word preached, yet they will not be reformed.
But as a father which cannot reform his son by words, must use the rod: so
the Lord when as the preaching of the word will not serve, he must needs take
the rod in his hand, to make us obey his will, to reform our lives, to try
which be his own children, and which not.

Christ before called these seven churches his true church, Use.
yet here we see this church has corruptions in it: so that a church may have
corruption in opinion and doctrine, and yet if it err not in fundamental
points, it may be the true church of God, and we must not condemn a church for
corruptions in it.

Thou have a name. Other churches judged of this church by the rule of charity:
seeing them to make show of religion, and to profess the Gospel, they judged
it to be a true church. So must we, so long as we see men live outwardly in the
fear of God, profess religion, judge of the^ in charity, til we see some
evident sign, and commit secret judgment to God. We see all infants are not
the children of God, yet we admit all, judge well of them in charity, coming of
believing parents; and Paul calls all the churches he wrote unto elect, by
the rule of charity, condemning none till God made them manifest.

But thou art dead. The churches about judged her to live, but Christ's
judgment is, thou art dead: then we must regard especially the judgment of
Christ, and not care so much to be approved of the church (though that be good)
as to be approved of Christ, which cannot err: for though the church approve
and commend us, if Christ approve us not, our estate is miserable.

Verse. 2. Be awake and strengthen the things ready to die. After the reproof
follows first the remedy, secondly, the reason. In the remedy, note two
duties: first, to be watchful: secondly, to confirm the graces of God decayed
in them. In that first he commands them to be watchful, we see it is an
excellent duty; and then is a man watchful when he has great circumspection
and heedinesse in respect of the salvation of his soul. This duty concerns
two things, namely sin and death: for we are commanded in the word to watch
against these two. Against sin in two things: first, for a man to bethink
himself of all the sins he may fall into: to do this, he must consider, first
his nature, secondly his calling. First his nature, that there is in it the
seed of all sin, ergo he may fall into all sin: secondly, a man shall find
that he is more inclined to one sin then to another, and against that he must
labor most. Secondly, for his calling, we must know that every calling has
his sins since the fall of man. Now a man must consider which be the especial
sins of his calling, and when a man sees them, he shall know by these two into
what sins he may fall, and against them he must watch. Another thing is, to
keep the heart that it be not tainted with any sin. Pro. 4. 24. above all
watch and ward, keep thy heart, that is, use all good means to keep thy
heart clean from all sin.

The second part of watchfulness is in death, against the coming of Christ at
judgment unto us, or in particular by death, in which note two things: first,
to bethink our selves of Christ's coming to judgment, or to come to us in
particular, and in this regard we must make account that every day is the day
wherein Christ will come, either in general or particular judgment. The
second duty is, to prepare our selves against Christ's coming, to make us
ready to die every hour, as if Christ would come even this day, so to morrow,
and every day. That we may do this, we must use sobriety and temperancie in
all the things of this life, moderately to use them, not to be drowned with the
pleasures and profits of this life: for we the^ forget the time of death. And
as Christ prescribes the remedy to Sardis, so to us: we are not better then
they: we take great care to prepare for the dangers of this life. If a town
were in danger to be sacked, or a house to be robbed, we would set watch and
ward to guard the^, how much more should we watch for the salvation of our
souls, and not hazard them at death for want of watchfulness? The second
reason to move us to watch, is the want of watchfulness, and security, which
is the forerunner of destruction. 1. These. 5. 3. When men cry peace, then
comes destruction. Luke 12. When the rich man thought all was safe, then came
destruction, and his soul was taken from him. When the old world thought
nothing, then came the flood and swept them away. This should admonish us to
take heed to prepare our selves, and watch both against sin and death,
unless we will cast away our souls.

And strengthen. Here is the second duty, which is the reforming of the
decayed graces. As if he should say, thou have had many graces, whereof diverse
are lost, and many are sore decayed, therefore labor to recover and strengthen
them. Where Christ teaches us, that if we have any gift of God, we must labor
to preserve it, and not only that, but to increase and grow on, and strengthen
it: we must not stand in one estate, but increase in good works, that we may
become perfect men in Christ, by growing in grace as in days: for our gifts
are not our own but Gods, we are his stewards, he looks to have his own
with advantage, else we are unprofitable servants. Then we must stir up the
gifts of God in us: and to do so, we must often and daily read the Scriptures,
daily hear them and meditate on the^, use the Sacraments often, use often
prayer and invocation, and strive daily against our own corruptions, and
withal stir up our hearts to good things, and to true obedience. Psalm. 119.
David says: I have inclined my heart, even my dead heart, and put life into
it: and so we must put life into our benumbed souls, and often call on them
which are half dead. But we commonly stand still, seek not to grow, but stand
at a stay. Christ by these words would signify, that some be dead, other
graces be ready to die: whence we have answer to that question, whether grace
may be utterly lost? We say some graces may, othersome cannot be lost, but sore
decayed and diminished. For Gods graces are of two sorts: some necessary to
salvation, as faith and regeneration: some are less necessary, which go not
with saving faith: as sensible and full feeling of Gods favor, joy in the holy
Ghost, earnest invocation on Gods name. Now these may be separated from faith,
and be wholly lost in the servants of God for a time: the other cannot, though
they may be sore diminished: nay, faith and regeneration considered in
themselves, may be lost wholly: for nothing is unchangeable in it own nature,
but God. The grace by which the elect Angels stand, is in it self chaungeable,
and these would perish and come to nothing unless they were continually
preserved, kept and confirmed in us and them. If this be so, why then do not
the elect fall away? Ans. Not because they have faith and regeneration, or that
they be in themselves unchangeable, but because of Gods promises: as Mat. 16.
Christ says, that the gates of hell, (though they show their violence,) shall
not prevail against Peter's faith: so that these graces are eternal, not of
themselves, but by Gods promise, which will preserve them to the end. Use.
Now seeing grace may be lost, we must not be too confident, if we have any
grace in us, but work out our salvation with fear and trembling: for they may
come to that ebb, that they may be at the point of death.

Now follows the reason of the remedy: For I have not found, etc. therefore
watch and seek to restore thy decayed graces. I have not found. Here Christ
signifies, that he made a search in this Church, and that to reward them
either with life or death. And so this was the practice of Christ when he came
to Sodom, he went down to search it. So Genesis 11. the Lord came down to see
Babel: the like is* Ierem. 9. And the Lord he visits, that is, he enquireth
of the sins of the fathers in the children, and if he find them, he punishes
them in the children. And always Christ first makes inquiry; and after
search made, he rewards accordingly. The like will Christ do with us,
therefore we must labor to be such as he may approve of. If a Magistrate were
to search our houses, we would see that nothing should be amiss: how much more
when Christ the heavenly Prince (which searches the heart, and cannot be
deceived) comes to search us, that he may approve of us and reward us?

But found thee not perfect. There is a twofold perfection: one of the law,
another of the Gospel. Of the law, when we satisfy the whole law: of the
Gospel, when our works done proceed from a believing heart, which is careful
to please God in all things. Now though no work of man be perfect, yet those
works coming from a heart full of faith are perfect in Christ, God accepting
the will and endeavor for the deed, through Christ.

Christ he searched, and found in this church many goodly works, in show only:
for they were full of hypocrisy, made show of godliness, but wanted the power
thereof, neither did they come from an heart full of faith, or that endeavored
to please God, not to sin in any thing: therefore they were not perfect and
pleasing to God. In that this church is reproved, not for want of works, and
those fair in show, but because they proceeded not from a believing and honest
heart; learn to pray as David, Psalm. 119. 80. Lord, let my heart be upright,
let me give all diligence to please thee in all things. This is a great comfort
when one can say in his conscience, My heart is upright: but hypocrisy is the
killing of the soul.

Before God. Christ seems to distinguish himself from God. But he speaks
not of God simply, but of the Father, and of himself as he is the Mediator,
and so is inferior to the Father, though he be now in glory. Now seeing he is
in heaven, and in glory there, yet carries himself as Mediator, we may pray
to him, without help of Angel or Saint, and it is no presumption, seeing he
is still by his own confession Mediator, and so carries himself toward us.

Remember. Here, after the remedy, Christ as a good Pastor of the soul,
shows how to use the same: namely, first, remember: secondly, hold fast:
thirdly, repent. In practicing of which three, stands the remedy of
hypocrisy. Remember: that is, call to mind the doctrine of salvation taught by
my Apostles. This remembrance is a most excellent duty, and brings with it
many graces, as subjection to Gods will, repentance, etc. Psalm. 73. David
seeing the prosperity of the wicked, had almost slipped, and was sore tempted:
he could not be rid of his temptation, till he went into the sanctuary of God:
that is, till he knew the word of God. Psalm. 119. 55. He kept the commandment
of God, because he remembered his name in the night season. Peter remembered
Christ's words, and so repented at the crowing of a cock, Luke 23. And indeed,
the cause of all sin, is forgetfulness of the word of God. Therefore Heb. 6.
every sin is called ignorance, because we commit sin, not remembering and
knowing Gods word: and if we could keep in lively memory the word of God, it
were not possible that we should sin as we do. Then it is a most excellent
means to cut off sin, to have the word of God running in our minds,
forbidding sin in us. And the Devil he labors above all things to make us
forget the word, for then he can draw us easily to sin. Now that we may have
the word continually in memory, we must labor to have our hearts affected
with the same: for we cannot remember more then we like and affect. Then we
must believe it, else we cannot remember: for that we believe not, slippeth
soon out of our memory. And the cause why so few remember the word, is,
because they be not affected and delighted with it, nor believe it.

That thou have heard and received. That is, that doctrine which by hearing and
receiving thou have learned. Seeing he puts hearing and receiving together, we
gather that this is the ordinary means of salvation, to hear and receive the
word preached. Then God calls not all men in all times, Use. 1.
seeing men in all ages have not heard the word, neither received it: and if
they have not heard the doctrine of salvation by Christ in all ages, they could
not be called; for first they must hear, and then be called. In this last age
only the word is sent to al nations: it was not so in former ages. Use. 2.
Again, false it is that God gives grace generally to all men, so that every
particular man has grace offered to salvation if he will receive it: but God
gave not the word to all: for all have not heard, therefore they could not have
grace.

The second duty is, to hold fast: this signifies two things: first to
maintain the doctrine taught by the Apostles, and received of them: secondly,
to practice the same in their life: but of these before.

The third duty is, to repent: that is, though she repented before, yet she
must restore and renew her repentancce. Hence we learn, that we must not only
begin, but often renew our repentance, and not only for great sins, but for
little slips and defects in grace, as dullness of heart, want of zeal, coldness
in practice of religion, etc. Now because this Church was ready to die, Christ
adds a reason, to put life into her, if she have any grace. If thou will not,
I will come on thee as a thief: A most terrible threatening: if thou will not
renew thy repentance, restore that grace decayed in thee, I will come as a
thief suddenly, and with speedy destruction, that thou shall have no time or
way to escape it. Note here, that this threatening is not absolute, but with
condition, and it is the most terrible commination in the whole word of God,
where Christ threatens to power out his whole wrath on a Church, so as they
shall have no time or means to escape it.

Then we having the same sin that she had, Use.
being dead in security by reason of our long prosperity, we had need of this
admonition to move us to watchfulness, to restore Gods graces decayed in us:
yet it seems we make light account of all these things. If a man had any
spark of grace this would stir him up, but if this most fearful
commination will not move us, then the end of all must needs follow, even the
heavy wrath and judgment of God must lay hold on us, and cast us into eternal
destruction, where is no hope of help, for then a man might have some comfort,
if after a long time she should get out, but he must live there for ever:
without al end of pain: when he has bin there a thousand year his pain is
still as great and as much, nay no end he can have. Then we must awake from our
sins, repent for our sins, our security, dullness and coldness in religion,
stir up the graces of God in us, shake off our ignorance; and that because
against these sins Christ gives out this most terrible and fearful
commination.

Verse. 4. Notwithstanding thou have a few names. Before Christ had reproved
this church of hypocrisy, now he commends her for a few which profess his
name among them. But Christ had said before, that the church was dead: how then
can this be a true church? Ans. Though the body of the Church were dead in sin,
yet a few, some of them were true believers, and testified their faith in
obedience.

Out of this coherence we have two instructions to learn: first, that a
particular church and congregation, is called a church in regard of the better
sort and part, and those which believe in Christ, and have the privileges:
also in regard of the better part which believe: for the Catholic Church is a
number of men on earth believing in Christ. Now the particular church is a
member of the Catholic Church, so far as they believe in Christ. Those
which believe not, are no part of the true church: but as bad humors in the
body are no true parts of the body, so these are no true parts of the Church.
Secondly, we see a distinction between man and man in this church, though all
be called, yet some called be dead, some alive in Christ, and continue so. Now
the cause of this distinction is, not from the will of man, but from the good
pleasure of God, Romans 11. 4. The whole body of the Israelites fell to idolatry,
yet the Lord had seven thousand which bowed not the knee to Baal. What is the
cause of this? not the will of man: but I have reserved seven thousand which
have not bowed to Baal, says the Lord. So then his will and good pleasure is
the cause why some stand and some fall. So the cause why some in this church of
Sardis lived, some were dead, is because the Lord in his good pleasure left
some to themselves, and to othersome he gave his spirit. This, as before,
confutes universal grace, which derogates much from the grace of God. For
this, why some stand, some fall, comes from and higher cause, even from the
power and will of God, which leaves some to themselves, and inableth some to
stand by his spirit.

Thou have a few names. Here is the commendation of the better part of the
church, there be yet a few persons known to me by their names, which have not
defiled their garments. Here he alludeth to the ceremonial law, for the Lord
in the ceremonial law, made a distinction between things clean and unclean,
not in themselves, but by his appointment. Now among the Jews, if a man with
his hand or garment touched a thing unclean, he was defiled: which ceremony
signified to them, that they should abstain not only from sin, but all
appearance of evil, in that they might not touch any unclean thing, no not
with their garments. Then here Christ would show there were sundry in Sardis,
which did abstain both from sin and all occasions, shows, and appearances of
sin: though the body of the church were dead, yet many in Sardis made such
conscience of sin, that they avoided the very occasions of sin.

Hence we see, Use.
that the servants of God be few in number, the body of the church is dead in
sin; but a few be so far from sin, that they defile not their garments, that
is, avoid all occasions of sin. Christ prepares the kingdom of heaven for a
little flock. Esaias says, only the best part of the Jews must be saved, the
rest hardened: and the way to hell is broad and easy, and many run that
way; the way to heaven is contrary. Mark. 7. 7. Then seeing the servants of God
be few, we must not follow the multitude: but this sin carries many a man to
hell, and to sin, when men desire to do as the most do, to live as the most
live; we must rather follow the little flock of Christ, and not run after the
multitude.

A few names. That is, persons known to Christ by their particular names: they
be called names, because Christ writes their names in a bill. Then we see
Christ knows his servants particularly by their names: Luke 10. he knows
all our hairs, much more our names. John 10. Christ calls his sheep by their
names.

This is a special comfort for us, Use.
to know that our names particularly are known to Christ, and be written in
his bil which is the King of heaven and earth.

The Lord to comfort Moses in trouble, used this, that he knows him by his
name: and so should it be to us that our names are known to Christ, and he
will accordingly help us. 2. Timoth. 2. there it is made the foundation of
salvation, that the Lord knows who be his.

Which have not defiled. These were commended for sincerity and uprightness
of life and conversation: though the rest of the church were dead, yet these
were alive, and kept themselves from all appearance of sin. Now Christ
commending them, he leaves in them a pattern of sincerity for us to follow,
to be as a looking glass, to see how we should profess religion. We must not
only know and speak of the Gospel, but we must live accordingly, we must
keep our garments from pollutio^, live without al occasion of sin: and that we
may live sincerely, we must first abstain from al sin in our own persons, take
heed we practice no sin. Secondly, we must take heed of contagion of sin, not
partake in other men's sins, by consent or winking at them, or giving counsel to
sin. Thirdly, we must abstain from all occasions of sin, from all appearance
of evil, we must not once name sin, nor give the least approbation thereof,
Let not fornication be named among you. Ephesians. 5. Then we must behold this
pattern, labor to be like them, that Christ may commend us as he did them: and
this we must do by living well, for religion stands not in knowledge but in
practice, and by doing these three, that is, abstaining from the practice of
all sin, from the contagion of sin, and from all provocation to sin, we shall
imitate them and become a most excellent people, and a worthy church of Christ.
Out of this place the Papists gather, that a man after baptism may live
without al mortal sins, for these few, having put on Christ, lived free from
all sin, nay from all appearance of sin. But first though they lived so till
this time, yet how prove they they lived so after? secondly, they be said to
keep their garments undefiled, not because they sinned not at all, but because
they lived and endeavored in constant purpose not to sin, but in all things to
please God: and so the Lord accepts their will and constant endeavor, for the
deed, and they be righteous before God, and no sinners, but keepers of the law.

And these shall walk with me in white. Here after the commendation is a
promise, to walk, that is, live, in white, that is, in joy and happiness.
Eccles. 9. 8. Let thy garments be white: that is, rejoice and take thy lawful
pleasure, in the things of this life. The church before was threatened to have
Christ as judge, and to destroy them, but these few they shall not taste of his
wrath, but be with Christ for ever in glory and happiness. By which we see,
that men which communicate not with the sins of towns, countries, or nations,
shall not partake in judgment with them. Lot lived in Sodom, yet his righteous
soul was not partaker of their sins, neither was it of their punishment, Genesis
19. Ezech. 6. 9. they which mourned for the sins of the people were marked, and
in the destruction not touched. By reason of our long peace, sins abound, so
that there is plenty of sin, of contempt of the word, of religion, etc. These
sins call for judgment, and will have judgment: now if we would escape this
judgment, we must take heed we communicate not with these sins, and then we
shall escape, though we live in Sodom.

After the promise, follows a reason of the same: For they be worthy. Hence
the Papists gather, that a man by his works may merit heaven, because here
they be worthy of reward, and be worthy to walk with Christ in glory. But I
answer, all true servants of God be worthy of life everlasting, because God the
father gives Christ to every true believer: so that every believer may truly
say, Christ is mine: and withal he gives the spirit of Christ, which stirs
up in the heart true justifying faith, which lays hold on Christ, applies
him and all his righteousness. Now Christ being given to us by God, and
received of us by faith, is wholly ours, and his righteousness is made ours by
imputation, so that Christ with all his benefits is truly ours: and when one
stands thus justified in Christ, and clothed with his righteousness, he is
said to be worthy of salvation, not for any thing of his own, but for Christ's
righteousness: for there is a double righteousness, one of the person, as
when Christ's righteousness is imputed to us: another of the work, as when a
work is done answerable to the rigor of the law, and then it is meritorious.
Now Christ speaks here of the worthiness of the person, not of the work of
the person, standing righteous in Christ's righteousness.

Verse 5. To him which ouercometh. Here is the conclusion: in it note two
parts: first, a promise: secondly, a commandment: of these before. To him
which ouercometh: that is, which gets victory over all his spiritual
enemies: which we do, by holding faith and a good conscience in all things to
the end: and this is, first the party to whom.

Seeing that the promises are ever made to him which ouercometh, we must labor
to have that estate; in conscience truly to say, we have labored in all things
to keep faith and a good conscience, and to think it a miserable estate to be
overcome of any enemy, be it sin, the devil, the world, or our flesh. I come
to the thing promised, which is threefold in words, but one in substance,
namely glory, happiness, and life everlasting. First, He shall be clothed in
white array, that is, with eternal glory, happiness, and life.

Out of this the Papists gather, that a man may do a good work in respect of
reward. It is true indeed, one may do so, as Moses had respect to the
recompense of reward, Hebr. 11. 26. yet that must not be the principal end,
but faith to edify the church and other men; and the^ we may do it to receive
eternal life as a reward.

And will not cut his name out of the book of life. Here two questions must be
assoiled. 1. What is the book of life? 2. Whether one can be blotted out of it?
for thou have the book of life in Gods predestination, or his decree in
election, by which he has ordained some men to life in his good pleasure: and
this decree of God is called in a resemblance the book of life. For as a
General in the field has his book, wherein he writes al his soldiers names:
and a Magistrate keeps a record, writing in it all the citizens of that city;
so God has his decree, wherein he writes the names of all those whom he will
save in his secret counsel.

The second question is: Whether one can be put out of this book? Ans. A man
is written in this book two ways: first, in the judgment of God truly:
secondly, in the judgment of men. Now if a man be truly written in the
counsel of God, then he cannot be put out: but if he be only in the judgment
of men, he may be blotted out. For the first, they cannot, because Gods
counsel is unchangeable: and (Romans 8.) whom he predestinates he calls,
justifies, and sanctifies. This golden chain cannot be broken, but whom he
predestinateth he glorifieth, ergo they cannot fall finally. As for the other,
being only in the judgment of men, as all be living in the church professing
Christ, these may be put out. Psalm. 69. Let them be blotted out of the book of
life: he prays that they might be manifested, that they were never indeed in
the book of life.

Hence, first we see the number of the elect is certain, for their names are
in Gods bill, they cannot be put out, but remain for ever. This then is no
universal election: for what need God a bill or book to write in some, if
all were elected? Seeing some men being in this book only in the judgment of
men, may be blotted out, and manifested to men to be but hypocrites: then we
must take heed of all sin, and make conscience of every sin; for so often as
we sin, we reach up a pen to heaven to cross our names, to blot them out as
much as in us lies. Let us then look to have our consciences assured that we
be in that book: which we may, if we find our consciences free from all sin,
and from all appearance of sin. But some godless person will hence gather, I
will live as I list, for if I be in the book of life I shall be saved; if not
damned, live how I can. But these deceive themselves, for if their names be in
it, they cannot live in sin, but in faith and obedience, in newness of life
and repentance: for he which is predestined is justified, and must live in
repentance and faith: and as surely as he shall be saved, he shall live in
faith and repentance.

3. I will confess him in the kingdom of heaven. That is, at the last day I
will take him for mine: he which thus ouercometh and lives in faith and a good
conscience, I will confess him to belong to me, to be my member, I will separate
him from all the world, and take him to my self, and pronounce to him the
sentence of absolution, Come thou blessed of my Father, Math. 25. The end why
Christ propounds this third blessing, is to move every person in the church of
Sardis, to confess Christ in this world: for he reasons thus, If thou shall
confess me before men, I will confess thee before my Father: if not, I will
deny thee, even before my Father. And so to us, if we will have Christ confess
us before God, we must confess him before men, and let no creature make us
deny him, but stand out against all his enemies, even against the gates of hell
and the devil, which is indeed a hard matter for flesh and blood; yet Christ
persuades us to do it, and to take pains to profess him before all men, for
he will confess us before God. If a King should come in company, and choose
out one, and come to salute him familiarly, call him by his name, and take him
by the hand, that would be a great credit: but what a happiness is it to have
Christ Jesus King of all kings to come and call us by our names, take us by the
hands, confess us to be his friends, and pronounce the sentence of absolution
before God, his Angels, the devil and all men, even our enemies?

Verse. 7. And write unto the Church of Philadelpha. Here begins the sixth
particular Epistle, reaching to the fourteenth verse. And as before every
particular Epistle, was set down a particular commandment, to write: so here
Christ gives John a particular commandment to write: the end of which
commandment, is to warrant John's calling, as before often I have showed.

The Epistle has three parts: first, the Preface: secondly, the matter:
thirdly, the conclusion. The Preface is in the seventh verse, and it shows in
whose name this Epistle was written: to wit, in the name of Christ. And as in
other Epistles Christ was described, to get credit to the Epistle: so is he
here by two properties: first, of holiness: secondly, of truth: besides, he is
desscribed by his kingly office: which has the keys of David. The 1 property
of Christ is, he is holy. But how can Christ be holy, seeing he comes of Adam,
as he is man? To this many answer, that Christ took his substance indeed from
Adam, yet so sanctified, as that it is free from all sin. This, though it be
true, yet is not sufficient: for as we take from Adam the corruption of nature,
so we have from him the guilt of sin. Now though sanctification takes away
corruption of nature, yet it takes not away the guilt of sin. Then the true
answer is this: All which come of Adam by natural generation, and that
commandment which God gave in the creation, Increase and multiply, they take
from Adam both corruption of nature and guilt of sin: for both be equally
conveyed to us from Adam. But God, to prevent this, ordained that Christ should
be borne, not by natural generation, but by a miraculous conception: and so
though he take of man man's nature, yet he takes not man's sin, which he
should as well have had, if he had come by ordinary and natural generation.
Now in that it is said, Christ is holy, note that he is so, first, in regard of
himself: secondly, of us and his church. In regard of himself, first, as he
is God: his Godhead is holy, nay his divine nature is holiness it self: there
is no difference between Christ as he is God, and his holiness. Secondly, in
regard of his humane nature, it was not only free from all sin, but filled
with all holiness, above all men and Angels: he had the holy Ghost without
measure. Thirdly, in his actions he was holy, as in his actual obedience and
fulfilling the law. Secondly, Christ is holy in regard of his Church, even of
us his members, because he is the author of all holiness in us, we have all
our holiness from him, nay, he is the very root of holiness; not as the
Father, or the holy Ghost, but in a more special manner, because from Christ as
the root, springs holiness in all his members. And as from Adam (being the
root in whom all mankind stood) was conveyed sin and corruption to all which
came of him: so from Christ, being the root, is conveyed holiness to all his
members in him: he is our sanctification, because we fetch our righteousness
from him, as a branch does sap from the root: for the humane nature of Christ
is the very root from whence is conveyed to us all righteousness.

Seeing Christ is holy, Use.
both in himself and in us, yea the root of all holiness, we must note this
maine principle of all true religion: which is, to be set and ingraffed into
Christ as a branch into a tree, and being once in him, to become new creatures,
to labor to feel the power of Christ killing in us the old man, our natural
corruptions, and also renewing in us the new man, and the image of God, in
righteousness and true holiness, to feel the power and virtue of Christ as
sensibly in us, as we feel the corruption of nature, and show this virtue we
receive of Christ, even as a branch shows the sap it receives from the
root, by the leaves and fruit.

2 Seeing Christ was thus holy, he propounds to us a pattern to follow,
teaching us to be holy as he was holy, to make conscience of al sin, to be
conformable to him, to mark what he did, and to imitate it. 1. Ioh. 3. 4. We
must purge our selves of sin, and be pure as he is pure: for he which is not
holy as he is holy, shall have no benefit or fellowship by his death and
passion. Thirdly we see, that title given to the Bishop of Rome is blasphemous,
to call him Holiness, as it is common in all their speeches to him. Now he in
that takes to him the title of Christ which is a part of Christ's honor,
communicable to none else: nay, he takes more on him then Christ here does:
for Christ is called but holy, he is called holiness it self.

The second title of Christ, is truth. Christ is called true in three respects:
first, because without error and ignorance he knows al things as they be in
themselves: so do not creatures, but by virtue from him. Secondly, because what
he wills and decrees, he wills and decrees seriously, without fraud,
deceit, or any contradiction, as appears in the whole Scripture, wherein is
nothing contrary to it self, but all without change and alteration. Thirdly,
because he makes good all his promises in his word, he accomplisheth and
performs them all, he is the performance of the (...), yea and Amen.

Seeing Christ is true, Use. 1.
nay, truth it self, we see a difference between Christ and all false spirits,
for they be spirits of errors: the devil is a liar from the beginning, he is
the father of lies, nay his nature is to lie, he can do nothing else: but
Christ is true, nay truth it self, every way true, in his knowledge, in his
will, and in his promises, he is true.

Seeing Christ is absolutely true, Use. 2.
we must believe in him, and believe his promises in his word without doubting:
for seeing Christ is true, nay truth it self, what need we call his promises
into question? And this should be the very prop of our faith, that he which
promises is true, and therefore will perform his promise. So in persecution, in
trouble and affliction, trust in Christ, he has promised to help; he will not
fail, because he is most true of his promise.

Seeing he is so true, Use. 3.
he propounds himself to be followed of us. Christ he knows things truly,
he wills and decrees things seriously: so should we promise, and perform,
and make good our lawful promises. Psalm. 55. The Lord hates the deceiptfull
person. Reu. 20. without, that is in hell, be all deceiptfull and lying
persons. Psalm. 15. It is a note of a member of the Church, and of Christ, to be
true and faithful, and to speak truth from his heart, for the devil is the
author of lies.

3 Christ is described by his kingly office: which has the keys of David.
First, let us see what is meant by the key of David. Esaias 22. 22. speaking of
Eliakim, says: I will put the key of David upon his shoulder: for Ezra had
been Hezechiahs Steward, an ancient steward in many kingdoms: but in his days
he began to be negligent in his duty, therefore he decreed to cast him out, and
to place Eliakim in his stead, (2. King. 18. 18.) and therefore says, he will
put the key of David, that is, the government of the kingdom of Judah on his
shoulder: for by David's house is meant the kingdom of David; and the giving of
the key, is the placing and inuesting him into his office, and giving him the
authority of the kingdom of David. Christ here has the key of David, great
and large authority of the Churches, as a chief Governor in a kingdom. It
will be said, David's key was temporal, Christ's kingdom spiritual. Ans.
First, Christ had David's key properly: for when Christ was borne, the scepter
was departed from Judah to the Roman Emperor; so that Christ then was the
next to it, and had true right to the crown and kingdom: Luke 3. And Christ
challenging his right, says, (Mat. 17. 26.) That the Kings sons be free, and
therefore he need not to pay tribute.

2 Christ had David's key typically and figuratively: for David's te^porall
kingdom was a figure of Christ's spiritual kingdom: so David was a figure and
type of Christ, therefore he is often called Christ: and Ezec. 3. Christ is
called David. Now he is said to have David's kingdom, and not Neroes or any
other, because their kingdoms were kingdoms of darkness and misery, and
cursed kingdoms: but David's kingdom was a kingdom of light, a blessed
kingdom, having those men which were acceptable to God, and therefore was a
type of the kingdom of Christ. Then where Christ is said to have David's key,
it is not so to be understood, that he had the same with David, but that which
is signified by David's key, Christ Mat. 2. is called a Nazarite, not that he
used their rites and customs: for he drank wine, they did not; but because he
was that signified by a Nazarite, namely, by Sampson, Iud. 13. For as he slew
more by his death, then by his life: so Christ he saved more by death then by
his life: yet Christ was a Nazarite, that is, severed from all sin and
pollution. And so Christ had David's key, that is, the spiritual key signified
by his temporal key, which key signifies authority, power, and government of
the church of God.

Which opens and none shuts. In these words Christ has relation to an
house, where, when one opens the door, he opens the house: and so Christ,
he opens and he shuts, which shows his absolute and sovereign
authority: he has the key of David, and he has it absolutely, no creature is
above him, but he can shut or open at his pleasure. Now this key is the power
of Christ. In his hand, which is a supreme soueraignetie over the church, by
which he can save or destroy. Now this sovereign power of Christ has three
parts: first, to prescribe: secondly, to judge: thirdly, to save and destory.
First, to prescribe, he has an absolute power without constraint of any
creature, to command what he will have done or not: so he propounds doctrine
to men's consciences to be believed upon pain of eternal death. Christ shows
in the books of the old and new Testament, that no man can make one article of
our belief: nay he which teaches any other doctrine then that, is accursed,
Gal. 1. Secondly, Christ has absolute power to prescribe regiment to his
Church, how and in what manner, and also the persons by whom it shall be
governed. So Moses made the tabernacle according to the pattern Christ showed
him. Solomon built the Temple according to the form he saw by revelation. 1.
Chron. 28. 12. Thirdly, Christ has authority to prescribe times for his
worship, to appoint Sabbaths, etc. And (Genesis 1.) as he created the Sabbath, so
has he power alone to alter it, no creature can prescribe a time to Gods
service, to the end of the world, but Christ alone. Then it is not true, that
the Church has power to appoint two Sabbaths in one week, or one in many
weeks; for it is Christ's honor to prescribe his worship, and the time of the
same.

The second part of Christ's sovereign power, is to judge, to have power to
determine of his own will, without help of any man or Angel. And in this
regard it belongs to him to give sense of the Scriptures, he alone gave them,
he is the lawgiuer, and must expound his own law. Secondly, Christ alone must
decide questions and controversies concerning faith. Then the Church has not
any such power, but from Christ, by help of the written word, by which Christ
expounds them to us.

The third part of this sovereignty is, that Christ can save and destroy, open
and shut, he alone has the keys of heaven and hell: he can open, that is,
pardon sin properly. And he alone promises this pardon, and can perform it
being God: and as he gives the pardon for sin, so he gives also eternal
life, saving men's souls. Secondly, he has power to shut, to cast some into
hell, and to destroy, when men live in sins and dye in the^ without
repentance: he has power to hold men in sins, after to cast them into hell,
and shut them up for ever.

Seeing Christ prescribes this doctrine to the soul and conscience, Use.
to the most secret part of man's soul, and such doctrine as can save and
destroy: we see, Christ he is Lord of the Church, he is Lord of the most secret
wills and affections, of the chiefest part of the mind. The Papists say, that by
virtue of this key of David, Christ can set up and depose kings and princes at
his pleasure: but this they hold, craftily to bring in the damned power of the
Pope. But it will do them no good: for Christ as he is Mediator of the Church,
and governor thereof, he deposes none, he makes no king: but as he is God,
so he makes and pulls down at his pleasure, being far above all men. And
hence kings are called Gods, because they represent Christ as he is God. Christ
as he is Mediator, makes men spiritual kings, but he makes not temporal
kings but only as he is God. For if he had such power, why did he refuse to
divide the inheritance, saying, Who made me a Judge? and to punish the
adulterous woman, confessing he was not a Magistrate.

From this power is another derived from Christ: namely, the power of the
keys, which proceeds from the power of Christ, and by which power the key of
David is put in execution. Mat. 16. 19. I will give thee the keys of heaven.
Now this power of the keys, is a ministry granted to the Church of God, to
open and shut the kingdom of heaven. First, it is a ministry, that is, a
service and duty: for that which the Ministers do, is but a service done to
the Church, and they be but servants and stewards of Christ in the Church of
God, in governing it. So then it is no authority but a service. When Adam
fell, we all fell in him, and he thrust himself and all mankind out of Gods
kingdom by his sin, and closed up heaven gates against us. Now since that
fall, Christ became man, and in his manhood dyed for our sins, and made
satisfaction to God for them; and this satisfaction of Christ is the thing
which properly opens the kingdom of heaven, and nothing else properly.
Christ alone can open and shut, the Church can only reveal and pronounce the
will of God: then no otherwise she opens or shuts, but by declaring the
same to be open or shut.

To the Church of God. That is, to the company of true believers called to
salvation by Christ, to them only is this key given, Mat. 18. 18. the promise
is made only to the Church and Gods people, not to all societies of men.

The end of it is, to open and shut. How, Christ he knew best, Ioh. 20. 23.
where he shows, what is the key, and what to open and shut: namely, to pardon
and remit sins, and no way else can men open and shut. Now we must
distinguish between giving sentence, and pronouncing that sentence. The first
belongs to Christ alone; the second to man, who forgiueth sin, not by giving
sentence, but pronouncing sentence given already by Christ in heaven. And to
make the church to forgive sins properly, is to rob Christ of a special
honor due to his Godhead. Then the right use of the power of the keys, is,
when the church of God uses them only in the name of Christ, to open and
shut: first, as his servants and stewards: secondly, according to his will and
word, not man's traditions and affections. Thirdly, to bring sinners to
salvation, to beget and continue them in repentance. They being so used have a
promise: namely, What you bind on earth, is bound in heaven, etc. and it is the
means by which Christ's power is put in execution.

Now this power of the keys given to the Church, has two parts: first, the
ministry of the word: secondly, spiritual jurisdiction. The first, Mat. 16.
19. namely, the ministry of the word, is set down and authorized by Christ:
I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, that is, the word of God:
and whose sins thou shall bind by that word, they shall be bound by the cords
of their sins in heaven, etc. This ministry of the word, is a key to open
and shut, two ways: first, by teaching and expounding the word of God, and
doctrine of salvation: and this is a key. Luke 11. 52. You have taken away the
key of knowledge. The key of knowledge is the doctrine of the word of God.
Secondly, the ministry of the word is a key in men lawfully called, in that
they apply in the ministry thereof, the curses of the law to them which live
in sins, and the promises of the Gospel to the repentant heart. So it
opens and shuts the kingdom of heaven: for that which the Minister
pronounces by Gods word to be bound on earth, is fast bound in heaven, etc.
Here we must remember, that Ministers are either certain or uncertain of men's
repentance: being certain, they must remit sins certainly and simply: but
being uncertain, they must do it with condition, and so they must simply or
with condition, remit and retain sins. Then in the public handling of the
word, men must pronounce with condition, seeing they be uncertain who are
penitent, who not. Their auditors are a mixed company, some believe, and some
do not believe: Lydiaes heart is opened, Simon Magus is hardened. The second
power of the keys, is spiritual jurisdiction: it is called spiritual, to
distinguish it from men's, and civil jurisdiction of the Magistrate. It is set
down and confirmed by Christ, Mat. 18. 16, 17, 18. and after, the promise is
added, verse. 19. 20. This spiritual jurisdiction is a power, whereby the Church
pronounces sentence upon an obstinate sinner, and puts the same sentence in
execution. It has two parts: Excommunication, and absolution. Excommunication
is an action of the church, in the name of Christ excluding an obstinate
offender from the outward privileges of the church and the kingdom of heaven.
That so much is in true excommunication, we see 1. Cor. 5. the incestuous
person must be excluded from the church, and be thrust out into the kingdom
and regiment of Satan, and his body some way afflicted. Math. 18. 17. if the
offender will not repent being excommunicate, he must be as a profane man,
even one which has no title to the kingdom of heaven. But some may say,
Christ only can thrust them out of the kingdom of heaven. It is true indeed,
so he does properly, yet the church pronounces who be received and who
refused, as that an obstinate sinner is shut out of the church, and withal
shut from the kingdom of heaven, she can debar him of the outward
privileges of the church. 1. Cor. 6. the drunkard which lives in drunkenness
shall not come to heaven: upon which ground the church shuts him out: by her
sentence, eue^ out of the kingdom of God and Christ. Ob. If this be so, the^
the true child of God may be shut out, seeing he may fall to such sins. Ans. He
may in part, and for a time, not wholly and for ever, because he may be
overtaken often, but yet as a free citizen is known to be a freeman, though he
be in prison for a time, and so has no use of his freedom; so the child of
God, though in part, for a time he be shut out, having no use of the kingdom
of heaven, yet wholly and for ever he is not; but so soon as he begins to
repent, he shall be received again.

Excommunication being so weighty a matter, Use.
it must be used with great advice, and due preparation, as we would when we
cut off a leg or an arm: not rashly, for then we sin against the third
commandment, seeing it is one of Gods special ordinances, which we abuse
when it is executed for each small offense. This excommunication has one
especial degree, as 1. Cor. 16. 22. he which loves not Christ, let him be
anathema, that is, accursed, and wholly shut from the kingdom of heaven. And
this is only pronounced upon one which sins against the holy Ghost, and
then the church upon sufficient ground may pronounce it. But it is very hard to
discern this sin, being more in the heart then any where else: for it is a set
malice against the person of Christ, and that upon knowledge. Now contrary to
excommunication is absolution: when an offender, upon his sufficient
repentance, is approved to be a member of the church, and of Christ: first
Christ must receive him; then the church, upon his repentance, pronounces and
declares him to be received.

Further, to know the power of the keys, we must know four abuses, crept in
the use of the power of them: the first abuse was in former ages, in that they
gave them only to Peter's person, and barred al other Pastors from them; whereas
they belong to al Pastors in their places as well as Peter. Ob. Mat. 16. 19.
Christ says, I will give to thee Peter. Ans. But before he spoke to all the
Disciples: and Peter he being more bold, and endued with aptnes, answered in
steed of all: not that the rest did not answer, but to avoid confusion he spoke
for them all, ergo Christ speaks to him in stead of them al. Secondly (John
20. 23.) he gives it to them al, not to Peter alone. And Ministers have that
power conveyed from the Apostles, by virtue of Christ's promise, Mat. 28. he
will be with them, not only in their persons, but in them which followed, to
the end of the world: to them (I say) which should preach and baptize as they
did.

The second abuse is, that the church of Rome has turned the power of the
keys into the supremacy of the church: for they make it a supremacy over al
Princes and churches, whereby they put up and pull down Kings, and make laws
to bind all men's consciences. For it is a service, and no supremacy.

The third abuse is, that they will have only the Clergy, and not the Prince
to deal in matters of religion: but we read the contrary in Gods word. Josias
2. Chron. 35. 32. he intends to banish idolatry, and to set up the true
worship of God, and therefore causes the people of Benjamin and Judah to stand
to his covenant, his subjects to obey his intent: and this is commended in him.
But they say, that Princes have not the chiefest power to govern, because
Pastors have the power of the keys. Answ. Spiritual power is given to the
Pastors, to rule the church spiritually; yet Princes have power to rule the
church ciuilly, to cause their subjects to embrace true religion, and to
forsake idolatry: but then (say some) they should be under the Pastors. Answ.
If we consider the Pastors person and goods, they be under the Princes: but as
they bear the key of Christ and his word, the King must honor them, for they
stand in the stead of Christ: but to make the Pastor above the Prince, is a
ready way to get all into his hand, and a great abuse in the church of God.

The fourth abuse is, that the Romish church has turned the power of the keys
into the hands of their Priests in the sacrament of penance, for every Popish
priest sits as judge, and every man comes to him, kneeleth to him, confesses
all his sins he can remember against every commandment: he inioyneth him to
bewail them, and after some signs of repentance, he forgiueth the fault, and
that properly as God does: yet after pardon, he must undergo some temporal
punishment, for he forgiueth the fault only, not the punishment. In which abuse
note these errors. First, there is confession of all sins, which has no
warrant in the word: secondly, he giving absolution properly as God does,
robs Christ of his honor: for eue^ the Pharisees confessed, that God alone
forgiueth sins properly. Thirdly, they absolve from the fault, but not the
punishment, and this is to enrich themselves, and to get whole countries, yea
all men's lands and livings into their own hands. Fourthly, they will have them
make satisfaction to God, which is impossible, and withal, makes Christ's
satisfaction imperfect. Now by these four abuses it appears, that Christ
unto the^ is no true Christ: but though the Pope give the keys of Peter, the
cross keys in his Arms, yet he has not the true use of them: nay, seeing he
makes new doors, (as beside that of heaven and hell,) those of Purgatory and
Lymbus Patrum, Use. 1.
he must make new keys to open them, flat contrary to the keys of Christ. In
that Christ is said both to open and shut, we learn, that he opens not to
all men and every person, but shuts heaven gates against some: for Adam
falling from Gods favor by his sin, shut out himself and his posterity,
both out of the heavenly and earthly Paradise: so that our sins be now as a
partition wall, and a cloud to separate God and us. And for this, even for our
sins, Christ shuts some out of heaven. Then by this we see our miserable
case: for by our sins we be all shut out of heaven, and under the power of
Satan. Our sins have been as so many bars to shut up heaven gates, which is
no small matter, yet the devil bewitcheth us, and makes us think sin is no
sin, great sins be small; small, none: whereas the least sin is
sufficient to shut us out of heaven for ever.

Again, Use. 2.
seeing sin shuts us out of heaven, we must repent for every sin: for we
cannot come thither if we live in any one sin, every sin is a bar and
lock to shut us from Gods kingdom: and we must labor to have these bolts
taken of, which is only by the passion of Christ, for that alone can take them
away. Thirdly, we see that Christ opened heaven to some, as to Nathanael in the
ministry of the word: and he has now opened heaven doors by his death, and
traced the way by his blood. Now the door being open, we must labor to enter
in, yea thrust and crowd to get in. That we may come thither, we must become
members first of his church on earth, else we cannot come to heaven. That we
may do this, first, we must come to the door, namely the church, before we
come to the house, namely heaven. Now the church is the door, and in it is the
key to open heaven gates, namely the word of God. That thou may come into the
church, first humble thy self for all thy sins, secondly trust in Christ for
the free pardon of all thy sins, and purpose in thy heart to live a new life,
and constantly in all things to please God to the end, and then thou art in the
church, and have the key to open heaven gates. But if thou come not to open
this door in this life where the key is, thou can never enter into the
kingdom of heaven in the life to come.

Verse. 8. I know thy works. From this eighth verse to the eleventh, is
contained the matter of the Epistle, containing three heads: first, praise:
secondly, promise: thirdly, commandment. The praise is in the eigth verse: the
promise is twofold, in the ninth and tenth verses: the commandment in the
eleventh. 1. The praise is propounded summarily, I know thy works. Then the
reason why he praises her, where the former words be expounded.

I know thy works. This has bin expounded in every Epistle, I know and
approve thy course and conversation of life. These words are repeated in every
Epistle, to stir up every church and member of the same, to the fear of God:
for Christ by these words would have us be persuaded, that God is present with
us, sees all we do, is an eyewitness of all our actions. Then we should do
all our actions as in his presence, as before his Majesty: and where this
consideration is not in some measure, there is no fear of God, nor true
religion. The reason of this commendatio^ is added, Behold, etc. here note two
points, first a sign of his approbation, I have given thee an open door, etc.
secondly, what be the works he approved, Thou have a little strength.

Behold, etc. These words may be understood either of the Angel of Philadelpha
alone, or of the whole church, both Pastor and people. If of the Angel, this
is the sense: Behold I have given thee, that is, behold and consider I have
given and vouchsafed thee liberty, and opportunity to preach my Gospel, and by
preaching to win and convert sinners to me. So 1. Cor. 16. 9. there Paul uses
the same words, signifying by the door of utterance, liberty and opportunity
to preach the Gospel of Christ.

For thou have a little strength: That is, though thou be endued but with a
small measure of gifts, yet thou have maintained the doctrine of salvation, and
not denied my Gospel in persecution. Now Christ saying thus to this Minister,
that he had given him liberty to preach; shows it is a great privilege to
preach the Gospel, and to win souls to Christ: for so much the word Behold,
and the words themselves import. That it is so, it appears in that the most
worthy Prophets have not had this granted, as Esaias, Ezechiel, etc. they
hardened the people, and they say they spent their strength in vain, and did no
good. For this, ministers are called the instruments of salvation, Dan. 12.
they shall shine, for the winning of souls, as stars in heaven. Then they
which have this privilege, should esteem of it highly above any thing in the
world, for it is a most excellent dignity, above all earthly preferments, for
which we ought especially to magnify Gods mercy.

For thou have a little strength. Though thou have but small measure of grace
and gifts, Use.
yet thou have maintained my word. Here we see that Ministers, though endued
with small gifts, may do much good to the Church, as this Angel of
Philadelphia did: and we have seen by experience, when as in Queen Mary's
time, in this place learning abounded, yet not one of them would stand out for
the Gospel: yet one not far off, having but small gifts in comparison of
their schoole-learning, stood out and sealed the profession of it with his
blood. And so now men of smaller gifts further the Church and Gospel, more
then they which have far greater knowledge in the arts and tongs: for such as
have greater gifts, be commonly flacke, so that they which be behind them in
gifts an hundred degrees, do more good in the Church then they, by a thousand
degrees. Yet for all this, men must be brought up in learning, and labor to
know Arts and Toungs, though we see it comes to pass, that men which want
such schoole-learning, they have zeal, and do more good then they which excel
in them: that so men of greater gifts might be humbled in the consideration of
this point. Naamans servant persuades him, when Elisha the Prophet cannot. 2.
King. 5. 12.

Behold. These words may also be understood of the whole Church: I have given
thee a door: that is, a special privilege to enter into the kingdom of
heaven, and title to it. I approve thy works: and this is a sign of it, that
I have given thee entrance into the same. Now this is a privilege not
belonging to all men, but only to the Church of God. Which confuteth
universal redemption. Use.
If this then be a privilege of the Church, to enter into the kingdom of
heaven, and to have such liberty, we must labor to use it, striving to enter
into that place. We have this privilege, to see heaven open by faith: we must
not then be so slack to enter into it: but alas we make no account of it, we
are wholly possessed with the profits and pleasures of this life: and our sins
are such a load to us, that we cannot enter in. Oh let us cast off such
burdens, that so we may more easily enter.

Which no man shall shut. That is, no power, after I have opened heaven, shall
be able to shut it. Here after the liberty, he shows the continuance of it:
namely, for ever. How then is it true, that Christ died for all men
effectually, if all men are not saved, because they will not? So Christ should
for his part open heaven, and they should shut it by their wills. But Christ
says, no power either of the devil or man can shut it, he having once opened
the same.

For thou have a little strength. Thou art endued with a little and small measure
of grace, of faith, hope, and regeneration: yet according to that measure, thou
have defended my word, and not denied me in persecution. By this we see, that a
man endued with a small measure of Gods spirit, may do works acceptable to God,
and by the same come to life everlasting, if his grace be true grace. Math. 17.
if their faith be but as a grain of mustard seed, it shall be able to remove
mountains. Now that which is true of miraculous faith, that is true of
justifying faith: if it be true, though never so little, yet it shall be able to
do works pleasing to God, and by the same we may come to salvation: for God
regards not so much the measure of grace, as the manner, that it be true, not
fained. In this is a special comfort for those which labor to keep faith and
a good conscience. Such are often troubled with the consideration of their own
weakness and wants: but they must know, that if they have true faith, though
it be but in small measure, the Lord accepts of them, if they labor to
please God in all things: for the Lord accepts a man, not for that he should
have, but for that he bestows on him, be it much or little. This may encourage
those which be not so forward in religion, which have not made such proceeding
as they should: for many seeing the Lord to require so much, they cast all off,
and never labor to come to know religion, and to keep faith and a good
conscience. But these should remember, that the Lord accepts of small gifts if
they be true; he accepts a man according to the measure of grace he bestows
on him, be it more or less. Then we must not be discouraged for our wants,
imperfections, and ignorances: for if we labor to have true faith, the Lord
regards not the measure of grace, but that it be true grace. Yet we must take
heed we abuse not this mercy of God, and take occasion to sin, and to become
negligent and careless in the duties of religion, but still labor to come to
such measure, as the Lord will most approve of.

Because, etc. Here Christ shows for what works he commends this Church:
first, she kept his word: secondly, she denied not his name, but maintained it
in persecution against all his enemies. And these two contain even all the
duties of a true Christian, and the whole practice of all religion. And these
must be an example for us: we must labor to keep his word, and in all things
to do his will. Secondly, we must in time of persecution defend his name, and
maintain his word against all his enemies.

To keep his word. A few words, but a great duty: for it signifies, that
she in all things, in every commandment of the law and Gospel, had care to
obey his word and will. And happy were we indeed, if Christ could say so of
us, that we obeyed his word, all the commandments of the law by obeying, and
the Gospel by faith and repentance, etc. But it cannot: for though in show we
profess we do, yet in life we show we fail in most points of both.

Verse. 9. 10. In these verses are two promises concerning the conversion of
certain Jews. Behold, etc. Here is the first promise concerning the the
confirmation of the Church of Philadelphia. Now it is likely, in this city
there was a synagogue of the Jews, which bare men in hand, that they were the
true worshippers of God, yet denied Christ the Savior, and so persecuted this
Church. Now Christ here promises he will make this synagogue repent, and
become true members of Christ, to profess Christ, and worship him. In this
promise note three points: first, who is the author of their conversion,
namely, God: for so it is said, I will make them, or I will bring them to that
estate, to worship me. Secondly, who be converted, namely, the synagogue of the
Jews. Thirdly, the fruits of their repentance: they shall worship before thy
feet. First, the author of their conversion is Christ himself: for so he
says, I will make them to repent. These are significant words, which give all
to God in their conversion of some and of all sinners, God is the sole author,
man has no stroke in his own conversion: man indeed wills it, and is
converted willingly; yet not by nature does he will it, but by grace. This
confutes the Papists, who hold that nature and grace may concur in the
conversion of a sinner: for a man (say they) being stirred up by grace, can
will and do that which is good. As a man being sick, he has the faculty of
walking, yet being faint he cannot, unless he lean on another shoulder: so a
man has a power to will that which is good, but it must be stirred up first by
grace. But Ephesians. 2. man by nature is not only sick, but stark dead in sin,
and cannot move one foot, no more then a dead man. Object. But (say they) then
man should be but a block, if he does nothing in his conversion. Answ. Though
he do nothing in the matter of conversion, yet he has sense and understanding,
which he can use in natural and civil causes, though he cannot use them in
spiritual actions, and so he is not like a stock.

I will give the^ and make the^ come: therefore a man being effectually called,
he cannot either come, or not come at his pleasure, as though God did for his
part offer man grace, and will him to come, yet he may refuse it, and not come:
but if God call, man cannot but come, else Christ would not have said, I will
give him and make him come.

But they say, Matthew. 23. Christ says to Jerusalem, How often would I, etc. but
you would not. Answ. He spoke that not as he was God, but as he was a Prophet,
or the Minister of circumcision to the Jews. Again, say they Act. 27. they
resisted the holy Ghost. Ans. That is the doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets, which was indicted by the holy Ghost, not the spirit of God himself,
for no inferior power can resist a superior. To come to the next.

Who be converted. Namely, a certain synagogue of the Jews at Philadelphia,
which said they were worshippers of Christ, yet indeed were the synagogue of
Satan, and bond-slaues of the devil.

Here we see not only small, Use.
but great and old sinners may repent and be saved. Christ he died for all
kinds of sinners, great, rebellious and obstinate: if they can repent, they may
be converted and come to Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 26. they must wait for the
repentance of those which were taken in the devils snares, so as he would wish
them no surer. Romans 1. some were given over to a reprobate sense, yet it is
likely that some of them repented. Then we see, great, grievous, and notorious
sins may be forgiven, yet we must not abuse the grace of God to live in sin,
but gather comfort hence, that though we be great sinners, yet if we can repent
there is mercy with the Lord, no sin can hinder us from Christ. We read that
Christ healed three sorts of dead men, some when they went to the grave, some
buried, and some which lay four days and stanke, as Lazarus did. So Christ
heals all kind of persons, he calls men of all sorts, even them which lie
stinking in sins, and are almost rotten in them. Then take the benefit of
Christ's exceeding mercy, when he calls thee to repent: come, and cast away
thy sin, though thou be a vassal of Satan, a man rotten in sin, yet Christ
has mercy infinite, he can heal and help thee: and he came to call, not those
which think they be righteous, but such as are penitent sinners, to take them
out of the Lions paw, and to save the lost sheep of Israel. Then abuse not
this exceeding mercy, but bless his Majesty for it, and use it as a means
to repent, to bring thee to newness of life, to break off thy sin, and to
make thee a lively member in Jesus Christ.

I will make them come and worship. Now follows the third point in the
conversion of a sinner: namely the good fruits of their repentance and
conversion.

I will make them worship. These words are expounded 1. Cor. 14. 25. where the
children of God prophesying, there comes in an unlearned man, he falls down
and worshippeth: so here he will cause these wicked Jews to come, and fall
down, and worship and adore the true God in the congregation of Gods church
and people. In these words note two fruits of conversion: the first concerns
God: the second, the church of God and the members of the same. For the first;
to worship God, it is a true fruit of a converted sinner, which no man can
truly perform as he ought till he be converted, to wit, to worship and adore
God in the company of his saints and people. The natural man knows that
there is a God, that this God must be worshipped: but to worship him as he
ought, it is a work that none but he which is truly converted can perform.
Another may perform outward worship, hear the word, receive the sacraments:
but true worship which is in the heart and spirit (for God is a spirit) that he
cannot perform. Now for the worship of God, three properties are to be noted
in these words: first, They shall come and worship: not worship simply, but
come, signifying that the true worship of God must be voluntary, willing, and
cheerful, not of constraint or compulsion, but as though there were no law or
judgment for them if they did not. Psa. 110. they came freely, not by
compulsion.

Then we see how most men come short: for men are not touched with love of the
word, never or seldom come to hear it, only come to morning or evening
Prayer, because if they do not, the law will compel them. These are no true
worshippers of God, for he cannot abide any worshippers, but willing and
voluntary.

And worship: That is, reverence God with bowing the body or knee: and this is
the second property: we must express our reverence in convenient and seemly
bowing of the body or the knee. Then we see, this is not a thing indifferent,
but necessary, to use meet and convenient gesture of the body in the service
of God, to bow down, and prostrate our selves, our soul and body. Esaias. 6.
the Angels in the presence of God cover their feet with three wings, and their
face with other three, testifying their reverence and adoration in the worship
of God. So must Gods people worship him in soul and body, etc. But we come
short in this duty: for whereas we should use seemly and convenient gesture
of the body, to show our reverence and humility, we see many lie snorting and
leaning on their elbowes, others irreverently with their heads covered which
ought to be bare, for God is a God of soul and body, therefore we must
reverence him with both.

Before thy feet. This is the third property: namely, in the congregation of
Gods people, they shall prostrate themselves at their feet: in hearing the word
or prayer, they must be humbled, the pride of their hearts beaten down, be
smitten with fear of Gods Majesty, and of their own sins. Act. 16. 29. The
Iaylor over night put Paul into prison, but in the morning finding all the
prison doors open, and thinking all the prisoners to be gone, he would have
killed himself. Now being thus astonished and afraid, Paul preaches the
Gospel to him, which before he contemned: but now being smitten with fear of
the Majesty of God, he hears Paul willingly with trembling, and comes
kneeling and crowching to him, saying: What shall I do? etc. And until a man
be smitten down with fear of Gods glorious Majesty, with sense of his
judgments for his sins, and so come to humble himself, he cannot be a true
believer of Gods will and word. The cause why there be so few true professors,
and that all serve God with formal worship, is, because they were never cast
down, they were never smitten with fear of Gods Majesty, never confounded
for their own sins: for till these be in us in some sort, we cannot worship
God, we cannot bow, and crowch, and humble our selves before him. And this is
the cause why most of the people every where content themselves with outward
and formal worship, with mumbling over their Creed, Pater noster, and the ten
Commandments; they were never smitten down with fear of Gods judgments and
their own sins: their natural pride was never beaten down with their own
unworthiness. Then if we would be true worshippers of God, let us come
willingly, let us worship God in soul and body, and let us come with humbled
hearts, with mortified minds and affections, and so we shall worship him aright.

The second fruit of the conversion concerns man: Before thy feet, meaning
the church of Philadelphia: namely, that they being converted to the church of
God, should reverence it, and the members thereof. They shall cast themselves
down in the congregation, as men not worthy to be members of the church, but
as a footstool for them to trample and tread on, by reason of the great sins
which these converted Jews had before committed. This their exceeding
reverence shows it self in the root of the same, which is a base conceit and
vile opinion of themselves, and so should every true convert study to confess,
namely, that he is the greatest sinner of all Gods children, and think so
basely of himself, that he can be content to be not a member, but the
footstool of the congregation: and this must we follow, if we be truly
converted; we must have a base opinion of our selves, think we are the most
vile of all Gods people, and give place to all men in regard of our sins. Paul
Tim. 2. calls himself the chief of all sinners, and we must do the like:
for the proud Pharisaicall heart is far from repentance, but the lowly and
humble heart is accepted of God.

And shall know that I love thee. Here is a reason of the former words, for why
did these persecuted Jews become true worshippers of God, and believe in him,
and reverence his church? The reason is, because I will make them persuaded that
I love them: and this is the ground of all true reverence. All superiors have
reverence due to them by Gods ordinance, as the father, master, Magistrate,
etc. Now that they may have true reverence of their inferiors, they must first
labor to be beloved of the Lord, and then they procure to themselves true
reverence: for the love of God to us, is the ground of this. Then those which
excel in birth or riches, they must not look to be reverenced for them, but
for that they be loved of God. And whence comes it that men in authority, as
the father, master, Magistrate, Prince, etc. want their due honor and
reverence, but because they seek not the ground of it, namely to be in the
favor of God.

Because thou have kept the words of my patience. Here is the second promise of
Christ, namely, preservation of this church in time of most bloody
persecution. This Epistle and book was written by John after Christ's ascension
in the days of Diocletian. Now after him came Traian, who raised a most bloody
persecution against the church in all countries, putting to death many of Gods
children. Now of this persecution, Christ foretells this church, and withal
makes this promise, that he will preserve them out of the Emperors hand, and
adds a reason, They were constant to obey his Gospel. In the promise
consider first the occasion, Because thou have kept: secondly, the thing
promised, Deliverance: thirdly, a prediction or prophecy of that which should
come on this Church.

The occasion: Because thou have kept the word of my patience. Some understand
by word of patience, the commandment of patience, which she should obey: but
that is too narrow: but it signifies the doctrine of salvation taught in
Christ. And this doctrine of salvation is called the word of patience: first,
because the doctrine of the Gospel teaches us patience: secondly, because it
is an instrument of patience, to work it in us: for when a man believes his
salvation in Christ, then he is patient in all things. Thirdly and especially,
because the Gospel cannot be obeyed constantly to the end, without patience.
For a time one may obey, but it is impossible to obey and be constant to the
end, without patience. The good ground brings forth fruit, but in patience.
Luke 8.

This Church received the doctrine of the Gospel, Use. 1.
and constantly believed it: for which is promised deliverance in persecution.
Then we see, that the grace of God well used, is rewarded with plenty and
increase of grace: so that they which have but small measure of grace, yet if
they be faithful, the Lord will reward it with greater increase. This should
make us take pains to increase, and use our talent of faith, patience,
repentance, and obedience, to the glory of God, and good of men: and the Lord
will double and triple the same, otherwise he will take that talent from us.

The doctrine of the Gospel, Use. 2.
being a doctrine of patience, how necessary is it for us to learn the same,
seeing the calamities and afflictions belonging to any calling are very many?
We must get our bread in the sweat of our brows, and no man is free from
sickness, sorrow, and death. Now if we would endure these afflictions, we must
have this grace of patience, and constantly believe the doctrine of salvation
by Christ, which will make us patient in any cross whatsoever. Again, we
profess the Gospel of Christ: now this is a doctrine not of disorder, but of
all order and moderation, teaching us to moderate and hold in our affections
and will: whereas if we want it, we are carried away at their pleasure.

My patience. Christ calls it his, because he is the author of it, and
works it in us. And this is added to beat down the pride of this Church.
For when Christ commended them for obedience, they might begin to be too proud.
Therefore he having commended her, lest she should be so, he tells her it is
not her own, but his gift, he puts it into her heart. And this may beat
down the pride of our hearts, when we consider that we have nothing of our
selves, but all good things in us come from Christ; he bestows them on us, he
gives all, nothing we have of our selves, What have thou that thou have not
received? why then should we be proud of it?

I will deliver thee. That is, from the great and bloody persecution of Traian
which lasted fourteen years, wherein many of Gods children were put to death.
Hence note, that God has set down the very times and hours, in which he will
try the faith of his children. Deuteronomy. 8. the Lord led Israel through the
wilderness forty years to try them. Chap. 13. 3. he sends false Prophets
to try his servants, whether they will cleave to him or not. So the Lord has
set times to try his for their sins, and to see what grace is in their hearts.
So he dealt with Abraham commanding him to kill his son, Genesis 22. 2. Chron.
32. 31. he left Hezechiah to try him. And so every Christian has his set time
when he must be tried, that so God may either discover his hypocrisy, or make
known his faith. When one foundeth a school, he sets some to see how they
profit; after seven years or some such space, he will look to try the
scholars, that he may see how they go on: and without this trial men will not
make so good progress. So in Gods school, the Lord he comes at his set time,
to try what profit men have made, to try their hearts, or true obedience, to
reward them accordingly.

If God will thus try us, Use.
then it is best to try our selves, to seek what is in us: for though thou
may bleare the eyes of the world, yet thou can not deceive him, he will
search thee, and lay all open to the world. If thou be an hypocrite, he will
detect thee, and make thee known: if not, he will make known thy grace. Then
never dawbe up the matter, spare not thy self, but seriously enter into thine
own heart, and never run with Adam from God, for he will pull thee out, slip
off thy fig leaves, and make thee manifest to all men. Now when we have
entered into a narrow search, we must in a strait manner seek to reform our
lives to the rule of Gods word, that so the Lord when he comes to try us, may
approve of us: for it is said, He will come, the time is set and cannot be
changed. It is a wonder to see how men's mouths be full of preciseness, so that
if men knew not the world to be full of blindness, it might daunt many
Christian hearts. But seeing there must be a day of trial of all that is in
us, the Lord will not take our hypocrisy, but he looks for sincerity: then
we must seek as much as is possible, to conform our selves to Gods will: for
when we have done all we can, we come far short, and though men mock us, yet
God will approve us. Then labor to be pure in all things without hypocrisy,
not given to any one sin: but in all things, word, deed, and thought, keep
faith and a good conscience: be not like to the foolish virgins; have not
blazing lamps without oil. If a man come to try a scholar in a good school,
and after long teaching find him not to have profited, it is a great disgrace:
the^ what disgrace is it for us, if after so long time of grace Christ come to
try us, and find no grace in us, no faith, repentance nor obedience, but
hypocrisy, and nothing answerable to our profession? But we must with David,
Psalm. 26. be so upright, that for sincerity of heart, we would be content to
have the Lord to try us, being not given to any sin, nor tainted with any
offense.

I will save them. But how can this be, seeing no Church was free from this
general persecution of Traian: for the Churches of Asia were all persecuted.
Now this was one of the most famous Churches: how then did Christ save them,
seeing they were persecuted grievously, and (it may be) put to death many of
them? Ans. Promises of deliverance (as this is) be not simply made, but with
condition. I will deliver thee: that is, save thee from temptation and
persecution, so far as it shall be hurtful for the salvation of thee. Christ
promises freedom, not simply from persecution, but from the hurt which might
come thereby to the^, in respect of Gods grace and their salvation. Ps. 91. He
which trusts in the Lord, the plague shall not come nigh his dwelling; yet we
see in common plagues, as well the godly as the wicked die: yet it is a true
promise, that the plague shall not come nigh him, to hurt him or his, to hinder
any man's salvation. And we pray: Lead us not into temptation, not to be free
from all temptations, but that we be not wholly left of God unto the devil: but
though we be tempted, that he will deliver us from the evil of the temptation,
that it may be for our profit and not our hurt, Use. 1.
and so Christ's promise is good to them. God will have his children tempted;
yet here is their comfort, he will keep them that they shall not have any hurt
by the temptation, to hinder his grace or their salvation. Though they be
subject to temptations, and suffer a thousand crosses, yea die in them, yet if
they keep the faith, they shall take no hurt: but the Lord will turn them to
their good: so that this may comfort and revive any perplexed and oppressed
conscience in persecution and temptation. Again, seeing this promise is only
conditional, and not simple, but as it freeth us from the hurt of the
temptation, we see, they which pray for freedom from all temptations,
afflictions, and persecutions, have no warrant out of Gods word, if they put
not in that caveat: for every petition must have a promise in the word: Use 2.
now there is no promise that a man shall be free from all temptations, but
only from the hurt of temptations and afflictions. Then we must (when we pray
for temporal deliverances) pray only with condition, so far as they shall
not hurt our salvation, and hinder Gods grace in us.

From the hour of temptation. But how can this also be true? that the long and
bloody persecution under Traian for fourteen years, should be called but an
hour of temptation? Ans. First, in regard of God, to whom a thousand years
are but as one day, therefore fourteen years is but a short time. Secondly,
in regard of eternal punishment in hell which we deserve, this time of
persecution is but a short time. Thirdly, in regard of the persecutions of Gods
people: Jacob served twice seven years for Leah, and they seemed a short time
to him, by reason of his affection to her: so the affections that Gods people
have to the Lord, to his word and religion, make them think many years
persecution a short time. Paul for his affection and love to Christ, thought
eternal damnation but a year, a short time. So these in this Church thought
this long and bloody persecution, a short time, an hour, for that love they
had to Christ and his Gospel, and the glory of God; and for this affection
could have been content to suffer it longer. The end why Christ uses this
phrase, is to comfort this and al other Churches in persecutions, by the
shortness of their continuance, which is but an hour, a short time. Now though
they last twenty years, yet if we have any affection to Gods glory and to his
religion, it will be but an hour, a short time. This consideration of the
shortness of time, might encourage any man, and arm him to endure any
persecution, cross, or affliction. Besides this which I have said, note that
in these words there is a prediction: there is a prediction of a thing to come,
namely, an hour of temptation. Here Christ foretells a thing, not present,
but to come, though not known to the Church, and that without the help of any
creature, man or Angel: which prophesying of this persecution under Traian,
shows that he is true God: for it is a property and privilege of God
simply, of, by, and from himself, without help of any creature, foreseeing of
things in their courses, to foretell a thing to come. Men cannot foretell any
thing, unless it be present in the causes, not simply. Then here we must know
the cause why this persecution came to them rather then peace, and why Christ
foretold it rather than peace. The cause why Christ says, this hour of
temptation shall come, is not any foreknowledge of Christ, or because he
foretells it: for things come to pass, not because God foretells and
knows them: but because they be to come to pass, therefore he foreseeth them
and foreknoweth them.

The cause then why things come to pass, is the will, good pleasure, and
decree of God. Act. 2. 23. Christ was put to death by the eternal counsel and
decree of God: so it was Gods will and pleasure, not his foreknowledge, or
foreseeing, that this persecution came on this church: and the decree of God in
the effecting of all things, is the highest cause by which all things come to
pass, and that gives being to al other causes. Object. Then God is the author
of sin. Answ. As Gods will and decree in the effecting of things, is in the
highest place: so must we distinguish of the things he wills; for he wills
some things which he effects himself, as all good things: some things he
wills, and yet does not effect them, but only permits them to be done by
other: as sin and evil things, which though they come not from his will, yet
they be according to his will, not against his will; for his will disposes of
sin and evil things; and in all things, good or evil, his will disposes and
sets down the causes and circumstances of place, time, manner, how, the end,
etc.

Then their opinion is false, Use.
which hold that certain things (as sin) come to pass, God only foreseeing
them, not decreeing them to come to pass, or permitting them. Now to give God
a bare foreseeing without decreeing, is to rob him of his Godhead, and to take
from him his providence, by which he disposes of all things, seeing every
thing which is done comes to pass by his will and decree, he either decreeing
and effecting it, as all good things, or permitting it, as evil things.

The end why Christ alleges this prophecy, is to expound the former words,
namely, why he called the time of persecution a temptation, because it should
certainly come to try the whole earth. Where we may note the property of any
affliction, persecution, or cross, namely to try a man, to discrie what is in
his heart, whether there be grace and fear of God, or hypocrisy. And for this
end is the cross sent to men, to make known either their faith or hypocrisy.
And there is nothing better to try the heart of man then temptation and
affliction: and then though thy heart was full of presumption before, thou
may know what is in thee, and judge of thy self.

Verse 11. Behold, I come shortly. Here is Christ's commandment: in it note
first the occasion it self: secondly, the reason to enforce it. The
commandment, Hold fast, namely, with both hands, as for life and death. If
thou have received a little measure of grace, rather part with any thing then
with it, keep it and preserve it till death: but of this before.

The reasons to enforce this commandment, are two: one before, the other
after. The first, Behold, I come shortly. I will come to thee shortly, either by
general judgment, or else by particular judgment by death. Now before it
Christ puts a word of attentio^, to show that this commandment is not to be
lightly passed over of us, but to be earnestly and often remembered. Now seeing
Christ teaches us that he will come shortly to us in judgment, general or
particular, we must believe him, and often have it in memory, that Christ is
not far off, but will come to us shortly to show our estate either in heaven or
hell. Then we must believe it, have it written in our hearts and in our
memories, and not flatter our selves: we must not say, that Christ will defer
his coming: he teaches us that he is at the door, he comes shortly, either
by general judgment of all men, or particular judgment to us. Hierome.
Then happy were we if we could (as that ancient father did) think we hear
his trumpet sound continually in our cares, and think in our hearts, and
remember this, that Christ will not be long, but will come very shortly. And
indeed the cause why men live in sin, and never call themselves to an account,
is, because men believe not, and have not learned this lesson, that Christ will
thus come shortly. If me^ were thus persuaded in heart, Christ will come to me
shortly, to judge me, give me my reward in heaven or hell, surely if they
belonged to God, it would make them turn to him from their sins, and break
off their wicked life; nay though a man were most desperate, yet this would make
him tremble, to think how Christ will come shortly to judge him: yea it would
make me^ if they had any spark of grace, to labor to get faith and a good
conscience. Seeing the^ Christ is to come to judge them shortly, who would not
repent? who would not leave his sins and turn to Christ, unless he will cast
his soul away? Then this is our duty to labor to get faith and a good
conscience, to judge our selves, that we may prevent Christ's judgment. Again,
this very consideration will make a man constant in all Christian duties: and
lastly it will comfort such as be in affliction, for they may be sure their
affliction shall not last always, for Christ will come to judgment shortly, and
he will free them from all their crosses, and he will ere it be long give them
deliverance.

Now follows the reason after the commandment, That no man take thy crown
from thee: that is, the crown of glory, word, to use his Sacraments
reverently, else he will take them from us, put off our crown, and make us a
barbarous and brutish people, given to all idolatry. O then let us hold these
fast with both hands; let all go, honor, riches, preferment, pleasures and our
own life, ere we loose our glorious crown of the Gospel of Christ: for if we
will not hold it fast, he will give it to a nation, which though now we
contemn, yet they shall scorn and hiss at us. And now that we hear of wars
and invasions, let these put us in mind of greater judgment, and assure us
that if we make not more account of the word and Sacraments, and not only
profess outwardly in body, but in the service of God join heart and hand, be
indeed as good professors as we bear the world in hand we are, the Lord will
remove our crown, and give it to a nation which will bring forth better
increase, and seek to maintain it better.

Verse. 12. Him that ouercometh, will I make a pillar in the temple of my God.
Here is set down the promise, which contains two things: first, to whom the
promise is made, to him that ouercometh: secondly, the thing promised in the
words following. For the first, he gives to understand, that whosoever will
have his service pleasing unto God, must dispose himself to fight a good
fight, and to wage battle against all his enemies. A man cannot be a good
Christian, except he be a good soldier: when he begins to turn to God,
then he has innumerable enemies* both within himself, and without, to make
him take another course, and turn from God: now if he be not a good soldier,
these enemies will overcome him.

For the second, the thing promised is eternal life: in these words: I will
make him a pillar in the temple of my God. Christ here alludeth to men in this
world, who have been wont to build pillars upon hills and mountains, that the
posterity to come might remember them when they were dead and rotten. 1. Sa.
18. 18. Absalom in his life had reared him up a pillar, which is in the kings
dale: for he said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance. This then
is the sense: It is the custom of men, to set up pillars for the remembrance
of their bodies: but I will make the man himself that ouercometh, a pillar.

In the temple. That is, in the Church triumphant, figured by the temple at
Jerusalem: as if he should say: Others set up pillars in fields and mountains,
but I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God.

I will make him a pillar. That is, I will not only make him a part, but a
worthy part in the temple.

My God. This is set down to show, that God is Christ's God, as he is Mediator:
otherwise as he is God the second person, he is equal to the Father.

And he shall go no more out. First, he shall abide a pillar for ever, he shall
not need renewing as the pillars of men do. This pillar shall have three names:
first, the name of God: whereby he does signify, that he is the servant of
God. Secondly, the name of the city of my God. By city is not meant the
triumphant Church, but the place thereof: namely, the high heavens. The meaning
of it is; I will make it manifest, that he is a citize^ of the place of glory.
This city is described in the words following; by a resemblance it is called
new Jerusalem, because that was a city that resembled Paradise where Adam was,
New Jerusalem. But how can it be called new Jerusalem, seeing it was before the
earthly Jerusalem? Answ. It is called new, not in regard of the being, but in
regard of revelation: for it was before the beginning of the world.

Which came down out of heaven from my God. It is not said, it shall come
down, but it is come down. This clause is added to answer to an objection,
which he that ouercometh might make, thus: Heaven is far off, how can heaven
come down from heaven? Ans. It comes down to us by the preaching of the
Gospel: for by it we begin to be citizens thereof. Ephesians. 2.

The third name is my new name. By the name of Christ we are to understand
glory and power. Ob. But Christ had glory and power from all eternity. Ans.
True, he had so: but this is to be meant as he is God incarnate. Now the ends
and reasons which made him describe the estate of life everlasting, are these:
first, to comfort them which keep faith and a good conscience, he does describe
the reward thereof, being an excellent means to encourage men to go forward in
the faith. Learn we then in all our afflictions, to keep this faith and good
conscience to the end, by beholding the estate of life everlasting, and the
reward thereof. Heb. 11. 26.
Moses desired to suffer afflictions, because he had respect to the recompense
of the reward. The second reason of this description, is, to bring men to view
the excellency of life everlasting. Many men are drawn from religion, because
they take such pleasure in earthly matters: which they would not, if they
thought eternal life so great a matter. The third reason is, to teach men to
practice Paul's rule in the 1. to Tim. 6. 12. to lay hold on eternal life. Men
with both hands lay hold on the world, both of honor and riches, none lays
sure hold of life everlasting, though it be never so sweet, pleasant, blessed,
and glorious. The fourth reason is: to make the people of God not to fear the
cruellest death that can be, seeing bodily death is a door to glory. Thus much
generally of the twelfth verse: now it follows that I speak particularly.

I will make him a pillar. Use. 1.
That which the servants of God shall be in the Church triumphant, that they
must begin to be in the Church militant. If therefore thou would be a
pillar in heaven, thou must begin to be one on earth, by upholding and
maintaining the Gospel. Again, in that he says, I will make him a pillar in
Jerusalem, that is, the Church triumphant, they must learn to amend their
erroneous opinion, who think every Church as holy as Jerusalem, and is to have
the same reverence.

And I will write upon him. That is, he shall have God for his God. Here he
gives us to understand, that we can have no fellowship with God but by Christ,
God will never save nor bless us out of Christ his Son. If therefore thou will give thanks to God, thou must do it through Christ: if thou will receive
any temporal blessing of God, it must be in and by, not out of Christ.

I will make him a citizen of the kingdom of heaven. Here we must learn to
carry our selves in this world as citizens of heaven, and not of this world,
otherwise we can never look for heaven. Phil. 3. 20.

I will make heaven come down. Here we may see the mercy of God to man:
heaven was shut up by our sins, but God has opened it by the blood of
Christ, that we might enter therein. Therefore if we will have the new name, we
must become new creatures: for neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails
any thing, but a new creature: if we content our selves with the old man, we
shall never come to heaven.

Verse. 13. Let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says to the
Churches.

This is the last part of the Epistle written to the Church of Philadelphia.
Now whereas Christ again and again repeateth the same words, the Ministers of
the Gospel have a warrant if they preach the same Sermon to the people, yea
though they preach it oftentimes. But they must look that they do it not for
ease, but for the good of the Church. And therefore the hearers hearing the
Minister repeat the same doctrine, ought not curiously to reprehend him: for
then they may as well reprehend Christ himself, as before I have showed. Here
then is a duty commanded: namely, to hear: this hearing is the good learning
that brings true faith, salvation, and sincere obedience with it. But to whom
is this commandment given? To hearing hearers, and to such as do not only
receive the word of God with their outward ears, but with the ear that is in
the heart. Hence we learn, first, that God does not give to all men grace to
hear his word to their salvation. Secondly, that we must so hear, that
thereby we may be converted and changed. But what is to be said? namely, what
the spirit teaches to the Churches. That we might hear attentively, he uses
a double reason: one drawn from the speaker: another from the auditors, to
wit, the Churches. But I have spoken of these before.

And to the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans write, Verse. 14.
etc.

As before all the other Epistles, so before this last Epistle, there is a
commandment given to John to write it. And the Epistle has three parts, as
the former had: first, a Preface: secondly, the matter: thirdly, a conclusion.
First, of the Preface, wherein Christ is described (in whose name it was penned)
by two arguments.

First, by his name and title, Amen, a faithful witness.

Secondly, by his privilege and property, the beginning of the cratures.

Amen, is an Aduerb of affirmation or asseueration, signifying truly, verily,
and certainly. The reason why he is so called, is rendered in the words that
follow, which are a commentary and full exposition of this, The faithful
witness, etc. So that to this end he is called Amen, to show that he is a true
and faithful witness. See chap. 1. 5. there I expound it. And here I will
repeat the heads only of that exposition.

He is called a witness, between God the father and us, because Cor. 1. 20.
All the promises of God are in him, yea and Amen: that is, most certain, and
therefore he is a witness, yea a faithful witness. Thirdly, he is called a
true witness, because he speaks the truth: that which he reuealeth from his
father, is the will of his father, who is truth it self: he says as the thing
is, without error or falsehood, nay his will is the rule of all truth. This is
the meaning of the first argument.

Now the use and the end why here Christ is so called, if we do but read the
Epistle and mark the contents, we may guess probably at the end: which is,
that he might show himself an example to the Angel of that Church, who was
slack and negligent in his ministry, therefore Christ instructs him how to
carry himself without respect of persons, teaching the word of God truly and
faithfully. See chap. 1. 5. And not only to the Angel, but to all the Church,
yea to all Christians, he propounds himself an example of two worthy virtues,
faith and truth: he would have all to be true and faithful in their life and
conversation, even as he is. This faith is a virtue, whereby a man's word
becomes as sure as an obligation, as we use to speak, whereby we make good
all our words, oaths and promises.

Truth is that whereby a man without lying, deceit, or fraud speaks the truth
from his heart, that (I say) which is necessary to be known for his own and
others good, and for the glory of God.

Set we this example before our eyes, and as Christ is a true and faithful
witness, so let us be careful to show our selves true in all our words and
speeches, and to be faithful in all our promises. These be excellent graces in
Christ, and fruits of the spirit in Christians, therefore let us be known by
these to be like Christ. The second end of this title, is to induce this Church
to apply it self to the word of God effectually; for it was faulty in this
point: therefore that he might bring them to this, he says that he is a
faithful witness.

How should they do this? Thus: consider in the word the law and the Gospel,
the commandments, promises and threatenings, and apply them particularly every
man to himself: the commandments to know sin, the threatenings to humble us,
and that we may be touched in conscience, and made fit to receive Gods grace:
see an example of it, Luke 15. in the prodigal son: I have sinned, and am not
worthy, etc. So Daniel and Ezra humbled themselves. No man can truly be humbled
till he make this particular application of the word which he reads and
hears.

Now the Gospel also must be thus applied: we are bound to believe the
promises of life eternal, not only that they are true, but to apply them to
our selves. The Gospel requires a further thing, which is the foundation of
the church: for proof see Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. The sum is this, he
esteems all things loss in regard of Christ, and desires the righteousness
which is by faith in Christ, and to know the virtue of Christ's resurrection.
Now mark the fifteenth verse: let so many as be perfect be thus minded,
teaching every one of us our duty, to apply Christ to our own person. Thus
are we bound in conscience to apply the Gospel to our selves: and whosoever
does not so, he makes God a lier, as much as in him lies. 1. John 5. And this
is the principal end and reason why Christ calls himself so, that men might
not only believe the word in general, but apply it in particular to
themselves. The not doing of this, is the cause of negligence in religon, of so
many lukewarm Christians and professors. Therefore let us all learn this
duty. It is not enough to know the word, no nor to be able to teach it, but
above al things to lay it to the conscience, to apply it, that we may be truly
humbled and turn to God: therefore justifying faith is that which applies in
particular.

Now the second title of Christ, is the beginning of all creatures, Col. 1. 16.
By him all things were created in heaven and earth: therefore in regard of
creation he is so called. Yet I doubt not but there is a further cause why he
is so called here, namely, because he is the beginning of the new creatures: as
Ephesians. 1. 10. where it is said, we are Gods workmanship, created in Christ to
good works. Mark there every Christian is a workmanship of God. To this
purpose Esaias 53. 10. says, when Christ shall give him self a free will
offering, he shall see his seed. How? Thus: All that are borne a new, they are
the seed of Christ, he is the beginning and root, and so much the very scope
of this Epistle declares. Now he is such a beginning two ways, first as he is
the author of regeneration, for whosoever is borne a new, Christ is the cause
and author of his conversion. Therefore Esaias 9. 6. he is called the father of
eternity, because he does regenerate men to life by his spirit, and Esaias 8.
18. he says, Lo here I am, and the children that thou have given me.

Secondly, as he is the matter thereof, Ephesians. 5. the Church is flesh and bone
of Christ, where the Apostle alludeth to the creation of our first parents: for
Adam was a figure of a man regenerate: and as Eve had her beginning from Adams
side, so the Church and every Christian have their being and beginning from
Christ: from his blood springs the Church of God and all Christians, as they
are new creatures and regenerate, not as they are men and women.

Now the end why he is so called, is to meet with a vice in that and other
Churches. Men have more care and desire to seem to be Christians, then to be
Christians indeed: men set more by a show, then truth; shadow, then substance.
Therefore he shows that their principal care must be to be true Christians
indeed, and not to seem so only. This church was not regenerate in that
church, and therefore Christ tells them of it, that he is the beginning of new
creatures. And the same is our fault, our care is not so much for the power of
godliness, as for the show of it: therefore I beseech you have care of this: to
hear the word and to receive the sacraments are good things in their kind, but
they are not sufficient to salvation: except thou become a true member of
Christ, thou have no good by them.

2 He says this to meet with another vice, that is, spiritual pride. He
shows that there is no excellency in outward things, all earthly excelle^cies
are nothing without this, whereby a man is a new creature: therefore we must not
stand upon our pantofles for our birth or gentry: but whosoever will rejoice,
must rejoice in this, that he has Christ for the author of his regeneration.

Further, this teaches us an excellent lesson, that Christ loves and
preserves his church, for as it was in the first Adam, so it is in the second
Adam. The woman had not her beginning apart from man, but of and from him, that
he might love her the better, and have care of her preservation. So this is to
teach us, that Christ has a care of us, and that we must honor him. Nay, which
is more, Adam was but the matter only, and not the author of Heuah, but Christ
is both to the church, to show his love to be endless. The root never hurts
the branches, nay it strengthens it self to defend, cherish, and maintain
the branches: it has no affection, inclination or disposition to hurt, but to
help. Thus much of these words, to note the bond between Christ and his
church, yea his love and our duty.

Hence I gather, that the Papists err, in teaching that a man has the use of
his own will in his regeneration, and that he can dispose himself in his
justification: for a creature cannot work nor help to create himself: but
every regenerate person is a creature of God, and the conversion of a sinner is
here made the creation of a man: the creature in his own creation is able to
do nothing. If there were no more such sayings in the Bible, this one were
sufficient to confute that opinion. And thus much of the preface. Now the
matter of the Epistle or contents and substance.

Verse 15. I know thy works, etc. that thou art neither hot nor hot, etc.
The Proposition has two parts. First, a dispraise, or reproof. Secondly,
counsel. The dispraise is for two faults: the first, lukewarmnesse: the
second, pride and vanity of mind. Then first, I will make the words plain:
secondly, declare the use of them. I know: that is, all thy ways and works be
manifest to me, and I utterly dislike them. And to lay open their fault the
more, he borrows a comparison from water, whereof there be these three sorts,
hot, cold, and warm.

Cold and hot water may be received into the stomach with less hurt and
annoyance: but the water that is lukewarm troubles the stomach, and ceasseth
not till it be cast up again.

Now with these three kinds of water, he compares three sorts of men. By cold
men, understand the enemies of religion, as Jews and Gentiles, Turks and
Saracens, Gadarens and Galileans.

By hot, understand men zealous in religion: by lukewarm, indifferent. So the
meaning is, thou art neither an open enemy of religion, nor yet truly
religious, or a true friend.

I would, etc. Christ here makes a wish: but he does not simply wish, that
they were enemies of religion: but in respect of their estate, he wishes they
were either of those, rather then as they were. Otherwise this absurdity would
follow, that Christ should wish them to be of a people no people of God. By
lukewarmenesse, he understands a people professing the word of God, and yet
not greatly regarding and reuerencing it. This people is a lukewarm people: as
if he should say, a mixture of both, neither hot nor cold, wanting the heat
of grace, and the fire of Gods spirit, whereby their hearts should be heated
and inflamed.

Verse. 16. Because thou art neither, etc. The meaning is this. Even as a man
that has received such water, will cast it up, and cannot keep it in: so
Christ being grieved with their sins will cast them off from having any
fellowship with him, and make them to be no Church. This is the true and right
meaning of the words. Now in them these things are contained.

First, Christ sets down their fault, and aggrauateth it. Secondly, he
compares three kinds of men together.

The hot man has the best place, and the cold man the second, and the
lukewarm man the last and lowest. So you see the enemy of religion and of
Gods grace, is better then he that professes religion, and lives not
thereafter. As if he should say, the ordinary Gospeller which contenteth
himself to hear the word, and to receive the Sacraments, is not so good
before God, as the Turk and Jew. The threatening follows: I will spue them
out of my mouth.

Now having found the meaning, we must examine our selves whether we may not be
charged with the same fault: and it will be found that we are guilty of this,
and even plain Laodiceans. Which that you may see, I will show diverse kinds
of such lukewarm Gospellers and Christians.

1 The Papist though he seem to make a great show of love to Christ, yet he
performs no such thing: for he parts stakes with Christ, and makes
himself to be his own savior: so that howsoever he pretend to be a most
zealous Catholic, yet he has no true grace.

2 The Temporizer, he which alters his religion as times alter. And such is
the body of our people, and they are not ashamed to confess it, that they
will follow the Prince, and change their religion with the time. And this
shows what men will do, if Popery come again: they may say they are good
Christians, but they show themselves plain Laodiceans.

3 All such as follow Nicodemus: that is, which love Christ, but dare not come
to him by day light: such as think they may hear Mass, and yet keep their
conscience to themselves, halting betwixt God and Baal.

4 Such as are mediators and pacificators, and would make an union between us
and the Papists, being persuaded that our religion and the Papists are all one
in effect, for the matter and substance of it: and that all the difference is
only in circumstance, so they write and defend their opinion: but let them
pretend what they will, zeal of Gods glory, or whatsoever, be it Luke 16.
Such as serve God and Mammon. And where are they? nay, where are they not?
Lamentable is out time, wherein men will needs be professors, and yet how is
all their time spent upon care for this world?. The greatest part of their life
and time is bestowed on that; there is all their joy, care, desire, labor and
study: let them say what they will, so long as their care and study is spent
upon Mammon, they are very Laodiceans. And such are the most part of our
hearers, they draw near God with their lips, but their hearts are upon their
goods; the whole heart is set upon the world, and the whole time of their lives
is spent in this. Who they are, your own consciences will tell you, they are
indeed Christians and professors, but lukewarm, and worse then Christ's enemies.

6 They that hear the word and like it, but in their lives give themselves to
sins, blasphemy, drunkenness, fornication, oppression, usury, some to this
vice, some to that. And even in this very rank I place those which profess
religion, but yet delight in the fond and irreligious fashions of the world,
using the new, strange and monstrous fashions of apparel: they spend so much
time upon their bodies, that the soul goes naked. The world abounds with
such now, young and old. It is strange to see how absurd men are, beyond all
common reason, in apparelling themselves so fondly, whereas their garments
should put them in mind of their own shame and nakedness, and be no cause of
glorying in them. And the modest garments should show the virtues of the mind:
now what do they else but show the vanities and vices of our minds?

Now, Use.
shall we excuse our selves, though we be none of these, not entangled with the
sins of the world? No, we cannot. We shall find wants, of the fear of God,
of hatred of sin, of the reverend regard and estimation of the Gospel, which
we ought to have: so as no man can say, he is free from this: nay, every man
even he that has best grace, shall feel in himself want of care and love to
God and his word. Therefore we must with Job lay our hands upon our mouths,
and say, we are vile.

Well, this being so, now consider the judgment threatened, lay it before your
eyes, mark the end and recompense: Christ will spue such out of his mouth,
that is, cast them from God, from Christ and his Church. This threatening
pertains to this age, and therefore we must tremble, and be ashamed, and
repent of this sin, left ere long we be spued out of his mouth. Thus much of
the examination of this sin.

Now of the amendment of it. Where note, first, the fault: secondly, the
greatness of it: thirdly, the punishment: that is, a separation from the
Church. Now I will proceed further to show, that even among us, as well as in
other places, this sin is to be found, that every one may be the better
acquainted with his own state. And this appears by diverse signs.

First, by common neglect of the duties of Religion, which is manifested
diverse ways: first, though we come often and greedily to the Church, yet very
few profit in knowledge, and fewer in amendment of life: and many that profit
in knowledge something, do thrive in obedience little or nothing at all. How
true this is, I appeal to every man's conscience. This is an evident argument
of great negligence in all sorts. Take the bodies of our congregations, and
they be as ignorant as any. I know there be some which profit both in knowledge
and practice: but I speak of the greatest part. Experience in diverse
occasions makes this manifest.

The second token of this negligence, is, that few spend any time in reading of
the word, to search the Scriptures, and try whether it be as they are taught or
not: nay, few will be at the cost to buy a Bible; or if they have one, they
will not take the pains to read in it, or to keep a constant course in
reading of it daily.

A third sign, is the profanation of the Sabbath: though many come to Church
at the time appointed for public worship and service, yet there is no private
sanctification of it at home: but when the congregation is dissolved, men
betake themselves to their own affairs, profits, delights and pleasures. No
such persons can possibly have any great measure of knowledge, or obedience and
grace, because they do not keep times for this purpose. By these signs it is
plain and evident, yea palpable, that there is great negligence in the duties
of Religion. Now where there is such negligence, though coldness be wanting,
yet there is no heat, and we are but lukewarm Gospellers. Another sign of
lukewarmnesse, is this: our religion stands on generals, and reaches not to
our particular callings. In the church we are good Christians, but when we come
home to the particular duties of our private callings, where is religion then?
where is the practice of that we hear? There is no conscience made of lying,
deceiving, and oppressing; and no care of that good dealing which ought to be
in men. Al our religion is in the church, and none at home. Whereas if religion
were in the heart, it would show some fruit in our lives: as fire and heat
cannot be hidden. Although I doubt not but there be some of whom these sins
take no hold, yet there be many which profess that they be neither hot nor
cold, but in a mean between both, and yet they will be partakers of the word
and sacraments: and when they see any have care to obey, they have presently
the name of precisenes ready for them, because they have care to do that which
they profess. In this very reproach they show, that they are lukewarm, their
mouths proclaim it, and their lives profess it, and they are never a whit
ashamed of it. Whosoever opens his mouth to fasten this reproach upon his
neighbor, he fastens upon himself this mark of luke-warmnesse without shame.
And so they go beyond the Laodiceans which were ashamed of it, and would not
defend it, whereas these boast of it. My meaning is, not to fasten this upon
every man, but I say it is a common sin, more then any other.

Well now, Use.
it being manifest, that this is the common sin of our time, yea our common
sin, a sin that takes hold of all sorts: mark what follows, they are in a
worse case then the heathen and Infidels are. The common Christian is worse in
some case then they, for Christ prefers them before these. A man may
persuade himself that he is in a good estate for all that: but you see Christ's
judgment and sentence: O, it had bin better for them never to have known the
truth at all. They are in a worse case which know Gods will and obey it not,
then they that never knew it. Let us not deceive our selves then: if we be but
drowsy Protestants, we are worse then Turks. We boast of our estate, and we
despise the Infidels, but except thou join with knowledge, purpose of
obedience, thou art more vile and contemptible then they: Publicans and harlots
shall come into heaven before thee: it is not the external profession of
religion that will make the better then they, but grace in the heart and
obedience. And this is the first point.

The second point is, that we are in danger to be spued out of Christ's mouth:
for this was written for our instruction, and for all Churches: that as
lukewarm water troubles men's stomachs, so do we trouble Christ, and
therefore are like to be cast out even as that is. We may flatter our selves,
and think all is well, as they did in Noah's time: but know it, we are in
danger of a most grievous judgment, namely, to be cut off from Christ, and to
be made no people. Though we had no more sins but this, we are in danger to be
cut off for it. And God can do this diverse ways, either by taking his Gospel
from us, or sending in our enemies among us. And, by example of other
countries, the Lord sets this before our eyes daily, how he can and will do
this: therefore let us not stand upon any outward privilege, but lay this to
our hearts. And so much for the first sin. The second vice follows in the
seventeenth verse.

Verse. 17. Thou say I am rich, etc. Here is a new reproof of a new fault,
and that is spiritual pride. These words depend on the former, as a reason and
cause: for before they were charged with luke-warmenesse. Now the cause of that
is pride: this is the mother, that is the daughter.

Thou say. That is, thou think thus. It is the manner of the holy Ghost to
express the thoughts of men by speeches; and when men think thus and thus,
the holy Ghost says, they say thus and thus: because, as manifest as our
speeches be to one another, so manifest be our thoughts to Christ.

In that Christ does thus express men's thoughts, Use.
we may gather that this book is canonical: for men cannot set down in
writing what be their own thoughts, much less other men's. And so in all the
books of Scripture the thoughts and imaginations of men are set down, even as
they conceive them: the like cannot be showed in any writings of men. It
remains therefore that we receive this book as the word of God. For, could
the Apostle John by any art or learning come to know their thoughts? No.

Now I come the thought. He expresses their pride by the effect of it, that
is, their thought: and what is their thought?

I am rich. That is, I abound with spiritual graces, as knowledge, judgment,
understanding and memory. By this thought Christ describes their pride, not
outward, but inward; not carnal, but spiritual, whereby they persuaded
themselves, that they were in much better case and state then they were. And
this is the common sin of churches. Against this sin of pride, learn we that
Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. But what, is
there any righteous since Adams fall? No: but some think themselves righteous,
as did the proud Pharisees, which said as the Church of Laodicea here, I am
rich. And Paul brings in the Corinthians, saying, We shall reign. Thus you see
that this has bin a common sin, and so it is at this time.

In the popish Churches this opinion takes place, when they persuade themselves
to satisfy Gods justice for temporal punishments by their works, and that
they can merit sufficiently for themselves and others.

And amongst us this wretched thought finds harbor. We think we abound with
knowledge, none will seem to be ignorant or to want knowledge, and therefore
not one of a hundred will ask a question: nay, many therefore will not hear
the word, because they know as much for substance as the Preacher can tell
them; for all a man's duty (say they) is but to fear God and keep his
commandments; and thou shall love God above all, and thy neighbor as thy
self: and what would you more?

Thus they persuade themselves, that they are rich, and want no knowledge, when
they know not one principle of religion more then the law of nature teaches
them, namely, Do as you would be done to. Others plead that they have had ever
since they could remember such a strong faith, that they never doubted of Gods
mercy. But this is no strong faith, but a strong presumption, and a strange
faith: for true faith is always joined with doubting and distrusting. Others
profess, that they are rich in love, and they will not be drawn from it, but
they love God and their neighbors, when they have neither knowledge, faith,
nor love. Which appears thus: let a man make relation of any bodily
calamity, and you are astonished, but let the Ministers tell you that you are
in danger of spiritual judgment, and who is afraid? where is the person that
trembles? Worldly news troubles you, but the word never scares you, the
remembrance of your own damnable estate grieueth you not. Let us say what we
will of your souls state, alas you regard it not, but the drunkard will
continue in his drunkenness, and the adulterer and blasphemer in their
wickedness, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
and every man blesses himself in his sins, and says God loves him, and he
loves God, I am rich in regard of Gods favor, of spiritual blessings, etc.
This being our sin, it stands us all in hand to labor to see it, and to be
humbled for it.

Increased in wealth, or made rich. This is added only for amplification, to
show the measure of their pride, that it was not small, but great: therefore
the word is doubled to show the strength of their conceit, and the greatness
of their pride. Now what is the cause why they were not only puffed up, but
given to such an high degree of pride? Answ. Knowledge was the cause, for no
doubt but the Angel of that Church had great knowledge, and was a learned man,
and the people were well instructed. Now knowledge puffs up, it makes men's
hearts to swell with pride; therefore it is true, that where much knowledge is,
there is much pride, if men want the grace of humiliation, and grief for sin.

And have need of nothing. Here is a further mark and token of their pride:
when a man thinks thus, that he needs no help for his salvation, if he stands
in no need of Christ's blood for the salvation of his soul, this is a notable
sign of abundant pride in the heart. This serves further, to convince our
congregration of this pride, for if we be never so little sick, straight we
seek to the Physicians; but though our souls be never so sick, none seek to
the Ministers: sicknesses we feel, but not sins, therefore the Physician is in
request, but the Minister is not thought of till the pangs of death be felt.
This shows that we abound in spiritual pride: therefore mark this, you must
labor to feel what need you have of Christ; for til you do so, there is no
grace in the heart. If you would have grace, learn this, that you want the
blood of Christ: and till you feel this, never think your case good, but
wretched and damnable. It is a dangerous case for a man to say, he wants
nothing.

And know not. Here he sets down the cause of their pride: that is,
ignorance: as if he should say, Thou know not thine own natural estate, as
thou were borne of Adam, thy state out of Christ. Thus we see, that ignorance
is the cause of pride, and pride of lukewarmenesse. By this he shows what
they are ignorant of.

Hence it may be gathered, that pride was not the first sin, nor the root of
all other sins, as the Papists and some other think. Indeed it is a great
sin, and a mother sin, yet it has a more inward cause: that is, ignorance.
Whereof? even of a man's own estate before God: so much Christ here signifies.
The cause why any think well of themselves, and swell in pride, is the
ignorance of their own estate: and because they are ignorant of that,
therefore they are puffed up with pride. By this we must all be admonished, to
have care to learn to know our own estate, in which we are by nature, without
Christ. Every person that will come to salvation must be thoroughly acquainted
with his own estate, and know his own sins, and the curse due to them: and
therefore it is that the Prophets so often call upon the people to search and
fan themselves, that they might be acquainted with their own estate. Till
you know this, you shall be but proud peacocks, and never have grace: although
you have otherwise very great gifts, of knowledge, and grace to conceive a
prayer, and be able to teach, yet you shall never have any grace to turn and
repent truly, till the ignorance of your state be removed: and then comes
grace, true obedience, and humiliation, and other graces needful for Gods
service: therefore labor for it. If there be any blemish in your face, you
will see it, O then labor to see the spots of your souls.

Now in that Christ does thus strike at the root of their pride, and bewray
their ignorance, he shows the state of every man by nature: so that here
comes to be handled the natural estate and misery of man.

The misery of this Church is propounded two ways: first, generally:
secondly, particularly. Generally, in two words, wretched and miserable.
Wretched, that is, one subject to misery, grief, and calamities: so much is
signified by the first word. That we may know what this misery is, I will
enter into a description of man's wretchedness. Where two things must be
considered: first, the root and fountain of it, namely, original sin:
which has two branches: first, that very particular offense and trespass
whereby Adam sinned, which is not only the sin of his person, but of man's
nature, and of every one that comes of Adam, Christ excepted. Secondly, from
that sin, as a part of it, and yet withal as a punishment of it, follows
the corruption of man's heart, and defacing of Gods image, whereby the heart
has got a pronenesse, and disposition, or inclination to all sin. In these
two stand man's misery: for from these do spring al our miseries, both in and
after this life. So much for the first part, what man's misery is. Again, we
must conceive it under the form of a punishment. All misery of what kind
soever, is a punishment laid upon man for that first sin. Now the punishment
of sin must be considered diverse ways, according to the diverse times of
man's being, either in this world, or departed hence. All punishment is either
in this life, or in the end of it, or after: and so is misery, in this life,
in the end of it, or after it. Again, some miseries concern the whole man,
and they are two principally. First, a subjection to Gods wrath, whereby a man
is in danger thereof every day, and made a child of wrath. This is a misery
of all miseries, and so much the more grievous, as a man cannot without some
grace see it. Secondly, bondage to the devil: the Scripture speaks of it
oftentimes. You may conceive it thus: The man regenerate says, I sin, but I
would not sin: the natural man says, I sin, and I will sin; it is my
nature to sin, and my pleasure, and in sin will I live. And these are the
two miseries concerning the whole man. Now there be miseries which concern not
the whole man, but the body or soul, goods or calling in this life.

Miseries concerning the soul are these. First, in the mind and understanding,
there is blindness and ignorance of Gods will. Secondly, in diverse persons,
madness and foolishness. All these are miseries, curses, and punishments
inflicted on man's soul for sin. And further, that nothing can be learned
without pains and difficulty. Further, in the mind there is a conscience, and
there is accusation, secret fears and terrors; and so many accusations, so
many miseries. In the will there is rebellion, and in the affections,
perverseness; which is not only a sin, but a plague and punishment.

And as the soul, so the body is subject to his miseries, to many pains,
aches, and diseases. Yea, the diseases of man's body are so many, that all
Physic books cannot record them. Besides diseases, there is mortality: that
is, a subjection to death; so as all the art and skill in the world cannot
prevent it.

In our goods, the want of necessaries is a misery, and by reason of sin a
punishment, and in it own nature a curse. And all the hurt that comes by the
creatures, (whereas they be at enmity between themselves, or with men) it is
a curse for man's sin. And in that they be subject to vanity too, all is for
the punishment of our sins. Further, all losses, and damages, and crosses
whatsoever, and wants of temporal blessings, they are miseries. The like we
may say of all callings: for there is none but it is subject to griefs and
vexations; no man can carry himself so in any calling, but he shall feel some
woe and misery.

And as in this life, so in the end of this life, the misery is bodily death:
that is, a separation of the soul from the body; which, if man had not
fallen, should have remained inseperable. This in it own nature is a fearful
curse: for it is the very gate of hell. And after this life, follows the full
accomplishment of Gods wrath: all the miseries in this life, are but
preparations to that. Then comes destruction endless in the place of the
damned. For this destruction, is first, a separation from God, and excludes
men from all society with him: secondly, an apprehension of Gods wrath in the
whole man, body and soul for ever. Thirdly, it is in the place of the damned,
with the devil and his angels: therefore this misery is the sum and
accomplishment of all miseries, the rest are but beginnings of this. Thus you
see what man's misery is.

Now then considering what is the fountain of our misery, original sin; and
what is the nature of misery, namely, it is a curse and punishment; we see
what it is to be wretched and miserable. Thou art wretched. That is, tainted
with sin, and subject to punishment for it, in this life, in the end of it,
and after it.

Now touching this general point, we are to consider the end why Christ says
this: And know not, etc. Which is, that he might teach them and us, to
learn to know our misery, and to feel it, and to be touched in conscience
for it.

Whosoever shall but lightly read over this Epistle shall see, that this is
the very end of it: for they thought themselves to be highly in Gods favor,
when it was nothing so indeed. I pray you all therefore which are now assembled
here, to hear things touching eternal life, and the salvation of your souls,
forsake and abandon other conceits, and turn your eyes to this, that you may
see what be the miseries to which you are subject: and when you see them, go
further labor that your hearts may be touched, that you may even cry out with
the men of Jerusalem, What shall we do? Act. 2. 39.
Till then we shall be like these Laodiceans, neither hot nor cold. We shall
never have true and sound religion in us, till we feel the weight of our
misery. I acknowledge, that the sight of our misery is Gods grace: but go to
the root, and seek that all pride may be expulsed, and you may embrace the
Gospel, which ministers a remedy for all misery.

But thou art miserable. (...).
This word miserable signifies one that is worthy to be pitied: which he uses
to express the greatness of their misery; meaning that they were so far
subject to misery, that they were to be pitied of all men: so that this is not
added to show any new thing, but to enlarge the former. Learn we hence, that
it is not our duty to disdain a sinner that is in misery, or to reproach and
scorn, but to pity him: the more grievous sinner a man is, the more he is to
be pitied. It was David's manner so to do, 1. Sam: 16. and he was so far from
contemning a sinner, that he shed rivers of tears, Psalm. 119. 136. And Ezec.
9. the good man was moved with the bowels of compassion, when the people were
sinful. 2. Cor. 5.
The like is in Ier. 9. It was the Corinthians fault, when the incestuous man
had sinned, they were never a whit humbled or moved with pity, but puffed up
with pride and contempt, so that they scorned him, and Paul reprooueth it in
them.

And this is a fault in many of us, that men are not humbled when they see
other men sin, our hearts are not touched with sorrow for it, but rather puffed
up. If we have received more grace then other, let us not despise or scorn
them which have not the like measure. Thus much of their misery in general. As
for the particulars, they are in number three: that he might strike their
hearts with a sense of their misery, he is not content to set it down in
general terms, but enters into particular, names three maine miseries of
theirs. (...).
The first word signifies one so poor, that he has not a rag to his back,
nor a bit of bread to put in his mouth, more then he gets by begging. But here
he means spiritual poverty, which what it is, we shall best understand when
we know what is true riches, to wit, the grace and favor of God in Christ, for
the pardon of sins, to life everlasting. So the poor man is he that wants
this, that has no good thing acceptable to God, who in regard of his soul, is
as a beggar which has nothing for the maintenance of this temporal life. Thus
you have the meaning of this first word.

Now the end likewise is to be considered why Christ calls them poor:
namely, that they and we might strive to see our poverty, that we might become
poor in spirit: for they thought themselves rich, therefore Christ (to beat
down this conceit, and to prepare them to true grace) tells them they are
poor, in regard of grace and life eternal.

And here we are taught a principal point of religion, Use.
namely, to feel our own poverty, that we have no goodness in us, and
therefore to despair utterly of our salvation in regard of our selves. This is
greatly commended in the Scriptures, therefore learn another duty. As we are
by nature poor, and have no goodness in our selves: so labor to see it, and
to be out of heart with our selves, that is to be poor in spirit: otherwise
you may come to church, hear the word, receive the sacraments, but never have
salvation, or have spiritual blessings except you be first acquainted with
your poor estate, that you are very beggars, nay more, plain bankerupts: for
so Christ taught us to pray, Forgive us our debts: therefore Christ tells the
proud Church of her poverty. Happy and blessed were our state and condition
if we could learn this, and lay aside our pride: for we are so poor, that we
must plead nothing but pardon, no merit or satisfaction. If we did this, then
would we esteem aright of the Gospel, and have some comfort by it. Now
because we have not this, we do not embrace the Gospel heartily and cheerfully
as we ought. Carry therefore away this lesson with you, that the beginning of
all grace is to feel the want of grace, to acknowledge your poverty, and to
be touched for it, and grieved even from the bottom of your hearts, and to
feel this as sensibly, as the beggar feels his misery. Deceive not your
selves, Gods word must stand: till you be beggars, the Gospel will be but a
dream and a fancy to you.

Quest. But how can Christ call her poor, seeing it was a very rich people?
Ans. It is true indeed, they were very rich, so histories do record: but as it
was a rich city, so it was a poor church; for all the wealth in the world is
poverty, without the favor of God in Christ: we are complete in Christ,
without him we have nothing. All things are yours, and you Christ's, and Christ
Gods. All temporal blessings are nothing out of Christ: riches are no riches,
honors no honors out of Christ. In Christ we are complete, and therefore rich
Laodicea is but a poor and beggarly people; and so are all without Christ.

Therefore if God have given you riches, lay up a good foundation; use then for
this end, that they may further and not hinder your salvation, as helps and
means thereof, otherwise they will be your ruin and destruction. So much for
the first part of man's poverty.

The second part is Blindness. How can they be said to be blind? they had no
doubt an excellent teacher, endued with great knowledge and ability to teach;
and I doubt not but the people were well instructed. Answ. It cannot be denied
but they had great knowledge, yet they are called blind: first, because they
knew not their own estate; for though a man had all the skill and knowledge in
the world, he were but a blind man without this knowledge. Secondly, because
they knew not God in Christ. They knew God in general, as many do now, but not
by a particular application to themselves, that God was their God in Christ,
and Christ their redeemer. They were content to know the Gospel generally and
confusedly. Thirdly, because they could not understand things that differred.
It is a great gift of God to be able to discern things that differ, earthly
things from heavenly, and temporal from spiritual. Therefore let us learn
this lesson: All knowledge is but ignorance, if a man know not himself, and
God to be his God, and Christ his savior* Let a man be brought up in the best
schools of learning, and have the most absolute gifts that can be, though he
go beyond all men in divine and humane knowledge and learning: if he know not
himself, and his state before God, he knows nothing. Christ sets this mark
upon the Angel of this Church, and yet no doubt he was a learned man: but it
shows he had no care to know him self. Therefore content not your selves to
have the knowledge of the Gospel or humane learning, but learn to know that
God is thy God, and Christ thy redeemer, and that his blood was shed for thy
sins. David intitleth the 32. Psalm. his learning: and yet what great or deep
learning is there, but this that he is blessed which has the pardon of his sins:
which he proves by his own example. And indeed this seasoneth al learning;
when you know Christ: till you do this, you are blind as these were.

The last point of man's misery, is Nakedness, which is twofold: first, to the
eyes of man: secondly, to the eyes of God. Corporal and bodily nakedness, is
twofold: first, before the fall, and that was an excellent kind of nakedness,
whereby their bodies being uncovered, were full of glory, without shame: but
that is not meant here. Secondly, since the fall, sinful and shameful
nakedness, where the body is full of deformity, and all parts of it should be
covered, but that for necessities sake the face and hands are left bare.
Besides this corporal nakedness, there is a spiritual nakedness, which God
sees and man cannot see, that is when a man lies open and naked before God:
Exodus 32. 25.
as Moses saw the people naked, not that their bodies were uncovered, but their
souls rather. Their sin appeared to God, and they in their sins, and so they
lay subject to Gods judgments. This is spiritual nakedness, a plague of all
plagues, and a misery of all miseries, when God beholds men in their sins.

Now in that Christ says, Use.
this Church was wretched and miserable, and a part of her misery was her
spiritual nakedness: we learn diverse instructions: first, not to cover our
sins before Gods eyes, for we stand al naked and uncovered before him. The
study and care of most men, is to hide their sins from the world, but few care
for covering them that God may not see them. Look as ye have seen Lazer-men
lay open their nakedness before you, so God sees your nakedness. Let al
careless and negligent persons remember this: whosoever considers this
seriously, they will be ashamed to neglect this duty.

Further, let us consider the end why Christ says they were naked. It is that
al men might have care to set themselves before God, and bring themselves into
his presence (and not seek to hide themselves from God as Adam did) that they
may obtain a covering. We must al learn to know our own nakedness, and be
persuaded that God sees al our sins. Then we must be humbled and touched for
them: then we must pray for a covering. It was David's practice, Psalm. 32. 1.
Blessed is the man whose sins are covered. First he unfolds his nakedness, and
then entreats the Lord to cover his sin, giving us to understand, that he had
laid open his nakedness. So also should we all do, show the wounds and scars of
our souls, that God may give us a garment to cover us. That we may all be
partakers of the covering of Christ's righteousness, labor to feel your
poverty and nakedness; for till you feel your own misery* you are never fit
for Christ.

Further, Christ says this, to prepare them and us for the good counsel
following: therefore let this be the conclusion. If you have received any
grace, labor to increase in it: if not, labor to have it: learn to know your
own poverty, blindness, and nakedness, and to feel it and be touched for it: be
humbled seriously and thoroughly. This must be the needle to draw Gods grace
through your hearts.

Verse. 18. I counsel thee, etc. Now follows the counsel of Christ, in the
three next verses: in which he propounds a most excellent and sufficient
remedy of their misery, in which note three things: first, the manner of
prescribing the remedy, by way of counsel: secondly, the remedy it self,
gold, apparel, and eye salve: thirdly, the means to obtain it, buy of me. Of
these in order. The manner of prescribing is mild: in it Christ takes upon him
the person of a Counselor to his Church: for as God has his Church and
people, so in mercy he gives them counsel and counselors. The president of
this council is Christ. Prou. 8. 14. Counsel is mine, says Wisdom. Isay 9.
6. Christ is called that Counselor. He is both King of and Counselor to his
Church. And surely this title of right belongs to him: for first, by his
office he advises men how they shall escape eternal death, and be saved:
secondly, he teaches how a man may please God in all his actions: thirdly, how
he may fly sin. These three he does daily in his church and children, and
that not by extraordinary, but even by ordinary means; as by his word and
spirit, and therefore may well be called our Counselor: neither can any,
either Angel or man, thus counsel us, but only Christ.

Now in that Christ is such a person by office and profession, Use.
therefore we must acknowledge him to be our Counselor: yea, the Counselor of
the Catholic Church, and every part thereof. Therefore we learn to do him all
the honor we can. Counselors of the common law are feed, reverenced, and
honored for their counsel, though it be but for worldly matters, and it
oftentimes fails. Much more is Christ to be honored, whose counsel
concerns the things of God, and cannot fail, but shall stand. Nay, as his
counsel is infinitely more excellent then the counsel of any other creature,
so much more is he to be honored.

Further, in all dangers and temptations one must resort to Christ for
counsel: for to this end is he a Counselor. He told them they were miserable,
and therefore gave them counsel, declaring that he is at hand in all our
miseries and distress. And therefore we must resort to Christ for his
counsel, and rest upon it, and order our selves according to it. The good king
Iehosaphat (when the Moabites and Ammonites banded together) was in great
distress, but what did he? We (said he) know not, Lord, what to do, but our
eyes are toward thee. That is, we look to thee for counsel and direction: we
must rest and rely upon thee for wholesome counsel and good direction. So
should all men do in distress and danger, as we are now, by reason of our
sins and the professed malice of our enemies: for by all likelihood these
days are the time of our chastisement and correction; therefore we must say as
he said. Therefore in all distress, whether it be sickness or pang of death,
forsake all ill counsel, go not to wizards and Astrologians for help: but
humble your selves, and pray for his counsel. So much for the first part, that
is, the manner of prescribing this remedy.

Now of the remedy it self. As the misery had three parts, and those great
miseries all: so Christ propounds his remedy in such sort, that it is
answerable to the three branches of the misery: first, gold, that thou may
be rich: secondly, raiment: thirdly, eye salve. By gold, (according to the
analogy of the Scripture) we are to understand the graces of Gods spirit, as
true faith, repentance, fear and love of God and man. All these are called
gold: as the trial of our faith is said to be more precious then gold. We may
likewise understand al other gifts of the spirit: yea, all Christ's merits, and
Christ himself the fountain of all.

Purged by the fire. That is, precious and fine gold, of special account, that
is purged from all dross by the art of man. This shows, what is the
property of his gifts and graces, they are as precious as fine pure gold: as
1. Pet. 1. 5. This is worth the marking, that the gifts of Gods spirit are of
great price and value, and that before Gold. Psalm. 119. 72. Math. 13. 4. This
teaches all, how to beautify themselves in soul and body. The blind and
false opinion of the world is, that strange attire and foreign fashions
beautify and adorn the body: and it is commonly thought that Jewels and
precious stones adorn us: and indeed it is true in some persons, such as be
great personages: but strange fashions and outlandish attire disgraceth the
body. The right way to beautify the body indeed, and to make it truly
glorious, and to adorn the soul also, i^ to get these graces: for these are
as precious as fine gold. Our bodies should be the temples of the holy Ghost,
and the houses of a worthy guest: therefore we should the rather labor for
the best ornaments. And if you will adorn your selves as you ought, you must
do it with the graces of Gods spirit, and abhor these fond and absurd
fashions, which no wise man can like of.

That thou may be rich, etc. These graces have a further effect, and serve
not only to adorn and beautify, but also to make men rich. Here then see the
common folly, nay, madness of men, which spend all their time, wit, and
strength to enrich their bodies, and leave their souls unfurnished. What a
madness is this, that so many should neglect true riches, and study for
nothing more then that which is nothing less then riches, even counterfeit
riches? By this text it is more then manifest, that such are more then mad, and
that this folly is very great. Therefore seeing true riches be the graces of
Gods spirit, seek for these. So much for the first part of the remedy.

White garments. That is, Christ himself and his righteousness imputed. As
Gal. 3. 27. even as a garment is put on the body, so is Christ and his
righteousness, and the fruit thereof, that is, sanctification: all this is
meant by garments here. Now the end is to cover the nakedness of the soul,
which is deformed and defiled with sin.

Eye salve. That is, the spirit of illumination, knowledge wrought in the mind
by the spirit of God. For as eye-salue does clear the eye sight, and sharpen
the same, where it was by some occasion hindered* so does Christ by illumination
make a man know and understand God in Christ, and discern between good and
evil, of things temporal and eternal. Thus you have the meaning of these
words.

Now by the exposition you may see, that by all these we can understand nothing
but Christ himself and his merits. One and the same thing is signified by
three words, to show, that there is in Christ the fullness of grace, and that
he has remedies for all our wants. The Laodiceans were poor in spiritual
goods, and Christ was their riches; naked, and he their garment; blind, and he
their eye-salue. So that look how many sins there be in men, so many
contrary remedies there be in Christ. What wants soever be in us, he has a
supply of them all. The Papists make him an insufficient Savior, in that they
patch our merits to his, and so they disgrace Christ: but we are to count
Christ a most perfect and absolute Mediator and Redeemer in himself without us.

To buy. The means how these worthy gifts of God are gotten. Christ says, by
buying and bargaining: he says not, receive, but buy. This is an allusion to
the state of that city which was rich, and consisted most of Merchants, which
lived by buying and traffic: therefore he speaks to them in their own
kind: as if he should say: You are a people exercised in buying and selling,
and are delighted with nothing more: therefore come, I have wares for you of
sundry sorts, gold, garments, and eyesalue, buy of me. Then the word buy must
not be understood properly: for so we can buy nothing of Christ, but all is
given us. This is said only by way of resemblance, and I will show wherein it
stands. The principal things in bargaining are these: first, a man that is to
buy sees his want, and desires to have it supplied: secondly, he comes to
the place where it may be had, calls for it, looks on it, and likes it:
thirdly, he makes the price and value of it, he cheapeneth it: fourthly, he
gives money for it, or moneys worth, and so buyeth it: fifthly, if it be a
great sum he gives earnest in hand. So by a certain proportion and
resemblance, there is a kind of bargaining between us and Christ. For a man
must feel himself to stand in need of Christ and of his merits, and so see
his own want and misery. For, because men see want of bread, meat, drink,
and cloth in their houses, therefore they go to buy of the baker, brewer,
butcher, and draper, etc. Well then, look how sensibly a man feels the want
of these things, so evidently should we feel our want of Christ and his
merits. And as the feeling of our want is the beginning and occasion of our
going to buy, so it should be in this our merchandise. Again, we should hunger
and long after Christ. As a buyer takes liking of, and longing for that he
wants, and is thereby stirred up to buy; so besides the sense of our want, we
should hunger and thirst after Christ. Besides, we must prize Christ at so high
a rate, that we count all things else as dross and doung; as Paul counted
most excellent things no better: we must value him above ten thousand worlds.
Lastly, we must make an exchange. How? seeing we can give him nothing but his
own: therefore he says, Come buy without money. Simon Magus would have bought
him for money, and was deceived. Yet there must be an exchange, we must give
him all our sins, and receive his righteousness. See here a most blessed
exchange: for our shame and confusion, we have Christ's righteousness and his
merits. How? Thus: when we begin to humble our selves, and pray for remission
and reconciliation, then this change is made.

Though we can give him no earnest, yet he gives us earnest. What is that? It
is some portion of Gods spirit, some small measure of his grace: that is our
earnest, that we shall have the kingdom of heaven. And thus heaven is bought
and sold between Christ and us.

When the heart mourns for sin, and prays for pardon, and purposes to sin
no more, this is the work of Gods spirit in us, and the earnest of our
eternal salvation in heaven. Be our graces never so few or small, it is a
sufficient earnest, as a penie is for a bargain of a hundred pound.

Seeing all these things concur to the receiving of Christ, therefore he
calls it bargaining. So this point is plain, how this spiritual bargain is
made, and why it pleases Christ to term it so.

Now we see that we are commanded this duty: Use.
but how stands the case with us? Surely though many come to Church, few make
that bargain which is mentioned: we are like passengers by sea, which see many
goodly buildings, fruitful lands, soiles, and sumptuous cities, but they make
no purchase of them: so we come and hear the word, but where is the party
that makes this bargain with Christ?

Come to particulars. I appeal to all your consciences: who almost feels or
sees his own want and misery? Men can soon see the want of necessaries in
their houses, but this they cannot see. And as for the desire of Christ, and
longing for him, there is none. When you are dry or hungry, you can say you
are dry and hungry: but who says, I thirst for Christ? If we look to our
estimation of Christ, we are plain Gadarens, and of Esawes mind, we set more
by a mess of red pottage, and esteem the basest things above Christ and his
merits: nay, we are loath to part with our sins, and to take his righteousness;
we will rather keep them still then change for the better. Who takes Christ's
righteousness, and declares it by fruits? We can be content to load Christ
with our sins, but we will not be laden with his righteousness. Is this a good
change? No, it is not. Every man can say; he must rise betimes which shall go
beyond him in base and earthly bargains: but who has regard of this excellent
and heavenly bargain? Then to conclude, I pray you al make this bargain with
Christ, and do it presently, let it be your first work. You are careful to
put your children to good trades, and you do well; but be as careful that they
may make this bargain, and you shall do much better. This is the cheapest and
the best bargain that ever was made, it will make you and yours rich for ever:
as for other bargains, many cannot get them, and many loose them when they
have gotten them; this only is durable.

Verse 19. As many as I love, etc. We have heard a sharp reproof, and as sharp
a threatening; by which, because they might take occasion to doubt and despair
of Gods mercy and favor in Christ Jesus, therefore now he takes away all
occasion in the 19. and 20. verses. First thus, If I use to rebuke and chasten
all that I love, then you need not doubt of my mercy, albeit I rebuke and
threaten you so. This, I take it, is the proper occasion of these words.

Now see the meaning: I love. Christ loves the creatures two ways: first, as
a Creator: secondly, as a redeemer. As he is a Creator, he loves them with a
general and common love, whether the creatures be reasonable or unreasonable.
As Redeemer, he loves them with a special and peculiar love, not common to
all, but to that part of mankind only which is elected and chosen to
salvation. And of this last love he speaks here: as if he should say, As many
as I love, communicating with them my righteousness and life eternal: I rebuke.
The word has a larger extent and signification, first to convince one of a
fault, and then to check or reprove the person: and it cannot well be rendered
in one English word. And chastise: that is, with such a kind of correction
which a father uses to his child, which is called nurture, to break a child
of his fault, and to teach him obedience: and so it is used Prouer. 3. 12.
whence this text is borrowed. The meaning then briefly is this: All those
persons whom I love, I convince of their particular faults, and rebuke them:
and like a loving father, I chastise them and nurture them, to break them of
their vices, and bring them to amendment.

Now for the use of these words: Use.
Christ sets down his ordinary dealing with his servants, which is, by
reproof and chastisement, and diverse visitations: for this very end, that he
might convince them and correct them. Every member of Christ must come under
his rod, therefore look for it: yea mark further, Christ lays upon all his
servants afflictions in diverse sorts, according to the diverse dispositions of
men's natures: such as will hardly be broken of their faults, he lays upon
them more sharp punishments: where men are easier to be amended, there he uses
milder correction.

The use of this is twofold: Proverb. 3. 12. the first is, despise not the
Lords chastiseme^t, for it is a token of his love: whensoever he reprooueth or
afflicts thee by visitations and crosses, make not light account, but make
profit of it. The second is, faint not, arm thy self with patience, because it
is the Lords manner to chastise those that he loves: and so many chastisements,
so many pledges and pawnes of his love toward his servants. By this Christ is
an example to all parents and governors: they must give tokens of love in
necessary corrections, that their children and servants may be brought from
their misdemeanure: for this end chastisement should be used.

It were to be wished, that all parents and masters did use to give correction
thus: but our case is lamentable in this respect. Men think it enough to
provide food and raiment for their household: all their care is for the body
only, and they never seek to reform their misdemeanors in life. This
negligence brings many sins with it, and pulls many judgments upon us. So
much for the second point.

Amend. Again mark the order of the words: Rebuke and chasten. Here we have a
necessary instruction, seeing Christ first propounds a direct end of his
chastisement, that is, their amendment: which that he may the better effect,
first he conuinceth them, secondly he reprehendeth, and thirdly chasteneth
them; and all these tend to our amendment. A worthy and excellent order, and
to be followed of all governors; they must propound a good end of all
chastisements: first the good of the party chastised: then they must use this
order, first a conviction of the conscience by the word of God: secondly,
reprehension: thirdly, correction, if the two former will not serve. Which being
so, you see how they ouershoote themselves, that make correction serve for
nothing but a means of revenge, an action of choler and rage, without any
purpose to better the party. Whereas this order used, would reform the
person, and stop many vices, and nip them even in the head: to some it is as
good as meat and drink to be fighting and brawling.

Be zealous. Here is a remedy for luke-warmnesse. In the eight verse they had
a remedy for pride: now he makes a plaster for luke-warmnesse. Here first
mark how these words depend on the former: Christ had said, Whom I love, I use
to chastise, according as their faults be greater or lesser: therefore seeing I
have corrected thee, repent. Where we are taught the use of all reproves,
admonitions and visitations; the special end of them, is to drive us to amend.
As often as the Lord does either by word reprove, or by deed correct us, it is to
show that we must repent and amend: therefore whenever you are visited, say
the Lord summons you to repent: take an occasion by the visitation, of further
reformation; yea, know it, that so many afflictions are so many sermons of
Repentance, to make you grow and increase in faith, repentance and obedience.

Now that we may the better understand what this commandment Be zealous
means, diverse points are to be handled: first, what zeal is. Zeal is an
affection, that is compounded of two affections, love and indignation, or
sorrow: therefore first we must love Christ above all things, if we will be
zealous: secondly, we must be grieved and angered when Christ is dishonored.
Love of religion, and grief for the want of good success thereof, will make
men zealous. We have an example in Christ, Ioh. 2. 17. where thus much is
signified, that his love to his father was so great, that the heat of his
indignation had almost consumed him: he preferred the accomplishment of his
Fathers will before all.

In the second place, note the diverse kinds of zeal: good, that is, true: or
bad, that is, counterfeit. To a good zeal there is required, first, true
faith: secondly, repentance: thirdly, knowledge. As for faith, it is the very
root of good zeal: for as Paul says, Love is from faith unfeigned. 1. Tim. 1.
5. Now zeal is an affection compounded of love and faith. And as for
repentance, we see that zeal and it are conjoined in this place. Iehu indeed
was zealous, but because he repented not, but lived in the sins of his
predecessors, it was no good zeal. And for the last, we must know, that zeal
without knowledge is but rashness. And thus you see how to distinguish true
zeal from counterfeit, even by the companions of it. Now further by the
fruits it may be discerned.

First, it compels a man to please God in all things: it will enforce one,
overrule and master him. 2. Cor. 5. 13. Whether we be out of our wit, we are
in it unto God, etc. The very love of Christ and his Gospel enforced him, that
he could not but preach. So wheresoever this true zeal is in any measure, it
will make a man that he cannot but do his duty. It will burst forth and find
an issue, Job. 33.
like a flame: as Elihu said, he could not contain, his belly would burst.
Secondly, It will make a man endeavor to obey God with all his heart, strength
and power. Example. Good king Iosia turned with all his heart, David prayed
with groans unspeakable: according to the multitude of thy mercies, etc. and so
goes on marvelous earnestly and fervently: he prayed not slackly and coldly,
but with all his force and power, from the heart, for pardon and
reconciliation. And so when he gave thanks, he says, My soul praise the
Lord, and all that is within me, etc. Psalm. 103. 1.

Thus you see what be the fruits of zeal, and what it is to be zealous. In a
word then it is this, to have our hearts enflamed with a love of Christ and his
word above all things, and to be exceeding angry when it is disobeyed,
enforcing us to do our duty with all the strength we have. Now to end this
point, we heard before, that lukewarmenesse in religion is our sin generally
throughout the land, our zeal is cold, and our profession but formal. How
shall we reform this? Become zealous, bear a fervent love to religion, love
Christ above all, and be grieved when you see him dishonored, or his word
disobeyed, and false worship established. Away with this slacknesse in
religion, otherwise it had been better you had been of no religion, then to be
neither hot nor cold. A man were better be a Turk or a Jew, then a lukewarm
Christian: for they are better then such, and such professors are worse then
they.

And amend. This is added, because zeal without repentance is but counterfeit
zeal, as Iehues was. But of what vices must they repent? Even of
lukewarmenesse. They were not bidden repent because of any gross sins that
they had committed, but for slacknesse in performing good duties. Here is a
good lesson for our common people, which say, because they are no gross
sinners, as adulterers, thieves, murderers, but mean well, hurt no man, and
live peaceably, their case is good. They despise preaching, and never think
how the want of practicing good duties, is a thing that they should repent for.
But they are to know, that they are summoned to repent for want of good duties,
though they do no evil. This is the devils enchantment, he rocketh them
asleep with it. You may have all these things, and yet be condemned and go to
hell. And yet this is a common opinion, and spread over every where: but know
it, thou may live and die with thy good meaning and peaceable living, and yet
be damned, if thou repent not.

Verse. 20. Behold, I stand at the door, etc. Lest any should despair, because
he had reproved them so sharply, and menaced them so severely, he adds these
words, which are to confirm the Church against doubting, by showing signs of
his love. Now before he sets down the special tokens of his love, he
says, Behold. In which very note of attention, we have a necessary
instruction, to teach us, that if we would arm our selves against doubting, we
must acquaint our selves with the tokens of Gods love, lay them to our hearts,
and remember them. We have of this an example in David, Psalm. 23. in all the
verses save the last, he rehearses Gods goodness and his particular
blessings: whereupon he infers this conclusion; Therefore without all doubt I
shall live long to praise God. And all this came from the particular
observation of Gods goodness; therefore if you would not stand in doubt of
Gods mercy, observe his dealing and his love in Christ, as plentiful tokens
of his providence. They being laid together, work in us peace of conscience,
and joy in the holy Ghost. There is no man so full of despair and doubting,
but if he lay these things together, and observe diligently all the tokens of
Gods favor, he shall find store of comfort: therefore look back to your
lives; what tokens of Gods love you have received, and in the time of trouble
that will be a remedy against desperation.

I stand. Christ expresses his mind by borrowed speeches: for in this verse he
compares every man to a house or householder, and our hearts to doors by which
an entrance is made: and himself to a guest or stranger which comes to the
house, and desires to be let in and entertained: yet not so much to look for
kindness to be showed him, as to show favor to us. By this similitude Christ
purposes to show this Church, what his mind is toward it: and he expresses it
by two signs here set down: first, a desire of their conversion, which he
heartily seeks and looks for, I stand and knock. Secondly, his promise
after their conversion, If any, etc. he will have fellowship, even mutual
fellowship with them.

Now of the words in order as they lie. The scope and substance of them being
thus first thus generally propounded, I here note two things. First, that this
Church (if we regard the greatest part of it) had not true fellowship with
Christ as yet, nor Christ with the^: because he was not yet received into their
houses, but stood at their doors which were shut. This may seem strange: but
the cause is evident, the truth is, there were many good things in them: for
they knew the Gospel and liked it, and professed it, and were partakers of the
seals of the covenant: and yet they were tainted with one great sin of
lukewarmenesse, which closed up the door of their hearts, so that though they
had many good things, yet this one sin kept out Christ. By which we see, that
one sin, in a man endued with many good graces, keeps out Christ, and
barreth him from all fellowship and society with him. Judas had many notable
things in him; he forsook all, and preached Christ, and yet covetousness kept
out Christ. Herod had so too, but incest kept the door shut against Christ. It
is the nature of sin to cut a man off from all fellowship with Christ: and so
we may have many excellent things among us, as the word and Sacraments; and yet
if thou be a man which have but one sin (and nourishest it) it is a bar to
keep out Christ from entering. If thou be given either to covetousness,
drunkenness, fornication, adultery, theft, blasphemy, or lying, etc. that one
sin whatsoever, will keep out Christ, so that he must be feign to stand and
stay at the door, and so must abide as long as a man continues in any one
sin. Therefore so many as have any desire to have fellowship with Christ,
must have care to cut off all sin: for though thou have knowledge, wit,
memory, understanding and utterance, yet if thou have but one sin, it takes
away the very ground of all fellowship with Christ: that is, of all felicity
and happiness.

In the original, it is not I stand, but I have stood. So Ier. 7. 13. I have
risen up early: and Esa. 65. 2. I have stretched out my arm all the day long.
And here, I have risen up early, and stood here long, all the day till night:
for so much the word of supping imports; as if he should say, till supper
time.

This shows Christ's exceeding patience, in waiting for the conversion of this
people. He might in justice have condemned them for their sins, and have cast
them to hell, and yet he stands still all the day waiting for their
conversion, till he is feign to complain.

Now this place serves to show and set forth, and gives just occasion to
speak of Gods patience, in waiting for the conversion and amendment of a
sinner. Now that which Christ says to them, may he justly say to us: he has
risen up early, and spent a long day in waiting at our doors, above six and
thirty years, therefore he may well vpbraide us. Let us then learn to know
the day of our visitation: Luke 19*
for that is the day of a peoples visitation, when the Gospel is preached and
Christ stands knocking: therefore it stands us upon to labor to know this,
and regard it. If we can resolve our selves of this, then we practice the duty
which Christ prescribes the church of Jerusalem* if we do not so, but shall
let pass all the signs and tokens of Gods mercy, we must look for the like
end as Jerusalem had. So much for the first part, I stand at the door.

And knock. First he used means to enter when they had barred him out. Mark
the unspeakable mercy of Christ: they by their sins stopped Christ from
entering* yet he pursues them with mercy, and offers mercy to them that
refused it, and contented themselves to lie and live in their sins. When Adam
had sinned and fled from God, the Lord sought him out, and made a covenant of
grace with him. So Esaias 65. the Lord says, he was found of them that never
sought him: they that never dreamed of mercy sound mercy. Luke 15.
In the parable of the lost sheep, that sheep which was left as a prey to the
wild beasts, Christ sought it up, and brought it home. All these places tend to
one end, to show the infinite mercy of Christ. This is true in all churches,
yea in this of ours. If we have mercy, we have it before we seek it, nay when
we refuse it, as much as in us lies. This should be an occasion to stir up
our hearts to magnify Christ for his mercy: we should not let pass such
considerations as these, but rather break out into praise of Gods love and
mercy, which is a bottomless sea.

Quest. It may be demanded, how he knockes. Answ. The words precedent show the
sense: for these words have relation to them. He said before, he would spue
them out: then he gives them counsel. Now by so sharp a rebuke they might
have despaired: therefore he shows, that by this threatening, and rebuke, and
counsel, he knockes, that they might perceive they were not tokens of wrath
but of mercy. So then this knocking is nothing else but the reproof,
threatening, and counsel used before. He knocks when it pleases him to make
men see their sin by such things.

Here then we are to mark the state of al people which have the ministry of
the word, they have Christ among them, and he stands at the door and
knocks at every man's heart. All threatenings of the law, reproves of sin,
exhortations, admonitions and promises, they are so many knockes of Christ. A
great and unspeakable mercy, that the King of heaven and earth should do
this: Now then does Christ knock thus by preaching, promises, and threatenings,
etc. then we must not be so dull, dead, and backward, but show more zeal. If
any man of great place and calling knock at your doors, what stirring is
there, that you may receive him as is meet? Then what a shame is this, when
Christ vouchsafes to deal thus mercifully with us? Again, in that Christ
comes by the ministry of the Gospel to work our conversion, it serves to
admonish us to turn with all speed, for we know not how long he will stand and
reach forth the hand of his ministry to beat upon our hearts. Mark further;
this knocking is not a light and soft kind of knocking, but it goes with
crying; he both knocks and cries, it is an earnest knocking of one that
would feign enter.

Seeing then Christ standing at the door of men's hearts knocks so earnestly
to save men's souls, we again ought to be earnest to receive and embrace the
Gospel. He knocks in good earnest, and we must accordingly by Gods grace be
as earnest. So much for the first token of Christ's love, his desire of their
conversion, which he shows by two signs; first his waiting, secondly his
knocking, and that joined with crying.

If any man, etc. Now follows the second token, namely, a promise of
fellowship with them after their conversion. These words have been much abused,
therefore I will stand a little to set down the meaning. Mark the form of
speech, it is such as seems to give a man an action in his own conversion,
whereby he comes and receives Christ. So it attributes to man's will an action:
as if he should say, I for my part stand and knock, if therefore any man hear
etc.

This may seem strange, that such an action should be attributed to a man that
is dead in sin. But this speech is used for just cause; for in the conversion
of a sinner there be three agents: first, the holy Ghost: secondly, the word:
thirdly, man's will. The principal agent and worker is the holy Ghost, which
changes the mind and will from evil to good, the will by nature willing
nothing but that which is against the will of God. Secondly, the word, which is
an instrument of the holy Ghost, for he works not now ordinarily by revelation,
or special instinct and inspiration, but when a man is reading or hearing the
word, and applying it to his heart, then the holy Ghost works in and by the
word, that being the power of God to salvation, from faith to faith. Thirdly,
the will though it be dead by nature, and can do nothing of it self: yet when
the holy Ghost begins to move it, it moves it self, and strives to be altered
when God moves it. We must not think ma^s will is like a piece of wax, which
has no actio^, but only passiuely receives and impression: but the will being
disposed, moves and stirs it self. Even as fire, so soon as it is kindled
it burns, and as soon as it burns is fire: so when God has once given
grace, the will moves, the mind sees and acknowledges sin, and the will
inclined by the holy Ghost begins a strife against sin, and makes a man
endeavor to please God so much as he can. So the will in the very first
conversion has his action, though not by nature but by grace. Now considering
these three actions concur in the conversion of a sinner, hence it is that
actions are ascribed to sinners which are to be converted, as here and in many
other places, not that they can do any thing of themselves without Christ, but
when they are wrought upon by the holy Ghost. Thus a man has a free will in
his first conversion by grace: as fire has some effects of fire so soon as
ever it is kindled: therefore it is said, Repent and believe, to impenitent
persons; not because they can do it of themselves, but because when it shall
please the holy Ghost to work it in their hearts by the word, they can turn,
and use good means. This is the cause why the holy Ghost ascribes an action to
such persons: when God gives grace to receive Christ, then it receives Christ:
when God opens the heart by that grace, it is enabled to receive Christ.

This being the true meaning of these words, let us see how this text has been
abused, first by Papists, which gather hereupo^ that a man has free will in
his conversion by nature: that he has and that is the faith which sets open
the heart wide to receive Christ. Thus if you shall humble your selves, and
acknowledge your unworthiness, and lay hold on Christ with true faith, and
testify it by fervent love to Christ and his members, then shall your hearts
be open indeed, and you shall receive Christ. Thus much for the true meaning of
the condition.

It follows, I will sup, etc. This is the promise it self, namely a mutual
fellowship with Christ: this is the ground of al joy, comfort and happiness:
therefore it is here propounded as the principal thing, and it has two parts:
first, I will sup with him: secondly, and he with me. The true communion
between Christ and his members, stands in these two things. Here is a double
feast, and these two contain the sum and substance of Salomons book called
the Canticles: for there Christ entertaineth and feasteth the church, and the
church feasteth him. For the first, I will sup with him. How? Cant. 4. end.
Come my well beloved and eat of the delicate things and pleasant fruits: there
you may see how every Christian soul converted, makes Christ a feast, to wit,
with the fruits of true repentance. Psalm. 51. The broken and contrite heart,
that is a most worthy part of the feast, and a sacrifice acceptable to God.
Secondly, a believing heart, for without says it is impossible to please God,
Heb. 11. and when we give up our bodies and souls a living sacrifice. Rom 12.
1. bring broken, believing, and obedient hearts: these are the dishes and
delicates wherewith Christ is fed, wherein he delights. And he with me. We must
also be feasted by Christ: for Christ comes not for this end to be entertained,
but to entertain. The feast which Christ makes, is his own body and blood in
the administration of his Supper: his body is true meat, and his blood is
true drink. And the vessels in which it is served out, are the seals of the
word; and the guests are penitent sinners, which have broken hearts, which
hunger and thirst after Christ. Now from this feast arises righteousness,
peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost. Romans 14. 17. All joy that heart
can think comes by this feast. Now seeing Christ makes these promises as a
principal token of his love, we must make some use of them. We must renounce
all our carnal vanities and earthly delights, and give our selves no more to
surfeiting and drunkenness, and sumptuous banqueting. Here is a better kind
of feasting, therefore turn your eyes from those, lift up your hearts, and
have care to entertain Christ: feast him with the graces that God has given
you, and labor again to be feasted of him, feed of his body and blood to life
eternal. Labor to be acquainted with these, that you may know by experience
how Christ feasts you, and you him. You know one friend how to entertain
another, every man according to his dignity: but you should have more care of
this spiritual and mutual entertainment between Christ and you.

Again, see here a notable abuse of those that come to the Lords table: for
mark how these two go together, Christ feasts us, and we must feast him, so
that there may be an enterchange of feasting: but our communicants come to the
Lords table, and they will have Christ feast then, but they will not feast him,
whereas we should feast him daily by faith, obedience, and repentance, and good
duties of our callings: but we like churlish and ungrateful Nabals, have not
one good dish to feast him withal. This is our shame. Or if we be good guests
for a day, yet after that is past, we have no care to entertain Christ. Look
to it therefore, and see that you feed Christ, not by your own natural power,
but by your gifts of grace.

To him that ouercometh, etc. This is the conclusion of the Epistle, in which
note two parts: first, a promise: secondly, a precept. The promise: To him that
ouercometh, that is, he that holds out, keeping faith and a good conscience
against all the enemies of his salvation. Shall sit: that is have fellowship
with Christ in his glory. Christ does not promise equal glory and honor, for
that is not possible for any creature, because he is the head of his church,
but only a participation: as if he should say, he shall be partaker of my
glory, so far as shall be meet and convenient for him: as appears by the
words following. But this (will some say) is no great matter. True, the carnal
heart of man may surmise so: therefore he adds, as I overcame, etc. This is no
small glory, for like as my father did advance me when I had overcome, so will
I advance all my members, when they have overcome their spiritual enemies. Now
as Christ is inferior to the Father, as he is Mediator, and yet sits with him:
so the members of Christ may sit with him, and yet be unequal to him in glory.

Verse 22. Let him that has an ear. This has been expounded often before.

The memorial of the righteous is everlasting: but the name of the wicked
shall rot. Prou. 10.

Laus Christo nescia finis.

An excellent Sermon, plainly proving that Rome is Babylon: and that Babylon
is fallen.
Preached long since by a famous Divine, and added as a Commentary to the
hardest part of the Revelation.
REVEL. 14. VERSE. 8. She is fallen, she is fallen, even Babylon that great
City: for of the wine of the fury of her fornication she has made all
Nations to drink.
THE holy Evangelist S. Luke in the fourth chapter of his Gospel records,
that on a time, when our Savior came into the Synagogue at Nazareth, to read
as his custom was, there was delivered to him a book containing the Prophecy
of the Prophet Esaias. Which after he had opened, at the first he found the place
where it was written in these words: The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because
he has anointed me, that I should preach the Gospel to the poor: He has
sent me that I should heal the broken in heart, that I should preach
deliverance to the captives, and sight to the blind, that I should set at
liberty them that are bruised, and to preach the acceptable year of the Lord.
Then after he had closed the book, and delivered it to the Minister, he sat
down to preach, and the eyes of all them that were in the congregation were
bent upon him. Then he opened his mouth, and spoke unto them these words: This
day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears, and they all gave him testimony
that it was so. In like manner may I say, concerning this place of Scripture
which I have read unto you: In your eyes and ears is this Scripture this day
fulfilled. And I pray God you may all likewise bear witness with me, that it
is so.

The last time that I spoke in this auditorie, I entreated of the flourishing
and prosperous estate of Jerusalem, which is the Church of God, set forth in
the 122. Psalm, and therefore good order now requires, that I should speak
of the decay and overthrow of the enemy of Jerusalem, which is Babylon, the Sea and Church of Antichrist: and for that purpose principally, have I chosen
this text of Scripture to speak of: that by the one we might be enflamed with
love of the true Church of Christ, and by the other be moved to the hatred of
that false Church of Antichrist. Now this text of Scripture (She is fallen, she
is fallen, even Babylon that great city, for of the wine of the fury of her
fornication she, has given all nations to drink) offers me three special
things to be considered: first, what Babylon is: secondly, what is become of
her: and thirdly, what is the cause of her heavy decay.

In the first part, by the assistance of God, I shall plainly show and prove,
that Babylon is Rome: In the second, that Babylon or Rome, by the just
judgment of God is fallen, yea, she is fallen: In the last, the reason of this
so sharp sentence of God against her, because she has deceived all the world
with drunkenness and whoredom. Within the compass of these three
propositions I will keep my self in all my discourse: saving that by your
favor, forasmuch as this is the middle voice of three Angels that speak in
this Chapter, for a Preface, I will use the voice of the first Angel, of whose
preaching this my text is a co^sequent: and in the stead of a conclusion I will
touch the voice of the third Angel, which is a consequent of this the middle
Angels voice. Concerning the preface, it shall be this in few words. After that
S. John had described the preservation and unity of the Church of God in
Christ their head, even in the midst of the fury of Antichrist, under the
figure of the Lamb standing on mount Sion with 144000. of his chaste
worshippers: next he declares that God would bring the same again into the
sight of the world by preaching of the Gospel, and the overthrow of the
kingdom of Antichrist. Wherefore he sends an Angel flying in the midst of
heaven, or between heaven and earth, bringing with him an everlasting Gospel,
and preaching that all men should fear God, and give glory to his name, for
the time of his judgment was at hand, and that they should worship him that
made heaven and earth, and all things that are in them. A very Angelical
sermon indeed, and an everlasting Gospel is that, (howsoever the enemies
charge it with novelty) that teaches to fear God, to give glory to his
name, and to worship him only that is the Creator of heaven and earth. And a
consequent of that Gospel is this Sermon of the Angel. She is fallen, she is
fallen, even Babylon that great City. For wheresoever men are taught to fear
God aright, to give all glory to him alone, and to worship none other but him
that made heaven and earth, and all things in them contained: there must needs
follow a great fall and overthrow of Babylon, and Babylonicall religion, which
teaches the contrary. Wherefore if we love the peace of Jerusalem, to the
overthrow of this her great adversary, let us embrace this everlasting
Gospel, that we fear God, glorify God, and worship God alone. Again, if we
hate Babylon with a perfect hatred; as we ought to do, and therefore would
seek her utter ruin and decay: let us procure that this Gospel may be
preached, that men may learn to fear, honor, and serve God only, and then
undoubtedly Babylon shall fall, she shall fall I say, she can stand no longer.
Let this suffice therefore for a Preface.

Now have we to consider, what Babylon is. I have undertaken to prove, that
Babylon here spoken of; is Rome. But first I must admonish you, how I
understand Rome. And that is not only for a certain place in Italy, compassed
about with walls, and furnished with buildings, as other cities are: but for
that authority, government and pre-eminence which is challenged by means of
that city, or for the Roman Empire, which is claimed by prerogative of the
same city: and so is Babylon taken in the Scripture, and namely in this
Prophecy. For in the eleventh Chapter of this Revelation, the same great city
is called also Sodoma and Aegyptus, where our Lord was crucified: Sodoma, for
the great abomination and filthiness therein maintained, and Aegyptus,
because it keeps the people of God in miserable bondage and slavery, as
Egypt under Pharao did of old. Whereby it is manifest, that the great city is
to be taken for that tyranny, government, and pre-eminence, as I said, which
is challenged in the right of that great City: and so is the regiment and
governance of the Roman Antichrist, depending upon the prerogative of his
See, which is Rome. Now if any will contend, that Babylon must be taken in the
proper sense, for a city in Chaldea only, as though we should look for the Sea of Antichrist out of the East (as the Papists for thirty or forty years
ago devised a fable, that was renewed also in Queen Mary's days, of a
monstrous child which should be borne at Babylon, which they would have men
suppose to be Antichrist:) he may be flatly convicted of great ignorance, when
the Angel in the seventeenth Chapter of this Prophecy testifies, that her
name is Babylon in a mystery, as in the eleventh Chapter, that she is
spiritually called Sodoma and Aegyptus, not in respect of situation of the
place, but in similitude and likeness of conditions.

Wherefore it remains, that (according to my promise) I prove Babylon here
mentioned, to be Rome. The greatest controversy that this day troubles the
world, is, where the true Church of God should be: the Papists making great
bragges, that it is on their side, and we affirming that it is on our side.
This controversy will soon be cut off, and brought to an end, if it may be
showed that Babylon is Rome: for then cannot Rome be the Church of Christ, but
the Church of Antichrist. And therefore it stands me upon, to bring very good
and substantial proofs, to maintain this my assertion, that Babylon is Rome.
But what proofs may be counted sufficient? Is not the authority of holy
Scriptures, and the testimony of ancient Doctors of the Church good and
substantial proofs? Therefore if authority of Scriptures be a good and
substantial proof, ye shall have Scriptures: if consent of ancient Writers
in the same sentence be of any value, you shall have plenty.

And first beginning with Scriptures, I will not allege such places as be hard
and dark to understand, but such as be plain, evident, and manifest, and can
receive no other interpretation, to satisfy the judgment of any reasonable
man. I omit therefore so many figures as in this Revelation do not very
obscurely signify, but even directly point at and paint out that Antichristian
Church. For although they do so aptly and fitly agree thereto, as a man might
easily judge they were made even for the same purpose: yet because they might
be wrested to some other meaning, if manifest places did not withstand, I will
leave all advantage that I might take of them, and hold me only at this time
to those plain and evident demonstrations, which with no equity nor
conscience can admit any other interpretation. Only I will here note, that
forasmuch as all figures, types, and colors contained in this book may so
conveniently be applied to Rome, as though they had been properly appointed to
describe her, (as they were indeed) it is great prejudice against Rome,
although no plainer proofs might be brought. But when so plain arguments are
brought forth, that without too much impudency cannot be avoided, and all
other figures and dark speeches agree accordingly, it is a manifest
conjunction that Rome is none other but this Babylon.

But to begin with these plain places (as I have promised,) the first shall be
out of the eleventh Chapter of this Revelation, the place before alleged:
where it is declared, that God in all times, yea in the greatest persecution,
would maintain his Church, and reserve at the least two witnesses which should
testify of his truth, in spite of Antichrist and his adherents. Which although
the monstrous beast that arises out of the bottomless pit, should murder
and slay, yet God should restore them to life again, continually stirring up a
sufficient number to bear witness of his name and doctrine. In that Chapter I
say is contained, that when the beast had murdered them, he should envy them
the honor of burial, and so their bodies should lie in the street or market
place of that great city, which is spiritually called Sodoma and Aegyptus,
where our Lord was crucified. Declaring thereby, that as Rome had slain and
crucified the head, so should Rome persecute the members. And in the same City
where their Lord was murdered, the servants should be persecuted.

But here a man would think that I were impudent to affirm, that our Savior
Christ was crucified at Rome, whom all the world knows to have suffered
death at Jerusalem. But you must call to remembrance, that at the first I gave
warning, that I did not understand Rome for the topographie of Rome, that is,
so much ground only as is compassed within the walls of that City, but for
the regiment, governance and prerogative that is claymed, by reason of that
City or Monarchy, whereof Rome is the head: and then I shall easily prove
that Christ was crucified at Rome.

For by whom was he condemned? was it not by Pilate the Deputy or Lieutenant
of the Romain Empire? For what cause or crime was he adjudged to die? was it
not for treason pretended to be committed against the Roman Empire? With what
kind of execution was he put to death? was it not such as was usual by the
laws of the Romans, for such heinous offenses as were unjustly laid to his
charge? Finally, was not the place wherein he suffered, within the circuit of
the Roman Empire? May I not then justly affirm that he was crucified at
Rome, when by the Roman Judge he was condemned for a crime against the
Roman state, and executed by a kind of death appointed by the Roman laws,
and in a place of the Roman dominion? As for the Jews, they had at that time
no authority to put any man to death, as they confess themselves, when Pilate
bad them take him, and judge him according to their own law, meaning they
should decree some light punishment against him. They answered: It is not
lawful for us to judge him to dye. As touching the cause, although they
accused him of blasphemy, in that he made himself the Son of God: yet could
he not be condemned for that, because Pilate would admit no accusation, but
such as contained a crime against the Roman laws. And as for the death of
the cross, it is manifest to be proper to the Romans: for the Jews would
have stoned him, if they might have condemned him for blasphemy, according to
the law of Moises. And that the Angel in that place by no means can
understand Jerusalem, it is manifest by these reasons: first, that he calls
it that great city; which term could never be spoken of Jerusalem. Also he
calls it Sodoma and Aegyptus, which was the sea of the monstrous beast
Antichrist, which in other places is often called Babylon. Whereas no man ever
did imagine that Jerusalem should be called Sodom, Egypt, or Babylon. Add
hereunto, that Jerusalem, the place where Christ suffered, was utterly
destroyed in S. John's time, whereby it is evident, that by this great city,
spiritually called Babylon, Sodoma, and Aegyptus, is meant none other but the
Roman Empire, which crucified the head, and should also bring forth to put
any man to death: and he has deserved the monstrous beast Antichrist, which
should torment and afflict the members, which began with murder of the Lord,
and should continue, till it were destroyed, in murdering of the servants. And
by this plain text, which cannot be wrested to any other sense, this great
city of Babylon, where Christ was crucified, is proved to be Rome, and the
authority, rule, and power of the Roman City.

The second plain and evident proof which I will use at this time, shall be
taken out of the thirteenth Chapter of this Revelation, where that evil shapen
beast is described, which is the head of the persecuting malignant Church,
having seven heads and ten horns: and is the same which afterward in the
seventeenth Chapter bears the great whore Babylon, the mother of all
abominations of the earth. Who so therefore will compare these things that are
written in this book, concerning the description of that monstrous beast, with
those things that the Prophet Daniel in the seventh Chapter of his Prophecy,
describes of the four beasts, and specially of the fourth, which all men
confess to be the Roman Empire: except he be too much blinded with
frowardnes and perverse affection, he must needs acknowledge, that this Beast
which John painteth out, is the same that Daniel sets out: which containing
in it the cruelty of the Leopard, the Bear and the Lion, which were the
former Monarchies, is unlike to them all, and therefore is the fourth Empire,
which all the world acknowledges to be the Monarchy of Rome. What should I
speak of the number of the horns, equal in both, and generally of all other
parts of their description, which is set forth so like, and almost with the
same words, both of the one and of the other, that it were mere madness to
imagine that this beast which John describes, should be any other, then that
Daniel had so long before portraited. Then if the Beast in Daniels description
does signify the fourth kingdom, as the Angel expounds it, which no man
will deny to be the Roman Monarchy: the same monstrous Beast, being here
painted out in this Revelation, with the same shape, colors and conditions,
must needs signify the Roman Empire, and so Babylon by this reason also is
proved to be Rome.

The third argument or proof is taken out of the seventeenth Chapter of this
Revelation, and the ninth verse: where the Angel expounding to Saint John the
mystery of the Beast with the seven heads, declares in very plain words,
that the seven heads do signify seven hills, whereon the woman sits. Now
seeing it is evident, that the woman signifies a great City, we must see
where we can find a great City builded upon seven hills, and that by the
interpretation of the Angel is Babylon, the Sea of Antichrist. And if we seek
throughout the whole world, where shall we find a great City builded upon
seven hills, but that great city in Italy? which all Writers Poets,
Historians, Cosmographers, with one consent do confess to be Rome, which is
builded upon seven hills, whose names are these: Palatinus, Capitolinus,
Auentinus, Exquilinus, Viminaelis, Quirinalis, and Caelius. This is so plain a
notation of Rome to be Babylon, builded on seven hills, that the Angel could
not more plainly have expressed Rome, though he had named her. Nay this is a
more evident and certain description of Rome to be the Sea of Antichrist, then
if in plain words he had said, Babylon is Rome. For it might be, that some
other city then that here was meant, might have the name of Rome, but no other
city could have this notation, to be builded on seven hills. For Constantinople
was afterward called new Rome, but Constantinople was not builded upon seven
hills like unto old Rome. Therefore this is a plain and manifest
circumlocution of Rome, which with no reason can receive any other exposition.

For what boy going to the Grammar school, and reading in Virgils Georgickes
this verse: Septem quae vna sibi muro circundedit arces: That city (says
Virgil) which has compassed seven hills within her walls. What boy, I say, in
the Grammar school does not understand this to be meant of the city of Rome,
although the Poet in that place does not once name Rome? With what face
therefore will any man deny, that the Angel here means any other city by
this Periphrasis and circumlocution, then Rome? For if any will be so froward
to except, that the word of hills is not taken in the proper sense, but
figuratively and metaphorically for some other thing, as some would seem to
interpret seven hills in this place for seven kingdoms, he shall plainly be
convinced by these reasons: first, it were absurd that the Angel should repeat
one thing twice; for in the next clause he shows that the seven heads do
signify kingdoms also: but specially we must remember, that this is an
interpretation of the Angel, which must either be plain and easy to be
understood, or it deserves not the name of an interpretation. Therefore if the
Angel, offering to expound the mystery of the seven heads, gives this
exposition, that they signify seven hills: if hills be not taken in their proper
sense, to what purpose serves this exposition? For if the name of hills has
need of another exposition, he had been as good to have left the name of heads
vnexpounded. And as for the interpretation of hills to signify Kings, is more
obscure, dark, and far fet, then that heads should represent Kings; for it is
more apt by metaphor to call a King an head, then to call him an hill. Therefore
except we will say, that the interpretation of the Angel is vain, yea more
dark then the thing that is expounded by him, we must needs confess that
hills are taken in their proper sense for hills, and then the city builded upon
seven hills without all controversy is the city of Rome.

The fourth and last proof that I will take out of the holy scripture, is the
last verse of the same seventeenth chapter, which is yet a more plain
description of Rome, if any thing can be more plain then that has been
already spoken: for there the Angel in plain words expounds, that the
woman which S. John saw, which was the great whore Babylon, is that great
City which has dominion over the Kings of the earth. What brazen face is so
impudent, to deny that Rome was that great city which had dominion over the
Kings of the earth at that time when this was spoken? Or what other city had
dominion over the Kings of the earth in S. John's time, but Rome? Who is
therefore so froward and untoward, that he will not acknowledge Babylon here to
be plainly called Rome? If I should name the chief city of England, who would
not understand London? If I should speak of the chiefest city of France, who
would not conceive Paris? And when the Angel named the chief city of the
world, who could be ignorant, living in that time, or knowing the history of
that time, that he understood it of the city of Rome, which was the sea of the
Empire, and from whence we should look that Antichrist should come, according
to the former prophesies? For it is a shame in this place to fly unto
allegories, and further expositions of this Angelical interpretation, which as
I said before, if it be not clear, plain, and easy to be understood,
deserves not the name of an exposition: as when one knows one unknown thing
is expounded by another as much or more unknown, it is vain, superfluous, and
ridiculous. Wherefore, whom any bonds of reason will hold in, they must be
satisfied with the exposition of the Angel, that Babylon is Rome. For seeing
it was necessary for the Church of God, to know as well the place where
Antichrist should fit, as to be instructed of his craft and cruelty: our
Savior Christ, the author of this Revelation, would not suffer his
congregation to be ignorant thereof, but sent his Angel plainly to interpret
and expound the vision of the great whore, that the Church being thoroughly
admonished of her wickedness, and instructed perfectly to know her, might more
easily take heed of her, fly from her, and abhor her: so that according to my
promise I have sufficiently proved by authority of holy Scriptures, this first
proposition which I took in hand, that Babylon is Rome.

But because some are of such obstinate and wilful frowardnes, that nothing
will satisfy them, but they will still grudge and repine, carpe, and object
against my interpretations of holy Scriptures (for the texts they cannot deny)
I wish them that are such, if they like not these expositions, which I have
brought to the defacing of Antichrist and his religion, that then they admit
and reverence those expositions, which their own authors bring for the
maintenance of the Popes authority and his religion: of which sort are these:
God (says Moses in Genesis) made two great lights, the Sun to rule the day,
and the Moon to govern the night: that is, says the famous Interpreter, God
ordained the Pope and the Emperor to rule the world. By the Sun is meant the
Pope, and by the Moon the Emperor: and look how much greater and more
glorious the Sun is then the Moon, so much greater and more glorious is the
Pope then the Emperor. And not content with this, he counts by Arithmeticke
how much greater the Sun is in quantity then the Moon, by proportion that
it has to the earth, and so by many parts he concludes that the Pope is
greater then the Emperor. But here a man might help him, what by Geometry, and
what by Arithmeticke, for where as the Sun is 166. times greater then the
earth, and the earth 39. times greater then the Moon (as is proved by
Mathematical demonstration) the Pope should be 6474 times greater then the
Emperor. This is one noble exposition that is set forth to advance the
dignity of the Pope and his kingdom.

Another like to this, is upon the words of the Apostles, which answered unto
our Savior Christ, when he commanded him that had no sword to sell his coat
and buy one, signifying the great danger that was at hand: Lord (say they)
here are two swords. These swords (says the Glosar) are the Civil and
Ecclesiastical power which remained in Peter, and therefore his successor the
Pope has pre-eminence of both. No doubt a worthy interpretation, and that
agrees well with the text, and does the Pope great worship. Again, S. Paul
says to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 2. The spiritual man judges all things, and
he himself is judged of none. This spiritual man, says the Interpreter, is
the Pope, which is Judge of all the world, and may not be controlled of any
man, no though he draw with him innumerable souls into hell fire, there to be
tormented with the devil and him for evermore; yet no man must be so bold as
to find fault with him, or to say, Domine, quid ita facis? Lord, why do you so?
Is not this an handsome exposition? Yea I promise you, even like unto this
other: Statuimus vt Clerici nec comam nutriant, nec barbam radant: We decree
(says the Canon of an ancient Council) that the Clergy shall neither wear
long hair, nor shave their beards. The Glosar finding this Canon to be so
clean contrary unto the custom of the Popish Clergy, who use to wear long
hair and to shave their beards, thought he would draw it, at the least if it
would not come by fair means, to maintain the laudable custom of the Popish
Clergy: and by exposition of one word, he makes the whole Canon to serve his
turn. Therefore Statuimus (says he) which is, we decree, is to be expounded
for Abrogamus, which is, we disanul or abrogate, and so the sense afterward
falls out very plain for the popish Priests thus: We disanul that Prists
should go without long hair, or vnshauen beards. A right cunning
interpretation, and proper for the place: and such in effect are all those that
serve for the maintenance of the Popes authority, and the religion of Popery.
Therefore he that is of so sharp judgment, that he will mislike and refuse
those plain expositions which I have brought of the places before alleged,
and except against them, as enforced, constrained, and far fetched: let him
like of, praise, magnify, and admire these interpretations, which are sought
to uphold and establish the Popes throne and religion, as rightly, faithfully,
and truly collected. Atque idem iungat Vulpes, and mulgeat Hireos: and by as
good reason let him join for his plough not Oxes but Foxes, and milk for his
paile, not she Goats but he Goats, as the Poet says.

Now that I have proved Babylon to be Rome by authority of Scripture, it
follows that I must show for the same the consent of ancient Doctors. And as
in my former probation I touched only such places as did plainly, directly,
and manifestly set forth my purpose, so in this behalf I will deal with the
Doctors. Not such as they are wont to allege against us, names indeed of great
and reverent antiquity, but works of mere falsehood and forgery, bewraying
their authors not to be such as they are fathered upon, but such as out of the
body of blindness and superstition of much later time have begotten them.
Such are the decretal Epistles of the old Bishops of Rome, Linus, Cleme^s,
Anacletus, etc. Of which, Cleme^s writing to S. James forsooth in his second
Epistle charge him very earnestly that the Pixe be cleanly kept, so that
there appear no Mise dong, or any other filthiness among the fragments of the
body of Christ, with many other like Apostolical commandments. The
impudency of whose authors appears notably in this, that whereas they were
ignorant buzzards that could not write true Latin, they would ascribe their
counterfeit Epistles to so learned fathers, as though at that time when women
and children spoke Latin naturally as their mother tongue, the Bishops were so
unlearned, that they did write so barbarously, and were not able to utter their
mind in true Latin.

But leaving those delicates for such as long after them, I will use no
authority for this purpose, but such as they cannot refuse, but that that is
ancient, catholic, and autenticall. I will begin therefore with Irenaeus, one
of the most ancient and autenticall writers that the Church has: who in the
fifth book of his treatise against all heresies, speaking of the sea of
Antichrist, upon the last verse of the 13. chapter of this Revelation, where it
is said, that the number of the beasts name is six hundred, sixty and six,
shows that the opinion of many in his time was, that seeing this name (...),
The nu^bring of the beasts name by the Greek letters. (...) 30 (...) 1 (...)
300 (...) 5 (...) 10 (...) 50 (...) 70 (...) 200 666.
which is in English, the Latin man, or Roman, in the numerall Greek letters
contains this number, that Antichrist must be sought at Rome. His words are
these: Sed and (...) nomen sexcentorum sexaginta sex numerorum, etc. and valde
verisimile est, quoniam verissimum regnum hoc habet vocabulum. Latini enim sunt
qui nunc regnant. Also (says he) this name LATEINOS, containing the number of
666. is thought to be the name of Antichrist: and it is very like so to be, for
that which most undoubtedly is a kingdom has that name: for they be Latins
which now do reign.

You see by this testimony of Irenaeus, that this prophecy of old time was
understood of Rome, and that the mumber of the beasts name is to be found in
one that bears rule at Rome. If this exposition or explication of the beasts
name had been devised by Luther, Zwinglius, or Calvin, it might have been
suspected as a thing imagined of spite and envy against the Church of Rome, but
when it is brought forth by so ancient a Doctor, which lived not many years
after this Revelation was given, as he himself says, that it was but a little
before his time, under Domitian the Emperor, which died thirteen hundred
years before Luther was borne: we must needs judge it both to be very
ancient, and void of all partiality. Wherefore I will pass over diverse
other applications of that number to other names, which nevertheless hit
Babylon home, because they have been sought out of late by such as bear il will
unto Rome. For I think this is sufficient with all reasonable men of equal
judgment, to prove that this is no new opinion, to seek the sea of Antichrist
at Rome. They themselves to prove their doctrine catholic, allege authority
of eleven or twelve hundred years antiquity: behold, this opinion is
thirteen or fourteen hundred years old, that Antichrist should be a
Roman, and that the sea of his tyranny should be at Rome.

The second witness of this assertion that Babylon is Rome, is Tertullianus, a
very ancient writer also, who in plain words affirms, that Babylon
signifies Rome, in the third book against Martion, which denied that Christ
had a true body. Wherefore Tertullian uses this reason against him: That
thing which has a figure of it, must be a thing of truth: and so discoursing
of many things figured, and the figures of them, comes to these words: Sic and
Babylon apud Iohannem nostrum, Romana vrbis figuram portat, perinde and magna,
and regno superbae, and sanctorum debellatricis: that is to say, even so does
Babylon (in the Apocalips of our S. John) bear the figure of the city of
Rome, which is altogether as great, and as proud in reign, and as great a
persecutor of the Saints, as Babylon was. You see therefore most clearly and
plainly, that Tertullian with all his learning could not interpret these
things that be written in this Revelation concerning Babylon, to be applied to
any other city then Rome: and he is also a witness void of all partiality
or affection to either part of them that strive in our days; for he departed
near about fourteen hundred years before our time: why should he not then
be credited in this case?

Well, next unto him I will join Chrysostom, in his Commentary upon the
second Epistle to the Thessalonians, the second chapter, in his fourth Homily:
where as S. Paul speaking of the manifestation of Antichrist, says, they knew
what was the stay, that he was not presently revealed. But when that stay is
taken away, he should be revealed in his due time. Chrysostom expounds this
stay to be the Roman Empire, which must give place unto Antichrist: that like
as the Persians came in place of the Chaldeans, the Grecians in place of the
Persians, and the Romans in place of the Grecians: even so Antichrist should
invade the Empire of the Romans. Vacantem imperij principatum inuadet, and
tentabit ad se rapere hominum and Dei imperium: Antichrist (says he) shall
invade the vacant principality of the Empire, and shall assay to draw unto
himself the Empires both of God and men. And is it not manifest that the
Papacy grew and took increase by the decay of the Empire, and at the fall of
the Monarchy, challenged full possession of all dominion, both spiritual and
temporal?

Of the same judgment is S. Jerome writing upon the same place of Paul, unto
Algasia, in the eleventh question, whose words are these: Nec vult aperte
dicere Romanum imperium destruendum, quod ipsi qui imperant aeternum putant,
vnde secundum Apocalypsim Iohannis in front purpuratae meretricis scriptum est
nomen blasphemiae, id est Romae aeternae, etc. that is, neither will he openly
say, that the Roman Empire should be destroyed, which they that govern it
think to be everlasting: wherefore according to the Revelation of Saint John,
in the forehead of the purple whore there is written a name of blasphemy,
which is, Rome everlasting. Lo, here another witness of good antiquity and
sufficient credit, which not only agrees plainly with Chrysostom, that
Antichrist should take possession of the Roman Empire when it should be
decayed in the Emperors: but also most plainly agreeing with Tertullian,
calls that Babylonicall strumpet, which is described in the seventeenth
chapter of this Apocalypse, that purple whore of Rome, and the name of
blasphemy, to be Rome everlasting: as though he had heard the Pope brag of the
eternity of his sea, which he says is the rock, against which the gates of
hell cannot prevail. But he is foully beguiled, for Rome the sea of his
Popedom is by Saint Ieromes judgment that Babylom of whom the Angel
preached, that howsoever she boasts of her eternity, She is fallen, she is
fallen, even Babylon that great city, and never shall rise again.

They cry out against us, that we rail and speak contumeliously of the holy
sea of the Pope, when we call Rome the whore of Babylon: but when the old
Doctors (to whose judgment they themselves appeal from the authority of the
Scriptures) fear not so plainly in their writings to paint out the
Babylonicall Strumpet in her right colors, and in flat words to say she is
Rome, the mother of all abomination, and the sea of Antichrist: why should we
be blamed for saying as we are taught by them? And especially of those men that
make so great vaunts that the judgment of the Fathers is altogether on their
side by whom they offer to be tried, when they dare not abide the judgment of
the Scriptures?

Again, consider I pray you; if the old Doctors before Antichrist were openly
revealed, did understand by the Scriptures that he should sit at Rome: what
think you would they have said and written if they had lived in these days,
and known and seen all that was prophesied to be fulfilled in him? With what
confidence suppose ye, would they have inueyed against him? With how open
mouths would they have cried out upon him? At least wise do you not think in
your conscience, that when they had considered the authority of the Pope, and
his wholesome doctrine, they would have changed their minds, and recanted their
writings against Rome, and repented that ever they had called her the purple
whore of Babylon, seeing she is the holy mother Church of Rome, the sea of the
most holy father the Pope the head of the same Church?

I must needs say thus much in your behalf (o ye Papists) as ill as I love
you, that if Jerome, Tertullian, and the rest of the Doctors did so account of
Rome as you affirm of them, they were much too blame to defame her with such
odious names, as to call her the whore of Babylon, which must needs make her
vehemently suspected to be the Church of Antichrist, and not of Christ: for
what Papist in these days dare say, that which Ierom said, that Rome is that
purple Harlot Babylon, which S. John speaks of in the Apocalypse? The same
Jerome in his 13. book of Commentaries of the Prophecy of Esaias, upon the 47.
chapter writes in this manner: Licet ex eo quod iuxta 70. scriptu^ est (...),
id est, filia Babylonis, non ipsam Babylone^ quidam, sed Romana^ vrbem
interpretantur, quae in Apocalypsi Iohannis and Epist. Petri Babylon
specialiter appellatur, etc. That is to say: For as much as the seventy
Interpreters write, not the daughter Babylon, but the daughter of Babylon, some
do interpret thereof, not Babylon in Caldea, but the city of Rome, which in
the Revelation of S. John, and the Epistle of Peter, is specially called
Babylon. Note that Jerome in this place accounted Rome to be Babylon the
younger, daughter of Babylon the elder. And secondly, that this was not his
opinion only, but the consent of many other in his time, and namely, of such
as used to interpret the Prophet Esaias. Thirdly and especially consider, that he
affirms Rome in the Apocalypse to be especially called Babylon. So that
Babylon in the Apocalypse, by his judgment, can be understood for nothing else
but Rome, because Rome is there specially figured by Babylon. What means
Jerome so often to beat in this nail, that Babylon is Rome? If it had slipped
out of his pen but once, he might have been pardoned for his oversight: but
when he has never done writing, that Rome is Babylon, why should we account
him any longer for a Catholic?

For in his Preface unto the book of Didimus, De Spiritu sancto, which he
translated out of Greek into Latin, writing to Paulinianus, he utters these
words: Cum in Babylone versarer, and purpuratae Meretricis essem Colonus, and
iure Quiritum viuerem, etc. Of late (says he) when I was in Babylon, and was
an inhabitant of the purple Harlot, and lived after the laws of the Romans,
I thought to entreat somewhat of the holy Ghost. What needed Jerome in this
place so odiously and contumeliously to call Rome by the name of Babylon, but
that he could never consider Rome otherwise, but to be the Sea appointed for
Antichrist? For in other places where he interprets the Scriptures and
Prophecies, concerning Antichrist, we may less marvel if he interpret Babylon
for Rome, because no reason could lead him to expound it otherwise. But here
talking pleasantly with his friend, what necessity compelled him to use such
descriptions of Rome, but that this persuasion was so deeply graven in his
mind, that Babylon is Rome, that neither in earnest nor jest he could forget
it, but is always harping upon it, as though he thought scorn to call Rome by
any other name, then that he had learned in the Scriptures to be Babylon, and
the purple harlot? For in like manner writing to Marcella, a virtuous
Gentlewoman of Rome, whom he allured to forsake Rome, and to dwell near unto
him in Bethelem, one special reason that he uses to persuade her, is this:
That as Bethelem whither he would have her to repair, is situate in the holy
Land, and the place consecrated to the birth of CHRIST: so Rome where she
desired to remain, was the Babylonicall harlot, according to the Revelation of
S. John, appointed for the birth of Antichrist, which there should arise, and
exercise his tyranny, and from thence should deceive the whole world with his
wicked wiles.

But who so will read the works of Jerome, may find yet more places, in which
he is bold to call Rome Babylon, the very See of Antichrist. Whereby it is
apparent, that it is no new or strange matter to seek Antichrist at Rome, when
such old Doctors of the Church, so commonly in Commentaries, Epistles, and
other writings, do teach us that Rome is Babylon: and the Scripture affirms
that Babylon is the Sea of Antichrist. But let us leave S. Jerome, and see what
other say of the same matter.

S. Ambrose, writing a Commentary upon the Revelation of S. John, is of the
same judgment. Of the authority of the work I will move no question at this
time, seeing it is commended to us by Cuthbert Tonstall, late bishop of
Duresme, who found it in an old Library, and first set it in print, under the
name of that great S. Ambrose, and is willing that men should so think of it.
It is good authority I say, against the Papists, being commended by so
Catholic a Prelate, and because they are wont to receive whatsoever comes
under the name of an old Doctor, though it be never so unlike his writing, and
cry out upon us for rejecting at our pleasure the works of ancient Doctors,
that make against our doctrine: as though we rejected any without cause, or
they refused none for any cause: whereas Pigius their great Patron, blushed not
to reject the report of two general Councels, the fifth and sixth of
Constantinople, which are commended to us by public faith of the Church of
Constantinople, because in the one Pope Honorius is condemned and accursed for
an heretic, and in neither of both the Popes Legates could have the highest
place, according to the request of their ambitious Master. But as for this
Ambrose, if he were not Ambrose of Millaine, yet is it apparent by the style,
that he was some ancient Writer of the Latin Church, and he throughout this
Prophecy interprets Babylon to be Rome, and Antichrist to be sought no where
but at Rome. Primasius also a very ancient Writer, who likewise commenteth
upon the Apocalypse, expounds these Prophecies of Antichrist to be fulfilled
in the Roman Empire, and of the city of Rome.

S. Augustine in his learned work De Ciuitate Dei, not once or twice, but
oftentimes is bold to call Rome Babylon, and Babylon Rome, as in his sixteenth
book and seventh chapter, he calls Rome another Babylon in the West. And in
his eighth book and second chapter, he calls Babylon of Caldea the first
Rome; and Rome of Italy the second Babylon: willing men to consider, that in
the beginning of the city of God, which was the Church in Abraham's time, the
first Rome, that was Eastern Babylon her enemy, was builded in Caldea, and
about the same time that the first Babylon was destroyed, lest the city of God
should lack her enemy, the second Babylon, which is Rome in Italy was
erected. It is a strange matter, that the same city which is the professed
enemy of the city of God, should be the mother of all religion, and the very
city of God it self. O Augustine, thou wast not well advised to make the
City of Rome enemy to the City of GOD, that Rome should be the same to the
Church of GOD, that Babylon of old was to Jerusalem! The same Augustine in the
22. Chapter of the 18. book, calls Rome another Babylon, and daughter of the
first Babylon. And in the 27. Chapter he calls Rome western Babylon. By
these and other testimonies of old Writers that might be brought but for
tediousness, I suppose it is sufficiently proved, that Babylon in this my text
spoken of, is Rome, and that we should not seek Antichrist to proceed from any
other place then from Rome. But what need I trouble my self to seek further
testimonial, for confirmation of this matter, that Babylon is Rome, then of
the Papists themselves? which affirm that S. Peter in his Epistle, where he
sends salutations from the Church gathered in Babylon, by Babylon
understands Rome. And they learn it of Ieronime, which in the life of S.
Mark does so expound it. So greedy they are to find a place in Scripture,
where Peter should be said to have been at Rome, that they are content to
acknowledge Babylon in the Scripture to be understood of Rome. And thus I have
performed, I trust sufficiently, that which I took in hand to prove, both by
the authority of holy Scripture in plain and manifest texts, and by consent
of many ancient writers, yea by the confession of the Papists themselves, that
Babylon in the Scripture is taken for Rome. And thus much for the first part,
in which, because I have been over long, I will be shorter in that which
remains.

In the second part I promised to declare how Babylon which is Rome is fallen,
according to the Prophecy of this Angel: She is fallen, says the Angel, She
is fallen. He repeateth the word of falling for two causes: first, to declare
the certainty of her decay, that howsoever she seemed to flourish and triumph,
as though she should never have fallen or come to ruin: yet God for her
wickedness most righteously, and for the comfort of his Church most
mercifully, had decreed undoubtedly that she should fall, when that time was
once come, which in his most wise and well ordered counsel was appointed for
her destruction. Secondly, he repeateth twice, that she is fallen, to show,
that she should have an unrecoverable fall: she should not fall as other
Cities, which have risen again: but she should fall without all hope of
recovery, never to be restored again. Therefore in the eighteenth Chapter, a
mighty Angel takes up a great Mil-stone, and throws it into the sea,
saying: With such violence shall Babylon that great City be thrown down, and
never be seen any more. So that as it is impossible for a great Millstone,
thrown with great force by a mighty Angel into the bottom of the sea, to
rise up again and swim above the water: so impossible is it that Babylon, when
she is at the lowest of her fall, should ever be set up again. And in the
nineteenth Chapter, it is said: That the smoke of her burning ascended up for
ever and ever. Also of her utter desolation, descriptions are made in the
eighteenth Chapter, where it is said, that Babylon is made a dwelling place of
devils, a cage of unclean birds: according to the Prophecy of Esaias concerning
old Babylon, that Zyim and Ohym, which be Sprights and Goblins shall walk in
her Palaces, Scrichowles and Ostriges shall cry in her houses, Apes and
Satyrs shall dance in her beautiful buildings. No voice of men shall be
heard in her, no sound of a Mill shall be heard, no light of a candle shall be
seen, but perpetual solitude and sorrow shall dwell there for evermore.
Therefore says the Angel, she is fallen, she is fallen, that is, she is
destroyed, and never shall be repaired.

But if we will better understand how she is fallen, we must consider more
distinctly wherein she is fallen. First, in wealth and riches she has
sustained a great fall. Consider how many kingdoms and states of the world
have renounced her obedience, and all those have withdrawn great rents,
revenues, and commodities, that in times past were addicted to the maintenance
of Babylon, the Church of Rome: A great fall without peradventure, and that
will never be recovered. Remember so many Abbeyes, Monasteries, Nunneries,
Frieries, Hospitals, Chauntries, Churches and Chapels, now overthrown and
made even with the ground. All lands, jewels, ornaments and great treasures
that belonged unto them, clean taken away from them: and you will confess
with me, that Rome in riches has a great fall. Yea, if you would see with your
eyes a manifest example of Gods judgment against Babylon, behold those evil
favored ruins and heaps of Monasteries, that were sometimes gorgeous and
sumptuous buildings. The same end remains all that pomp and pride of Babylon
not yet altogether beaten down, but even now in falling. For the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it, and his immutable counsel has decreed it, and he has
sent an Angel to proclaim it.

Some wish perchance, that Monasteries had stood still, and been converted to
better uses: but undoubtedly the providence of God so ordered all things, that
his curse which was upon them might be executed, and the Prophecies that were
concerning them, might be fulfilled, that they might be a monument of his wrath
unto all the posterity, the beginning of the fall of Babylon, and an example
of the destruction of all the rest, that should follow soon after. Who would
ever have thought that so great riches, treasures and revenues should so
suddenly be overthrown, destroyed, and come to nothing? Therefore it is
manifest, that the wealth and worldly substance, whereby the pride,
voluptuousness, and intemperance of ryotous Rome was maintained, and grown to
an intolerable excess, is greatly diminished, sore decayed, and has a foul
fall, and shortly shall have a final fall.

Well, Babylon is not fallen only in wealth and riches, but also in power and
authority. For the kings of the earth which sometimes were subject to that
monstrous beast, have now shaken off the yoke of her servitude, and withdrawn
the obedience of all their subjects from her. Yea, the most part of the ten
horns, which sometime gave over their power and authority unto the beast,
which were all the Kings and Potentates that acknowledged the Pope for their
supreme head, and sovereign Lord, do now hate and abhor the Harlot of Rome,
and shall make her desolate by withdrawing their Subjects from her obedience,
and naked by spoiling her of her treasures, and shall eat her flesh for pure
hatred, and burn her with fire: For great is the Lord which judges her. So
that she which before at her pleasure might command all Princes to begin
war, to cease from war, to defend her quarrels, to annoy her enemies, now
is glad to flatter a few seduced Princes to take her part, that she be not
utterly forsaken of all men: or else to practice by treason and treachery,
suborning Rogues and Vagabonds to stir up tumults among the rude people, to
trouble godly estates and commonwealths that despise her dominion; but without
all hope ever to recover her ancient tyranny.

Her thunderbolts of Excommunication, which were sometime terrible to all men,
are now feared of no man. What though she retain her proud and presumptuous
stomach, and will do while her breath lasts, to pronounce sentence of
deprivation against Princes that abhor her wickedness? Her impudent
arrogancy is not so much detested of many, as laughed to scorn of all. Her
Proctors and privy practisers, though they change themselves like Proteus,
into never so unlikely shapes, are espied in every corner. For God himself
reuealeth their pretenses, and will not suffer her to prevail any longer. So
that in power and authority Babylon is fallen, and falls daily more and more
into utter contempt with all men, until she be utterly consumed and brought to
nothing, which will not be long before it come to pass. For this sentence that
God has pronounced against her, and begun also to execute, cannot be changed,
or much longer deferred.

But especially and chiefly Babylon is fallen in credit of her doctrine. For
besides so many Princes and estates of Christendom, that by public authority
have received the Gospel, and utterly abolished all Babylonicall doctrine:
even in the midst of her tyranny and persecution, great multitudes daily are
lightened with the bright beams of the Gospel: that for all Inquisitions,
imprisonments, exquisite torments, and cruel burnings, they never a whit
diminish, but rather increase, as God has provided that the blood of the
Martyrs should be the seed of the Church. And they are more then obstinate, if
they do not acknowledge that this matter is governed from God above. For if it
had been of men, it must needs have decayed before this time, and have come to
naught, as Gamaliel said of the doctrine of the Apostles. Therefore in fighting
against it, they show themselves but after the manner of the old Giants, to make
war against God. Or as it is contained in this Prophecy, that Antichrist
should gather together the Princes of the earth to make battle against him
that sits upon the white Horse, whose name is The word of God, but all to
their utter confusion and destruction. For the word of God must conquer and
prevail in the last age, and Antichrist must be consumed by the spirit of the
mouth of Christ, which is his holy word, and utterly abolished by the glorious
brightness of his coming to judgment, as S. Paul testifies in the second
Chapter of the second Epistle to the Thessalonians. Therefore it is vain that
they seek to underprop the doctrine of Babylon by cruelty and tyranny, for
all will not serve, seeing the time of her final fall approaches, and now
already our Savior Christ with the spirit of his mouth has wasted and
consumed a great part of that credit and estimation, in which the doctrine of
Babylon of long time has triumphed. And it is our parts to pray that her
credit may daily more and more decrease, that the kingdom of Christ may be
perfectly established amongst us, and the kingdom of Antichrist overthrown,
even from the foundations, that no superfluous relics of Babylonical religion
may remain where the church of Christ is in building, but that the doctrine of
Babylon may fall altogether.

Thus I have declared that Baylon in wealth and substance, in power and
authority, in credit and estimation of her doctrine, is fallen, and that
without hope of recovery: for her credit is cracked, not only amongst her
enemies the Protestants, but even amongst her best friends and greatest
Arch-papists. For I suppose there is none in the world so blind, so
superstitious, so devoutly addict in all points of Popish idolatry and
superstition, as they were 30. or 40. years past. Although they close their
eyes never so obstinatly against the light of Gods word, yet some effect of the
beams of force will pierce even through their eyelids. And that they
themselves cannot dissemble, although they would never so feign, but that they
have been deceived with gross errors and shameful superstitions: their
pardons, their pilgrimages, their legends: who is now so blind that sees not
how the world has bin seduced by them? And the simplicity of the people
abused to satisfy their insatiable covetousness?

As for the greatest Patrons of Popery that be learned, they cannot deny, but
that great errors have been received and taught for truth. Yea the Pope
himself has acknowledged, that many errors have crept into the church, yea
even into the Mass: but the reformation of them pertains to him alone and
the general Council. But what hope of reformation is to be looked for at
their hands, let it be seen in the decrees of the last Council of Trent. What
little Mise those great mountains in so many years travel have brought
forth? In forty or fifty years consultation two great matters reformed. One
for Pardoners not to be common pedlers, another for the Communion in both
kinds, to those that desire it, so they confess it were as good in one kind,
and agree with them in all other points of Popery. Yet all was not well, they
confess by their correction. And as for the greatest Pillars and Proctors they
have, if they be pressed near, acknowledge a great deal more. As one that
landed lately at Yarmouth, before witness of good credit testified, that if he
might be satisfied in two points, concerning the Popes supremacy, and the
real presence, for other matters he would not greatly strive. So that I will
conclude, that Babylon is fallen in riches, in power, in credit of Doctrine,
not only with Protestants, but even with Papists themselves.

But now I know what will be objected against me, That I have traveled all in
vain, to prove that Babylon is fallen, and that Babylon is Rome: and that I
have abused the texts of Scripture, and sentences of old Doctors, to prove the
same. For whatsoever is contained either in the Scripture, or in the writings
of the ancient Doctors, to prove that Babylon is Rome, is to be understood of
Rome under the heathen Emperors, and not under the Popes: and that all this
while I have wrested the Scriptures, and enforced the Doctors to affirm that
which they never thought of. Indeed I will confess that some Prophesies
contained in this Revelation, were fulfilled in the heathen Emperors, and that
the heathen Empire was an introduction unto Antichrist: but that Antichrist the
great enemy of the church of Christ, and which is principally called
Antichrist, could not be any of the heathen Monarchy, I will make it manifest
by plain demonstrations. And first I will retain this Principle sufficiently
proved before, that Rome is the Sea of Antichrist, and that by authority of
Scriptures, and consent of ancient Writers we can seek him no where but in
the Roman Empire. And now the controversy rests in this, whether the
heathen Emperors or the Pope be he.

First, S. Paul in the second chapter of the second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, speaking purposely of Antichrist, says expressly, that he shall
sit in the Temple of God, which is the Church of Christ. But it is manifest
that the heathen Emperors did not sit in the Church of God, therefore the
heathen Emperor is not this Antichrist. And by the same reason it is manifest,
that Mahomet is not that especial Antichrist, because he sits without the
temple of God, as there be diverse that would have these things to be understood
of Mahomet or Ottomanus: but it is as clear as the Sun at noone days; for
as much as neither the heathen Emperors, nor Mahomet, nor Ottomanus sits in
the Temple or Church of God, that none of them is that great Antichrist, of
whom the prophesies of the Scripture are to be expounded.

And whereas some of them interpret the abomination of desolation where of
Christ speaks, to be meant of Antichrist, or at leastwise to be a sign of
him, that cannot be understood of the heathen Emperors, or any other that is
without the Church: for that stands in the holy place which is the temple,
and signifies the Church. Now the Pope sits in the midst of the temple of
God, and boasts himself to be God, chalenging to himself such authority as
is proper only to God, and usurping such honor as is peculiar only to God.
Therefore not in the heathen Emperors, but in the Popes is this prophecy
accomplished.

Another reason to prove that Antichrist (which in this Revelation is
foreshewed to come into the world) cannot be understood to be the heathen
Emperors, is taken out of the seventeenth chapter of the same book: for there
the Angel interpreting to S. John the mystery of the beast that bears the
harlot, which has seven heads, signifying seven hills, he declares also that
they signify seven Kings, or principal estates, or forms of regiment, for so
the name of King is often taken in the Prophets and specially in Daniel, at
which prophecy S. John borrows many phrases. Of these seven heads, five (he
says) were fallen, the sixth was then presently in authority, and the seventh
was not yet come, which seventh was the monstrous beast Antichrist, that was
both the seventh and the eight. Now it is evident, that this could not be
understood of the heathen Emperors: for Nero the first persecuting Paynim was
come and gone, and Domitian another persecutor, (by whose tyranny S. John was
banished into the I Will of Pathmos, where he saw and received this Revelation)
was then in authority: so that of the Monarchy or tyranny of heathen
Emperors, this could not be understood, and of the Christian Emperors, no man
will expound it: so that it must needs be turned over to the Pope, for it can
rest in no place else: and being referred unto him, all the rest have a very
apt exposition.

For the city of Rome, and the dominions thereof, has had seven principal
states or forms of regiment: the first state of Kings, the second of Consuls,
the third of Decemviri, the fourth of Dictators, the fifth of Triumviri, the
sixth of Caesar's or Emperors, and the seventh of Popes. Now five of these states
or forms of regiment were fallen and abolished in Saint John's time; the sixth
which was the Emperors, in his time was in place, and the seventh which is the
Popes, was not yet come, which was the very beast it self: the Roman Empire
revived and raised up from the bottomless pit of hell, into the usurped
tyranny of the Pope. And this is that beast, that sometimes was of wonderful
great power and glory in the days of Augustus, and some other of his
successors, but then much decayed, as if it had not been, although in some sort
it were, but should be restored in the usurped authority of the Pope, that
claims all the world to be his Diocese: which power comes not from God,
but from the Prince of pride, out of the bottomless pit. But chiefly let us
consider, that the beast although he be but one, yet in the account he stands
for two, for he is that seventh head, and the eight also. And remember that the
Pope challenges double authority, namely the power of both the swords, the
spiritual and temporal. So that in this exposition all things agree most
aptly.

Again, it is manifest in the Scriptures, that Antichrist should deceive the
world with false doctrine, under pretense and color of true religion, and
therefore so often times the Scripture warns men, that they be not seduced by
him: which were needles, if any open professed enemy of Christ should be that
Antichrist. For there is no likelihood that an heathen man, a Jew or a Turk
should deceive any multitude of true Christians: but he that under the pretense
of the name of Christ, seeks most of all to deface the honor of Christ, he
is a subtle adversary, and the very spirit of Antichrist, as S. John also in
his Epistle does testify. For in the second chapter speaking of those
Antichrists, which were the forerunners of the great Antichrist, he shows
that they went out from the Church. And in the fourth chapter he calls them
false Prophets, and teaches men how to know the spirit of Antichrist, He that
denies Jesus to be Christ, he that denies that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh: that is, he that derogateth any thing from the honor of Jesus to be
Christ, and in his flesh to have performed the full work of man's redemption, as
the Pope does most blasphemously, he is Antichrist: and who so teaches any
such doctrine, speaks by the spirit of Antichrist. For the testimony of Jesus
is the spirit of prophecy. Seeing therefore that S. John accounts Antichrist
for one that is gone from the church, and for a false Prophet, it is clear
that Antichrist is no heathen Emperor, which was never of the Church, nor yet a
false Prophet that took upon him to teach in the Church. The same may be said
of Mahomet, who never professed himself to be a Christian, nor yet a Prophet
in the Church of Christ, pretending to uphold the religion of Christ, but an
open enemy of the Gospel, and of our Savior Christ, altogether without the
Church. By these arguments I doubt not but all men may see, that seeing Babylon
is Rome, and that the head of Babylon is Antichrist, that he cannot be any of
the heathen Emperors, but even the Pope himself. And therefore I conclude
according to my text, that Rome is fallen, if Babylon be fallen.

Now remains the last part that I promised to entreat of, namely the cause
of Gods so severe judgment against Babylon, that he has decreed her utter
overthrow and destruction, which the Angel comprehends in these words,
Because she has made all nations drunk with the wine of the fury of her
fornication: that is, she has deceived all the world with false doctrine,
which he compares unto two kinds of vices, whereby men are so deceived, that
they loose all their right judgment, drunkenness and fornication: for as
these two vices do allure men to commit them, by coveting of vain delectation
that is in the^; even so Babylon has enticed all men like another Circe, to
drink of the cup of her delectable errors, and to commit most filthy
fornication with her idolatrous religion. For of al other religions, to the
carnal man none is so pleasant as Popery is, in which be so many kinds of
satisfaction to be obtained, both in this life and after men be dead, that
there is no greater security for an hypocrite to sleep in, the^ in the fair
promises of Popery. And that causes so many willingly to embrace it, and so
loath to depart from it, because they would still continue without check of
true doctrine, which calls men to repentance, and amendment of life, or else
threatens eternal damnation. For howsoever it pleases them to charge the
doctrine of the Gospel with cause of security, it may easily be seen by
comparison of it with the doctrine of Popery, whether is cause of security:
that which teaches no satisfaction but one, for them that be penitent in this
life: or theirs that has so many ways to merit rewards, and to satisfy for
sins, not only while men live in the world, but also for them that are
already gone out of it. And there is no wine so sweet to the taste of a carnal
man, as that which makes him drunk with opinion of his own righteousness:
as it is the nature of strong wine, to make very cowards think themselves to
be valiant champions: and such is the cup of popish doctrine, containing merits
and satisfactions.

Again, when we consider that Antichrist should make men drunk with his
erroneous doctrine, we marvel less how men could be so blinded and infatuate,
that they could not see and perceive such gross errors and manifest untruths
as are in Popery. For as they that are overcome with the strength of wine,
have lost the right use both of their wit and of their senses: even so they
that are drunk with the heretical doctrine of Papistrie, do grope in the
clear light of the Sun, and see not their own deformity, though all the
world beside cry out of them. In like manner, they that be overcome with the
dishonest love of harlots, they have their reason so imprisoned in corrupt
affection and foolish fantasy, that they are at liberty neither to see their
own folly, nor to admit any wise and godly counsel. So it fares with those
that the Babylonical Circe the Church of Rome has allured by her
inchauntments, to commit spiritual fornination with her, they cannot abide to
hear the voice of them that call them out of that damnable estate, so highly
they please themselves in their own misery, as if they were in case of perfect
felicity. This is the effect of their drunkenness, this is the effect of
their fornication, and this is the just judgment of God, that they which have
shut up their ears from hearing the truth, should be deceived with strong
delusions, that they might believe lies. Furthermore, by the names of these
vices, the Angel comprehends all other vices that follow drunkenness and
incontinencie. For these crimes go not unaccompanied, for where either of them
is, commonly both will be, and they have either of them, and both together,
their train to wait upon them: and all these we see to have ouerflowed in
Rome the Western Babylon, as she her self, though she have a brazen forehead,
and be past all shame, cannot deny altogether. And because of these so great
and heinous inormities, the just sentence of God pronounced here by the Angel,
is come upon her, that she is now in her fall and decay, as she was once in her
ruff and glory. But this especially is to be noted, that the Angel here
says, that she should deceive all nations with the fury of her fornication.
For this is the great universality that they make so great bragges of, and
would have it to be a certain note and mark of the Catholic Church to be
universal. Behold the Angel says here in plain words, that all nations
should drink of the wine of the fury of her fornication: Where is then the
universal consent and unity of all nations in Religion, that makes a true
Religion? and yet universality and unity be two great pillars of the Church
of Rome. And for my part, I do not envy her those marks which she challenges
of universality and unity (although we might stand in law with her for them,)
but let her peaceably enjoy them: for they may help to prove her to be the
false Church of Antichrist, but they cannot make her to be the true Church of
Christ. We see plainly that Babylon has here universality and unity, for
she makes all nations to drink of the furious wine of her fornication: but
the Church of Christ (as he himself says) is a small flock; and himself by
Simeon is said to be a sign of contradiction, a mark that is gaine-said of
most men.

And here also is answered one great mighty objection, wherewith they think
to choke us: That seeing the Church of Christ is the Spouse of Christ, how
could it be that Christ should forsake his Spouse, and suffer her to continue
in damnable errors so many hundred years? Why, Christ himself declares,
that the deceipts and errors of false Prophets should be so great, that if it
were possible the very elect should be deceived: yea, there should be such a
miserable dispersion, that scarce two true professors of his name should
remain together in one place, and yet the holy band of unity should be in the
head, which is our Savior Christ: for wheresoever the carcass is, thither the
Eagles would be gathered. And Saint Paul in manifest words declares, that the
second coming of Christ should not be before there were a general apostacy,
that is, a departure from the true faith and Religion of Christ, and that the
son of perdition Antichrist were openly showed. And in this Revelation how
often is it said, that Antichrist should deceive all the world, all nations,
people and tongues, and that the Church of Christ should be driven into the
wilderness, out of the sight of the world, and there remain a space, until
she should be brought again to light and open knowledge of all men? As it is
come to pass this day, Gods name be therefore everlastingly praised.

But because I have occupied long time, I will draw to an end: for by that I
have said, I trust it does sufficiently appear, that God according to his
righteous judgment, has determined utterly to overthrow Babylon, because she
has deceived all nations with the wine of the fury of her fornication. And
now it rests only that I speak a word or two of the voice of the third
Angel, which is a consequent of this my text, and serves very aptly for the
conclusion of my Sermon.

The third Angel followed, crying with a loud voice, saying: If any man shall
worship the Beast, or his image, or receive his mark en his forehead, or in
his hand; or shall acknowledge any obedience or reverence to him, as willing to
drink of the cup of Babylons fornication, the same shall drink of the wine of
the fury of Gods wrath, which is powered forth unmingled into the great cup
of Gods anger, and they shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, before the
Lamb and his holy Angels, and the smoke of their torments shall ascend for
evermore, and they shall have no rest day nor night from extreme torments that
worship the Beast, or show any reverence unto Antichrist. The effect is in few
words: that horrible, intolerable, and eternal torments remain for all them
that now (especially when Babylon is now discovered) will have any thing to do
with her damnable errors and pernicious doctrine: for howsoever ignorance
before her fall, though it were inexcusable, yet seemed to diminish the
greatness of the crime; now that her wickedness is openly displayed, no
pretense can save men from the extreamitie of Gods wrath, if they will still
obstinately continue in her heresies.

Let us therefore pray unto Almighty God instantly, that all men in their
vocation may seek the utter overthrow and destruction of Babylon: that Princes
and Magistrates may according to the prophecies of them, hate her with a
perfect hatred, and utterly abolish whatsoever belongs to her: that they may
reward her, as she has rewarded us, and give her double punishment according
to her works: and in the cup of affliction that she has powered forth for
us, they may power forth double as much to her. And look how much she has
glorified her self, and lived in wantonness, (which was without measure) so
much they may bestow upon her of sorrow and torments. That Preachers and
Ministers of Gods word may plainly and without dissimulation or halting,
discover her wickedness, and earnestly to urge whatsoever has yet need of
perfect reformation. That all subjects may continue in holy obedience, first to
God, and then to their Prince, to the aduauncing of the honor and glory of
God, through Jesus Christ: to whom with the holy Ghost be all honor, glory,
power and dominon, both now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

