JACOBS VOW, OR THE TRVE HISTORY OF TITHES:

A Sermon penned by RICHARD PERROT Batchelour in Divinity, Vicar of Hessell
with the Trinity Chapel in Kingstone upon-Hull, and sometimes Fellow of
Sidney-Sussex-Colledge in CAMBRIDGE.

ZACH. 1. 4. Be ye not as your Fathers, unto whom the former Prophets have
cried* saying; Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Turn you now from your evil
ways, and from your evil doings* but they did not hear nor hearken unto me,
says the Lord. Greg. magn. lib. 7. Indict. 2 Epist. 78. In causa ^n qua Deo
placere cupio, homines non formido. Printed by THOMAS BVCKE and JOHN BVCKE,
Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE. 1627.

TO THE MOST Reverend Father in God TOBY, by the providence of God Archbishop
of YORK, Primate and Metropolitan of ENGLAND.
Most Reverend Father in God;
THis following discourse which I make bold to commend to the World under your
Graces most favorable protection, contains the sum and substance of a
S^^mon purpos^ly studied to have been preached in your M^t^opolitane Church of
S. Peter's in York, at the summer Assize, 16^0. To the publicat on whereof,
besides the general zeal which I of duty bea^e and owe to Gods house and
inheritance, I have been the rather induced for these reasons following;

First, that I might test^fie my thankfulness to God for that portion of
inheritance he has allotted me amongst the sons of Levi; that among so many
that have of late endeavored the repair of his decayed Sanctuary, and to
restore unto him and his Ministers that portion o^ inheritance he has reserved
to himself for them, I might bring at least stones and mortar to help forward
and further so great and necessary a work.

Secondly, that the greater Volumes of Doctor Tilseley and Mr. Mountague, which
in regard of the greatness of the price, and manner of handling, are not
obvious to all men's hands and understandings, may by this smaller work, and
plain discourse become common to all men; and so that great opinion that most
men have of the unanswerablenes of Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, may be in
some measure, if not fully satisfied.

Thirdly, to stir up not only your Grace with the rest of the Reverend
Fathers of the Church, but all other true-hearted Christians to further the
repair of Gods house, and the reducing and bringing back that portion of
inheritance, by Impropriations and other means so long detained from God and
his Ministers, and so procure unto him and them that due honor, love, respect,
and maintenance, which his mercies, their pains and places do justly
challenge at all men's hands. Never had the Ministers of God more need to urge
this point then in these times, in regard both of the general opposition of
men of all sorts against it and them, as also of those manifold strange
disasters which have already s^azed upon this our Kingdom, and suspiciously
h^ng over our heads. I know the seeming impossibility of reducing
Impropriations and other Churches rites, due to Gods house and Ministers,
without great loss and damage to many particulars, has been a just cause to
hinder all wel-disposed persons from attempting this so worthy and necessary a
work: But if it will please your Grace, with the rest of our Reverend Bishops,
now at last to assay it, I doubt not but the project may be so made, that in a
short time the matter may be effected, and all Impropriations restored to the
Church (this conclusion held, that all Tithes may be paid in their proper
kind) without any loss or damage at all to the Laitic who now enjoy such
Impropriations, without any hurt to the Church or Churchmen in general; to
few, if any, in particular: but so done, that God shall be much thereby
glorified, the King and Kingdom not one^y much honored, but the revenewes of
the Crown increased, the Church of God in all places of these Kingdoms in a
short time supplied with a sufficient and able preaching-Ministerie, the thing
so much to be desired; the Gospel thereby in all places most plentifully
propagated, to the rooting out of Popery and superstition, and to the da^ly
increasing of Gods Church and Kingdom, which without this course can never be
expected.

Fourthly, to make answer to two particulars of moment, specified and much
mistaken by Mr. Seldom in his History of Tithes; the one a custom within mine
own Parish, grounded upon a donation of Robert de Hessell to the Monastery of
Gisburne; the other within the East Riding of Yorkshire, grounded upon a
customary payment of Threaves; whereby it will appear that Mr. Seldom has not
been so curious and careful in this his Masterpiece, as he would have the
world believe he has been.

Fifthly, that I may give the World notice, who, and of what condition those
Ministers have been, and still are in the Church, that have oppugned Gods ^ight
in his House and Tithes, and that fill the world with such like strange and
idle positions. And that those men might again know, that howsoever the pure
wo^ldlings fawn upon them, as the only true sanctified Churchmen in these
times; yet it is not ou^ of any such true conceit they have of them, but only
to humo^r them up in their froward positions and doctrines; well knowing that
by this means they may not only with more freedom abuse their own Pastors
whom God has set over them, detaining from them what of right and due
appe^taines unto them; but they know that by these factious doctrines and
practices, there is a gappe and way made for them for time to come, to enter
upon the rest of God; inherit^nce, yet remaining to his poor M^nisters, the
only forbidden fruit so much desired on all hands in these days.

And, though last named, yet neither least nor last in my intention, that I
might tender some thankful duty and service to your Grace, for those
manifold favors I have from time to time received from you both before and
since I was your servant, as being he alone by whose love and protection, next
under God, I have not only peaceably enjoyed mine own, which otherwise had
been violently extorted from me, but I have been able to help and succor my
friends against the factious abetments of their adversaries and enemies. For
these reasons (most Reverend Father in God) have I made bold to publish this
following discourse, the which together with my person, I commend unto your
Graces protection; no ways doubting but as it has always pleased your Grace
ever since my coming into your Diocese, even before I was your servant, to
countenance me and my poor labors far beyond their desert; so now you will
double your favor and protection both upon me and them: for which I shall be
ever bound to double my most hearty prayers to God for your Graces health and
happiness: that God would grant you long life, and happy days on earth; and
after this life fullness of joy at his right hand for evermore. In the mean
time I shall ever rest

Your Graces most truly bounden, and no less h^mbly devoted Chaplain^, R. P.
Bi^hop-^hor^^ Kal. Ma^^ Ann. Salut. 1621.
To the Reader.
GOod 'Reader, six years agone this discourse was s^^shed, since which time
it ha^l lame at the Press l^ke the lame man at the Poole of Bethesda, not for
want of friend, to put it in, but for want of Angels to move the P^nters
waters Had it been some idle Pampblet, or foysted C^ranto ^^ false or ill
news, it would have found Midwives to baslen it into the world; and though it
had suffered abo^tion, and com. may^ed sorth as most of them do, yet should it
not have wanted welcomers and entertainers. But such is the ^ iserie of these
times, such the evi^^ will that ^ren bear generally to Gods Sion that even
those men who can suck gain out of the most idl^ and scurr^ out subjects,
dare not attempt to print a^y thing o^ this nature, for fear of loss and
damage. The consideration whereof made me oftentlmes resolve to relinquish all
furthe^ prosecution of the Press, as expecting but poor entertainment at
their hands who must pay for my labors, when those that were likely to gain
by them, for some sinister respects seemeds slight them. But having at the
length by the industry of ^^ friends found out those, who out of their true
love to God and his inheritance, were content to venture their pains and
Press, if I ^urst hazard my cred ^; besides, consi^ering the ma^sold evil of
later times befal^en our Kingdoms, and greater in likel^ hood to be expected,
is not ^^ma^y prevented, and being in conscience persuaded that the sin^^ of
S^c^iledge has been, an is no so all cause both of the one and of the other; I
have not feared to commit these labors to thy religiou^ and charitable
centure: wherein if I haved me any thing that may terd^^ the glory of God, the
honor and welfare of my King and Country, I have my desire: If I have failed
in mine own, and not given satisfaction to others desires, it is an error
proceeding from the duty I owe to God and my Sovereign, and the love I bear
to my Country; not any ways out of humorous disconten's, as maliguing or
envying at any thing either in the public or private state, or hoping to
gleane either private game or popular applause: So that I dare say, if what I
have made bold to write, be read, considered, and accepted with as true and
sincere an heart as it was first studied, and is now commended to the world, I
doubt not but it will work that true effect I wish and desire, glory to God,
honor to my King, and happiness to my Country: for the least whereof as I prize
not my life, so have I not feared for them all to hazard my credit. When this
discourse was first studied, it was fitted for a Sermon, and fashioned at all
points accordingly; but being by Gods providence prevented therein, and by
the entreaty of friends drawn to commend it to public view; I drew it out
into a longer tract, fitting it accordingly to the general times as then they
were: since which time, the times themselves altering, so have I been forced
to alter many particular circumstances, whereby this discourse is much shortened
of that perfection, which happily had been found therein, if it had been
published when it was first intended: So that in reading hereof thou must
consider some things as spoken from the pulpit, others as in story, and those
spoken as the times then were; yet so as thou make application from time to
time unto this present: which if thou performest with a good eye and honest,
heart, thou shat credit me, and profit thy self; which curtesis if thou
^onchsafe me, I shall have my expected desire, and rest ever

Thine R. P.

GENES. 28. VERSE. 20, 21, 22. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be
with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to
eat, and raiment to put on,

So that I come again to my fathers house in peace: then shall the Lord be my
God;

And this stone which I have set for a pillar, shall be Gods house; and of all
that thou shall give me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee.


THis Text relates unto us an holy vow, made by an holy man, (even the Israel
of God) to the Holiest of Holyests, even the Holy one of Israel: in the
handling whereof (not to speak more of vows then my Text shall naturally
aftord me) these four generals offer themselves to our consideration.

I. Quis, the person vowing, JACOB; and Jacob vowed.

II. Cui, the person to whom the vow was vowed, God; If God will be with me.

III. Quale, the kind and quality of this vow, which is conditional; If God
will be with me, then shall the Lord be my God, etc.

IIII. Quid, the materials of the vow, or things vowed:

Which are three;

1. That he would acknowledge the Lord for his God.

2. For a testimony of this acknowledgement, that stone which he had set up
should be called Gods house.

3. For the better maintenance of Gods house and wo^sh^p therein, he would give
unto the Lord the tenth of all, whatsoever the Lord shoald give unto him.

And first of the person; vovebat Jacob, Jacob the son of Isaac and Rebecca,
two holy persons; and although the younger brother by birth, yet the elect and
chosen heir Genesis 25. 23.
unto all those blessed promises which God made to Abraham and his seed, and
that whilst he was yet unborne: A most just, upright, and religious man, who
for his uprightness and power with God, obtained the conquering name of
Israel; from whence the people of God the Jews Genesis 32. 23.
afterward took their name. This holy man Jacob, making request unto God for
the accomplishment of what God had promised, the better to bind himself to
obedience, and to testify his thankfulness, makes this vow mentioned here
in this Text: An action and duty, as commendable in Jacob, manifesting him a
right religious and thankful person; so is it in the practice of all
Christians: it being not only lawful, but expedi^nt, that as we pray unto God
for his mercies; so to vow, not only the performance of the general vow of
Christianity; but the better to b^nde us to obedience, and to testific the
truth of our thankfulness to vow the performance of some particular action,
whether ind ff^rent, or commanded, when it shall please the Lord graciously to
hear us, and answer us according to our requests. Thus did Jacob here, thus
Hannah, thus Paul, and diverse others of Gods Saints Sam. 1. 1^. Act. 18. 18.
in all ages.

True it is, that we deny the use of vows according to the doctrine and
practice of the Church of Rome.

As first, we deny that there is now, or ever was, any necessity of making
vows in external exercises and Deuteronomy. 13. 22.
out ward things.

Secondly, we deny that vows made of things not commanded, as meats,
drinks, attire, etc, are essential parts of Gods wo^ship; much less that
they bring a man to an higher estate of perfection, then keeping of the Law can
do. We acknowledge them adminicula cultus divini, certain staics and helps
in Gods wo^ship, not ipsum cultum, the worship it self; the kingdom of God
not con sisting in eating and drinking, nor in external, but in spiritual
Romans 14. 17.
worship.

Thirdly, we deny the necessity of keeping and performing vows made,
especially if they be repugnant to the rules prescribed for vows, holding that
rule of Isiodore Isiod. Hispal. lib. 2. Synon. cap. 10. Isiod. l'clus. lib. ^.
Ep. 96.
infallibly true, In malis promissis rescinde sidem, in turpi voto muta
decretum, better to fail in a wicked promise then to perform, better to
change an unlawful vow then to keep it: yea, vows being made the better to
enable us for Gods service, though the thing vowed were lawful in our first
act of vowing, yet finding them afterward an hinderance to the duties of Gods
worship, we may justly and lawfully cease further to perform and keep them;
according to the saying of the said Isiodore; Quod inca^te Isied. Hisp. ibid.
vovisti ne facias; impia est promissio quae cum scelere adimpletur.

Lastly, we deny the vows so frequently made and magnified by Papists to be
just and lawful: such is the vow of perpetual chastity and single life, the
vow of voluntary poverty, and Monastique life, etc. and lastly, the vow of
pilgrimage for visiting the holy city and se pul^hre, the shrines and r^liques
of Saints; as being altogether repugnant to those rules and conditions
required to make a vow lawful.

For he that will make vows pleasing unto God (and so lawful) must be sure
that they be grounded upon, and regulated by these particular rules and canons
following.

1. They must be de rebus lititis and de necessariis, of C^pr. lib. 1. ^p. ^.
things lawful and warrantable by the word of God: for the word of God being
the ground of our faith, and whatsoever we do without faith being sin; our
vows must necessarily be founded thereupon. Again I say de necessarus, not
usually, not frequently, but in case of eminency and necessity; vows being
premissiones ardenter orantis, promises made at the begging extraordinary
blessings and graces at the hands of God.

2. They must be made considerately with deliberation Hiecon. in histor.
I^ph^a Eccl^s. 5. 1. 2
and advise, not rashly and headily; so Solomon, Keep thy foot when thou
go^st into the house of God, be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy beart
be hasly to utter a thing before God.

3. They must be made of such things which are in our own power to do, and
that sub condition auxilii divini (...) ^. Hisp ib
, under the condition of Gods help and assistance: it being he only that makes
us able both to will and to do of ^hil. 2. 13.
his good pleasure.

4. They must be correspondent and agreeable to our general vow of
Christianity, and be made the better to help us in the performance of the
same; as when we vow to do some things, or to abstain from some things in
their own nature law^ull, as wine, sleep, or the li^e, either to take
pan^shment on our selves for some sins committed, or to prevent sin for the
time to come, or to enable us the better for Gods service, or to testific our
thankefulnes to God for such blessings as we receive from him: as Jacob here
in my text.

5. They must be spontanea, done with chearefulnes and alacrity; for hilarem
datorem diligit D^us, God only ^* Cor. 9. 7.
loves a cheerful giver.

6. The person vowing must be a Jacob, a person sanctified, a b^leeving
Christian; in that, first Abels person Genesis 4. 4. Hebr. 11. 6.
must be accepted before his sacrifice, and without faith it is impossible to
please God.

These be the particular canons required in all vows; by all which if you
will examine the forenamed Popish vows as they are in use and practice amongst
them, we shall find them altogether repugnant to them, and so altogether
unjustifiable, either in doctrine or in practice. But when vows are regulated
by these rules and conditions, then may a Christian lawfully vow them, and
being vowed must faithfully perform them.

2. The second general considerable in this vow is Cui, the person to whom
Jacob vowed this vow: where it is remarkable that he does not make it to any
of the Angels whom he saw ascending and descending by the ladder reaching to
heaven; but he makes his vow unto God, and that not to any of the Idol gods of
the Gentiles, but to the God of his forefathers, who appeared unto him on the
top of the ladder, and made so large and loving promise of love and protection
unto him.

And indeed in thus vowing did Jacob vow aright; for howsoever the making of
vows be no essential part of Gods worship, binding all men to perform them;
yet when they are made, they may not without sacrilege be made to any but God
alone.

Thus the Scripture, DEVT. 23. 21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord
thy God, thoushalt not slack to pay it. and PSALM. 76. 11. Vovete and reddite
Domino D^o vestro.

And howsoever the Church of Rome does practice the contrary, yet do they
confess the same in doctrine: for ^, Can. 2. Cap. de voto
thus the Canon law defines a vow, ut Deo dicat factam esse promissionem, a
promise made unto God. And Peter Lumbard (with whom agree the Schoolmen) quod
sit testificatio Thom. 2. 2. q. 83. art. 1.
promissionis spontanea, qua Deo, and de his q^^ De^ sunt, sieri debet, it is
the testification of a free promise made unto God of such things as appertain
to his special worship.

And diverse reasons may be alleged for the proof of this conclusion.

1. To those only must we vow, to whom only we must pray; vows being
promissiones ardenter orantis: but we must pray to God, and to him alone. Psalm
5. 15.


2. To him only must we vow, of whom all good things are obtained; vows
being made for the obtaining some blessings at the hands of God: but every
good giving Iam. 1. 17.
and perfect gift comes from God, and him alone.

3. To him only must we vow, who knows our hearts if we vow aright, and
is able to punish us if we fail to perform: but God is only (...), and to
Acts: 1. 21. Hcbr. 1^.
him only does vengeance belong: To him then, and to him only must we make
our vows.

And here we justly meet with another implety in practice in the Church of
Rome, who as they invocate and Bellar. Tom. 2. c. 14. ^itu. demo^^^h^s I^^m
^i^. 3. de cult^ san^^^^^. cap. 9.
pray to the Saints departed, so no less do they make vows unto them; and
having vowed, do no less strictly, nay oftimes more carefully perform them
then the vows made to God himself. Thus one vows to the Virgin Marie,
another to Saint Clare, one to Saint Frauncis, another to Saint Thomas, one to
Saint Katherin, another to Saint Clement; yea we may not only say in this
point of them as Jeremiah of the Israelites, according to I^^^^^ 11. 13.
the number of thy cities were thy gods O ludah; nor yet only as it was said
of the Romans, that singulae professiones habebant propria Numina quibus
vovebant, every profession had their several Deity to whom they vowed; but
quot bumines ^ot Numina, almost as many Sain^s as particular men, yea as
particular occasions. They have Men-Saints, and Women-Saints, Land-Saints, and
Sea-Saints, etc. yea for every sickness, malody. and disease, whether of man or
beast, they have some particular Saint unto whom they pray and vow upon
obtaining that they pr^y for.

Neither have they only particular Saints, but they have their National
Saints; to whom as they a^ct be a power of protection, so do they both pray
and vow unto them. Thus have they Saint Dennis for France, Saint lames s^r
Spame, Sairt Paterick for l^cland, etc. only ^oore Saint George for England
have they thrust out of the calendar of Saints. In which particular as we
cannot but laugh at their nalier and envy, yet have we just cause to praise
God for the same; who has turned their mahce to our Saint George, to the
manifestation of the truth of our profession: this being our conclusion, That
how soever there be Gods many and Lords many; some by 1. Cor. 2. 5. 6.
adoption, as Kings; some by nuncupation, as idols etc. yet to u^ there is but
one God the father, of whom are all things and we in him, and one Lord lesus
Christ, by wh me are all things and we by him; and to this God alone, one in
essence, three in persons, God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, do we pray
and make our vows, as our Savior, Sanctifier, Feeder, and Protector; and to
him and his honor only, being vowed, do we faithfully perform them.

3. The third general is quale v^tum, of what kind and quality this vow of
la^ob is. And here not to stand upon the distuction of vows, this by the
consent of all is of that kind which they call conditional: If God will be
with me etc.

But when If yet is a vow made sub condition, we must not un^^^stan^ it, as
if it were c^nd^ti^ obliganti^, an obligatory conduction as ^f he would not
perform this vow unl^^^^ God performed the condition: neither is it cond^tio
dissi ^^^^is, as ^f* ^^ mistrusted that God would not ^^^forme what he he^
promised, unless he made this vow: but it is condi^io co^side ^^i^ and
gratitudints, a condition confident thankfulness, a prayer and vow no wa^es
arising out of fear and distrust, but out of a full assurance of faith: being
fully perswad^d that God would p^^f^^^e what he had promised, he is not only
bold to beggest Gods hands for them; but out of ^^ a^urance to obtain them, he
promise^h by w^^ ^^ th^^^^fuln^s, that when that time should ^ome, he would
then perform what he here particul^^ly vowed.

From whence, by the way, we may see the nature and prope^^ie of true faith
most lively expressed, that it is (as the Apostle tells us) the substence of
things hoped for, H^b ^^. ^.
and the evidence of things not sec^^. It makes things that were and are not,
as if they were; and things many years yet to come, as if they were present.
Thus lacob relying upon the promise of God, and believing his word, does
presently assure himself of the enjoying, and no less confidently does he
promise the employing a part of them to Gods worship, as if they had been
present with him.

But to come to the particulars of lacobs request (the conditional part of
this vow) which are four, answerable to his need and distreste;

1. W^ reas he was now to leave and forsake his fathers house, wherein at that
time the true worship and service of God was only established and professed;
so that he should be deprived of all ordinary means of knowledge in spiritual
things: he desires that God would be with him extraordinar^ly t^ illuminate
him with knowledge, and to conten^e upon him all manner of saving graces.

2. Whereas by the malice of his brother he was enforced to this solita^^e
journey, whereby he was exposed to more then us^all dangers he desires Gods
special protection, both against his brothers malice, and all other dangers.

3. Because ^e was ^^ go^ into a f^rr^ Country, and knew not what might be his
entertainment, and that without things necessary no man can live; he desires
of God that he would provide him bread to eat, and clothes to put on.

4. Lastly, his fathers family being not only the then present Church of God,
but that land where he dwelt being the land of promise, the type and figure of
the heavenly Canaan; he desires that God would in his good time return him
thither again safe and found.

From all which particular requests of Jacob, we may briefly observe these
general instructions following:

First, that he that would have any blessing from God, must beg it by humble
and hearty prayer; yea, though God has in a special manner made promise
thereof unto him. Thus Jacob having but immediately before my Text received
Gods promise for all these things, yet here he makes together with a vow a
request unto God for them.

And the reasons hereof are diverse:

1. Because God requires the use of the means as fully as he promises the
end^; but prayer is the means ordained by God for the obtaining of his
blessings: Ask Matt. 7. 7.
and yeshall have, secke etc. Hence it is called by the Fathers, Rete
gratiarum, situlagratie, clavis coeli, etc.

2. The better to put us in mind of our wants, and to make us acknowledge from
whom we receive what in this life we enjoy, a thing which we are ready to
forget.

3. By prayer both the things themselves we receive, 1. Tim. 1. 5.
and our persons are sanctified; they unto us, and we unto them: and so we
receive and enjoy them with more comfort and profit.

Secondly, here we learn that a Christian may lawfully beg, not only for
spiritual blessings, but for benefits temporal: and the reason thereof
(amongst others) is this; because without a competencie of them, we cannot well
perform spiritu^ll (...) and duties, that being in^all^l^^ (...) Po^t, as we
(...) as Morality,

^au (...) ^mergunt, quorum virtu^^bus obstat
R^^ angusta dom. --
Our own experience daily ^eaching us this truth; that where there is a want
of competencie for maintenance, there is but small growth in the knowledge of
God, and duties of godliness.

Thirdly, hence we l^arne, qu^ mensur^, in what measure we may and must pray
for temporal things: not for supers^^itie and abundance, but only for things
necessary: for ^acob requests not for variety of dishes, or change of ra^ment;
but only for bread to eat and clothes to put on: And the same lesson Paul
gives, when he exhortes us not to ask supers^uitie, but having food and
raiment there (...).
withal to be content: and so our Savior implies, when he teaching us to
pray, bids us only pray for our daily bread: Cui parum non est satis, nihil est
satis, him that a sufficiency (...) (...).
suffices not, nothing will content. In the begging therefore temporal
blessings, if we will so ask as to receive, we must either pray with Agu^, Give
us Lord neither poverty Prove. 3^. 8.
nor riches, but ^eede us with food convenient for us; or with Jacob in my
text, for bread to cate, and clothes to put on.

Fourthly, hence we learn, quo ordine, in what order we are to pray for
temporal blessings: not in the first place before spiritual; but first with
Jacob here for spiritual, then for temporal: thus Christ in teaching us to
pray, directs us first to pray that Gods name may be hallowed etc. and then to
pray for daily bread; and Matthew. 6. Quarite primum regnum Dei etc. seek first
the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, etc. And this order is
observable in the metho^e of Isaacs blessing his two sons Jacob and Esau;
where blessing Jacob he first blesses him with the deawe of heaven, and then
with the fatness of the (...). (...).
earth, as being the nature of heavenly minds to prefer heavenly ^^^ngs
before earthly: but (...) blessing Esau, he blesses him first with the
fatness of the earth, and then with the deawe of heaven; this being their
song, Quarend^ pecuma (...) est, first seek gold, then God.

Lastly, in that Jacob requests here at Gods hands for all these particul^^s;
hence we learn, that without Gods special blessing we cannot provide for our
selves the least things necessary for this (...); but whatsoever we have and
enjoy, we have it from God and him alone: thus S. James tells u^ that we
receive all things from above from Iam. 1. ^7.
the Father of lights, as well the good (...), as the perfect g^^t* he being the
author not only of blessings spiritual, but of bencht temporal* giving not
only grace to obey his will but as the Psalmist speaks, Dat ^^^am little, he
^sal 145. 15 (...) 9. 11.
gives us meat ^n due season; and Solomon tells us, non est pants (...), be a
man never so wise yet he is not able of himself to sup^ly his own wants, no
not so much as with bread; it is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, nor in him that planteth, nor in him that waters; 2. Cor. 9. 10.
sed ipse est qui dat semen s^^^ent^, and pauem manducan^^, he gives us both
seed to sow, and he it is that likewise gives us bread again of that seed: and
without his blessing all our labor is but lost, and all we get put into a H^^
^. 6.
broken ba^ge.

The use of all which, in a word, is to make us acknowledge our own wants and
weakness, and to cast our care upon God, as our only helper; to pray unto
him in that measure, after that manner and order, and to that end, as he has
prescribed; and having obtained at Gods hands such mercies and blessings as we
requested from him, let 1. (...). 29. 14
us confess with David, that whatsoever we have received, we have received
(...) at Gods hands; and in token of our true thankfulness, with Jacob here*
vow unto him not only our selves, but a part of that he shall or has given
us, to his special honor and service.

And thus come we to the last general part of this text, namely, the matter of
Jacobs vow, or the things particularly vowed; Then shall the Lord be my God,
etc.

In which general, Jacob vows 3 particulars.

1. That the Lord shall be his God. 2. That that pillar should be called Gods
house. 3. Because Gods worship and service could not be performed without
maintenance, he vows that of all whatsoever God should give him, he would
surely give a tenth unto God again. In the first he vows inward, in the two
latter outward worship; in the first he vows himself, in the two latter his
labor and goods.

Then shall the Lord be my God: that is, then will I fear God, and him above
all; then will I love God, and him above all; then will I acknowledge God to
be the guider, governor, and giver of all things; of whom I have received
whatsoever I shall possess: and as I will put my trust in him and him alone;
so will I pray unto him, and him only for whatsoever I shall need. This I take
to be the sense and meaning of the words in general. Neither must we
understand these words spoken de futuro only, as if Jacob did not in present
acknowledge the Lord for his God; but Jacob vowing this particular, vows the
performance of a double duty necessary to be observed in the practice of all
Christians in the manner of rendering thanks to God for his blessings.

First, with what kind of worship he would first and principally labor to
manifest his thankefulnes; namely, as he begged first at Gods hands for
spiritual blessings, so he would principally labor to manifest the truth of
his thankefulnes by rendering unto God the inward devotion and spiritual
worship of his heart and soul, as being that which God principally requires,
and without which all the duties we perform are no ways pleasing unto him,
he being, as Saint Ambrose well observes, non corticis sed cordis Deus, Lord
not only of the body, but chiefly and H^b^. (...). 9 (...) 4. 24. (...) 23. 26
(...) 13^. 1 (...) ^. 46. 47.
principally of the soul; he being not only Pater spirituum, but himself a
spirit; and therefore must be worshipped in spirit and truth; thus wisdom
exhorts, thus David promises, thus the blessed Virgin practiced, and thus must
all Christians f^llow. FILI MI, my son give me thy heart, it must be the
soul^^ m^g^^^icat, the spirits re^oycing, with the special parts of Gods
worship proper to the same, whereby and wherewith we must first and
principally praise God our Savior, Feeder and Protector.

Secondly, Jacob in vowing this particular, voweth what should be the extent
and continuation of his thankfulness; namely, that the Lord sho^led not now
only be his God, when he stood ^n want and necessity, when he stood in
extraordinary need of his help; but even then when God should bestow these
mercies in such abundance that he should have whatsoever he needed, or could
desire, yet then should the Lord be his God: nay further, his thankefulnes
shall be answerable to Gods mercy and blessings: the more G^d trusted him with
his mercies, the more would he put his trust and confidence in God; again, the
more God manifested his love toward him in feeding him with his goo^nes, the
more would he love and serve God again; the more God ack^owledged him for his
(...) by ^ultiplying his blessings upon him, the more would he fear, (...),
and obey him, and with more confidence and assurance pray unto him; yea then he
would not only give unto God the inward devotion of his soul, bu^ he wo^^d
labor to testify his thankfulness before men, by doing and perform^ng these
outward actions of building God an house, and of paying unto God a part, a
tenth of a^l that he should receive from him.

The which two particulars in Jacobs practice, as they serve for a pattern^ ^.
president to all men in the rendering of thanks unto God for his blessings
(these particular practices in him being recorded for our instruction and
^xample); so serve they to rip up and lay open the great impiety and
unthankefulnes of these days; wherein as men offend against the first of these
rules (our general profession of religion, and Christianity, and practice of
holy duties, consisting more in shadow and color, then in truth and substance,
more in the outward duties, then in the inward truth and sincerit^e of our
heart^); so do we most evidently testify the same in sinning against the
sec^nd rule obs^rv^ble in Ia^obs practice; being so far from this constancy,
from this squaring our thankefulnes answerabl^t* Gods mercies, that God may
more truly say of us then (...) of the Jews, ailectus meu^ imp ^guatus Deuteronomy.
3^. 15
recalcitravit. my beloved wax^ng satt spurned with his he^le against me.
Never any Nation an^ people so abundantly blessed with all manner of bl^ss^ngs,
never any people walking so rebellio^sly and stubbor^^ly against God: our times
being no w^it unlike the times of the Jews, whereof the Prophet Isaiah
complai^es, for we have drunk i^ Job. ^5. ^6. Isaiah. 5. 18
iniquity like water, and drawn sin with cart-ropes; being drunken, nay
drowned* not only in the par^icular sins of our own Nation; but we have
drunk so deeply of the sins of all o^^^r Nations that we exceed them in their
wickedness; so that we may s^y more tru^ly of these our times, then Saint
Bernard of his, that empar^ per^culosa n^^ modo instant, sed extant, the
perilous times spoken of by ou^ Savior Christ are not only instant but
extant. Chariti^ Mitth. ^4.
never ^ore cold, iniquity in all places, amongst all sorts, ranks, and
degrees never more abounding. I shall ^ot need to particularize: our sins are
w^i^ten ^n o^r faces and ^n cur apparel; they are written in our goi^gs; they
ar^ written on our tables, in ou^ tra^^s, o^ ou^ wives, children and s^r^ants*
our tongues boldly talk them* ou^ h^nds confidently act them, our feet r^nn^
swi^tly to the execution of them, and our bodies evidently show them in ugly,
putrified, and loathsome diseases; yea there is not one sin that any member
can act or contract, whether against God or man, that is not in a shameful
manner, and with an high hand committed in these our days: all which give us
just cause to fear, that as we are fallen into those evil times Christ
prophesied should happen in the latter days; so the evils threatened in those
times should speedily fall upon us: the which that we may prevent, let us with
all speed call to mind Gods manifold mercies from time to time multiplied upon
us, and proportion our thankefulnes according to the same; let us acknowledge
with Jacob, the Lord to be our God; and in token that we do^ it from our
hearts, let us make it apparent by our outward actions; as specially with
Jacob, by building Gods house, and returning to God the tenth of what he shall
give us, for the better maintenance of his worship and service therein.

And thus we come to the two last particulars vowed here by Jacob, which I
will jointly handle together.

The first is that that stone which he had then reared should be called Gods
house, that is, the place where he would publickely worship God, and offer
sacrifice.

The second, that he would give a tenth unto God for the maintenance of this
his worship; and that not of some part of his goods, as of his estate
personal, or prediall; but of all whatsoeve^ God shall give him, he would
surely give the tenth unto God again. Totum quod es debes ei ^ quo habes
omnia: as all that we have either concerning soul or body we receive it from
God, and from him alone, so ought we to testify our thankefulnes with all that
we have; it being not sufficient, as Augustine has well ob^erved, that we
serve God totis votis, with the inward devotion of the heart aloue; but we must
serve and worship him totis vobis, even in and with the performance of those
outward actions he requires at our hands, with our bodies, and our goods: nay
as we say of faith and works, There may be works without faith, though not
properly goo^ yet wheresoever there i^ (...) it will be e^ident in the pract^se
of good wo^^^^: so howsoever there may be the outward worship without the
inward, yet it the inward be sincere, it will manifest it self in the du^ies
of outward worship: if the heart once s^y, ve^^te, ^^orenn^^, (...). 95. ^.
com^ let us worship; the tongue and knee w^ll presently answer, ^^i^m and
genua s^^l^amus, let us kneel^ l^kewise and fall down before God: if David's
heart be once fixed and Ps^^. 1^8.
prepared, his lu^e and harp will be called presently to awake to join in the
worship of God with him: and if lacob once acknowledge the Lord for his God,
he will presently resolve to build him an house, and vow unto him a tenth of
all that God shall give unto him.

But to pass from this general to the particulars here vowed: where from
Jacobs practice in ^y text, I lay down this conclusion, necessary in the
knowledge and practice of all Christians, That the best actions we can do
(respecting outward worship) to testify o^r thankefulnes to God for those
extraordinary blessings we daily receive from him, is to build, repair, and
maintain Churches and Chappells, places for the public worship and service
of God, and duly and tr^ely to pay unto God the teath of whatsoever God shall
b^stow upon u^, for maint^nance of his Ministers, for the performance of the
parts of his worship and service ther^in.

The truth of which conclusion will appear evident by the precepts of God and
practice o^ Gods Saints in all ages, both before the law, under the law, and
since, in the times of the Gospel. Before the law, we have the examples of
Genesis ^. 2^. (...) ^3. ^8. and 28. ^^. and 35. 1.
all the Patriarchs, who always erected altars in all places where they
abode, for the offering of sacrifices, and the performance of other parts of
public worship, and that by Gods special command: as when the lord had
brought the children of Israel by a strong hand out of Egypt, and delivered
them safe from their enemies hands; the first and principal thing God requires
at their hands, (...) 25* 2.
by w^y of thankefulnes, was the building of the tabernacle; and ^eing built he
gives command, L^VIT. 19. 30. and 26. 2. that they should keep his Sabbaths,
an ireverence his Sanctuary, pr^mising great blessings upon so doing; and as
God commanded, so they labored to testify their love and thankfulness by their
bountiful offering to that work. When the Lord h^d delivered David out of all
h^s troubles, and had settled him in peace in his kingdom, he chooses this as
the chiefest argument to testify his love and thankefulnes, the building of a
settled temple; and therefore makes a solemn vow, and binds it with an oath,
that he will not enter into the tabernacle of his house, nor come upon ^sa^.
132.
on the pallet of his bed, nor suffer his eyes to sleep, nor his head to take
any rest, until^ he had ^ound out a place, an house for the God of Jacob. When
God had settled Solomon his son in his fathers kingdom, and had made him many
promises of mercy and protection: where begins he to testify ^. (...), 5.
his thankefulnes, but in building the temple, which his father had promised,
and from which he was by God prohibited? And of all his wort^y acts, and
honorable epithets, none does more commend him then the building of the
temple* SOLOMON'S TEMPLE.

When Cyrus ^ame once to know, and understand, that it was the God of Isra^l
that had given him victory over (...). 3.
all ^is enemies, and made him triumph over so many Nations and K^ngdomes,
p^esen^ly in token of thankefulnes he releaseth the I^we, out of captivity,
commands them with all speed to re^d^^^e the Temple, restoring not only all
the v^ss^ls which Nebuchadn^zzar had carried away, but commanding it should be
built at the charges of his own tr^^surie: And both Cy^us, Darius, and
Artaxerxes (all which three had their hands in the work) have their histories
recorded by the Spirit of God, to their high renown, and everlasting memory.
When the Jews come to entreat Christ, that he would go and heal the
Centurions servant, what argument do they bring to moove Christ, but that he
loved their Nation? And how do they Luk 7. 5.
prove it? He had built them a Synagogue. And as for latter ages in the time
of the Gospel, witness all the curious and wel-built Churches and Chapels
throughout all the parts of Christendom, which have been built by the Saints
of God, as arguments of their zeal and devotion, and in thankfulness to God
for his blessings conferred upon them. Neither have we the practice of the
Saints alone, but the very heathen, who have always accounted the erecting of
Temples as works of greatest holiness, and as testimonies of greatest
thankfulness to the D^ities; all their Temples being either memoriae sacra,
or honori dedicata, built and dedicated to the honor of their idol gods, and
by way of thankful remembrance for such benefits they conceited they received
from and by them. And as God has commanded, and men out of the light both of
religion and nature have accounted the erecting, repayring, and maintaining the
places of Gods worship, as arguments of true devotion and thankfulness to God
for his extraordinary mericies; so no less has God from time to time
commanded: no le^^e careful have men in all ages been to endowe them and their
Ministers with large and liberal maintenance, and that with Jacob here, by
giving a tenth of all that God from time to time bestowed upon them. Thus the
Lord, EXODUS 21. 29 D^cimas tuas and primitias tuas, etc. Thoushalt not delay to
offer thy tithes, the first of thy ripe fruits, and of thy liquors; the first
borne of thy sons shall thou give unto me. LEV. 27. 30. All the tithe of the
land, whether of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree, is the
Lords, it is holy unto the Lord. LEVIT. 27. 32. And concerning the ^ithe of the
heard^ or of the flock, even of whatsoever passes under therod, the tenth
shall be holy unto the Lord. NVMB. 18. 20. 21. Thou shall have no inheritance
in their land, neither shall thou have any part among them; I am thy part and
thine inheritance: and behold I have given the children of Levi all the tenth
in Israel for an inheritance for their service which they serve, even the
service of the Tabernacle of the congregation. In all which places we find God
claiming the tithes to be his; and that not only ^ure creationis, by right of
creation, nor jure potestatis, because he has the disposing of all; for so
the whole is Gods: but jure proprietatis and reservationis, in respect of the
very propriety thereof, and by way of reservation; because, having given all
the rest to the sons of men, he has reserved unto himself the tenth to
bestow where he will; and that he has bestowed on the Minister se^ving at the
altar. And hence it is, that MALAC. 3. 8. 9 10. the Prophet tells the people,
they were cursed with a curse, because they had robbed God in not paying their
tithes and offertags. And for the practice of Gods Saints; witness Abraham and
Jacob before the law, the practice of the Jews under the law th^oughout their
tribes and generations, so long as they walked uprightly with God, and went not
a whoring after their own inventions. For witness here of take one for all* 2.
CHRO. 31. the practice of the Jews under the Reign and reformation of
Hezekiah: wherein four things are re^a^keable;

1. That so soon as ever Hezekiah had destroyed idolatry, and ostablished the
true worship of God, in the next place he takes order for the peoples payment
of tithes, first f^uits, and offerings; as being that without which Gods
worship was not perfect, nor God truly praised, verse. 4.

2. The peoples readiness and liberal bounty in the performance of this duty,
verse. 5. 6. And as soon as the commandment came abroad, the children of
Israel brought i^ abundance, the first fruits of corn, wine, and oil, and
honey* and of all the increase of the field etc. intimating that where the
worship of God is sincere, there tithes are will^ngly and readily paid.

3. The reason alleged by the Priest why and how so great and abundant store
was in so short a time gathered together; namely, that since the people began
to bring the offerings into the house of the Lord, the Lord ad blessed his
people; teaching us that the paying of tith^s increases Gods blessings, and
Gods blessings increasing ought to make us increase in that duty. verse. 9. 10.

4. Though there was plenty and abundance, more then the present need required*
yet Hezekiah and his Princes did not cause it to be carried into their private
treasuries and storehouses; but comman^ed it should be kept for the use and
benefit of the Priests and Levites in the storehouse of the Temple, verse 11.
12. If any shall object that this was for the second tithe only, not for the
tithe of inheritance; I answer, if they were so strict in the payment of this
tithe, which was a second full supernumerary tithe ov^^ and above the first;
then much more in the payment of the first, which God challen^eth as his right
of inheritance, and which they never omitted to pay when the other were
generally neglected, as may be gathered, NEHEMIAH 13.

Neither is the Gospel without either precept or practice for the necessary
performance of this duty; witness the manner of Christ his reprooving the
Scribes and Pharisees, MATT. 23. 2^. where he infers a necessity of tything,
even in the smallest matters, whether we understand the phrase actively or
passively, either in the payer or receiver* Woe unto you Scrib^^ and Phari^^^,
Hypocrites; (...), for you pay tithe of mint, and ^nise, and c^mmine, and have
omitted the we^ghti^^ matters of the I^^^; indgement, mercy, and faith: These
things ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other un^one. Neither will
it suffice to ob^ect against the text, that the Ceremonial law was then in
force, and so Christ ^ight (...) command it: for first, how will they answer
that disti^ct^on of Augustine; Cae^em^nta (...) ^9. ^^ ^. 2.
(...) Christum n^c (...) ^ra^^, nec mortif^rae; ^ost pr^mu^^ (...), and mort^^
(...) mortiferae; inter (...) n^^m (...) promulgationem, (...), s^^ non
mor^i^^r^, The ceremonies of the ^^we before Christ were neither de^^, nor
dea^ly; after the promulgation of the Go^pell, (...) d^^d, and deadly; betwixt
Christ's passion and the prom^l^^tion of the Gos^ell, dead, but not deadly?
Where by the p^ssion of Christ we understand, not his passion (...), his
suffering upon the cross, when he breat^^d out, together with his consummatum
est, his life; but the whole time of his suffering here upon earth, especially
from the time of John the Baptists beginning to preach, and Christ his
Baptism: at what time the ceremonies (...). 1. 2. (...). 103. (...). ^.
of the law began to be dead quoad necessitatem, in regard of the necessary
observance of them; howsoever quoad co^vente^^ia and vinculum charitatis, in
respect of conveniencie and to avoid scandal, the observation of them was not
deadly; according to that of Christ, MATT. 11. 13. All the Law and the Pro^^ets
prophesica until Ioha* and that of Paul GAL. 3. 24. 25. The law was our
Schoolmaster to Christ, but after that ^^rth ^s come we are no more under the
Schoolmaster. Where by the (...) and the Prophets is understood tot^ Mo^is
politia se^ ^conomia, and const^tu^io Sacerdotii, the whole regiment of Moses
Law, not only Ceremonial an^ Iud^ciall, but Moral likewise, so far forth
as it was to be ab^ogate, together with the I ^gall Preisthood; ^o that if
Christ had held the payment of tithes as a duty of the Ceremonial law, he
would never have set a (...) upon them, and have taught them as a duty
necessary, which ought to be done, and not left undone.

But that I may remoove all scruple, in the second place let us consider that
our Savior Christ makes not the payment of these tithes a Ceremonial law,
but a Moral, yea an Evangelicall law, of the same nature with judgment,
mercy, and faith; distinguishing them only secundum magis and minus; which, as
Logicians teach truly, non variant speciem, differ not the kind. Besides this
of Christ, Paul 1. COR. 9. prooves by nine forcible arguments the necessity of
the Ministers maintenance now in the time of the Gospel, and how it ought to
be done. An^ GALAT. 6. 6. seconding Jacobs vow in this place, Let him that is
taught communicate unto him that teaches, not in some particular kind, nor
yet in gross a competency out of the whole; but (...), in all his goods, or in
all good things. And as for practice, witness the liberality of the Saints in
the very days of the Apostles; who are said to sell all they Act. 4.
had and to lay the price at the Apostles feet, for their maintenance, and
releife of the poor distressed brethren. And in succeeding a^es as the
Churches increased and obtained peace, so did the Saints according to the rule
of Gods word, and practice of the Saints, establish a settled maintenance of
tithes for Gods Ministers, as that portion of inheritance which God had
allotted them, and which might not be detained without sacrilege. The truth
Consule Doctore Tile^ley in Catal
whereof will appear by the unanimous consent of all the ancient and truly
religious Fathers of the Church in all ages, with the general practice of the
Saints in all places, where and so long as religion was purely and sincerely
taught and professed. Neither have we only the consent of holy Church both in
doctrine and practice, but of the very heathen, enforcing the necessity of
this duty; Thus Festus, as epitomized by Paulus Diaconus, speaking of the
customs of the Romans, tells us that decima quaeque veteres Diis suis
offerebant, the ancient gave tithe of all unto their Gods. I know the
Tithes-Historian together with Joseph Scaliger, fear not to accuse Paulus
Diaconus of barbarism and falsification of Festus, and to correct his
authority; the one putting out quaeque, and so denies the generality of tithes
of all things given by all men, restrayning both persons and tithes to some
particulars; Seld. page 29.
the other changing Di^^ suis into uni tantum Herculi, as if tithes were paid
by the Romans to Hercules only: but by what authority or sound ground I know
not: for mine own part, I see no reason why Paulus Diaconus should not be as
worthy of credit as either, yea as both of them; sure I am the world, and the
learned of those times wherein he lived, accounted him a man of as great
knowledge and judgment, and as worthy of credit, as either is Divine Scaliger,
or Antique Mr. Seldom. Besides, say the Romans had given tithes to Hercules
only; yet Festus speaks not of the custom of the Romans only, but of other
Nations likewise: and howsoever by his silence he seems to consent with
Scaliger in the correction of Paulus Diaconus for uni tantum Herculi, yet
himself confesses, that neither the Romans, nor their next Page 27.
neighbors did tithe only to Hercules; but these their arbitrary vows and
thankesgivings (I speak in the Historians language) were sometimes also paid
to other Deities, whereof he names diverse particulars. Next to the authority
of Festus, he brings in the practice of the Grecians, for general consent.
Thus Harpocration, who says that the Grecians used to tithe the spoils of
war (...), Page 32.
to the Gods. And another, It was a Greek custom to consecrate the tithes of
their abundance (...), to the Gods in general, without exception, or
limitation either ^^^* de a^^. I^r. Civ. Romans ^^m (...) (...)
of things or persons, by whom or to whom, as general every whit as Festus.
And the same Deities (as Catolus Sigorius has well observed) being worshipped
amongst the Romans, which were amongst the Grecians and the Romans no whit
inferior in superstitious piety to the Grecians; it is not likely, but as
they devoted themselves to their Gods, so they worshipped them with the self
same worship, and paid them tithe as fully as the Grecians. Many other
particulars might be alleged out of heathen stories to enforce this point, as
how those who gave not of their increase were called (...), irreligious people,
not serving God, without piety, who never escaped punishment for their
Atheism: yea we shall read of many fearful judgments that fell upon such
persons who were negligent in the performance of this duty to the Gods. But I
refer the Reader to Mr. Mountague, and Mr. Seldens own history, where you
shall find sufficient in this kind. And the reason of these strange
punishments inflicted upon those that robbed the heathen Gods is well given by
Lactantius; God (says he) punished this Instit. 2. c. 4.
sin of sacrilege among the heathens, because though he cared not for an
injury done to an Idol, yet he would make men afraid of withdrawing any thing
from him, whom they in their blind judgment took for the true God. But to
pass from these instances, and come to the answering of such objections as are
brought against the necessity of performing of what Jacob here vows, The first
objection is made against the necessity of the place of Gods worship the
second against the payment of tithes. The first is this; God is present in all
places, and has not Christ taught us, that God dwells not in temples made with
hands, but wheresoever two or three are gathered together in his name, there
will he be in the mi^st of them? To what end and purpose then need we build
Churches and Chapels, for Gods worship to be performed in? First we confess
that of the School to be most infallibly true, that enter, praesenter Deu^ hic
and ubique potenter, all things are commanded by Gods power, all things are
open to his sight, all things are filled with his presence, he is present in
heaven by his glorious Majesty chearing and blessing his glorious Saints and
Angels; he is present in hell by his power and justice, punishing the wicked
sinners and devils; he is present in all the world, feeding and ordering all
both good and bad by his providence: yet suscepimus Deus miserecordiam Psalm. 4.
9.
tuam in medio templitus, his Church, his Sanctuary, that is his Curia Gratiae
his gracious court of mercy; therein after a more diverse way, and therein
after a more special manner is he present to and with his Saints upon earth,
then in all other places whatsoever. Again true it is, that Deus non habitat
templis manufactis, God is not circumscribed within Temples made with hands,
but ubicunque wheresover men are met together in his name, he will hear and
answer them: yet at Jerusalem is his Sanctuary, Psalm. 7^.
at Salem is his Tabernacle; that is the place which he has chosen for
himself, wherein to put his name; that is the place whereunto the people shall
resort to worship him; not only to oster their sacrifices and prayers to
obtain his blessings, but to praise him for his benefits received from him.
Neither let any man object and say non nunc ut olim, this was true of the
material Temple and Tabernacle before Christ his coming, but not so now: for
God has not left his Church, he has not forsaken his Sanctuary; but as Christ
himself on earth, honored the Temple and the Synagogues with his presence and
preaching, and as the Saints of God since (and that no doubt by the direction
of Gods Spirit) have erected and dedicated places to and for his special
worship; so is God in a special manner present in them more then in others:
nay, as we have a common saying of the win^e, that if there be any stirring
it is most evident about the Church; so if there be any slatus spiritus, If
God be any where present (as he is every where) he is specially present to
and with his Saints, at such time as they are assembled together in his Church
and Temple, to hear his holy word, to receive his blessed Sacraments, by
prayers and praises to worship him for his blessings: Thus howsoever the
erecting of Churches etc. are not necessary necessitate absoluta, because in
time of persecution omnis locus est Deo sacer, all places are his, be it in
house or fiel^* where his Saints are assembled: yet are they necessary
necessitate conditionata; when we may enjoy them, we must provide them, and
being provided, honor and reverence them, even as the house of God, his holy
Sanctuary.

The second objection is made against the Ministers maintenance, and that not
in general; for there is none so impiously sacrilegious, that will deny (at
least in words) the necessity thereof; but the question is about the rule of
proportion and law, whereby they are due to God, and from him to his Ministers;
whether by the Divine Moral law of God, or by virtue of humane laws and
Ecclesiastical constitutions; whether secundum totam, a proportion answerable
to the Leviticall Priesthood, or whether secundum quotam, in the same full due
and kind as they were paid to the Leviticall Priesthood. The adversa^ies of
God and his tithes, hold and maintain the law for tithes abrogate, as
Judicial, and Ceremonial; and so the payment in that quota to be void, and
the law for payment only Civil and humane.

For answer hereof we confess, that if they speak of the maintenance of the
Leviticall Priesthood in general, we deny not but there were some things in
their quota partly Ceremonial, partly Judicial, and so to us are now
abrogate; such were their primitiae taken in the strict sense, their part^ of
sacrifices, their special and particular Cities, their ha^ing their tithes
gathered and brought home at the costs and charges of the owners* their parts
and portions in the second annual tithe, and in the tithe of every third
year; but for the first tithe, which is the tithe called the ti^he of
inheritance, that is, the tithe of all increase (nine parts d^ely and truly
deducted) which was given by God to the Priests and Levites; to say this is
abrogate, as being a Ceremonial or Judicial law, tying men to the payment
thereof during only the time of the Leviticall Priesthood, and continuance of
the Jewish Polity, is most false and erroneous. And that I speak no more then
I shall be able to prove, I will lay down three Conclusions;

First, that the law for payment of the tithe was not simply Ceremonial or
Judicial, binding the payment only to the Jewish Priesthood.

Secondly, that the tenth is that proportion which is simply due unto Gods
worship and service.

Thirdly, that the payment of tithes for the qu^ta is a Divine Moral law, yet
standing in force to bind all Christians to pay them unto the Evangelicall
Priesthood.

That the law for payment of tithes was never simply Ceremonial etc. is thus
prooved;

If the law binding to pay the tenth for the quota, were barely Ceremonial or
Judicial, then were tithes only due to the Leviticall Priesthood: but the
tenth was not only due to the Leviticall Priesthood: ergo, etc. The consequent
of the ma^or is undeniable, the minor is thus prooved; That which of due was
paid to another Priesthood, and that by the Leviticall Priesthood, was not
only proper and due unto them: but tithes were paid by the Leviticall
Priesthood of due to another, even to him that was the type of the Evangelicall
Priesthood: therefore not due only to the Levites. The minor is thus prooved;
That which was paid by Abraham to Melchisedeck, was paid by the Levites to
another Priesthood: but tithes were paid by Abraham to Melchisedeck: ergo, etc.

This argument Paul urges, Hebr. 7. where comparing the Priesthood of Christ
with Aarons, he makes this one argument to prove Christ his Priesthood the
greater, in that Levi in Abraham paid tithes unto M^lchisedeck, who was the
Typical Priest of the New Testament. Whereas the Historian objects that
Abr^ham paid tithes only of the spoils of war, not of all his substance,
the word (...) signifying only the tithe of such spoils;

First, I answer that both the text of Genesis, Chap. 14. 20. and HEBR. 7. 2.
speak in general terms, that Abraham gave tithes of all; and as for the
word (...), to signify only the spoils of war, the Tithes-Histo^ian is not
a^ a^y ag^^ement with himself (neither indeed can he be; the word bearing a
larger signification); and therefore I will not stand to a^^wer it. But say we
should grant that at this time when Abraham met M^l^hise deck, he gave the
tithe only of the spoil of war; yet that infringeth not, but at other times
he paid tithes of all. And that may appear first by the emphasis of the
Apostle, Hebr. 7. 4. where he speaks of the payment of these tithes of the
spoils, as of a greater and more eminent action then the paying of ordinary
tithes of his ground, saying, Now consider how great this man was, unto whom
the Patriarch gave the tenth, not only of his ordinary substance, but (...),
even the tenth of the spoils. Neither will that allegation suffice that is
made by M^. Cartwright in his Annotations upon the Rhemes Testament, that the
payment of tithes was a ceremonial thing, whereby was signified that we in a
tenth offered to Christ do declare that all we have is his.

For first, if he mean particularly of Abraham's action, then Abraham di^ it
either with warranti^ or without, if with warrantie, then was there some law
commanding tithes before Mos^s* if without warranti^, then no^ lawful, and so
not commendable, and so consequently not a fit type to signific the duty of the
faithful to Christ.

S^cond^y the Apostle in that place bringes not in Abraham paying tithes in the
person of all the faithful, but in the person of Levi; though true it be that
all paid in Abraham.

Thirdly, if it was (as we deny not) a ceremonial rite signifying and
declaring the duty of all the faithful to Christ, then it should appear to
be the first quota, and proportion whereby to testify and declare our
subjection, thankef^ln^s and obedience: And then I ask what wrong has Christ
d^ne us under the Gosp^l* that we should not still testify our obedience and
thankfulness, in and by paying at least the same proportion; seeing we are not
only the faithful children of Abraham, and have no law for bidding, but all
enforcing the same duty. And here by the way observe with me two other
passages in those Annotations upon the aforenamed place;

The first is a relation of Possidoni^s in the life of Saint Aug in Ser. de
temp. 2^9 In Dom. 12* post Trinit. Hom. 4^. inter 50 Ser. in Psalm. 146.
Augustine; wherein h^^ would make Saint Augustine an enemy to the custo^e of
paying tithes in the quota, dire^^ly against his own perempto^y assertion in
all his Tracta^^s.

The second is a misconstruing of Saint Jerome, no^ only against his general
text, but the sense and r^les of G^a^mer: for whereas ^. Jerome inveighing
against the covetousnes and licentiousnes of the Clergy in those times, thus
concludes, Si quasi Levita and sacerdos vivo de decimi^, and al^ari Ad Nepot.
de vit. ^ler.
(...) iens altaris oblatione sus^^^tor, habens victum and vestitum his
c^n^en^us ero* which in r^ght English is, that so long as I live as a Levite
and Priest, upon tithes, or other offerings due to chose that serve at the
altar, I will rest my self contented, though it only suffice for food and
raiment: i^t^m^ting, that as long as he lived upon Go^s allowance, it should
su^fice, were it never so small; assuring himself o^ Go^s ^l^s^ing in and upon
his own ordinance. There the construction of Saint Ieromes mind is this;

That if less then a tenth will find him things necessary for his honest
maintenance, Jerome will not stand upon a title of tithes.

2. The tr^th of this may appear in the practice of Jacob in this vow: for
Jacob vows not this of paying tithes de novo, as a work not formerly done, no
more then he does the other, that the Lord shall be his God; but he vows that
which according to the ancient law of God, and practice of his fathers, he
was to perform, when God should bestow these blessings upon him; only by this
vow he binds himself to a more strict and careful performance of what he
ought; it being lawful to make vows, not only in things indifferent, but in
things necessary and commanded.

The second thing which I propounded to prove was, that the tenth, even for
the quota, is the certain rule of proportion due unto the Ministers of God
which serve at the altar, and which without sacrilege cannot be detayned from
them: the which I thus prove;

That for which we have the precept of God by authority of his word in time
commanding, the practice of all people in all places, and that in all ages, and
that of duty Vox populi, (...) e^^ vox (...); Cic. (...) 1.
readily performing for the maintenance of Gods worship; that must necessarily
be the rule for the practice of all men, nor may it be altered till we have
precept to the contrary: but of this nature has been the practice for the
payment of tithes: therefore etc.

By all ages I understand, 1. Before the laws, as in the example of Abraham and
Jacob. 2. Under the law, where we have both precept and practice. 3. In time
of the Gospel, when and where the Gospel has been known, and embraced.

By all persons I understand both faithful and insidels; testimonies whereof
you have heard already.

By all places I understand, 1. the several and particular Kingdoms of
Christendom; not some one or few, but all 2. not some heathen, as the Romans
alone, or Grecian only, but both, nay all whosoever are recorded to acknowledge
a Deity or at least we read of none that did not with out punishment; Quis enim
aesos impune putarit esse Deos?

But against this argument there are brought diverse instances: first, against
the practice of the heathen; secondly, against the practice of the Church of
God.

For the heathen, these objections are made. 1. They had no compulsary law to
compel them. 2. They paid not necessarily, Seld. page 28
but arbitrarily. 3. They paid not annually, nor of all things, not to all
Deities, nor by all men. For answer of all which, in a word; first, what needed
they any law to compel them, when as they were a law to themselves, drawn
thereunto either by the law of nature, more forceable then any humane law; or
else by traditionall custom from the practice of their forefathers, which to
us is above all, and to them was always in the nature and force of a law, they
not having always their laws written (as we now) further then in the
customary practice of the country? Secondly, for the making of laws for the
payment of tithes, they well could not, in that they paid tithes to several
Deities; so that to have made a law for one, had been to draw the envy of
another Deity upon them. As for the second, that they paid them not upon
necessity, but voluntarily, we shall find the contrary confessed by the
Tithes-Historian, page 31. where recording the vow of Cypselus of Corinth, he
says that Cypselus had special regard to the tenth part of the goods of the
Citizens, as competent to a Deity; and in the same page (relateing out of
Herodotus the practice of Cyrus) tells us that Cyrus being admonished of
Croesus, would not have the goods of the Lydians ransact by the soldiers,
because (...) they were necessarily to be tithed to Jupiter; and that not only
as a vow, but as a custom: otherwise (as Mr. Mountague observes) it would
have been a poor argument to have made the soldiers desist from their right
in the spoil.

And as for annual payment he confesses, page 30. that it was a custom to
bring unto Apollo yearly first fruits in tenths; and a little before, speaking
of the Syphnians, he says that they gave yearly the tithes of their mines
which they found in the Isle. And Mr. Mountague further Page 493.
adds, that when covetousnes made them leave paying that tribute of tithes,
the sea brake in among them and swallowed up those mines; a just vengeance of
God upon detainers of divine right, by dishonouring God to loose all. And in
the last place where he averreth all paid not, nor of all things, nor to all
Deities, let him or any show as much in the negative, as we have showed in the
affirmative, and we will yield the bucklers: and yet I see no reason why the
proof of a negative after the affirmative prooved, should stand good against
Gods right, that will not stand good against an earthly Kings, no not against
the right of a private person.

But grant that all this were true that is alleged, that they paid not
yearly, nor of all things etc. Were they not heathen, in whom the light of
nature being darkened, might fail in the perfect performance of such things as
nature required. Certainly if we fail, having a greater light, in the
performance not only of this duty, but of things of greatest moment,
especially when gain and profit come in our way, let us not expect perfection
from them, though in natural things; howsoever, what they did prooves the
truth of my former conclusion, in that they paid neither an eighth, ninth,
eleventh, or twelfth, but always a strict tenth, or at least nomine decima;
demonstrating thereby the tenth to be due de jure, howsoever they failed de
fallo to pay it in the full proportion or quota.

The reasons brought to infringe the practice of tithes under the Gospel, are
two; both taken from matter of fact. The first is the practice of the primitive
Church in the days of the Apostles, who neither received tithes, nor
challenged them; together with the settling of the payment of tithes in all
particular countries where the Gospel has been received; which paiments have
been settled according to the particular laws and customs of particular
countries.

First for answer, we say that a facto ad jus non valet consequentia, it was
not done thus and thus, and therefore it ought not to have been otherwise, is
no good consequence either in Logic or Law, much less in Divinity.

Secondly, the Church in those times of the Apostles, and many years after,
was not settled, but was in great persecution, and so not a fit time for
Ministers to be forward in urgeing that question, least, as Saint Paul spoke of
himself, they should have seemed to have sought theirs more then them. And to
reason thus, we may as well say that the Israelites paid no tithes in the
wilderness, nor in their captivities; therefore they were not due at any time.

Thirdly, those that were not converted paid according to their ancient
customs unto their Idoll-Gods; those that were, willingly brought all and laid
them at the Apostles feet: but the Church was no sooner settled, but tithes
were demanded, and readily by way of thankefulnes to God paid when and where
the Gospel was from time to time received and embraced, as the particular
graunts specified by Mr. Seldom himself will sufficiently witness.

The second reason opposing the practice for the times of the Gospel, is
grounded upon the doctrine of the Schoolmen, and practice of the Church; first
set abroach by Alexander Seld. p. 158.
Hales. Their doctrine was, that tithes for the quota are not due now in the
time of the Gospel; either by the Moral law, or the law of Nature; but only
jure Ecclesiastico, by the judicial laws and constitutions of the Church,
being grounded upon the equity of a mutual distribution betwixt the
Ministers and the people; that as the one gives spiritual things, so the other
should afford unto them of their temporal things. The practice of the Church
was in suffering the conveyances of Parochial rites in tithes to be diverted
unto the maintenance of Monks and Friars in their cloisters, which (says the
Tithes-Historian) the Church would never have suffered, Page 159.
had they formerly held tithes due to be paid by divine right, either lege
scripta, or nata.

But these reasons to them that will understand reason, are easily answered;
for first, the Schoolmen and Friars are contrary to themselves and one to
another, for which I refer the Reader to Gregory de Valentia in his Title of
tithes.

Secondly, what is the judgment of a few Monks and Friars, who by their
niceties and subtilties have obscured the truth, rather then explained it,
being compared with all the ancient Fathers of Gods Church in all ages, which
have sealed to the truth of their doctrine by shedding of their bloods?

Thirdly, let all honest Christians consider the end that these Schoolmen aimed
at, with the miserable event that followed their doctrine and practice. For
their ends, they were two;

The first was to increase the maintenance of the Ministry, Thom. 2. 2. qu.
^7. art. 1
and to draw it to a greater proportion, by how much the Priesthood of the
Gospel was more excellent the^ that of the Law: for less then a tenth they
never yielded unto.

The second was, by maintaining them due only by positive law, and not
divine, they labored to draw them from their Parochial Ministers unto the
maintenance of the^ and their Cloisters: which they effected even to the
impoverishing of the Ministers serving at the altar, allowing unto them only a
small competency of personal tithes.

Lastly, for the event of this doctrine, it was most fatal; giving not only
occasion to Wicklife and others to broach that heresy of maint^ining tithes to
be mere alms; but gave occasion also to the civil power, to take from the
Church not only the jurisdiction of tithes, but to alienate them in the end
from the Church and Churchmen to a me^re civil use; as your Prohibitions,
Inhibitions, Impropriations at this day witness at large, not only here but
in all places.

And as for the practice of the Church suffering the alienation of them; First,
it was not by general consent of all: for the Canonists of those times were
against it. Secondly, suppose the whole Church had erred in this particular at
this time, yet does it not infringe the right of them by general consent
before nor since, in that the whole Church has erred in matters of greater
weight and moment then the point of tithes, as in the heresy of Arrianus, when
totus mundus factus erat Arrianu^, the whole world were become Arrians, some
sewe particular persons only excepted. And in the times of Popetie before the
days of Martin Luther, when there was no poi^t of divinity free from either
addition or subtraction in any one Church of Christendom. And for the
allegation of particular prescriptions and customs, let them first prove
tithes due by humane constitution only, and that God has relinquished his
right, otherwise it is not only idle, but wicked, to plead custom, or
prescribe against God.

The last thing to be prooved for the payment of tithes is, that the law of
tithing was and is a divine law, standing still in force, which may not be
abrogate without special law to the contrary: which will appear by these
reasons following;

1. To whom the self same power and duty of blessing belongs, as did to
Melchisedeck, to them from the blessed ought the same duty to be performed,
which Abr^ham performed to Melchisedeck; that is, the tithes of all: benedicere
and decimas accipere and dare being set down by Hebr. 7. 1. 2
the Apostle as relatives, quorum uno posito, ponitur and alterum, and ^
contra: otherwise the Apostles argument is of no force; but the Ministers of
the Gospel have the same power and right of blessing the people, as had
Melchisedeck: ergo, etc. If any shall object that parents do and may bless
their children, and children their parents, Genesis 24. 60. Iosh^a 22. ^. Psalm.
129. 8 Ruth 2. ^.
and Kings their subjects, yea all Christians ought to bless one another; and
yet cannot challenge a propriety in tithes: I answer, that there was and is a
great difference betwixt their blessing and the blessing of the Priest and
Minister.

For first, the Priests had a special commission and Deutr. 10. 8
command, as being set apart by God for that purpose.

Secondly, to them was given a prescript and certain form of blessing, which
was not to others: The Lord bless Numb. 6. 24. 25. 26.
thee and keep thee, the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be
gracious unto thee, the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee and give thee
peace.

Thirdly, there was a promise of a special blessing annexed unto the Priests
blessing, which was not made to Numb. 6. 26
any other; others only praying for a blessing, but they pronouncing it also.

Lastly, God has annexed the blessing of the Priests and the payment of tithes
by the people, as necessary dependants. D^VT. 10. 8. 9. At that time the Lord
separated the tribe of Levi to bear the arc of the covenant of the Lord, to
stand before the Lord, to minister unto him, to bless in his name unto this
day: wherefore Levi has no part nor inheritance with his brethren; the Lord is
his inheritance, according a^ the Lord thy God promised: and what this promise
was, we read, NVMB. 18. 21. And be^old I have given the children of Levi all
the tenth in Israel.

If it be objected that this was a ceremonial action belonging only to the
Leviticall Priesthood, the answer is negative, that it was not a Ceremonial,
but a Moral duty. 1. Because it was in practice before the law of ceremonies
or Leviticall Priesthood, as in the example of Melchisedeck, G^N. 14. 19. 20.
He blessed Abraham, and received tithes of all. 2. Christ himself practiced
it, MAR. 10. 16. LVK. 24. 50. 3. Christ commanded his disciples to do the
like, LVK. 10. 5. promising to second it upon such who should readily receive
them, and kindly entertain them. 4. The Apostles practiced it after Christ's
ascension and their receiving the holy Ghost, blessing the people with that
Evangelicall form of blessing mentioned 2. COR. 13. 14. The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost be with
you all; Amen. According to which form, the Ministers of God in all ages since
have continued to bless the people: the which form, though it differ in words
from that used under the Law, yet is it the self same for sense and
substance: and that both more sweet, by how much the sweet name of JESUS is
therein mentioned; as also more plain, in that the three persons of the
blessed Trinity are therein distinctly expressed, which in the other are only
closely implied under the triple iteration of the name and title of LORD.

The truth and confirmation of this whole argument is apparently prooved, HEBR.
7. 12. where Paul thus reasons; Arg. 1.
If the Priesthood be changed, then must there be a change of the Law, and so ^
contra, where the Priesthood is the same, the Law must be the same: but our
Priesthood is the same for blessing with Melchisedecks, yea with Aarons: and
therefore the Law of our Priesthood for receiving tithes must be the same.

That law, the abrogating whereof dishonours God, Arg. ^.
and makes the Ministers of the Gospel inferior to the Ministers of the Law,
cannot be temporary, but of divine constitution, which cannot be abrogated: but
to maintain the law for the right of the tithe in kind to be abrogate and not
in force, tends to the dishonor of God, and making the Ministers of the Gospel
inferior to them under the Law: ^rgo, etc. The ma^or is thus prooved; That
law, the abrogating whereof leaves the Ministers of God under the Gospel
without a certain rule for maintenance, dishonours God in making him more
regardlesse of his Ministers under the Gospel, then under the Law, and makes
them inferior to the Leviticall Priesthood: but to maintai^e the Law
commanding tithes for the quota to be abrogate, is to leave the Ministers of
the Gospel without a certain rule for maintenance: ergo etc. The major is
evident by two reasons; 1. Because maintenance is one of those four necessary
duties required of all men toward their Ministers now in the time of the
Gospel; the other three being love, countenance, obedience. 2. In regard of
those manifold mischieses and inconveniences which must necessarily follow, in
leaving them to a voluntary stipende or contribution of man, without a certain
rule given by God himself: as,

1. Flattery, or suspicion of flattery, in being thought to have some
persons in admiration, because of advantages which cannot be in tithes.

2. Dissimulation and deceit, in making as though they received little when as
they have much; which cannot be in tithes.

3. By this means the poorer sort are either much disgraced in regard of that
little they have, or else are forced to strain themselves above their ability
to their utter ruin, as woeful experience makes too evident in such places
where Ministers live on contribution; whereas in the payment of tithes every
man rests content with Gods blessing.

4. Ostentation in some, in giving much, and disdaining those that give less;
which cannot be in tithes.

If it be objected, that all this may be amended by a set stipende arising
from goods proper to the Church; I ask what they understand by Church goods:
If they mean tithes which are the proper goods of the Church; how can any man
proportion a stipende better then God himself has done, to give every
Minister the tithes of those people committed to his charge? If by goods proper
to the Church, they understand such voluntary offerings as shall be brought in
by the faithful into the common treasury of the Church, or otherwise shall
be rated by authority upon every particular person; then I demand what
contribution can be so sure, what stipend established by man so certain, but
that either by the wickedness of the Magistrates who have power to establish, or
inconstancy of those by whom it is be paid, or covetousnes of those by whom
it is to be collected and gathered, is subject either to change, or else to
enforce Gods Ministers to the former evils: as is evident in all places, where
Ministers live either upon such voluntary contributions or set stipends. But
more of this hereaster.

The minor is thus prooved; If there be a law or rule, it is for more, or
less, or the same certain due; if it be for more, why do they withhold it?
if for less, then are we in worse case then the Levi^es: but whether it be for
more or less, let them show us the rule, and we shall willingly consent; if
they cannot then it remains necessarily, that the same rule and law must
stand in force for us now under the Gospel, which was in force for the
Priesthood under the Law.

If they say that Paul sets down a rule and law. 1. COR. 9. GAL. 6. 6. I say
then, it is a divine law, not humane; for more honorable maintenance, not for
less: as all the reasons plainly ^n^orce; and so whosoever withholdes the
tenth is sacrilegious, unless they will maintain Code and Statute above
Scripture, and the laws and constitutions of men, above the laws and
commandments of God. But the truth is, that neither of those texts are rules
or laws simply, but only comments upon the first law, first imprinted in
man's heart, and afterward given by God himself unto Moses, and alleged by
Paul for backing the same; as not only the reasons there alleged necessarily
imply and enforce, being grounded upon the law of Nature, and the law
Moral; but verse the 14 he concludes it to be the same law, saying, ^ic enim
constan^t etc. Even so ^ath the Lord ordained that they which preach the
G^sped, should live of the G^spell. Let men then either show some other statute
law given by God, or else they must necessarily gra^nt, that Paul ^n^orc^^h no
other but the first law.

^. But because such is the corruption of man's nature, that they are more
drawn to the practice of holy duties by the fear of punishment, then allured
by the force of ^recept and hope of reward; take in the last place a reason
enforcing this duty, drawn from the manifold judgments denounced and
threatened by God, and no less inflicted upon such who have any ways been
detainers of his tithes in all ages, or any thing else truly dedicated to ^oly
use for the better maintenance of his worship and service; where we shall
find that such things have been fearfully fatal to all the actors and
abettors and their posterity after them: And here not to speak of that great
punishment of the Jews mentioned MAL. 3. nor yet of those notorious
Sacrilegists of ancient times and in other countries; but to keep our selves
at home, and to speak only of such particulars as are fresh in our memory, of
that great sacrilege begun and ^econded in the days of King Henry the eighth,
with the success of it in all the actors and abettors of the same.

And first to begin with Cardinal Wolsey the president for future sacrilege,
in demolishing certain petty Monasteries and religious houses, though to a
good intended use, for the building of two Colleges, the one in Oxford, the
other in Ipswitch: both which, as they stand to this day unfinished as a witness
against him of his sin; so not long after suddenly and unexpectedly followed
his ruin and overthrow. From him come to the Lord Cromwell the instigator of
the King to the dissolution of the rest re^a^ning, though to an happy end,
even the rooting of Pope^y, Superstition, and Idolatry out of this kingdom
(which could never have been so easily effected if those places had been left
in their being and glory); yet for neglecting to be as careful to tender
unto God his due by restoring unto him and his Church his tithes and other due
rites, as be was to root out superstition and take away such places and
particulars as were dedicated and given to such idolatrous uses, gathering into
his own hands a great part of those possessions; they prooved not only fatal
to himself, as his fearful (though lamentable) ruin^ shortly after made
apparent; but those possessions have been no less fatal to his stock and
posterity who by virtue of his right have still inherited them: Yea take a
veiw of the whole Gentry of England into whose hands the revenues Church were
then by w^y of exchange or otherwise divolved, and we shall find they have
been like to Tholosse gold, or Aulus. Gell. lib. 3. 6. 9. Prove. 20. 25
those holy things spoken of by Solomon, which have not only ensnar^d the
souls of their possessors, and perished themselves in their use; but with
themselves have de voured other fair and ample possessions: So that either the
face or the name of our Gent^y then in being is wholly changed, or else there
is none remaining who are successively possesso^s of those tithes to a fourth
generation; or, if there be any, either they want means of maintenance
answerable to their births, or at least they want heirs of their loins to
continue those inheritances in their names: either of which prooves that
general assertion both of religion and nature in^allibly true, that de male
quasitis non gandet ^^r^i^^ here is, of goods ill gotten the third heir shall
have small cause to rejoice. I might instance the like satall success of those
r^v^^ues even in R^gia stirpe, in the succession of King Hemy the eighth. And
the only happiness that our late gracious Sovereign JAMES of blessed memory,
had in the remainder of those holy things, was this, that he was so happy as
to rid the crown of them; and from my soul I wish that (as I have often
heard it was his desire) so for Gods glory, his own honor, the future
happiness of his posterity, and of his kingdoms, he had been so further happy
as to have restored Gods part in his tenths unto the Church again. And
howsoever those who now possess such tenths think they shall and may more
safely and freely enjoy them, because they are persuaded they have paid more
dearly for them: yet caveat emptor, let such buyers beware least before
another third generation come, they prove not as fatal to them and to their
posterity, as they were to their predecessors; for if once sacrilege, ever;
our God from whom we receive the whole, and to whom the tenth is ever due,
being the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

Thus to conclude this point, By all ^^^se reasons it is apparent, that
howsoever the laws whereby men at this day pay their tithes unto their
Ministers, be the laws positive, and customs of Churches and several
Kingdoms wherein they live; yet the laws whereby they are primarily due, an^
by which the true Church has ever and does yet challenge them, is the divine
law of God.

And for the laws Imperial, and Canons Synodall and Pontificiall with the
particular graunts and laws of particular Kingdoms concerning tithes, they
were made from time to time in favor of the Church, for the maintenance of
divine right, and repressing the wickedness of such as would not have paid them,
had not the fear of the law of man been more powerful with them then the
law of God.

The truth whereof will appear evident, if we take but a view of those
Graunts, Laws, and Chartelaries mentioned by Mr. Seldom himself in his eighth
Chapter, made and granted by the Kings of England, where we shall find them
all grounded, and that only upon the divine right; as in the general Synod
held in the year 706. under Offa page 199.
King of Merc^land, and Elfwolde King of Northumberland, with the full consent
of all the Lords both spiritual and tempo^all, grounding that law of tithing
upon that text of MALAC. 3. they thus conclude, Nemo justam el^^mosynam de his
qu^ p^ssidet, facere valet: nisipri^s separaverit Domino, quod a primordio ipse
sibi reddere delegavit: ac per hoc plerunque contingit, ut qui decimam non
tribuit, ad decimam revertitur: unde etiam cum obtestatione pracipimus, ut
omnes studeant de omnibus qua possident decimas dare; quia speciale Domini Dei
est; and de novem partibus sibi vivat, and ^l^^mosynas tribuat etc. No man may
give alms out of any thing he does possess, though upon never so just cause,
before such time as he has first set apart that to the Lord which he from the
beginning reserved to be rendered to himself: for by this means it often comes
to pass, that he which neglects to pay the tenth, is himself brought to a
tenth: therefore we adjure all men that they studiously endeavor to pay the
tenth of all that they have, because that is in a special manner the Lords:
and to maintain themselves and give alines out of the other nine parts only.

The like grant he mentions of Ethelulph, anno 855. who gave with the consent
of all the Lords both spiritual and temporal, the tithes of all his Kingdom
to the Churches and Ministers of the same; free from all manner of Regal or
secular service: in the conclusion of which grant is added, Qui autem augere
volu^rit nostram donationem, page 209
a^geat omnipotens Deus dies ^^us prosperos: si quis vero minuer^ v^l mutare
pr^sumps^rit, noscat s^ ^^te Tribunal Christi r^dditurum ration^m, ^isi pri^s
satisfactione emendaverit, If any shall augment this our donation, the Lord
make his days many and prosperous: if any shall presume either to lessen or
change the same, let him know that he shall give an account thereof before the
Tribunal of Christ, unless before that time he make full satisfaction for the
same.

The like of the grant and general law made by King page 213.
Athelstan, grounded, as he confesses, upon the example of Jacob, and text of
ho^y Scripture. page 214.

The like of King ^dmund, Decimam pra^ipimus omni Christiano super
Christianitatem suam d^re. 215. we command all Christians to pay their tithes
upon fo^f^iture of their Christendom.

In the laws of King Knout. page 223. Reddantur Deo debita rectitudines annis
singulis, Let God have his due right yearly provided him. And then follows the
law of tithe in kind.

In the laws made by King Edward the Confessor, h^ving set down the
particulars what tithes ought to be paid, this is the ground, D^cima pars ^i
reddenda ^st qui ^o ve^ parts simul cum decima largitur, The tenth ought to be
paid to him, who together with the tenth gives us freely the other nine parts.
And so of the rest.

In room whereof I will add the opinion of the Divines of the whole
University of Oxford touching personal tithes, against the doctrine of one
Friar Russell, who denied page 225.
tithes to be due jure divino* against which opinion they thus conclude, Quic^^
que hanc sententiam tenuerit, and per ^inaciter def^nderis, apud reputationem
^ostram hareticus est censendus: and quia a sancta doctrina Ecclesia est
divisus, a corpore ^jusdem Ecclesi^ vel^t putrid^m membrum est prascind^ndus,
Whosoever shall perversely hold and maintain this ass^rtion, let him upon our
credi^s be held an heretic: and because he has rent himself from the holy
doctrine of the Church, let him be cut off from the Church as a rotten member
of the same.

I know M^. Seldom goes about to weaken these authorities, page 201.
especially of the Synod held under Offa and Elfwold, by calling into question
the faithfulness of the Centuriators, from whence he recites it; because the
record of that Synod is no where ^lse to be found, as he says. And for the
censure of the University of Oxford, he affirms that they were too vehement
and too confident in the page 174.
point. But I leave to the censure of his own Profession, with what
indiscretion and more vehement confidence they would censure a poor Postillian
Divine that should go about to call into question the faithfulness of Ployden,
the Lord Dyer, Sir Edward Cook, Rastall, etc. because that all particular
original records of judgments and statutes recorded by them in their
Commentaries, Cases, Reports, Abridgements, are not come to his view, or it may
be cannot be found, as being stolen by some siltching hand, or perished by
antiquity of time, or the negligence of those that had them in custody: or,
after that all the Judges of the Land, together with all the Lawyers of all the
Innes of Courts, after long and serious arguing, had determined a case in Law;
some puny Barrester should censure them all to be too vehement and confident in
their determination.

And that all the world may see that the dull ignorance and ignorant confidence
is not so proper to the poor Divines of these times, but Mr. Seldom may shake
hands even in these things wherein he would make the world believe he had no
equal; take into your consideration his peremptory conclusion upon these two
graunts and records following, alleged by him to prove that decima and
decimatio are not always taken for a tenth, but sometimes for a far less
portion: as also that the free disposing of the Cap. 10.
tenth, was in the power of the owner to give, what, to whom, and to what use
he pleased, without the consent of Bishop or Incumbent.

The first* though second in the history, is a grant of Robert de Hessel to
the Monastery of Gisburne in Yorkshire whereby he gives, duas garbas de tota
terra quam de novo colui in territorio de Hessell post quam illam tenui; aut
quam ego de catero colam, vel haredes met; ita ut decimatio hac cedat in
fabricationem Ecclesiae novae de Gisburne: here the gift of two sheafes only
out of all his land (says he) is called decimatio* the which if he would make
good, I would willingly give him yearly the price of a Ploydens Commentaries,
and yearly gain by the bargain. But the truth is, he is much mistaken; for
by duas garbas, we may not understand two sheafes only of his whole land new
tilled; but as Doctor Tilesley observes, duplam decimam: and yet not two
sheafes of ten, but duas decimas garbas, or primam and secundam decimam, two
tenth-sheafes, or two sheafes of tenth; the custom of tithing in that ground
and territory being this, That the Collectors for that right of the Abbey of
Gisburne, received, and do still, the tenth and twentieth sheafe, and the
Minister or Incumbent the thirtieth sheafe, or third sheafe of tenth; so that
garba there, is the same with decima. The like custom to this I remember to be
in the Parish of Hurstper-poynt in Sussex, payable to the Abbey of Lewis: but
whether it be of lands aunciently belonging to that Monastery, or otherwise a
donation, as this of Hessell, I cannot well remember.

Further, it must be remembered concerning this custom, that the land newly to
be tilled was a wood; some of it standing to this day: and all of it called the
Wood-sield: and so was not liable formerly according to the custom of England
to pay any tithe.

Secondly, in liew of this the Incumbent receives annually out of that portion
of Gisburne, nine threaves of corn, to wit, sour of wheat, if there be so
much growing upon the ground, and the rest of barley. The which threaves may
amount sometimes near to the loss in the double tithe given from him, and
then no doubt did, much of it being lately converted from wood to arable; by
which it appears, that the alienation and grant was not without the consent
of the Bishop and Incumbent, but with consent of all parties.

The other is the customary payment of four threaves of corn of every
plough-land in the East Riding of Yorkshire, given, as he says, by King
Athelstan to the Church of Saint John of Beverley (which came not, as he
affirms, near to the tenth) which threaves are styled decimae in a bull of
one of the Pope Gregory's, as if decima in one notion had signified any kind
of revenue devoutly offered to holy uses.

For answer hereof, I must confess I cannot fully resolve my self of this
custom by all the enquiry I have made; yet I shall be able I hope to inform
my reader so much, as shall prove the Historian much mistaken in this
allegation.

First if they who have skill in the Saxon dialect may be believed, we may as
well by [forne thraue] understand the fourth threave of every plough-land, as
simply sour; and then here was a greater quantity then a tenth. But take it as
it is alleged, yet it is not so base and contemptible a portion as he would
make it seem to be; for every threave being sour and twenty sheaves, and an
hide or If Caracu^a (as himself confesses) signifies an ^i^e or plough land.
plough-land being usually not above thirty six acres, and in many places
less; and part of this being meadow, part pasture, and part yearly fallow;
fourscore and sixteen sheaves, and that of the principal come, as wheat and
barley, was not so contemptible a portion as the Tithes-Historian would seem
to make it. But the truth is, I cannot learn or hear of any of the Laity that
hold or enjoy any temporal land that paies, or ever paid any such portion to
S. John of Beverley, either by the gift of Athelstan, or any other King; nor
that ever King Athelstan had any such portion in the East Riding, payable unto
his Avenary by custom of the Country from the Laity. True it is that there is
a custom in the East Riding called the payment of threaves; but of another
nature and foundation, and that begun in the days of Saint John of Beverley,
under the reign, and by the permission and favor of King Athelstan. The story
by tradition is this; The East Riding, especially the parts about Beverley and
Holdernes, in regard of the woods and waters, were much annoyed with the
hurtful beasts called Beavers, Wolves, Otters etc. which destroyed daily their
young cattle: the destruction whereof the Bishop having first endeavored at
his own cost and charges, and in the end finding the charge to be too great
to be borne by himself, called to his aid and assistance all the Clergy of
the Eastriding; who gave certain threaves of corn (every one according to the
valuation of his living) some more, some less; the which was first paid in
kind as it grew upon the ground, and brought home either to Beverley, or to
places appointed, where men and dogs and horses were maintained for this
purpose; in the end the evil of beasts being by this means remooved, and yet
this evil custom for the Clergy remaining, it was changed first into the
payment of certain quarters of corn, after into a pecuniary payment, which in
valuation is a double tenth, twice so much as we pay annually to the King for
tenths, and so may not unfitly be called decimae.

Howsoever, grant it were more or less, yet being paid only by the
Clergy, and that out of the tenths of the Church, Pope Gregory might call it
fitly a tenth, and yet no whit diminish the propr^ety of decimation, but still
under that term is intimated a tenth in some one quota or other.

By which particulars it appears, that the Tithes-Historian has not been so
carefully industrious to inform himself of the truth of things, or not so
faithful to relate them as he does confidently confess and protest, but has
taken what may serve for his own turn and purpose, to frame an history
according to his own intention, and not to the truth: the truth, or true
history of tithes being no other then that which is contained in holy writ,
and which is no whit subject to the Laws Imperial, or Canons either Synodall
or Pontificiall; but contains a law given by God, even like himself, which
may not be changed, but must remain one and the same throughout all
generations.

The use of all which, as it serves to enforce the truth of my general
conclusion, so to manifest, and manifesting to reprehend the sacrilegious
impiety of these times, wherein men are so far from holding it a duty of
religion, a point of devotion, an argument of thankefulnes to God for his
manifold blessings, to follow Jacobs example in building and repairing Gods
house, and truly paying the tenth of what God bestows upon them, that they
think they can do God and their Country no better service then in pulling
down his Churches and Chapels, to rob him of his tithes, and abuse and
wrongfully disgrace his Ministers. We have a common Proverb, that PATER NOSTER
built Churches, and OUR FATHER pulled them down: This I confess is contrary to
our Profession; but if we will look to the practice of these times, we shall
find it truly verified: for if we consider the practice of former ages, (I
mean not those of the latter times of Popery, whose devotion was superstition)
but those first times of the Church of Rome, and those times of other Churches;
if, I say, we shall compare their devotion in erecting and building Churches
and Chapels, their zeal in decking and adorning of them, their bounty and
liberality for the maintaining of them for time to come, and compare it with
our practice in these our days; we shall find that they were not so devout to
build them, as we have been, and still are, to pull them down; they were not
more zealous to adorn them, then we are to deface them; they were not so
forward and liberal to maintain them, and the worship of God in them, as we
are to pill and poll from them. For witness whereof, how many places of this
Land may a man come to, where he shall find most goodly and glorious houses,
wrought both within and without with most curious works of the most ingenious
Artists, environed about with all the delights and pleasures of man; and in the
same place or parish shall find God served in a thatched Church, or wooden
Chapel? nay, with grief let it be spoken, how many such houses be there,
that have been built with the stones and mortar of the ruins of Gods house?
how many Churches and Chapels may be found in this Land, which are turned into
barnes and stables, and to more base offices? how many are there again in this
our Land, which are hardly content with the most curious needle-workes, the
purest linen, and the massiest gold and silver for their own tables, whiles
in the mean time, Gods table must be content with some piece of linsey*
woolsey for a carpet, course linen for a table cloth, and if they will be at
cost for a silver chalice, for other vessels God must rest content with brass
and pewter, and in many places hardly that. It is recorded of the Jews in the
third of Ezra, that at the building of the second Temple, they amongst them
that had seen the first Temple, and compared the glory of it with that they
were now to build, burst forth into mourning and lamentation: so if we should
pass through the parts of this our Country, and compare the Churches that are
now built, with those that were built in former ages, or those that were built
formerly, with that we may read or see them to have been; it would make the
stoniest heart to grieve, and the driest eye to shed some tears, to behold so
great a desolation in Gods Sanctuary.

And as such and so great is the evil will that men have to Gods Sion, in
respect of the place of his worship; so no less, nay more in the matter of
maintenance and respect to his Ministers, which are special means to
encourage and to enable them for the performance of the parts of his public
worship in those places.

Not to speak of any Symoniacall contracts, impropriations, appropriations,
customs, compositions, prescriptions, prohibitions, inhibitions, as things
that never trouble men's consciences, and by which they have, and do daily rob
God and his Church of the best part of his spiritual inheritance: but to
speak only of that small portion of maintenance which the iniquity of times
has left yet remaining to the Church; and it is strange but to imagine, what
thifts, tricks, and devises men have, and all to coosen God of his right; what
shifting, what chopping and changing from field to field, Parish to Parish,
kind to kind; thinking every little too much that the Minister enjoyes, and
all well gotten that they can deceitfully get from him: or if their envying
that little we have, or the private coosening of us of what is our due were
all, yea if we might have but fair proceeding at the Law for what is violently
detained from us, we could hold our selves well contented; but to have it
violently wrested out of our hands (or rather Gods) by perjurie, cruelty, and
oppression, is an height of impiety more then heathenish.

For witness of the truth hereof, how often falls it out that a Parishioner
discontented with his Minister, it may be because he cannot have his tithe at
his own rate and pleasure, or it may be for just reprehension of him for
withholding Naboths Vineyard, or keeping his brother Phillips wife, or some
other such like crying sin; this discontented person by way of revenge
instantly detaines some part or the whole of his tithe, puts the poor Minister
to a long and tedious suit, forceing him thereby to come to a composition for
his own, and so as to stand to his worships courtesy; but if it fall out that
he cannot get his desire, he calls in his Tenants, friends, and neighbors,
pleading a prescription and customary payment of some kind of tithe, and that
not for himself, but the whole Parish, adviseing them to join and hold with
him; who, either out of fear of his person, or hate to their Minister, or
rather covetous desire of what they ought not to have, cry, ^aciamus impietatis
pari^tem unum, habeamus etiam omnes unum marsupium: and having thus impiously
smitten hands to hold together, least the Minister should get the day (which of
all other is held the greatest disgrace, be his cause never so good); their
next care is to suborne witnesses, which usually go accompanied with these two
good properties, old men, who have forgotten to speak truth, or else think
they may speak what they list, because they think none can control them:
swearing oftentimes for many years before they were borne: or secondly, poor
and needy persons, such as are ready to ^ell themselves for a morsel of bread;
so that if they should be prooved perjured, the poor Minister should have no
redress against them, but to get an obdurate ear and a perjured tongue,
unsavory and unprofitable morsells for distressed souls, and a poor
recompense for so great a loss. From these honest witnesses it goes to a jury
of laymen, and those usually picked out of purpose, men of more law then
conscience; who, knowing that the Judge must of necessity give sentence
according to their verdit, instead of examining the cause, cry, ^am nostra res
agitur, it is this man's cause to day, it may be ours tomorrow; let us take heed
how these blackcoates get the day of us; and so never making more enquiry
either into the nature of the evidence given by the Judges, or the quality of
the witnesses brought in to prove their evidence, cry with one consent, Billa
vera, all is true that is alleged against the Minister; and, which is not the
least of evils, when he is thus doubly forsworn out of his right, yet he
must undergo the censure of a troublesome factious fellow, which would not
rest contented with what his predecessors enjoyed before him.

Never any age wherein men were more forward to call upon their Ministers for
the performance of their duties, never any wherein they were more subject to
censure them upon the least omission, never less regard had either of their
places or persons, men never envying the happiness and prosperity of any other
profession, so they can keep the Ministers of God poor enough. For evident
proof whereof, take into your considerations another particular.

A Minister holding two benefi^es (carefully providing to have them both
served, and paying for these ordinarily or extraordinarily toward the necessary
affairs of the King and Kingdom, and giving more to the releese of the poor
then it may be his whole Parish, or the best Justice in the Country about him)
this is held a great impiety, a roaring sin of these days: and yet in the
mean time, for a layman to hold four, five, six, or eight spiritual
livings, the least of them (it may be) worth both the others; and out of all
these ^ardly allowing so much as would sufficiently (...) an able Minister, nor
yet paying any thing toward the necessary affairs of the King or Kingdom, is
by no man maligned or envied.

True it is, that to cloak all this impiety it is pretended that
conditionally every Minister would be content with one living, and every Church
and Chapel might be provided of an able preaching Minister, they could wish
that there might be a competency allotted out of all livings, impropriations,
and other, for the better and sufficient maintenance of Ministers therein. A
fair cloak I must confess, if the cloth were answerable to the color; but
quadam videntur and non sunt, all is not gold that glistereth. Give you me
leave therefore a little to examine this competency, and to ask the question;

1. Of what nature it should be: whether they will provide for all Ministers
portions alike, equal or unequal. If to all equal, then would they do wrong
to God and his Ministers, who, as he bestows upon some greater gifts, will
have them served and rewarded with a double 1. Tim. 5. 17.
portion; according to that of the Apostle, He that rules well is worthy of
double honor etc. if they say their portion shall be unequal and answerable
to men's deserts, then in the second place give me leave to ask, By whom
shall these portions be proportioned? by whom shall men's gifts be judged? by
whom shall these portions be conferred and bestowed? do we not think that
a Brother, a Son, a Kinsman, a Friend, a velvet Gown, a Coach and all other
necessary furniture, nay three or four hundred pieces will be are as great a
stroke, and work as feelingly in the bestowing a pension of an hundred pounds
per annum certain without further charge, as now in bestowing a living of that
value and rate uncertain. If Christ had foretold, that in the latter days
chari^ie should abound, and iniquity grow cold, there might have been some
hope that with the change of the form the evil might have been avoided* but
Christ having told the contrary, it is against hope to expect it.

But to go on a little further; why should any man go about to prescribe God
his allowance, when God himself has allotted and proportioned it' Is not this
for men to make themselves wiser then God? Or is it likely that they who now
make no conscience of breaking Gods law in taking from him and his what he has
allotted and given, will make any conscience to change their own laws to
lessen, or wholly take from God and his Church what they themselves shall allow?

God has given and allotted us the tenth: the tenth we challenge as Gods and
our own proper due, which no man can detain without sacrilege: let them give
us that, as God has given it, and I dare say the Church will not only
carefully provide for every Parish an able and sufficient preaching Minister,
but we shall all rest our selves satisfied with one cure of souls: yea let us
have our tenths duly and truly paid as God commanded, and as we have prooved
due; so far shall they find us from covetousnes, that we shall be willing
to resign up all our temporalties (the royalties and dignities of the Church
only excepted:) and yet we dare maintain that the Church has as good right
unto them, as any temporal Lord has to his temporal possessions, though he
can claim them from the donation of Brutus (if any such were) first King of
great Britain.

But for men to talk of a competencie to have every Parish provided of a
sufficient preaching Minister, and every Minister content with one cure of
souls, and yet they to keep any part or portion of the tenth in their own
use and possession, is an evident sign that how soever this plea of competency
bear the show of religion (and I am persuaded many wish and desire it out of a
good heart) yet it is a plain sleight of the Devil for the utter overthrow of
all piety and religion by bringing into the Church an equality, by equality to
bring in poverty; from whence as follows necessarily a contempt of the persons
and calling of Gods Ministers, so no less a contempt of their doctrine,
according to that of Saint Bernard, Cujus persona despicitur, ejus doctrina
contemnitur.

And that I may speak no more then the truth, I desire men to consider of the
present respect given, and uncivil dealing by men of all sorts to and with the
Clergy of England; as their supercilious looks, their scornful and
opprobrious terms and titles, their pilling and polling, their posting of us
from wall to kennill, from the hall to the parlour, from session to assise,
with twenty other such disgraceful abuses; the base estimation of our callings
and labors, thinking no men so easily come to their learning and living as the
Minister, no m^ns pains less then the Ministers; equalling, nay preferring
of^entimes their Clarke, Horskeeper, or Hun^sma^ before their Chaplain and
Pastor; thinking twenty pounds per annum with a lease in reversion for the
benefit of wife and children to be but a reasonable allowance for the one;
whilst bare twenty pounds per annum without either live^y or lease in
reversion is held a Lordly allowance for the Minister. An evident demonstration
of the large competency we should have, if we should leave Gods claim and our
right of ^nheritance in tenth, to come to man's allowance.

I ^enie not, b^t some men will use some Prophet^ kindly* this man, because he
is a good fellow and good compame; another, because h^ is well bo^ne and well
friended, such an one as is better able by his pu^se and friends to bestead his
neighbors, then they him. Others, more dainty eared then ten^er conscioned,
are all for ^o^gue and ^loquence; other^, discon^^^ted with that little glory
and m^intenance the Church has yet left, if they ^^n meet with a discontented
Separatist, do h^nour him like a S. Paul, or S. Augustin^: and indeed, as
these time, go, the more fact^ous, the more in some men's books. But to find
a m^n that loves, respects, and ent^^tain ^s a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet; this is a task for which a m^n had need, with Diogen^^, to use a
l^ntho^n at noone day. So that as one h^th w^tt^ly defined a Papist, to be such
an one as loves his Neighbor, and cates his God; another a Puritan, to be
such an one as loves God, but hates his Neighbor: so may I no les^e truly
define a common Profes^our of these times, to be such an one as loves
preaching, but hates the Preacher. Never more calling upon them for Se^mons at
all hands, never les^e respect had unto their persons or maintenance; dealing
with the Ministers, as Pharaoh with the Israelites, doubling our task, but
lessening our straw; or giving us by their good wills nothing but straw for all
our great pain and perilous labors.

Neither are these all the evils that attend the Clergy of these times, but
there be two particulars more which much help to increase their miseries.

The first is the consideration of the reasons alleged why they are not so
religiously devoted and affected toward Gods house and Ministers as formerly;
namely, for fear least we should grow rich and proud, and trample upon the
Laity, as in times of Popery; or least if they should be curious in decking
Gods house, pious in maintaining and reverencing his Ministers, they should
make way to bring in Popery and superstition.

For answer, I deny not but the Clergy in times of Popery were too covetous,
too proud, too superstitious; but because they then fleeced the Laity, must
the Laity now needs fl^^^^ the Clergy? because the Pope in his pride
trampled on the neck of Kings, must every ordinary person, who has but a
little more wealth or honor then his neighbors, trample on the heads of our
greatest Clergy? because they were too curious and superstitious, must we needs
be careless and irreligious? It stands not with our profession, much less
with our religion. And as for bringing in of Popery by this means, it is so
little to be feared, that I dare say, the neglect of these forenamed
particulars, is and has been the cause to hold up the head of Popery so much
in these Kingdoms: it being a principle, not only in Religion, but Nature,
that where there is a neglect of Gods house, a contempt of his Ministers,
either in withholding that honor and maintenance, or withdrawing that respect
and countenance which is due unto them, the profession of religion in such
persons c^^ never be sound or sincere.

The second evil aggravating the misery of the Church and Churchmen, is the
confideration of the persons who have been and are so injurious unto them, who
are not only Laymen, FILII ALIENI, Ammon and Amaleck, the Philistines, and
those of Tire, who take the houses of God into possession, whose sole and
greatest part of patrimony consists of the revenues of the Church: (for it is
no wonder that those malign us, seeing that as a th^ese or murderer hates none
so much as the persons and friends of them whom they have robbed or murdered;
so it is impossible that these men should look upon the thin cheeks, bare
clothing, and base respect of Gods Ministers, and compare them with their own
well furnished tables, rich and gorgeous attire, great estimation and account,
and all this arising out of the Ministers maintenance, but that, their own
consciences accusing them with theft and murthe^, the persons of Churchmen of
all other should be most hateful unto them:) these, I say, are not only of
our backe-friends, but Perditio ^ua ex teo Israel, there are d^ nobis, such who
have made an entrance into sacred orders, and so are, or at least ought to be
of us, to maintain the honor, credit; rites and privileges of God in his
Church against the enemies and adversaries thereof; yet fear not both by pen
and preaching publickely and privately to seek the ruin, destruction, and
overthrow of the same. I know generally, and for the most part these are only
your fratres sportulantes, your Friar mendicants, stipendary Preache^s,
together with your rambling crew of wandering Levites; who though they seem to
hate nothing more then a Bishop, and double benefice, yet would they willingly
(...), be busy Superintendents over all the Parishes in a Country. Whose
maintenance arises as they can raise faction; and whose faction increases by
setting the Pastor and the Parish together by the ears; and no better way and
means for these purposes, then to equal or prefer their private meetings
and places thereof, with or before the public meetings of Gods Church;
denying the payment of tithes to be due jure divino, leaving their maintenance
to every man's particular bounty, and goring the sides of their fellow
Ministers by false and scandalous accusations and aspersions; by which means
they have so scrued themselves into the affections of the Laiti^ (who had
rather give twelve-pence of bounti^ to a stranger, then two pe^ce of duty to
their own Pastor) that no men live so richly, none more contentedly; whilst
in the mean time, the Parsons and Vicars live no where in more disgrace, in no
places so unquletly and discontentedly, as where such kind of teachers live,
and are frequent. But if these men did rightly understand what belonged to ^
cure of souls, nay if they preferred not their own glory before Gods, and the
filling of their own purses before the feeding of men's souls, making their
gain their godliness; it is impossible that they should write, preach, and
do so opposite, not only to the text of Gods word, but the testimoni^ of their
own consciences, which cannot but convince them either of wilful ignorance,
or obstinate er^or, in running such irregular and irreligious courses. Neither
are these only our back friends (who I may truly say are amongst us, but not
of us) but there are (the greater our misery) ex nostris, such who know the
Law, that they who do such things are worthy of death; more, who are placed in
high place in the Church, for the protecting of it, and the rites thereof, and
to punish those that do contrary; yet these men, either do^ the same things,
or at least are patrons, and savourors of them that do them. So that the
Church, or God for his Church may justly take up that complaint of the Prophet,
It is not mine enemy that does me this wrong, but my familiar friend that
eats at my table, yea whose table I have filled with a full hand; he has lift
up his he^le, tongue, hand, and all against me.

But when I speak in these general terms I would not be thought to be like
Eliah, that I only were left a friend to Gods house and his inheritance; nay
there are (the Lord be bles^ed for it) many thousands in the Church of England
who have not bowed their knees to Baal, who have not yet put to their hands for
the pulling down of Gods Sanctuary, the robbing God of his tithes, or abusing
his Ministers. And here I may not forget that mirror of piety in this kind,
I mean K. James our late Sovereign, ever of blessed memory; who for his zeal
to Gods house, his care for the advancement and increase of true religion, and
for his love to Gods Ministers, may well be called another Solomon: witness his
care in his first settling, to settle religion as the foundation of his other
buildings, and to establish to this end all things in order and peace in the
Church, with his constant course for the maintenance and increase of the same:
witness his forwardnes, not only to provoke others by command, but by
example, by his own purse and bounty to repair Churches in diverse parts of
this Kingdom, to restore and endow, yea to raise Bishopprickes and other
maintenances for the Clergi^, both in Scotland and other parts of his
dominions: witnes^e his love in restoring Bishops and others to their ancient
privileges and dignities, to be not only a sacrts, but secretioribus
consil^is, of his sacred, but most secret and private counsels: witness his
readiness and forwardness of all hands to do the Church any good; even to
the restoring of her right in tithes. In all which particulars had the hearts
of his Subjects been upright with God and him, as were Solomon's in the
dedication of the Temple; I doubt not, but as in other things, so in this I may
truly call him another Solomon. Neither are our hopes any whit lessened in his
Kingly Son Royal King Charles our most gracioas Sovereign, who is the
lively image of his Royal Father for interior virtues and endowments of soul
and mind, especially those which have been the greatest glory of Christian
Kings, and wherein his Royal Father placed his highest pitch of content and
happiness, to be the Defender of the Christian faith, a Nurse of Gods Church,
a Patron and Protector of his worship, with all the places, persons, and rices
thereunto appertaming and belonging. To there two tall Cedars of the worlds
Libanus may we add many strong and goodly Oaks of our English Basan, as many a
I^ho^ada, Obediah, Centurion, Reverend Bishops, Right Honorable Counselors,
with other Nobles of high rank and degree, truly borne Gentry, who neither
leaning to su^^^st^^^on o^ t^^ right hand, nor to faction on the left h^nd, but
wa^king up rightly with their God ^n truth and sincerit^^ of true religion,
labo^^ to t^sti^ie the sa^e by their b^uary to Gods house, and resp^ct to ^is
M^n st^r^* and I wo^ld these were not ^^^rmed your stat^* P^^^^stan's, your
tempo^iz^ng professors, nay friends and ^betters of P^p^ry and su^^^^t^^ion:
yea Ces^rea (...) a ^ornel^u^* ^o^pa a Simon, ^p^^s^s a Priscilla, etc. ^a^^
G^^^t^^n^ are their ^^ many p^r^s of this kingdom, who for the good of Gods
house and ^is Minist^^^ would w^ll^^gly pl^ck^ ^ut their own eyes; and
howsoever the world accounts of them, yet I do^b^ not ba^ at the general d^y
of account^ these shall pass freely with a Scio and Place^ for me^ t^^ely w^^e
and r^^igious, when their sco^ners shall be stayed with a Nes^i^ and a No^
placet, as being unworthy of any degree or place in the Kingdom of heaven.
Thus I say there are some of all ranks, orders, and degrees, who like Joseph
and Jacob bring Gods blessing, and with Moses in the gap withhold Gods hand
from his fierce judgment: who (maugre all the spite and malice of Satan and
his abettors, the enemies of God and his inheritance) are and will be liberal
toward the maintenance of his house, respectfull of his Ministers, willingly
and liberally honoring them both with maintenance and countenance. But alas
these are but as a gathering after vintage, and a gleaning after harvest, if
you come to Voxpopuli, the general cry of the general number, who either can
or will cry no other song then that of the Caldeans at the sacking of
Jerusalem, Down with Churches, away with tithes, let us trample both them and
their Priests down to the ground.

All which duly considered, as it gives all true hearted Christians just cause
to lament and bewail the wretched and miserable estate and condition of men in
these times; so gives it us no less cause to fear, that God has some
extraordinary plague or other in store for us, which without repentance will
speedily and suddenly fall upon us; yea Gods judgments, as a just punishment of
this sin, are already fallen upon us. And that it may appear to others* that
this fear is not causeless, this assertion truthlesse, let us take into our
consideration these three texts of Scripture: the first is that of Deuteronomy. 28.
15. 16. 17. etc.

From whence I make this inference, that if he which keeps not all Gods
Commandments shall be obnoxious and liable to all these curses (many of them
fitly squaring with the evils of these times;) why should not the committing
of that sin which at once breaks seven of the ten Commandments? For what
man can truly say he loves, fears, or trusts in God, when he regards not his
house, nor his Ministers; but robbs both him and them of that maintenance which
he has reserved to himself for that purpose? or how can God be worshipped
with holy worship* how can his Sabbaths be duly and holily kept; how can we be
said to honor our parents, when our spiritual Fathers are not only
contemned, but robbed of those things which God has alloted for their better
maintenance? and lastly, if to covet not only Gods, but the Ministers house,
wife, maintenance etc. to rob God of his tithes* and that to the grinding of
his Ambassadors faces* be not a breach of the 6, 8, and 10 commandment,
impossible it is that they should be broken* I say, all these considered, why
may not this sin which thus at once violates 7 of the 10, be the very cause,
or at least one of the principal causes of all the evils that are lately
fallen upon us?

But because general threats take small place in remooving particular and
accustomed sins, in the next place view and consider HAG. 1. and MALACH. 3.
the one concerns Gods house, the other his tithes, both his Ministers respect
and maintenance; where if we compare the sins and punishments there
mentioned for those sins, with these times, we shall find them in many
points fitly to answer one another.

For first for the sins, was there ever any age wherein men might more truly
be said to dwell in seiled houses, and Gods house ly wast; whena^ the houses of
every ordinary Esquire, for glory without and rich and costly furniture within,
is answerable to the ancient mansions of Nobles, yea palaces of Kings, whilst
Gods house was never less glorious without, never more poor and bare within?
Or was there ever any age wherein men might more justly be accused for robbing
God of his tithes and offerings, then this of ours; who rob him not only of
superstuities, but of his very tithes of inheritance; allowing in many places
hardly a tenth, nay not a twentieth part even of that which he has wholly
reserved for him and his?

And for the punishments, they are no less answerable: let ^e give you a bill
of so^e particulars: and! ^^^in, not to ascend higher, then since the time that
that mystery of iniquity the History of tith^s was first revealed to the
world, since which time the sin of sacrilege has turned Catholik-christian,
a warrantable sin, if not a commendable virtue* but yet not impune* for was
there ever any age wherein has been no^ed more frequent exportations of
English commodities, especially of the fruits and increase of the earth, but
with less accrument and advantage either to the exporters, or to the kingdom?
and has not experience taught us of late times, that our barnes some yeare^,
have scarce ever been fuller of straw, and yet at the very self same time our
garners seldom emp^ier of corn? have not our fields some times laughed and
sung as it were with a promising harvest, and yet our sh^af^s when they came to
undergo^ the threshers flayle, have wept as it were and shrunk away, not
fearing so much the blow of Tribulation, as conscious to themselves of their
own inability to satisfy the husbandmans labor and expectation? And why may
not this (to pass all others) be a very pithy and satisfying reason, viz, God
seeing men hug and fat themselves in their own conceits with hopes and
expectations of great increase, but like the hog under the tree never looking
up to the Author of their welfare, grudging God a cut of his own loaf* and
basely denying, as their man^er is, the repaime^t of a tenth for the frc^
donation of an hundred fold; why I say might not this be ^ just inducement to
Almighty God to blow upon their harvest, and so sometimes frustrate their
greatest expectations? And again, was there ever any age, wherein the most
pregnant men have more beat their brains by new projects and devises, to fill
both the public treasury and their own private purses, but with less
success and honor to their enterprises? so that it may truly be said as it is
in HAGG. 1. 6. They have so^^n much and brought in little; eaten, but not had
enough* drunken yet not b^^^^ satisfied; they have fit as it were upon addle
eggs, taken up their Inn at the Labor in vai^^* their wages and earning^
have been trussed up in a broken bag.

To add to these, has not the Turk, and D^nkirk, and other enemies (as our
haven-Townes too well know by experience) much destroyed and endamaged us
abroad? and at home have not our informers, projectors, monopolists, that
hellish brood of state-horsleatches, sucked out almost the very hearts of the
subjects purses* if not of the King^ treasury? has not the Lord thundered
diverse (...) from heaven, shot out his arrows of wrath and indigna^^^^, the
arrow I mean that flies by night, and devoureth thousand^ at noon^ day, and
no doubt for our reformation and a^endment as well of this crying sin of
sacrilege, as of any other gross enormities whatsoever? Is not our kingdom
at this present involved and perplexed with many perilous and hazardous
engagements, the success whereof in likelihood depends upon the reformation as
well of this as of any our other intolerable impieties? And lastly, how ever
dulc^ b^llum inexp^rtis, war was the votes and desires of many men during the
times of quietness and peace; yet upon this little experience we have had of
late, we quickly perceive how great a devourer war is both of the public
and private stock; and consequently a punishment upon a kingdom, though never
so justly and necessarily ^ndertaken. To these might be added many more; but I
had rather d^ale ^y instances in this kind by weight then number.

Neither will* it serve for excuse to say that the defacing of Gods house and
the al^^nation of his tithes to the dis^onour of God, and the prejudice of his
Ministers, was an act of our forefathers done many years since, and it is not
like that God after so long a time will punish the sins of the fathers upon
the children: or if it were a sin, it was done by the exemplary practice of
the Church, who suffered them to be so al^enated: that our Ministers are not so
many as were amongst the Jews, and those not so good in these times as to
deserve so great a portion for their maintenance as the tenth of the whole land
and kingdom.

For to answer each in a word; For the first, I say it will not excuse the
edging of the childrens teeth that their fathers have eaten sour grapes; and
how soever God does not always punish the sins of the fathers in and upon the
children* (...) if the children live and continue in their fathers sinne^,
wickedly to possess that which their fathers wickedly got, in the punishment
of the child the fathers sins are not forgotten, though it be to a fourth
generation.

Neither in the second place can the Churches practice in times past be any
warrant or excuse for the practice of these times: for if they speak of the
first alienation in the times of the Schoolmen, though they were al^enated from
the true use of parochial right, yet not altogether from the use of the
Church; Mon^st^^ies, whether of Monks, Friars or Nun^, whether regulars or
seculars, being accounted the greatest and principal amongst Churchmen in
those times.

Again, how weak a reasoning is this, to reason from the corrupted times of
the Church, the days of cove tousnes and ignorance, when Popery and
superstition were at their height, to maintain the self same practice in
these days, these glorious days of the glorious light of the Gospel? We hate
to follow them in all other doctrine and practices, why should we go^ beyond
them in this?

If they speak of the times of the dissolution in the Reign of King Henry the
eighth, I answer more then what I have said in this particular before; that I
never heard any understanding man either Protestant or Papist, though he can be
content to hold tithes by virtue of the practice of the Church in those times,
but he accounted of the taking away of the tithes as a thing in its own nature
wicked, a practice neither warrantable by the rules either of religion or
reason. And howsoever the Ministers of these times are not so many as were the
Levites for proportion with the rest of the people, and these not all so good
as were to be desired, yet God who demands the tenth, and from whom we
receive the whole, is no changeling, but always one and the same both to us
and them: or if there be any odds, it is on our part, in that what we want in
number we have double in the excellency of our ministry and ministerial
function with the glad tidings we bring men: and let them make the worst of us
they can, they cannot make us worse then were the Priests and Levites in the
days of Malachi and of our Savior Christ, yea I dare say there are now in
these kingdoms more and more able men for the work of the ministry, and more
conscionable for the performing their duties, then ever were since the first
settling of the Gospel in these parts. And lastly, for the length of time since
the first alienation of them, whether they understand it of the time of
Alexander H^les, or the days of King Henry the eiphth, I answer, Nullum ^e^
pus occurrit Reg^, time will not prescribe the title of an earthly King, and
shall it stand good against the right and inheritance of the King of heaven?
Secondly, God has not altogether deferred to punish us in all these times, but
has sent amongst us many, and those extraordinary punishments, though we have
slightly regarded them, or at least not accounted them as punishments for
these sins principally amongst others. But say God had not hitherto, yet now
he has: and it is not usual wi^h God to punish sin always at the first,
but only in his dearest children: as for obstinate sinners, he lets them go on
in their sins till they come to their full height, that so he may punish them
with more severity. And if this sin of sacrilege were at the height in any
age, Church, or Kingdom, we may truly say these are the times, in that,
notwithstanding the glorious light of the Gospel has shined so many years
together amongst us, notwithstanding the glorious example of a religious King,
the great number of able Ministers, and the daily endeavor of these Ministers
(yea of Laymen themselves, the more their S^ Hen. Spilman. S^. James Sempill.
honor) both by preaching and writing to withdraw men from this sin, by
drawing them to give God his due both in his house and inheritance; yet men
grow worse and worse, their hearts in this sin more and more hardened; yea so
impudent and brazen faced are men grown, that they dare maintain it not only
by private practice, but public pen, shouldering God and his servants out of
their own, either by plain force of arms, or tricks of playing
legerdemaine. All which considered gives us just cause to believe that this
sin is not only one chief cause of the present evils in and of these times,
but that God has some other great plague to punish us withal, without our
speedy and hearty repentance; that God should take from us the light of his
Gospel, and send us a famine of his word as he has of other his blessings, the
next step to the utter destruction both of souls and bodies: from which evil
the Lord for his mercies sake long keep and defend us! And that we may the
better hope and expect his mercy therein, let us every one in his particular
rank, order, quality, and condition, labor for the good of Gods house, and
give unto his Ministers that countenance and maintenance he has given them,
and requires on their behalf at our hands toward them.

And first, right honorable Judges the pillars both of Church and common
wealth, let me entreat you in the name of God and his Church, that as your
laws and judgments flow from the seas of Gods laws and statutes, so they may
return thither again in streams, to the maintenance of the same with all the
parts and persons belonging thereunto; that you would be pleased in your
circuit to take a view of the ruins and decays of Gods house, the place
where his honor dwells; and amongst other particulars of your charge, help
forward men's backward devotion, by teaching them the dues, and bewailing the
ruins of the same.

And seeing that the sin of sacrilege is grown to that height, that men
fear not by perjury to hazard their own souls for the committing of it, that
you would be pleased to suppress the great number of prohibitions granted in
that case, the cause of this evil to the damning of many a soul; and that you
would consider in the case of prohibitions and suits of this kind, the nature,
quality, condition, both of witnesses and jurors, enforming them not only of
the truth of the evidence, but of the nature of the finne both of sacrilege
and perj^ry with the judgments of God necessarily following upon the same.

And seeing we that are God; Ministers do not withdraw our selves from the
secular yoke and power, but acknowledge our selves to be bound in all obedience
to our civil Magistrates, both King as supreme, and his Ministers under him;
that you would be pleased to inform all men of the quality and condition of
our persons and places, to teach them the bounds and limits of their power,
that so we may not be made a daily pray to the insulting humor of every man in
inferior place and office.

And as I have been bold to make this request to your Lordships, so give me
leave to second the same to all, that every one in his several rank and
degree endeavor the reformation of these sins and abuses both in themselves
and in others. And to this end, let us not look so often on our stately built
houses, so well beautified without, and so well furnished within, and seeing
Gods house having neither glory without, nor beauty within (the Gospel
excep^ed;) but lying ruinated and in the dust; let us call to mind what a
sin it is for us to dwell in our seiled houses, and Gods house lie wast; and
so to our several qualities and abilities cast some few mi^es into the
treasury of the Sanctuary for their repair and maintenance. So often as you
look upon your rich tapestry carpets, pure and fine linen, rich and well
furnished cubboards of plate of all sorts and ^ashions, think it a shame for
you to be thus richly and abundantly stored, and Gods house and ^abl^ in the
mean time so basely and contemptibly provided; and spar^ something out of your
superfluiti to Gods honor for the beautifying of the same. So often as you
walk into your well grown fields abounding with all sorts of grain and other
things necessary for your corporal sustenance, your garners full abounding
with all manner of store, your sheep and oxen bringing sor^h thousands and ten
thousands in your pastures, your sons growing up like young plants, your
daughters like polished corner-stones, your selves and servants and cattle
healthful and strong to labor for the daily increase of your states; call to
mind from whom (namely God alone) you receive all these blessings and
abundance; and think it a shame to detain from him and his that small portion
of tenth that he has reserved for himself and his Ministers for the better
feeding and nourishing of your souls. And that the Merchant and Tradesman may
not think himself exempted from this duty, because his gains are not so
easily known and descryed; so often as he viewes his ship^ come safe from sea,
full richly stowed with all manner of choice and time-serving commodities,
filling his warehouse and returning to his coffers an hundred fold for his
outsent adventures; so often as he beholds his shop thro^ging with chapmen
for the venting of those his far fe^cht or home made commodities, so greatly
enriching* his estate that he is able yearly to add house unto house, land
unto land, lordship unto lordship, till he know no end of his wealth; rising,
as in estate so in honor, from the lowest to the highest rank and degree for
the place wherein he lives: let him seriously call to mind from whom he
receives all these blessings, and think it a shame, yea a sin to receive all
this from the hands of God daily, and in the mean time to return him thanks
with a two penny dole at Easter, or if he stretch himself to a ten shillings
gift (for due he will acknowledge none) to hold it a work of supererogation,
for which God and his Minister are bound unto him all the year after in all
things to be at his command, whilst in the mean time his poorest tenant in
the country, who sits upon rackt rents, and has no more besides his handy
labor but a Cow, Goose, and Sow for the maintenance of himself and family,
shall return God by way of thankefulnes double his proportion, and bless God
that he has it to render him by the hands of his Ministers.

And howsoever we your poor Ministers are but men subject to the same
infirmities with your selves (yea, as Saint Chrysostom affirms, (...)
Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in cap. 1. Tit.
quan^o celsior dignitas, tanto Sacerdotis majora sunt pericula) who in regard
of the excellency of our callings, and opposition of Satan against us in the
same, are subject to more dangers then others, and so our slips and falls more
and more notorious then of those in other callings; yet remember we are Regale
Sacerdotium, we are Gods Ambassadors, beseeching you in Christ his stead,
representing his person; and so afford unto^u^ that due honor that our places
and callings require; though not for our own, yet for his sake that sent us:
and in a word to conclude all with that saying of holy Nazianzene; O ye
sheep, take not upon you to prescribe rules and laws of maintenance to your
sheapheardes; neither incroach upon their privileges and possessions; let it
suffice you that you are rightly fed; take not upon you to judge your judges,
nor give laws, to your lawgivers; remembering always that not you nor we our
selves, but God has made u^ the Pastors of your souls: or to use the Lords
own ^li 20. 23.
words HAG. 1. 8. Go up to the mountain and bring wood, and build the house,
and I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorifyed^ and MALACH. 3. 10. 11.
12. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be mea^e in my
house, and prove me now herewith, if I will not open you ^^e windows of
heaven, and power you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to
receive it; And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not
destroy the fruit of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her fruit
before her time in the fields of the Lord of hosts: And all nations shall call
you blessed; for you shall be a delightsome land, says the Lord of hosts. Of
which blessings that we may be partakers, he grant us to do what he
commands, even the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to whom be glory and
honor from generation to generation.

FINIS.
A brief Prescript to the Appendix.
AFter this discourse had lain five years by me, and had taken it is last
farewell of me for the Press, and was at the instant of printing, there came to
my hands a manuscript of an unknown Author, written by way of answer to Doct.
CARLTON, St. HENRY SPILMAN, M. ROBERTS, and others, the which when I had read
over I found it to be a mere invective, written with the pen of some malicious
Martin Mar-prelate, containing as many scurrilous raylings as pages, more lies
then leafes; and so unworthy of answer. Yet being certified by the friend that
brought it, that it passed from hand to hand amongst many of our Gentry in
these Northern parts, and that with so great approbation, that some of them
were resolved to have it printed at Amsterdam, the most proper place to bring
forth such a birth; I thought it would not be altogether unnecessarie, to add
this brief answer by way of Appendix to my former discourse, that so if it
came to any of these Gentlemen's hands (seeing both the weakness and the
wickedness of their so much admired and adored Idol) they might reform their
error, and embrace the truth. The sum of which discourse, I have drawn into
these five following heads; the residue being, not worth the answering, or
already answered in the former part of this Book

ARGVMENTVM I.
MOses in the book of Genesis sets down no Law of Priesthood, or tithing of
force with Gods people in those days; therefore the instances of Melchisedeck
and Jacob, brought to prove the divine right of tithes, prove nothing in this
question, that they were of general and necessary use in those times.

First, we say that the Church of God was then contained Respon. 1.
in one, or a very few families; so that there was no necessity of a general
Law, either of Priesthood or tithes: the eldest in the family being as a
Priest to the rest.

Secondly, God taught not his Patriarchs lege scripta, as 2
he did his Church afterward; but specials instinctis, by special revelation
and instinct, which to them was instar legis supra legem, as sure and strongly
binding as any written law: God himself being their Priest, revealing himself
and his will by dreams and visions; and immediately blessing his Church, as
after he did by his Priests and Prophets, Vrim and Thummim under the Laws and
by his Apostles, Evangelists, and Pastors now under the Gospel.

Thirdly, he that has but half an eye may perceive 3
that Moses in his book of Genesis does not write an exact continued story of
all things, as he does in his other books, but only so much as may show the
continued success of Gods Church from family to family, until such time as
God established a National church visible to the eye of the world, together
with some other occurrences, as were worthy the knowledge of Gods Saints,
either to be imitated or avoided in all succeeding ages: so that if there had
been mention made of tithes paid but once in that story, it had been sufficient
premises to have drawn a necessary conclusion for the general practice of
those times. But to have two such remarkable examples; the one of Abraham the
father of the faithful (the Jews not only after the flesh, but after the
spirit, the Church Evangelicall) paying tithes not to a Legal Priest, but to
Melchisedeck, the Typical Priest of the New Testament; the other of Jacob (the
head of Isreal's family, and the Jewish Church after the flesh, in whose family
the visible National church of the Jews was first founded and established)
vowing the tenth of his estate to God, the then immediate Priest of his Church.
These two instances, I say, of Abraham and Jacob rendering to God by way of
thankfulness for his blessings, not an eighth, ninth, eleventh, or twelfth,
but in a quota of tenth (the same quota being established afterward by God so
soon as ever he settled a Church and Priesthood) are sufficient to enforce the
general practice, not only for those times, but for all succeding times, so
long as God should continue a Church or Priesthood, or at least till he should
prescribe some new law to the contrary.

But against these instances he makes many exceptions. First, against the
practice of Melchisedeck he alleges, Object.
that this Melchisedeck was Christ himself, appearing in the form and shape
of a man, and blessing Abraham.

First, both David and Paul cross this assertion, who Solut. 1.
make Melchisedeck a type of Christ, PSALM. 110. and HEB. 7. unless we will
make Christ a type of himself.

Secondly, say we should grant this; what would then Solut. 2.
follow, but that Christ (being the everlasting Bishop of our souls, the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever; upon whose Priesthood all other Priesthoods
have sole dependence; of whom all other Priests are either types, or to whom
they are substitutes) blessing Abraham, and receiveing tithes in lieu thereof,
in the person, office, and order of Priesthood, and that before the Law
established, must needs infer the payment of tithes in their quota to Christ
and his Priests throughout all generations? Yea, to have a Priest no sooner
named in the book of God, but tithes to him paid, does so necessarily conjoyne
them, that none but he that will make himself a professed enemy to Christ and
his Priests can disjoyne them.

But we read that the Egyptians had Priests who received Object.
no tithes; therefore Priests and tithes are not relata so necessarily
conjoined.

How prooves he this assertion? We find mention only of their lands, and
allowance made by the King in the time of famine; therefore they had no tithes.
Martin Mar-prelate to a hair.

Why should not Moses his mentioning tithes paid by Solut.
Abraham and vowed by Jacob, as well prove the affirmative for the practice of
Gods Church and people for the payment of Tithes? or what has Baal and his
service to do with God and his service? I have read that the heathen have been
Apes to Gods people, for the manner of divine worship, but never that the
Saints were to be regulated by the heathen. But to shape an answer to the
objection, why may not I say that the King of Egypt receiving a fifth part of
all increase of his land, included in that fifth the Priests tenth; maintaining
them in the time of dearth out of his own store? By which means he did not
only take from the Priests the envy of the people, but maintained them and
theirs better then otherwise their lands and tithes would have done. Sure I am
that many a Minister in these days who has a competent living in time of
plenty, would be glad the King would take the like care for him in time of
scarcity: all that he can say against me is but a non est scriptum, Moses
writes not so much: howsoever sure I am there is a scriptum est, first against
his sacrilege; for when the King bought all the land of his people, he bought
not the Priests land: secondly against his contributary competency; for the
Egyptian Priests lived not of the contribution of the people, but had lands of
their own, and when those lands were not able to relieve them, the King left
them not to the mercy of the people, but maintained them out of his own store.

Against the practice of Jacob he thus reasons; Vows Object.
are to be made only of things indifferent, such things as are in our power
to do, or not to do; but Jacob vowed tithes; therefore the payment of tithes
is not necessary but a thing indifferent.

First, I answer that the law of vowing or vows, was Solut.
made after Jacob, and therefore if there were any such clause in it, yet it
bound not Jacob: if he say the law made by Moses serves as a rule for all
ages, why then not the law of tithing, which he cannot deny, but under the Law
was a duty necessary? But to draw near to an answer, Vows, says the Author,
were to be made of things only indifferent, not necessary. I ask then whether
we may swear to the performance of things necessary; if we may, then we may
vow to perform whatsoever we may swear to perform: but we may swear the
performance of things necessary: ergo.

Obedience to Kings is a thing necessary, ROMANS 13. 1; but we may swear
obedience to Kings. To forsake the Devil and all his works is a duty
necessary; but we may not only vow this in baptism, but take the Sacrament
after to bind us to the performance of that vow: nay if we may not vow
things necessary, why did Jacob vow that the Lord should be his God ^ And
whereas vows are defined to be promissiones spontaneae voluntary promises and
actions, they are not so termed in relation to the substance and matter of the
things vowed, but to the persons vowing, and the law whereby no man is bound
necessarily to make a vow of any thing. But for the thing vowed, if it be a
thing in it is own nature lawful to be done, be it of things necessary or
indifferent, it must be performed; As for the instance of Iephta's, Readiness, and
the Israelites vows, the things vowed were unlawful and therefore prove
nothing to this question.

But tithes were Gods own before, as is alleged; then Object.
was it idleness in Jacob to vow them. And he confirms his assertion thus;
God forbad the children of Israel to vow their first borne, because they were
his own before.

First, I say as before, that a law made many years after, Solut.
binds not for the time past. Secondly, observe the wickedness of this man,
who rather then Jacobs practice shall be of force to prove the divine right of
tithes, will make Jacob to be both an idle and wicked companion, doing things
not only unnecessary, but unlawful. Thirdly, suppose God had made such a law
concerning the first borne; what is that to tithes, unless God had made the
like law for them? Fourthly, where does he find such a law, wherein God forbad
the Israelites to vow their first borne, because they were his? I read in the
last of Leviticus of such a law made concerning the firstlings of beasts, as
of oxen and sheep, but not of man or ought else; nay, in the same Chapter and
elsewhere, God gives express command for the sanctification of the first borne
of man, though not for the office of Priesthood, as before: because Levi was
now chosen to that office; yet to be at Gods disposal and command. And for the
lawfulness of vowing the first borne, it is evident in Annas vowing Samuel.
Lastly, in the said Chapter there is a law of tithing expressed both for matter
and manner, what and how they ought to be paid, and how to be redeemed. But
nothing either in that place, or any else impugnes the lawfulness of vowing
them to the Lord. And thus much for the first argument.

ARGVMENTUM 11.
THe distinction of Parishes was and is humane, and of humane constitution, not
divine; therefore tithes are only humane, and of humane constitution.

If I should deny his proposition, and say that all distinction Respons.
of Parishes was not, is not humane, and of humane constitution, I could more
easily prove my negative then he his affirmative: but the consequence is so
infirm, I may spare that labor. For tithes were not therefore given and paid,
because Parishes were divided; but Parishes were divided that tithes might in a
convenient and competent manner be conferred upon Gods Ministers according to
their merits, and the quantity, quality, and estate of the persons and places
committed to their charge. And for the truth of his conclusion, I may as well
reason thus; Set times of prayer, of preaching, and administering the Sacraments
are of humane constitution; therefore prayers, preaching, and the Sacraments
are humane. But I see the drift of this Gentleman; he would have both humane
and divine Law to bind all Gods Ministers strictly to their task of preaching,
etc. but the people at liberty what to give them for their pains, or at most,
bound only by man's law, which this Gentleman and those of his opinion hold
themselves bound to observe no longer then they shall like and approove of
their Ministers. And indeed this is one argument whereby he labors to
infringe the divine right of tithes.

God established no special law for the punishment of Object.
such as should detain tithes; therefore they were not moral. But he
forgeteth, that as God chose Levi Solut.
under the Law, and chooses all lawfully called Ministers under the Gospel, to
and for his special service, to teach, bless, and pray for his people, giving
them his own portion of tithes for their inheritance, accounting the honor
done to them as done to himself, the robbing them the robbing of himself; so
has he promised that he in a special manner will be their revenger: And it is
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; as the Jews did
often by experience too well know even for this very sin in special. Or if
this answer will not satisfy, I add further, that as Solon ordaining laws,
made none against the sin of Paricide, because he thought no man could be so
inhumanely cruel, as to commit it: so God (I speak with reverence to his
prescience and omniscience) thought no man to be so gracelesly unthankful, as
to deny a tenth to him from whom he received the whole; and therefore made no
law for the punishment of such oftenders.

ARGUMENT. 111.
THe third argument may thus be framed; Where there is an end of the work,
there the wages cease: but the work, in recompense whereof tithes were by God
given, is at an end: therefore tithes.

The minor they thus prove, Tithes were given for the service of the
Tabernacle; but the Tabernacle and service thereof are at an end; ergo. The
service of the Tabernacle for which God gave tithes, consisted in carrying the
Tabernacle, offering Sacrifices, with the performance of other ceremonial
rites and services; but all these are ceased; ergo.

For answer, though I might justly deny the first proposition, Resp.
that where the work is changed there must needs be a change of the wages (one
and the same wages being given for works of diverse kinds) yet I will not
insist thercupon, but will examine the Levites work with their wages, setting
down certain Theses as necessary conclusions, by way of answer to the former
objections.

First for wages; And here not to speak of the first fruits, freewill
offerings, and oblations etc. but only to insist upon the wages of tithes, we
read in the Scripture of a fourefold tithe in use amongst the Jews, and that
by God his special appointment.

The first was called the tithe of inheritance, or the tithe of all the
increase of the seed that the field brought forth every year, DEVT. 14 22.
together with a tenth of whatsoever passed under the rod, or what else they
possessed; This was separated in the field before they might bring ought into
the barn, or might intermedle with any thing for their own use.

The second is mentioned DEVT. 14. 23. and was called the second tithe, which
was a full tenth of the nine parts, remaining after the deduction of the first
tenth, and which was to be eaten before the Lord, in the place wherein he
should put his name, by the Owners, Priests and Levites, at the time of their
public Feasts and solemn assemblies: And both these were to be paid yearly;
neither might the people use any of the rest till such time as these two tithes
were separated from it; the latter whereof might be changed into money, verse.
25. but the former not.

The third was a third tenth payable only every third year, and so was called
the tithe of the third year, which was a tenth part, for quota, out of the
eight parts remaining, the two former tithes first deducted; which was laid up
within the gates of their several Cities for the releise of the Levite, the
stranger, fatherless, and widows within their gates; DEVT. 14. 28. 29.

The fourth was decima decim^, the tenth of a tenth, the tenth part of the
tithe of inheritance, offered by the Levites as an heave offering to the Lord
for the use of Aaron the Priest, and accounted to the Levites as the increase
of the threshing-sloor, and the increase of the winepresse: after which, and
not before, they might account the tithes their own, which they might lawfully
eat in every place with their houshoulds.

In which particular donation and constitution three things are remarkable:
First, that this heave offering of their tithes should be reckoned to the
Levites as though it were the corn of the threshing-sloore, and the fullness
of the winepresse. Secondly, they might not without sin rate any of their
tithes before they had paid out this tithe; intimating in my poor judgment
thus much unto the Levites, that when the time should come that the Priesthood
should cease from their Tribe, and themselves cease from the service of the
Tabernacle, enjoying inheritance of lands, and dressing and tilling them as the
rest of their brethren; yet then should not all Priesthood cease, nor tithes to
that Priesthood, nor yet might they exempt themselves from paying tithes,
because they were descended from Levi's loins; but they should pay a full
tenth of their come and wine, and other substance, as they formerly had done
out of their inheritance of tithes, unto whomsoever it should please the Lord
to confer the office of Priesthood; neither should they account ought their
own, until they had so paid their tithes. Thirdly, this tenth being paid, it
was lawful for them to eat the rest, not only at Jerusalem, but in any other
place where their household remained. So much for the Wages.

The Service of the Tabemacle was such as the Priests and Levites were to
perform, either about, within, or without the Tabernacle.

By their service about the Tabernacle, I understand the preparing of it for
carriage, and the bearing thereof. NVMB. 4.

Their service within the Tabernacle, was partly Ceremonial and Typical, and
partly Moral.

The Ceremonial was either of the Sanctum Sanctorum, the Tabernacle of
Witness, EXODUS 25. or Sanctum, the Tabernacle of the Congregation, EXODUS 26.
Now the service hereof was about the Candlesticks, Shewbread, LEVIT. 24. the
golden Altar of incense, EXODUS 30. the brazen Altar, EXODUS 27. appointed for
burnt. offerings, LEVIT. 1. 2. 3. peace offerings, LEVIT. 3. 1. 6.
sinne-offerings, LEVIT. 2. 4. 5. etc.

The Moral service within the Tabernacle, I call reading and expounding the
Law, the celebration of public prayers, blessing the people at the end of
solemn assemblies, etc. unto which I may add the power of the execution of
Ecclesiastical censures.

Their service without the Tabernacle was either Civil and Judicial,
consisting in the hearing and determining matters of controversy in all the
quarters of Israel, for the better maintenance of piety and religion; or else
Moral, as the teaching and instructing their children in their several Cities
in the knowledge of the several laws, the better to sit them for the service
of the Tabernacle, being Masters of the Schools; or else in reading and
expounding the Law, and celebrating of public prayers out of Jerusalem, remote
from the Tabernacle, either within their own Cities, whereunto the Jews
generally resorted on Sabbath days and at other times appointed (as some are
of opinion) or else within the several Cities of Judah and Israel, as may be
gathered by that charge so often repeated by the Lord, to have special respect
to the Levites within their gates.

And of these services, some were proper to the Priests, some to the Levites,
some common to both. The which who so desires to know, shall find them in the
books of Moses, and 1. CHRON. 9. 23.

From these premises these Conclusions will follow.

1. Tithes were not given to the Levites, as the sons of Levi, but because
God had selected that Tribe for the Numb. 18. 1. 2. 3. 6.
office of the Priesthood, and service of the Tabernacle, and as assistants to
the Priests in the celebration of Divine worship: So if I grant (which you
cannot deny) that Priests and Divine worship stand in force; then tithes must
necessarily be yielded as due. And I presume this is one chief reason, why the
name of Priest is so odious to the Laity, because it infers a necessity of
payment of tithes.

2. In the donation of tithes of inheritance, under the name of the Levites
family is included Aaron and his family, as may appear, not only because they
communicated with them in their tithes, but all the places of Scripture wherein
the grant is made, enforce no less, as will appear by comparing of places,
DEVT. 10. NV MR. 18. 20.

3. So far forth as the Priesthood and service thereof was Leviticall, and
tied to a certain Tribe, family, number, habit, form, and external order of
Legal service, yea in all respects wherein it was a Type of Christ, or had
ought to do with things Typical, So it is ceased, but not otherwise.

4. The tithes of inheritance were not given simply for the service of the
Altar, nor yet for carrying of the Tabernacle, by which service this Author and
all men generally understand the service of the Tabernacle. For first, the
service of the Altar was proper to the Priests only, NV MB. 13. Secondly, in
lieu of the service of the Altar the Priests had an other allowance, and that
by Gods special appointment, NV MB. 18. DEVT. 18. which allowance, for the
quota, is ceased together with that service. Thirdly, if tithes had been the
wages of the service of the Altar, then those only who had been employed in
this service had been partakers thereof; but not only those employed about and
within the Tabernacle and Temple, but those without might partake of tithes,
ergo etc. Neither could the carrying of the Tabernacle be the service; for the
Levites ceased from that service after fifty years of age, during the
continuance of the Tabernacle; and after the establishment of the Temple, this
service ceased, 1. CHRON. 23. and yet they partaked of tithes.

5. It remains that the service, for which tithes were properly given, was
reading the Law, expounding the Law, performing of public prayers, with the
rest of the Moral and Judicial service both within and without the Tabernacle.

Lastly, These services are the same for substance under the Gospel, as they
were under the Law, and as necessarily required of the Priests and Ministers
now under the Gospel, as they were under the Law of the Priests and Levites;
therefore, the service being the same by this Adversaries own confession, the
wages must needs be the same.

But against this he objects, and that with many bitter Object.
invectives against Doctor Carlton and the rest, That we never read that the
Levites read or expounded the Law: and he forces this exception by that of our
Savior, who told the Jews, that the Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses his
Chair; but the Scribes and Pharisees were not Levites.

Risum teneatis amici? is it possible that a man should Solut.
so peremptorily accuse so reverend a Bishop, so grave and judicious a Knight,
and diverse other learned Divines, of ignorance in the Scripture, and yet he
himself never have read NEHEM. 8. 7. 1. CHRON. 23. 30. EZRA. 7. 11. 1. CHRON.
24. 6? Or that so great a Rabby, so universally skillful in all learning and
story, as this Author would have the World esteem him to be, should be ignorant
that the name of Scribe was the name of a Function and not of a Sect; amongst
whom there were as well (...) as (...), as (...), Temple-Scribes as
Towne-Scribes; Scribes, to whom the custody, writing reading, and expounding
the Law of God was committed, as Scribes unto whom the custody, writing, and
expounding the Records and Laws of the King and Kingdom were entrusted (the
which office of Temple-Scribes was proper only to the sons of Levi) and that
the name of Pharisee was the name of a Sect and not of a Function; amongst
whom there were Priests and Levites and men of all professions, as at this day
there are amongst Brownists, Familists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries?

ARGUMENT. IIII.
THe fourth maine objection is drawn from the small Object.
number of Ministers now under the Gospel, in respect of those under the Law;
the Priests and Levites being a twelfth part of the Israelites, whereas now
they are hardly the hundredth part of the people; and it is not like that God
would allow so great a portion of maintenance to so small a number. This is an
usual Argument both with this Author, and frequent in the mouths of all
Decato-masticks.

To which I first answer, that howsoever the number of Solut.
Ministers be not the same, yet God is the same, and his right in tithes is the
same; and may not God do what he list with his own? Gods ways are not as
man's, neither is he bound to means, or alligated to number; but he can work as
well by few, as by many; much less is he bound to bestow those things which
are his, according to man's judgment, or at man's appointment. Suppose God had
chosen only Aaron and his family to receive his part of tithes, as he did to
the office of Priesthood; had it not been as great a sin for the Israelites
to have denied them tithes, because their number was so small, as it was for
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram to contest with them about their office of
Priesthood? And no less a sin do they commit, who make this an argument to
infringe Gods right of tithes to his Ministers, because they are fewer then
were the Priests and Levites.

2. I cannot choose but wonder that this Author, or any of his strain, should
make this an argument to oppose the right of tithes, when as in their right
understandings, and when they speak the truth from their hearts, they think
the number of Priests that receive tithes in these days to be too great; yea,
conditionally they might save their tithes, could be content there were no
Priests, but that every man might be a Priest to his own family; preferring
private conventicles before public Assemblies.

Thirdly, were the maintenance for Ministers more, their number would soon
increase: Let the times of Popery speak for England, when as the Church had
gotten a third of the land into their possessions (and the like we may see in
other Countries) and I doubt not, but if there were now the like maintenance,
the name of Priest now so odious, would be held a name honorable.

Lastly, If we shall examine the number of the Priests and Levites with their
maintenance, as their first fruits, their Therumab, their two tenths, and
portion in the tithe of the third year, their parts and portion of sacrifices,
with their devoted oblations and freewill-offerings, and all these brought home
at the cost and charges of the owners, and to these add their 48 Cities with
their suburbs, and compare them with our number and maintenance; it will
appear that, for their number, their maintenance exceeded ours in these times,
though we should pay the full tenth without fraud, coven, or deceit.

Had God now under the Gospel made us partakers of worse things, and a meaner
Ministry then he did the Jews under the Law, and with all had bound us to the
like maintenance for his Ministers, we might have had cause to complain; but
for God to exceed in his blessings, to make us partakers of better things, and
give us a more glorious Ministry, and yet not to require a tithe of that he
required of the Jews; to grudge and repine to render to God so small a
pittance by way of thankfulness for so extraordinary blessings, savours more
then Jewish covetousnes, heathenish impiety and sacrilege.

ARGUMENT. V.
THe fifth and last argument is laid down by way of replication Object.
to an allegation made for to prove the divine right of tithes, taken from the
Judgments of God inflicted in all ages upon Impropriators and sacrilegious
persons; to which he thus replyeth, That if Ministers children who live upon
tithes were examined, they would be found as very unthrifts, as the children of
Impropriators.

By which, as he shows his true love to the poor Clergy, Solut.
so his great weakness, greater wickedness: for we ascribe neither the
Childrens wickedness, nor unthriftines, to their Fathers sacrilege; nor the
consumption of their estates, to their own unthriftines: we acknowledge that
grace and godliness is the gift of God in Regeneration, not of their fathers in
Generation; so that oftentimes the best of men, not only Ministers, but
others, have most graceles children, and e contra.

2. Though true it be, that oftentimes this is the unhappy case of Gods
Ministers, and the oftener by reason of the Impropriators detaining the means,
whereby they should both maintain themselves and educate their children; or
otherwise by other wicked practices, suits, and contentions of malicious and
factious spirits, whereby they are not only diverted from the duties of their
callings, but from the care of their private families; yet it is not the
universal case of all Ministers children, but God be blessed there are and
have been in all ages happy successions of their children for diverse
generations. But he cannot instance the like in the children of Impropriators,
for they have universally failed in all places and ages.

Lastly the wonderment in this particular is not because their children are
unthrifts, but this, that their children being in show as great good husbands
as their Forefathers, yet their estates by a third generation are utterly
wasted and consumed, or their names wholly extinct; so that they are forced to
confess for the justification of themselves the truth of that of Solomon, The
holy thing left by their fathers, or gotten by themselves, has privily eaten
up both it self and all their other substance. I will conclude with the words
of holy Hierome, spoken in the person of ^ comment. super Mal. 3
the Lord: Quia mihi non reddidistis decimas and primitias, idcirco in fame and
penuria maledicti estis -- and pro decimis and primitiis, qua parva erant si a
vobis darentur, ubertatem possessionum vestrarum, and omnem fragum abundantiam
perdidistis. Vt autem sciatis me hoc irascente perfectum, quia fraudastis me
part mea, hortor vos atque commonco, ut inferatis decimas in horrea, hoc est,
in Thesauros Temple, and habeant Sacerdotes, atque Levitae qui mihi ministrant,
cibos; and probate me si non tantas pluvias effudero, ut cataracta coeli aperta
esse credantur. Et effundam vobis benedictionem usque ad abundantiam.

Because ye have not given me tithes and first fruits, therefore are ye cursed
with want and hunger, and by reason of the defalcation of those dues (which had
been but little, though truly paid) therefore your Harvest and Substance is
blown upon. And that you may know, that I take special notice of such
offenses, I advise and warn you to bring all the tithes into the storehouses,
that there may be meat in my house for the Priests and Levites, and then
prove me if I will not open the windows of heaven, and pour you out a
blessing in such abundance, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page lin. 29 2 pro first quota lege fittest quota. 44 25 denied ^ithes denied
those tithes. 57 22 fleece the Clergy slay the Clergy.


