THE Wonderful and strange effect and virtues of a new Terra Sigillata lately
found out in Germany,

With the right order of the applying and administering of it: being oftentimes
tried and experienced by Andreas Bertholdus of Oschatz in Misnia.

AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Robinson for Richard Watkins. 1587.

To the right worshipful, my especial good friends M.D. Master, and M.D.
Baylie, Doctors in Physic attendant upon her Majesty.
WELL known is it unto you both, Right reverend and learned doctors how
carefully our good friend M. Hugh Morgan her Majesty's Apothecarie, has
evermore employed himself and his purse to furnish this Realm with the
rarest, perfectest and best sorts of all manner of Plants, Fruits, Iuyces,
Gumes, Metals, Mynerals, Boales, Stoanes, and whatsoever else needful: For
the either preserving or restoring of health. Whereby he has not only well
deserved of his Country at home. But is also become famous for sundry his
compounds, specially for his exact Composition of his Mythridat, and his
Tyracle of Andromachus: throughout France and Italy and many places further
off. It pleased him (I thank him) of late to send unto me a new Terra
Sigillata, lately found out in Germany: which has not only been tried by
the Physicians of those parts to be most sovereign against all poisons and
sundry deadly diseases: but has also in the like cases been here well
experienced by my good and learned friend M. Doctor Hector, Nuns and diverse
others of your learned College in London, who has found it most effectual in
sundry dreadful and dangerous diseases. He sent me withal a little book in
latin written by Andreas Bertholdus touching the virtues and the right use
thereof, which I thought good for the benefit of such as be ignorant in that
tongue to put in english and to publish it under your learned protection.
Accept it I beseech you and vouchsafe it your favorable countnance. Aluingham
this 14. of August. 1587.

Your assured loving friend, B. G.

Of the Virtues, force, and use, of the right and approved Terra Sigillata of
Germany.
FIrst (which in nature is most to be wondered at and reverenced,) it
resists all manner Poisons or Venoms received inwardly, be they never so
furious or deadly, and speedily expels them by vomit, if either before or
presently after the poisons it be taken, if any thing later, it drives them
out by sweating.

Secondly, with the like wonderful quality of nature, it resists the most
cruel and horrible infection of the Pestilence, not only in preserving such
as use it, but also in speedy curing and calling to life, such as are
infected, and half dead.

Thirdly, it cures the bitings or stingings of all manner of venomous beasts,
or worms, and any wound made with poisoned Darte or weapon.

Fourthly, it is found to have a singular and most sweet agreement and
wonderful Sympathy with the vital parts of man's body, so as it greatly
comfort the heart, refreshes the brain, and keeps away diseases from all
the inward parts besides. It asswageth all manner of headache, pain and
trembling of the heart. It helps wounded, inflamed, bleared, and watring
eyes. It has also been found by experience, that in wounds and inflammation of
the brain and the stones, this excellent earth has done more good than any
other medicine could promise or perform.

Fifthly, against all unmeasurable bleeding, either of vein, Arterye, or any
other part of the body, there cannot a more assured remedy be found.

Sixthly, it dries up all manner of Rewmes, Destilations, and Murrs.

Seventhly, it stops the Laske, Lyentery, bloody flixe, and all other too
much looseness of the belly.

Eighthly, it thoroughly heals all burnings, or scaldings, by Fire, Water, or
Metal, both keeping them from blistring, and speedily restoring the hurt parts.

Ninthly, it heals soundly and perfectly all green wounds, and rankled and
rotten Soars.

Tenthly, it is against the Quinsey and inward Inflammations a most present
remedy.

The eleventh, against Itch and Skabs that are hardly cured, this earth is with
very good success used.

The twelft, it is a most meet medicine against all such sickenesses as are to
be avoided by Sweating.

The thirteenth, against the consuming of the Longs, as well in drying up the
Soar, as in staying the spitting of blood, it is a medicine most profitable.

A more full and playner declaration, of the manner and order in the using the
said earth against the diseases before named.
FIrst, to speak in general of the use of this earth, and the manner of
taking it: It is with most happy success given. In the like sort, and
against the same unnatural diseases, as is the earth of Lemnos, which of old
time was so famous, and is at this day so highly of the Turkish Emperor and
his Bassas accounted of, as they esteem it to be far more precious than
gold: Nay which is more, in the curing of many diseases, it far exceeds
the said Lemnian earth, which for the most part counterfette, is yet with such
difficulty brought out of Turkey unto us (For that which is commonly sold at
the Apothecaries, is in comparison hereof not worthy to be named.) And
therefore great good reason it is, that we confess, and with a thankful
mind acknowledge, the singular liberality and bounty of that great and most
mighty majesty extended toward our countrymen of Germany: That where by
reason of the Turkish barbarousnesse so godly and blessed gifts of God, as
likewise all learning, arts, and liberal sciences, has been defaced and
corrupted, yet has it pleased him at this day, so to bewtifie this poor
Country of Germany, not only with all kinds of good learning and arts, and
with the profound knowledge of Divinity, but has likewise sent unto us such
his most rare and excellent gifts, whereby we are sufficiently provided of
whatsoever concerns the health of either soul or body. And because I would
not have men be persuaded by my bare words (who upon a charitable affection
have willingly published to the world this worthy benefit of God,) I do unto
all learned men commit the efficacy, form, and vertuousnes of this blessed
and never sufficienly commended earth, to be wayed and examined with sound
judgment and consideration, which has often been proved by good trial and
experience. The virtues whereof for their furtherance that have not been much
acquainted with Physic, I will here briefly set down.

First, if poison be given to any man in meat or drink or otherwise, or if
any have unawares, as many times it chances, tasted any deadly or venomous
medicine, as soon as he perceives himself diseased, let him take a dram
of this earth, or more or less according to ye strength of the poison, and the
age and force of the sick man, and in some convenient Lyquor let him drink it
up, and if the poison have been but newly received, he shall presently bring
it up by vomit: But if so be through longer time the Venom have beeue dispersed
and carried to the inward veins yet being well covered in his bed, he shall
happily drive it out by sweating. The Lyquors that are most meetest to take it
with, are these: the water of Carduus benedictus, Dyuils bitt, swallowwort.

The water of the roots of the great broad Clott, Angellica, Pympernell, and
such like: If you have not these waters at hand, this sovereign preservative
may be taken very well in white Wine.

Secondly, against the plague it may be used in the like manner, especially when
it is to be given unto such as are already infected. But if you mean to take
it but as a preservative, you need not to take a whole dram, for half a
dram taken in the morning in a little wine or vinegar of Marygolds, or any
other convenient Lyquor, will very well serve.

I my self have always used this earth with very good success, in manner as
follows, as soon as a man feels any pain of his heart or his head, or
perceives any anguish, grudging, lothsomnesse, guiddinesse, or other signs of
the pestilence, I do straight disolue in wine, water, or other lyquor, a dram
of this earth, and give it to the sick man in his bed, casting him in a
sweat, wherewith the venom is in a very few hours driven out, without any
outward sore or swelling: But if it so fall out as it be not taken in time, the
blood being for the greatest part infected, there comes out in the sweating
either sore or carbuncle. In this case you must open the vein as nere to the
sore as may be: As if it be under the arm, Or middle vein.
open the Mediana of the said arm, if the botch be in the flank or grain,
the great vein on the inside of the leg is to be opened, if the sore be
under the knee, open the vein in the soale of the foot. In the mean time be
not negligent in quallifying of evil humors, least the poison gathering force
should strike to the heart, the heart being relieved, will forthwith drive the
venom into a sore, which sore being ripe, must by an expert Surgeon out of hand
be launced and well healed up, neither must you omit to take a little portion
of this earth, and steeping it in vinager with powder of Cynamon, make it in a
plaster, and lay it upon the heart, you shall perceive a great quantity of
the poison drawn out by the plaster.

Herewithall must you remember after the receipt of the medicine to take a toste
wet in very good vinager, and to cause the patient to hold it to his nose to
keep him from casting it up again. And if he fortune to cast it up you must
give it again and again, till his stomach do keep it. This manner of using
of it a man of great authority and calling in the Turks Court did send to a
noble man his friend as a great secret, with this protestation, that a
principal Physician of the Turks did leave this order written in the Arabyck
tongue, which the experiences of a great number has since confirmed.

Thirdly, against the biting of a mad dog, the stinging of Serpents,
Scorpions, Spyders, or any other venomous worms, as also against wounds made
by poisoned weapons, this earth may in this sort be most commodiously used.
Take as much thereof as shall suffice for the bigness of the wound, and with
fasting spittle make it into a paste spread upon Linen, and lay it to the
soar, or being made more thinner anoint the soar with it, whereby the venom
shall not all only be drawn back, but the force thereof quite abated, so as
in this case it is not possible to have a better medicine. And if it happen the
plasture be applied too late, then must you of neressitie drive out the poison
by receiving inwardly a dram of the earth infused in wine or other medicinable
Lyquor.

Fourthly, it does wonderfully assuage the pains and raging of the head,
whether it come of heat, wind, labor, watching, care, or trouble of mind,
and restores the consumed spirits if it be taken with good Aqua vitae, the
waters of Betony, Rosmary, Mageram, Penyroyall, or such like, or in great heat
a dram of it taken in the morning with Rosewater. The pains and trembling of
the heart it asswageth, and the heart it self being dumpish it greatly
rejoices, if a dram of it be taken with the waters of Balm, Salendine,
Mother-wort, Buglasse, Borage, or Geliuer Flowers, or drunk in like sort with
good white wine. For the burning heat of the eyes, bleerednes, rumes, or any
flux, this earth is specially good, applied either with Rosewater, the waters
of Planteyne, Eybright, Valeryan, Fenell, or any such, and dropped into the eye
with the fether of a black hen, or linen cloth dipped in the water and
laid to it, for any stripe in the eye it heals it, if it be laid to with ye
whit of an egg, and any convenient water as shall seem good to the Physician
or Surgeon. It helps the wounds of the head or of the stones, if being
disolued in Rosewater, a linen cloth dipped therein be laid to the hurt place,
for thereby shall the soar be kept from any inflammation, flux of evil humors,
or hurtful accident.

Fifthly, you may quickly stanch blood breaking out from any part of the body,
if you beat a Trocyse of this earth into powder, and mingling it with spittle
or any other lyquor, apply it to the place, you shall soon restreyne bleeding
at the nose if mingling this earth with vinager, ye white of an egg, and the
water of Tormentyll, you spread it upon linen cloth and lay it to the temples
to the part of the head, and put it into the nose, you shall easily also
dissolve cluttered blood congealed within the body by any casualty, if you take
either this earth alone in warm wine, or if you cause the patient to drink a
dram of the earth and a dram of that bole which they that dig in
quarreyes find in the midst of the stones, and name it it in Dutch of the
color Lyuerstone, and of the place Steynmarle, dissolved in the white of two
eggs and warm vinager, with a scruple of Saffron.

Sixthly, to cure the Rewme, use often to drink this earth morning and evening,
either in white wine or other lyquor, whereby you shall immediately sweat and
find great ease.

Seventhly, you shall stop any looseness of the body if you give a dram
of this earth in the morning and at night in the water of Tormentyll, of Oak
leaves, or of the flowers of our Acacia.

Eighthly, to keep any part of the body that it blyster not after burning and
skalding and to skin it very speedily, power upon this earth clear
Fountain water wherein unquenched Lime has soaked the night before, and
herewithall with the fether of a black hen anoint often times very tenderly
the sore place.

Ninthly, if this earth be put in any plaster steeped in any lyquor, or
received any ways into the body, it perfectly cures al pains, inflammations,
or evil accidents of any wounds or ulcers, especially wounds of the kydneis,
stones, or inward parts.

Tenthly, it heals Itches, Scabs, Rybes, Skuruinesse, Mangies, or other such
filthy diseases of the skin and makes the skin smoth and white, if so be
it be dissolved in spring water or plantyne water, if the foul and leprous
skin be often washed therewith and not dried after it.

Lastly, this earth of ours does help the quinsey, inward inflammations,
vlcered Lungs, and such other inward diseases, if a dram of it be taken in
any water proper to the disease, and likewise it cures all Collickes, and
Illyacke passions. These are in effect the virtues of this excellent earth, as
far as I have hitherto had experience. Other virtues of this blessed earth
doubtless there are many, which I leave to the experiences of the learned
Physicians. Only this I will tell them, that this earth is of the nature of
the Sun, or of Gold, for it grows in no place but in the gold mines in
the midst of the rocks, as does the precious stone. (I mean the yellow earth,
for the white is in the silver mines, and likely it is that every metal else
has his proper vole or earth as I guess, for as yet I have not fully
understood it.) Whereupon it is called by Paracelsus in the first part of his
great Surgery and in other places, the grease of the Sun, because it has in
it some show of fatness. Moreover, I have had of some skillful Alchymists two
sorts of earth, the one drawn from gold, the other from silver very like
unto these of ours, which so being, out of all doubt that earth of ours being
as it ought to be prepared and applied, will cure all those grievous diseases
that gold it self being prepared according to Art will cure, which I leave to
the search of the wise and learned Physicians: For my self it suffices to
have showed the way to others, whereby they may garnish and advance the glory
of God and our Country.

In fine, these and other many remedies sundry Doctors have daily found out,
especially in the falling sickness, wherein they have found by good trial
and experience that diverse infected with that disease, by taking of this earth
gotten in the golden mine, have been thoroughly delivered, so as they have not
any time after been touched with it.

And therefore I heartely desire all such to whose hands this earth has come,
and who have had any experience of it, that if so be they happen to have any
other experience of it either by themselves or others, than a number of learned
men have tried (whose witness of great credit yea, even of Magistrates and
Princes before whom it has been tried I have set down,) that for the
comfort of the diseased, brotherly charity, and commodity of the universal
members of Christ, they would vouchsafe to send me word of it hither into
Silesia, where I remain in a town called Kupfferberg, or to advertise the
famous and most learned Philosopher D. Ihon Montanus Doctor in Physic, now
dwelling at Striga.

Touching the names of both the white and the yellow earth, to speak something
thereof, I trust there is no man that can justly be offended with me, in that I
have termed the white earth dug out of the silver mines, by the name of
mynerall unicorn, wherein I have not so much here followed mine own fancy
(though it may be permitted to the Inuentors to give names to such things as
they have found out) as the counsel and advise of the best Myners, and Doctors
of Physic, who commonly give names according to the effect and quallitie of
the medicine, and not according to the outward shape or show only, as the
unlearned use to do: Or because I have called the yellow earth the grease of
the Sun, being gotten out of the gold mines, and afterward with great
diligence prepared. For I have found by experience, that the yellow earth has
the same force and virtue in curing diseases that gold it self has: as the
white has the virtues of silver. So as good reason to me it seems, to name
them according to the things whereof they take their force. If these names
displease any man, the party may come hither to the mines where they grow,
and consider the place, circumstance, form, and property, of the thing,
before he as unskillful in Mynerall matters, do maliciously blase abroad his
foolish writings against the secret works of God, or upon a covetous conceit,
fearing that his Ritchin will be the colder, if out of Germany that may be had
at a small price, which is hunted for out of Araby, Turquy, and the barbarous
places there abouts, with so great sums of money and with greater gain
retayled, although not half so good as this which we may have with less cost
by much at home: Yet must they in the mean time be accounted great Doctors,
because they can skill of such things as are far fetched, though they never
saw the place where they grew, nor ever have seen them green or new
gathered, as has ^itherto happened of that excellent ^earbe Scordium, which
being ^^ught by the Merchant out of far Countries and sold at a very high
price, yet is now lately found to have grown continually in Germany, both as
fair as that which comes from beyond seas, and of better use for the bodies
of our Germains than the other. In like sort falls it out with mynerals,
metals, and precious stones, which as the learned Story writer Sebastian
Munster affirms, are now found all to grow at home with us, and are sent
abroad into other Countries in great abundance, which a hundred and fifty
years ago were sought for at strangers hands, and so distributed about.

We that do daily with infinite toil and excessive charges hunt for these
hidden treasures in the bowels of our old mother the earth, do every day
find new kinds both of metals and mynerals, that the old writers never knew
of, nor those that at this day inhabit those Countries are yet acquanted with,
beside the unskillful Doctors, and dwellers at home, is it possible that these
fellows should have better knowledge of such things, as at home they were
never acquaynted with? neither know what kind, sort, or nature they be of:
than those to whom they be most familiar, and who daily gather them where they
grow: Yet cease they not with their eloquent pens, impudently to lie and to
deface the truth, attributing to every thing most foolish and feyned names both
in Greek and Latin, not waying the properties and qualities of every thing,
according to which the Lord God did by Adam from the beginning name them: but
as seems best to their foolish brain, which fancy of theirs is as foolishly
still mainteyned, and shamelesly defended by their followers, alleging only
this slender reason, such and such a Philosopher has said it: which for the
blindness sake and untrustiness of the parties they might rather have deemed
to have been most false. And thus not only to God and his gifts, but to their
own Country of Germany, these Doctors and Philosophers of Germany are found
to be most injurious, who despise the rare blessings of God that are proper to
them and their Country: Only commending and desiring such things as are
gotten abroad, suppressing with a vile kind of mind such things as they have
at home, nay, which is a fowler thing, they neither have desire to benefit
their Country nor their brethren, neither will they suffer others that would
do it, but study continually how they may with all sorts of raylings and
slanders stop and deface the good and laudable attemptes of such as they
know to be studiously and honestly given. Where it had been a great deal
more meet for them first (...) have given most hearty thanks to God that in
the latter days has so abundantly blessed our Country of Germany in
bringing to light such infinite treasures as having long lain hid, are now
through his mercy found out, to the end that by continual beholding of them
we may be called from the dungeon of darkness to light, and to the amendment
of our lives. And even of the very bounty and goodness of their disposition,
thou may easily (good reader) perceive them whom God will have partakers of
his hidden treasures, when as they do not with injustice keep to themselves
the secret knowledge which they have received from God, but seek by all the
means they may to make them common to all men, especially to those that be
good and godly: and for the others, his good will is they should continually
apply their studies to their private contentation, and never atteyne to the
knowledge of the truth: And these good fellows use always to keep in their
own custody such things as they them selves have no skill of, neither will
they suffer such as are of understanding to have the use of them. But let us
leave this kind of people as withered and rotten stocks, neither profitable
to themselves nor others: And according to that which God has given us, let us
be fruitful, always giving praise and thanks to God our merciful father,
not seeking our own honor or private commodity, who shall also make us
profitable and fit for his kingdom: with which he has promised to give to
us whatsoever we shall have need of, so that we seek for that kingdom before
all other things. To this only God who is and has been from everlasting,
be everlasting honor and glory.

THe testimonials of the Princes and Magistrates, who have seen before them the
experience and miraculus force of the Silesian Terra Sigillata: And there upon
for the acknowledging of such divine benefits, and extolling the glory of God,
have under their great seals confirmed the truth in such order as follows.

FIrst an exemplification, that is an abstract out of the German original
faithfully translated into Latin, that the most noble Prince William Landgraue
of Hesse in Cassell Court in Catzenelnbog, Ditz Ziegenheim and Nidda, of his
great clemency, did grant to Andreas Bertoldus of Oschatz, by his Doctors in
Physic and Chancellor.

Be it known unto all persons, that an honest man called Bertold of Oschatz,
came into the presence of the most noble Prince and Lord, the Lord William
Landgraue of Hesse Court of Catzenelnbogen Ditz, Ziegenheim and Nidda etc. our
gracious Lord and Prince, and in humble manner declared unto him, that he had
found in an old mine of Gold within the dominion of Schueidnitz, a new kind
of earth, which is a present help and a most notable remedy against all manner
of poisons and sundry diseases, which earth having a stamp upon it he offered
to sell unto his Excellency: who not trusting the man upon his bare word,
committed the matter to his Physicians, Maurice, Thaurern, and Laurence Hyper:
Commanding them to make a perfect trial of the said earth, whereupon the
said Doctors in Physic to satisfy their Prince, did make a double proof of
this earth, in this manner. They took four sundry sorts of the deadliest
poisons that might be, which were, Mercury Sublimate, Aconitum, Nereum and
Apocinum, and of some one of these they gave half a dram a piece to eight
dogs, to four of them they gave the earth after the poison, and to the other
four the poison alone: Of these four that took it alone, the first that
took Apocynum, dyed within half an hour: the second that had taken Nereum,
died within four hours: the third that swallowed Mercury, died within nine
hours after: And although they all did cast up some part of the poison, yet
after most cruel torments with crampes and trembling they died: the fourth
dog that eat Aconitum, sustained thirteen great panges of the crampe, so as
every man thought he would have died with his fellows, yet lived he the
first day, and having half the dose of this medicine given him, he thoroughly
recovered. The other four dogs to whom the poisons before named with the
like quantity of this Terra Sigillata was given, for three hours after the
receiving of it, were very sick and feeble, especially one of them to whom the
double quantity of Aconitum by negligence was given, vomited thrice: the next
day they were all well and did eat their meat greedily, so as there appeared
scarce any token of poison. When thus his Highness had seen the experience of
this earth to be so present a remedy against such deadly poisons, and that
the said Andrew Bertold had humbly craved his letters of credit, both in the
favor of the man and advancement of the truth, that others might have
knowledge, he denied not to grant them: But commanded that his letters
testimonial sealed with his Highness his privy seal, and subscribed with
the hands of the foresaid Doctors, in whose presence this trial was made,
should be given unto him. Which we the abouenamed Doctors upon our allegiance
to his Highness, and for the furtherance of the truth, because we found it as
has been declared to be true and unfeigned, most willingly have done. Given
the xxviij. of July, the year of our Lord, 1580.

Mauritius Thaurer D. Laurencius Hyperius M.D. Johan Krug.


IN the year of our Lord 1580. the day of Saint James: In the presence of the
most noble and worthy Prince William Landgraue of Hesse there was made of the
Terra Sigillata brought unto him by Andreas Bertholde of Oschatz this proffe
upon certain dogs.

A red Dog with a white ring about his neck had given him between eight and
nine in the morniug a scruple of Mercury sublimed, and a scruple of the Terra
Sigillata therewith: within half an hour after the second hour he vomited
extremely, the third hour again he cast up certain colloricke matter, so
did he the fourth hour, and without any great harm he escaped.

A yellowe Cur with a whit breast had given unto him a scruple of Mercury
sublimed and nothing after it, within half an hour after he made water and
presently after he scummered, within half an hour afterward he was taken
with a Crampe and fell to the grouude, after this Crampe he stood up a while
panting and grinning, and presently after was again taken with the crampe, and
withal swelled in the belly: at one of the clock he was taken with a more
grievous Crampe and lay as though he had been dead for a quarter of an hour,
within half an hour after two, he began again to go, and for an hour and
an half afterward, he stod still without moving: between four and five, he
was again extremely taken with the crampe and sundry times after, at last he
died in ye night.

A black little hound with a white tail, had given unto him a great dram of
Aconitum, and therewith a dram of this earth, within half an hour afterward
he vomited extremely and within half an hour after, he cast up certain
frothie matter, after the first hour he vomited the third time and so escaped.

A branded shaghairde dog with a white tail had half a drame of Aconitum
given him and nothing herewith, within an hour he was taken with a great
Crapme and (...) king one hour after that about (...) of the clock he was
taken (...) with the crampe sundry times, (...) wise after one, and half an
hour after two he fell into the Crampe again, so did he at three a Clock,
after three he was extreemely pulled with the crampe, and by and by after had
the like fit wherewith he made a great quantity of water, that stonke
horribly, then was he again touched with the Crampe, when as there was given
him at the commandment of our gracious Lord the Landgraue of Hasse half the
dose of this suffraine medicine whereby he recovered and escaped.

A black Curre with a white neck had given unto him half a drame of Nerium
or Oleander and half a drame of this earth, within one hour after the taking
of it, he vomited extremely, and within a little after he vomited green
bagage, within half an hour after he frothed and foomed at the mouth, this
was the faintest and weakest dog amongst them all, yet did he presently
recover and escape.

A brown Cur with a white neck had given unto him half a dram of Merium
and nothing of the medicine. First he vomited a thin matter about ten of the
Clock he vomited again, after twelfe he was taken with a great quaking and a
terrible crampe, which fit was very long and extreme: afterward he was pulled
with the crampe till almost three, after three he was terriblie racked with the
Crampe, and between three and four he died.

A gray little begle had given unto him a drame of Apocynum half leaves and
half roots and withal a dram of this Terra Sigillata. This dog as far as
we could discern was not all the day long any wise vexed, but escaped very
well.

A branded dog had given unto him a dram of Apocynum half root and half
herb and nothing of the medicine, within half an hour after the receite of
the poison, he was taken with an extreme crampe and quauering, and within a
very small while after he fell suddenly dead to the great wondering of those
that stood by.

Mauritius Thaurer D. Laurencius Hyperius. D.


A copy of the Letters Pattents which the noble earl Wolfgan earl of
Hohenloe, Lord of Langenburg etc. Had granted to Andrewe Bertolde of Oschatz,
in witness of the wonderful virtues of the Terra Sigillata, found latly in
Germany which has been tried to be an approved medicine against the strongest
poisons, and sundry other grieves: faithfully translated out of the Germayne
Original.

WE Wolfgangus Earl of Hohenloe, Lord of Langenburg, etc. Do openly make
known unto all men by these my Letters Testimonial, that there came lately
before me at Langenburg, my well-beloved friend Andreas Betholdus of Oschatz,
and declared unto me that he had a most excellent kind of Terra Sigillata,
which was not al only of great force against sundry diseases: but also a most
undoubted remedy against all manner of venomous poisons, as had been proved
by sundry witnesses upon a great number of dogs, which made me also desirous
to see the trial of it. It happened at the same time, that one called Wendel
Thumblardt was by our Lieuetenant of Langenburg for certain fellonies
imprisoned, who being examined by our Justices, confessed himself guilty of a
great number of robberies: And therefore brought to the bar was condemned to
be hanged. Being yet detained in prison, and coming to his ear that there
was such a medicine, so sovereign against sundry sicknesses, and the most
deadly poisons, he made humble request as well by his parents, as by other his
friends, of which there were present no small number, desiring for the mercy
of God, and respect of his poor life, that being thus condemned, he, might
have given unto him the most deadly poison that might be devised, whereby a
perfect trial might be had of the worthiness of this medicinable earth. And in
this respect, not only for this pitiful request of his: but also for the
commodity and benefit of all Christendom, (if so be the medicine prove
answearable to the report) pardoning the offender, we granted his life upon
that condition. Therefore the day of the date of these presents, in the
presence of our self, and our well-beloved Cousin the County George Friderick of
Hohenloe, and Lord in Langenburg, and in the presence of all our Nobility and
Commons, the said patient received a dram and a half of Mercury Sublimate,
mingled with Conserve of Roses, and immediately after it he drank a dram of the
Terra Sigillata in old wine. And albeit the poison did in the judgment of our
learned Physician George Pistor Doctor in Physic, and John Lutzen our
Apothecarie, who were both by him all the while, extremely torment and vex
him: yet in the end the medicine prevailing overcame it, whereby the poor
wretch was delivered, and being restored to his health was committed to his
parents. Whereas therefore the foresaid Andrew Berthold, has humbly required
io have our Letters Testimonial for his farther credit, we have thought good
for the furtherance and advancement of the truth, to grant him these our
Letters, signed with our seal Manuell. Given at Langenburg the 25. of
January, in the year of our Lord. 1581.

The copy of the Letters Testimonial granted by the Magistrates of the City
of Iuliers unto Master Crisantus a Cronenbnrg, Citizen of Coleine, in the name
and behalf of Andreas Bertholdus of Oschatz, touching the force and virtues of
the sealed earth lately found in Germany. Truly drawn out of the dutch
original.

WE the Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Iuliers do signify unto all to
whom this present writing shall come, that there presented himself before us
one Crisant of Cronenburg a substantial man, and Citizen of Coleine, declaring
unto us that he had an assured remedy against all poisons, called by the name
of Terra Sigillata, Axungia Solis, S. Paul's earth, or Adams earth, being made
up in diverse trocisks, some of them reddish in color, some Greyish, sealed
with a scutchin wherein is portrayed the Sun, the half Moon, and five
Stars. In place of the helmet these Letters, A.B. and on the other side V.O.
Who beseeched us to give him leave to make trial in our sight of the said
earth upon certain dogs and beasts. Which when we had granted, the said
Crisantus did will to be brought before him two great dogs of like color and
bigness, and therewithal two Crowns weight of Mercury Sublimate, which he
divided in our presence, and in the sight of John Oitweilers our sworn
Surgeon, into two equal portions, whereof the one he gave alone in a piece of
Larde to the one dog, the other part of the poison he gave to the other in a
piece of Larde being mingled with the quantity of three Trocisks of the Terra
Sigillata. Both the dogs in our presence devoured the portions that were
thrown unto them, and both vomited and grew to be very feeble, six hours
after the receiving of the poison, the first dog that had taken the poison
pure without any of the earth, dyed. The other which had received the Terra
Sigillata with the poison, remained safe and alive, and being shut up for a
day, after was suffered to go at large. Since these things we saw to be true as
they be reported, we thought good to grant to the before named Crisanti^^ of
Cronenburg these our Letters of Credence, sealed with our common Seal. Given
at Iuliers in the year of our Lord 1580. The xij. of February.

Subsigned Paulus Herle.

THis copy was drawn out in the presence of the honorable Henry Wendelen,
and Theodorck a Bruck, both the Scauins in Dusseldorff, was by me Antony Burker
chief Notarie there, conferred with the true original, sealed and subscribed,
neither rased canselled, nor to be suspected, which original remains in the
keeping of the said Crisantus, wherewith I confess it agrees word for word,
which I the aforesaid Anthony Burker do witness with mine own hand. Dated the
ninth of March, the year. 1582.

Andrewe Berthold to the loving Reader.
BE it known unto al and singular the studious, and searchers out of the
treasures of nature, that for their own necessity or their friends, desire to
be pertakers of the wonderful and medicinable force of the Terra Sigillata of
Silesia: as well for recovering and keeping of their health, as to be preserved
from all deadly poison: That I Andrew Berthold of Oschatz, upon the mountain
called Kupfferberg, dwelling near unto the Golden river named in the German
tongue the Bober, about seven miles from the head of the river called the Elbe,
have been earnestly required by sundry Doctors in Physic and other men of
name, to leave some quantity of this precious earth in some place near unto
the Rheyn, specially at Franckfort, where in my absence, as often as occasion
served, it might be had. When as therefore I caused these books to be printed by
that virtuous man Christopher Coruin a Printer, and Citizen of Franckfort: I
thought it good not any where better leave it, than with him who might utter it
at a reasonable price to all such as have need of it: which I could hardly
entreat him to trouble himself withal, but only in respect that he had
printed the copies. Wherefore I entend, God sparing me life, to send abroad
every Mart not only good store of this earth, but also certain precious
stones needful in Physic: As Rubyes, Emeralds, Saphyrs, Iacincts, Carnelins,
Citrins, Chrystals, Serpentins, Amethists, Garnats, and such like. And
whosoever lacks any stones belonging to Physic or otherwise, he shall be
sure at the said Coruins to have not only them, but also the earth ready
prepared, which our merciful God has bestowed upon Germany, for the common
profit of all Christendom. To which almighty Lord be all honor, glory, and
praise, for ever and ever.

Andreas Bertholdus
of Oschatz.
FINIS.

