How to live, and that well: Jn all estates and times, specially when helps and
comforts fail.



Printed by John Legate, printer to the University of Cambridge. 1601.

And are to be sold at the Crown in Paul's Churchyard by Simon Waterson.

To the Reader.
GOod Reader, if thou would be saved by thy faith in Christ, after death:
thou must here live by it before death. And faith for the time of this life,
has two great uses. The first is to cut off worldly sorrows and cares. It is
the common fashion of men, to multiply their cares out of measure, and thereby
to make their lives most miserable. For first of all, beside necessary
labors, they take upon them many needelesse and superfluous businesses.
Secondly their manner is, to care not only for the labors to be done, but
also for the event and success of their labors, that they may always prosper
and never be crossed: but this care belongs to God alone. Thirdly they content
not themselve; with their lot and condition, but seek by all means to
increase their estate, and to make themselves rich. Lastly they exercise
themselves not only in disposing of things present, but they forecast many
matters in their heads, and plotte the success of things to come. Now faith,
when we have done the works of our callings according to the prescript of the
word of God, says (I say) makes us commend to God the blessing, success, and
event thereof by prayer and affiance in his promises, not doubting but he will
give us all things necessary. And if we want the blessing and success we look
for, yet faith makes us to renounce our own desires, and in silence to quiet
our hearts in the good pleasure of God. And thus many worldly cares are cut off.

Secondly, when a man at his wits end, knows not what in the world to do,
being (as it were) plunged into a sea of miseries, faith gives direction and
stays the mind. For when all temporal things fail us even to the very
skin and life, faith preserues within us an affiance of the grace and mercy
of God, and the hope of life everlasting. Faith shows us hidden things not to
be discerned by sense and reason. Life everlasting is promised us, but we die
for all that: we hear of the resurrection, but in the mean season we rot in
our graves: we are pronounced blessed, but yet we are overwhelmed with infinite
miseries: bundance of all things is promised, but for all this we often hunger
and thirst: God promises to hear us and to be present with us, but he seems
often times to be deaf (as it were) at our cries. Now then comes faith, which is
the substance of things hoped for, and makes us lift our minds above the whole
world, to apprehend the invisible and unspeakable things of God which he has
revealed and promised unto us. These things I show more at large in this small
treatise following; read it at thy leisure, use it for thy good, and see thou
be a doer of them.

W. Perkins.

Hab. 2.4. The just man shall live by his faith.
IN the former chapter the Prophet complains, and expostulates the matter with
God, why the Jews the people of God should be oppressed by the Chaldeans, the
enemies of God. In the beginning of the 2. chapter the Lord makes answer to the
Prophet, and the effect of the answer is this: They shall certainly be delivered
in the time appointed, but they shall not yet be delivered. Upon this answer the
Prophet might happily object on this manner: How then shall the afflicted Jews
be able to live in the mean season: the Lord answers by a distinction thus; The
unjust man puffs up himself with vain confidence, but the just man shall live
by his faith.

For the better understanding of the words, five things are in order to be
explaned. The first, what is meant by the just man. Justice mentioned in the
word is twofold: the justice of the law, and the justice of the Gospel. The
justice of the law has in it all the points and parts of justice, and all the
perfection of all parts: and it was never found in any upon earth except Adam
and Christ. The justice of the Gospel, has all the parts of true justice, but
it wants the full perfection of parts: as a child has all the parts of a man
in the infancy, though it want perfection of stature and tallness. And this
kind of justice is nothing else, but the conversion of a sinner, with a
purpose, will, and endeavor to please God, according to all the comma^dements
of the Law. Thus was Noe just, Job, Luke 1.^; Job 1.^.
Zachary and Elizabeth: and thus must the just man be taken in this place for
one that turns to God, and by grace endeavors to please God, according to the
whole law of God in his place and calling.

The second point to be considered is, what life is here meant? As death is
here twofold, the first and the second; so is life. The first is the
conjunction of the body and the soul, the second is the conjunction of the
whole man with God. The first is called natural, the second spiritual or
eternal life: and both are meant in this place. For Paul brings this very text
to prove the justification of a sinner by faith; Romans 1.17. Gal. 7.11.
and justification is a part of spiritual life: because it is the acceptance
of a sinner to eternal life. And for this cause the prophet says, The just
man shall live, having relation not only to the time of affliction then to
come, but also to eternal life.

The third point to be considered is, what is the faith here meant? And that is
justifying or saving faith; because we must live by the same faith, whereby we
are saved. And faith has his effect not only after this life, but also in
this life. We must live first by it before we can be saved by it. Paul
therefore in his own example expounding this text, says, Gal. 1.20.
And in that I live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God, who
has loved me, and given himself for me.

The fourth point is the construction of the words; and that is two ways. The
first is thus, The just by faith, shall live: the words by faith, being joined
upon the word lust. And then the sense is this: He that is just by his faith,
shall live, or have eternal life. The second is thus; The just, shall live by
his faith: the words by faith, being joined to the words shall live: and then
the sense is this: The just while he lives in this world, he shall live by his
faith. This latter construction and sense, I rather choose and embrace, because
Paul, Gal. 3.11, 12.
cue^ in this sense brings this text to prove that life eternal, and
consequently justification comes not by working according to the law, but by
believing, and he makes an exposition between living by faith, and living by
works.

The fifth and last point to be considered is, How a man should live by faith.
Because this last point is of great moment, I will spend some time in the
explaning of it. That a man then may live by his faith, two things are
required: the first, that faith be rightly conceived and grounded in the heart;
the second, that after it is once conceived, it Reign and rule in the heart.
That faith may rightly be conceived, two things are required. The first is the
knowledge of the word of God, for faith stands in relation to the word: and the
word alone is the foundation of our faith. Hereupon the word is called the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. Ephesians. 1.18.
By light of natural reason we understand, that the world had a beginning and
was made of God. Yet cannot reason breed in us a certain persuasion of this
point, but only the testimony of the word of God: and therefore it is said,
By faith we understand that the world was ordained by God. Heb. 11.3.
And this made David say, In God I will praise his word. Psalm. 56.4.
Furthermore, in the Word three things are to be known, precepts or
commandments, because they teach obedience: threatenings, because they
restrain disobedience: promises, because they serve to confirm us in our
obedience. Again, promises are either principal or lesse-principall. The
maine or principal promise is that, in which God offers and reuealeth
righteousness and life everlasting by Christ. Within this promise is contained
the grant of remission of our sins, of necessary patience, of the
assistance of the spirit of God, and of all gifts that are inseparably joined
with faith. Promises lesse-principall are concerning deliverances in
temptations, safety in dangers, health, wealth, liberty, peace, etc. And
these must all be understood with an exception of the cross and correction:
and they shall so far forth be accomplished as they serve for Gods glory and
the good of them that believe. Now all these heads and points of the word of
God must be known, and that in some particular sort, that a man may live by
his faith.

The second thing required for the right conceiving of faith is, after the word
of God is once known, To trust God upon his word: yea to depend upon it, and to
build upon it. This is the first and principal work of true faith: and it is
called by Paul the obedience of faith: Romans 1.5.
and it is made the end and scope of the preaching of the Gospel: and not
without cause. For this is the first and principal honor of god to believe him
upon his bare word; and thereby to make a confession of the truth of God. This
the devil knew right well: and therefore the first thing that he sought to
overthrow in Adam, was his faith in the word of God: and the scope of the first
temptation, whereby he assaulted our Savior Christ, Math. 4.3.
was to overthrow that faith and confidence he had in his father: saying, if
thou be the son of God, command that these stones be made bread: but this
thou can not do: therefore thou art not the son of God.

That this obedience, which we give to God by trusting his very word, may be
right obedience, it must have six conditions. First of al, it must be
absolute, nature desired first to feel, before he would believe. But God must
be trusted, though that which he says be against reason and experience. Thus
Abraham believed God against all humane hope. Romans 4.18.
sincere. For we must trust Gods word for it self, because it is Gods word;
all byrespects set apart. They, which are as the stony ground receive Gods word
and rejoice in it: and yet afterward in time of temptation go awrie. The
reason is, because they receive the word, and rejoice in it not properly for it
self, but in respect of honor, profit, Luke 8.13.
or pleasure, which they look to reap thereby. John the Baptist was a burning
candle: Ioh. 5.35.
and the Jews rejoiced in his light, only in respect of the noualtie of it:
and therefore the holy ghost says, they rejoiced in it but for a season. with all our hearts, that it may take deep root and be an ingrafted word. Iam. 1.^^.
It is not sufficient for us to have a taste of the good word of God, and to
receive it with joy unless we thoroughly and soundly build and rely our selves
upon it. The fifth condition is, an honest heart, that is, with an heart in
which there is a distinct and settled purpose not to sin, but in all things to
do the will of God. The good hearers are they which receive the word with an
honest and good heart. Luke 8.15.
Without this can no man possibly live by faith. He that puts away his good
conscience, makes shipwreck of his faith. It is godliness alone that has the
promises of this life and the life to come. 1. Tim. 1.19.
And none can live the life of faith, but he that is a just man. After that men
have made some good proceedings, and do know the word, receive it, rejoice in
it, Heb. 3.38.
and bring forth some fruit: if the heart for all this be evil, it will cause
them at length to depart from God, by distrusting or by denying credence to his
word. The sixth condition is, stable and constant. The Lord says, Heb. 10.38.
my soul has no pleasure in them that withdraw themselves, that is, which for
a time believe God, and afterward pull back their foot and go back from
their faith.

Seeing this is the right way to conceive faith, to know the word of god and to
trust him upon the same word, all such as would live by faith, must have their
hearts kindled with a desire to do the things before named, specially to give
credence to every word of God. We may not forsake God for any creature: now we
forsake him, when we distrust him in his word. Again not to believe God, is
very Atheism. For by this means God is made a liar, and his glory and
majesty is abolished. It is the greatest part of our glory to believe God:
Joh. 3.31.
as Christ says, He that receives his testimony, puts to his seal, that God
is true: that is, gives unto God, as it were, a testimonial of his truth, and
thereto puts his hand and seal. And what greater honor can there be then
this, that the creature should give testimony to the creator?

Thus much of the conceiving of faith: now follows the Reign of faith. The
reign of faith is, when it bears rule and sway in heart and life. For where
faith is, there neither thought, will, affection, nor lust raigns, but faith
alone. It reigns by two actions. First of all it mooues and makes us to attend
on the calling of God, and yield subjection to him in all his commandments.
Paul says, Romans 3.^^.
that faith establishes the law: and one reason is; because it makes us do
that which the law prescribes. Again Paul says, that his weapons are
spiritual and mighty, bringing every thought in subjection to God. Now these
mighty weapons are the word of god, 2. Cor. ^^
preached and believed. He that is borne of God can not sin, ^. Ioh. 3.9.
because the seed of God remains in him, that is, the word mingled with
faith. Heb. 1^.7.
Noah his faith made him build an Arc at Gods commandment: Genesis 8.16.
after it was made, to enter into it, and not to dare to come out of it till he
had warrant from God. Abraham's faith made him forsake his country and kindred
at Gods commandment, and go, he knew not whether. And that good obedience
may be performed to every commandment of God, faith works two things in us,
Psalm. 119.11. Act. 16.31.
memory, attention. Memory, whereby Gods word is laid up in the heart; that
it may be drawn out to use when occasion shall be offered. Attention is, when
faith makes us seriously to consider and to believe that the commandment of
God is a commandment not for form but in truth, and that it does indeed
pertain to us. An example of both these actions of faith we have in Joseph,
who when he was tempted to folly of Potiphars wife, answered, Genesis 39.9.
Shall I do this wickedness, AND SIN AGAINST GOD. Mark here how his mind was
filled and possessed with a thought and consideration of Gods commandment.

The second action of faith whereby it reigns in the heart is, to establish and
confirm them that believe in their obedience and subjection to God. And this
it does, by presenting Gods promises to the mind. For by means of them it
works four actions in the heart. First of all it makes us fly unto the true
God alone, whose the promises are. Secondly it makes us to believe that God
both can and will help us according to our need. Thirdly it makes us to hope
for his help, that is, for good success in prosperity and deliverance, or
some mitigation of our evils in adversity, according to the tenor of his
promises. Lastly though te^porall blessings fail, it makes us still to rest on
God for mercy and for life everlasting. And thus at all times it makes God to
be our Refuge, our castle, our rock, and tower of defense. Thus we see
generally how faith reigns.

To proceed further: the just man lives a double life, namely a spiritual
life and a temporal, and both of them are led by faith; as I will plainly
manifest. Spiritual life, which is the beginning of eternal life, stands
specially in four things, Reconciliation with God, peace of conscience, joy of
the holy Ghost, and newnes of life. Touching reconciliation with God in Christ;
it is revealed, offered, and given unto us in the maine promises of the Gospel,
and in the Sacraments: and it is no way in this world made ours and holden of
us, but by our faith. And in the case of our reconciliation with God, faith
has two actions, one to receive it, the other to assure us of it.

Touching the first, faith apprehends and receives reconciliation on this
manner. First of all the spirit of God works in men a ge^nerall faith of the
law and the threatenings thereof, (...). ^.15.
and it is called the spirit of bondage to fear. Because it causes in us a
sight of our sins, an apprehension of Gods anger, fear of due and deserved
condemnation, despair of our selves in respect of our selves. This being
done, the same spirit works in us an other faith called saving or justifying
faith, and it apprehends or receives Christ with his benefits, by certain
steps and degrees, and they are specially three. For first of all upon a
thorough touch and lively sense of our misery, there arises in the mind an
earnest and serious meditation of the promise of mercy and the benefits
therein offered: and it is called the opening or pearcing of the ear. Psalm.
^^.^.
Then in the second place there follows a purpose, will, desire, and endeavor
to believe upon consideration of the commandment of God that biddes us to
believe and apply the promise to our selves. 1. Ioh. 3.23.
And further this will and desire shows it self by instant and serious
invocation, which is nothing else but a flying from the condemning sentence of
the law to the throne of grace for mercy. Heb. 4.16.
Thirdly after this, there follows in process of time, a settling and quieting
of the mind touching Christ and his benefits upon some assurance thereof,
wrought and conceived in the mind by the spirit of God. Isa. 26.3.
And this third degree is called a stablished thought. On this manner come we
by degrees to receive Christ for our full reconciliation with God. For, when
upon the commandment to believe, we do in any measure believe Christ to be
our Christ, he is our Christ indeed according to the tenor of the
Evangelical covenant. Thus faith apprehending Christ for our reconciliation
with God, becomes a victorious conqueror and preuailes against the Law, Satan,
hell, death, condemnation, 1. Ioh. 5.4.
and all our spiritual enemies: and thus every believer is above the Law,
sin, hell, death, even in this life.

The second action of faith in the case of our reconciliation with God, is to
certify and assure us in conscience thereof: and that is done by a practical
syllogism, which faith frames in the mind on this manner: He that believes
the gospel, shall have all the benefits and blessing of God promised therein;

But I believe the Gospel, and I believe in Christ:

Therefore the benefits promised therein, are mine.



The major or first part of this reason, is the voice of the Gospel: the minor
or the second part is the voice of the believing heart, which subiecteth it
self in will and affection to the commandment which biddes us believe in
Christ: and this is the act of special faith. And we may not think that this
voice of the believing heart is a false alarm. For he that truly believes has
his mind and conscience supernaturally enlightened to discern that he
believes. The third part, or the conclusion is the foundation of all our joy
and spiritual comfort. For it contains in it the chiefest certentie of our
adoption and salvation that can be had in this life, namely the certentie of
faith, whence follows in a lower degree in the second place, the certentie
that is by works. And thus does faith certify all such as truly believe that
they are the children of God.

Out of the former conclusion, or out of the certentie which is by faith,
follows a full and lively certentie of the doctrine of the Gospel, worthy
consideration; on this manner. There is a threefold certentie: the first is
certentie of reason or of general faith, when a man by force of argument is
convicted of the certentie of the doctrine of the Bible. This may be in the
wicked and ungodly without faith in Christ. After this, in the elect by a more
special work of Gods spirit, follows a faith in Christ, and the certentie of
justifying or special faith expressed in the conclusion of the former
syllogism. Thirdly after this certentie of special faith follows an other
experimental certentie of the truth of the Bible, which also faith concludes on
this manner: That doctrine which assures us to be Gods children is certainly of
God:

But the doctrine of the Gospel, believed or mingled with our faith, assures
us to be Gods children Therefore it is of God.



The major is granted of all: the minor is in effect the conclusion of the
former syllogism, and it is known by an experience of that spiritual comfort
which the godly feel in their hearts. The conclusion sets down the certentie
of the Bible upon a further ground, then any wit or learning of man can attain
unto without the spirit of grace, namely upon an inward assurance of our
reconciliation with God. Of this certentie our Savior Christ speaks notably,
If any man will do my fathers will, Ioh. 7.17.
that is, believe it, and subject himself to it, he shall know [namely by that
comfort which he shall feel upon his subiection] of the doctrine, whether it
be of God, or whether I speak of my self. And Paul says, 1 Cor. 2.14.
that the spiritual man, that is, one regenerate by the spirit of God, judges
all things. Hence it follows, that such as desire to be settled for their
religion, and such as desire to be good and profitable students in Divinity,
must first of all humble themselves and endeavor in their hearts truly to
believe in Christ. Because hence flows the best experience of the certentie
and consequently of the unspeakable excellency of the Bible.

Thus then we see, how we are to receive, hold, and enjoy our Reconciliation
with god in Christ, by no other thing within us, but by means of our faith
alone. And therefore we must have special care, that we may by the use of Gods
means attain to a lively faith. And for this cause we must do two things:
first we are to labor to be convicted in conscience of the certentie of the
word. This done, we must the^ subject our wills to the commandment of God that
biddes us believe in Christ: we must bewail our unbelief: we must strive
against the same, and pray unto God to confirm and increase our faith, by
establishing our hearts in his love.

The second part of spiritual life is Peace of conscience, which is nothing
else but a constant and stable tranquillity of mind, when the conscience does
not accuse but excuse: and when neither hell, death, condemnation, nor any
danger is feared overmuch. This peace was in David, Psalm. 3.5.
when he said, I laid me down and slept, and rose again, in the midst of
manifold dangers. This peace is of great excellency, for it is the peace of
God: Phil. 4.7.
it is one part of the kingdom of God: Romans 4.17.
it passes all understanding: it is in stead of a guard to keep our hearts
and minds in Christ. Now this excellent peace springs out of our faith, whereby
we believe our reconciliation with god. Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith we
have peace with God. 1. Chron. 20.20. Trust in the Lord and ye shall be secure.
Yea, as our faith is, so is our peace: no faith, no peace: lively faith, lively
peace: constant faith, constant peace: faith in life, peace in life: faith in
death, peace in death: so as we may say with Simeon; Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace.

The third part of spiritual life is, Phil. 3.1.
the joy of the Holy Ghost: and that is to rejoice in God because he is our
God, and in Christ because he is our Christ. And this kind of joy is not taken
from us or abated in afflictions, but rather increased. Romans 5.3. We rejoice in
tribulatio^s. And Hebr. 10.34. Ye endured the spoiling of your goods with joy.
Now, our faith in the promise of life is the mother and breeder of this joy,
which arises of that happy and blessed conclusion that faith frames in the
mind; I believe: therefore the blessings of God promised in the Gospel, are
mine. 1. Pet. 1.8.
Thus says Saint Peter, Believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious. Again the continuance and increase of our faith, is the increase of
this joy.

The last part of spiritual life is, newness of life and conversation,
whereby we are borne anew, and made new creatures: not because the substance of
body and soul is changed, but because the image of God is restored. Now this
change both for the whole and for the parts thereof, is by faith. Touching the
whole: Men as they are new creatures have their beginning from the word of
promise, or from Christ crucified who is propounded in the promise, and that as
the said word, or Christ is apprehended by faith. Act. 15.9. Your hearts being
purified by faith. 1. Ioh. 3.3. He which has this hope, purifieth himself. 1.
Pet. 1.22. Your souls are purified in obeying the truth. And again, Being
borne anew of the immortal seed of the word.

The parts of newness of life are specially three: True wisdom, good
affections, good works. True wisdom is to advise of good things, and to use
good means for the execution thereof. This wisdom arises of our faith in the
word of God. David says he was vviser then his teachers, and vviser then the
ancient: and he renders the cause thereof from the work of his faith. For thy
testimonies are ever with me, and they are my meditation. Psalm. 98.99.
Out of the same fountain spring all good affections. The love whereby we love
God, comes of our faith, believing the love wherewith God loves us. The
persuasion of the forgiveness of many sins in the woman that washed Christ's
feet with her tears, Luke 7.47.
caused her to show much love to Christ. Godly sorrow, when the heart is
grieved properly for the offense of God, arises of faith apprehending and
believing the mercy of God in Christ. And in every good work, there is a
threefold action of faith required. First there is required an act of general
faith, which is to believe that the work to be done in his kind pleases god.
Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. The second is an act of
justifying faith, which is to purge the heart, and to cause it to bring forth
the good work to be done. Psalm. 116.10. I believed, therefore I spoke. The
third is also an act of justifying faith, and that is when the work is done,
to apprehend Christ who by his merit is to cover the defect of the work:
because no work of ours can please God without remission of sin.

Thus newnes of life with all the parts thereof, has his offspring of our
faith. Yea after that a man is once made a new creature, faith gives him his
life and sense: faith is the eye of the mind, whereby we behold Christ in the
word and sacraments. By this faith Abraham saw the day of Christ and rejoiced.
Ioh. 8.56.
With this eye we may sufficiently behold Christ; and bodily sight in this
case is not necessary for the time of this life: therefore Christ says, Ioh.
20.25.
Blessed are they which have not seen and have believed. Again faith is the
hand of the soul, whereby we lay hold on Christ and receive him with all his
benefits. It is the mouth of the heart, whereby we feed on Christ, eating his
body and drinking his blood to eternal life. It is the feet of the soul,
Genesis 5.^^.
that makes us walk with God. Lastly it is a means to bring us into
familiarity with God. For it is an ear whereby we hear God speak to us in
his word; and it is as it were the tongue of the soul, whereby we speak to
God by Invocation of his holy name.

To go yet further, Spiritual life is most of all manifest in afflictions and
temptations, in the bearing whereof faith reigns: and that by a threefold
action. First of all it makes us to depend on gods promises, and to trust God
without limitation. For it does not limit God to any set time of deliverance,
but leaves all to God. Isa. 16.28.
He that believes, does not make have. Dan. 9.
Daniel waited 70 years for deliverance out of captivity in Babylon, and then
finding the time of deliverance to be at hand, he prayed to God for the same. 2
Again faith does not limit God to any means of deliverance. God made promise
to Abraham of a blessed seed. For the verifying of this promise he gave him
Isaac in his old age. This don, he commands him to offer his only son in
sacrifice. A grievous cross: for by this means all hope is cut off, touching
the promised seed. Yet by faith Abraham still beleeuees the promise, and that
in the very offering of his son. Lastly, 3
faith does not limit God for the measure of affliction. Job says, He will
trust in God, Job 4.
though he kill him. It was a grievous affliction for David to be driven out of
his kingdom by his own son, yet mark what he says in the flight: If he say,
2. Sam. 15.26.
I have no delight in thee, behold here I am, let him do unto me as shall
seem good in his eyes. The second action of faith is to make us believe the
promises of God, when we feel the contrary, and in one contrary to believe
an other. When we feel our own sins, it makes us believe our justification:
when we feel our wretchedness and misery, it makes us believe our
happiness: when we feel nothing but death, it makes us believe our eternal
salvation: when we apprehend Gods anger and feel him to be our enemy, it
makes us to apprehende his mercy and to believe his fatherly kindness. When
Christ was forsaken of God, he even then by his faith believes God to be his
God. The third action of faith in afflictions, is to assure us of Gods
presence, and to behold him with the eyes of faith. Thus David says, Psalm.
16.18.
I have set the Lord always before me: for he is at my right hand. Moses left
Egypt and feared not the wrath of the king: Heb. 11.27.
because he saw him that was invisible. When the servant of Elisha feared over
much the host of the king of Syria that compassed the town of Dothan, ^. Reg.
6.19.
the Prophet prays to God for him that his eyes might be opened, to see the
fiery charets of the Angels of God protecting him: and we likewise are to pray
to God, that the eyes of our minds may be opened to believe and to acknowledge
the same or the like protection. And thus are men to live by faith in the midst
of their afflictions.

By this which has been said, we are admonished first of all to acquaint our
selves with the promises of God, as they are recorded in the books of the
Prophets and Apostles: secondly at all times to build upon them by our faith,
and not to suffer our selves to be drawn from them, though all temporal
blessings of God fail us, yea health and life it self. This is to arm our
selves with a shield against all the fiery darts of the devil, and to put on
a breast plate that will save the heart and life, Ephesians. 6.16. 1. Thest. 5.8.
though otherwise in temptations we be grievously maimed and foiled.

Thus much of spiritual life. That our temporal life is lead by faith, I make
it thus manifest. Temporal life is preserved and maintained by an honest
calling: every calling has his labor and work: and the labor of all callings
has misery and trouble for his companion and fellow; and in all these faith
reigns and bears the sway in them that believe.

For the first, that is for the choosing and holding of our callings with good
conscience, there is required a double use of faith. For we must have a faith,
whereby we must be assured that our callings are good and lawful in themselves:
as Paul says, What soever is not of faith, is sin. For the settling of this
faith, this rule must be remembered, That offices and callings which serve to
preserve the good estate of any family, Church, or commonwealth, are lawful
and of God: because these are estates ordained of God, and established in the
commandments of the moral law, specially in the first, fifth, and sixth
commandments. Again faith is required, whereby every man must believe that the
calling in which he is, is the particular calling in which God will be served
of him. For unless the conscience be settled in this, no good work can be done
in any calling. And for the better establishing of the conscience, an other
rule must be remembered, That they which are furnished with gifts for their
callings, namely aptness and willingness, and are thereunto called or set apart
by men whom it concerns to call, are indeed called of God. Thus the Elders
of Ephesus, Act. 20.28.
having gifts to feed, and being not called of God immediately, but by men, are
said to be made overseers by the holy Ghost. And Paul says, 2 Cor ^.1^. 1 Timothy
4.
that God committed not only to himself but also to Timothy the ministry
of reconciliation: and yet was Timothy not called immediately of God, but by
men. And thus, in all other offices and conditions of life, he that has gifts
sit for his place, and is in good manner called thereto by them whose duty it
is to call, may assure himself, that he is called of God. And from this double
faith and persuasion, that our calling is lawful in it self, and lawful or
pleasing God in respect of us, arises an assurance of the presence of God, and
of his protection, when we walk in the duties of our callings.

In the labor and work of our calling there is required a double action of
says. The first is to order our labors, that they be done in good manner,
that is, in obedience, and to good ends, that is, to Gods glory, and to the
good of men with whom we live. Heb. 11.7.
In this respect is Nohe said to build an Arc by faith, and good princes to
order their common wealths, and in way of protection to make war with their
enemies: ^^^ 33.34.
and thus must every man of every office, calling, trade, occupation, do his
duty by faith. The second action of faith is, in our daiely labors to
restrain and moderate our care. Men commonly take upon them a double care; one
is to do the works and labors of their callings; the other is to procure a
blessing and good success to their foresaid labors. But faith in Gods word
where it reigns, it stirs up the hearts of men only to the first care, which
is in the performance of their painful labors and duties, and it restraines
them from the second, causing them to leave it to God. For when men have done
the duty that appertains unto them, the^ faith makes them without any more
ado, to wait for a blessing on god. To this purpose the holy Ghost says,
Cast thy burden on the Lord and he shall nourish thee. Psalm. 55.23.
Again, Phil. 4.6.
Be nothing careful, but in all things let your requests be showed unto God in
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving: and, ^ Pet. 5.7.
Cast your care on God. Now this faith, whereby we depend on God for the
success of our labors, has an infallible ground, namely, That God best
knows our wants, and he will give unto us all things which he in his wisdom
knows to be necessary. Christ says, Math. 6.32.
Your heavenly father knows that you have need of these things, that is,
food and raiment. 1. Pet. 5.7.
Again, He cares for you: Psalm. 34.9.
and, nothing shall be wanting unto the^ that fear God. If men would by faith
build on these promises, they should not need like drudges of the world to
foil and spend themselves, and the best part of their days in worldly cares,
as they do. For they should have a greater blessing of God with less care, if
they would trust him: and they should have far more time then they have to
care for heaven and heavenly things.

Thirdly and lastly, every calling since the fall of Adam has misery and
affliction to be his companion. And for the quiet bearing of the miseries of
every calling, faith is of great moment. For it works patience by persuading
and settling our minds in two things: the first, that God is well pleased with
us, and that we are reconciled to God in Christ: the second, that all our
miseries shall in the end turn to our good and everlasting salvation. And
where these two persuasions take place, there is contentation in any estate.

Thus much for the meaning of the text: now follows the use. The first and
principal use concerns the information of our judgment, in the maine point
of our salvation. For hence Paul has taught us to gather, that a sinner is
justified before God by his faith, without the works of the law. And he
disputes on this manner: If a sinner be justified by faith, he is not justified
by the law: Gal. 3.11, 12.
but a sinner is justified by faith: therefore he is not justified by the law.
The conclusion is propounded in the eleven verse of the 3. chapter to the
Galatians. The major is confirmed in the 12. verse by the diverse manner of
justifying: The law (says Paul) justifies by doing, not by believing: and
faith justifies not by doing, but by believing. The minor is confirmed in the
11. verse by the testimony of the prophet Habacuk: The just shall live by his
faith. And whereas the Papists of our time say that Paul in this argument
disputes only against such works of the law as are done by nature, but not by
grace: they err and are deceived. For he opposes not works of nature and
works of grace, but works and faith doing and believing: and the prophet says
very plainly, and mark it; that the just man, who is a doer of the works of
grace, is justified and lives not by his works, but by his faith. Again,
where they make a double justification; one whereby a sinner is made a just
man, the other whereby a just man is made more just: and teach that the first
is by faith without works, and the second by faith and works, they err
likewise. For not only a sinner unconverted, but the just man stands just, and
is still justified by his faith without his works. Paul when he alleged this
text knew but of one justification, whether we respect the beginning or the
continuance and the accomplishment thereof.

Secondly, hence may be learned the right way of reformation of our lives. In
this reformation two things are required: an Examination, and a change. If we
examine our lives by this text, we shall find two maine faults and aberrations
in the lives of men. The first is, that they reject and put away the rule of
direction that serves for the ordering of their lives. And this they do, when
they do not believe and trust God in his word. And we may not think, that
this our unbelief is a small matter: because it is a mother sin of all other
sins: and it is the principal law of the kingdom of darkness, not to believe
God. Hereupon our enemy Satan endeavored by all means to imprint this lesson
of unbelief in the minds of our first parents: and having effected his
purpose, he ever since endeavored to make this sin to reign in the lives of
men. It reigns commonly by seven especial fruits or sins. The first is
Atheism, when men deny God and his word. Atheism has two parts: Epicurisme
and Temporising. Epicurisme is, when men contemning Gods comma^dements,
threatenings, promises, care for nothing but meat, drink, and pleasures.
Temporising is, when men embrace religion on-so far forth as they are forced
by laws and times, and no otherwise. These are the common sins of our days.
The second fruit is Heresy, and that is, when men distrust God in some
article of faith. This fruit abounds in this last age of the world: because in
these times the devil has revived the heresies of the former ages. The third
fruit is Apostasy, and that is when men change their faith and religion. And
this change is made, when the evil heart of unbelief causes them to depart
from the living God. Heb. 3.12.
This has been the fault of the people of this land in the days of
persecution. The fourth fruit is Hypocrisy, which is to make a show and
pretense of faith, and to want the power of it in honest and godly
conversation: or again, hypocrisy is nothing else but the unbelief of the
heart covered over with the false appearance of faith. And it is the common
sin of these times, in which a formal or ceremonial faith and ceremonial
repentance bear a great sway. For me^ make the highest degree of profession
that can be, when they come to the Lords table: and yet afterward take to
themselves liberty to live and do as they list. The fifth fruit is carnal
security, when men upon contempt of the judgments of God, and threatenings of
his word, go on still in their sins, flattering and soothing themselves.
Thus the sons in law of Lot, Genesis 19.4.
when they heard of the destruction of Sodom, esteemed it but as a mockery.
Thus did the Jews make a league with hell and death, Isa. 28.15. Math. 25.37.
and said with themselves that the scourges of God should not come at them.
And in this last age of the world, men shall wholly addict themselves to
pleasures and profits, thinking nothing of any judgment of God, till vengeance
befall them. The sixth is wilful ignorance of the will and word of God. For
the devil blinds the minds of unbelievers, that the light of the Gospel shine
not unto them. 2. Cor 4.4.
This is the fault of our common people, who commonly hold an opinion, that it
belongs not to the^ to know the word of God: because they are not learned (as
they say:) or because they have other business to think on. The last fruit is
worldlines, and that is when men mind nothing but worldly matters. And this
comes of the want of faith in the providence of God. Math. 6.30.
These are the principal fruits of unbelief, whereby it may easily be
discerned and discried where it is. And if any man think himself to have a
fullness and perfection of faith, as many do; even this one thing is a
sufficient argument of his unbelief. For it is the first stepp to faith, to
see in our selves the want of faith.

The second maine aberration in the lives of men is, that they set up false
Rules to order their lives by: and they are four. The first is the light of
natural reason. For many are of opinion, that it is sufficient to the pleasing
of God, if they live ciuilly, that is, do justice to every man, and live
peaceably, hurting none. This is the blind Divinity of the world, that if
they carry themselves thus and thus, whatsoever their sins be, God will hold
them excused. But they are far wide: for in a life acceptable to God, faith
is required; the light of reason will not serve the turn. Paul says, Romans 8.5.
The wisdom of the natural man is enmity to God: 1. Cor. 1.14.
and he can not discern the things of God. The Pharisees had civil justice and
goodness: yet says Christ, except your justice exceed theirs, ye cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven.

The second false Rule is Sense, that is, seeing and feeling: by this men
commonly live. If we enjoy the good blessings of God, health, wealth, liberty,
peace, honor, good report, then we can trust God: but if he withdraw his
blessings and present himself to us with an empty hand, we trust him no
longer, nay we murmr and despair, and without fear of God use any unlawful
means to relieve our selves. Though we have his precious word, yet do we not
trust him upon on his bare and naked word, unless withal he lay down unto us
some good pawn, and make us to feel and enjoy his good blessings. Again if
any man, that is our friend, make promise of help or deliverance in any
danger, we rest content and find our selves much eased thereby: and yet the
promises made by God in his word of help and deliverance, though they be often
read unto us, and often urged, breed not the like contentation. He that on his
death-bedde has commended his children to some trusty friend, departs more
quieted in mind, then if he had commended them without help of friend to God
their best father. A man upon good security lendes to an other, an 100. pounds
hoping for the principal with the increase at the years end: yet dare he not
skarse deliver an 100. pence to the poor members of Christ, upon the promise
and bond of God himself, who says, He that gives to the poor, lends to the
Lord, and he will return the said gifts with a blessing. Now all this comes to
pass, because men rather trust them whom they see, then God whom they never
saw Moreover it is a property of them that do indeed believe, to judge their
estate by feeling: but herein they deceive themselves. For we must live by
faith and not by feeling: and feeling is often deceitful. Because such as
finally fall away from God may have a feeling, or taste of the good word of God,
Heb. 6.2.
and of the powers of the life to come.

The 3. false Rule is False faith, which is without or against the word. Thus
the Turk lives by his false faith: the Jew by his: the Papist by his For he
believes as well the Traditions of men, as the word of God, and he puts his
trust not only in God, but also in the creatures, namely Saints and Angels.
Thus also do Magitians, sorcerers, witches, inchaunters, whatsoever they do,
by a satanicall faith in that covenant which they have made with the devil.
And such persons as ask counsel of witches and wizzards, called cunning men
and women; help themselves only by their false faith. For when they use
charms or spells, or like Satanicall ceremonies, they commonly find success
and are helped of the evils that betide them. And that comes to pass on this
manner. In the use of the foresaid ceremonies prescribed and delivered by
witches, they have a blind and erroneous faith: upon their faith follows a
Satanicall operation in effecting of the care desired For charms or spells
being but words have no virtue in them to ease or help man or beast, either
by creation or by any ordinance of God in his word: and therefore the effect
they have, is by the power of the devil upon man's faith. Let our common people
think on this, who though they much boast of their faith in Christ, yet when
they are in any extremity or danger, very commonly practice this Satanicall
faith.

The last false rule is, the lust of the heart: and by this rule do most men
square their lives. The lust that commonly rules is threefold: lust concerning
bodily pleasure, lust of worldly wealth, lust of honor, as S. John says, 1.
Ioh. 2.^^.
Whatsoever is in the world, is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and
the pride of life.

Thus much of the examination: now follows the change. That we may change our
lives in respect of unbelief, four things are required. The first is, that we
must acknowledge and bewail our unbelief with the manifold fruits thereof.
And we have good cause to do so. Ephesians. 1.1.
For by unbelief the devil erects his kingdom in men's hearts, and works his
pleasure in us and upon us. Secondly unbelief corrupts and defiles all our
actions whatsoever, though otherwise they be good and lawful in themselves.
Paul says, that to unbelievers all things are unclean, Tit. 1.15.
yea their minds and consciences are defiled. Thirdly unbelief depriues us of
the good blessings of god which otherwise we might enjoy. If ye believe not, ye
shall not be established, Isa 7.9.
says the Prophet. Mark. 6.^.
In Capernaum Christ could do no great wonders by reason of their unbelief.
Lastly unbelief plucks down upon men the plagues and judgments of God. Number.
20.1^.
Moses and Aaron were barred the land of Canaan for their unbelief. 2. King. ^.
A certain prince was trodden to death in the gates of Samaria, because he
would not believe the word of the Lord by the mouth of Elisha. Luk 1.^^.
Zachary was dumb for a time because he would not believe the message of the
angel. Many at this day, when the judgments of God lie heavy on them, say
presently they are fore spoken, and they cry out on this or that suspected
witch. But such persons are often deceived. For the great witch that does them
all the hurt, is the unbelief of their hearts whereby they distrust God in his
word: and this sin alone, if there were no witches in the world, is
sufficient alone to provoke God to plague and punish us sundry ways, and that
grievously. Therefore let us with bitterness of heart bewail our unbelief: and
the rather, because it is a step to faith to acknowledge the want of faith.

The second thing to be done, is to make examination whether we be in
conscience convicted of the certentie of the word or no. If we be not, we must
labor to be co^uinced. Because that natural atheism, whereby we doubt
whether the books of the Prophets and Apostles be the word of God or no,
hinders the certentie of faith. For the settling of the conscience in this
point, these arguments may be used. The first: it is a principle in nature that
there is a God: if there be a God, nature can say he is to be worshipped: if he
be to be worshipped, he has revealed himself and his will to man, for
otherwise he cannot be worshipped. And this revelation is to be found in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and in no other writings of men: because
we find the doctrine of Scriptures to be agreeable to the very nature and
majesty of God, and so is no other doctrine or learning whatsoever. For it is
the most ancient, and all other religions come far short of it. It is one and
the same, evermore consenting with it self, without change or alteration. The
Apostles agree with the prophets: the Prophets with Moses: and all with the
first revelation made at the creation Again Psalm. 10.6.11.13. and 14. 2. Luke
18.11, 12. Apoc. 18.7. 1. Cor. 2.14. Math. 12.24. Psalm. 7.8. Isa. 28.15. Luke
12.19.45.
it discouers and reueales the secret thoughts of men, that no art or learning
can discover: and this argues that it was penned by him who is the searcher of
all hearts. The second argument is a wonderful Evidence of the truth, not to
be found in any other writings in the world. This evidence stands specially in
eight things The first is, that the writers of Scriptures fully and plainly
set down their own faults, Number. 20.12. Psalm. 52. and 1.6 11. and 73. 11, 12.
1. Tim. 11.13.
yea their chiefest faults, not sparing to shame themselves in man's reason: and
this argues, that in writing they were guided by the spirit of truth. The
second is, that the books of Scriptures contain many mysteries above the reach
of man's reason, yet not against reason: because we may discern a truth in
them, and that by grounds and principles of reason. The third, that the
speeches of Scripture aim not at by-respects, but simply and absolutely give
and ascribe all glory to God alone. The fourth is, that the Scriptures
contain full and perfect doctrine for the pacifying, settling, and directing of
the conscience in all things. The fifth is, the holiness and purity of the
law of Moses, in that it accuses and condemns all men of sin, and
prescribes perfect righteousness. Herein it surpasses the laws of all
countries, commonwealths, kingdoms, whatsoever. The sixth is the wisdom that
appears in the policy or government of the commonwealth of the Jews set
down by Moses. The seventh is a reconciliation of justice and mercy
propounded in the Gospel. For in Christ justice and mercy meet, and justice
after a sort gives place to mercy. The eight thing wherein this evidence of
truth appears, is the consent of Scripture with it self: for doctrine agrees
with history, and every part with every part. This manifold evidence of truth
shows that scripture is from the god of truth. If any say, that they find no
such evidence in Scripture, I answer it is their own fault: for if they would
seriously read the Scriptures with prayer to God, it would appear. The third
argument is the Efficacy of the word: which appears on this manner. Heb.
4.12. 2. Cor. 10.
Gods word is flat contrary to the nature and corrupt disposition of man: and
yet for all this, when, being preached, it conuinceth and condemns men of
sin; it turns and conuerteth them to it self, and causes them to live and
die in the love and obedience thereof. This could it never do, unless it were
of divine operation. The fourth argument is, that the Prophets and Apostles
wrought miracles for the ratifying and confirming of their doctrine. Now these
miracles surpass the strength of nature, and were immediately from God: and
therefore the doctrine thereby confirmed, was also of God. The fifth and last
is, that the writings of the prophets and 1. King. 13.2.
Apostles contain many prophecies or predictions of things to come, that none
could foresee or foretell, but God. Isa. 44. end.
The name of Josias and his doings are foretold 330. years before he was
borne. Cyrus and his doings are mentioned more* then an 100. years before his
birth: now these and the like prophecies argue that the whole doctrine is of
God. By these and like arguments, are all that inwardly doubt of the word of
God, to settle and stablish their consciences.

This done: then follows the third point, and that is, that we must search and
inquire what is the substance and scope of the word of god. The scope of the
whole Bible is Christ with his benefits, and he is revealed, propounded, and
offered unto us in the maine promise of the word: the tenor whereof is, That
God will give remission of sins and life everlasting to such as will believe
in Christ. To this main promise, God has added a maine commandment, which
biddes us to believe the said promise, 2. Ioh. 3.23.
or to apply Christ with his benefits unto our selves. Now then our third
duty is, to subject our hearts and wills to this commandment that biddes us
believe in Christ. This is the subjection of faith, of which two things must be
observed. One is, that this is the first subjection that we can give to God, to
trust him upon his promise for the pardon of our sins, and for life eternal.
And from this subjection of faith arises our subjection to the whole word. In
Christ are all the promises of God, yea and amen: 2. Cor. 1.^^.
the law and the obedience of all the commandments thereof is established by
faith: without Christ no good thing can be done. The second point is, that this
subjection is easy in respect of that subjection which the law requires. The
perfect obedience of the law is impossible to all men except Christ, yea to
such as are borne anewe of the Holy Ghost, though for the time of this life,
they desire it never so earnestly. Yet faith in Christ and repentance is so
far forth possible to all that will and desire it, that whosoever does
seriously but will to and be converted, does indeed believe and is converted,
and does please God, and shall not perish eternally; although the beginning of
this faith and conversion be weak; so it be in truth and not counterfeit. Isa.
1.19. If ye will and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the land. Luke
11.13. Your heavenly father gives the holy Ghost to them that desire him.
Math. 11. My yoke is easy and my burden light. Therefore let us try our
selves whether we have a will to subject our selves to the word of God, that
biddes us believe in Christ. Nevertheless we may not think that this will to
believe is in our power. For it is by the special mercy of God stirred up in
the hearts of the Elect, by the operation of the Holy Ghost.

The fourth and last thing in this change is, that faith in Christ, or in the
word believed, must reign and rule in the heart: bringing the whole man in
subjection to the whole word of god. And this faith in Christ does: because
when it is once settled in the heart, it works in us a full and settled faith of
every part of the word of God; namely of his precepts and of his threats. Here
then our duty is to subject our selves by means of our faith to the whole
word: and to suffer nothing within us but it alone to bear sway. Col. 3.27.
This is the will of God: let the word of God dwell in you plentifully. The
good ground yelds it self and gives place, that the seed may take deep root.
It is a blessed thing to have the kingdom of God erected in our hearts: now
this kingdom is erected, when the word of God keeps all the powers of body
and soul in subjection. And when our faith in Christ brings our thoughts,
affections, words, deeds, sufferings in subjection to the word of God, then we
live by faith.

The third use follows: in that we are to live by our faith, we are taught to
seek for knowledge of the will and word of God, and daily to increase in the
same knowledge; specially to acquaint our selves with the commandments of God
that concern us, with his promises, and threatenings. For faith is the life of
our souls, and the word is the life of faith: because it is first kindled and
afterward confirmed by the hearing of Gods word. Again the word moderates our
faith, that we believe not more then we should, or come short in believing. The
word therefore that serves thus to limit our faith, must be known in his
several heads and points.

Fourthly, hence we learn how we are to carry our selves in greatest dangers,
as in the time of plague and pestilence, in the time of famine, in the time of
war and bloodshed, in the time of our last and deadly sickness. We have then
need of great help: and the only way is then to stay our selves and
establish our hearts by our faith on Gods promises. It is the very scope of
this text to teach this one point of doctrine to the Jews, being now
oppressed by the Babylonians. David in danger, and Christ in the time of his
passion, by their faith commend their spirits into the hands of God. Of the
martyrs and Saints of God, Heb. 11.36.
some were by their faith imprisoned, some racked, some stoned. Faith in
perilous times is of great use. First, when a man is half dead, it quickens
and puts life in him, as David says, Remember the promise made to thy servant,
Psalm. 119.49.
wherein thou have caused me to trust: it is my comfort in my trouble: for thy
promise has quickened me. Understand here the promise as it was tempered and
mingled with his faith. Again faith in the times of danger does as it were
sense and compass us with the promises of God. This may be gathered by the
opposition that is between these words and the former. The unjust man puffs
up himself; says the Prophet, or builds towers of defense to himself: but
the just man only believes: and that shall be to him in stead of all the
towers in the world. For it brings us under the presence, wing, and protection
of god: it makes him to be our safeguard and tower of defense. This doctrine is
to be thought on the rather; because, though we now enjoy peace and other
blessings of God, yet our common sins and especially our unbelief, calls
down for the great and grievous judgments of God.

Moreover, hence we are taught that every man must have a faith of his own,
The just man shall live by his OWN faith, says the Prophet. And good reason:
for every man is a creature of god and must do his homage to God by believing
in him: and because every man has need of Christ for himself: therefore must
every one have a faith of his own to lay hold on Christ. It may be objected,
that some time the faith of others has saved men. Mark. 2.5. When Christ saw
their faith, he said to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins are forgiven thee.
And, Iam. 5.6. The prayer of faith shall save the sick. I answer, that the
faith of one man may be a means to procure health of body and other temporal
blessings, yea faith unto others: yet cannot any man receive pardon of sins,
and eternal life but for himself. Therefore when it is said in the first
place, When he saw their faith, the faith of the palsy man must not be
excluded but included: and the place of James speaks only of the bodily
health.

Again, it may be alleged, that seeing we are justified by the justice of an
other, namely of Christ: we may also be justified and saved by the faith of an
other. I answer, that the reason is not like, because the obedience of Christ
is both his and ours: his, because it is in him: ours, because it is applied
unto us by God, and received by our faith: and the like can not be said of the
faith of any other man.

Thirdly it may be alleged, that infants have no faith of their own. I
answer, there be three opinions touching Infants faith. The first, that infants
have actual faith wrought in them by the holy Ghost: because it is said, Mat.
18.6. Whosoever offends one of these little ones that believes in me. But
this opinion seems to be an untruth: because faith presupposes understanding
and knowledge, which infants want. Again, if infants received to believe when
they are young, they would, no doubt, show it when they come to be of years:
but faith they show none, unless they attain unto it afterward by diligent
teaching and instruction. And the place in Matthew may be understood of men of
years, who if they have contrite and humbled hearts, are little ones believing
in Christ. Again, children after some years by good education and
instruction, may attain to some knowledge and consequently to faith. Thus
Timothy was brought up in the Scripture of a child. The second opinion is,
that all places of Scripture entreating of faith are to be understood of men of
years, and that children are saved by some other unknown and unspeakable way
without faith. I somewhat doubt of this: Muk. 16.16
because it is said, Whosoever believes not is already condemned. Again,
Without faith it is impossible to please God. The third opinion is, that
children have faith after a sort: because the parents according to the tenor
of the covenant, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, believe for
themselves and their children; and therefore their faith is not only theirs
but also the faith of their children. Hence it is that the Scripture says, If
the root be holy, the branches are holy: and, Romans 12.
If ye believe, 1. Cor. 7.1^.
your children are holy. According to humane law, the father and his heirs are
but one person, the father couenanting for himself and his children: what then
should hinder, that the father might not believe for his child, and the child
by the parents faith have title to the covenant, and the benefits thereof. It
is alleged, Bella^. l. 1, de bapt* c 4.
that by this means children shall be borne believers, and so be conceived and
borne without original sin. I answer: Believing parents sustain two
persons: one, whereby they are men: and thus they bring forth children having
man's nature with all the corruptions of nature. The other, as they are holy men
and believers: and thus they bring forth infants that are not so much their
children as the children of God. And Infants are Gods children not by virtue of
their birth, but by means of parents faith, which intitles them to all the
blessings of the covenant. Children proportionally sustain a double person: If
they be considered in and by themselves, they are conceived and borne in
Original sin. If they be considered as they are holy and believe by the
faith which is both theirs and their parents faith, and consequently have by
this means title to Christ and his benefits; original sin is covered, and
remitted. If it be said, that by this means all children of believing parents
are the children of God; I answer, that we must presume that they are all so;
leaving secret judgments to God. To this third opinion I most incline: because
we are to judge, that infants of believing parents in their infancy dying are
justified, and I find no justification in Scripture without faith. And this
has been the judgment of ancient fathers. Aug. sermon. 14. of the words of
the Apostle. How (says he) do infants believe? by the faith of the parents.
If by the faith of parents they be purged, by parents sin they are polluted.
The body of sin in the first parents begot them sinners: and the spirit of
life in their latter parents did regenerate them to be believers. Bernard,
epist. 77. says, Among the nations as many as were faithful, if they were of
years, we believe that they were cleansed by faith and the sacrifices, and that
the parents faith alone avails for children, yea that it is sufficient for
them. Again, It is meet and for the honor of God, that to whom age denies
their own faith, See further Justin. 9.56. Aug epist. 23.57.105. de bapt. l.
4. c. Bernar. ser. 66. in Cant.
grace should grant to them a benefit by the faith of an other.

Thus then it is manifest, that every person must have a faith of his own.
Hence we learn, that the doctors of the Romish Church err and are deceived,
Immanuel Sa. in Aphorismis co^festatiorum*
when they teach, that a man may rest himself in the faith of his teachers,
believing in sundry things only as the Church believes, though he knew not
distinctly what is the faith of the Church. Again, here the Popes pardons fall
to ground. For in vain does the Pope by the power of the keys, apply the
meritorious works and the satisfactorie sufferings of one man to an other,
considering every man is saved only by his own faith. The wise virgins
professed that they had oil no more then served their own turns. They knew
not the popish doctrine, that men might have good works enough for themselves,
and an overplus for others. upon Mat. 25.
Hilarie gathers hence, that one man's good works cannot be applied to an
other. Hierome says, ibidem.
Every man shall receive a reward for his own works: and that one man's works
cannot cover another man's faults in the day of judgment. The speech of Leo may
stop the mouths of all Papists. Sermon. 12. de passione.
Though (says he) the death of the Saints be preticus in the sight of God, yet
the killing of no innocent is the reconciliation of the world. The righteous
have received crowns but they have not given crowns. And the fortitude of
believers ministers examples of patience, but not gifts of justice. For the
deaths of them all were private or particular: neither did any of them by his
funeral discharge another man's debt: considering among the sins of men,
Christ our Lord is only found in whom all are crucified, dead, and buried, and
rise again. Paul indeed says to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 12.15.
that he desired to be bestowed for their souls: and, 2. Tim. 2.
that he suffers all things for the elect: but this he speaks in respect of
his Apostolical ministry, and not in respect of any works of satisfaction,
performed by him in the behalf of others. Again he says, I bear in mine
own body the remainders of the sufferings of Christ: Coloss. 3.
but these remainders are the sufferings which every man must bear for himself
For every disciple of Christ, must take up his own cross, and so accomplish
the sufferings of the whole mystical body.

Thirdly by this we learn, not to rely on the gifts, suffrages, and prayers
of others: but to seek for a sufficient and lively faith of our own. The
foolish virgins that supposed they might have furnished themselves with
sufficient oil of the wise virgins, were utterly disappointed. Therefore the
speech of the Papists is to be detested: ^ollar. de Indulg c. 14. p. 85.
namely, that the suffrages of the living, that is, their fastings, prayers,
alms, masses, etc. do three ways help the dead, by way of merit of
co^gruitie, by way of entreaty, and by way of satisfaction.

Lastly here we learn that faith and the justice of good conscience must
always go together. And for this cause it is not said, that man lives by
faith, but the just man. Let all protestants learn and remember this. For it
is Gods commandment that we should jointly keep faith and good conscience.
And it is a common offense to Atheists, papists, worldlings, that such as
pretend faith, fail in the righteousness of good conscience. Some it may be,
will say, that it shall suffice for the^ to call upon God when they are dying,
and to die by faith. I answer, that we must not only die and be saved, but
also live in this world by our faith.

FINIS.

