THE ART OF PROPHESYING: Or A TREATISE CONCERNING the sacred and only true
manner and method of Preaching.

First written in Latin by Master William Perkins: and now faithfully
translated into English (for that it contains many worthy things fit for the
knowledge of men of all degrees) by Thomas Tuke.

Nehem. 8. 4. 5. 6. And Ezra the Scribe stood upon 1
a pulpit of wood, which he had made for the preaching. And Ezra opened the
book before all the people: for he was above all the people: and when he
opened it, all the people stood up. Moreover, Ezra praised the Lord the great 2
God, and all the people answered, Amen, Amen, -- verse. 7. In like manner
Ieshua and Bani 3
etc. verse. 8. And they read in the book of the law of God distinctly: and
gave the sense, and 4
caused them to understand the reading. Imprinted at London by Felix Kyngston
for E. E. and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Swan. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR WILLIAM ARMIN Knight.
SIR, many and excellent benefits has the Lord in mercy vouchsafed to us
these eight and forty bypast years together: of which this is not the least,
if not the greatest, that he has dispelled the duskie clouds of Popish
darkness as palpable as that of Egypt, and has caused the Sunlight Exo. 10.
21.
of the Gospel to shine clearly in all our coasts. He shows his word unto
us, as he did unto Iaacob, Psa. 147. 19
his statutes and his judgments, as he did sometimes to Israel. He has given
us his Prophets and Ambassadors, which do serve like that cloud and pillar
of fire to direct us Exo. 13. 22
in our pilgrimage through the wilderness of this wicked world into celestial
Canaan. He has thrust forth many faithful and industrious laborers into his
Vineyard to prune and to dress the vines of our souls, that we may bring
forth the grapes of piety and the clusters of justice; (unless we will needs
be like to the Cypress, which, as Pliny says, can endure no husbanding, but
makes that her malady, which is a medicine to other trees) Amongst whom the
Author of this learned Tractate did show himself with the foremost; carrying
always with him a Light of learning, and a Lamp of godly living. And, qualis
vita, finis ita; As he was a Lamp whiles he lived, so like a Lamp, alijs
inseruiens seipsum consumpsit. His whole life was labor, seribenda dicens and
legenda scribens. One whereof was this present discourse and platform
concerning the true understanding and using of the Scriptures, written in his
younger years: which I am bold to present and dedicate to your Worship in this
plight you see; partly because it is a Thesaurus and storehouse of excellent
precepts, (as Domitius Piso says that books should be such) having in it
(...), sufficient furniture to further perfection in that sacred science: and
partly to demonstrate my gratitude, and devoted affection to you, who have
always bin a constant patron (etiam minitante Fortuna) to my nearest and
dearest friends.

Thus I take my humble leave, desiring your kind acceptance, and so commend
your Worship with your whole progeny to the protection of the Lord. London,
Ian. 1. 1606.

Your Worships in all duty Thomas Tuke.

TO THE FAITHFVLL MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL: AND to all that are desirous of,
and do labor for the knowledge of Holy learning.
THat common place of divinity, which concerns the framing of Sermons, is
both weighty and difficult, if there be any other throughout all that sacred
science. For the matter, which it is to explicate and treat on, is Prophecy;
an excellent gift indeed, whether we consider it in respect of dignity, or of
use. The dignity thereof appears, in that like a Lady it is highly mounted
and carried a loft in a Chariot: whereas all other gifts, both of tongues and
arts, attend on this like handmaides a loofe off. Answerable to this dignity
there is also a two fold use: one, in that it serves to collect the Church,
and to accomplish the number of the Elect: the other, for that it drives away
the Woolues from the foldes of the Lord. For this is indeed that Flexanima,
that allurer of the Soul, whereby men's froward minds are mitigated and moved
from an ungodly and barbarous life unto Christian faith and repentance. This
also is that Engine, which as it has shaken (the foundation of) ancient
heresies, so it has in these few bypast years, cut asunder the sinews of
that great Antichrist. Wherefore if it be demanded which is the most excellent
gift of all, doubtless the praise must be given to Prophesying. Now by how
much the more excellent every thing is, by so much the more diligently it ought
to be adorned with variety and plenty of precepts. Therefore, when I saw this
common place so handled of many, as that it would remain naked and poor, if
all other arts should call for those things, which are their own: I perused
the writings of Divines, and having gathered some rules out of them, I have
couched them in that method, which I have deemed most commodious: that they
might be better for use, and fitter for the memory. I do also publish them,
that they might be approved, if they bring with them that which is good: if
any evil, that they may receive their deserved punishment. And whosoever thou
art that please to read them, where thou art persuaded of this order of
Preaching, which here I handle, walk on with me: where thou stand at a
stay, inquire with me: or when.
where thou perceiuest thine own errors, return to me: where thou see mine,
call me back to thee. For that, which now likes me, shall dislike me, if it
like not gadlie and moderate minded men. But if any man shall carpe at this my
travail, though very small, let him know, that my only meaning is to benefit
the Church of God: and that the conscience of my fact is a sufficient mu^^ment
against all calumnies. I do now betake you to God, and this (tractate of the)
art of Prophesying, both to you and to God. Anno 1592. December. 12.

WILLIAM PERKINS.

The Analysis of the whole book.
The Art of Prophesying. The parts thereof are two, 1. Preaching: in which
consider 1. The object, which is the word of God: in it note, 1. The
excellency thereof. 2. The parts, which are the two Testaments, 1. The Old,
whose books are, Historical. Dogmaticall. Prophetical.

2. The New.



2. The parts, which are 1. The preparation or provision of the Sermon,
consisting of Interpretation of the Text Analogicall and plain. or, Crypticall
and dark.

The cutting or dividing of it aright, consisting of The resolving or
vntwisting of it. The applying of it 7. Ways of applying it. The parts, which
concern The understanding by Doctrine. Redargution, or improouing.

The Practice by Instructing. Correcting.









2. The uttering of the Sermon The hiding of humane wisdom. The demo^stration
of the spirit, in The speech, which must be Spiritual. Gracious: grace is of,
1. The person, to wit, holiness, 1. An inward feeling. 2. A good conscience.
3. The fear of God. 4. A love of the people.

2. Of the Ministry, Authority. Zeal.





The gesture and action of The voice. The body.









2. Conceiving of public Prayer: in which note 1. The matter. 2. The form.
3. The parts, Meditation. Ordering. Uttering.





THE ART OF PROPHESYING.
CHAP. 1.
THe Art or faculty of Prophesying is a sacred doctrine of exercising
Prophecy rightly.

Prophecy (or Prophesying) is a public and solemn speech of the Prophet,
pertaining to the worship of God, and to the salvation of our neighbor. 1.
Cor. 14. 3. But he that prophecieth speaks unto men to edification, to
exhortation and to consolation. Verse 24. But if all prophecy, and there come
in one that believes not, or one unlearned, he is rebuked of all men, and is
(...).
judged of all men, Romans 1. 9. God is my witness, whom I serve (or worship
(...)) in my spirit in the Gospel of his Son.

CHAP. II.
Of the Preaching of the Word.

THere are two parts of Prophecy: Preaching of the Word, and Conceiving of
Prayers.

For in speaking there are only two duties of the Prophet, that is of the
Minister of the word; to wit, Preaching of the word, and Praying unto God in
the name of the people. Romans 12. Having prophecy, let us prophecy according
to the (...).
proportion of faith. Genesis 20. 7. Deliver the man his wife again, for he is a
Prophet: and when he shall pray for thee, thou shall live. For this cause the
word (Prophecy) is given also to prayers. 1. Chron. 25. 1. The sons of
Asaph, and Heman and Ieduthun, who were singers, prophesied with Harpes, with
Uials, and with cymbals. 1. King. 18. 26. The Prophets of Baal called upon the
name of Baal from morning to noone. 29. And when midday was passed, and they
had prophesied until the offering of the evening sacrifice.

And every Prophet is partly the voice of God, to wit, in preaching: and
partly the voice of the people, in the act of praying, Ier. 15. 19. If thou
take away the precious from the vile, thou shall be as it were My Mouth. Nehe.
8. 6. And Hezra blessed the Lord the great God, and all the people answered
Amen.

Preaching of the word is Prophesying in the name and room of Christ, whereby
men are called to the state of Grace, and conserved in it. 2. Cor. 5. 19. And
has committed to us the word of reconciliation. 20. Therefore we are
Ambassadors for Christ: as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
the name of Christ, that ye be reconciled to God. 2. These. 2. 13. 14. God has
from the beginning elected you to salvation, through sanstification of the
Spirit, and faith embracing the truth: whereunto he called you by our Gospel.
Romans 1. 16. The Gospel is the power of God to salvation to every one that
believes. Prou. 29. 18. When there is no vision the people are naked. Romans 10.
14.

CHAP. III.
Of the Word of God.

THe perfect and equal Or, the word of God is the whole and only matter,
about which preaching is exercised: it is the field in which the Preacher must
contain himself.
object of Preaching is the Word of God. Lok. 16. 29. They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. Mat. 23. 2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in
Moses chair, that is, they teach the doctrine of Moses which they do
profess. 3. All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and
do.

The Word of God is the wisdom of God concerning the truth, which is
according unto godliness descending from above. Iam. 3. 17. But the wisdom,
which is from (...).
above is first pure, etc. Tit. 1. 1. Paul a Servant of God -- according to the
acknowledging of the truth, which is according unto godliness.

Admirable is the excellency of the Word, which is evident partly by the
nature thereof, partly by the operation.

The excellency of the nature is either the perfection thereof, or the
eternity.

The perfection is either the sufficiency or the purity. The sufficiency is
that, whereby the word of God is so complete, that nothing may be either put to
it, or taken from it, which appertains to the proper end thereof. Psalm. 19.
7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
Whatsoever I command you, take heed ye do it: thou shall put nothing
thereto, nor take ought therefrom. Revel. 22. 18. 19.

The purity thereof is, whereby it remains entire in it self, void of
deceit and error, Psalm. 12. 6. The words of the Lord are pure words, as
silver tried in a furnace of earth fined seven times.

The eternity of the word is that, whereby it abides inviolable, and cannot
pass until all that, which it commands, be fully accomplished, Matthew. 5.
18.

The excellency of operation is that, whereby it is endowed with virtue; first
to discern the spirit of man, Heb. 4. 12. For the word of God is lively, and
mighty in operation, and sharper then any two-edged sword, and enters through
even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, and of the joints and the
marrow, aad discerns the thoughts and intents of the heart. Secondly, to bind
the conscience. Iam. 4. 12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to
destroy. Esa. 33. 21. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the
Lord is our King, he will save us. To bind the conscience is to constrain it
either to accuse us or to excuse us of sin before God.

The Word is in the holy Scripture.

The Scripture is the word of God written in a language fit for the Church by
men immediately called to be the Clerks or Secretaries of the holy Ghost. 2.
Pet. 1. 21. For prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but the holy
men of God spoke as they were carried and moved by the * (...).
holy Ghost.

It is called Canonical, because it is as it were a Canon, that is to say, a
Rule or Line of the Master workman, by the help whereof the truth is both
first to be found out, and also afterward to be examined. Gal. 6. 16. And as
many as walk according to this (...).
Canon or Rule. Therefore the supreme and absolute determination and judgment
of the controversies of the Church ought to be given unto it.

The Sum of the Scripture is contained in such a syllogism (or form of
reasoning, as this is which follows.) The Mayor, or Proposition.
The true Messiah shall be both God and Man of the seed of David; he shall be
borne of a Uirgin; he shall bring the Gospel forth of his Fathers bosom; he
shall satisfy the Law; he shall offer up himself a sacrifice for the sins
of the faithful; he shall conquer death by dying and rising again; he shall
ascend into heaven; and in his due time he shall return unto judgment. But
The Minor or Assumption.
Jesus of Nazaret the Son of Mary is such a one; He The conclusion.
therefore is the true Messiah.

In this syllogism the Mayor is the scope or principal drift in all the
writings of the Prophets: and the Minor in the writings of the Evangelists and
Apostles.

The Scripture is either the New Testament or the Old.

The old testament is y^ first part of the Scripture, written by the Prophets
in the Hebrew tongue, or at least in the Chaldie, unfolding chiefly that old
covenant of works. Luke 16. 29. and 24. 27. And he began at Moses, and at all
the Prophets, and interpreted unto them in all the Scriptures the things which
were written of him.

It is distinguished by books, which are either Historical, or Dogmaticall,
or Prophetical.

The Historical books are stories of things done, for the illustration and
confirmation of that doctrine which is propounded in other books. 1. Cor. 10.
11. Now al these things came upon them for (...).
ensamples: and were written to admonish us. Romans 15. 4. For whatsoever things
were written afore-time, are written for our learning.

These books are in number fifteen.

1 Genesis, which is an history of the creation, fall, promise, and of the
state of the Church conserved (and shut up) in private families.

2 Exodus, which is an history of the deliverance of the Israelites from the
Egyptians, of their going out of Egypt, of the promulgation of the Law, and
of the Tabernacle.

3 Leuiticus, which contains a story of the Ceremonial worship.

4 Numbers, which is an history of their martial marching into the land of
Canaan.

5 Deuteronomie, which is a commentary repeating and explicating the Laws out
of the foresaid books.

6 The book of Joshua, which declares their entrance into, and possession of
the land of Canaan under Joshua.

7 The book of the Judges, which comprehends an history of the corrupt and
miserable condition of the Church and Commonwealth of Israel from Joshua to
Eli.

8 The book of Ruth, which is an history concerning the marriages and
posterity of Ruth.

9 The first and second book of Samuel, which is a story of things done under
Eli and Samuel Priests, and under Saul and David Kings.

10 The first and second book of Kings, which makes a narratio^ of things
achieved in the days of the Kings of Israel and Judah.

11 The first and second book of Chronicles, which is a methodicall history
of the beginning, increase, and ruin of the people of Israel, serving to
explain and show the Line or Lineage of Christ.

12 The book of Ezra, which contains an history of their return from
captivity in Babylon, and of the beginning of the Restoring of the city.

13 The book of Nehemiah, which speaks of the restoring of the city which
was to be finished.

14 The book of Hester, which is an history of the preservation of the Church
of the Jews in Persia by Hester.

15 The book of Job, which is an history entreating of the causes of
tentations, as also of his manifold conflicts, and lastly of his happy issue.

The Dogmaticall books are those, which teach and prescribe the Doctrine of
Divinity.

These are four in number.

1 The book of Psalms, which contains sacred songs to be fitted for every
condition both of the Church and the particular members thereof, and also to be
sung with grace in the heart, Col. 3. 16.

2 The book of Proverbs, which is a treatise of Christian manners, teaching
piety toward God, and justice toward our Neighbor.

3 The Eeclesiastes.
book of the Preacher, which discloseth the vanity of al humane things, so
far forth as they are used without the fear of God.

4. The The book of Canticles.
Song of Songs, which speaks of the mutual communion of Christ with the
Church, under an allegory of a Or husband and spouse.
Bridegroom and his Bride.

The Prophetical books are Predictions, either of the judgments of God for the
sins of the people, or of the deliverance of the Church, which is to be
perfited at the coming of Christ.

But with these predictions That is, the Prophets
they do mingle the doctrine of repentance, and do almost always use
consolations in Christ to them that do repent.

It is their custom also for the helping of their hearers memory and
understanding to propound their sermons briefly, which they made at large.
Esa. 8. 1. Moreover the Lord said unto me, take thee a great roll, and write
in it with a man's pen. Hab. 2. 2. Write the vision, and make it plain upon
tables, that he may run that reads it.

Prophecies are either greater or lesser.

Greater are such as do more plentifully deliver all those things that are
foretold; as the prophecy of Esaias, Jeremy, Ezekiel, Daniel.

Hitherto belong the Lamentations of Jeremy, touching the misery of the
people of the Jews about the time of the death of Josiah.

Lesser prophecies are those, which entreat more sparingly or briefly of all
those things that are foretold, or at least of some of them; as the prophecy
of Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obediah, Jonas, Michah, Nahum, Habakuk, Zephanie, Hagge,
Zachary, Malachie.

Thus much for the Old testament.

The New Testament is the second part of the Scripture written in the Greek
tongue by the Apostles, or at least approved of them, propounding plainly the
doctrine of the new covenant. Ephesians. 2. 20. And are built upon the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles.

Peter approved the Gospel of Mark, at whose motion and appointment it was
written by Mark, as it pleases Nicephorus to auerre, Lib. 2. cap. 45. And
John, that wrote the Gospel, approved the Gospel of Luke. It is of small
moment, which is reported by Eusebius; to wit, that it is apparent by two
places (2. Tim. 2. 8. and Romans 2. 16.) that Paul was the author of that
Gospel, which is called Lukes. For Paul does not here speak of any one book,
but of his whole ministry: for he adds, In * which I suffer trouble as an
evil doer even unto bonds, 2. Tim. 2. 9. (...).


The new Testament contains partly Histories, and partly Epistles. The
Histories are:

1 The four Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John: which are an history of
the life, deeds, and doctrine of Christ exhibited unto the world, continuing
from his conception even until his ascension into heaven.

And there are four writers: two that were hearers, and two that were
eyewitnesses, that they might give greater assurance of the truth of the
history.

The difference betwixt the Evangelists is on this wise: Matthew lays open
the doctrines which Christ delivered. Mark sets down the history briefly:
yet did he not make an abridgement of the Gospel which Matthew wrote, as
Hierome supposed. For he begins his discourse in a diverse manner, and
proceeds in another order, partly entreating of things more largely, and
partly interlacing of new matters. Luke aims at or frames a perfect
history, and described in a certain order. John is almost wholly taken up in
laying open the Godhead and benefit of Christ, which is derived from his
Godhead unto us.

Hierome distinguishes the Evangelists by their beginnings or entrance. He
says Matthew is like a man, because he begins with the Manhood of Christ. He
likens Mark to a Lion, because he begins with the preaching of John, which
was like the roaring of a Lion. He compares Luke to an Ox, because he
begins with Zachary the Priest offering his sacrifice. He compares John to
an Eagle, because he does (as it were) so are up aloft and begin with the
Godhead of Christ.

2 The Acts of the Apostles, which is an orderly history, specially relating
the deeds of Peter and Paul: that there might be an ensample of governing the
Church extant. 2. Tim. 3. 10. 11.

3 The Revelation which is a prophetical history concerning the condition of
the Church from the age in which John the Apostle lived unto the end of the
world.

The Epistles follow. 1. thirteen Epistles of Paul.

1 To the Romans, of justification, sanctification, and the duties of
Christian life. 2 The first to the Corinthes, concerning the reforming of the
abuses of the Church of Corinth. 3 The second to the Corinthes, containing
chiefly the defense of himself and of his Apostleship against his
adversaries. 4 To the Galatians about justification by faith without the works
of the Law. 5 To the Colossians, 6 To the Philippians 7 To the Ephesians 8 The
1. to the These. 9 The 2. to the These.
Which confirm the Churches in doctrine, and in the duties of Christian life.
10 The 1. to Timothy: 11 The 2. to Timothy:
Which prescribe the form of ordering the Church aright.
12 The Epistle to Titus, of ordering the Church of the Cretians. 13. To
Philemon, of receiving Onesimus.
The Epistle to the Hebrews, concerning the person and offices of Christ, and
of faith bringing forth fruit in good works.

The Epistle of James, concerning works to be joined with faith.

The first and second Epistle of Peter, touching sanctification and the works
of new obedience.

The first Epistle of John, concerning the signs of fellowship with God.

The second Epistle of John to the elect Lady, about perseverance in the truth.

The third Epistle of John to Gayus, concerning hospitality and constancy in
that which is good.

The Epistle of Jude, of constancy in the faith against false Prophets.

And thus the Canonical Scripture is distinguished by her books.

Now there are very strong proofs, which show that she alone is the word of
God, and no other besides.

Of these proofs one does make a man certainly to Probatio (...), and (...).
know the same, the other does but declare or testify it.

Of the former kind there is only one, namely the inward testimony of the
holy Ghost speaking in the Scriptures, and not only telling a man within in his
heart, but also effectually persuading him that these books of the Scripture
are the word of God. Isai. 59. 21. My Spirit, that is upon thee, and my words
which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth -- from
henceforth even for ever.

The manner of persuading is on this wise: The Eelect having the Spirit of God
do first discern the voice of Christ speaking in the scriptures. Moreover,
that voice, which they do discern, they do approve: and that which they do
approve, they do believe. Lastly, believing they are (as it were) sealed with
the seal of the Spirit. Ephe. 1 13. Wherein also after that ye believed, ye
were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise.

The Church also may bear witness of the Canon, persuade she cannot. For by
this means the voice of the Church should be of greater force then the voice
of God: and the whole state of man's salvation should depend upon men; than
which what can be said to be more miserable?

Object. The Scripture is the word of God by it self, but it is not so to us,
but by the judgment of the Church. Ans. 1. The distinction is vain. For, the
first part thereof shows the manner, whereby the Scripture is the word of
God: the latter part shows not the manner how, but the person to whom. 2. The
Scripture does also testify the same thing with that kind of testimony, which
is surer even then all the oaths of men. For we have the voice of the holy
Ghost speaking in the Scripture: who does also work in our hearts a certain
((...)) full persuasion of the Scriptures, when we are exercised in hearing,
reading and meditating of the^. Neither do we believe a thing, because the
Church says it is to believed: but therefore we do believe a thing, because
that which the Church speaks, the Scripture did first speak. Yea the Church
cannot stand, nor yet be imagined without faith: faith is not without the word:
which word is the Rule or Object of faith: and not the judgment, though it be
of most holy men. 3. He which doubts of the Scriptures, will doubt as well of
the testimony of the Church.

Object. 2. The Church has a judgment to determine of matters, Act. 15. 28.
It seems good to the holy Ghost and to us. Ans. 1. The sovereign or supreme
judgment concerning matters of faith belongs to the holy Ghost speaking in
the Scriptures. The ministry of judgment (or a ministerial judgment) is
only given unto the Church: because she must judge according to the Scriptures:
and because she does not this always, but sometimes fails. 2. The Apostles
were present at that Council which was held at Jerusalem, who were men that
had authority which was * of it self to be believed, (...).
which authority the Ecclesiastical ministry now has not.

The proof of declaration or testification is that, which does not demonstrate
or persuade, but only testify, and by certain tokens approve the true Canon.
This proof is manifold.

First, the perpetual consent of the Church: of the ancient Church of the
Jews. Romans 3. 2. For chiefly, because unto them were of credit committed the
Oracles of God. And of the new and latter Church. 1. From Christ and the
Apostles, who cited testimonies forth of those books.

2. From the Fathers. First, Origin, as Eusebius testifies, Lib. 6. 18. and
23. 2. Melito, as the same Eusebius witnesses; Lib. 4. 3. Athanasius. 4.
Cyril, Sermon. 4. 5. Cyprian, or rather Ruffine in his exposition of the Creed.
6. In his preface upon the first Psalm. 7. Hierome, in Prologo Gal. and in his
preface upon the books of Solomon. 8. Epiphanius, in his book of weights and
measures. 9. Damascene in his fourth book of faith, chap. 18. 10. Gregory,
Moral. on Job. lib. 9. chap. 27.


3. In Councels, the Nicene, and Laodiccan. Can. 59.

With these agree Hugo de Sancto Victore in his first book of Sacraments,
chap. 7. N. Lyra in his prologue upon the books of Aprocrypha. Hugo Cardinalis
in prologo in Iosuam.

Secondly, the consent in part made by the Gentiles, and enemies affirming the
same things, which are delivered in holy Scriptures.

1. Of the creation spoke Homer, and Plato in Timaeo.

2. Of Christ, Josephus lib. 20. Antiquit. cap. 6. and 8. and in his sixth book
of the war of the Jews, chap. 8. and book the 6. chap. 25. 27. 28. 47.

3. Of the Redeemer of the world, who was to be exhibited in the last times,
prophesied the Sibylls, as Lactantius records, lib. 4. cap. 6. and Cicero,
lib. 2. de Diuinat. and Virgil in the fourth Eclogue.

4. Of the miracles of Christ, Suetonius speaks in Nero: and Tacitus, lib. 5.
and 20.

5. Of the Wisemens star, Plin. lib. 2. and. 25.

6. Of the slaughtering of the infants, Macrobus in Satur.

7. Of the death of Herod Agrippa, Josephus in his 19. book of Antiquities,
chap. 7.

8. Of the flood, Berosus in those fragments which are extant. Josephus Antiq.
book 1. chap. 3. And the Poets.

9. Of the tower of Babel Eupolemus speaks, as Eusebius testifies, De
praeparat. Euangel.

10. Of the Dove which Noe sent out, Plutarch mentions, Lib. quod Bruta sunt
rationalia.

11. Of Iaphet the son of Noe the Poets fable many things.

12. Of Abraham's sacrifice, Alexander Polyhist.

13. Of the miracles of Moses, Pliny speaks: though he do ill in calling him
a Magitian.

Thirdly, the Antiquity of the word, for it contains in it a narration of
things done from the beginning of the world. But the most ancient humane
History whatsoever was not written by any before the days of Ezra and
Nehemiah, who were about the year of the worlds creation 3500.
three thousand and five hundredth.

Fourthly, the most certain accomplishment of the prophecies: as are these, of
the calling of the Gentiles: of Antichrist: of the apostasy of the Jews, etc.

Fifthly, the matter thereof: which is of one true God, of the true worship of
God, and that God is the Savior.

Sixthly, the consent of all the parts of the Scripture.

Seauenthly, the miraculous preservation of the Scriptures in the perils of the
Church, and in the time of general reuolting.

Eighthly, the operation thereof: for it conuerteth men, and though it be
flatly contrary to the reason and affections of men, yet it wins them unto
it self.

Ninthly, it is full of majesty in the simplenes of the words. Lastly the holy
penmen set down their own corruptions: and Moses commends himself, saying
that he was the meekest of all men; which argues that they were led by the
holy Ghost. And Christ, who is described in the Gospel, affirms very
plainly that he is the son of God, and that he is one with God the father,
and challenges all the glory of God unto himself. Which if it had not bin
right and true, he should have felt the wrath of God with Adam and with Herod,
who would needs be like unto God. But on the contrary, God has revenged his
death both upon Herod, and upon the Jews, and upon Pilate, and upon those
Emperors that persecuted the Church.

And thus we have seen the (...).
tokens of the Scripture. Whereby it appears that the book of Tobit, the
prayer of Manasses, the boooke of Judith, the book of Baruch, the Epistle of
Jeremy, the additions to Daniel, the third and fourth book of Ezra, the
additions to the book of Hester, the two books of Machabees, the book of
Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus are not to be reckoned in the Canon. Reas. 1. They
are not written by the Prophets. 2. They are not written in Hebrew. 3. Christ
and his Apostles alleged in the new Testament no testimonies out of those
books. 4. They contain some feigned things, and contrary to the Scriptures.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the interpretation of the Scriptures.

HItherto has been spoken of the object of Preaching. The parts thereof are
two. Preparation for the sermon, and the Promulgation or uttering of it. Matthew.
13. 52. Then said he unto them, therefore every Scribe, which is taught unto
the kingdom of heaven, is like unto an householder, which brings forth out of
his treasure both new and old.

In preparation private study is with diligence to be used. 1. Tim. 4. 13.
Till I come give attendance to reading, to exhortation, and to doctrine. 1.
Pet. 1. 10. Of the which salvation the Prophets have inquired and searched,
which prophesied of the grace that should come unto you. Dan. 9. 2. In the
first year of his reign I Daniel understood by books the number of the
years.

Concerning the study of Divinity take this advice. First, diligently imprint
both in thy mind and memory the substance of Divinity described with
definitions, divisions, and explications of the properties. Secondly, proceed
to the reading of the Scriptures in this order. Using a grammatical,
rhetorical, and logical Opening of the text.
analysis, and the help of the rest of the arts, read first the Epistle of
Paul to the Romans after that the Gospel of John (as being indeed the keys of
the new Testament) and then the other books of the new Testament. will be more
easy when they are read. When all this is done, learn first the dogmaticall
books of the old Testament, especially the Psalms: then the Prophetical,
especially Esaias: Lastly the historical, but chiefly Genesis. For it is
likely that the Apostles and Evangelists read Esaias and the Psalms very much.
For there are no books of the old Testament, out of which we can read more
testimonies to be cited, then out of these. There are about threescore places
alleged out of Esaias: and threescore and four out of the Psalms. Thirdly, out
of Of sound iu de ement: or sound, and judicious, and consonant to Gods word.
orthodoxall writings, we must get aid not only from the latter, but also from
the more ancient Church. Because Satan has raised up from the dead the old
Heretics, that he might hinder the restoratio^ of the Church, which is begun
to be made in our time. For the Antitrinitaries have newly varnished that
opinion of Arius and Sabellius. The Anabantists renew the doctrines or sects of
the Essees, Catharists, Enthusiasts, and Donatists. The Swenkseldians revive
the opinions of the Eutychians, Enthusiasts, etc. Menon follows Ebion: and
the Papists resemble the Pharisees, Encratites, Tatians, Pelagians. The
Libertines renew the opinions of the Gnostics and Carpocratians. Seruetus has
revived the heresies of Samosatenus, Arrius, Eutyches, Marcion, and
Apollinaris. Lastly, the Schismatiques, that separate themselves from
euangelical Churches, receive the opinions, facts, and fashions of Pup^anus in
Cyprian, of the Audians, and Donatists. Therefore in like manner, we must not
so much seek for new repealings and confutations of these heresies, as we are
for our use to fetch those ancient ones out of Councils and Fathers, and to
account them as approved and firm. Fourthly, those things, which in studying
thou meetest with, that are necessary and worthy to be observed, thou must
put in thy tables or Commonplace books, that thou may always have in a
readiness both old and new. Fifthly, before all these things God must carnestly
be sued unto by prayer, that he would bless these means, and that he would
open the meaning of the Scriptures to us that are blind. Psalm. 119. 18. Open
mine eyes, that I may see the wonderful things of thy Law. Revel. 3. 18. I
advise thee to buy gold for thee -- and to anoint thine eyes with eye-salue,
that thou may see.

Hitherto pertains the framing of Commonplace books. Concerning which
observe this slender counsel. 1. Have in readiness commonplace heads of every
point of divinity. 2. Distinguish the foremost pages of thy paper book into
two columns, or equal parts lengthwise. In every one of those pages set in
the top the title of one head or chief point, the contrary side remaining in
the mean while empty, that fresh paper may be put to. 3. All things, which
thou read, are not to be written in thy book, but those things that are
worthy to be remembered, and are seldom met with-Neither must thou put the
words of the Author in thy common places, but briefly note down the principal
points of stories and of things, that thou may know from what author to fetch
them, when thou shall have use: and make a point in the author himself, that
thou may know, that the thing is there handled, which thou wrotest in thy
commonplace book. 4. Because some things do very often offer themselves with
a doubtful signification, so as that thou can not tell, if thou write the^ in
thy common places, from whence to fetch them, therefore to thy common places
thou must join an alphabeticall table. 5. Always provided that thou trust not
too much to thy places. For it is not sufficient to have a thing written in thy
book, unless it be also diligently laid and locked up in thy memory.

Preparation has two parts, Interpretation, and right division or (...).
cutting.

Interpretation is the (...).
Opening of the words and sentences of the Scripture, that one entire and
natural sense may appear.

The Church of Rome makes 4. senses of the scriptures, the literal,
allegorical, tropological, and anagogicall, as in this her example.
Melchizedek offered bread and wine. The literal sense is, that the King of
Salem with meat which he brought, refreshed the soldiers of Abraham being
tired with travel. The allegorical is, that the Priest does offer up Christin
ye Mass. The tropologicall is, therefore something is to be given to the
poor. The Anagogicall is, that Christ in like manner being in heaven, shall be
the bread of life to the faithful. But this her device of the fourefold
meaning of the scripture must be exploded and rejected.

There is one only sense, and the same is the literal. An allegory is only
a certain manner of uttering the same sense. The Anagoge and Tropologie are
ways, whereby the sense may be applied.

The principal interpreter of the Scripture is the holy Ghost. 2. Pet. 1. 20.
So that ye first know this, that no prophecy in the Scripture is of any
private (...).
interpretation. Moreover, he that makes the law, is the best and the highest
interpreter of the law.

The supreme and absolute mean of interpretation is the Scripture it self.
Nehem. 8. 8. And they read in the book of the Law of God distinctly, and gave
the sense, and caused them to understand by the Scripture it self, per
Scripturam ipsam.

The means subordinated to the scripture are three; the Analogy of faith, the
circumstances of the place propounded, and the comparing of places together.

The analogy of faith is a certain abridgement or sum of the Scriptures,
collected out of most manifest and familiar places. The parts thereof are two.
The first concerns faith, which is handled in the Apostles Creed. The second
concerns charity or love, which is explicated in the ten Commandments. 2.
Tim. 1. 13. Keep the true (...).
pattern of the wholesome words, which thou have heard of me, with faith and
love which is in Christ Jesus.

The circumstances of the place propounded are these: Who? to whom? upon what
occasion? at what time? in what place? for what end? what goes before? what
follows?

The collation or comparing of places together, is that, whereby places are set
like parallels one beside another, that the meaning of them may more evidently
appear. Act. 9. 22. But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded
the Jews, which dwelt at Damascus, confirming ((...), that is, conferring or
conioyning of places of Scriptures, as Artificers being about to compact or
join a thing together are wont to fit all the parts amongst themselves, that
one of them may perfectly agree with each other) that this was that Christ.

Collation of places is twofold. The first is the comparing of the place
propounded with it self cited and repeated elsewhere in holy writ. Esa. 6.
10. Make the heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut their
eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their hearts, and convert, and he heal them. This place is six times
repeated in the new testament. Mat. 13. 14. Mark 4. 12. Luke 8. 10. John 12.
40. Act. 28. 27. Romans 11. 8.

Places repeated have often alterations for sundry causes. These causes are,
first exegeticall, that is, for exposition sake, as

Psalm. 78. 2. compared with Mat. 13. 35.

I will open my mouth in a parable: I will declare occulta.
things hidden from of old. I will open my mouth in parables, and will utter
the things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world. Psalm.
78. 24. John 6. 31. He gave them of the wheat of heaven. He gave the bread from
heaven to eat. Isai. 28. 16. Romans 9. 33. Behold I will lay in Sion a stone, a
tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation. He that believes
shall not make bast. Behold, I lay in Sion a stumbling block, and a rock to
make men fall, and every one that believes in him shall not be ashamed. Psalm.
110. 1. 1. Cor. 15. 25. Sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies
thy foot stool. He must reign till he have put all his enemies under his
feet. Psalm. 116. 10. 2. Cor. 4. 13. I believed, quia.
because I did speak. I believed, and therefore have I spoken. Genesis 13. 15.
Gal. 3. 16. All the land which thou see, will I give unto thee, and to thy
Now to Abraham and to his seed were the promises made. seed for ever. He
says not unto the seeds, as speaking of many: but, and to thy seed, as of
one, which is Christ.

A second cause is diacriticall, or for discerning sake, that places, and times
and persons might be mutuallie distinguished.

Michah 5. 2. Mat. 6. And thou Bethlehem Ephrathah art little to be among the
Princes of Judah: out of thee shall he come forth to me, that shall be the
ruler in Israel. And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah art not the least
among the Princes of Judah: for out of thee shall come the governor, that
shall feed my people Israel.

Thirdly, these causes are circumscriptiue: or for limitation sake, that the
sense and sentence of the place might be truly restrained, according as the
mind and meaning of the holy Ghost was.

Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and shall serve
him. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
Isai. 29. 13. Matthew. 15. 8. This people draws near with their mouth and
honor me with their lips: but their heart they reremooue far from me: and
their reverence toward me is by the commandment of men. When this people
draws near unto me, they honor me with their mouth and with their lips,
but they remove their heart far from me. 9. In vain do they worship me,
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. Genesis 2. 24. Mat. 19. 5.
Wherefore a man shall leave his father and his mother, and shall clean unto
his wife, and they shall be one flesh. Wherefore a man shall leave father and
mother, and shall clean unto his wife, and they which were two shall be one
flesh. Isai. 50. 20. Romans 11. 26. And the Redeemer shall come unto Sion, and
unto them that turn from iniquity in Jacob, says the Lord. The Deliverer
shall come out of Sion, and shall turn away the ungodliness from Jacob.

A fourth cause is for application sake, that the type might be fitted unto
the truth: and the general to a ceretaine special, and so contrariwise.

Jonas 1. 17. Matthew. 12. 39. Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow
up Jonah. And Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days, and three
nights. An evil and adulterous generation seeks a sign, but no sign shall
be given unto it, save the sign of the Prophet Jonas. 40. For as Jonas was
three days and three nights in the whales belly: So shall the Son of Man be,
etc. Esaias 61. 1. Luke 4. 18. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me: therefore
has the Lord anointed me: he has sent me to preach good tidings unto the
poor to bind up the broken hearted, to preach liberty to the Captives, and to
the^ that are bound the opening of the prison: To preach the acceptable year of
the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our god. The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me, therefore he has anointed me that I should preach good tidings to the
poor, he has sent me to heal the broken in heart, that I should preach
deliverance to the Captives, etc. This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your
ears. Psalm. 69. 27. John 19. 28. They gave me gall for my meat, and in my
thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. That the Scripture might be fulfilled
he said, I thirst. Therefore there was set a vessel full of vinegar: and they
filled a sponge with vinegar, and put it about an bysope stalk, and put it to
his mouth. Exodus 12. 46. Ioh. 19. 36. Neither shall ye break a bone thereof.
These things were done, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which says,
there shall not a bone of him be broken. Psalm. 69. 25. Acts 1. 20. Let their
habitations be void, and let none dwell in their tents. It is written in the
book of the Psalms; Let his habitation be void, and le^t no man dwell
therein.

Fifthly, some things are omitted for brevity sake: or because they do not
agree with the matter in hand.

Zach. 9. 9. Matthew. 21. 5. Rejoice greatly O daughter Sion: shout for joy O
daughter Tell ye the daughter of Sion, behold thy King comes unto Jerusalem:
behold thy King comes unto thee: He is Just, and saved himself, poor and
riding upon an Ass, and upon a colt the foul of an Ass. thee, meek and
sitting upon an Ass, and a colt the foale of an Ass used to the yoke.

The second collation is of the place propounded with other places: and those
again are either like or unlike.

Places that are alike are such, as by certain ways or in some sort agree one
with another. And places do agree either in their phrase and manner of speech,
or in sense.

Places that agree as concerning the phrase, are such as these.

Genesis 28. 12. John 1. 51. Then he dreamed, and behold there stood a ladder
upon the earth, and the top of it reached up to heaven, and lo, the Angels of
God went up And he said unto him, Uerilie, verily, I say unto you, hereafter
shall ye see the heaven open, And the Angels of God ascending and descending
and down by it. upon the Son of man. Genesis 3. 15. Romans 16. 20. I will also put
enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed. He
shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. The God of peace shall
break ((...)) Satan under your feet. Genesis 8. 20. Ephesians. 5. 2. Then Noah
built an Altar to the Lord, and took of every clean beast, and of every
clean foul, and offered burnt offerings upon the Altar. 21. And the Lord
smelled a savor ofrest, and said. Christ has loved us, and given himself for
us an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God.

For the finding out of these places the Greek and Hebrew concordances serve
very fitly.

Places, which agree in sense, are those that have the same meaning. Here
excels the comparing of a general place with a special example in the same
kind: as

Prou. 28. 13. Psalm. 32. 3. 4. He that hides his sins, shall not prosper,
but he that confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy. When I held my
tongue my bones consumed, etc. 5. I acknowledged my finne unto thee, neither
hid I mine iniquity. I said, I will confess against my self my wickedness
unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin. 2. Sam. 15. 25.
1. Pet. 5. 6. The King charged Zadok saying, carry the Ark of God again into
the city. If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me
again, and show me both it, and the tabernacle thereof. Humble your selves
therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may extol you in due time.

Thou shall have ready very many places of this kind in the Common-places of
Marlorate gathered together with diligence. And thus much for places that are
alike.

Places that are unlike, are those, which in show do not agree, either in
respect of the phrase, or in regard of the meaning. As,

Romans 3. 28. Iam. 2. 24. Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith
without the works of the Law. Ye see therefore how that of works a man is
justified; and not of faith only. 1. King. 9. 28. 2. Chron. 8. 18. And they
came to Ophir, and they fetched from thence four hundred and twenty talents of
gold, and brought it to King Solomon. And they went with the servants of
Solomon to Ophir, and brought from thence four hundred and fifty talents of
gold, and brought them to King Solomon. Acts. 7. 14. Genesis 46. 27. Then sent
Joseph, and caused his father to be brought, and all his kindred, even
threescore and fifteen souls. All the souls of the house of Jacob, which came
into Egypt are threescore and ten. Act. 7. 16. Genesis 48. 22. And were removed
into Sychem and were put in the Sepulcre, that Abraham had bought for money of
the sons of Emor, son of Sychem. I (that is Jacob) have given unto thee one
portion above thy brethren, which I gat out of the hand of the Ammorite by my
sword and by my bow. Zach. 11. 13. Matthew. 27. 9. And I took the thirty pieces
of silver, and cast them to the potter in the house of the Lord. Then was
fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the Prophet, saying, and they took
thirty silver pieces, etc.

CHAP. V.
Of the ways of expounding.

THe manner or ways of Interpreting are according to the places of scripture,
which are to be handled.

Places are either Analogical and plain, or Crypticall and dark.

Analogicall places are such, as have an apparent meaning agreeable to the
analogy of faith, and that at the first view. Concerning these places receive
this Rule:

If the natural signification of the words of the place propounded do agree
with the circumstances of the same place, it is the proper meaning of the
place. As for example;

Act. 10. 43. To him also give all the Prophets witness, that through his name,
all that believe in him, shall receive remission of sins. The signification of
the words of this place is very manifest, to wit, that Jesus Christ does give
righteousness and everlasting life to those that do believe in him. And this
sense we do presently admit without any delay, because we see that it does
agree with the analogy of faith and with the holy scriptures.

We must further know, that every article and doctrine concerning faith and
manners, which is necessary unto salvation, is very plainly delivered in the
Scriptures.

Crypticall or hidden places are those, which are difficult and dark: for the
expounding of them let this be thy Rule and leader.

If the native (or natural) signification of the words do manifestly disagree
with, either the analogy of faith, or very perspicuous places of the Scripture:
the^ the other meaning, which is given of the place propounded, is natural and
proper, if it agree with contrary and like places, with the circumstances and
words of the place, and with the nature of that thing, which is entreated of.
As for example; 1. Cor. 11. 24. This is my body, which is broken for you.

The sense that is given by some:

This bread is indeed and properly the body of Christ; namely by conversion.
Or, the body of Christ in, under, or with the bread.

The unfitness of this sense.

The (...)
letter or words used in this place being retained (or expounded accordingly
without any alteration) does disagree with an article of the faith, He ascended
into heaven, and with the nature of a Sacrament, which ought to be a (...)
Memorial of the body of Christ absent. Therefore a new exposition is to be
sought for.

A new or second sense.

In this place the bread is a sign of my body: by a Metonymie of the subject
for the adiunct.

The fitnes of this exposition.

First, it agrees with the analogy of faith, 1. He ascended truly into heaven,
that is, he was taken up out of the earth into heaued locally and visibly.
Therefore his body is not to be received with the mouth at the Communion, but
by faith (...)prehending it in the heaven. 2. Borne of the Uirgin marie, etc.
Therefore he had a true and natural bodle, being long, broad, thick, seated
and circumscribed in some place. Whereby it appears that the bread in the
Supper cannot be properly his very body, but only a sign or pledge thereof.

Secondly, this sense consents with the circumstances of the place propounded:

1. He took, he brake it. Here it is not likely that Christ sitting amongst
his disciples did take and break his own body with his hands. Therefore the
bread is no more then a sign and seal.

2. Delivered (or given) for you. The bread can in no wise be said to be given
for us, but the body of Christ: therefore the bread is not properly the body,
but symbolically or by way of signification.

3. The Cup is the new Testament, not properly, but by a Metonymie: therefore
nothing hinders, but that a Metonymie may be as well in these words, This is
my body.

4. Christ himself did eat of the bread; but he did not eat himself.

5. Do ye this in remembrance of me: therefore Christ is not corporally
present to the mouth, but spiritually to the faith of the heart.

6. Until he come: therefore Christ is absent in his body.

7. Christ said not, Under the form of bread, or in the bread: but he said,
This, that is, This bread is my body.

Thirdly, this sense accords with the nature of a sacrament: in which we must
make a proportion and resemblance between the sign and the thing signified:
which here can be none, if the bread be properly the body.

Fourthly, it agrees with like places.

Genesis 17. 10. This is my covenant, which ye shall keep betwixt you and me
--.11. Ye shall circumcise the foreskin of your flesh, and it shall be a sign
of the covenant between me and you.

1. Cor. 10. 4. They drank of the spiritual Rock, that followed them: and
the Rock was Christ.

Romans 4. 11. He received the sign of Circumcision, which might seal the
righteousness of faith.

Exodus 12. 1. The Lamb is the Lords Passover. Verse 13. It is a sign of his
passing over.

Act. 2. 38. Be baptized for the remission of sins.

Ioh. 6. 35. And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that comes
unto me shall not hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst.

1. Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion
of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ? that is, a sign of the communion.

Fifthly, it agrees with the laws of Logique. For one disparate is not spoken
or predicated of another but by a borrowed speech.

Sixthly, it is agreeable to the common custom of speaking. So we put the
Fasces or bundle of rods (used to be carried before Magistrates) for
government it self: the gown we put for peace: and the laurel garland for a
triumph: as in Tully,

Cedant armatogae, concedat laurea linguae.

Therefore this other sense is proper.

Now from this fruitful Rule do arise many consectaries or conclusions
necessary for the understanding of the Scriptures.

Consectary 1. The supply of every word, which is wanting, is fitting for the
place propounded, if it agree with the analogy (or squire) of faith, and with
the circumstances and words of the same place. As for example:
Ephesians. 3. 1. For which cause, I Paul the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you
Gentiles. The sentence is defective: therefore a supply must be made. And let
this be the supply [I will be an Embassadour] for you Gentiles. This is not
fit, because Paul was not an Ambassador for the Gentiles, but for Christ. Let
another be given. [haue boasted] for you Gentiles. But this seems to be
something too bold, neither is any such like speech to be met with in any part
of the scriptures. Therefore the sentence may be fitly supplied after this
manner; For which cause I Paul am the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles.

The same may be said of the rest.
Defective Speeches. Their Supply. Esaias 1. 13. I cannot iniquity. I cannot
(bear) iniquity. Luke 13. 9. And if it bear fruit: if not, then after thou
shall cut it down. And if it bear fruit (thou shall let it stand): if not,
then after thou shall cut it down. Exodus 4. 25. Then Zippora took Then Zippora
took a sharp, and cut away the foreskin of her son. a sharp (knife) and
cut, etc. 2. Sam. 21. 16. Isbi Benod, which of the sons of a certain Gia^t,
the weight of whose sword the weight of three hundred shickles of steel: and
he girded with a new. Isbi Benod, who (was) of the sons of a certain Giant,
the weight of whose sword (or spears head, mucronis) [was] the weight of three
hundred shiekles, of steel, and he was girded with a new sword. 1. Cor. 9. 25.
And every man, that proves masteries, is continent in all things: and they to
obtain a corruptible crown, but we for an incorruptible. And they (are
continent) to obtain a corruptible crown, etc. Exodus 19. 4. You have seen
how [as it were] upon I have carried you upon Eagles wings. Eagles wings.

Consect. 2. If that other exposition given of the place propounded do change
one nowne (or name) for another, then the words of the place contain in them a
trope, or berowed speech.
Hence arise many cautions concerning sacred tropes.

1 An Anthropo-pathia is a sacred Metaphor, whereby those things, that are
properly spoken of man, are by a similitude attributed unto God. Hence it is
that the soul of God is put for his life or essence. Ierem. 5. 29. Or shall
not my soul be avenged of such a nation as this? Head is used for prince, or
above. 1. Cor. 11. 3. God is the head of Christ. His face is put for favor or
anger. Psalm. 30. 7. Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled. Psalm. 34. 16.
The face of the Lord is irata.
angry at those that do evil. His eyes are used for grace and providence.
Psalm. 34. 15. The eyes of the Lord are upon the just. The apple of his eye
signifies a thing very dear. Zach. 2. 8. He that touches you, touches the
apple of mine eye. His ears are put for his accepting of men's prayers. His
nostrils for indignation. His hands for power and protection. His arm for
strength and fortitude. His right hand for authority and power. His finger for
virtue. His foot for government and might. Psalm. 110. 3. His smelling for his
acceptance of something. Genes. 8. 21. He smelled the savor of rest.
Repentance is used for the alteration of things and actions made by God.

2 A sacramental Metonymie is that, whereby the name of the adiunct, as also
of the helping cause is put for the thing represented in the Sacrament: or,
whereby the sign is put for the thing signified, or contrarily. Genes. 2. 9.
The tree of life: the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; that is, the
tree which is a sign of these. Genesis 22. 14. Abraham called the name of that
place, The Lord will see or provide, that is, it is a sign that the Lord will
do so. Genesis 28. 22. The stone is called Gods house. Exodus 12. The Paschall
Lamb is the passing over. Exodus 17. 15. The Altar is called, The Lord is my
Vexillum.
standard or banner. Ezekiel. 48. 35. Jerusalem is named, The Lord is there.
Leuit. 16. The Priest is termed a satisfier. Ioh. 1. Christ is called a Lamb:
Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. The Paschall
Lamb is called Christ. 1. Cor. 5. 7. Our Passover Christ is sacrificed for
us. And in the same place Christians are said to be unleavened. Romans 3. 25.
Christ is termed the propitiatory ((...)) or the cover of the Arc of the
Covenant. 1. Cor. 10. Christians are said to be one loaf.
bread. And the Rock is called Christ. Tit. 3. 5. Baptism is named the
washing of the new birth. 1. Cor. 11. The Cup is called the new Testament: and
the bread is said to be the body of Christ.

3 The (...).
communication of the properties is a Synecdoche, by the which by reason of the
personal union, that is spoken of the whole person of Christ, which does
properly belong to one of his two natures. Act. 20. 28. To feed the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood. Ioh. 3. 13. For no man
ascends up to heaven, but he that has descended from heaven, the Son of
man which is in heaven. 1. Cor. 2. 8. For had they known it, they would not
have crucified the Lord of glory. Ioh. 8. 58. Jesus said unto them, Uerily,
verily I say unto you, before Abraham was I am. Luke 2. 52. And Jesus increased
in wisdom, and in stature, and in favor with God and man.

This communication of the properties has place only in the concrete, and not
in the abstract. Concrete is the name of the whole person, as God, Man, Christ,
etc. Abstract is a name of either of the two natures considered apart, as the
Godhead, Manhead etc.

4 Things spoken of God, which carry with them the show of evil, must be
understood in regard of his operative or working permission. Nehem. 9. 37. And
it yields much fruit unto the Kings, whom thou have set over us because of
our sins: and they have dominion over our bodies, and over our cattle at
their pleasure, and we are in great affliction. Isa. 19. 14. The Lord has
mingled among them the spirit of errors: and they have caused Egypt to err in
every work thereof. Exodus 4. and 9. and 11. and 14. God does harden the heart
of Pharaoh. Deuteronomy. 2. 30. The Lord thy God has hardened his spirit, and made
his heart obstinate, because he would deliver him into thine hand, as
appears this day. Josh. 11. 20. It came of the Lord, that their heart was
hardened, that they might come against Israel in battle, to the intent that
they should destroy them utterly, and show them no mercy, but bring them to
naught. 1. Sam. 2. 25. They hearkened not to the voice of their father, because
the Lord meant to destroy them. 2. Chron. 22. 7. The destruction of Ahaziah
came from God. Psalm. 105. 25. He turned their heart to hate his people, and to
work craftily against his servants. Romans 1. 28. God delivered them up to a
reprobate mind. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. God will send them strong delusions, that
they may believe lies. Ezekiel. 14. 9. And when that Prophet shall be enticed to
speak a prophecy, I the Lord will entice that Prophet, and stretching out
mine hand against him, I will destroy him out of the midst of my people.

5 Things spoken (completiue) as if they were already finished, if they be not
as yet finished, they are to be understood (inchoatiue) as being begun, and in
the way to be fulfilled. Genesis 5. 32. And when Noah was five hundred years old,
he begot Shem, Ham, and Iapheth, that is, he began to beget them. Genes. 11.
26. Terah lived seventy years, when he begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran. 1.
King. 6. 2. 37. Psalm. 119. 8. I will observe thy statutes, do not forsake me.
It is to be understood of his endeavor to do so, as in Phil. 3. Not as though
I had already attained to it, or were already perfect: but I follow on, if
that I may comprehend that for whose sake also I am comprehended of Jesus
Christ. Verse. 15. Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded. Luke
1. 6. And they were both just in the sight of God, walking in all his
commandments and ordinances without blame.

6 Moral commandments or laws under one sin by name expressed, do
signify and mean all the sins of that kind, their causes, occasions, and
allurements to them, and command the contrary virtues. For so Christ expounded
moral laws, Matthew. 5. 2. to the end of the chapter. 1. Ioh. 3. 15. He that
hates his brother is a manslayer.

7 Threats and promises are to be understood with their conditions. Those are
to be conceived with the condition of faith and repentance: and these,
specially if they be corporal, with the exception of chastisement and the
cross. Ezech. 33. 14. When I shall say unto the wicked, Thou shall die the
death: if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right, -- 15.
he shall surely live, and not die. Revel. 21. 8. But the fearful and
unbelievers etc. shall have their portion in the lake, which burns with fire
and brimstone, which is the second death. But in the sixth verse he annexeth a
promise, saying, I will give unto him that is a thirst of the well of the water
of life freely. Jonah 3. 4. Yet forty days, and Nineue shall be subverted.
By those things which follow it appears that a condition is to be understood.
Ierem. 18. 19.

Like to these there are particular examples. Esaias 38. 1. of Hezechiah: Give
commandments to thy family, for thou shall shortly die, and shall not live.
The condition of Gods will is to be understood. Genesis 20. 3. The Lord says to
Abimelech, because he had taken Abraham's wife to himself: Behold, thou shall
die for the woman which thou have taken; except, unless thou restore her.

Hence arose ye distinction in the schools of the Signi. Beneplaciti.
Signifying will, and the will of Gods Good-pleasure. The will of Good-pleasure
is that, whereby God does will something absolutely and simply without any
condition, as the creation and regiment of the world, and the sending of his
Son. The Signifying will is that, whereby he wills somethings for some
other thing and with condition: and so we say, because that the condition
annexed is a sign of the will, that God does so will.

8 A superlatiue or exclusive speech used of one person, does not exclude the
other persons of the Deity, but only creatures and fained gods: to which the
true God, whether in one person or in more, is opposed. Ioh. 17. 3. This is life
eternal to know thee to be the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. He calls the Father the only true God, that he might oppose him to all
false gods. Romans 16. 27. To the only wise God be glory by Jesus Christ. 1.
Tim. 1. 17. Ioh. 10. 29. The Father is greater than all: not than the rest of
the persons, but than the creatures. Mark. 13. 37. The Father alone knows the
day of judgment. All the outward works of the Trinity, and all attributes are
to be understood inclusiuely, that is, without exception of any of the persons.

9 When God is considered absolutely, or by himself, the three persons are
comprehended: when the word (God) is conferred or set with a person of the
Trinity, it signifies the Father. 2. Cor. 13. 13. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with you
all.

10 A general word is taken specially, and so on the contraric; as All (says
August. lib. 6. cont. Julian cap. 12.) for Many, and Many for All are
oftentimes used in the Scriptures. Genesis 33. 11. God has had mercy on nice,
therefore I have all things. Iere. 8. 6. All are turned to their own race,
that is, the greater part. Matthew. 21. 26. All men counted John as a Prophet,
that is, the most. Phil. 2. 21. All seek their own things, and not the things
of Christ. Deuteronomy. 28. 64. And God shall scatter thee among all people, that is,
many. 1. King. 12. 18. And all the Israelites stoned him, that is, all that
were present. Exodus 9. 6. All the living creatures of Egypt died. Ierem. 26.
9. Then was gathered together all the people against Jeremy in the house of
the Lord, that is, all wicked people. Matthew. 4. 23. Healing every disease, to
wit, that was offered to him. John 14. 13. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father
in my name, that is, whatsoever ye shall ask according to his word. 1. Cor.
6. 12. All things are lawful for me, that is, all (adiaphora) things that are
indifferent and not simply evil.

Nothing is put for little or small. Ioh. 18. 20. I have spoken nothing in
secret, that is, little. Act. 27. 33.

None is used for few. Ierem. 8. 6. There is none that repents of his
wickedness, that is, but a few. 1. Cor. 2. 8. Which wisdom none of the Rulers
of this world knew, that is, very few.

Always is taken for often or long. Prou. 13. 10. Amongst the proud there is
always contentions, that is, often. Luke 18. 1. He spoke unto them a parable
that they ought to pray always. Luke 24. 53. And they were always in the Temple
lauding and praising of God. Ioh. 18. 20. I always taught in the Synagogue, and
in the Temple.

Eternal is used for a long time agreeing with the matter in hand. Genesis 17. 8.
All the land of Canaan is given unto Abraham for an everlasting possession.
Leuit. 25. 46. Ye shall use their labors for ever. Deuteronomy. 15. 17. If thy
servant be thy brother an Hebrew, and will not go from thee, then shall thou
take an aule, and pierce his care thorough against the door, and he shall be
thy servant for ever, in aeternum. 1. Chron. 15. 2. God has chosen the
Levites, that they might minister for ever unto him. Esaias 34. 6. And beasts
shall possess Idumea and Bozra eternally. Dan. 2. 4. O King live for ever.
Ierem. 25. 9. I will make Judea and the regions bordering upon it an amazement,
a hissing, and a perpetual desolation.

Vbique passim.
Every where is used for Here and there, without respect of place. Mark. 16. 2.
And they went out and preached every where the Lord co-working. Act. 17. 30.
The Lord admonishes all men every where to repent.

[ Non.
Not] is restrained to some special matter. Psalm. 7. 4. Iniquity is not in
mine hands, that is, in my cause against the accomplices of Saul. Ioh. 17. 13.
Neither have his parents sinned, that is, that this man should be borne blind
for their sins: I will have mercy, not sacrifice. Not is put for seldom,
scarsely, or hardly. 1. King. 15. 5. David declined not from any of the things
which the Lord had commanded unto him, saving in the matter of Vriah, that is,
seldom. Luke 2. 37. She was a widow, and went not out of the Temple.

Consect. 3. Grammatical and Rhetorical proprieties of words signify
diversely with those words: As,
An That is, when one or more words are wanting.
Ellipsis signifies either brevity, or the swiftnes of the affections. Genesis
11. 4. Let us build us a city and a tower, whose top [may reach] unto heaven,
that we may get us a name. Act. 5. 39. But if it be of God ye cannot destroy
it, [ac nescio, and I know not] whether ye shall be found fighters also with
God. Psalm. 6. And thou O Lord how long? Exodus 22. 20. He that sacrifices to
strange gods, let him be destroyed as a thing execrable: saving him [who
sacrificeth] to Jehovah. Genes. 3. 22. Now therefore [we must looke] lest that
stretching out his hand, he take of the tree of life. 1. Chron. 4. 10. If thou will bless me effectually [I will do this or that] If thou vex the
fatherless child [I will vex thee].

The Enallage of the preter perfect tense, whereby the time past is put for the
time to come, signifies in the oracles of the Prophets the certentie of the
thing that is to come. Genesis 20. 3. Thou have died because of the woman, that
is, thou shall die. Isai. 9. 6. Unto us a child is borne, unto us a son is
given. Isa. 21. 9. It is fallen, it is fallen Babylon, etc.

A When some words abound.
Pleonasme, which is manifold, when it is of the substantive repeated in the
same case, it does signify, 1. A force and It is when words signify more
then show for or seem.
emphasis. Psalm. 133. 2. As the ointment which descended unto the beard, The
beard of Aaron. Luke 6. 46. Why call ye me Lord, Lord? 2. A multitude. Genesis 32.
16. He gave into the hands of his servants droues, droues, that is many
droues. Joel. 3. Troops, troops in the valley of concision, that is, many
troops or multitudes. 3. Distribution, At the gate and gate, 1. Chr. 16. that
is, in every gate. Leuit. 17. 3. A man and a man, that is, every man. 2. Chr.
19. 5. Thou shall appoint Judges in a city and in a city, that is, in every
city. 4. Diversity and variety. Psalm. 12. They speak with an heart, and an
heart, that is, with diverse or a double heart, Prou. 20. 20. A weight and a
weight are abominable unto the Lord.

There is a Pleonasme of the Substantive when one is governed of another. 1. In
the singular number it is very significant and argues certentie. Exodus 31. 15.
One the seventh day is the Sabbath of Sabbath. Mich. 2. 4. And they shall
lament the lamentation of lamentation. 2. In the plural number it signifies
Excellency. Psalm. 136. 2. The God of Gods, that is, the most high God. Dan. 3.
The King of Kings. Eccles. 1. 2. Vanity of vanities. A Song of Songs. A
Servant of Servants.

The Pleonasme of the Adjective, and sometimes also of the Substantive
repeated, signifies exaggeration or increasing. Ierem. 24. 3. I see good
figs, good. Esaias 6. 3. Holy, holy, holy the Lord God of hosts. Exodus 34. 6.
The Lord passing before his face cried, Jehovah, Jehovah, the strong God. Ier.
7. 4. Trust not in lying words saying, the temple of the Lord, the temple of
the Lord, this is the temple of the Lord. Ier. 22. 29. O earth, earth, earth,
hear the word of the Lord. Ezekiel. 21. 28. Say thou the Sword, the sword is
drawn, and furbished for the slaughter. Prou. 6. 10.

The Pleonasme of the Verb does either make the speech more emphaticall and
significant, or else signifies and shows vehemency, or certentie, or
speedines. Genesis 2. 17. In dying thou shall die. Esaias. 50. 2. Is mine hand
shortened in shortening? Esaias. 56. 3. By separating God has separated me from
his people. Psalm. 50. 21. Thou think me by being to be like thee. Psalm.
109. 10. Let his children in wandering be wanderers (or vagabonds) and let them
beg. Iere. 12. 16. And it shall come to pass if in learning they shall learn
the ways of my people. etc. 2. King. 8. 10. Prou. 27. 23. Exodus 13. 17. Isai.
6. 9. Isai. 55. 2. 2. King. 5. 11. Genes. 46. 4. 2. Sam. 15. 30. Ierem. 23. 29.

The Pleonasme of the Conjunction sometimes argues earnestnes. Ezekiel. 13. 10.
Therefore, therefore because they have made my people to err.

Wherefore a Coiunctio.
Conjunction doubled (otherwise than it is in Latin) increases the denial.
Exodus 14. 11. Have thou brought us to die in the wilderness, is it because
therewere No No graves in Egypt? that is, None at all? Matthew. 13. 14. By
seeing ye shall see and shall Not Not ((...)) perceive.

The Pleonasme of the sentence signifies first, distribution. A court was in
the corner of the court: a court was in the corner of the court: a court was in
the corner of the court; that is, in every corner of the court there was one
court. Secondly, it makes an emphasis. Exodus 12. 50. The Israelites did as
Moses and Aron commanded, so did they. Psalm. 145. 18. The Lord is near unto
all that call upon him: to all that call upon him in truth. Psalm. 124. 1,
Unless the Lord had been on our side may Israel now say: unless the Lord had
been on our side. Thirdly, the repetition of the sentence, which is done in
other words, is for exposition sake. 2. King. 20. 3. I beseech thee, O Lord,
remember now how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight, Psalm. 6. 9. 10. The Lord has
heard the voice of my weeping, the Lord has heard my prayer: the Lord has
received my supplication. Esaias 3. 9. They have declared their sin, and have
not hidden it. John 1. 3. All things were made by him, and without him nothing
was made.

All tropes are They enlarge the sense.
emphaticall, and besides delight and ornament they do also afford matter for
the nourishment of faith: as when Christ is put for a Christian man, or for the
Church of God. Mat. 25. 35. 1. Cor. 12. As the body is one, and has many
members: and all the members of one body, though they be many, are yet but
one body: so also Christ, that is, The Church. Act. 9. 4. This trope does
comfort a faithful soul, and nourish says.

An It is when the contrary to that which was spoken is meant, it is used in
slouting sometimes.
Ironie signifies a just reprehension of sin. Judge. 10. 14. And the Lord
said to the children of Israel: Go ye, and cry out to your gods, whom ye
have chosen: let them save you in the time of trouble. Mark. 7. 9. And he said
unto them, Well ye abrogate the commandment of God, and observe your own
traditions. 1. King. 22. 15. The king said unto him, Michaiah, shall we go
against Ramoth Gilead to battle? or shall we not? and he answered, Go up and
prosper: doubtless the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the King. 1.
King. 18. 27. And at noone Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry aloud, for he is
a God: either he talks, or pursues his enemies, or is in his journey: or it
may be he sleeps, and must be awaked. 1. Cor. 4. 8. Now are ye full, now
are ye enriched, without us ye have gotten a kingdom.

Figures of a word in the repetition of a word or sound, have for the most part
an emphasis in them. Psalm. 66. 7. Let God, even our God bless us. Isai. 48.
11. For mine own sake, for mine own sake will I do it. John 1. 51. Uerilie,
verily I say unto you. Psalm. 67. 6. The people shall praise thee, O God; all
the people shall praise thee. In the 136. Psalm. there is a repetition made in
every verse for this cause.

An Interrogation signifies, 1. an earnest affirmation, or asseucration. Genesis
4. 7. Is there not remission, if thou shall do well? Josh. 10. 13. Is not this
written in the book of the just? John. 4. 35. Do ye not say that it is yet
four months to harvest? Josh. 1. 9. Genesis 37. 13. 1. King. 20. 27. Mark. 12.
24. John 6. 7. Secondly, it signifies a denial: Genesis 18. 4. Shall any word
be hard unto God? Romans 3. 3. Shall their incredulity make the faith of God of
none effect? Mat. 12. 26. If Satan shall vanquish Satan, how shall his kingdom
continue? 3. It signifies a forbidding. Psalm. 79. 10. Help us, O God, why
shall the Gentiles say, where is their God? 2. Sam. 2. 22. And Abner said to
Asahel, depart from me: wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? 4. It
argues sundry affections, as admiration, compassion, complaining, and finding
of fault. Psalm. 8. 10. O Lord, how admirable is thy name in all the earth!
Isai. 1. 21. How is the faithful city become an Harlot! Psalm. 22. My GOD, my
GOD, why have thou forsaken me?

Concession (or yielding) signifies a denial and reprehension. 2. Cor. 12.
16. But be it, that I charged you not, but because I was crafty, I took you
with guile. 17. Did I pill you by any of them, whom I sent?

Consect. 4. If the Opposition of unlike places shall be taught to be, either not
of the same matter, but of name only, or not according to the same part, or
not in the same respect, or not in the same manner, or not at the same time, a
reconciliation or agreement is made.
Examples.
Psalm. 7. 8. Esaias 64. 6. Judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness. We
have all been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy
clouts.

The Reconcilation.
It appears by the scope and circumstances of both the places, that this
contradiction is not in the same respect. Distinguish therefore. There is one
righteousness of the cause or action: and an other of the person; the first
place speaks of the former: and the second of the latter.

Mat. 10. 10. Mark. 68. 9. Nor a scrip for the journey, neither two coats,
neither shoes, nor a staff. And commanded them, to take nothing for their
journey, save a staff only, neither scrip, neither bread, nor money in their
girdles, but that they should be shod with sandales.

The Reconciliation.
Distinguish the respects. Matthew means such a staff, as may be a burden
to the bearers thereof. Mark understands such a one, as may sustain and
ease those that travel; such a one as Jacob used, Genes. 32. 10. Moreover, the
shoes that Matthew mentions are new, such as are with care and diligence
prepared for to travel in. The sandales in Mark are not new, but such as are
daily worn on the feet.

From this fourth Consectarie many Prouisoes or Cautions arise meet to be
observed in the reconciling of places.

1 The holy Writers speaking of things and persons, that are past, do
anticipate, that is, they speak of the^ according to the custom of that place
and time, in which they wrote. Genes. 12. 8. Afterward removing thence unto a
mountain Eastward from Bethel. The place was so called in the days of Moses:
but in Abraham's time it was not called Bethel, but Luz. Genesis 28. 19. Genesis 13.
1. Abram went up out of Egypt -- toward the South; not in respect of Egypt,
but of that place wherein Moses was. 1. Pet. 3. 19. Christ in his spirit
preached to them that are in prison. They are said to be in prison in regard of
the time, in which Peter wrote this Epistle, and not of that wherein Noah
lived. Psalm. 105. 15. Touch not mine anointed. Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob are
said to be anointed in respect of the manner and fashion of the time wherein
David lived. For they had no external anointing.

2 Allegories are to be expounded according to the scope or intent of the
place. So Chrysostom says upon the 8. of Matthew. Parables must not be
expounded according to the letter, left many absurdities do follow. Aug. upon
the 8. Psalm speaks on this sort: In every allegory this rule is to be
retained, that that be considered according to the purpose of the present
place, which is there spoken of under a similitude.

3 Places and persons in the Scriptures have very often two names: Gideon was
called Ierubbaal, Judge. 6. 32. and also Ierubesheth, 2. Sam. 11. 21. Abimelech,
1. Samuel 21. 3, and Abiathar, Mark. 2. 26. Solomon, 1. Samuel 12. 24, and
Iedidiah, 25. Zimri, 1. Chron. 2. 6, and Zabdi, Josh. 7. 1. Hazariah, 2. Chron.
22. 6, and Ahaziah, 1. Chr. 3. 11, and Iehoahaz, 2. Chr. 21. 17. Iohanan, 1.
Chr. 3. 15, and Iehoahaz, 2. King. 23. 30, and also Shallum, Ierem. 22. 11.
Iehoiachin, 2. King. 24. 6, and Iachoniah, 1. Chro. 3. 16, and Coniah, Ierem.
32. 24. Mephibosheth, 2. Sam. 4, and Meribbaal, 1. Chro. 8. 34. Abinadab, 1.
Chron. 10. 2, and Ishui, 1. Samuel 14. 49. Eliachim and Iachim, 2. King. 23.
24. Ozias and Azarias, 2. King. 15. 1. 2. Chr. 26. 1. Hester, Edissa, Hest. 2.
7. Simon, Peter, John 1. 42. and Cephas and Bariona: Ioses and Barnabas, Act.
4. 36. Saul and Paul, Act. 13. 6. 8. Matthew and Leui. Herusalem is called
Iebus and Salem.

Moreover, the name, which is indeed one, receives many times changes and
differences. As Salmon, Ruth. 4. 21. is called Salma, 2. Chron. 2. 11. Abigal,
2. Sam. 17. 25. is named Abigail, 1. Chron. 2. 16. Tiglath-pilezer, 2. King.
15. 19. is termed Tilgath-pilneezer, 1. Chr. 5. 6. Aram, Mat. 1. 3. is the
same with Ram, 1. Chr. 2. 9.

Again, on the contrary, distinct persons, and diverse places have one name:
Matthew. 1. 11. Josiah begat Iecboniah and his brethren about the time they were
carried axay into Babylon. 12. And after they were carried away into Babylon
Iechoniah begat Salathiel. Here now, because Iechoniah does both finish the
That is, the second foureteenth generation, mentioned in Mat. 1. 17 in which
place three fourteeene generations are set down
second tesseradecade, and begin the third, one of them will be wanting to one
of those tesseradecads, unless we say that there were two Iechoniases both
father and son. Succoth is a name of three places. The first is in Egypt,
Exo. 12. 37. The second in the tribe of Gad, Josh. 13. 27. The third in the
tribe of Manasses, 1. King. 7. 46.

4 In sacred accounts, by reason of the wickedness of the Prince, either his
name or the number of years, in which he reigned wickedly, are omitted and
left out. 1. Sam. 13. 1. Saul reigned two years over Israel; that is,
lawfully, or as Lyra speaks, De iure. according to law or equity.
rightly: but otherways he reigned longer. Matt. 1. 8. Ioram begat Ozias.
Here three are left out for their wickedness, to wit, Ahaziah, Ioas, and Amaziah.

5 The time spoken of is taken either That is, as fully finished, or as but in
the finishing.
completely, or vncompleatly: and the parts thereof are understood either
inclusiuely or exclusiuely; As, 1. Kings 15. 9. And in the twentieth year of
Jeroboam Asa reigned over Judah.

1. King. 15. 25. 1. King. 15. 28. Nadab the son of Jeroboam [began to reign
over Israel the second yeere] of Asa King of Judah: and reigned over Israel
[two year.] Even in the [third year of Asa King of Iudah] did Baasha slay
Nadab, and reigned in his stead.

The Reconcilement.
Nadab, who began to reign in the second year of Asa, might reign 2. years,
although Baasha succeed him in the third year of Asa; because the last years
of Vltimi ann^.
the Kings of Israel and Judah are not fully expired, but some of them (as in
this place) do scarsely contain months in them: the rest of the years being
put compleately.

Mat. 17. 1. Luke 9. 28. And the sixth day after Jesus took Peter, and James,
and John his brother, and brought them up unto an high mountain. And it came to
pass about an eight days after, that having take to him Peter, and James, and
John, he went up into a mountain.

The Reconcilement.
Matthew puts exclusiuely only the days that were between, which were
altogether accomplished: Luke puts in the reckoning the two outtermost days
also.

The parts of time are put sometimes inclusiuely, and sometimes exclusiuelie.
1. That the number may be more perfect. Augustine says, quaest. 47. on Exodus.
In a perfect number oftentimes that, which is either wanting or abounding, is
not counted. Judge. 11. 26. Israel dwelt in Heshbon and Aroer and their towns
three hundred years. These years are to be reckned from the departure of the
Israelites out of Egypt, after this manner. The time of their abode in the
wilderness was 40. years. The time of the government of Joshua was 17. years:
of Othoniel, 40. years. Judge. 3. 11. Of Ehud and Samgar, 80. years. Judge. 3.
30. of Barak, 40. years. Judge. 5. 51. of Gideon, 40. years. Judge. 8. 28. of
Abimelech, 3. years. Iud. 9. 22. of Tolah, 23. years, Judge. 10. 2. of Iair, 22.
years. Judge. 10. 3. The whole in all is, 305. years. Here therefore the five
odd years are not named; it may be because this even number of three hundred
is fitter both for the computation and the speech. 2. For brevity sake: Judge.
20. 46. There were slain of the Beniamites twenty five thousand. Here an
hundred are not counted, as appears, verse 35. The Israelites slew that day
of the tribe of Benjamin five and twenty thousand and a hundred men.

5. The King being hindered either with foreign war, or with old age, or by
reason of some disease does whiles he yet lives appoint his son to be King
in his stead: and therefore with the computations of the years of father and
son reigning at one time, the years of the reign are reckoned sometimes
jointly, and sometimes apart.

2. King. 1. 17. 2. King. 3. 1. Ahaziah died, and Iehoram reigned in his stead
[in the second year of Iehoram the son of Iehosaphat] King of Judah. Ichoram
the son of Ahab reigned in the [eighteenth year of Iehosaphat. Chap. 8. 16.
In the [fift year of Ioram the son of Ahab] Iehoram the son of Iehoshaphat
began to reign, and reigned eight years.

The Reconciliation.
Iehoshaphat determining in the seventeenth year of his reign to help King
Ahab against the Syrians appoints his son Ioram to be Viceroy. In the
eighteenth year of his own reign, and in the second of his sons, Ioram the
son of Ahab reigned. Afterward in the fifth year of this Ioram the son of
Ahab, Iehosaphat being stricken in age confirms his kingdom to his son
Ioram: who is said to have reigned eight years, four whilst his father was
alive, and four alone by himself after the death of his father.

2. King. 15. 30. 2. King. 15. 33. And Hoshea the son of Elah wrought treason
against Pekah the son of Remaliah, and smote him, and slew him, and reigned
in his room [in the twentieth year of Iotham] the son of Vzziah. Iotham the
son of Vzziah was five and twenty year old when he began to reign [and
he reigned sixteen yeeres] in Jerusalem.

The Reconciliation.
He reigned sixteen years alone after his fathers death: he reigned also
twenty with his father: for he governed the kingdom for his father who was
diseased with the leprosy.

6. The East-country men do diversely distinguish their artificial day, both
into twelve equal hours (commonly called planetarie hours) and into
quadrants, having their name of the hour going next before. Beroald. Chronol.

The Eastern men's accounting: ^.

The manner of our counting: 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.

Mark. 15. 25. Ioh. 19. 14. And it was [the third houre] when they crucified
him. And it was the preparation of the Passover, [and about the sixth houre]
and he said unto the Jews, Behold your King.

The Reconciliation.
The opposition is not in the same respect: therefore distinguish the manners
of accompting the hours of the day, and then it will appear that Christ might
be crucified at the third hour and about the fixed.

7. The lesser number is to be counted under the greater and the more complete.
Judge. 3. 11. The land had rest forty years when Othoniel died. Under this
number are all the years comprehended from the death of Joshua to the death of
Othoniel, as also the eight years of servitude under the Syrians. Judge. 3. 30.
The land had rest 80. years. Here from the death of Othoniel are numbered also
the years of Ehud and Samgar. For Ehud could not be Judge 80. years: for when
these years are expired the whole time of man is run out. The like we meet
with, Judge. 5. 31. and 8. 28. and 9. 22. and. 10. 2. 3. and 11. 26. Where, in
the three hundred years are included the forty years of their tarrying in the
desert.

8. Filiation or Sonship is either natural or legal. Natural is by
generation: legal is by adoption, which is to be testified by education and
bringing up, and by succession in the kingdom, and in To understand this,
read Deuteronomy. 25. 5.
Leuiration by the law of redemption.

2. Sam. 21. 8. 1. Sam. 18. 19. And the King took the five sons of Michal the
daughter of Saul, whom she bear to Adriel the son of Barzilli the
Mehalohite. When Merab Saul's daughter should have been given to David, she was
given unto Adriel a Mehalohite to wife.

The Reconciliation.
They are the natural sons of Merab, and the legal sons of Michal; and
therefore (to bear) does only signify to bring up, to feed and to nourish.
For thus the sons of Machir, Genesis 50. 23. are said to be borne (nati) on
Joseph's knees, that is, brought up.

Mat. 1. 12. Luke 3. 27. Ieconias begat Salathiel. Salathiel the son of Neri.

The Reconciliation.
Salathiel was the son of Neri by nature: and the son of Ieconias legally
in regard of succession in the same kingdom. After this manner Zedekias is the
brother of Ieconias or Iehoiakin, 2. Chron. 36. 10. and uncle, 2. King. 14. 17.
and son, 1. Chro. 3. 16. His brother by generation, and his son by the right
of succession. On this manner Matthew and Luke are reconciled in the genealogy
of Christ. For the one follows the natural order, as Luke, and the other the
legal.

Consect. 5. When the natural sense of the place (propounded) is given by the
foresaid helps, a signification of a word signifying diverse things ((...))
shall be given, which is fitting to the place.
Thus the significations of Uau the prefixe or copulative are (as Brunerus has
observed in his Hebrew Grammar) distinguished according to the diversity of
the places. It signifies, I. At, Isa. 9. 10. These Aduerbs and Conjunctions I
do of purpose not translate, as being fittest in Latin.
Genesis 42. 10. II. Quoniam, Isa. 53. 11. III. Quin, Isa. 9. 11. Psalm. 73. 4.
IIII. id est, Isa. 9. 14. 1. Sam. 17. 40. V. Idcirco, Prou. 1. 18. VI. Ita vt,
Psalm. 18. 39. Isa. 24. 20. VII. Sic etiam, Isa. 10. 10. and 51. 11. VIII. Et
tamen, 1. Chron. 5. 2. Nehe. 9. 19. IX. Atqui, Psalm. 73. 2. and 19. 6. X.
Postea tunc, Isa. 16. 12. Genesis 3. 5. XI. Autem, Isa. 1. 21. Nehe. 2. 9. XII.
Etiam, 2. Reg. 3. 8. XIII. Number, Isa. 37. 11. XIIII. Sicut, sicm Psalm. 125. 2.
Dan. 7. 2. XV. Qui, quae, quod, Isa. 43. 8. XVI. Quum, Psalm. 50. 17. XVII. Vt,
Isa. 49. 6. XVIII. Quamuis, Iere. 31. 35. XIX. Inquam, Isa. 55. 1. XX. Idque,
Psalm. 105. 12. XXI. Atque ita, Prou. 3. 4. XXII. Et vt Isa 58. 5. 6. XXIII.
Quoniam, ideo, Psalm. 109 17. XXIIII. Imo, Psalm. 109. 18. XXV. Nec non, Psalm.
72. 16. XXVI. Verum, Psalm. 73. 23. XXVII. Etiamsi, Job. 19. 26. XXVIII. Aut,
Psalm. 139. 7. XXIX. Quod, idque, Psa. 139. 14. XXX. Et vero, Psalm. 139. 17.
XXXI. Tum, Nehe. 12. 27. XXXII. Simulatque, Iere, 50. 43. XXXIII. Si sin, 2.
Reg. 5. 17. XXXIIII. Nec, Isa. 41. 8. XXXV. Hoc igitur, Prou. 17. 33. XXXVI.
Vna cum, Prou. 8. 18. XXXVII. Quod, Genesis 47. 6.

Thus it appears that (Berech) signifies contrary things, as to bless and
to curse. Job. 1. 5. 1. King. 21. 10. and 11. 2. 9.

To conclude, hence it is evident that (Huchal) Genesis 4. 26. does not signify
Profaned, but Begun. Reason. 1. when Chalal signifies to profane, it ought to
be joined with a nowne, and to govern it; but here it does immediately follow
Rara a verb infinitive. Reason. 2. Amongst many causes of the Deluge Moses
reckons not the profanation of Gods worship, which notwithstanding should
have been chiefly noted, if so be that it had reigned among the people of God.

Consect. 6. If a word given in the Bible, whether it be an Hebrew word or a
Greek, if first it do agree with Grammatical construction, and with other
approved copies: if also it do agree in respect of the sense with the
circumstances and drift of the place, and with the analogy of faith, it is
proper and natural.
I lay down this rule, not because I think that the Hebrew and Greek text is
in all copies corrupted through the malice of the Jews, as Lindanus does
wickedly calumniate, and after him all Papists: but that the diverse readings,
which in some places have crept in, either by reason of the unskillfulness or
negligence and oversight of the Notaries, might be skanned and determined. As,
Psalm. 22. 16. In ordinary copies the words run thus; Caari, that is, As a
Lion my hands and my feet. In other copies the reading is diverse, after this
manner: Caaru, They have dug (or pierced) my hands and my feet. Now the
rule propounded does teach that this latter reading is to be followed. For it
agrees. 1. with Grammatical construction: 2. with the circumstances of the
Psalm: 3. with some ancient copies: yea even by the testimony of the Jews.

CHAP. VI.
Of the right Dividing of the word.

HItherto we have spoken of Interpreting the word. We are now come to speak
of the (...)
right cutting or the right dividing of it.

Right cutting of the word is that, whereby the word is made fit to edify the
people of God. 2. Tim. 2. 15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a
workman that need not to be ashamed, dividing (or (...).
cutting) the word of truth aright. It is a Metaphor taken it may be from the
Levites, who might not cut the members of the sacrifices without due
consideration. Isai. 50. 4. The Lord has given me the tongue of the learned,
that I might know to minister a word in due season to him that is weary. The
parts thereof are two: Resolution or partition, and Application.

(...).
Resolution is that, whereby the place propounded is, as a weauers web,
resolved (or untwisted and unloosed) into sundry doctrines. Act. 18. 28.
Mightily he confuted the Jews, with great vehemency publicly showing by
Scriptures that Jesus was that Christ.

Resolution is either Notation, or Collection.

Notation is, when as the doctrine is expressed in the place propounded. Romans
3. 9. We have already proved that all both Jews and Gentiles are under sin.
10. As it is written; there is none righteous, no not one. 11. There is none
that understands, none that seeks God. 12. All are gone out of the way:
they have been made altogether unprofitable: there is none that does good, no
not one. Act. 2. 24. Whom God has raised up, and loosed the sorrows of death,
because it was impossible that he should be held of it. 25. For David says
concerning him, I beheld the Lord always before me: for he is at my right
hand, that I should not be shaken. 26. Therefore did mine heart reioyee, and
my tongue was glad, and moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope. 27. Because
thou will not not leave my soul with the dead, neither wilt suffer thine holy
one to see corruption.

Collection is, when the doctrine not expressed is soundly gathered out of ye
text. This is done by the help of the nine arguments, that is, of the causes,
effects, subjects, adjuncts, dissentanies, names, distribution, and definition.
For example.

A place. The collection. John 10. 34. Jesus answered them, Is it not written
in your law, I said ye are Gods? From the comparison of the lesser. 35. If he
called the^ Gods, unto whom the word of God was given, and the Scripture cannot
be broken: 36. Say ye of me, whom the Father has sanctified and sent into
the world, thou blasphemest, because I said I am the Son of God?

A place. The collection from the lesser. 1. Cor. 9. 9. For it is written in
the law of Moses, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox, that treads out
the corn. What, has God care of oxen? Verse. 4. Have we not power to eat, and
to drink?

A place. The collection from the contrary. Gal. 3. 10. For so many as are of
the works of the law are under a curse: for it is written, Cursed is every
one, that continues not in all things which are in the book of the law to do
them. Verse. 9. Therefore those which are of faith are blessed with faithful
Abraham. Verse. 11. For the just shall live by faith. Verse. 11. And that no man
is justified by the law before God, it is evident.

A place. A collection from the Adiunct. Heb. 8. For in rebuking them he says,
Behold, the days will come, says the Lord, when I shall make with the house
of Israel and with the house of Judah a new testament. Heb. 8. 13. In that he
says a new testament, he has disanulled the old: now that which is
disanulled and waxed old is ready to vanish away.

In gathering of doctrines we must specially remember that an example in his
own kind, that is, an Ethique, Oeconomique, Politic, Ordinary, and
Extraordinary example has the virtue of a general rule in Ethique,
Oeconomique, Politic, Ordinary, and Extraordinary matters. The examples of
the fathers are paterns for us. 1. Cor. 10. 11. Romans 15. 4
And whatsoever is written, is written for our learning. And it is a Principle
in Logique, that the Or general.
Genus is actually in all the Or specials and particulars of that kind or
general.
species: and a rule in the Optiques, that the general species of things are
perceived before the particular.

A place. The Collection from the Species. Romans 9. 7. Neither are they all
children, because they are the seed of Abraham: but in Isaac shall thy seed be
called. 10. Neither he only felt this, but also Rebecca, when she had
conceived by one, even by our father Isaac. Verse. 8. That is, they which are
the children of the flesh, are not the children of God: but the children of the
promise are counted for the seed. Romans 4. 18. Which Abraham against hope,
believed under hope, etc. 21. Being fully assured that he which had promised
was also able to do it. 22. And therefore it was imputed to him for
righteousness. Romans 4. 23. Now it is not written for him only, that it was
imputed to him for righteousness, 24. But for us also, to whom it shall be
imputed for righteousness, which believe in him, that raised up Jesus our Lord
from the dead.

That also I add, that collections ought to be right and sound, that is to
say, derived from the genuine and proper meaning of the Scripture. If
otherwise, we shall draw Aduerb. any thing out of any thing, quidlibete
quolibet.
any doctrine from any place. Prou. 8. 22. the Greek translation of the
Seventy Interpreters is ((...)) The Lord has created me; it is the speech of
Wisdom, that is, of Christ speaking of himself. Whence the Arrians collect
very wickedly, that the Son was created. But in the Hebrew it is (Jehovah
kanneni) The Lord has possessed me. Now the Father possesses the Son,
because he begat him from eternity, and because the Father is in the Son,
and the Son in the Father. And so, Genesis 4. 1. When a Son was borne unto
Adam, he says, I have possessed a man from the Lord. The error perhaps came of
this, that (...), he has created.
Ectise was either through ignorance or malice put for (...), be has possessed.
Ectese. Augustine also upon the tenth verse of the 39. Psalm, reads on this
wife: I held my peace because thou have made me, fecistime. From whence he
does wittily gather, that it is a marvel that he should hold his tongue,
that has received a mouth to speak: whereas (me) is neither in the Hebrew nor
in the Greek. And upon the 72. Psalm and 14. verse he disputes much about
vsuries, and proves that vsuries are sins: whereas there is no such matter
in that text. For the words are; He shall deliver their soul from deceit and
violence, so precious is their blood in his eyes.

It shall be lawful also to gather Allegories: for they are arguments taken
from things that are like, and Paul in his teaching uses them often. 1. Cor.
9. 9. But they are to be used with these cautions: 1. Let them be used
sparingly and soberly. 2. Let them not be far fetched, but fitting to the
matter in hand. 3. They must be quickly dispatched. 4. They are to be used for
instruction of the life, and not to prove any point of faith.

Any point of doctrine collected by just consequence is (...)
simply of it self to be believed, and does (...).
demonstrate. Act. 18. 24. And a certain Jew, named Apollos, borne at
Alexandria, came to Ephesus, an eloquent man and mighty ((...)) in the
Scriptures. 28. For mightily he confuted the Jews publicly with great
vehemency, demonstrating ((...)) by the Scriptures, that Jesus was the Christ.
From hence it follows:

First, that humane testimonies whether of the Philosophers or of the Fathers
are not to be alleged. Augustine upon the 66. Psalm says thus: If I speak,
let no man hear: if Christ speak, woe be to him that does not hear. So
again he says (De vnitat. Ecclesiae) Let us not hear, These things I say,
These things he says: but let us hear, These things the Lord says. Yet with
this exception, Unless they convince the conscience of the hearer. Thus Paul
alleged the testimony of Aratus; Act. 17. 28. For by him we live, and move,
and have our being, as one of your own Poets has said; For we are all his
progeny ((...)). 29. Forasmuch then, as we are the progeny of God, etc. As
also a saying of Menander, 1. Cor. 15. 33. Be not deceived, evil (...).
conuersations corrupt good manners. And of Epimenides, Tit. 1. 12. As one of
their Prophets has said, the Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, and
slow bellies. And then also it must be done sparingly, and with leaving out the
name of the profane writer.

Secondly, that a few testimonies of Scripture are to be used for the proof of
the doctrine: and that sometimes there is need of none.

Lastly, hence it follows that the Prophets delivering their doctrine thus,
are not to be reproved of other Prophets. 1. Cor. 14. 32. And the spirits of
the Prophets are subject unto the Prophets. Yet afterward he adds, verse.
37. If any one seem to be a Prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge that
those things, which I write unto you, are the commandments of God.

CHAP. VII.
Of the ways how to use and apply doctrines.

APplication is that, whereby the doctrine rightly collected is diuerslly
fitted according as place, time, and person do require. Ezekiel. 34. 15. I will
feed my sheep, and bring them to their rest, says the Lord. 16. I will seek
that which is lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind
up that which was broken, and will strengthen the sick. Jude 22. And having
compassion of some in putting difference. 23. And save other with terror,
pulling them out of the flame.

The foundation of Application is to know whether the place propounded be a
sentence of the Law, or of the Gospel. For when the word is preached there is
one operation of the Law, and another of the Gospel. For the Law is thus far
forth effectual, as to declare unto us the disease of sin, and by accident
to exasperate and stir it up: but it affords no remedy. Now the Gospel, as
it teaches what is to be done: so it has also the efficacy of the holy Ghost
adjoined with it, by whom we being regenerated, we have strength both to
believe the Gospel, and to perform those things which it commands. The Law
therefore is the first in the order of teaching: and the Gospel second.

It is a sentence of the Law, which speaks of perfect inherent righteousness,
of eternal life given through the works of the Law, of the contrary sins, and
of the curse that is due unto them. Gal. 3. 10. So many as are of the works of
Law, are under the curse; for it is written, cursed is he whosoever abides not
in all things, which are written in the book of the Law to do them. Matthew. 3.
7. O generation of Vipers, who has forewarned you to flee from the anger to
come? 10. And now also is the axe put to the root of the trees: therefore every
tree, which brings not forth good fruit, is cut up ((...)) and cast into the
fire.

A sentence of the Gospel is that, which speaks of Christ and his benefits,
and of faith being fruitful in good works: as, John 3. 16. So God loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish but have everlasting life.

Hence it is that many sentences, which seem to belong to the Law, are by
reason of Christ to be understood not legally ((...)) but with the Euangelice.
qualification of the Gospel. Luke 11. 28. Blessed are those which hear the
word of God and keep it. Deuteronomy. 11. This commandment which I command thee this
day, is not hidden, nor set a far off, but it is by thee in thy month and in
thine heart. This sentence which is legal in Moses, is euangelicalll in Paul:
Romans 10. 8. Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are those that are perfect in the way, who
walk in the law of Jehovah. 2. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies and
seek him with their whole heart. John 14. 21. He that has my commandments,
and keeps them, is he that loves me: he that loves me shall be loved of my
father. 23. If any man do love me, he will keep my word: and my father does
love him, and we will come unto him, and we will dwell with him. Genesis 6. 9.
Noah was a just and upright man in his time: Noah walked with God Indefinenter.
continually. Genesis 17. 1. I am the strong God, omnipotent, walk always before
me and be upright.

The ways of Application are chiefly seven, according to the diverse condition
of men and people, which is seuenfold:

I. Unbelievers who are both ignorant and unteachable.
These men in the first place are to be prepared to receive the doctrine of
the word. 2. Chro. 17. Iehosaphat sent Levites throughout the cities of Judah
to teach the people and to bring them from Idols.

This preparation is to be made partly by disputing or reasoning with them,
that thou may thoroughly discern their manners and disposition, and partly by
reproving in them some notorious sin, that being pricked in heart and
terrified, they may become teachable. Act. 17. 17. He disputed in the
Synagogue with the Jews, and with them that were religious, and in the market
place with whomsoever he met. Act. 9. 3. Now as he iournied it came to pass,
that, as he was come near to Damascus, suddenly there shined round about him
a light from heaven. 4. And he fell to the earth and heard a voice saying to
him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? 5. And he said, Who art thou Lord?
And the Lord answered, I am Jesus of Nazaret, whom thou do persecute: it is
hard for thee to kick against the pricks. Act. 16. 27. Then the keeper of the
prison awoke out of his sleep: and when he saw the prison doors open, he drew
out his sword, and would have killed himself, supposing the prisoners had bin
fled. 28. Then Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thy self no harm,
for we are all here. 29. Then he called for a light, and leaped in, and came
trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas. 30. And brought them out, and
said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? 31. And they said, Believe in the Lord
Jesus and thou shall be saved, and thine household. Act. 17. 22. And Paul stood
in the midst of Marsstreete, and said, Ye men of Athens, I see that in all
things ye are (...).
too superstitious. 23. For as I passed by and beheld your devotions, I found
an altar, wherein was written, Unto the unknown God; whom ye then ignorantly
worship, him show I unto you. 24. God, that made the world and all things in
it, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made
with hands.

When now there is hope that they are become teachable and prepared, the
doctrine of Gods word is to be declared to them generally in some common terms
or ordinary points. Act. 17. 30. And the time of this ignorance God regarded
not, but now he commands ((...)) all men every where to repent. 31. Because
he has appointed a day, in which he will judge the world in righteousness by
that Man whom he has appointed, whereof he has assured all men, in that he
has raised him from the dead.

If they shall approve this doctrine, then it is to be opened to them distinctly
and in every particular; but if they shall remain unteachable without hope of
winning them, they are to be left. Matthew. 7. 6. Give not that which is holy
unto dogs: neither cast your pearls before swine, lest they tread them under
their feet, and turning again all to rent you. Prou. 9. 8. Reprove not a
scorner, lest he hate thee. Act. 19. 9. But when certain men were hardened,
and would not obey, speaking evil of the way of the Lord before the multitude,
he departed from them, and separated the Disciples from them.

II. Some are teachable, but yet ignorant.
To these men the Catechism must be delivered, Act. 18. 25. Apollos was
catechized ((...)) in the way of the Lord. And he spoke fervently in the
spirit, and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the baptism
of John. 26. And he began to speak boldly in the Synagogue. Whom when Aquila
and. Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the
way of God more perfectly. Luke 1. 4. That thou may know the truth of those
things, whereof thou have been catechized ((...)) or instructed.

The catechism is the doctrine of the foundation of Christian religion,
briefly propounded for the help of the understanding and memory in questions
and answers made by the lively voice.

The matter therefore of the Catechism is the foundation of religion.

The foundation is a certain sum of the principles of Christianity, Heb. 5.
12. For when as concerning the time ye ought to be teachers, yet have ye need
again that we teach you the [first principles of the word] of God.

A principle is that which does directly and immediately serve both for the
salvation of men and for the glory of God, which being also denied and
ouerturned no salvation can be hoped for.

There are especially six principles: Repentance, Faith, Baptismes, that is,
the Sacraments, Imposition of hands, that is, the ministry of the word by a
Synecdoche, the resurrection, and the last judgment, Heb. 6. 1. 2. 3.

The form of the Catechism is to handle the elements or grounds plainly by
asking and answering, 1. Pet. 3. 21. To the which also, the figure that now
saves us, even baptism agrees (not the putting away of the filthiness of the
flesh, but the stipulation or (...).
interrogation of a good conscience). Act. 8. 37. What does let me to be
baptized? And Philip said unto him, if thou beleeuest with all thine heart,
thou may. Then he answered saying, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God. Tertullian de resurrect, carnis says: The soul is not purged with
washing, but with answering.

And here we must hold a difference between Milk and strong meat, which are
the same indeed, but do differ in the manner and fashion of delivering.

Milk is a certain brief, plain and general explication of the principles
of the faith: as when a man does teach yt we must believe one God and three
persons, Father, Son and holy Ghost; and that we must rely only upon the
grace of God in Christ; and that we ought to believe the remission of sins;
and when we are taught that we ought to repent, to obstaine from evil, and to
do that which is good.

Strong meat is a special, copious, luculent and clear handling of the
doctrine of faith: as when the condition of man before the fall, his fall,
original and actual sin, man's guiltiness, free will, the mysteries of the
Trinity, the two natures of Christ, the personal union, the office of Christ,
the imputation of righteousness, faith, grace, and the use of the law, are
delivered out of the word of God distinctly and exactly.

Moreover, milk must be set before babes, that is, those that are rude or
weak in knowledge: strong meat must be given to such as are of ripe years, that
is, to them that are better instructed. 1. Cor. 3. 1. Moreover, brethren, I
could not speak unto you as to spiritual: but I have spoken unto you as to
carnal, that is, to infants in Christ. 2. I have fed you with milk, and not
with meat. Heb. 5. 13.

III. Some have knowledge, but are not as yet humbled.
In such the foundation of repentance ought to be stirred up, that is to say,
a certain sorrow which is according to God. 2. Cor. 7. 8. For though I made
you sorry with a letter, I repent not, though I did repent: for I perceive
that the same Epistle made you sorry, though it were but for a season. 9. I now
rejoice, not that ye were sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance: for ye
sorrowed according to God ((...)) so that in nothing ye were hurt by us. 10.
For sorrow, which is according to God (or godly) causes repentance unto
salvation not to be repented of: but worldly sorrow causes death.

Sorrow according to God, is a grief for sin, even because it is sin.

To the stirring up of this affection, in the first place a man must use the
ministry of the Law, which may beget contrition of heart, or the horrors of
conscience, which though it be not a thing wholesome and profitable of it own
nature, yet is it a remedy necessary for the subduing of a sinners
stubbernnesse, and for the preparing of his mind to become teachable.

Now, that this legal sorrow may be wrought, it is fit to use some choice
parcel of the law, which may reprove some one notable sin in men that are
not as yet humbled. For sorrow for, and repentance Or, though but.
even of one sin is for substance ((...)) sorrow for and repentance of all.
Act. 8. 22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, that if it be
possible, the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. Act. 2. 23. Him have
ye taken by the hands of the wicked, being delivered by the determinate
counsel, and foreknowledge of God, and have crucified and slain. Psalm. 32. 5.

Yea further, if any man being afflicted with the cross, and with outward
calamities have only a worldly sorrow, that is, if he mourn not for sin as
it is sin, but for the punishment of sin, he is not by and by to be
comforted, but first this sorrow is to be turned into that other sorrow which
is Godly.
according to God: as is the counsel of Physicians in the like case. For if a
man's life be in danger by reason of blood gushing out at his nose: they
command also that blood be let out in his arm or in some other place as the
case requires, that they might stay the course of the blood which rusheth out
at the nostrils, that so they might save his life, who was ready to yield up
the ghost.

Then let the Gospel be preached, in the preaching whereof the holy Spirit
works effectually unto salvation. For whilst he renews men, that they may
begin to will and to work those things that are pleasing to God, he does
truly and properly bring forth in them that sorrow which is according to God
and repentance unto salvation.

To the hard-harted the Law must be urged, and the curse of the Law must be
denounced with threatening, together with the difficulty of obtaining
deliverance until they be purified in the heart. Matthew. 3. 7. And when he
saw many of the Pharisees and of the Sadduces come to his baptism, he said unto
them, O (...).
progeny of Vipers, who has forewarned you to fly from the wrath to come?
Matthew. 19. 16. Good Master, what shall I do that I may have eternal life? 17.
And he said unto him -- if thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.
Mat. 23. 13. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because ye shut up
the kingdom of heaven before men: for ye your selves go not in, neither
suffer ye those that are entering in ((...)) to go in, etc. Verse. 33. O
Serpents, and progeny of Vipers, how shall ye escape the damnation of hell?

But when the beginning of compunction does appear, they are presently to be
comforted with the Gospel.

IIII. Some are humbled.
Here we must very diligently consider whether their humiliation be complete
and sound, or but begun and but light or slight: lest that he or they,
receiving comfort sooner than is meet, should afterward wax more hard; like
iron, which being cast into the furnace becomes exceeding hard, after that it
is once cold.

Let thy proceeding be after this manner with those, that are humbled in part.
Let the Law be propounded, yet so discreetly tempered with the Gospel, that
being terrified with their sins, and with the meditation of Gods judgment,
they may together also at the same instant receive solace by the Gospel. Act.
8. 20. Then Peter said unto him, thy money perish with thee, because thou
think that the gift of God may be obtained by money. 21. Thou have neither
part, nor fellowship in this business, for thine heart is not right in the sight
of God. 22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, that if it be
possible the cogitation of thine heart may be remitted. 23. For I see that
thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. Genesis 3. 9. And
the Lord God cried unto Adam, and said unto him, where art thou? And God said,
who has showed thee that thou art naked? What, have thou eaten of the fruit of
that tree, of which I forbad thee to eat? 13. And the Lord God said to the
woman, what is this which thou have done? And the woman said, this Serpent has
seduced me, and I have eaten. 15. Moreover, I will put enmity betwixt thee and
this woman, and likewise between thy seed and her seed: this shall break
thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. 2. Sam. 12. Nathan being sent from
God, by a parable which he does propound, he recalleth David to the conscience
of his fact, and pronounces pardon to him being penitent.

The doctrine of faith and repentance and the comforts of the Gospel ought to
be promulged and tendered to those that are fully humbled. Luke 4. 18. The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, therefore he has anointed me to preach glad
tidings to the poor: he has sent me to heal the contrite in heart, to preach
deliverance to the Captives, and to the blind the recovery of their sight, and
to set at liberty those that were broken. Act. 2. 37. When they heard these
things, they were pricked in heart, and said unto Peter, and the rest of the
Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? 38. And Peter said unto them:
Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins. Matthew. 9. 13. I came not to call the just, but sinners
unto repantance.

V. Some do believe.
To these must be propounded. 1. The Gospel of justification, sanctification,
and perseverance. 2. The law without the curse, whereby they may be taught to
bring forth fruits of new obedience beseeming repentance. Romans 8. 1. There is
no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus. 1. Tim. 1. 9. The law is not
appointed for the righteous. Let the Epistle of Paul to the Romans be the
example. 3. Howsoever the curse of the law is not to be urged against the
person that is righteous and holy in the sight of God, yet it is to be urged
against the sins of the person, which are remaining. And as a father does
oftentimes set his iron rods that are appointed for the servants before the
eyes of his sons, that they may be frayed: so the meditation of the curse is
to be stirred up very often in the faithful themselves, left they should abuse
the mercy of God to licencious living, and that they may be more fully
humbled. For sanctification is but in part: therefore that the remainders of
sin may be abolished, we must always begin with the meditation of the law,
and with the feeling of sin, and make an end in the Gospel.

VI. Some are fallen.
Those that are fallen are they, which do in part fall from the state of grace.

Falling is either in faith or in manners.

Falling in faith is either in the knowledge of the doctrine of the Gospel, or
in the apprehending of Christ.

Falling in knowledge is a declining into error, whether lighter or
fundamental.

Now unto those that fall thus, that doctrine which does cross their error, is
to be demonstrated and inculcated (or beaten upon them) together with the
doctrine of repentance, and that with a brotherly affection. Take for an
example the Epistle of Paul to the Galatians. 2. Tim. 2. 25. Instructing them
with meekenes that are ((...)) contrarily affected: if God at any time will
give them repentance that they may know the truth.

The fall which is in apprehending Christ, is desperation.

For the restoring of those that do despair, there are to be used a Trial,
and the Remedy.

The Trial or Search is either of the cause of the temptation, or of their
estate.

The trial of the Cause is made fitly by private confession. Iam. 5. 17.
Confess your sins one to another, and pray for one another that ye may be
healed. But lest that confession should be made a kind of rack or torture,
it must be limited with these prouisoes. 1. It ought to be free, and not
compelled: because salvation depends not upon it. 2. It must not be of all
sins, but of those only which wring the conscience, which unless they do
reveal, greater danger may hang over their heads. 3. Let it chiefly be made
to Pastors; yet so as that we must know that it may be safely made to other
faithful men in the Church.

The Trial of their estate is, whereby we make diligent inquiry whether they
be under the law, or under grace.

That this may manifestly appear, we must by asking of questions first draw
out of them, whether they be displeased with themselves, because they have
displeased God, that is to say, whether they hate sin as it is sin: which
is the foundation of repentance unto salvation. Secondly, we must demand of
them, whether they have or do feel in their heart a desire to be reconciled
with God, which is the ground of a lively faith.

When Trial is made, the Remedy must be applied unto them out of the Gospel,
which is double. First, some evangelical meditations are to be often
inculcated and pressed upon them: as 1. That their sin is pardonable. 2. That
the promises are general in respect of believers, and that they are indefinite
in respect of particular men, and do exclude no man. 3. That the will to
believe is faith, Psalm. 145. 19. Revel. 21. 6. 4. That sin does not abolish
grace, but rather (God turning all things unto the good of those that are his)
does illustrate it. 5. That all the works of God are done by contrary means.
Secondly, they must be entreated to stir up in them in the very bitterness of
the temptation, their faith which has lien in a swoune, and bin Sopitam fidem.
covered (as it were with ashes) and that they would certainly set down with
themselves that their sins are forgiven them, and that it would please them
to struggle manfully in prayer either alone or with others against carnal
sense and humane hope. And that they may perform these things, they must be
very earnestly beaten upon, and those that are unwilling must in a manner be
constrained. Psalm. 130. 1. Out of the depths have I called to thee, O Lord. 2.
Lord listen unto my voice: let thine ears attend to the voice of my prayers.
Psalm. 77. 1. My voice came to God when I prayed, my voice went to God, that
he would turn his ear (vt aduertat aurem) unto me. 2. In the day of my
distress I besought the Lord. Romans 4. 18. Who (Abraham) against ((...)) hope
believed under hope, that he should be the father of many nations.

Now that these medicines may be of force, that ministerial power of binding
and loosing is to be used according to the form prescribed in the word. 2.
Sam. 12. 13. Then David saidto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord:
Wherefore Nathan said to David, Godhath also forgiven thy sin: thou shall
not dye. 2. Cor. 5. 20. Therefore we are Ambassadors in the name of Christ,
God as it were beseeching you by us: We pray you in the name of Christ that
ye would be reconciled to God. And if perhaps Melancholy trouble the mind,
the help of the medicine must be in private sought for.

Falling in manners is, when any faithful man falls to the committing of
some actual sin in life. As Noah's drunkenness, David's adultery, Peter's
denial etc.

To those that are fallen thus, for so much as grace remaining in respect of her
virtue and habit may be lost for a time in respect of sense and working; the
Law must be propounded being mixed with the Gospel: because a new act of
sin requires a new act (or work) of faith and repentance. Isa. 1. 4. Ah,
sinful nation, a Isa. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4.
people laden with iniquity, a seed of the wicked, corrupt children: they
have forsaken the Lord: they have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger,
they are gone backward. 16. Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of
your works from before mine eyes, etc. 18. Come now, and let us reason
together, says the Lord; Though your sins were as crimsin, they shall be
made white as snow: though they were red like skarlet, they shall be as wool.

VII. There is a mingled people.
Amixt people are the assemblies of our Churches. To these any doctrine may be
propounded, whether of the Law or of the Gospel: if the i. If it be limited
and meant to them.
limitation and circumscription of the doctrine be made to those persons, for
whom it is convenient. John 7. 37. Now in the last and great day of the Feast,
Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst let him come unto me and
drink. And this was the manner of the Prophets in their Sermons, to denounce
judgments and destruction to the wicked: and to promise deliverance in the
Messiah to those that do repent. A (...).
doubt. If any man shall despair in the public congregation, when the rest
are hardened, what ought to be done? (...).
Ans. Let those that are hardened, hear the Law circumscribed within the
limits of the persons, and of the vices: and let the afflicted conscience hear
the voice of the Gospel applied in special manner unto it.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the kinds of Application.

APplication is either (...).
Mental or (...).
Practical.

Mental is that, which respects the mind: and it is either doctrine or
Improouing, confuting.
Redargution. 2. Tim. 3. 16. The whole Scripture is given by Gods inspiration,
and is profitable for doctrine ((...)) for Redargution or improouing, ((...))
for correction ((...)) and for instruction ((...)) in righteousness. 17. That
the man of God may be perfect, being perfectly instructed unto every good work.

Doctrine is that, whereby doctrine (or teaching) is used for the information
of the mind to a right judgment concerning things to be believed.

Redargution is that, whereby teaching is used for the reformation of the mind
from error.

In confutations, which are made publicly before the assembly, these cautions
must be used. 1. The thing that is determined ((...)) or the state of the
question that is to be discussed must be thoroughly understood. 2. Let those
errors only be reproved, which trouble the Church, in which we live: all
other being altogether let alone, which do either lie dead, or are external:
unless some danger be ready to ensue of them. Matthew. 16. Beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees and Saduces. Mark. 9. Take heed, and beware of the
leaven of Herod. Reave. 2. The men of Pergamus are warned to beware of the
Nicolaitans, to whom some of them did assent. 3. If the error be out of the
foundation of faith, the confutation must not only be Christianlike, as it
should be ever: but also a friendly, a gentle and brotherly dissension.

Practical application is that which respects the life and behavior. And it
is instruction ((...)) and correction, (...).

Instruction is that, whereby doctrine is applied to frame a man to live well
in the Or government of the family, oiconomia.
family, commonwealth, and Church. To this place belong consolation and
exhortation. Romans 15. 4.

Correction is that, whereby the doctrine is applied to reform the life from
ungodliness and unrighteous dealing. Hitherto belongs admonition. This must be
done, first generally, the circumstances of the persons being omitted. 2. Sam.
12. Nathan brings David to the knowledge of his sin by the help of a
general parable. Act. 19. 26. Ye see and hear, that not only at Ephesus, but
almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away much
people (because he says that those are not Gods which are made with hands.)
35. Then the Town Clerk, when he had stayed the people, said, Ye men of
Ephesus, etc. 37. Ye have brought hither these men, which have neither
committed sacrilege, neither [doe blaspheme] your goddess. Afterward, if the
former reproof prevail not, it must be urged after a more special manner. 1.
Tim. 5. 20. Them that sin, rebuke openly, that the rest may also fear. But
always, in the very hatred of sin, let the love of the person appear in the
speeches: and let the Minister include himself (if he may) in his
reprehension, that it may be more mild and gentle. Dan. 4. 16. Then Daniel --
said, My Lord, the dream be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation
thereof to thine enemies. 17. The tree, which thou saw -- it is thou, 19.
Gal. 2. 15. We that are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles. 1.
Cor. 4. 6. These things, Brethren, I have by a kind of figure translated to my
self, and to Apollo for you, that ye might learn by us not to be wise above
that which is written.

Now these four kinds of application do offer themselves in every sentence of
the Scripture. I will also set down that example, which Illyricus has
propounded.

Illyricus in his book of the way to understand the Scriptures. Tract. 1.
Matthew. 10. 28. Fear ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul: but rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and
body in hell. 29. Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of them
shall not fall on the ground without your Father? 30. Yea, and all the hairs
of your head are numbered. 31. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value
than many Sparrowes. It were easy to draw from hence many doctrines: partly of
the confession of the faith: and partly concerning (Gods) providence.
(...).
Doctrine 1. That it is needful for us publicly to profess the doctrine
which we know, so often as there is need. 2. That we must make confession also
with the hazard of goods and life. 3. That our life should be contemned in
comparison of Christ and his truth. 4. That eternal punishments to be
suffered both in soul and body are prepared for those that are not afraid to
deny Christ, and his truth. 5. That God is intent and ready to govern us,
that we might make our confession aright. 6. That the providence of God is not
only general, but also special, which is diligently occupied about all our
smallest matters, yea even the hairs of our head.

(...).
Redargution. 1. Those do err, who think it to be sufficient, if in heart
they do embrace the faith and a right opinion concerning religion: and that it
is at a man's choice in the mean season to grant or affirm any thing before
men, as the condition of the place, time, and persons requires; especially
when the life seems to be in imminent danger to be lost. 2. The Epicures
err, in that they deny the divine providence: because they think it too base
for the Majesty of God to take care of humane affairs. 3. The Stoics do
err, who imagine that all things are governed by the fate, (or an irresistable
and violent necessity.) 4. They do err who make chance and fortune, without
any wise ordination of the divine providence. 5. The Pelagians do err in
giving more than is due to man's strength, as if it were put in men's power to
embrace the faith at their pleasure, to continue constant in the same, and to
confess it to the end without fear. 6. They do err, who do lean more upon
outward things and inconstant riches, than upon the power and goodness of God.

(...).
Instruction. 1. Thou must to the utmost of thy power labor to have the true
fear of God before thine eyes: because thou now hear that one God is to be
feared above all men.

2. Thou must learn such a contempt of humane things, as that thou may
always desire, having forsaken them, to depart hence, and to be joined
together with Christ in the heavens. 3. The consideration of (Gods) special
providence does cause thee to think of the presence of God that Beholder, to
crave his help, and also to believe that thou art helped in all things, and
finally that there is no danger so terrible, but he both can and will deliver
thee from, when it is fit.

(...).
Correction. 1. These words of Christ correct their negligence, who in their
prayers do not crave of God sincere love, that being inflamed with it they may
not refuse to lay down their life for his name. 2. The negligence of those men
is also taxed, which do not acknowledge and behold the providence of God
showing it self in all things. 3. Those are reproved, who give not God thanks
for vouchsafing to govern and defend us and all things that belong unto us by
his providence. 4. Those are reproved, that abuse the good creatures of God,
seeing that it is manifest that God has care of all things.

Thus any place of Scripture ought to be handled: yet so as that all the
doctrins be not propounded to the people, but those only, which may be fitly
applied to our times and to the present condition of the Church. And they must
not only be choice ones, but also few, lest the hearers be ouercharged with
their multitude.

CHAP. IX.
Of Memory in Preaching.

BBecause it is the received custom for Preachers to speak Memoriter.
by heart before the people, some thing must be here annexed concerning memory.

Artificial memory, which stands upon places and images, will very easily
without labor teach how to commit sermons to the memory: but it is not to be
approved. 1. The animation of the image, which is the key of memory, is
impious; because it requires absurd, insolent and prodigious cogitations, and
those especially, which set an edge upon and kindle the most corrupt affections
of the flesh. 2. It dulleth wit and memory, because it requires a threefold
memory for one: the first of the places: the second of the images: the third
of the thing that is to be declared.

It is not therefore an unprofitable advise, if he that is to preach do
diligently imprint in his mind by the help of dsposition either axiomaticall,
or syllogisticall, or methodicall the several doctrines of the place he means
to handle, the several proofs and applications of the doctrines, the
illustrations of the applications, and the order of them all: in the mean time
nothing careful for the words, Which (as Horace speaks) will not unwillingly
follow the matter that is premeditated. Uerbaque praeuisam rem non inuita
sequentur.

Their study has many discommodities, who do con their written sermons word
for word. 1. It asks great labor. 2. He which through fear does stumble at
one word, does both trouble the congregation, and confound his memory. 3.
Pronunciation, action, and the holy motions of affections are hindered; because
the mind is wholly bent on this, to wit, that the memory fainting now under
her burden may not fail.

CHAP. X.
HItherto has bin spoken of the preparation or provision of the sermon: the
Promulgation or vttring of it follows.

In the Promulgation two things are required: the hiding of humane wisdom,
and the demonstration (or showing) of the spirit.

Humane wisdom must be concealed, whether it be in the matter of the sermon,
or in the setting forth of the words: because the preaching of the word is the
Testimony of God, and the profession of the knowledge of Christ, and not of
humane skill: and again, because the hearers ought not to ascribe their faith
to the gifts of men, but to the power of Gods word. 1. Cor. 2. 1. When I came
unto you brethren, I came not with the eminency of eloquence or of wisdom,
declaring unto you the testimony of God. 2. For I did not decree to know any
thing among you but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. 5. That your faith should
not consist in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.

If any man think that by this means barbarism should be brought into
pulpits; he must understand that the Minister may, yea and must privately use
at his liberty the arts, philosophy, and variety of reading, whilst he is
in framing his sermon: but he ought in public to conceal all these from the
people, and not to make the least oftentation. Artis etiam est celare artem; it
is also a point of Art to conceal Art.

The Demonstration of the spirit is, when as the Minister of the word does in
the time of preaching so behave himself, that all, even ignorant persons and
unbelievers may judge, that it is not so much he that speaks, as the Spirit
of God in him and by him. 1. Cor. 2. 4. Neither was my speech and my preaching
in the perswasiue words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the
spirit and of power. And 14. 42. If all prophecy, and there enter in an
unbeliever, or one that is ignorant, he is reproved of all, be is judged of
all. 25. And so the secrets of his heart are disclosed, and so falling upon his
face, he willworship God, returning word that God indeed is among you. And 4.
19. I will come unto you shortly -- and I will know not their Non verba, sed
virtutem.
words that are puffed up, but their power. 20. For the kingdom of God is not
in words but in power. Mich. 3. 8. I am filled with power by the spirit of the
Lord, and with judgment and might to show Jacob his defection, and to Israel
his sin. This makes the ministry to be lively and powerful. Luke 11. 27.
And it came to pass, when he had spoken these things, that a certain woman of
the multitude lifting up her voice said unto him, Blessed is the womb that
bare thee, and the breasts that gave thee suck.

This demonstration is either in speech or in gesture.

The speech must be spiritual and gracious.

That speech is spiritual, which the holy Spirit does teach. 1. Cor. 2. 13.
Which things also we speak, not in the words, which man's wisdom teaches,
but which the holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual
things. And it is a speech both simple and perspicuous fit both for the peoples
understanding and to express the majesty of the spirit. Act. 17. 2. Paul
disputed with them three sabbath days out of the Scriptures. 3. Opening
((...)) and showing that Christ must suffer and rise again. Gal. 3. 1. O ye
foolish Galatians: -- to whom Jesus Christ before was described in your sight,
and among you crucified. 2. Cor. 4. 2. But we have cast from us the clokes of
shame, and walk not in craftines, neither handle we the word of God
deceitfullie: but in declaration of the truth we approve our selves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God. 3. If our Gospel be then hid, it is hid
to them that perish. 4. In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds,
that is, of the infidels. etc.

Wherefore neither the words of arts, nor Greek and Latin phrases and quirks
must be intermingled in the sermon. 1. They disturb the minds of the
auditors, that they cannot fit those things which went before with those that
follow. 2. A strange word hinders the understanding of those things that are
spoken. 3. It draws the mind away from the purpose to some other matter.

Here also the telling of tales, and all profane and ridiculous speeches must
be omitted.

The speech is gracious, wherein the grace of the heart is expressed. Luke 4.
22. And all bare witness of him, and wondered at the gracious words, which
proceeded out of his mouth. John 7. 46. The Officers answered, never man spoke
like this man.

Grace is either of the Person, or of the Ministry.

Grace of the person is the holiness of the heart, and an unblameable life:
Which howsoever it makes not a Minister, yet is it very necessary. 1. Because
the doctrine of the word is hard both to be understood and to be practiced,
therefore the Minister ought to express that by his example, which he
teaches, as it were by a type. 1. Pet. 5. 3. Not as though ye were Lords over
Gods heritage, but that ye may be examples ((...) types) to the flock. 1.
Tim. 4. 12. Be an example to the faithful, both in word and conversation.
Phil. 4. 8. Furthermore, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest -- think on these things. 9. Which ye have both learned,
and received, and heard, and seen in me, those things do, and the God of
peace shall be with you. 2. He that is not godly, howsoever he may understand
the scriptures, yet does he not perceive the inward sense and experience of the
word in his heart. Psalm. 25. 8. The Lord is good and right, therefore he
teaches sinners his way. 9. He makes the meek to walk in the Law, and
teaches the meek his way. Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing,
but he reuealeth his secret to his servants the Prophets. Genesis 18. 17. And the
Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham the thing which I am about to do? 18.
Seeing that Abraham shall be indeed the father of a great and mighty nation,
etc. 29. For I know him that he will command his sons and his household after
him, that they keep the way of the Lord to do righteousness and judgment. 3.
It is a thing execrable in the sight of God that godly speech should be
conjoined with an ungodly life. Psalm. 50. 16. 17. Unto the wicked God says,
what have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, and to take my covenant into
thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed. It is a strange sight to see him,
that is the guide of the way to others, to wander out of the way himself, and
to see a Physician of others to be full of botches himself in the mean while,
as Nazianzene speaks. 4. It is an ecclesiastical secret: That the Minister
ought to cover his infirmities, that they be not seen. For the simple people
behold not the ministry, but the person of ye Minister. Herod heard John
Baptist willingly, not because he was a good minister, but because he was a
good man. Mark. 6. 20. Well says In verse.
Nazianzene, He that teaches sound doctrine, and lives wickedly, reaches that
with one hand, which he cleeketh away with the other. Chrysostom upon the 25.
of Matthew says: The doctor of the Church by teaching well and by living well
instructs the people how they ought to live well: but by living ill he does
instruct God how to condemn him. And in his 30. Hom. in Act. It is an easy
matter to show wisdom in words, teach me to live by thy life: this is the
best teaching. For words make not such an impression in the soul as works
do. 5. A Minister, that is wicked either openly or secretly, is not worthy to
stand before the face of the most holy, and the almighty God. Ier. 15. 19.
Therefore thus says the Lord, If thou return, then will I bring thee again
and thou shall stand before me. Isai. 6. 6. Then flew one of the Seraphims unto
me with an hot coal in his hand, which he had taken from the Altar with the
tongues. 7. And he touched my mouth and said, Lo, this has touched thy lips,
and thine iniquity shall be taken away, and thy sin shall be purged. 8.
Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send? and who shall
go for us? Then I said, Here am I, send me. Leuit. 10. 3. Then Moses said to
Aaron, This is that which the Lord said, I will be sanctified in them that come
near unto me, and I will be glorified before the sight of all the people. And
hence it is that the judgments of God remain for wicked Ministers to tremble
at. 1. Sam. 2. 17. Therefore the sin of the young men was very great before
the Lord: for men abhorred the offering of the Lord. etc. ver. 25. They obeyed
not the voice of their father, because the Lord meant to slay them.

The parts of sanctity are especially, 1. A good conscience. 2. Cor. 1. 12.
For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, and not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God, we have had our conversation in the world. 1. Timothy 1. 19. Keeping
faith and a good conscience, which some having put away as concerning the faith
have made Ship-wreck. Act. 24. 16. And herein I endeavor my self to have
always a clear conscience toward God, and toward men. If this be wanting,
the mouth of the speaker is shut. Isai. 56. 10. Their Watchmen are all blind:
they have no knowledge, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark, they lie
and sleep, and delight in sleeping. 2. An inward feeling of the doctrine to be
delivered. Wood, that is capable of fire, does not burn, unless fire be put to
it: and he must first be godly affected himself, who would stir up godly
affections in other men. Therefore what motions a sermon does require, such the
Preacher shall stir up privately in his own mind, that he may kindle up the
same in his hearers. 3. The fear of God, whereby, being thoroughly stricken
with a reverent regard of Gods Majesty, he speaks soberly and moderately.
4. The love of the people. 1 Thessalonians. 27. But were gentle amongst you, as a
nurse that cherishes her children. And that this affection may appear, the
Ministers duty is to pray seriously and fervently for the people of God. 1.
Sam. 12. 23. God forbid that I should sin against the Lord and cease praying
for you. 5. The Minister must also be ((...)) venerable, that is, such a one as
is to be reverenced for constancy, integrity, gravity and trueth-speaking,
who also knows how to perform reverence to others either privately or
publicly, as is befitting the persons of all his hearers. 6. He must be
((...)) temperant, who restrains inwardly his over vehement affections, and
has his outward fashions and gestures moderate and plain, by the which
dignity and authority may be procured and preserved. Therefore he must be
neither covetous ((...) a lover of silver) nor ((...)) a follower of wine, nor
litigious, nor a striker, nor wrathful: And let the young men exercise
themselves to godliness, and fly the lusts of youth. 1. Tim. 4. 7.

The grace of the ministry is. 1. to be apt to teach ((...)) 1. Timothy 3.
2. Now Paul's meaning is, that it is not only decent and laudable if this gift
be had, but also that it is so necessary, as that may not be wanting. For this
consideration Nazianzene refused a bishopric: and Theophylact upon this place
says, that this duty of teaching is especially of all other necessary to be
found in Bishops. In the Nicene and Miletian Council, this was imposed in
stead of a punishment, to hold the name of a Minister, but not to preach the
Gospel. 2. Authority, whereby he speaks as the Ambassador of the great
Jehovah. Tit. 2. 15. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all
authority. 1. Pet. 4. 11. If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of
God. 3. Zeal, whereby being most desirous of Gods glory he does endeavor to
fulfill and execute the decree of election concerning the salvation of men by
his ministry. Job 32. 18. I an full of matter, and the spirit within me
compels me. 16. Behold, my belly is as the wine which has no vent, and
like the new bottels that brast. 2. Tim. 2. 25. Instructing them -- proving if
God at any time will give them repentance, that they may know the truth. Col.
1. 28. 29. Admonishing every man -- that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus.

Gesture is either in the action of the voice or of the body.

The voice ought to be so high, that all may hear. Isai. 58. 1. Cry aloud,
and spare not: lift up thy voice like a trumpet. John 7. 37. In that last and
great day of the feast Jesus stood up and cried, Act. 2. 14. And Peter standing
with the eleven lift up his voice and said.

In the doctrine he ought to be more moderate, in the exhortation more
fervent and vehement.

Let there be that gravity in the gesture of the body, which may grace the
Messenger of God. It is fit therefore, that the trunk or stalk of the body
being erect and quiet, all the other parts, as the arm, the hand, the face and
eyes have such motions, as may express and (as it were) utter the godly
affections of the heart. The lifting up of the eye and the hand signifies
confidence. 2. Chron. 6. 13. Solomon made a brazen scaffold, and set it in the
midst of the court -- and upon it he stood, and kneeleddowne upon his knees
before all the congregation of Israel, and stretched out his hands toward
heaven. 14. And said, O Lord God of Israel, etc. Act. 7. 55. And Steven being
full of the holy Ghost, bending his eyes up to heaven beheld the glory of God.
The casting down of the eyes signifies sorrow and heaviness. Luke 18. 13. But
the Publican standing afar off would not so much as lift up his eyes unto
heaven, but he smote his breast saying, God be merciful to me a sinner.

Concerning the gesture other precepts cannot be delivered; only, let the
ensample of the grauest Ministers in this kind be in stead of a Rule.

CHAP. XI.
Of conceiving of Prayer.

HItherto has bin spoken concerning Preaching of the word: it remains now to
speak of the conceiving of prayers: which is the second part of Prophesying,
whereby the Minister is the voice of the people in calling upon God. Luke 11.
1. One of his Disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also
taught his Disciples. 1. Sam. 14. 24.

Here are to be considered:

1. The matter thereof, first the wants and sins of the people: and then the
graces of God and the blessings they stand in need of. 1. Tim. 2. 1. I exhort
therefore above all things, that supplications -- be made for all men. 2. For
Kings and those that are in authority. Tertul. Apolog. says, We do all pray
for all Emperors, that they may obtain a long life, a quiet reign, a safe
family, courageous armies, a faithful Counsel, loyal subjects, a peaceable
world, and whatsoever things are desired of a man and of Caesar, Again: We
pray for Emperors, for their ministers and powers, for the state of the time,
for the quietness of their affairs, and for the delaying of their death. The
Lords prayer reduces this matter to six heads, which are Gods glory,
kingdom, obedience, the preservation of the life, the remission of sins, and
the strengthening of the spirit.

2 The form thereof. 1. Let there be one voice, and that the Ministers alone,
the people being in the mean while silent, and showing their assent at the
end, by saying Amen. Act. 4. 24. Who when they had heard these things, they
lift up their voice with one accord unto God, and said, etc. Nehem. 8. 6. And
Ezra praised the Lord the great God, and all the people answered, Amen, Amen.
1. Cor. 14. 16. Else, when thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he that
supplieth the place of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks. Iustine
in his 2. Apolog. to Antoninus, says: When the ((...)) President has finished
his prayers and thankes-giuings, all the people that are present, cry out with
a favorable approbation, saying, Amen. Athanasius Apolog. ad Constant. Imp.
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 8. Jerome Prooem. 2. in Gal.

2. Let the voice be understood. 1. Cor. 14. 15. I will pray with the spirit,
I will pray also with the understanding: I will sing with the spirit, I will
sing with the understanding also.

3. Let the voice be continued, not iagged and abrupt, that idle repetitions
may be avoided, (...). Matthew. 6. 7.

4. The parts, which are three: Consideration, Ordering, and Uttering of it.

Consideration is that, whereby fit matter for the framing of prayers is
diligently searched for.

Ordering is that, whereby the matter being found out is disposed in the mind
in a certain order.

Prolation or vttring of it is that, whereby it is orderly pronounced in
public to the edifying of the people.

Trin-vni Deo Gloria.
THE ORDER AND SVMME of the sacred and only method of Preaching.
1. To read the Text distinctly out of the Canonical Scriptures.

2. To give the sense and understanding of it being read, by the Scripture it
self.

3. To collect a few and profitable points of doctrine out of the natural
sense.

4. To apply (if he have the gift) the doctrines rightly collected to the life
and manners of men, in a simple and plain speech.

The Sum of the Sum.

Preach one Christ by Christ to the praise of Christ.

The Writers which lent their help to the framing of this Art of Prophesying
are:

Augustine, Hemingius, Hyperius, Erasmus, Illyricus, Wigandus, Iacobus
Matthias, Theodorus Beza, Franciscus Iunius.

Soli Deo gloria.


