THE FOUNDATION OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION GATHERED INTO SIX Principles.

And it is to be learned of ignorant people, that they may be fit to hear
Sermons with profit, and to receive the Lords Supper with comfort.

Psalm. 119. verse. 20. The entrance into thy words shows light, and gives
understanding to the simple.

ALMA MATTER CANTABRIGIA
printer's or publisher's device HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA

Printed at London by John Legate, Printer to the University of Cambridge.
1618.

To all ignorant people that desire to be instructed.
Poor people, your manner is to soth up your selves, as though you were in a
most happy estate but if the matter come to a just trial, it will fall out
far otherwise, For ye lead your lives in great ignorance, as may appear by
these common opinions which follow.

1 That faith is a man's good meaning and his serving of God. 2 That God is
served by the rehearsing of the ten commandments, the Lords prayer, and the
Creed. 3 That ye have believed in Christ ever since you could remember. 4 That
it is pitrie that he should live which does any whit doubt of his salvation. 5
That none can tell whether he shall be saved or no certainly, but that all men
must be of a good belief. 6 That howsoever a man live, yet if he call upon
God on his death bed, and say, Lord have mercy upon me, and so go away like
a lamb, he is certainly ued. 7 That if any be strangely visited, he is
either taken with a planet, or bewitched. 8 That a man may lawfully swear when
he speaks nothing but the troth and swears by nothing but that which is
good, as by faith and troth. 9 That a preacher is a good man no longer then he
is in the Pulpit. They think all like themselves. 10 That a man may repent
when he will, because the Scripture says, At what time soever a sinner does
repent him of his sin, etc. 12 That it is an easier thing to please God, then
to please our neighbor. 13 That ye can keep the commandments as well as God
will give you leave. 13 That it is safest to do in religion as most do. 14
That merry ballads and books, as Sk^ggin, Beuis of Southampton, etc. are good
to drive away the time, and to remove heart qualmes. 15 That ye serve God
with all your hearts* and that you would be sorry else. 16 That a man need not
hear so many Sermons, except he could follow them better. 17 That a man which
comes at no Sermons, may as well believe, as he which hears all the Sermons
in the world. 18 That ye know all the Preacher can tell you. For he can say
nothing, but that every man is a sinner that we must love our neighbors as
our selves, that every man must be saved by Christ: and all this ye can tell as
well as he. 19 That it was a good world, when the old religion was, because all
things were cheap. 20 That drinking and bezeling in the alehouse or tavern is
good fellowship, and shows a good kind nature, and maintains neighborhood.
21 That a man may swear by the Mass, because it is nothing now: and by^ Lady,
because she it gone out of the country. 22 That every man must be for
himself, and God for us all. 23 That a man may make of his own whatsoever he
can. 24 That if a man remember to say his prayers in the morning (though he
never understand them) he has blessed himself for all the day following. 25
That a man prays when he says the ten commandments. 26 That a man eats
his maker in the Sacrament. 27 That if a man be no adulterer, no thief, no
murderer, and do no man harm, he is a right honest man. 28 That a man need
not to have any knowledge of religion, because he is not book-learned. 29 That
one may have a good meaning when he says and does that which is evil. 30
That a man may go to wizzards, called wise men, for counsel: because God has
provided a salve for every sore. 31 That ye are to be excused in all your
doings, because the best men are sinners. 32 That ye have so strong a faith in
Christ, that no evil company can hurt you.
These and such like sayings, what argue they but your gross ignorance? Now
where ignorance raineth, there reigns sin: and where sin reigns, there the
devil rules: and where he rules, men are in a damnable case.

Ye will reply unto me thus that ye are not so bad as I would make you. If
need be you can say the Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments:
and therefore ye will be of Gods belief, say all men what they will, and you
defy the dinell from your hearts.

I answer again, that it is not sufficient to say all these without book,
unless ye can understand the meaning of the words, and be able to make a right
use of the commandments, of the Creed, of the Lords prayer, by applying them
inwardly to your hearts and consciences, and outwardly to your lives and
conversation. This is the very point in which ye fail.

And for a help in this your ignorance, to bring you to true knowledge,
unfeigned faith and sound repentance, here I have set down the principal
points of Christian Religion in six plain and easy rules: even such as the
simplest may easily learn: and hereunto is adjoined an exposition of them word
by word. If ye do want other good directions, then use this my labor for
your good instruction. In reading of it, first learn the six principles: and
when you have them without book, and the meaning of the withal, then learn
the exposition also: which being well conceived, and in some me asure felt in
the heart, ye shall be able to profit by Sermons, whereas now ye cannot: and
the ordinary parts of the Catechism, namely, the ten Commandments, the
Creeds, the Lords prayer, and the institution of the two Sacraments, shall more
easily be understood.

Thine in Christ Jesus, William Perkins.

The Foundation of Christian Religion gathered into six Principles.
The first Principle,
Question. What do thou believe concerning God?

A. There is one God, Creator and governor of all things, distinguished into
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

Proofs out of the word of God.
1. There is a God.

For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, Romans
1.20
are seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his works, to
the intent that they should be without excuse.

Nevertheless, he left not himself without witness, in thou be did good,
Act. 14.17
and gave us rame from heaven, and fruitful seasons, fulfilling our hearts
with food and gladness.

2. There is one God.

1. Cor. 8.4
Concerning therefore meats sacrificed to idols, we know that an idol is
nothing in the world: and that there is none other God but one.

3. He is Creator of all things.

In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. ^en. 1.1.


Through faith we understand, that the world was ordained by the word of God:
^eb. 11.5.
so that the things which we see, are not made of things which did appear.

4. He is governor of all things.

The eyes of the Lord in every place behold the evil and the good. ^rou. 15.3.


Yea, and all the hairs of our heads are numbered. Mat. 10.30.


5. Distinguished into the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

And Jesus when he was baptized, came straight out of the water: Mat. 3.16.
and lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and John saw the Spirit of God
descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him.

And lo a voice came from heaven, saying, This is my well beloved Son, Verse
17.
in whom I am well pleased.

For there are three which bear record in heaven, 1. Ioh. 5.7.
the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one.

The second Principle.
Q. What do thou believe concerning man and concerning thine own self.

A. All men are wholly corrupted with sin through Adams fall, and so are
become slaves of Satan, and guilty of eternal damnation.

1. All men are corrupted with sin.

As it is written, There is none righteous, Romans 3.10
no not one.

2. They are wholly corrupted.

Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, 1. These 5.13.
and I pray God that your whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be kept
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This I say therefore and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not
as other Gentiles walk in vanity of their mind. Ephesians. 4.17.


Having their cogitation darkened, Verse. 18.
and being strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the hardues of their hearts.

When the Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, Genesis 6.5.
and all the imaginations of the thought of his heart were only evil
continually.

3. Through Adams fall.

Wherefore as by one man, sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and
so dea^ went over all men, ^om. 5.21.
for so much as all men hau^ sinned.

4. And so are become slaves of Satan.

Wherein in times past ye walked according to the course of the world, Ephesians. 2.2.
and after the Princ^ that rules in the air, even the spirit that now works
in the children of disobedience.

For as much then as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, Heb. 2.14.
he also himself likewise took part with them that he might destroy through
death, him that had the power of death, that is, the devil.

In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds, 2. Cor. 4.
that is, of Infidels, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which
is the image of God, should not shine unto them.

5. And guilty of eternal damnation.

For as many as are of the works of the law, Gal. 3.10.
are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every man that continues
not in all things, which are written in the book of the law, to do them.
Likewise then as by the offense of one, the fault came on all men to
^ondemnation: so by the justifying of one, the ^enefit abounded toward all men
to the instifi^ation of life. Romans 5.1


The third Principle.
Q. What means is there for thee to escape this damnable estate?

A. Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God, being made man, by his death upon
the cross, and by his righteousness, has perfectly alone by himself,
accomplished all things that are needful for the salvation of man.

1. Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God.

And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory
thereof, Ioh. 1.14.
as the glory of the only begotten (Son) of the Father, full of grace and
truth.

2. Being made man.

For he in no sort took the Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham. Heb.
2.16.


3. By his death upon the cross.

But he was wounded for our transgressions, Esa. 53.5.
he was broken for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and with his stripes wear healed.

4. And by his righteousness.

Romans 5.15
For as by one man's desobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of
one sha^^ many also be made righteous.

For he has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, Cor. 5.21
that we should be made the righteousness of God in him.

5. Has perfectly

Wherefore he is also able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him,
^eb. 7.27.
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

6. Alone by himself.

Neither is there salvation in any other for among men there is given none
other name under auen, ^ct. 4 12.
whereby we must be saved.

7. Accomplished all things needful for the salvation of mankind.

And he is the reconciliation for our sins: and not for ours only, 1. Ioh.
2.2.
but also for the sins of the whole world.

The fourth Principle.
Q. But how may thou be made partaker of Christ and his benefits?

A. A man of a contrite and humble spirit, by faith alone apprehending and
applying Christ with all his merits unto himself, is justified before God, and
sanctified.

1. A man of contrite and humble spirit.

For thus says he that is high and excellent, He that inhabiteth the
eternity, Esa. 57.1^
whose name is the holy one; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble,
and to give life to them that are of a contrite heart.

The sacrifices of God, are a contrite spirit, Psalm. 51.1.
a contrite and a broken heart, O God, thou will not despise.

2. By faith alone.

As soon as Jesus heard that word spoken, he said unto the ruler of the
Synagogue, Mark. 5.3.
Be not afraid, only believe.

So Moses made a serpent of brass, and set it up for a sign, Numb. 21 19.
and when a Serpent had bitten a man, then he looked to the Serpent of brass,
and lived.

And as Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, Ioh. 3.14.
so must the Son of man be lifted up.

That whosoever believes in him, Verse 15.
should not perish, but have eternal life.

3. Apprehending and applying Christ with all his merits unto himself.

But as many as recciued him, Ioh. 1.12.
to them he gave


