MARTINUS LVTHERVS.
Roma orbem domuit. Romam sibi Papa subegit.
Viribus illa suis, fraudibus is te suis.
Quanto is to mayor Lutherus, mayor et illa,
Jstum illamque uno qui domuit calamo.
Cum priuill.

portrait of Martin Luther

LVTHERS FORE-RVNNERS: OR, A CLOVD OF WITNESSES, DEposing for the Protestant
faith.

Gathered together in the History of the Waldenses: Who for diverse hundred
years before Luther successively opposed Popery, professed the truth of the
Gospel, and sealed it with their blood: Being most grievously persecuted, and
many thousands of them martyred, by the tyranny of that Man of sin, and his
superstitious Adherents and cruel instruments.

Divided into three parts.

The first concerns their original beginning, the purity of their Religion;
the persecutions which they have suffered throughout all Europe, for the space
of above four hundred and fifty years. The second contains the history of
the Waldenses called Albingenses. The third concerns the doctrine and
discipline which has been common amongst them, and the confutation of the
doctrine of their adversaries.
All which has been faithfully collected out of the Authors named in the page
following the Preface, By I P. P. L.

Translated out of French by SAMSON LENNARD.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Star under Saint Peter's Church in Cornhill, and in Pope's Head Alley. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM EARL OF PEMBROOKE, BARON HERBERT of Cardiff,
Lord Parre and Rosse of Candale, Lord Fitz Hugh, Marmion and Saint Quintin,
Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's House, Lord Guardien of the Stannery, and
Governor of the Town and Castle of Portesmouth, Knight of the most noble
order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
RIght Honorable,
The more then honorable and princely Prophet David, entering into a due
consideration with himself, how to show himself thankful unto God for his
great and unspeakable mercies and favors bestowed on him, he cries out, Quid
retribuam Domino? what shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits
bestowed on me? and finding nothing could be returned, that could carry the
least proportion to his bounties, he presently answers, I will receive and
not render, I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the
Lord. A strange kind of retribution it is, to repay by taking more; and yet
thus stands the case at this time betwixt your Honor and my self. I have many
a time and often meditated with my self how to do your Honor service, and to
show my self thankful in some measure, for that honorable favor and
readiness I have ever found in you to do me good, but finding nothing in my
self that might any way parallel your goodness, I was enforced to say with
David, I will take and not give, I will requite by asking more. My humble
petition therefore to your Honor is, that you would be pleased to honor these
my weak labors with your honorable protection. The reasons that embolden me
to request this favor at your hands, are principally three. First the love you
once bare to my honorable friend and dear cozen Henry Lord Dacres of the
South, the want of whom I feel the less, because I find no want of love in
your self toward me for his sake. The second is that love and duty I did
ever owe to your more then honorable Uncle Sir Philip Sidney, whom I followed
in the wars of the Netherland when he received his fatal wound. The last and
principal is your love to God and true religion, which has made God to love
you, and the world to honor you. The truth of which religion and visibilitie
of this our Church of England, is made manifest in this history for the last
four hundred and fifty years: which confutes that common and triuiall
objection of the common Adversary, that our religion began with Luther. The
Lord of his infinite mercy make you ever constant in the profession, and
defense of the same truth and religion which you have been borne and bred in,
that as your love toward God does daily increase, Gods love toward you may
increase too, to your everlasting honor in this life, and eternal happiness
in the life to come.

Your Honors in all duty to be commanded. Samson Lennard.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND PVISSANT LORD, FRANCIS DE BONNE, Duke, Peer, and
Marshall (now Constable) of France, Lieutenant General for his Majesty in
Dauphiney, Lord of Lesdiguieres, etc.
MY very good Lord, this History does rightly belong unto you, and you may
challenge it as your due for many reasons. First because the most populous
Churches of the Waldenses are within the circuit and enclosure of your
government, and they have had no time to breath in with liberty, but only
then, when about some forty years since you defended them from the outrages
of their enemies both within and without the Realm: God chearing them up by
his goodness, they have had a sure protection by your love and favor, and a
strong bulwark under your name. Besides the proofs of the sufferings of their
forefathers in passed ages, are the holy booties and spoils that were made in
the taking of Ambrun, when you reduced that City to the obedience of the King.
The Archbishops of that place have carefully kept for above these last 4.
hundred years, the process and proceedings against the said Walde^sian
Churches, which has brought upon those that persecuted the^ an everlasting
shame and dishonor; and contrarily have eternized the piety and judgment of
that follower of yours, that kept the bag of the said process from the fire
of the Archbishop of the said place, whose access to the Tower where they were
saved, the enemy endeavored to withstand.

It was the Lord of Vulcon Counselor to the King in the Court of Parliament at
Grenoble, that recoured them and brought them to our hands, contenting himself
in all that conquest with that only bag, which inditeth the devil himself
with all his adherents, being reserved for the good and edification of the
Church of God. All which being well considered, this benefit comes from you (my
Lord) and the fruit of your arms.

Having therefore resolved with my self, to bring this history to light under
your name, I have but brought it to it first original, by restoring it to it
first benefactor, and dedicating this edifice to him that has furnished it
with the most substantial matter. And herein I have wrought the more
certainty unto it, in that I have dedicated it to him that has seen and
known more of the state of the said Waldenses then I can write. And herein
especially does the work of God show it self, when men of one and the same
name, and one and the same Province, have been so different in their designs.
For it is above three hundred years since, that the noble Arroas de Bonne
persecuted in Dauphiney the fathers and grandfathers of those whom our noble
and great Francis de Bonne has restored. Thus does the eternal God know, when
it pleases him, how out of one and the same stem to make the light of his
mercies to shine, from whence heretofore sprang nothing but darkness. Long and
many happy years may your Honor continue in the same purpose and intent, to
preserve and to love that Church for which Christ Jesus died, and to dedicate
the rest of your days to his glory, and the edification of those flocks for
whom he has shed his most precious blood. Herein consists all your glory. And
that your felicity may spring from hence, I beg at Gods hands from the
bottom of my heart, even with the same affection, which binds me ever to
continue

Your Honors most humble servant, John Paul Perrin of Lion.
From Nyons in Dauphiney, Ian. 1.
THE PREFACE.
THe Church of God in the world, is of higher esteem then the world it self.
It is the fruition of our Lord Jesus Christ. He was crucified for it, and
without it nothing can be accounted good. But as our Redeemer inuiteth us to
enter and to continue therein for our salvation, so Satan endeavors to make
men wander from the right way to their damnation. He blinds them, to the end
they may take that for the Church that has but the name thereof, holding them
in error, seducing them by a worldly glorious pomp, and so makes them disdain
the true Church, principally because it is subject to persecution in the world:
wherein they that honor not the Master cannot cherish the servants: in such
sort, that not acknowledging any other Church, then that which has triumphed,
for many ages together, in the blood of those Martyrs whom it has killed, they
demand with great importunity, what, and in what parts of the world the
Chatholicke Church has been, if that which so long and so peaceably has
obtained the title thereof be not the same? Where was it hid (say they) during
the five ages last past? They are instant upon us, that at the least we show
them some one, in the whole course of so many years, that has believed that,
which in our times has been so much extolled under the name of Reformation.

This history of the Christians called Waldenses and Albingenses will satisfy
those that can read it without passion. For therein appears, that for these
last four hundred and fifty years, there have been (especially in Europe) a
great number, in diverse kingdoms and countries, which have made profession of
a religion altogether conformable to the word of God, and the doctrine which
has been received in the reformed Churches; having mourned under the
darkness of Antechrist, wherein they shined like precious stones in a
dunghill, and roses among the thorns. They seemed to the world but as abject
men, but God beheld them as his children, and gave them eyes to see, and ears
to hear, and an heart to understand the truth. And as he made way to his
judgments, by leaving those to the spirit of amazedness that had forsaken his
word: so he has made way to his mercies in withdrawing this remainder of his
people from the Temples polluted with idolatries, causing the sacred inward
ministry of his Spirit to work in them, providing them temples, and
preserving them from the infection of the external ministry, defiled with
infinite humane inventions.

The writings of the said Waldenses and Albingenses, which have been
miraculously preserved unto this present time, make good in this history the
purity of their religion, and justify them against the imputations of their
adversaries. They make it appear unto the world, that they have had for the
foundation of their faith, the Simbole of the Apostles, allowing also of that
of Athanasius: for the rule of their obedience, the eternal law of God: for
the substance of their prayers, the Lords prayer. And finally that they have
preserved the Sacraments instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ in the self same
purity wherein he first ordained them. And also that they have always lived
under a good and holy discipline, carrying themselves in regard of their
manners and conversation according to the same word, which is the rule of their
faith. And yet nevertheless we shall make it appear, that for all these
things, without which no man can be a true Christian, they have been cruelly
condemned to death, banished, sacked, burnt, cursed, and persecuted with
violence of arms.

Without reason then is it demanded, where the Church was in these ages last
past, since it appears that the almost infinite numbers which the Popes for
righteousness sake have put to death, were the Church, how contrary soever to
the Church of Rome and the Popes, in whatsoever they were contrary to the
Church of God.

Now forasmuch as the first point of the truth which these faithful Martyrs
have maintained, concerns God, who is without beginning and without end,
without whose command there is nothing true or auailable, it must necessarily
follow that the inventions of men must give place when God speaks, especially
the truth being as ancient as the lie. And we must also acknowledge, that they
that have believed in former ages in one only God by Jesus Christ, have been
the true members of the Church, making the Catholic Church, in what part of
the world soever they have been placed. Now it appears by the doctrine and
confession of the faithful (whereof much is spoken in this history) that they
have always put their hope in the living God, expecting salvation and life by
no other means but by the Son of God. If then: for these things they have
been slaughtered, what wrong is done unto those that are guilty of the same
sins, by those bloody desires which they have to banish those out of the
world whose mouths by reason they cannot stop, if seeming to seek the Church
in ages past, they be sent unto those faithful whom such as themselves have
put to death. Have they not rather reason to be thankful unto God with us, for
that the violent assaults of Satan have been always in vain, because the
Church has ever continued in the person of Gods servants victorious by faith,
and triumphant by martyrdom: which we have not measured in this history
according to the cruelty of their punishment, but the justice and goodness of
the cause? It will add much to the glory of God, to follow this blood by the
trace, gathering together the certain proofs of the faith and constancy of
millions of witnesses, who have sealed the truth with the loss of their own
lives. They whose hearts God shall move to enlarge this history, by the true
narration of what has passed touching this subject, in those places where it
has pleased the Lord to make them grow and increase (as there is no Kingdom,
State, Principality, nor almost City, town, or village in Europe, where this
innocent blood has not been shed) shall add much to the edification of his
Church, when many shall contribute to the notice thereof that which God has
done in passed ages, that we may know where and how he has preserved it.

In this holy employment, we need not doubt of the venom of wicked tongues,
the scoffs of Atheists and profane persons. A stomach ill affected loves
nothing but what is contrary unto it, and the wicked have nothing in esteem,
but what is conformable to their vicious humor. If the quippes of the wicked
should have been an hinderance to the service we owe unto God and to his
Church, we had given over this history before we had written three lines
thereof: for it has been snarled at by diverse upon the first bruit thereof,
what then may we think they will do, when they shall see that they never
thought we could so truly have maintained. Doubtless passion will extort from
malignant minds the suggestions of the malignant, in counterchange whereof
(having advertised thee, gentle Reader, that in the first page and inscription
of this history, thou have the name, the division, the intention, the fruit,
and the end, in a few lines) I will pray to the eternal God for those that
wrong us, that he would be pleased to make them know the truth, and give unto
us whom he has placed and planted in his house, after the conflicts of this
life, that portion which he has reserved in heaven by his well-beloved Son our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be all honor glory, and power for ever and ever.
Amen.

The names of those Authors cited in this history that have been adversaries
to the Waldenses.
Albert de Capitaneis Archdeacon of Cremona, in his history of the Waldenses,
and their original. Alphonsus de Castro.
B
Baronius in his Annals. Saint Bernard. Bellarmin. Bernard de Girard Lord of
Haillan. Bodin.
C
Carpentras his Boniour. Claudius Rubis in his history of Lion. Claudius
Seissel. The Council of Latran. The Council of Vaur. The Council of
Mompelier. The Council of Thoulouse. The Council of Vienna. The Council of
Lion. Constitutions of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. Constitutions of
king Roger. Constitutions of Pope Alexander the third. Constitutions of Pope
Innocent the third. Constitutions of Pope Honorius. Constitutions of Pope
Gregory the ninth. Constitutions of Pope Alexander the fourth. Constitutions
of Pope Clement the fourth.
D
Dubrauius.
E
Eccius.
G
Gaspard Bruschius. Gualter Monk a Jesuit. Guichardin. Guido de Perpignan.
Godefredus Monachus.
H
Hosius. History of Languedoc.
I
Jacques de Riberia. John Bale. John Vuier. John le Maire.
K
Krantzius.
L
Lindanus. Letters of Pope John 22. Lewis 12. king of France.
M
The Martyrologe. Matthew Paris. Memorials of the Archbishop of Ambrun Rostain.
N
Noguiers.
P
Paul Languis. Paulus Aemylius. Platina. Peter of the valleys Sernay, a Monk.
Peers Library.
R
Raynerius.
S
The Sea of histories. Sigonius. Simon Deuoion. Statutes of Lewis 9. Statutes
of the Earl Remond the last Earl of Thoulouze.
T
Du Thou. Thomas Walden. Treasury of the histories of France.
V
Vesembecius.
The names of those Authors cited in this history that have made profession of
Reformation.
A
Aldegonde.
B
Bullinger.
C
A Catalogue of the witnesses of truth. Chassagnon. Constans upon the Reuela.
E
Esrom Rudiger.
H
History of the Martyrs of our times. History of the estate of the Church.
History of the Churches of France. Holagaray his history of Foix.
I
The Inuentory of Serres. Ioachim Camerarius.
L
Lauatter. Lewis Camerarius. Luther.
M
Memorials of Hanibal Oliuier. Vignaux. Georg Morel.

P
La Papoliniere.
R
A Reuiew of the Council of Trent.
T
Theodor Beza.
V
Viret. Vignier in his Historical Library.
THE HISTORY OF THE WALDENSES, COMMONLY CALLED IN ENGLAND LOLLARDS:
The first Book.
CHAP. I. That God in all times has raised up laborers for the gathering
together of his Saints. At what time Valdo began to teach, and with what
fruit: what he was, and all they that from his name are called Waldenses.
GOD has never left himself without witnesses, but from time to time he
raises up instruments to publish his grace, enriching them with necessary
gifts for the edification of his Church, giving them his holy Spirit for their
guide, and his truth for a rule, to the end they may discern the Church which
began in Abel, from that which began in Caine: As also teaching them to define
the Church by the faith, and the faith by the Scriptures, strengthening them in
the midst of their greatest persecutions, and making them to know, that the
cross is profitable, so long as the faithful change by that means earth for
heaven, and the children of God are not lost when being massacred and cast into
the fire by a course of justice, we may find in their blood and ashes the seed
of the Church.

That which has been observed in allages, has after a more particular manner
appeared amongst those Christians that are called Waldenses, who were raised in
a time when Satan held men in ignorance, having wrapped the greatest part of
those that call themselves Christians in that great sin of the world, I mean
Idolatry, Kings and Princes employing their authority for the establishment
thereof, appointing all those to the slaughter that would exempt themselves
from the wounds due unto Idolaters.

This was about the year of our Lord a thousand one hundred and threescore, at
what time the punishment of death was inflicted upon all those that did not
believe, that (the words of consecration being pronounced by the Priest) the
body of our Lord Jesus Christ was in the Host under the accidents of the
bread, the roundnesse and whiteness, yea the very body, as great and as large
as it was upon the cross, the bread vanishing, and being transsubstantiated
into the flesh of Christ. At what time it was likewise enjoined to adore the
Host, to crouch unto it, to bow the knees before it: yea it was called God,
and men did beat their breasts before it, and locked it up in a box to
worship it, as they still use even at this day.

This doctrine being altogether unknown to the Apostles, who never spoke word
of any such mystery, as also in the Primitive Church, wherein there was never
any Doctor that taught this expiatorie sacrifice for the living and for the
dead, occasioned many Christians to enter into a detestation thereof, choosing
rather to suffer a temporal death by resisting such Idolatry, then by
consenting thereunto to suffer in hell.

Peter Valdo a citizen of Lions showed himself most courageous in the
opposition of this invention, Guido de Perignan in the flower of Chronicles.
taxing therewithal diverse other corruptions, which with time crept into the
Church of Rome, affirming that she had lost the faith of Jesus Christ, that she
was that whore of Babylon, that barren fig tree, which our Savior had long
before cursed.

That we were not to obey the Pope, in as much as he was not the head of the
Church.

That Monkerie was a stinking carrion, and the mark of the Beast.

That Purgatory, Masses, dedication of Temples, worshipping of Saints,
commemoration of the dead, were no other then the inventions of the devil, and
the snares of Avarice.

Valdo was so much the more attentively hearkened unto, See the Sea of
Histories. fol. 203.

Claud. Rubis in his history of the City of Lions. p. 269.


because he was in high esteem for his learning and piety, as also for his
great bounty toward the poor, not only nourishing their bodies with his
material bread, but their souls with the spiritual, exhorting them
principally to seek Jesus Christ the true bread of their souls.

Many Historiographers do write, Lois Came. in his hist. of the orthod. brethren
of Bohemia. p. 7. Guido de Perignan in his flower of Chronicles.
that he had a resolution to lead an unblameable life, approaching as near as
he could to that of the Apostles, and that upon a mournful unlucky accident
that fell out unexpected, and it was this. Being one evening in the company of
some of his friends, after supper passing the time with talk, and refreshing
themselves, one of the company fell down dead upon the ground, The Catal. of
witnesses of the truth. p. 535. Simon de Noion in his book of the names of the
Doctors of the Church.
with which sudden accident all that were present being strangely affrighted,
Valdo amongst the rest was touched to the quick, and by this dart of Gods
justice was wrought to an extraordinary amendment of life, applying himself
wholly to the reading of the Scriptures, seeking in them his salvation, and
sometimes consulting the writings of the ancients, he continually instructed
those poor people that resorted unto him for alms.

The Archbishop of Lions called John de Belles Mayons, being advertised that
Valdo made profession of teaching the people, boldly blaming the vice, luxury,
excess and arrogancy of the Pope and his Clergy, inhibited him from
teaching, especially for that being a lay person, he exceeded the limits of his
profession and condition of life, and therefore that he should not continue
therein under pain of excommunication, and proceeding against him as against
an Heretic.

Valdo replied, that he could not hold his peace in a matter of so high
importance as the salvation of men, and that he would rather obey God, who had
enjoined him to speak, then man who had commanded him to hold his peace.

Upon this answer the Archbishop endeavored to have him apprehended, but that
could not be, because Valdo having many kinsfolk and friends, was beloved of
many, and so continued closely in Lions, by the favor and protection of his
friends for the space of three years.

Pope Alexander the third of that name, having understood that in Lions there
were diverse persons that called into question his sovereign authority over
the whole Church, fearing that this beginning of rebellion might give some blow
to his supreme dignity and power, cursed Valdo and his adherents, and
commanded the Archbishop to proceed against them by Ecclesiastical censures,
even to the utter extirpation of them.

Claud. Rubis says, Claud. Rubis in his hist. pa. 269.
that Valdo and his followers were wholly chased out of Lions, and Albert de
Capitaneis says that they could not be wholly driven out. Other things we
could not learn of this first persecution, but only that they that escaped
out of Lions, Albert de Capit. in his book of the original of the Vaudois.
who of Valdo were called Waldenses, followed him, and afterward did spread
themselves into diverse companies and places.

CHAP. II. That the dispersion of Valdo and his followers, was the means that
God used to spread the doctrine of Valdo almost throughout all Europe.
ALbert de Capitaneis says, that Valdo retired himself into Dauphiney at his
departure from Lions, and Claud. de Rubis affirms that he conuersed in the
mountains of the said Province, with certain rude persons, yet capable to
receive the impressions of his belief. And true it is that the Churches of the
Waldenses which have continued very long, and whereof there are yet a greater
number then in any other place of Europe, are they of Dauphiney, and the
bordering race or lineage of them, that is to say, those of Piemount, and
Prouence. Vignier says, that he retired into Picardie, Vignier in the 3. part
of his historical Bibliotheque. pa. 130.
where in a short time, he did so much good, that there were diverse persons
that did adhere unto his doctrine, for which shortly after they suffered great
persecutions. Dubranius in his history of Bohemia. Book 14.
For as Dubranius says sometime after, King Philip Augustus enforced by the
Ecclesiastical persons, took arms against the Waldenses of Picardie, razed
and overthrew three hundred houses of gentlemen that followed their part, and
destroyed certain walled Towns, pursuing them into Flanders, whither they
were fled, and caused a number of them to be burnt.

This persecution enforced many to fly into Germany, where shortly after they
were grievously persecuted, namely, See the Sea of Histories.
in the country of Alsatia, and along the Rhine by the Bishops of Mayence and
of Strasburge, who caused to be burnt in the town of Bnigne thirty five
Burgesses of Mayence in one fire, and at Mayence eighteen, who with great
constancy suffered death. And at Strasburge fourscore were burnt at the
instance of the Bishop of the place. These persecutions multiplied in such sort
by the edification that they received who saw them dye, praising God, and
assuring themselves of his mercy, that notwithstanding the continual
persecutions, there were in the County of Passau, and about Bohemia, in the
year one thousand three hundred and fifteen, to the number of fourscore
thousand persons that made profession of the same faith. Math. Paris in his
history of the life of king Hen. 3. in the year 1223.
They had likewise goodly Churches in Bulgaria, Croatia, Dalmatia, and
Hungary, as Math. Paris reports, instructed and governed by one Barthelmew
borne at Carcassonne. The Albegeois on the other side professing the same
faith, have filled many countries, until in the end, they were almost wholly
extirpated, as shall appear in their particular history.

CHAP. III. By what names the Waldenses have been called by their adversaries:
and with what faults and offenses they have been charged.
THe Monks, Inquisitors and mortal enemies to the Waldenses, not being content
to deliver them every day to the secular power, they have besides laid upon
them many opprobrious imputations, affirming them to be the authors of all the
heresies in the world which they endeavored to purge, imputing all those
monstrous abuses that they had forged only to the Waldenses, as if they only
had been the receptacle of all errors.

First therefore they called them, of Valdo a citizen of Lions, Waldenses; of
the country of Albi, Albigeois. Vaudois. Albigeois.


And because such as did adhere to the doctrine of Valdo, departed from Lions
spoiled of all humane means, and the most part having left their goods behind
them, in derision they called them the beggars of Lions.

In Dauphiney they were called in mockery Chaignards. Chaignards.


And because some part of them passed the Alps, Tramontaines.
they were called Tramontaines.

And from one of the disciples of Valdo, called Joseph, who preached in
Dauphiney in the diocese of Dye, Iosephists.
they were called Iosephists.

In England they were called Lollards, Lollards.
of the name of one Lollard who taught there.

Of two priests who taught the doctrine of Valdo in Languedoc, called Henry,
and Esperon, they were called Henriciens, Henriciens. Esperonistes.
and Esperonistes.

Of one of their pastors who preached in Albegeois, named Arnold Hot,
Arnoldistes. Siccars.
they were called Arnoldists.

In Prouence they were called Siccars, a word of Pedlers french which
signifies Cutpurse.

Fraticelli.
In Italy they were called Fraticelli, as much to say, as Shifters, because
they lived in true love and concord together.

Insabathas.
And because they observed no other day of rest but the Sabbath days, they
called them Insabathas, as much to say, as they observed no Sabbath.

And because they were always exposed to continual sufferings, Patareniens,
or Paturins.
from the Latin word Pati, which signifies to suffer, they called them
Patareniens.

And forasmuch as like poor passengers, they wandered from one place to
another, Passagenes.
they were called Passagenes.

Gazares.
In Germany they were called Gazares, as much to say, as execrable and
egregiously wicked.

Turlupins.
In Flanders they were called Turlupins, that is to say, dwellers with wolves,
because by reason of their persecutions they were constrained many times to
dwell in woods and deserts.

Toulousains. Lombards. Piccards. Lionistes. Bohemiens,
Sometimes they were called by the names of those countries and regions where
they dwelt, as of Albi, Albigeois: of Toulouze, Toulousains, of Lombardie,
Lombards, of Piccardie, Piccards, of Lion, Lionists, of Bohemia, Bohemiens.

Sometimes to make them more odious, they made them co^federates with ancient
heretics, but yet under more then ridiculous pretexes. For because they made
profession of purity in their lives, and of faith, they called them Cathares.
Cathares.
And because they denied the bread which the priest showed in the Mass to be
God, they called them Arriens, Arriens.
as denying the divinity of the eternal Son of God. And because they
maintained that the authority of Emperors and Kings depends not upon the
authority of the Pope, Manicheens. Gnostiques. Cataphrigiens. Adamites.
Apostoliques.
they called them Manicheens, as appointing two Princes. And for other causes
which they fained, they called them Gnostiques, Cataphrigiens, Adamites, and
Apostoliques.

Sometimes they spitefully abused them. Ribalds. Buggerers. Sorcerers.
Matthew Paris calls them Ribalds. The compiler of the Treasure of histories
calls thrm Buggerers. Rubis says, that when a man speaks of a sorcerer, he
calls him Vadois. And that which is more, he takes upon him to prove that they
are so. To which temeritie it shall be necessary to answer in his due place,
where they shall be cleared from all those impostures which their enemies have
laid upon them, out of those books from which we have gathered that which
follows.

First they impose upon them, This imposture is found in the book of Albertus
de Capitaneis, of the original of the Vadois, pa. 2. In the book of Ramerius,
de forma hoereticandi hoereticos. fol, 36.

Item in the accusation of the Priests of Bohemia, which they make to the king
Ladislaus against the Vadois. Rai. ibid. fol. 37.


that ancient calumny wherewith the painims defamed the Christians of the
Primative Church, that is, that they assembled themselves in the night time, in
corners and lurking holes, and that the Pastor commanded the lights should be
put out, saying, Qui potest capere capiat, that is, catch who catch can,
whereupon every man endeuoreth to fasten upon whom he can, without any respect
of blood or parentage, and that the lights being put out, they committed
abominable incests; many times the child with his mother, the brother with his
sister, and the father with his own daughter: adding moreover, that they were
to understand, that the children begotten by such copulations were most fit to
be Pastors.

Secondly, they have charged them that they maintain that a man may put away
his wife when he will, and the wife her husband to follow that sect.

Claud. Rubis in his history of Lion. pa. 269.
The third calumny that they charge them withal is, that they have community
of all things amongst them, even of their wives and all.

S. Bernard in his Homily 66. upon the Canticles. Albert ibid.
The fourth is, that they reject the baptism of little infants.

The fifth, that they adore their Pastors, prostrating themselves before them.

Albert ibid.
The sixth, that they maintain that it is not lawful to swear, for any cause
whatsoever.

Rain. fol. 36.
The seventh, that they maintain that the Pope does sin mortally when he
makes war against the Turk, and that they likewise sin mortally that do
obey him, when by them he makes war against heretics.

Rain. ibid. fol. 22. article 32.
The eight calumny is, that they use no reverence toward holy places, and that
he sins not more grievously that burns a Church, then he that breaks into
any other private house.

Albert ibid.
The ninth, that they maintain that the Magistrate ought not to condemn any to
death, and that they that do it sin mortally: and that they maintain this
error, to the end they may escape the hands of the Judge, and go unpunished.

Idem ibid.
The tenth, that the layman being in the state of grace, has more authority
then the Prince that lives in his sin.

Rain. in Summa fol. 12.
The eleventh, that with the Manicheens they ordain two Princes, that is, one
good God, the creator of good, and one bad, that is, the devil, the creator of
evil.

Idem lib. de forma haeret. fol. 21.
The twelfth, that whatsoever is done with a good intention, is good, and that
every one shall be saved in that which he does in that said good intention.

Albert. de origin Vaud. fol. 4.
The thirteenth, that it is a meritorious work to persecute the Priests of the
Church of Rome, the Prelates and their subjects. And that a man may without
sin hurt them in their persons or goods, and withhold their tenthes from them
without scruple of conscience.

The last is taken out of the book of Rubis, Claud. Rubis in his history of
Lion, book 3. pa. 269.
where he says, that Valdo and his Pastors retired themselves into Dauphiney
in the vale Pute, and the valley Angrongne, where they found certain people
rather like savage beasts then men, suffering themselves to be mocked and
abused, and where they became, says he, one like another, and such as rid post
upon a besom. Adding therewithal (to bring within the compass of his
calumnies, the Towns, Cities, and States where the Gospel is received in our
times:) And to say the truth (says he) these are two things that commonly
follow the one the other, heresy and sorcerie, as it is verified in our times,
in those Cities and Provinces which have given entertainment unto heresy.

CHAP. IIII. How the Waldenses are justified and cleared from the calumnies
contained in the former Chapter, by those writings which they have left.
THe Waldenses of Bohemia, whether they were the remainder of that people that
followed Valdo, as some are of opinion that he ended his days in Bohemia,
after he had retired himself out of Germany, and escaped the hands of the
Bishops of Mayence and Strasburge: or whether they were such persons as
afterward professed the same faith which the Waldenses did, it is without all
doubt that they were grievously persecuted by king Ladislaus king of Hungary
and Bohemia: and we have in our own hands an Apology of the said Waldenses,
which they sent unto the king whom they called Lancelau, to justify themselves
against sundry complaints which were made against them by their adversaries: as
also we have a book with this inscription, Aico es la causa del nostre
despartiment de la Gleisa Romana. That is to say, Behold the cause of our
separation from the Church of Rome. And forasmuch as the answer to the first
calumny, that is, that they assembled themselves in dark corners, where the
candles being put out, their adversaries do affirm they committed villanons
incests, we have copied out the answer of the said Apology in their own
terms and language, for the more certainty, and better edification.

This Apology the author Iean Paul Perrin set down in two columns, the one
French, the other in the language of the Waldenses, which for breuity sake we
set down only in English, referring those unto the French book that desire
to see the original.
In the letter to king Ladislaus. pa. 2.
AMong other things (say they) they publish, like angry barking curres, that it
is a law and common amongst us to say, Yield thy self to whomsoever shall
request thee: and that we take our pleasures in dark caves and corners with
whomsoever shall present themselves unto us, whether they be our mothers, or
daughters, or wives, or sisters.

How true this is, it may appear in that God having kept and preserved us for
above these forty years past, it has been never known that there has been
any whoredom amongst us that has escaped unpunished, or any such villainy
committed. In such sort that our lives and carriages condemn those that accuse
us.

And for as much as the Waldenses speak this of themselves, and to their own
praise, and therefore this their justification may seem but weak, look a
little into that which they have written elsewhere against whordome, which may
suffice to show, that they were very far from this diabolical affection to
debase themselves by incests. The sin of luxury is very pleasing to the
devil, Their book of the remedy against the sin of luxury. Chap 21.
displeasing unto God, and injurious against our neighbors, because therein a
man obeys the basest part of his body, rather then God who has preserved
it. A foolish woman does not only take from a man his good, but himself too.
He that is given to this vice keeps faith to no man, and therefore David
caused his faithful servant to be slain, that he might enjoy his wife. Amon
defiled his sister Tamar. This vice co^sumes the heritage of many, as it is
said of the prodigal child, that he wasted his goods living luxuriously.
Balaam made choice of this sin, to provoke the children of Israel to sin,
by occasion whereof there died twenty four thousand persons. This sin was
the cause of the blindness of Sampson: it perverted Solomon: and many have
perished by the beauty of a woman. Prayer, and fasting, and distance of place
are the remedies against this sin. For a man may overcome other vices by
combating with them, but in this a man is never victorious but by flying from
it, and not approaching near unto it: whereof we have an example in Joseph. It
is therefore our duties to pray daily to the Lord, that he will keep us far
from the sin of luxury, and give us understanding and chastity.

See their book of Virtues, in the Chapter of marriage.
Against the second imposture, that they maintain that a man may put away his
wife when it pleases him, they say that marriage is a knot that cannot be
untied but by death, except it be for fornication, as our Savior Christ says.
And Saint Paul 1. Corinthians. 7. says, That the wife is not to depart from her
husband, nor the husband from his wife.

See the book of the Waldenses entitled of virtues in the Chapter of marriage.
To the third calumny, touching the community of goods and wives, they say
concerning marriage, that it was ordained by God long since in the terrestrial
Paradise, and that it is a good remedy against whoredom. And that Saint Paul
speaking thereof says, Let every man have his wife, and every woman her
husband: As also that the husband ought to love his wife as Christ loved his
Church, and that the married couple ought to live together in holiness with
their children, bringing them up in the fear of God.

As touching goods, every man has possessed his own proper substance at all
times and in all places. In Dauphiney, It appears by the process that we have
in our hands, by which it appears that Jews the 12. of that name, condemned
the usurpers of the goods of the Waldenses to a restitution.

It appears by the treatises of Meneobe, and other instances made by the
Waldenses of Prouence.


when the Archbishops of Ambrun, John and Rostain, had spoiled them of their
goods: when the Lord of Argentiere, and Montainar, and Arreas of Bonne had
dispossessed the Waldenses that dwelt in the valley of Fraissimere and of
Argentiere of their goods and possessions, the restitution of every man's
inheritance was prosecuted by the particular persons from whom they had taken
them. The Waldenses of Prouence do demand at this present of the Pope, the
goods and lands which have been annexed to their demaine, and taken from them
by confiscation, every particular person making faith for every part and
parcel of goods and lands which had descended upon them from their ancestors
the Waldenses time out of mind, they never having had any such community
amongst them, that might any way derogate from that lawful propriety which
every one had to his own lands.

The fourth calumny was touching Baptism, which, In the book of the
Waldenses entitled the Spiritual Almanacke. fol. 45.
it is said, they denied to little infants: but from this imputation they quit
themselves as follows.

The time and place of those that are to be baptized is not ordained, but the
charity and edification of the Church and congregation must serve for a rule
therein, etc.

And therefore they to whom the children were nearest allied brought their
infants to be baptized, as their parents, or any other whom God had made
charitable in that kind.

True it is, that being constrained for some certain hundred years to suffer
their children to be baptized by the Priests of the Church of Rome, they
deferred the doing thereof as long as they could possibly, because they had in
detestation those humane inventions which were added to that holy Sacrament,
which they held to be but pollutions thereof. And forasmuch as their Pastors
(which they called Barbes) were many times abroad employed in the service of
their Churches, they could not have the Sacrament of Baptism administered to
their infants by their own Ministers: for this cause they kept them long from
Baptism, which the Priests perceiving, and taking notice of, charged them
thereupon with this imposture: which not only their adversaries have believed,
but diverse others who have well approved of their life and faith in all other
points.

The fifth calumny was, that they adored their Pastors, prostrating themselves
before them. To justify the Waldenses from this imposture, there needs no
more, but that the Reader will be pleased to take the pains to read that
which they have written touching the adoration of one only God, in the
exposition that they made in the book of their doctrine upon the first
Commandment of the Law of God. There you shall find that they have given much
honor even to their Pastors, as unto those that keep the word of
Reconciliation, entertaining them charitably, accompting themselves obliged
thereunto for conscience sake; but that they ever had any intention to give
that worship to the creature that is only due unto the Creator, can never be
made good but by way of calumny. It appears by the process formed by the
said Albert against the Waldenses of the Alps.
Howsoever Albert de Capitaneis their deadly enemy in the Diocese of Turin,
would have extorted from them, that they adored their Pastors, which he could
never enforce them to confess.

The sixth calumny was, that they maintained, that it was not lawful to swear
at all.

In their book entitled the Spiritual Almanacke, in the exposition of the
third commandment.
They say and affirm, that there are lawful oaths tending to the honor of
God and the edification of our neighbors, alleging that place in the 6. Heb.
16. That men swear by the greater, and an oath for confirmation is to them an
end of all strife. As also they allege, that it was enjoined the people of
Israel to swear by the name of the eternal God, Deuteronomy. 6.13. and the examples
of those oaths that past between Abimelec and Isaac, Genesis 26.31. and the oath
of Jacob, Genesis 31.53.

The seventh calumny was, to make them odious to the people, as if they had
preferred the peace with the Turk, before that with the Church and the
kingdom of Christ, affirming that they maintained, that the Pope did mortally
sin when he sends an expedition of soldiers with the badge of the cross
upon their Cassockes or Coatarmour against the Sarazens.

For their justification herein, we must observe, In the book of the causes of
their separation from the Church of Rome. p. 235
that they complain not of the enterprise of war against the Turks, but of
those spoils that the Popes make of the goods of the Church and other divine
graces under the pretense thereof, abusing the ignorant people with their Bulls
and Benedictions, who too willingly receive their lies and inventions, buying
them at a dear rate. As also they think hardly of it, that the Pope should
send out his Croisades, his crossed soldiers being strangers, to pursue them
as heretics, before they be heard or convinced to be such.

But they are not the only men that condemn this avarice, which the revenging
spirits of the Popes have showed by their Croisades.

Paulus Langius a Germane Historiographer lays an imputation upon Leo the
tenth, Paul. Lan. in his Chronicle of France 1513. See the examination of the
Council of Trent. lib. 1. c. 5,
that he levied great sums of money under a pretense of war against the
Turks, which he bestowed shortly after upon thirty Cardinals, which he had
newly created.

Guicciardine notes in his History, that the self same Pope imposed great
exactions upon the people, the benefit whereof fell into the lap of his sister
Magdalen, and that all that levy of money was but to satisfy the avarice of a
woman, and that the Bishop of Aremboldo was thought by him a commissarie worthy
such an action, to put it in execution with all manner of extortion.

Alexander the fourth converted the vow of Jerusalem, to the vow of Pouille,
that is to say, A part of Naples, whose inhabitants are held very dangerous.
the vow of revenge: For he gave power to his Legates to absolve the King of
England, Henry the third by name, dispensing with his vow of the cross for
Jerusalem, upon condition that he should go to Pouille, to make war against
Manfred Frederic Emperor not long before. It is the Historiographer Math.
Paris, Math. Paris in his History of England.

See the first book of the examination of the Council of Trent. cap. 5. In
the book of the causes of their separation from the Church of Rome. p. 125


that sets down the complaint that then was made, that is to say, that the
tenths employed for the succor of the holy Land, were taken away and converted
to the relief of Pouille, against the Christians.

The eight calumny was, that they used no reverence toward holy and
consecrated places, holding that that man sinned not more grievously that
burns a Church, then he that breaks into any other house.

They say, that neither the place, nor the chair, make a man the more holy,
and they have maintained that they deceive themselves much that comfort
themselves, or presume the more, because of the dignity of the place: for what
place more high then Paradise? what place more secure then heaven? and yet
nevertheless man was banished out of Paradise for sinning there; and the
Angels were thrown from heaven, to the end they might be examples to those
that came after, and to teach them, that it is not the place, nor the
greatness nor dignity thereof, that makes a man holy, but the innocence of
his life.

Against the ninth calumny, that is to say, that they defend that the
Magistrate ought not to condemn any to death, they say:

In the book of the Waldenses entitled The light of the treasure of faith.
fol. 214.
That it is written, that we are not to suffer the malefactor to live, and that
without correction and discipline doctrine serves to no purpose, neither should
judgments be acknowledged nor sins punished. And therefore just anger is the
mother of discipline, and patience without reason, the seed of vices, and
permits the wicked to digress from truth and honesty.

It appears by the complaint they made to the King Ladislaus, King of Hungary
and Bohemia.
True it is that they have found fault that the Magistrates should deliver them
to death, without any other knowledge of the cause, then the simple report of
Priests and Monks, who were parties and judges, insomuch that having
discovered the abuse which they brought into the Church, they condemned them
for heretics, and delivered them to the secular power (so they call their
Magistrates.) Now this seemed unto them a cruel simplicity in the said
Magistrates, to give faith to persons passionate and not indifferent, such as
the aforesaid Priests were, and to put to death so many poor innocent people,
never hearing them or examining the cause.

The tenth calumny, was to make them odious to Kings and Princes, that is to
say, that a lay man in the state of grace, had greater authority then a Prince
living in his sins.

Against this imposture they affirm, In the book of the causes of their
separation from the Church of Rome. p. 41.
that every one must be subject to those that are in authority, obey them,
love them, be at peace with them, honor them with double honor, in
subjection, and obedience, and readiness, paying unto them that which is their
due.

The eleventh calumny was grounded upon that assertion of the Waldenses, that
the Pope had no authority over the Kings and Princes of the earth, who depend
immediately upon God alone. For from thence they take occasion to call them
Manichees, as appointing two Princes.

Against this imputation they say; In the book of the treasure of faith. art.
2.
We believe that the holy Trinity has created all things visible and
invisible, and that he is Lord of things celestial, terrestiall, and
infernal, as it is said in S. John, All things are made by him, and without
him nothing is made.

The beginning of this calumny was taken out of the Extrauagantes of Pope
Boniface 8. who subiecting the authority of Emperors unto his, says of his
own, Quicunque huic potestati resistit, Dei ordinationi resistit, nisi duo
(sicut Manichaeus) fingat esse principia. De Maiorit. and obedientia, Can. Vnam
sanctam. l. 1. tom. 8.

The twelfth calumny imports thus much, that they held that whatsoever is done
with a good intention is good, and that every one shall be saved in whatsoever
is done with the said good intention.

To this imposture we need no other answer then that which the Monk Raynerius
(who was always their back-friend) says elsewhere, Rain. lib. de forma
haeretic, art. 38.
that is, that they maintain that every man is saved by his faith, which he
calls a Sect. It is very necessary that a liar should have a better memory,
then to affirm things contradictorie.

And to show that they made no profession of any such belief, that may suffice
that they have said against Antichrist; That he has brought these errors into
the Church under a color of good intention, and a show of faith.

The thirteenth calumny was, that they maintain that a man may kill, or
detain from the Priests their tithes, without scruple of conscience.

It is certain that if the Waldenses had power to employ their tithes to some
other use then to the nourishment of those whom they find to be dumb dogs,
drowsy watchmen, It appears by the process against the Waldenses of
Dauphine, by Albert de Capitaneis, and other Monks Inquisitors.
slow bellies, seducing and being seduced, they had done it: but there was
never any as yet that has occasioned the least troubles that may be in that
regard. It well appears that in whatsoever depended on their own wills, they
have never offered more or less unto those people, taking no thought for their
Masses and Trentals after their death: the which the Priests complain of, and
from thence take occasion to accuse them for heretics. And as touching
revenge, hear what they say.

The Lord knowing that we shall be delivered, says: In the book of the
Waldenses entitled of Tribulations. p. 274
Beware of men: but he does not teach or counsel any of his chosen, to kill
any, but rather to love their enemies. When his disciples said unto him, in the
ninth of S. Luke, Will thou that we command that fire come down from heaven,
and consume them? Christ answered and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit
ye are of. Again the Lord says unto Peter, Put up thy sword into thy sheath,
etc. For temporal adversities are to be contemned, and patiently to be
endured, for there happens nothing therein that is new. We are here the Lords
floor, to be beaten, as the come when it is separated from the chafe.

The last calumny of the Waldenses, which we have gathered out of the writings
of their adversaries, is that which Claud. Rubis lays upon them as a foul
aspersion, Claud. Rubis in his history of Lions. p. 269.
in his History of the City of Lions. That being retired unto the Alps, at
their departure from Lions they became like the rest of the people of that
country, beesome riders.

And he is not content to tie himself to the Vaudois only, but he adds,
These are things that ordinarily follow one another, Heresy and Sorcerie, as
it is verified (says he) in our times in those Cities and Provinces that have
given entertainment unto heresy.

We will first justify the Waldenses, and then answer Rubis in the behalf of
those Cities and Provinces which he has enclosed within this calumny. All
they offend against the first Commandment (say the Vandois in the exposition
of the first Commandment) that believe that the Planets can enforce the will
of man. These kind of men, as much as in them lies, account the Planets as
gods; for they attribute unto the creature, that which belongs unto the
Creator. Against which the Prophet Jeremy 10. speaks: Learn not the way of
the heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven, for the heathen are
dismayed at them. And S. Paul in the fourth to the Galathians, Ye observe
months, and days, and times, and years: but I am afraid of you, lest I have
bestowed upon you labor in vain.

All they offend against this commandment, that believe Sorcerers and
Soothsayers: for these men believe the devils are gods. The reason is, because
they ask of devils that which God alone can give, that is, to manifest things
hidden, and to foreshew the truth of things to come, which is forbidden of God,
Leuit. 19.31. Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after
wizards to be defiled with them. And in the 20.6. The soul that turns after
such as have familiar spirits, and after wizards to go a whoring after them, I
will set my face against that soul, and will cut him off from amongst his
people. And in the last verse of that Chapter, A man or woman that has a
familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death; they shall
stone them with stones, their blood shall be upon them.

As touching the punishment of this sin, and the vengeance that God takes
upon such a one, we read in the 2. Kings 1.3. that the Angel of the Lord sent
unto Elijah to meet the messengers of Ahaziah, and to say unto them, Is it not
because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baalzebub the
God of Ekron? and therefore says the Lord in that place, Thou shall not come
down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but shall surely die. Saul died,
because he had disobeyed the commandment of God which he gave unto him: he
regarded it not, neither did he hope in the Lord, but took counsel of
Sorcerers, for which cause the Lord took away his life, and transferred his
kingdom unto David the son of Ishai.

Let every man therefore know, that all enchantment, or coniuration, or charm
in writing, made to give remedy to any kind of persons or beasts, is of no
value, but is rather a snare of our ancient adversary the devil, by which he
entrappeth and deceives mankind.

Here you may see what the Waldenses have written against Sorcerers out of the
word of God. It remains that we answer unto that calumny of Rubis, that it
is apparent in our times, that heresy and sorcerie are inseparably joined
together, in those Cities and Provinces that have given place unto heresy.

He taxes without all doubt the City of Geneua, and the States of the Cantons
that have received the Gospel, without any other show of proof, but that most
commonly in those places Sorcerers are condemned to death, following the
commandment of God, which suffers no Sorcerer to live. He might far better
have concluded, if he had said that in those places where the reformation of
Religion was established in our times, no man does either converse or has
acquaintance with Sorcerers, but so soon as any such is found he is put to
death: And therefore no man can affirm that to be true, except he will say,
that to burn Sorcerers, is to support them, and by the authority of the word
to put them to death, be a kind of heresy.

It is true indeed that in those places heresy and sorcerie are joined
together, where they that make profession to teach the people are for the most
part Sorcerers; whereof many men have complained, who have written with a great
deal of grief, that which they knew to be put in practice by their Priests
and Monks, yea by some of the Popes themselves.

Bodin in his Demon. l. 4. c. 6. p. 211.
Bodin affirms, that there are infinite indictments in which it appears
that the Priests many times are not only Sorcerers, or at least wise that
Sorcerers have intelligence with the Priests, but that they are content to say
Masses for Sorcerers, fitting them with sacrifices, consecrating their
parchments, putting rings upon their graven tombs, or other the like things
upon their altar, or under the linen of the altar when they said Mass.

John Vuier in his book of devils. l. 4. chap. 3. fol. 303.
John Vuier Physician to the Duke of Cleue, though he made profession of the
Romish religion, writes as follows. If the Pastors of the Churches did stop
up the windows of false doctrines and other impieties, they should certainly
have (says he) a wholesome preservative for those that are under their charge
against the subtle practices and impostures of the devil, whereby they that
are most unadvised should not be so often entangled as commonly we see them, to
the great hurt and detriment of their souls; which comes to pass, not only
by the negligence of the Priests, whom it most concerns, and whose charge it
is to look unto it, but also by their pursuit, counsel, perverse doctrine,
and deceitful working, by which they allure and draw the simple people to have
recourse to unlawful remedies, as often as they are any way afflicted with
sudden, long, known and unknown maladies, proceeding from natural causes, or
from those which are above nature: which turns to the great scandal of the
Church, considering that they make profession to be Ecclesiastical persons,
and for the most part they are Priests or Monks, whom men think to be such,
that it is a great wickedness to have the least ill thought or opinion of
them, since they should serve for an example to their flock, and considering
they are Doctors and teachers; But perhaps (says he) these Magicians think
that this art belongs unto them by a special prerogative, and that they have
right thereunto by an hereditarie succession, because the Priests of Egypt (of
whom Pithagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, Plato, have learned their Magic)
were Negromancers. Now I think not, says he, that they that will take upon
them to defend these Priests and the practice of their enchantments, are so
audacious as to object unto me diverse Popes of Rome skillful in the Magic
art, affirming that they have put it in practice to their great profit and
comfort: such as Siluester 2. was, Platina in the life of Siluester 2. fol.
218. printed at Paris ann. 1551.
who as Platina and Nauclerus affirm, obtained the Popedom by that means:
and such as Benedict 9. in the year one thousand three hundred and two, who
before was named Theophilact, and after Maledictus, John Maire in his History
of the Schisms of the Church says, that all the Popes here spoken of were
Sorcerers, Magicians and Negromancers.
because of his wickedness. Such also as was John 20. and John 21. as
Cardinal Benno writes, who aided themselves with their familiar friends,
Laurentius, Gratian, and Hildebrand, all culpable of these enchantments. For
all the Popes that were after Siluester 2. unto Gregory 7. who was a great and
a famous Magician, and who (as Benno writes) as often as it seemed good unto
himself, would shake his sleeves in such a manner, that sparkles of fire
should come forth of them, whereby he blinded the eyes of the more simple and
less subtle, as if they had been miracles and signs of sanctity. Such were
all these Popes, as it is set down in their lives, where you may also read
many execrable examples, whereby they won women to their love, and were much
given to offer abominable sacrifices unto devils in forests and mountains.

The Magicians then of our times, says Vuier, must not think to cover
themselves under this mantell and pretense. But we have reason to deplore the
miseries of these times, wherein we can hardly find any men more wicked and
less punished, then they that do always admonish the simple people that the
evils that happen unto them are sent by the permission of God.

Moreover he complains that these coniuring Priests dare to use infinite
blasphemies, enriched with diverse crosses figured with their cursed and
sacrilegious hands. As also of that use they make of their holy water, of their
exorcised salt, their consecrated tapers at Easter, their candles and tapers at
Candlemas against the devil, with which he mockes them: as also the
fumigations of holy bows upon Palm sunday, and of herbs stuck upon the
doors upon the day of Saint John the Baptist, and the sprinkling of holy water
at the feast of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary. Moreover such Priests, says
he, abuse the sacrament of the Eucharist to commit their villainies.

He likewise complains that Theology and Physic are polluted with colored
exorcismes, by their mumbling of barberous words in an unknown tongue, by
abusing the word of God, by bands, neck-laces, and charms, all which conspire
and procure the utter ruin and damnation of men.

Moreover he says, that the Priests have very apparently made use of diverse
apparitions of Satan, affirming themselves to be the souls of this or that
man, and faining to be in the pains of Purgatory, for their own particular
profit. And when the devil has not sufficiently furnished them, they have
counterfeited themselves to be spirits, to draw the living to more frequent
oblations, donations, and dotations, to satiate their avarice.

Lauater says as much, Lauater in his book of the apparition of devils, Chap.
14.7.
and relates at large the history of the false spirit of Orleans, and of the
Iacobins at Berne, which amongst others were the most famous impostures of
Monks.

The famous Parliaments of Aix and Grenoble have condemned unto death diverse
Priests that were sorcerers, as namely, at Aix a certain Hermit adored of the
people for a Saint. And Jews Godfrey, that famous Magician, beneficed in the
Church of Acoules at Marseilles, who was burnt in Prouence the last of April,
1611. And at Grenoble Nobilibus a Monk, and a certain Priest in the Diocese
of Ambrun, who baptized infants in the name of Baalzebub And therefore we may
conclude, that forasmuch as in these venerable Parliaments they have condemned
sorcerers to death, which is not done elsewhere, they are to have the blame
that do it not, of which fault Rubis would seem to tax the States and Cities
without exception. More modesty becomes a man then was in this passionate
Rubis: for it is great reason, that among Priests such should be excepted, as
God has not so far forth abandoned, as to suffer them to adhere to the
sorceries of Satan. This pratler should have thought, that either soon or late
this calumny would be retorted to his own shame. He should have contented
himself with his reproachful speeches against the Waldenses, of whom he has
belched many false reports, carried by the violence of his own humor, and not
have laid aspersions on the living: yea he should blush to think that he has
given us just occasion to retort upon himself and his wicked Priests, that
which he would lay upon those that make profession of the Gospel, and that
punish with death all sorcerers: so far are they from having communion or
converse with them. Thus you have the justification of the greatest calumnies
that have been laid upon the Waldenses by their own writings, which may
satisfy any man that is not carried with passion. It is necessary that we now
produce such witnesses, for the better defense of their innocence, as are free
from all suspicion.

CHAP. V. Testimonies of piety, probitie and erudition given to the Waldenses,
by diverse of their adversaries themselves.
IAcobus de Riberia, who in his time gave aid to the persecution of the
Waldenses, Jacob. Rib. in his collections of the City of Tholous.
says, that they held a long time the higher place in Gallia Norbonen. in the
Diocese of Albi, Rodes, Cahors, and Again, and that in those times they were of
little esteem that would be called Priests and Bishops, Chassagno^ cites
Riberia in his history of the Albigeois. pa. 27.
because the said Priests for the most part were either unworthy or ignorant:
and therefore it was an easy matter for the Waldenses (says he) to get the
upper hand amongst the people, for the excellency of their doctrine.

Rain. in his book De forma heret. fol. 98.
Rainerius a Iacobin Monk and a cruel Inquisitor of the Waldenses, thinking
to darken their reputation, because they usually read the Scriptures, says,
that when the Waldenses would give knowledge of their doctrine, they alleged
many things touching chastity, humility, and other virtues, showing that we
are to fly all vice and wickedness, alleging the words of Christ and his
Apostles, insomuch that the women that understood them, were so ravished
therewith, that they seemed to them rather to speak like Angels then men.

He adds, Ibid. fol. 98.
that they taught what manner of men the disciples of Christ ought to be, out
of the words of the Gospel and the Apostles, affirming that they only were
the successors of the Apostles that imitated them in their lives. Concluding
hereupon (says he) that the Pope, the Bishops, the Clergy that enjoy the
riches of this world, and imitate not the sanctity of the Apostles, are not
the governors of the Church: it not being the will of Christ to commit his
Church to such kind of people, that should rather prostitute her by their ill
examples and wicked actions, then to present her a chaste virgin, in the same
purity they have received her from him; and therefore that we are not to obey
them. He adds moreover, that they lived very religiously in all things, their
manners well seasoned, and their words wise and polished, by their wills always
speaking of God and his Saints, persuading to virtue, and to hate sin, to the
end (says he) that they might be in greater esteem with good men.

Claud. de Seissel Archbishop of Turin, Claud. in his treatise against the
Waldenses.
gives this testimony of the Waldenses, that as touching their life and
manners, they have been always sound and unreprovable, without reproach or
scandal amongst men, giving themselves, to their power, to the observation of
the Commandments of God.

The Cardinal Baronius attributes to the Waldenses of Toulouse the title of
good men, Baronius in his Ecclesiastical Annals, Tom. 12. an. 1176. pa. 835.
which tells us that they were a peaceable people, howsoever he elsewhere
imputes unto them sundry crimes, and that very falsely.

As touching erudition, Rainerius has said, Rain. ibid. fol. 97.
that they teach their children, yea even their daughters, the Epistles and the
Gospels. Iacobus de Riberia says, that they were so well instructed in the
Scriptures, Jacob. de Rib. in his collections of the City of Toulouze.
that he has heard a plain countriman repeat the book of Job word by word,
and diverse others that could perfectly repeat the whole new Testament.

Vesembec. in his Oration touching the Waldenses.
The Bishop of Cauaillon in the time of the great persecution against the
Waldenses of Merindall in Prouence (of which history we shall speak in his
due place) appointing a certain Monk a Divine, to enter into conference with
them, to convince their error, before (says he) we come to violence: but the
Monk being much perplexed, retired himself, saying, that he had not so much
profited in his whole life in the Scriptures as he had done in those few days
of his conference with the said Waldenses, in examining the Articles of their
Confession by the passages of Scripture cited by them. This Bishop not being
satisfied by this trial, sent a company of young Doctors, that came lately
from Sorbonne, to confound them by the subtlety of their questions. But one
there was among the rest, that said at his return with a loud voice, that he
had learned more touching the doctrine neccessarie to salvation, in attending
to the answers of the little children of the Waldenses in their catechizings,
then in all the disputations of divinity which he had ever heard in Paris.

Bern. de Gir. in his history of France. lib. 10.
Bernard de Girard Lord of Haillan says, that the Waldenses have been charged
with more wicked opinions then they held, because (says he) they stirred the
Popes and great men of the world to hate them for the liberty of their speech
which they used in condemning the vices and dissolute behavior of Princes and
Ecclesiastical persons.

Vesemb. in his Oration of the Waldenses.
King Lewis 12. having been informed by the enemies of the Waldenses dwelling in
Prouence, of many grievous crimes which were imposed upon them, sent to make
inquisition in those places, the Lord Adam Fumee master of Requests, and a
Doctor of Sorbon called Parui, who was his Confessor. They visited all their
Parishes and Temples, and found neither images, not so much as the least show
of any ornaments belonging to their Masses and ceremonies of the Church of
Rome, much less any such crimes as were imposed upon them; but rather that
they kept their Sabbathes duly, causing their children to be baptized
according to the order of the Primative Church, teaching them the Articles of
the Christian faith and the Commandments of God. The king hearing the report
of the said Commissioners, said, (and he bound it with an oath) that they were
better men then he, or his people. It appears by the memorials of the
Archbishop of Ambrun named Rostain.
The same king understanding that in Dauphiney, namely, in the valley of
Fraissiniere, in the Diocese of Ambrun, there were a certain people that
lived like beasts without religion, having an evil opinion of the Romish
religion, he sent a Confessor of his with the Official of Orleans to bring
him true information thereof. This Confessor with his colleague came unto the
place, where they examined the Waldenses dwelling in the said valley, touching
their belief and conversation. The Archbishop of Ambrun who made account that
the goods of the said Waldenses were annexed to the demaine of his
Archbishopricke, as being confiscable for the cause of heresy, pressed the
aforesaid Commissioners speedily to condemn them for heretics; but the said
Commissioners would not obey his desire, but rather justified the^ as much as
in them lay, insomuch that before their departure, the said Confessor of the
king in his chamber at the sign of the Angel in Ambrun, wished in the
presence of many, that he were as good a Christian as the worst of the said
valley of Fraissiniere.

Ioachim Camer. in his history, page 352.
King Francis the first of that name, and successor to Lewis 12. understanding
that the Parliament of Prouence had laid heavy burdens upon the Waldenses
dwelling at Merindol and Cambriers, and other places thereabout, desired to be
informed of the belief, life, and conversation of the said Waldenses, and to
that end commanded William de Belay, Lord of Langeay at that time his
Lieutenant in Piemont, to make a diligent inquiry into those affairs:
whereupon the said Lord sent into Prouence two honest reverent men, to whom he
gave in charge to make inquiry both of the lives and religion of the Waldenses,
as also of the proceedings of the Court of Parliament against them. These two
deputies to the Lord de Langeay reported that the greatest part of the country
of Prouence did affirm that the said Waldenses were a kind of people very
painful, and that about two hundred years since they departed from the
country of Piemont, and came to dwell in Prouence, and taking upon them the
profession of husbandmen and sheepheards, they made many villages that were
destroyed in the wars, and other desert savage places, very fertile by their
labors. And that they had found by informations in the said country of
Prouence, that the aforesaid men of Merindol were a peaceable people, beloved
of their neighbors, men of a good and godly conversation, careful to keep
their promises, and to pay their debts without suites of law, very charitable,
not suffering any amongst them to fall into want and beggary, liberal to
strangers and poor passengers to the utmost of their power: As also that the
inhabitants of Prouence did affirm that they of Merindol were known from
others of the country, because they could never be persuaded to blaspheme, or
so much as to name the devil, or in any sort to swear, except it were upon
certain contracts or in judgment. And that they were likewise known by this,
that whenever they fell into company of such as used either idle, or wanton,
or blasphemous discourse against the honor of God, they presently departed.

Thus you see how many of the adversaries of the Waldenses have given
honorable reports of them, enforced thereunto by the force of truth it self.
Let us now see in what esteem they have been with those that succeeded them in
the same belief.

CHAP. VI. Testimonies given of the Waldenses by many great personages that
have made profession of the reformed religion.
THeodor Beza calls the Waldenses the seed of the most pure ancient Christian
Church, Beza in his history of worthy men.
which was miraculously preserved in the midst of the darkness and errors
which have been hatched by Satan in these latter times.

Constans upon the Revelation, Constable. upon the Apocalypse.
shows that the reformation of the Church in the Western parts of the world
began in France, by the means of Waldo, and that from this source it spread it
self through the rest of Europe.

Bullinger speaks thus of the Waldenses, Bullinger in the Preface of his
sermons upon the Revelation.
What should we say (says he) that above four hundred years since,
throughout France, Italy, Germany, Poland, Bohemia, and other countries and
kingdoms of the world, the Waldenses have made profession of the Gospel of
Christ Jesus, and in many their writings and continual preachings accused the
Pope to be the true Antichrist of whom the Apostle Saint John had prophesied,
and therefore we were to fly from him. These people being tortured with
diverse most cruel torments, have with unspeakable constancy given testimony
of their faith by glorious martyrdomes, and the like they suffer even at this
very day. It is beyond the power of man to banish them or to root them out,
notwithstanding it have been often attempted by most mighty kings and Princes
stirred up by the Pope, but it is God (says he) that has hindered all their
violent outrages. Vesembecius in his Oration of the Waldenses.
Luther confessed that he hated the Waldenses as desperate men, until he knew
the piety and truth of their belief by their own confessions and writings,
whereby he perceived that these good and honest men were much wronged, and that
the Pope had condemned them for heretics, being rather worthy of the praise
that is due to Saints and Martyrs: And that he had found in the said Waldenses
one thing worthy admiration, and to be observed as a miracle never heard of in
the Church of Rome, namely, that the said Waldenses having abandoned all humane
learning, gave them selves wholly, to the utmost of their power, to the
meditation of the law of God day and night, and that they were very expert in
the Scriptures, and well exercised in them; and that contrarily they whom we
call our great Masters in the Papacy, made so light account of the Scriptures
(glorying nevertheless in the title thereof) that there were some amongst
them, that had scarce seen the Bible.

Having also read the confession of the Waldenses, he said that he did thank
God for that great light that it had pleased God to impart unto them, taking
great comfort with them, for that all occasion of suspicion amongst them
whereby one was suspected to the other of heresy, was taken away, and that
they were knit so close together, as that they were all sheep of one fold,
under the only Pastor and Bishop of our souls, who is blessed for ever.

Occolampadius writ unto the Waldenses of Prouence, in the year a thousand
five hundred and thirty, this letter following.
WE have understood with a great deal of contentment by your faithful Pastor
George Morel, This letter is found in the book of George Morel, pastor of the
Waldenses touching the conference which he had with Oecolamp. and Martin Bucer.
what your faith and religion is, and with what terms you speak thereof. We
therefore yield humble and hearty thanks to our merciful Father, who has
called you to so great light in this age, even in the midst of those obscure
darknesses which are spread throughout the whole world, and the unlimited power
of Antichrist. And therefore we acknowledge and confess that Christ is in you,
for which we love you as brethren. And I would to God we had power and ability
to make you feel that in effect which we shall be ready to do for you, yea
though it be in matters of greatest difficulty. We would not that you should
take that which we write to proceed out of any pride, or attributing to our
selves any superiority, but out of that brotherly love and charity we bear
toward you. The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ has imparted unto you an
excellent knowledge of his truth, more then to many other people, and has
blessed you with a spiritual benediction. So that if you persist in his grace,
he has in store greater treasures for you, which he will enrich you withal,
and make you perfect, that you may grow to the full measure of the inheritance
of Christ.


The subscription of the letter is, Oecolampaedius wishes the grace of God the
Father, by his Son Jesus Christ, and his holy Spirit, to his well-beloved
brethren in Christ, which they call Waldenses.

Martin Bucer writ unto them at the same time this letter following.

BLessed be the Lord God and our loving Father, who has preserved you to this
present time in so great knowledge of his truth, and who has now inspired you
in the search thereof, having made you capable and fit to do it. Behold now
what the nature of true faith is, which is, that so soon as it knows in part
any spark of the divine light, it preserves carefully the things that are
given unto it of God. Saint Paul is an example unto us, who in all his Epistles
shows the great care that he has had to procure the glory of God. And
doubtless if we pray with a good heart, that the name of God be sanctified,
and his kingdom may come, we shall prosecute nothing with such diligence as
the establishment of the truth where it is not, and the advancement thereof
where it is already planted. The rest of this letter is hereafter in the book
of the persecutions of the Waldenses.

Vigneaux in his Memorials of the Waldenses. fol. 4.


One only thing does especially grieve us, that our employments at this time
are such about other affairs, that we have no leisure to answer you at large
as we desire, etc.


Le Sieur de Vigneaux who was a Pastor of the Waldenses in the valleys of
Piemont, has written a Treatise of their life, manners, and religion, to whom
he gives this testimony, that they were a people of a holy and godly life and
conversation, well governed, great enemies to vice, but especially their
Barbes, for so they called their Pastors. And speaking of those of his own
time, he says: We live in peace in these valleys of Piemont, and in love and
amity one with another, we have commerce together, never marrying our sons
to the daughters of those of the Church of Rome, or our daughters to their
sons; yea our manners and customs please them so well, that such as are
masters and call themselves Catholics, desire to choose their men servants and
maid-seruants rather from amongst us then themselves. And they come also from
far to seek nurses for their children amongst us, finding in ours more
fidelity then in their own.

And as touching the doctrine for which the Waldenses have been persecuted, It
appears by the History of the Estate of the Church. p. 337.
they do affirm (says he) that we are to believe the Scriptures only in that
which concerns our salvation, not any way depending upon men. That the
Scriptures contain in them whatsoever is necessary to salvation, and that we
are not to believe any thing but what God has commanded us.

That we have one only Mediator, and therefore we are not to invoke Saints.

That there is no Purgatory, but all such as are justified by Christ go to
eternal life.

They approve of two Sacraments, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

They affirm that all Masses are damnable, especially those that are said for
the dead, and therefore are to be abolished.

That all humane traditions are to be rejected, as not being necessary to
salvation.

That singing and often rehearsal of divine Service, fasts tied to certain
days, superfluous feasts, difference of meats, so many degrees and orders of
Friars, Monks, and Nuns, so many benedictions and consecrations of creatures
vows, pilgrimages, and the whole confusion and great number of ceremonies
heretofore invented, are to be abolished.

They deny the supremacy of the Pope, and especially that power that he
usurps over civil government; and they admit of no other degrees, then
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

That the Sea of Rome is the true Babylon, and that the Pope is the fountain
of all the evils in these days.

That the marriage of Priests is good and necessary.

That they that hear the word of God, and have the true knowledge thereof, are
the true Church, unto which Christ Jesus has delivered the keys, to let in
the flock, and to chase away the wolves.

Behold here (says Vinaux) the doctrine of the Waldenses, which the enemies of
the truth have impugned, and for which in those times they persecuted them, as
their enemies themselves do witness.

Viret of the true and false religion. lib. 4. chap. 13. p. 249.
Viret speaks of the Waldenses as follows. The Papists (says he) have
imposed great crimes, and that very wrongfully, upon those ancient faithful
people, commonly called Waldenses, or the poor people of Lions, from Waldo
whose doctrine they followed, by which they make it appear that the Pope is
Antichrist, and that his doctrine is nothing else but humane traditions,
contrary to the doctrine of Christ Jesus. For which cause they have dealt
against them, as the ancient Painims did against the Christians, accusing them
that they killed their own children in their assemblies.

The Ecclesiastical History of the reformed Churches of France. tom. 1. lib.
1. p. 35.
The Author of the History of the reformed Churches in France writes thus. The
Waldenses (says he) time out of mind have opposed themselves against the
abuses of the Church of Rome, and have in such sort been persecuted, not by the
sword of the word of God, but by all kind of violence and cruelty, as also by
a million of calumnies and false accusations, that they have been enforced to
disperse themselves into what parts of the world they could, wandering through
desert places like poor savage beasts, the Lord nevertheless preserving the
remnant of them, in such sort, that notwithstanding the fury of the whole
world, they were still preserved in three countries far distant one from the
other, that is, Calabria, Bohemia, and Piemont, with the bordering parts
thereabout, from whence they have been dispersed into the quarters of Prouence,
about two hundred and seventy years since. And as touching their religion,
they have always avoided the Papal superstition. For which cause they have
been always vexed by the Bishops and Inquisitors, abusing the power of secular
justice, in such sort, that it is an evident miracle of God that they should be
able to continue.

John Chassagnon writes as follows. John Chassagnon in his History of the
Albigeois. p. 25.
It is written of the Waldenses (says he) that they rejected all the
traditions and ordinances of the Church of Rome, as unprofitable and
superstitious, and that they made no great account of their Clergy and
Prelates. And for this cause being excommunicated and chased out of the
country, they dispersed themselves into many and diverse places, as into
Dauphiney, Prouence, Languedoc, Piemont, Calabria, Bohemia, England, and other
places. Some have written that one part of the Waldenses retired themselves
into Lombardie, where they multiplied in such a manner, that their doctrine was
dispersed throughout all Italy, and came as far as Sicile. Nevertheless in
this great dispersion, they always kept themselves in union and fraternity
for the space of four hundred years, living in great sincerity and the fear
of God.

The History of the Estate of the Church. p. 336.
The Author of the History of the State of the Church writes of them thus.
After that Waldo (says he) and his followers were driven out of Lions, one
part of them retired to Lombardie, where they multiplied in such a manner, that
their doctrine began to disperse it self into Italy, and came into Sicile, as
the Patents of Frederick the second, given out against them whilst he
reigned, do witness.

Vesemb. in his oration of the Waldenses p. 3.
Vesembecius says, that when the Pope and his catch-poles saw that the Roman
Hierarchy received great detriment by means of the Waldenses, insomuch that
there were certain Princes that had taken their defense, amongst whom was the
King of Aragon, and the Earls of Toulouze, in those days puissant Princes in
France, they began to oppress them upon most unjust occasions, bringing them
into hatred with the people, and especially of Kings, to the end that by this
means they might be utterly exterminated.

Vignier in his Historical Bibliothec. p. 130.
Vignier makes mention of the Waldenses in his Historical Bibliotheke, and
says, that they have endured many long and grievous persecutions, and yet
notwithstanding there was never any thing that could hinder them from retaining
that doctrine which they had received from the Waldenses, delivering it (as it
were) from hand to hand unto their children.

Hologaray in his History of Foix p. 120. 121.
Hologaray affirms, that the Waldenses and Albigenses were of a contrary
opinion to the Bishop of Rome in all those maxims or principles that were
publicly preached and commanded by his authority, that is, that were invented
by him, and contrary to the word of God. And he witnesses withal, that there
were amongst them wise men, and very learned, and sufficient to defend their
belief against the Monks.

Mathias Illyricus writes, Math. Illyricus in his Catal. of the witnesses of
the truth. p. 134.
that he finds by the writings of Waldo, which lay by him in certain ancient
parchments, that Waldo was a learned man, and that he did not cause the books
of the Bible to be translated into the vulgar tongue, but that he took pains
therein himself.

It is most certain, that the adversaries of Waldo and the Waldenses, make no
great account of these above named testimonies, because they hold them to be
both of one and the same rank and order, both the witnesses and those to whom
they bear witness, that is, all for heretics: but this History is not only
for the enemies of the truth, but to the end the lovers thereof may see that
that which is here produced, does not intend only our own particular
commendations, but to show that there have been before us certain great
personages, whose memory they reverence that have spoken of the Waldenses as
of the true Sacraments of God, who have maintained the truth with the loss of
their lives, and earnestly desired in their times to see the reformation we
enjoy in ours.

And as le Sieur de S. Aldegonde says, In the first table of his differences,
the third part. p. 150.
the occasion why they were condemned for heretics, was no other but because
they maintained that the Mass was an impious corruption of the holy Supper of
the Lord.

That the Host was an idol forged by men.

That the Church of Rome was wholly adulterated and corrupted, and full of
infidelity and idolatry.

That the traditions of the Church were but superstitions and humane inventions.

That the Pope was not the head of the Church, and for other points of this
nature.

And as the said Aldegonde observes, it was a great work of God, that how
diligent soever the Popes with their Clergy have been, using likewise the
assistance of secular Princes and magistrates, to root them out, yet they
could never do it, neither by proscriptions, nor banishments, nor
excommunications, nor publications of their Bulls, nor Indulgences and Pardons
to all those that shall make war against them: nor by any manner of torments,
fire, flames, gibets, or other cruel effusion of blood, could they ever hinder
the current of their doctrine, but it has spread it self almost into all the
corners of the earth.

This has le Sieur de Saint Aldegonde writ of the Waldenses. But forasmuch as
doubt may be made, whether we have in these days any proofs in the world of
their belief, it is necessary that we produce hereabouts an inventory of
books which they have left unto us, to the end that when there shall be any
question of their doctrine, every one may understand what the writings are out
of which we have gathered that which they taught.

CHAP. VII. That Peter Waldo and the Waldenses have left books which make
proof of their belief, and what they are.
In the former Chap.
THat Waldo left something in writing unto us, it appears by that which Math.
Illyricus says, that he has certain parchments of his, which show him to be
a learned man.

History of the Estate of the Church. p. 307.
The Author of the History of the Estate of the Church gives this testimony
that follows. Waldo at the same time (says he) made a collection in the
vulgar tongue of sundry passages of the ancient Fathers, to the end he might
defend his opinions not only by the authority of the holy Scripture, but also
by the testimony of the Doctors against his adversaries.

About forty years since le Sieur de Vignaux Pastor of the Churches of the
Waldenses in Piemont, writ as follows in his memorials that he made: Of the
beginning, Antiquity, Doctrine, Religion, Manners, Discipline, Persecutions,
Confessions, and progress of the people called Waldenses, I that write (says
he) can witness, that being sent unto these people to preach the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which I did about some forty years together, I had no
need to take much pains to win them from the ceremonies of the Church of Rome,
not to root out of their minds the Pope, the Mass, Purgatory, and such other
things, wherein they were a long time Doctors before my coming, although the
greatest part of them knew neither A nor B.

It is to this servant of God to whom we are much bound for the multitude of
books written by the Waldenses. For as often as he lighted upon any, he gathered
them together and kept them carefully, which he did the more commodiously, for
that, as he says, he conuersed with them almost for the space of forty
years, which was about some fourscore years past. For it was about the end
of his days that he delivered to some particular persons his said Memorials,
which he had gathered touching the Waldenses, and all those ancient books
which he had collected in their valleys, touching the substance of which he
thus speaks. We have, says he, certain ancient books of the Waldenses,
tontaining Catechismes and Sermons, Ibid. p. 3.
which are manuscripts written in the vulgar tongue, wherein there is nothing
that makes for the Pope or popery. And it is wonderful, says he, that they
saw so clearly in those times of darkness, more gross then that of Egypt.

Le Sieur de Saint Ferriol, Pastor in the Church of Orange, being carried with
an holy curiosity, gathered together many of the said books, In his first
table. p. 153.
which he showed to le Sieur de S. Aldegonde, who made mention of them in his
first table, wherein he says that there are other manuscripts written in a
very ancient letter in the Library of M. Joseph de la Scale.

Now all the books hereunder mentioned, being delivered unto me to furnish me
with proofs for this History, I will reduce into this Catalogue.

First we have in our hands a new Testament in parchment in the Waldenses
language, very well written, though with a very ancient letter.

Also there is a book entitled the Antechrist, which thus begins, Qual cosa
sia l'Antechrist, en datte de l'an mill cent and vingt.

In the same volume there are contained diverse Sermons of the Pastors of the
Waldenses.

With a Treatise against sin, and the remedies to resist sin.

Also a book entitled, The book of Virtues.

In that volume there is another Treatise with this inscription, De
l'enseignament de li filli: that is to say, of the Instructions of children.

A Treatise of Marriage.

A Treatise entitled, Li parlar de li Philosophes and Doctors, that is,
sentences of Philosophers and Doctors.

All which books are written in the language of the Waldenses, which is partly
Prouenciall, and partly Piemontaine. All of them sufficient to instruct their
people to live well, and to believe well: the doctrine of all which books
being conformable to that which is taught and believed at this present in all
the reformed Churches.

From hence we conclude, that that doctrine that has been maintained in our
times against humane inventions, is not new but to those that have buried it
wilfully, or whose ancestors have detested it, out of their ignorance of the
goodness thereof; there being found diverse writings, and that in great number,
which make good that for these four hundred and fifty years the doctrine of
the reformed Churches is the selfsame which for many ages has been buried by
ignorance and ingratitude.

Which our adversaries themselves have in some sort avouched, when they say and
confess, that that doctrine which they call new, is but the substance of the
errors of the ancient Waldenses, as may appear by their own writings, from
whence we have gathered that which remains, in the Chapter following.

CHAP. VIII. That the adversaries of the Waldenses have acknowledged that the
doctrine of the Waldenses is conformable to that of those that at this present
make profession of reformation.
LIndanus makes Calvin an inheritor or heir of the doctrine of the Waldenses.
Lindan. in his analiticke tables.


The Cardinal Hosius says, Hosius in his fi^^^ book of the heresies of our
times.
that the leprosy of the Waldenses has infected all Bohemia, at what time
following the doctrine of Waldo, the greatest part of the kingdom of Bohemia
was separated from the Church of Rome.

Gwalt. in his Chro. table. sec. 12. Chap. 15. pa. 494.
Gwaltier Monk the Jesuit, in his Chronographicall table, or to speak
otherwise, in his molehill of lies, makes the Waldenses, and those they call
the poor abused, and the Ministers of Calvin, to be of one and the same
belief in twenty seven Articles.

Claud. Rubis in his history of the City of Lions. lib. 3. pa. 269.

Syluius and Dubrauius in their Histories of Bohemia.

Tho. Wall. in his 6. volume of things sacrame^tall. Tit. 12. Chap. 10.

Le Sieur de la Popeliniere in his hihorie of France. l. 1.


Claud. Rubis says, that the heresies that have been in our times have been
grounded upon the heresies of the Waldenses, and he calls them the relics of
Waldo.

Aeneas Syluius who was afterward Pope Pius the second of that name. And John
Dubrauius Bishop of Olmusse in their histories of Bohemia, make the doctrine
taught by Calvin all one with that of the Waldenses.

Thomas Walden, who writ against the doctrine of Wickliffe says, that the
doctrine of Waldo crept out of the quarters of France into England. Whereunto
agrees le Sieur de la Popeliniere, who adds that the doctrine of the modern
Protestants differs very little from that of the Waldenses, which (says he)
being received into the parts of Albi, the Albigeois communicated it unto the
English their neighbors, who then held Guienne, from whence it was dispersed
into many parts of England, and so at the last, as it were from hand to hand it
came to the understanding of Wickliffe, a famous professor of divinity in the
University of Oxford, and Pastor of the parish of Luterworth in the Diocese
of Lincoln, who for his eloquence and rare gifts, won the hearts of many of
the English, even of the greatest men amongst them; insomuch that a certain
scholar carried unto Prage a book of Wickliffes called the Universalities,
which being diligently read over by John Hus, he increased and explaned the
doctrine long before sowed in Bohemia by the Waldenses, and was in a manner hid
from the time of Waldo: in such sort that many of the people, scholars,
Nobles, and Ecclesiastical persons themselves, followed the same doctrine.

The Cardinal Bellarmine says, Bellar. Tom. 2. lib. 1. Chap. 26. col. 86.
Ecchius in his common places Chap. 28.
that Wickliffe could add nothing to the heresy of the Waldenses.

Ecchius lays an imputation upon Luther, that he has done nothing else but
renew the heresies of the Waldenses, Albig. Wickliffe, and John Hus, long since
condemned.

Alphonsus de Castro says, Alphonsus lib. 6. against heresies. pa. 99.
that Wickliffe has done nothing else but brought to light the errors of the
Waldenses.

Arnold Sorbin priest of Monteig reprocheth the cities and towns of Saint
Antonin, Montauban, Millan, In the history Friar Peter of the valleys Sernay,
fol. 172.
Castres, Puylorens, Gaillac, and others of the Albigei and Languedoc, that
they have done nothing but revive the errors of the Albigeois.

John de Cardonne in his Rimes in the forefront of the history of the said
Monk of the valley Sernay says thus: In the history of the Monk of the
valleys Sernay.
What the sect of Geneua does admit,
Th'hereticke Albigeois does commit.


Anthony d'Ardene of Toulouse in the same book says: Ibid.
Wherewith our Hugonites seasoned were,
The same intention, the selfsame care.


We need not therefore dispute any longer of the antiquity of this doctrine,
but only of the purity thereof, since that not only by the affirmation of
those that were adversaries to the Waldenses and the last reformation, there
are whole ages, during the which the substance of that belief has remained in
diverse persons, who crying out against the abuses which have crept into the
Church, have been oppressed by persecutions. And for as much as it is denied,
that we have had a succession of such instruments, who have opposed themselves
from time to time against those corruptions and errors, which have borne sway,
we will produce in the Chapter following a catalogue, both of those which our
adversaries have named, and put to death, and of those whom the Waldenses have
had for their Pastors for these four hundred and fifty years last past, at
leastwise of as many as have come to our knowledge.

CHAP. IX. The names of those Pastors of the Waldenses who have instructed
them for four hundred years last past, and have come to our knowledge.
WAldo from whom the Waldenses took their name, began to teach the people in
the year of our Lord, a thousand one hundred and sixty.

In his first table of Differ. pa. 150.
Le Sieur de Sancte Aldegonde observes, that at the same time that Waldo began
to show himself and to teach at Lions, God raised others in Prouence and
Languedoc, among whom the principal were, Arnold, Esperon, and Joseph, of whom
they were named Arnoldists, Iosephists, and Esperonists: though because their
doctrine was first received in Albi in the country of the Albigeois, they were
commonly called Albigeois, in such manner that on the one side the Waldenses,
and on the other the Albigeois were as the two Olives, or the two lamps which
Saint John speaks of, whose light did spread it self through all the corners
of the earth.

At the same time (says he) followed Peter Bruis, whereupon many called them
Peter Brusiens.

To whom there succeeded in doctrine, one Henry, the one being a Priest the
other a Monk, and they taught in the Bishoprics of Arles, Ambrun, Die, and
Gap, from whence being chased away, they were received at Toulouse.

There was a certain man (says he) called Barthelmew borne at Carcassonne,
Idem ibid. p. 151
that ordered and governed the Churches in Bulgaria, Croatia, Dalmatia,
Hungaria, and appointed Ministers, as Matthew Paris reports, naming him their
Pope or Bishop, and alleging to that purpose the letter which the Bishop of
Portuense Legate to the Pope in the parts thereabouts, writ to the Archbishop
of Roan and his suffragans; demanding succors and assistance against them,
insomuch that they were at the last constrained to retire themselves into
deserts, following that prophecy in the 12 of the Revelation, which says,
that the woman great with child, that brought forth a man child, which is the
true Church of God, should in such sort be persecuted by the Dragon, which cast
out of his mouth water as a flood after the woman, that he might cause her to
be carried away of the flood, so that she was constrained to fly into the
wilderness, where she should be nourished for a time, and times, and half a
time, or for the space of forty two months, or a thousand two hundred and
threescore days.

Rainerius makes mention of two famous Bishops of the Waldenses, viz, of one
Belazinanza of Verona, and one John de Lugio, who taught amongst them after the
abouenamed, and about the year a thousand two hundred and fifty.

Arnold Hot, pastor amongst the Waldenses, maintained the disputation at Mont
Real, whereof we shall make mention in his due place.

Lollard was also in great reputation amongst them, both for a Commentary which
he had written upon the Revelation, as also for that he had given knowledge of
their doctrine in England, of whose name the Waldenses were called Lollards.

The Waldenses of the valleys of Angrongne, of Dauphiney, Prouence, and
Calabria, have had for their Pastors, these whose memories they have preserved
for above three hundred years past, that is to say, in Piemont,

It appears by the memories of Vignaux. fol. 14.
Paul Gignons de Bobi.

Peter the less.

Anthony of the valley of Suse.

John Martin of the valley Saint Martin.

Matthew de Bobi.

Philip of the valley Lucerna.

George of Piemont.

Steven Laurence of the valley Saint Martin.

Martin de Mean.

John of the valley of Lucerna, who for some offense was suspended from his
office for seven years, during which time he remained at Gennes, where the
Pastors had a house, as they had also another very fair one at Florence.

John Girard, de Mean, surnamed with the great hand.

Of the valley of Angrongne, Thomas Bastie, who died in the service of the
Waldenses Churches at Pouille.

Sebastian Bastie, who died in Calabria.

John Bellonat, of the same valley, who was the first amongst the Pastors that
married a wife.

Of the valleys of Perouse, James Germain.

Benedict Gorran.

Paul Gignous, de Bobi.

John Romagnol, of Sesena in Italy.

Of Dauphiney, Francis of the valley of Fraissiniere.

Michel Port, of the valley Loyse, in Brianconnois.

Peter Flot of Pragela.

Of Prouence, Angelin de la Cost.

Daniel de Valentia, and John de Molines.

These two were sent into Bohemia to serve in the Churches of the Waldenses
gathered together in the said Realm: but they betrayed the Churches, and
brought much mischief upon them, by discovering unto the enemies of the said
Waldenses whatsoever they knew of their troops and meetings, whereby there
happened a great persecution: which occasioned the Churches of Bohemia to write
to the Waldensian Churches of the Alps, from thence forward not to call to
such vocations any persons whose faith, honesty and zeal, was not thoroughly
known by long proof and experience.

The last Pastors which they had were George Maurel, and Peter Mascon, who in
the year of our Lord 1530. were sent into Germany to confer of religion with
Oecolampadius, Bucer and others. Peter Mascon was taken prisoner at Dijon.

Steven Negrin and Lewis Paschal were sent into Calabria in the year 1560. to
the Waldensian Churches at Montald, Saint Xist, and other places thereabout.
Steven Negrin was taken prisoner and sent to Cosence, where he died in prison
for want of sustenance.

Lewis Paschal was sent to Rome, where he was condemned and burnt alive, Pope
Pius the fourth of that name being present and his Cardinals: whom he summoned
to appear before the throne of the Lamb to give an account of their cruelties.

There are a great number of others, as may appear by the process commenced
against the Waldenses of Dauphiney which are come to our hands, wherein mention
is made of diverse Pastors which they have had, It appears by that bag of
procese which was found in the Cabinet du Sieur d' Auencon Archbishop of
Ambrun, at the last taking of Ambru^, against the Waldenses of Froissiniere,
and Largen^ere.
who have been many times imprisoned and delivered unto death by the Monks the
Inquisitors, who caused them to be watched even upon the high Alps, when they
traveled from one company to another. This small number may suffice to give
us to understand, that though their enemies did their best endeavor wholly to
banish them, and to root them out from off the earth, yet the eternal God
has not ceased to provide laborers for his harvest, when there was any need,
to preserve even to this present day, only in Dauphiney and Prouence, many
thousands that think it their glory to have come from the ancient Waldenses,
and are rather inheritours of their zeal and piety, then their earthly
substance, which their persecutors do possess, as the Pope does at this
present, who has joined to his pretended Apostolic chamber, all the
inheritance of the Waldenses who have had any thing in his country of Venecin;
and under the pretense of heresy, if he could, he would take away their lives
too: so far is he from thinking to restore that which in vain he has been
importuned to do, and which his officers have promised to restore, with more
vanity and falsehood then honesty or true meaning. Now forasmuch as the Reader
not knowing what manner of men their Pastors were, they may be the less
esteemed, we will in the Chapter following insert what we find in their
writings, which may make proof of their vocation, the exercise of their
charge, zeal, and piety.

CHAP. X. What manner of men the Barbes or Pastors of the Waldenses were: what
their vocation, with what zeal and fidelity they have exercised their charge.
THe Monk Rainerius reports many things touching the vocation of the Pastors
of the Waldenses, which never were. Rain. de forma haret. fol. 8.
As that which is imposed upon them, that they have one greater Bishop, and two
followers, which he calls the elder son and the younger, and a Deacon; that he
laid his hands upon others with sovereign authority, and sent them whither he
thought good, like a Pope.

Against these impostures, I have here set down what is found in their
writings touching the vocation of their Pastors.

All such (say they) as are to be received for Pastors amongst us, The book of
the Pastors George Maurel, and Peter Mascon. pa. 8.
notwithstanding they remain yet with their parents, are to entreat us to
receive them to the ministry, and that we will be pleased to pray unto God
for the^, that they may be made capable of so great a charge. Which the said
suppliants do to no other end, but to show their humility.

They are to learn certain lessons, and to learn by heart all the Chapters
of Saint Matthew and Saint John, and all the Epistles which they call
Canonical, a good part of the writings of Solomon, David and the Prophets.

Afterward having good testimonies of their learning and conversation, they
are received with the imposition of hands into the office or function of
preaching.

The last that are received are to do nothing without the leave and license of
their Seniours received before them. As also they that are first ought not to
attempt any thing without the approbation of their companions, to the end yt
all things might be done amongst us in order.

We Pastors do assemble our selves together, every year once, to determine of
our affairs in a general Council.

Our nutriment and apparel are willingly administered unto us, and as it were
by way of alms, very sufficiently by the people whom we teach.

The money that is given us by the people, is carried to the aforesaid general
Council, and is delivered in the presence of all, and there it is received by
the most ancients, and part thereof is given to those that are travelers or
wayfaring men, according to their necessities, and part unto the poor.

When any of us that are Pastors shall fall into any foul or unclean sin,
he is cast out of our company, and forbidden the charge of preaching.

Amongst other power and authority which God has given to his servants, it
belongs unto them to choose guides of the people, and Ancients in their charges,
according to the diversity of employment, in the unity of Christ. Which is
proved by the saying of the Apostle in his Epistle to Titus, Chap. 1. verse 5.
For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the
things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I have appointed
thee.

Thus you see how the Pastors of the Waldenses were chosen and maintained in
their charge, but to the end that their zeal may the better appear, we will
insert in the Chapter following a letter which one of the said Pastors writ to
one of their Churches, by which it may easily appear with how holy and
sanctified affection they labored to call the people to repentance, and to
instruct them in the faith.

CHAP. XI. An Epistle of the Pastor Barthelmew Tertian, written to the
Waldensian Churches of Pragela. Jesus be with you. To all our faithful and
well-beloved brethren in Christ Jesus. Health and salvation be with you all. Amen.
THese are to advertise and to advise your brotherhood (hereby acquitting my
self of that duty which I owe unto you all in the behalf of God, principally
touching the care of the salvation of your souls, according to that light of
the truth which the most high God has bestowed on us) that it would please
every one of you to maintain, increase, and nourish to the utmost of your
power, without diminution, those good beginnings and customs which have been
left unto us by our ancestors, whereof we are no way worthy. For it would
little profit us to have been renewed by the fatherly instance, and the light
which has been given us of God, if we give our selves to worldly, diabolical,
and carnal conuersations, abandoning the principal, which is God, and the
salvation of our souls, for this short and temporal life. For the Lord says
in his Gospel, What does it profit a man to gain the whole world, and to lose
his own soul? For it should be better for us never to have known the way of
righteousness, then having known it to do the contrary. For we shall be
inexcusable, and our condemnation the greater: for there are greater and more
grievous torments provided for those that have most knowledge. Let me therefore
entreat you by the love of God, that you decrease not, but rather increase
that charity, fear and obedience which is due unto God, and to your selves
amongst your selves, and keep all those good customs which you have heard and
understood of God, by our means: and that you would remove from amongst you
all defaults and wants, troubling the peace, the love, the concord, and
whatsoever takes from you the service of God, your own salvation, and the
administration of the truth, if you desire that God should be merciful unto
you in your goods temporal and spiritual. For you can do nothing without him;
and if you desire to be heirs of his glory, do that which he commands: If
you will enter into life keep my commandments. Likewise be careful that
there be not nourished amongst you any sports, gluttony, whoredom, dancings,
nor any lewdness or riot, nor questions, nor deceits, nor usury, nor discords;
neither support or entertain any persons that are of a wicked conversation, or
that give any scandal or ill example amongst you, but let charity and
fidelity reign amongst you, and all good example; doing to one another as
every one desires should be done unto himself. For otherwise it is not
possible that any man should be saved, or can have the grace either of God or
man in this world, or glory in another. And it is necessary that the
conductors principally should have a hand herein, and such as rule and govern.
For when the head is sick all the members are likewise ill affected. And
therefore if you hope and desire to possess eternal life, to live in good
esteem and credit, and to prosper in this world in your goods temporal and
spiritual, purge your selves from all disorderly ways, to the end that God
may be always with you, who never forsakes those that trust in him. But know
this for a certain, that God hears not nor dwells with sinners, nor in the
soul that is given unto wickedness, nor in the man that is subject unto sin.
And therefore let every one cleanse the ways of his heart, and fly the danger
if he would not perish therein. I have no other thing to write at this present,
but that you would put in practice these things: And the God of peace be with
you all, and accompany us in our true, devout, and humble prayers, that he
will be pleased to save all those his faithful that trust in Christ Jesus.

Wholly yours Barthelmew Tertian, ready to do you service in all things
possible according unto the will of God. This Epistle of the Pastor Tertian
gives us assurance of that holy affection which they had to lead the people of
God; but the Confession of the faith of the Waldenses found in the books of
those Pastors above mentioned, shall show us more clearly how pure their
belief has been, and how far from those heresies and errors that have been
imputed unto them. And that therefore they have been very unjustly persecuted.

CHAP. XII. The Confession of the faith of the Waldenses.
WE believe and do firmly hold all that which Taken out of the book entitled
the Spiritual Almanac, and from the Memorials of George Morel.
and we account all that for heresy which agrees not with the said twelve
Articles.

We believe that there is one God, the Father, Son,

We acknowledge for holy and Canonical Scripture the Moses.

Genesis. Exodus. Leuiticus. Numbers. Deuteronomie. The book of Joshua. The
Judges. Ruth. 1. of Samuel. 2. of Samuel. 1. of Kings. 2. of Kings. 1. of the
Chronicles. 2. of the Chronicles. 1. Esdras. Nehemiah. Ester. Job. The book of
Psalms. The Proverbs of Solomon. Ecclesiastes. The song of Solomon. The
Prophecy of Isaiah. The Prophecy of Jeremy. The Lamentat. of Jeremy.
Ezechiel. Daniel. Hosea. Joel. Amos. Obadiah. Jonah. Micah. Nahum. Habakuk.
Zephaniah. Haggai. Zachariah. Malachi.
The Apocryphal books are these that follow, which are not received of the
Hebrews, but we read them (says S. Hierome in his prologue to the Proverbs,
for the instruction of the people, not to confirm the authority of
Ecclesiastical doctrines: that is to say, The third book of Esdras. The
fourth of Esdras. Tobiah. Judith. Wisdom. Ecclesiasticus. Baruch, with the
Epistle of Jeremiah. Ester after the 10. chap. to the end. The song of the 3.
children. The history of Susanna. The history of the Dragon. 1. Maccabees. 2.
Maccabees. 3. Maccabees.


Here follow the books of the new Testament.

The Gospel according to S. Matthew. Mark. Luke. John.


The Acts of the Apostles. The Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans. The first to
the Corinth. The 2. to the Corinthians. The Epistle to the Galat. The Epist. to
the Ephesians The Epistle to the Philippians. The Epistle to the Colos. The
first to the Thessal. The second to the Thessalonians. The first to Timothy.
The second to Timothy. To Titus. To Philemon. To the Hebrews. The Epistle of
S. James. The 1. Epistle of S. Peter. The second of S. Peter. The 1. Epistle of
S. John. The second of S. John. The third of S. John. The Epistle of S. Jude.
The Revelation of S. John.
The books above named teach thus much, that there Adam according to his own
image and similitude: but by the malice of the devil, and the disobedience of
Adam, sin entered into the world, and we are made sinners in Adam, and by Adam.

That Christ was promised to our forefathers, who received

That Christ was borne at the time appointed by God

That Christ is our life, and truth, and peace, and justice, and is raised
again for our justification.

Marie, that she is holy, humble, and full of grace; and so do we believe of
all the other Saints, that they attend in heaven the resurrection of their
bodies at the day of judgment.













CHAP. XIII. Another Confession of the faith of the Waldenses.
WE believe that there is one only God, Taken out of the book of Charles du
Moulin de la Mon. de Francois. p. 65.
who is a Spirit, the Creator of all things, the Father of all, who is above
all, and in us all, who is to be adored in spirit and truth, upon whom only we
wait, and to whom we give all glory for our life, our nourishment, clothing,
health, sickness, prosperity, adversity: we love him as the author of all
goodness, we fear him as knowing our hearts.

We believe that Jesus Christ is the Son and image

We believe that the holy Ghost is our Comforter,

We believe that there is one holy Church, which is word thereof is agreeable
unto God, without which no man can be saved.

Aaron, nourishing the flock of Christ, not for dishonest gain, or as having
any superiority over the Clergy, but as being an example to the flock, in
word, in conversation, in charity, in faith, and in chastity.





faith and charity, examining our selves, that so we may eat of that bread
and drink of that cup, as it is written in the holy Scripture.

We confess, that marriage is good and honorable,

We confess that they that fear God, seek the things

On the contrary, we confess that we are to take heed

We hold the old and new Testament for the rule of I believe in God the Father
Almighty, etc.

And for as much as the Pastors of the Waldenses taught their people the
Athanasian Creed in the Waldensian language, we have taken it out of their
books, word by word as they pronounced it in old time.

CHAP. XIIII. The Symbol of Athanasius in the Waldensian language.
QValquequal vol esser faict salf deuant totas cosas es de necessita tenir la
fe Catholica, laqual si alcun non tenre entierament sensa dubi perire
eternalment. Ma aquesta es la fe Catholica. Que nos honran un Dio en Trinita,
and la Trinita en vnita, non confondent personnas, ni departent la substantia.
Car autra es la personna del Pair, and del Filli, and del Sanct Esperit. Lo
Pair non crea, lo filli non crea, lo Sanct Esperit non crea. Lo Pair non
mesuriuol, lo Filli non mesuriuol, lo Sanct Esperit non mesuriuol. Lo Pair
Eternal, lo Filli Eternal, lo Sanct Esperit Eternal. Emperco non tres Eternals,
ma un Eternal, enaimi non tres mesuriuols, and non crea. Semeillament lo Pair
tot Poissant, lo Filli tot poissant, and lo Sanct Esperit tot Poissant,
emperco, non tres tot Poissants, ma un tot Poissant. Enaimi lo Pair es Dio, lo
Filli Dio, lo Sanct Esperit Dio, emperco non tres Dios, ma un Dio. Enaimi lo
Pair es Seignor, lo Filli Seignor, lo Sanct Esperit Seignor, emperco, non tres
Seignors, ma un Seignor. Ca enaimi nos sen costreit confessar per Christiana
verita, vna chascuna persona Dio o Seignor, enaimi per Catholica Religion, nos
sen defendu dire esser tres Dios ni tres Seignors. Lo Filli es sol del Pair,
non faict, ni crea, ma engenra, lo Sanct Esperit es del Pair, and del Filli,
non fait, ni crea, ni engenra ma procedent. Donc lo es un Pair, non tres
Paires, un Filli, non tres filli, un Sanct Esperit, non tres Sanct Esperits. En
aquesta Trinita alcuna cosa non es premiera ni derniera, alcuna cosa mayor, o
menor, ma totas tres personas enter lor son ensem Eternals, and eygals. Enaimi
que per totas cosas coma esdict de sobre, la sia ^honorar la Trinita en Vnita,
and l'Vnita en Trinita. Donc aquel que vol esser fait salf senta enaima de la
Trinita. Ma a la salut eternal es necessari creyre fidelment l'encarnation del
nostre Seignor Jesus Christ. Donc la fe dreita es que nos crean, and confessan
que lo nostre Seignor Jesus Christ filli de Dio, es Dio and home. Et es Dio
engendra auant li segle, de la substantia del Pair, and es home na al segle de
la substantia de la Maire, essent perfect Dio, and perfect home: d'anima
rational and d'humana carn, aigal del Pair second la Diuinita, and menor
second l'humanita. Loqual iaciaco quel sia Dio and home, emperco lo es un
Christ and non dui, ma un, non per conversion de la Diuinita en carn, ma
propiament de la Humanita en Dio, vntotalment, non per confusion de la Diuinita
en carn, ma propiament de la humanita en Dio: un totalment, non per confusion
de substantia ma per vnita de personas. Car enaima larma rational, and la carn,
es un home, enaima Dio and home es un Christ loqual est passionna per la nostra
salut, descend en li enfern, lo ters iorn resuscite de li mort, and monte en
li cel, and see a la dextra de Dio lo Pair Omnipotent. Daqui es a venir iugear
li vio and li mort. A laduenament delqual tuit an a resuscitar, cum li lor
corpse, and son a render racon de li lor propi faict. Et aquilli que auran faict
ben, anaren en vita eterna, and aquilli que aurant faict mal anaran al fuoc
eternal.

The belief of the Waldenses is sufficiently known by that which is contained
in the pure and holy doctrines of their confessions above mentioned: and yet
nevertheless it is for the same that they have been persecuted for the space
of four hundred and fifty years, and still should be if they lived near
those places where humane inventions are preferred before the word of God. For
though Satan be confounded, and his kingdom dissipated by the brightness of
the Gospel, yet he ceasseth not to hold those under the yoke of Idolatry,
whose understandings he has blinded, and to keep them by violence under the
tyranny of his laws, hiding that ignorance and error that men do naturally
love, in those darknesses wherein they take pleasure. But as it has not
pleased the eternal God, that the faith of his servants and Martyrs should be
buried, so it likewise pleases him, that their constancy should be made
manifest for our edification and example. And this is the reason why having
showed in the first book that the Waldenses believed to salvation what was
necessary, I have thought good to publish in the second book that which is
come to my knowledge of their sufferings for righteousness.

The end of the first Book.
PART OF THE CATALOGVE OF the Waldenses books, being accidentally omitted in
page 44. after the 30. line, are here inserted as follows.
A Commentary or paraphrase upon the Symbol of the Apostles. A Treatise of
the Sacraments. A Commentary or Paraphrase upon the Commandments. A
Commentary upon the Lords prayer. A Treatise of Fasting. A Treatise of
Tribulation. A little Catechism entitled, Interogations menors. A Treatise
against dancing and tauernes. A Treatise of four things to come, that is to
say, death unto all: eternal life to the good: hell to the wicked: and the
last judgment. A Treatise entitled, Del Purgatori soima: that is to say, Of
the dream or invention of Purgatory. A Treatise against the invocation of
Saints. We have also a book very ancient whereof the title is, Aeyco es la
causa del nostre dispartime^t de la Gleisa Romana. That is to say, This is the
cause of our separation from the Church of Rome. In this volume there is an
Epistle or Apology of the Waldenses entitled, La Epistola al Serenissimo Rey
Lancelau, a li Ducs, Barons, and a li plus veil del regne: lo petit tropel de
li Christians appella per falls nom falsamente P. O.V. that is to say, Poor or
Waldenses. There is also a book, wherein there are many Sermons of their
Barbes, and an Epistle called, The Epistle to our friends, containing many
excellent doctrines to teach all sorts of people how to lead their lives in
all ages. In the same volume there is a book entitled, Sacerdotium, wherein
is showed what is the charge of a good Pastor, and what the punishment of a
wicked. There is also come to our hands, a book of poetry in the Waldensian
tongue, wherein are these Treatises following. A prayer entitled, New comfort.
A rithme of the four sorts of seeds mentioned in the Gospel. Another
entitled Barque. In his first Table p. 153.
And one called, The noble lesson, of which book Le Sicur de Saint Aldegonde
makes mention. We have also an excellent Treatise entitled, Vergier de
consolation, containing many good instructions, confirmed by the Scriptures and
diverse authorities of the Ancients. Also an old Treatise in parchment
entitled, Of the Church: and another called, The Treasury and light of faith.
Also a book entitled, The spiritual Almanacke. Also a book in parchment, Of
the means to separate things precious from the base and contemptible, that is
to say, virtues from vices. Also the book of George Morel, wherein are
contained all the questions which George Morel and Peter Mascon moved to
Oecolampadius and Bucer touching religion, and the answers of the said parties.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE WALDENSES: Containing that which is
come to our knowledge, of the grievous persecutions which they have endured for
their Faith, for the space of more then four hundred and fifty years.
CHAP. I. By whom the Waldenses have been persecuted, for what, by what means,
and in what times.
THE Waldenses have had no greater enemies then the Popes; because, Rainerius
of the Waldenses.
says the Monk Rainerius, that amongst all those that have raised themselves
against the Church of Rome, the Waldenses have been always the most dangerous
and pernicious, insomuch that they have resisted him for a long time; as also
because this Sect, (says he) is more general, for there is not almost any
Country in which it has not taken footing. And thirdly, because all other by
their blasphemies against God, strike a horror into men's hearts; But this on
the contrary, has a great appearance of piety, for they carry themselves
uprightly before men, and believe rightly touching God in all things, holding
all the Articles that are contained in the Simbole, hating and reuiling the
Church of Rome, and therein (says he) they are easily believed of the people.

Rainer. cap. de studio peruertendi alios and modo decendi. fol. 98.
And in another place the said Rainerius says, that the first lesson that the
Waldenses give to those whom they win to their Sect, is this, that they teach
them what the Disciples of Christ ought to be, and that by the words of the
Gospel and the Apostles, affirming, that they only are the Successors of the
Apostles, that immitate their life. Inferring thereby (says he) that the
Pope, the Bishops and Clergy, that possess and enjoy the riches of this
world, and seek after them, follow not the examples of the Apostles, and
therefore are not the true guides of the Church, it never being the purpose of
Christ Jesus, to commit his chaste and beloved spouse, to those who rather
prostitute her by their ill examples, and wicked actions, then preserve her in
that purity wherein they received her at the beginning, a virgin chaste and
without spot.

In hatred therefore of diverse discourses which the Waldenses have written
against the luxury, avarice, pride, and errors brought in by the Pope, they
have always persecuted them to the death.

The means they have used utterly to exterminate them, have been in the first
place their thunderbolts, curses, cannons, constitutions, decrees, and
whatsoever else might make them odious to the Kings, Princes, and people of the
earth, giving them over, as much as lies in their power, unto Satan,
interdicting them all communion and society with those that obey their laws,
judging them unworthy and incapable of any charges, honors, profits, or to
inherit, or to make wills, or to be buried in common churchyards,
confiscating their goods, dis-inheriting their heirs, and where they could by
any means apprehend them, they have condemned them to be delivered to the
secular power, their houses to be razed, their lands and moueables confiscated,
or given to the first conqueror. These sentences are to be seen in the manuel
of the Inquisitors, with the letters of Pope Alexander the thirteenth and of
diverse other Popes which succeeded him.
And of all these sentences we have at this day the scedule, given by the
Popes, with the instruments which they have employed to such executions, as
also of the commands which they have given unto Kings, Princes, Magistrates,
Consuls and People, to make an exact inquisition, to shut the gates of the
City, to crave the assistance, and best help of the people, to ring the
Tol-bell, to arm themselves: and if otherwise they cannot be apprehended, to
kill them, and to use all manner of violence, which they shall see needful in
such a case: Giving to the accusers the third part, or some other portion of
that which shall be confiscated, all counselors and favorers of them being
condemned to the same punishment.

And forasmuch as no Prince or Magistrate, or any other had any power to frame
a process against any in the fact of pretended heresy; commandment was given
to the Bishops, every one in his jurisdiction, to make an inquiry into their
flocks, and take notice how every particular person was affected, to the
ordinances of the Popes, and the Church of Rome. So when Waldo began to
complain and to cry out against the corruptions, of the said Church of Rome.
Alexander the third then Pope, enjoined the Archbishop of Lion to proceed
against him; and forasmuch as the said Prelate did not banish him according and
as soon as he desired, This Council was held at Latran. 1180. See the 27. Chap.
he speedily assembled a Council, where he excommunicated Waldo, and all those
that followed his doctrine, though it were under other names.

But this means was thought to be too easy for so pressing an action as this
of the Waldenses was, who ceased not for all those thunderbolts, to preach,
that the Pope was Antichrist, the Mass an abomination, the Host an idol, and
Purgatory a fable. Points that being received were sufficient to overthrow all
the authority of the Pope, and to dry up all the rivers of gain and grease of
the Clergy. And therefore Innocent the third, who succeeded Pope Celestine the
third of that name, about the year 1198, took another course then that of the
ordinary Bishops, to frame the process against the Waldenses, and others whom
he called Heretics. He authorized certain Monks, who had the full power of
the Inquisition in their hands, and framed the Process, delivered to the secular
power, by a full and absolute authority, and a far shorter way, but much more
cruel, delivering the people by thousands into the hands of the Magistrates,
and the Magistrates to the executioners; whereby in a few years, all
Christendom was much moved by those pitiful and lamentable spectacles, to
see all those burnt or hanged, that did trust only in one Lord Jesus Christ for
their salvation, and renounced the vain hopes invented by men, and for their
profit, which was all the fruit of that aforesaid Inquisition, which we shall
speak of in the Chapter following.

CHAP. II. Of the Inquisition: by whom it was first put in practice: by what
subtilties and cruelties the Waldensis have been vexed by it.
IN the beginning of the prosecution of the Popes, utterly to exterminate the
Waldenses, they were content with the means above mentioned in the precedent
Chapter, but either because the business went but slowly forward, or because
notwithstanding those means, the number increased in such manner, of those
that believed, that these means were found to be weak, it was resolved by
Pope Innocent the third, to assay whether by the way of preaching he could
obtain that, which by violence he could never do. He sent therefore certain
Bishops and Monks, who preached in those places of the Waldenses that were
suspected to profess their religion; but as he says, The Treas of Hist. in
the year 1206.
that writ the Treasure of Histories, the said Preachers converted not any, but
a few poor people, but for the most part (says he) they still persisted in
the profession of their faith. In Gallia Narbonensi there were employed two
Monks, that is to say, Pierre de Chateauneuf, Lib. Inquisit. cap. de non
occidendo. fol. 100. Sic fuit oecisus Sanctus Petrus de Ordine fratrum
Praedicatorum.
and Dominique born at Calahorre in Spain, to whom they joined a certain Abbot
of Cisteaux, and in a throng, as it were together, there came many other
Priests and Monks, and amongst the rest a certain Bishop of Cestre. The Monk
Pierre de Chateauneuf was slain in this business, and for that canonized for a
Saint. Dominique continued in his persecution of the Waldenses both in deed and
word. This Monk seeing himself to be in authority, M^ynes qui mandient.
instituted an Order of begging Monks, who after his name were callad
Dominicans, and the said Monk was canonized, and his Order confirmed by Pope
Honorius, being warned (says he) to do it, by a dream. For it seemed to
him, that the Church of Rome was falling, and that Dominique vpheld it with his
shoulders, in recompense whereof, the said Pope commanded that the said Order
should have the first place among the Mendicants. Mandians.


The Martirologe in the life of Dominique.
It is said of this Monk, that his mother when she went with child with him,
she did dream, that she had in her womb a dog that cast out flames of
fire out of his throat. His followers interpret this to his advantage, as if
hereby we were given to understand, that he should be that dog, that should
vomit out that fire, which should consume the Heretics: But on the contrary,
they whom he every day delivered unto death, might well say that he was the
dog, that had set on fire all Christendom, and that the flames that came out
of his throat, do note unto us, those fiery and infernal sentences which he
pronounced against the Christians. Howsoever he carried himself so well in
these affairs, that before he died, he built many goodly houses in Languedoc,
Prouence, Dolphine, Spain, and elsewhere, by which he had obtained great
revenues, either from the liberality of those that affected his Order, or the
Confiscations of the Waldenses, by which the Count Simon of Montfort gave him
great privileges and alms, as cutting large thongs of another man's leather.

He labored in the Inquisition as the chief, with such contentment to the
Popes, that from that time forward, the Monks of his Order, have been always
employed in the Inquisition.

The power given to these Monks Inquisitors, was without limits. For they
could assemble the people, whenever it pleased them, by the sound of a bell,
proceed against the Bishops themselves, and send out process, if there were
need, to imprison, and to open the prisons without control. All manner of
accusations was auailable enough: A Sorcerer, a Harlot were sufficient
witnesses, without reproach, in the fact of pretended heresy. It was no matter
who did accuse, or whether by word of mouth, or by tickets cast in before the
Inquisitor, for without any personal appearance, or confronting one another,
the the process were framed, without party, without witness, and without other
law, then the pleasure of the Inquisitor. To be rich was a crime near unto
heresy, and he that had any thing to lose, was in the way to be undone,
either as an Heretic, or at the least, as a favorer of heretics. One bare
suspicion stopped the mouths of fathers and mothers, and kinsfolk, that they
durst not intercede for punishments to come, and he that did entreat for the
convey of a cup of cold water, or a little straw to lie upon in some stinking
dungeon, was condemned for a favorer of Heretics, and brought to the same or
worse extremities. There was no Advocate that durst undertake the defense of
his nearest kinsman or friend, or Notary that durst receive any act in his
favor. And that which was more, after that a man was once entangled within the
snares of the Inquisition, he could never live in any assurance, for he was
always to begin again: For if any man were set at liberty, it was only for
a time till they might better consider of it. Death it self made not an end of
the punishment, for they have left unto us certain coppies of their sentences
against the bones of the dead, to dis-interre and to burn them, yea thirty
years after the decease of the party accused. They that were heirs had
nothing certain, for upon any accusation of their fathers or kindred, they
durst not undertake the defense of their own right, or possess their own
inheritance, without the crime or suspicion of Heresy, and that they rather
inherited their bad faith and opinions then their goods. The people, yea the
most mighty and richest amongst them, were constrained, in a manner, to adore
these Monks the Inquisitors, and to bestow upon them great Presents for the
building of their Couents and dotations of their houses, for fear to be
accused of Heresy, and not to be esteemed zealous for the faith of those holy
fathers. And the better to entertain men with an apprehension of these things,
they sometimes made shows and brauadoes of their prisoners, leading them in
triumph at their Processions, some being enjoined to whip themselves, others to
go covered after the manner of St. Benedicts, that is to say, with certain
red Cassockes with yellow crosses, to signify that they were such as had been
convinced of some error, and that at the first offense they should afterward
commit, they were already condemned for Heretics. Others appeared in their
shirts, bare-foote and bare-headed, with a with about their necks, a torch in
their hands; that being thus prepared and furnished, they might give terror to
the beholders, to see such persons of all estates and sex, brought to so
miserable a condition, being all forbid to enter into the Church, but to stay
in the porch, or to cast an eye upon the Host when it was showed by the
Priest; until it was otherwise determined by the Fathers the Inquisitors.

And for the full accomplishment of the contentment of the said Fathers, their
accused were exiled for a penance, into the holy Land, or enrolled for some
other expedition against the Turks or other Infidels, levied by the command of
the Pope, to serve the Church for a certain time at their own charge: and in
the mean time, the said holy Fathers took possession of the goods of the
poor Pilgrims; and that which was worst of all, at their return, they must
not enquire whether the said Monks had in their absence any private
familiarity with their wives, for fear lest they should be condemned for
back-sliders, impenitent, and altogether unworthy of any favor.

Now these violences being executed from the year a thousand two hundred and
six, which was about the time that Dominique erected his Inquisition, to the
year one thousand two hundred twenty eight, there was so great a hauock made
of poor Christians, that the Archbishops of Aix, Arles, and Narbonne, being
assembled together at Aingou, in the said year 1228, at the instance of the
said Monks the Inquisitors, to confer with them about diverse difficulties in
the execution of their charge, had compassion of the misery of a great number
that were accused, and kept in prison by the said Monks the Inquisitors,
saying:

It is come to our knowledge, See the Catal. of the Test. of the truth. page
534.
that you have apprehended so great a number of the Waldenses, that it is not
only not possible to defray the charge of their nourishment, but to provide
lyme and stone to build prisons for them; we therefore counsel you (say they)
that you defer a little such imprisonments, until the Pope may be advertised
of the great numbers that have been apprehended, and that he do advise what
pleases him to be done; if not, there is no reason you should take offense
for those that are impenitent and incorigible, Vous tuissies.
or that you should doubt of their relaps, or that they should escape away, or
having their liberty should infect others, because you may condemn such
persons without delay.

There needs no other proof then this of the aforesaid Prelates, to make it
appear that the number of those whom the Inquisition had delivered unto death,
was very great. For touching the question moved by the said Inquisitors,
whether they that have frequented the company of the Waldenses, and have
received the Supper of the Lord with them, are to be excused, because they say
they offended out of ignorance, not knowing that they were Waldenses: The the
answer of the said Prelates was, that they were not to be excused; Because (say
they) who is so great a stranger, as not to know that the Waldenses have been
punished and condemned for these many years since, and who knows, not that
for a long time they have been pursued and persecuted at the charge and travel
of Catholics, this pursuit being sealed by so many persons condemned to death;
if it cannot be called into doubt.

And yet nevertheless, the speech of the said Prelates being conferred, with that
which George Morell, in the year a thousand five hundred and thirty, has
written, it would be none of the least wonders that God has wrought, that
notwithstanding the bloody persecutions after Waldo his time, in the year a
thousand one hundred sixty, George Morel in his memorials. pa. 54.
there were according to the report of Morel, above eight hundred thousand
persons that made profession of the faith of the said Waldenses.

As touching the subtleties of the said Inquisitors, we should not have had any
knowledge thereof, but from such as have escaped from the Inquisition of
Spain, but that it was the will of God that their cunning tricks should not
be so closely hid, but that we had examples thereof even from themselves.

Behold then the crafty subtleties of the Inquisitors, which served them for a
rule in the framing of their process against the Waldenses.

It is not expedient to dispute of matter of faith before lay people.

No man shall be held for a penitent man, if he accuse not those that he knows
to be such as himself.

He that accuses not those that are like unto himself, shall be cut off from
the Church, as a rotten member, for fear lest the members that are found,
should be corrupted by him.

After that any one has been delivered to the secular power, great care must
be taken, that he be not suffered to excuse himself, or to manifest his
innocence before the people: because if be he delivered to death, it is a
scandal to the lay people; and if he make an escape, there is danger of his
loyalty.

Good heed must be taken, not to promise life unto him that is condemned to
death, before the people, considering that an Heretic will never suffer
himself to be burnt, if he may escape by such promises. And if he shall
promise to repent before the people, if he have not his life granted unto him,
there will arise a scandal amongst them, and it will be thought that he is
wrongfully put to death.

Note (say they) that the Inquisitor ought always to presuppose the fact,
without any condition, and is only to enquire of the circumstances of the
fact, as thus: how often have thou confessed thy self unto Heretics? In what
chamber of the house have they layen, and the like things.

The Inquisitor may look into any book, as if he found there written, the
life of him that is accused, and of all that he enquires of.

It is necessary to threaten death to the accused, if he confess not, and to
tell him the fact is too manifest, that it is fit he should think of his
soul, and renounce his Heresy, for he must die, and therefore it shall be
good for him to take patiently whatsoever shall light upon him. And if he shall
answer; since I must die, I had rather die in that faith I profess, then in
that of the Romish Church, then conclude for certain, that before he made but
a show of repentance, and so let him suffer justice.

We must not think to vanquish Heretics by learning or by the scriptures,
inasmuch as men that are learned, are rather confounded by them, whereby it
comes to pass, that the Heretics fortify themselves, seeing they are able
to delude the most learned.

Again, great heed must be taken that the Heretics never answer directy, and
when they are pressed by frequent interrogations, they have a custom to
allege for themselves, that they are simple and foolish people, and therefore
know not how to answer. And if they shall once see the assistants to be moved
with compassion toward them, as if they should do them wrong, thinking them
to be simple people, and therefore not culpable; then they gather heart, and
make a show of shedding tears like poor miserable creatures, and flattering
their judges, they endeavor to free themselves from the Inquisition, saying:
Sir, If I have been faulty in any thing, I will willingly do penance, but yet
give me your aid and assistance to deliver me from this infamy, into which I
am fallen by the malice of others, not mine own fault.

But then the courageous Inquisitor must not yield for all these flatteries,
nor give any belief to those dissimulations.

Moreover the Inquisitor must tell them, that they shall gain nothing by
swearing falsely, because they have enough to convince them by witnesses; and
therefore they must not think, that by means of their oath they shall avoid
the sentence of death; but they must promise them (say they) that if they will
freely confess their error, they shall have mercy; for in such perplexities,
there are many, that confess their error in hope to escape.

Thus you see the subtilties of the Monks the Inquisitors, such as they
practiced in times past, against the Waldenses throughout all Europe: It
remains that we now see what their practice has been in every particular
Realm and Province, so far forth as is come to our knowledge. And first we
will begin with Dauphine, because it is the Province into which Waldo and his
followers retired themselves at their departure from Lion.

CHAP. III. Of the Waldensian Churches in Dauphine, and the persecutions which
they have suffered, which are come to our knowledge.
THe Waldensian Churches in Dauphine, have been for these many hundred years
spread abroad throughout diverse parts of the Province. For they have had
Churches in Valentia, Valentinois.
whereat this present there are places, wherein times out of mind, the faith of
the Walde^ses has been received from the father to the son, as the place des
Faulques, and Beauregard in Valentia, and La Baulme near Crest; out of which
places there are come to our hands certain process against some particular
persons of the same places, for being accused by the Inquisitors as adhearing
to the faith of the Waldenses above three hundred years since. But the more
famous Churches of the said Province, are those of the Valley of Fraissiniere,
near Ambrun, of Argenterie, of the Valley Loyse, which for the Waldensis
sakes was called Val lute, as if there had been nothing in the said Valley but
a Brothel-house, and receptacle of all manner of dissolute living and villainy.
This was utterly rooted out. On the other side of the Alps, there is a valley
called the Valley of Pragela, where they have inhabited time out of mind. A
Valley that is in the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Turin, peopled even at
this present with those that are descended from the first Waldenses, of whom
mention has been made heretofore. They were the inhabitants of this Valley
that peopled the Waldensian Valleies of Piedmont, La Perouse, Saint Martin,
Angrongue and others; as also those of the Waldenses inhabited in Prouence, and
Calabria, are come out of those places of Dauphine, and Piedmont. In said
Valley of Pragela, there are at this day, six goodly Churches, every one having
their Pastor, and every Pastor having diverse villages, which belong to every
one of these Churches, all filled with those that have descended from the
ancient Waldensis. They are Churches truly reformed time out of mind. For
although in the said Valley, there are at this present old people, and not a
small number that draw near, yea and some that are above a hundred year old,
yet these good old men, have never heard of their fathers, or grandfathers,
that mass was ever sung in their times in that Country. And though perhaps the
Archbishops of Turin, have caused it to be song in the said Valley, whereof
the inhabitants have had no knowledge, yet there is not any amongst them, that
makes profession of any other faith or belief, then that the confession
whereof we have heard in the former book.

For all those books before mentioned, have bin received by the Inhabitants of
the said valley, which has been in times past, one of the safest retiring
places that the Waldenses had in all Europe, environed on all sides with
mountains almost vnaccressable, within the caves whereof they retired
themselves in times of persecution.

Le Sieur de Vignaux who was one of the first Pastors that preached to his
people, long before the exercise of the reformed Religion was free in France,
could not satisfy himself with the liberal speech, integrity, and piety of
these people, whom he found altogether disposed to receive the dispensation of
the word of God, which their forefathers had cherished, and in which they had
instructed their posterity. And it was worthy the observation, that
notwithstanding they were weakened on all sides, and environed with the enemies
of their Religion, in danger to be apprehended when they went out of their
doors, yet was there never any worldly respect that had power to alter their
holy resolution, from the father to the son to serve God, taking his word for
the rule of their faith, and his law for the rule of their obedience. And in
this design it was, that they have been blessed of God, above all Christian
people throughout Europe, insomuch that their infants were hardly weaned from
their mothers breast, but their parents took a singular delight to instruct
them in the Christian faith and doctrine, until they were able to confound
many persons dwelling elsewhere well strooken in years, and overwhelmed with
ignorance.

To this pass their Pastors brought them, who not being content to give them
exhortations upon the Sabbath days, went also in the weeke-daies to instruct
them, in the villages and hamlets thereabouts, not sparing themselves for the
roughnes of the rocks, the coldness of the air, the inciuility of the
country, where they were feign to clime up high mountains to visit their
flock, and to carry unto them the food of their souls; even at those times
when the people in the heat of summer were keeping their cattle upon the high
rocks, and there they many times teach and instruct them in the open fields.
There you may see those that hear the word of God with attention and
reverence: There is discipline exercised with fruit; There the people pray with
feruency of zeal, at their from their labors, at night when they go toe their
retain rest, and in the morning before they undertake any work; First in
their private houses, then in the Temple they beg the assistance of the Lord
in all their actions, thoughts, words, and deeds, and so betake themselves to
their labors, under the protection of the living God, whom they love, and
honor and adore. There you may descry more zeal, and more simplicity, then in
many other places, that abound in the delights and pleasures of this world;
neither are they so rude and blockish, but that they have diverse amongst them
that can read, and deliver their minds in good terms, especially they that
travel sometimes into the lower Countries for their commodities; they have
Schools wherein their children are taught and nurtured, neither do they want
any thing they think necessary to advance the glory of God amongst them.

The first persecution that is come to our knowledge, was that, which was moved
by a certain Monk Inquisitor of the Order of the Frier-Minors, named Francis
Borelli, having a Commission in the year 1380, Anno 1380.
to make inquiry and to inform touching the Sect of the Waldenses, in the
Dioces of Aix, Arles, Ambrun, Vienna, Geneua, Aubonne, Sauoy, the Venetian
County, Dyois, Forests, This Bull was taken out of the Chamber Country of
Grenoble.
the Principality of Orange, the City of Anignon and Selon, as his Bull gave
him authority, which he received from Clement the seventh, who then was
Resident and ruled in Anignon. By reason of the neerenes of his Court to the
habitation of the Waldenses; he thought good to purge Dauphine, of those that
held him to be Antichrist; and for this cause he commanded the Bishops of
Dauphine, Prouence, and other places, to which his power did extend (for there
was then a schism, and all Europe was divided, partly for Vrbani the sixth, and
partly for this said Clement) to watch in such sort over their flocks, that
there might not any live amongst them that was of the Sect of the Waldenses.

This Monk cited to appear before hin at Ambrun, all the inhabitants of
Erassiniere, Argentiere, and the valley Pute, upon pain of excommunication.
They appeared not, nor any for them, and were therefore condemned for their
contumacy, and in the end shut out of the Church, by the last and most direful
excommunication of offenders: and in the space of thirteen years, during
which time he always caught one or other, he delivered by sentence to the
secular power to be burnt at Grenoble; that is to say, of the valley Pute,
William Marie of Vilar; Peter Long, alias Chastan; John Long, alias Truchi,
Albert Vincens, Ioane the wife of Steven Vincens, and diverse others; that is to
say, to the number of one hundred and fifty men, diverse women, with many of
their sons and daughters well strooken in years, whose names we have not
here inserted because we would not grieve and weary the Reader.

Of the Valley of Argentiere and Frassinieres, Astine Berarde, Barthelemie the
wife of John Porti, and others of both sexes, to the number of eighty, who were
all condemned to be delivered to the secular power; in such sort, that
whenever any one of them was apprehended, he was presently brought to
Grenoble, and there without any other show of process, burnt alive.

This last sentence was pronounced at Ambrun in the Cathedral Church, in the
year one thousand three hundred ninty three, to the great gain and commodity
of the Monks the Inquisitors, who adjudged to themselves two parts of the
goods of the said condemned, and the rest to the temporal commanders, with
inhibition to their bordering neighbors, to assist them in any manner
howsoever, to receive them, visit, defend them, or to minister relief or
sustenance to any of them, or to converse with them in any sort, or to do them
any favor, or give them any aid or counsel, upon pain to be attainded and
convinced for a favorer of Heretics, they being declared unworthy of all
offices, and public charges and counsels; forbidding every man to use the
service of any of them in matter of testimony, they themselves being judged
insufficient to make a will, or to succeed in any inheritance. And if any of
them should be judges, that their sentences should be of no force, and no
causes should be called before them. And if any of them be Advocates, that
their defenses and pleas be not received; if Notaries, that their instruments
be of no effect, but cancelled and defaced; If Priests, that they be deprived
of all offices and benefices, with inhibition to all Ecclesiastical persons,
to minister the Sacrament unto them, to give them sepulture, or to receive from
them any alms or oblations, upon pain of deposition from charges, and
deprivation of their Benefices.

This Monk reserved to himself, by the said sentence, the reuiew and
examination of the process of some dosen that he named therein; and they were
those which he would willingly have to pass by the golden gate. For in the
process that are come to our hands, there are many that complain, that they had
never been entangled in the snares of the Inquisitors, but for their goods;
being well known that they never had any knowledge of the Belief of
Waldenses.

As touching the Waldenses of the valley of Pragela, they were assailed by
their enemies upon the side of Susa a town in Piedmont, 1400.
about the year a thousand four hundred: and forasmuch as they had many times
assaulted them in vain, at such times as they could retire themselves into the
high mountains, and caves or hollow places thereof, Vineaux in his Menor. fol.
6.
from whence they might much indamage, and hinder those that came to assail
them, the said enemies set upon them, about the Feast of the Nativity of
Christ, a time when these poor people never thought, that any would have durst
to have past the mountains being covered with snow, who seeing their caves and
cauerns taken by their enemies, they betook themselves to one of the highest
mountains of the Alps, named afterward the Albergam, that is to say, the
mountain of retrait, and running together in troops with their wives and
children, the mothers carrying their cradles, and leading their infants by the
hand, that were able to go, the enemy followed them until night, and slew
many before they could recover the mountain. They that were then slain had
the better bargain. For night coming upon these poor people which were in
the snow, without any means to make any fire to warm their little infants,
the greatest part of them were benu^med with cold, and there were found in the
morning fourscore small infants dead in their cradles, and most of their
mothers mothers died after them, and diverse others were giving up the last
gasp.

The enemies being retired in the night, into the houses of these poor people,
they ransacked and pillaged whatsoever they could carry to Susa, and for the
full accomplishment of their cruelty, they hanged upon a tree a poor
Waldensian woman, whom they met upon the mountain de Mean, named Margaret
Athode.

The Inhabitants of the said Valley, hold this persecution to be the most
violent, that their fathers have related unto them, that in their times or the
times of their grandfathers they have ever suffered; and they talk of it at
this present, as if it were a thing lately done, and fresh in memory; so often
from the father to the son, has mention been made of this unexpected
surprise, the cause of so many miseries amongst them.

Now in the mean while, the Waldenses of the valley Frassiniere, that remained
and had escaped this aforesaid persecution, were again violently handled by
the Archbishop of Ambrun their neighbor in the year 1460, that is, 1460.
in the time of Pope Pius the second of that name, and of Lewis the eleventh
King of France.

This Archbishop named John, made a Commissioner against the said Waldenses, a
certain Monk of the order of the Frier-Minors, called John Vayleti, who
proceeded with such diligence and violence, that there was hardly any person in
the valleys of Frassiniere, Argentiere, and Loyse, that could escape the hands
of the said Inquisitor, but that they were apprehended either as Heretics, or
favorers of them.

They therefore that knew nothing of the belief of the Waldenses, had recourse
unto King Lewis the eleventh, humbly beseeching him, to stay by his authority
the course of such persecutions. The King granted unto them his letters, the
which we have in this place thought good to insert at large, because by them
it shall be easy to know what the will and desire of the said Monks was, who
entangled in their process many of the Romish religion, under color of the
Inquisition against the Waldenses.

The Letters of King Lewis the eleventh. Lewis by the grace of God, King of
France, Dauphin de Vienois, Conte de Valentinois, and Dioys; to our
well-beloued and faithful Governor of our Country of Dauphine, health and
dilection.
TOuching that part of the Inhabitants of the valley Loyse, Frassiniere,
Argentiere, and others of our Country of Dauphine, it has been certified, that
notwithstanding they have lived, and are desirous to live as becomes good
Christian Catholics, without holding, or believing, or maintaining any
superstitious points, but according to the ordinance and discipline of our
mother the holy Church; yet nevertheless, some religious Mandians, who call
themselves the Inquisitors of the faith, and others thinking by vexations and
troubles, to extort from them their goods, and otherwise to molest them in
their persons, have been desirous, and still are, to lay false imputations upon
them, that they hold and believe certain Heresies and superstitions against
the Catholic faith; and under this color, have and still do vex and trouble
them with strange inuolutions of process, both in our Court of Parliament in
Dauphine, and in diverse other Countries and jurisdictions.

And to come to the confiscation of the goods of those whom they charge with
the same offense, many of the Judges, yea, and the said Inquisitors of the
faith themselves, being commonly religious Mandians, Mandians.
under the shadow of the office of Inquisitors, have sent, and every day do
send forth process against those poor people, without reasonable cause; putting
some of them to the rack, and calling them in question without any precedent
information, and condemning them for matters whereof they were never culpable,
as has bin afterward found and of some, to set them at liberty, have taken,
and exacted great sums of money, and by diverse means have unjustly vexed and
troubled them, to the great prejudice and hinderance, not only of the said
Suppliants, but of Us and the Weal. public, of our Country of Dauphine.

We therefore being willing to provide against this mischief, and not to
suffer Our poor people to be vexed and troubled by such wrongful proceedings,
especially the Inhabitants of the said places affirming, that they have always
lived, and will live, as becomes good Christians, and Catholics, not having
ever believed, nor held other belief, then that of our mother the holy Church,
nor maintained, nor will maintain, or believe any thing to the contrary, and
that it is against all reason, that any man should be condemned of the crime of
Heresy, but only they, that with obdurate obstinacy will stubbornly maintain
and affirm things contrary to the sincerity of our faith. We have by great
and mature deliberation, and to meet with such frauds and abuses, unjust
vexations and exactions granted to the said Suppliants, and do grant, and of
our certain knowledge, and special consent, full power and authority royal,
and Delphinale; We have willed and ordained, and do will and ordain by these
Presents; that the said Suppliants, and all others of our Country of Dauphine,
be freed from their courts and process, and whatsoever process any of them shall
have sent forth, for the causes above mentioned; We have of our certain
knowledge, full power and authority royal and Delphinale, abolished, and do
abolish, made, and do make of none effect by these Presents, and we will that
from all times past unto this day, there be nothing demanded of them, or wrong
offered, either in body or goods, or good name. Except nevertheless there be
any, that will obstinately and out of a hardened heart, maintain and affirm
any thing against the holy Catholic faith.

Moreover, we have willed and ordained, and do will and ordain, that the
goods of the said Inhabitants Suppliants, and all other of our Country of
Dauphine, that for the causes above mentioned, have been taken and exacted of
any person, in any manner whatsoever, by execution or otherwise; shall by the
ordinance or command of our Court of Parliament of Dauphine, or any other
whatsoever, as also all bills and obligations, which they have given for the
causes above said, whether it be for the payment of fees for the said process or
otherwise, shall again be restored unto them, unto which restitution all such
shall be constrained, that have in any thing, either by sale or spoil of their
goods, moueables or vnmoueables, by detention or imprisonment of their persons
any way wronged them, until they have restored their goods, and things above
mentioned, and obeyed; otherwise to be enforced by all due and reasonable
means requisite in such a case, notwithstanding all appellations whatsoever,
which our will is in any manner be deferred.

And because that by reason of those confiscations, which have been heretofore
pretended, of the goods of those whom they have charged and accused in this
case, diverse more for covetousness, and a desire of the said confiscations, or
part of them, then for justice, do and have put many people in suit, and to
come to the end of their confiscations, have held diverse terms against
justice. We have declared, and do declare by these Presents, that we will not
from hence forward, for the said cause, have any confiscations taken, levied,
or exacted, for us, or by our Officers; and whatsoever right may come unto us,
we do acquit our selves off, and remit unto the children or other inheritours
thereof, against whomsoever shall pretend a right to those confiscations. As
also to meet with these frauds and abuses, offered by the said Inquisitors of
the faith; we have forbid, and do forbid, that any man suffer any of the said
Inquisitors of the faith, to proceed from hence forward against any of the said
Inhabitants of our country of Dauphine, nor restrain any of them for the cause
above mentioned, without express letters from our self touching that matter.
Moreover we have forbid, and do forbid, for the cause aforesaid and the like,
any of our Judges and Officers of our Subjects to undertake any jurisdiction or
knowledge, but all causes and process in the said case, to be sent unto us, and
those of our grand Counsel to us; to whom, and not unto others, we have
reserved the hearing and determination. We therefore command and directly
enjoin you, that our Letters be put in execution from point to point,
according to the form above said, and not other ways, as in such case is
requisite. For it is our pleasure it should be done; and to do it we give you
full power and authority, and commission, and special commandment. We charge
and command all our Justices, Officers, Subjects, Commissioners, and Deputies,
1478.
to give their assistance for the due obedience thereunto.

Given at Arras the 18 of May, 1578.

The Archbishop of Ambrun cease not to proceed against the accused, yea he
was much more animated then before, grounding himself upon that clause of the
aforesaid Letters; If there be not any found rebellious and refractary, and
that obstinately harden themselves in their opinions. And therefore he
pretended not to do any thing against the aforesaid Letters, because they that
had obtained them, made not their appearance in judgment, for their
justification, verifying that they were neither obstinate nor rebellious.
Moreover, the Archbishop extorted from the one part of the Inhabitants af
Frassiniere, Argentiere, and the valley Loyse, a disclaiming of those requests
presented to the King, declaring that there were no people in Dauphine less
free from Heresy, then they that were most forward to purge themselves before
the King: He caused information again to be made, and that which we have
observed in the said informatio^s is, that the witnesses produced by the
Archbishop were almost all Priests or Officers of the said Archbishop, as
namely William Chabassal Canon of Ambrun, Francis Magnici, Priest of the valley
Loyse, Rostain Payan, Curat of Saint Marcelin, Anthony Garneri Priest, Aimar
Raimond Chaplin, Michael Pierre, Curat of Frassinieres, al which deposed, that
all they that had recours unto King Lewis the eleventh were Waldenses. The
Archbishop being thus strengthened, by their disclaim, and these witnesses,
and the assertion of one John Pelegrin, who was corrupted with silver, to
accuse the Waldensis of such ancient calumnies, as long since have been laid
upon the Christians of the Primative Church, that is, that they assembled
themselves together in dark places, to commit whoredom, the candels being put
out; he sent to the Court, to justify himself against those informations given
to the King, that he pursued the Waldenses, rather to get their goods, then for
any zeal he bare to the Catholic faith: but this only witness prevailed but
little, against many other, who would never depose any thing against their
conscience, that they had ever seen amongst the Waldenses anything that had but
the least appearance of that villainy wherewith the aforesaid false witness had
charged them. Nevertheless the Archbishop cease not to annoy the foresaid
accused to the uttermost of his power, in such sort, that wanting means to
defray the charge, the greatest part of them betook themselves to flight,
there being only amongst those that were persecuted, one James Patineri, who
openly auerred the unjust vexation, to the prejudice of the Letters obtained of
his majesty, and demanded a copy of the proceeding, that he might right
himself by Law. The Archbishop leaves him in peace, pursuing those that
wanted courage to oppose themselves against his violences. But the Consuls of
Frassiniere, Michael Ruffi, and John Girand, sped not so well: For having been
cited to appear before the said Archbishop to answer both in their own
name, and of the inhabitants of their Valley; having answered that they had
nothing to say before the said Archbishop, because their cause was then
depending before the King and his Counsel, which they then openly auerred, and
demanded a Copy off: being pressed to answer, notwithstanding their
protestations, and auerment to the contrary, Michael Ruffi answered in his own
language, and nodding his head, Veici rages, and upon a new instance or
importunity veici vna bella raison; the Archbishop being strangely moved
against the said Consuls for this their contempt, sent them to the fire without
any other Indictment. But the Archbishop stayed not long after them; for he
died, and not without an evident proof of the justice of God, presently after
the said execution. Thus ended the persecution of the said Archbishop, and his
Commissioner John Veileti in the year one thousand four hundred eighty seven.
1487.


Now we may observe one notorious villainy in the process framed by this Monk
Veileti: For having the said process in our hands, we found certain bills or
tickets, in which the said Commissary took the answers of those that were
accused, simply as they were taken from their mouths; but we have afterward
found them strangly stretched and extended in the process, and many times quite
contrary to that which was in the sumptum as they call it, inuerting and
altering the intention of the said accused, making him to say that which he
never thought of; as for example: Inquire whether he believed, that after the
words of the Sacrament were pronounced by the Priest in the Mass, the body of
Christ was in the Host, in as gross a manner and as great, as it was upon the
cross; If the Waldenses shall answer no; Veileti sets down the answer thus;
That he had confessed, that he believed not in God, or at least wise his
Scribe, he dictating it. Again, Inquire whether we ought not to pray unto
Saints; If he answer no: they set it down, that he railed and spoke ill of the
Saints. Inquire whether we are to reverence the Virgin Mary, and pray unto her
in our necessities; If he answer no: They set it down in writing, that he
spoke blasphemy against the virgin Mary. Behold here the fidelity of the said
Monks inquisitors, in an action so important, and it could not be without the
great providence of God, that such impiety should be conserved and kept unto
this present time, that men might see with what spirit they were led, that cut
the throats and burnt the faithful of the Church, after they had oppressed
them with impostures, demanding of us nevertheless, where these faithful of the
Church were, which they have massacred before these times wherein we live.

And if the Reader desire to know, how such Process, and Indictments are come to
our hands; here he may see again, that it has not been without the great
providence of God, that they themselves that have committed these cruelties and
villainies, are they that have kept the said papers and process in their
libraries, and places wherein their Records are laid; as namely the
Archbishops themselves of Ambrun; John and Rostain and others until the time
that this City being recovered out of the hands of the Conspirators, in the
year one thousand five hundred eighty five, 1585.
and brought under the obedience of the King, by Monsieur the Mareshal de
l'esdignieres; all the said process and proceedings attempted, and intended for
many hundred years together, against the said Waldenses, were cast into the
street, by reason that the Archbishops house was set on fire, by the enemies
themselves, with an intent to defend a tower, called Tour Brune, whether they
were retired, and to cut off a Gallery of wood, by which the Archbishop had
passage to the said Tower. The Lord de Calignon of happy memory, and whilst he
lived being Chancellor of Nauarra, being there; and the Lord of Vulcon at this
present, Counselor to the King in his Court of Parliament at Grenoble, they
caused the said Indictments long since framed against the Waldensis to be
gathered together, from whence we have collected that which concerns the
cruelties, and lewd carriage of the said Monks Inquisitors, and their
adherents, as also, that which hereafter follows touching the Waldenses in
Dauphine, and the persecutions of the Archbishops of Turin against the
Waldensian Churches of Pragela by their Commissaries.

Hitherto we have not found that any have hotly pursued the Waldenses by war;
but Albert de Capitaneis, Archdeacon of Cremona, sent against them by Innocent
the eight, in the year one thousand, four hundred, 1488.
eighty eight, began to entreat the assistance of the Kings Lieutenant in
Dauphine called Hugnes de la Paln, who for this service levied troops of men,
and marched to those places, where the said Albert told him there were any of
the Waldenses, namely in the valley of Loyse. And to the end the business should
seem to be undertaken according to a form of justice, and to give the better
authority to that which by them should be executed, the said Lieutenant of the
King took in his company a Counselor of the Court, named Mr. John Rabot.
Being arrived at the said valley Loyse, they found none of the Inhabitants, to
whom they might speak a word; for they had all retired themselves into their
cauernes into the high mountains, having carried thither with them their
little children and whatsoever was most precious unto them, and fit for
nourishment. This Lieutenant of the King caused a great quantity of wood to be
laid at the entrance of their caves or cauernes, and fire to be put unto it, in
such manner that either the smoke by smothering them, or the fire by burning
them, constrained a great number, to cast themselves headlong from their
cauernes upon the rocks below, where they ended their lives, being broken in
pieces, and if there were any amongst them that durst to stir, he was
presently slain by the soldiers of the said County of Varax, Lord of Paln.
This persecution was very extreme; For there were found within the said
cauernes four hundred small infants, stifled in their cradles, or in the arms
of their dead mothers. It is held for a certain truth amongst the Waldensis
of the neighboring Valleis, that there then died above three thousand persons,
men and women of the said Valley. And to say the truth they were wholly
extirpated, in such sort, that from that time forward, the said Valley was
peopled with new Inhabitants, there was no family of the said Waldenses that
ever took footing there; which is a certain proof that all the Inhabitants
thereof of both sexes died at that time. This Lieutenant of the King, having
destroyed the said Inhabitants of the Valley Loyse, fearing left the Waldenses
should settle themselves there again, and to the end they might not one day be
troubled again to chase them out, he gave the goods and possessions of the
said Valley, to whom it pleased him, which was no sooner parted amongst them,
but the Waldenses of Pragela, and Frassinieres had provided for their safety,
attending the enemy at the passages, and narrow straites of their Valleies, in
such manner, that when the said Leiutenant of the King came to invade them, he
was constrained honestly to retire. Albert de Capetaneis being called elsewhere
by his Commission, surrogated a certain Monk of the Order of Saint Francis,
named Francis Ploieri, who began to inform anew against the Waldenses of
Frassiniere, in the year one thousand four hundred eighty nine. 1489.
He cites them to appear before him at Ambrun, and for not appearing, he
excommunicateth them, curses and recurseth them, and in the end condemned them
for Heretics, partinacious, and backsliders, to be delivered to the secular
power, and their goods confiscated. To this judgment there gave assistance, in
behalf of the Court of Parliament in Dauphine, a certain Counceller thereof
named Ponce, to the end that this mixed judgment might be without appeal. The
sentence was pronounced in the great Church at Ambrun, afterward fastened upon
the door of the said Church in a great Table, in the lower part whereof, there
were thirty two Articles of the belief of the said Waldenses, that is to say,
against the Mass, Purgatory, the Invocation of the Saints, Pilgrimage, the
observation of Feasts, distinction of Viandes upon certain days, and other
matters that were affirmed by the said Waldenses.

But this Inquisitor added to the Articles of their belief, that they held,
that for the augmentation of humane kind, a man might company with his own
sister, niece, or other in any degree of proximity whatsoever, because God has
said, Increase and multiply.

Again, that every man that burns in lust, may carnally know any woman
whatsoever, without sinning, because the Apostle says, that it is better to
marry then to burn, and because it is said in the Gospel (qui potest capere
capiat) interpreting it thus, catch he that catch can.

Now the informations upon which they grounded their sentence being come to our
hands, this imposture has been dicouered to their own condemnation: for there
is not any witness, or at leastwise the greatest part of those that were heard;
but they were Priests or Monks, who being demanded by the said Monk, whether
they knew this belief contained in the aforesaid Articles to be true,
answered, that they never knew, amongst the Waldenses any such things either
taught or practiced.

In the same bundle or bag of process against the Waldenses, Sur le col de cost
Plane.
there is there one framed against two Pastors, who were taken, about the hill
in the side of the Plain, the one named Francis Gerondin, the other Peter
James, 1492.
in the year one thousand four hundred ninety two. Being demanded why the
Sect of the Waldenses grew and increased so fast, and for a long time together
had spread it self into so many places. This Monk thus sets down the answer
of the Pastor Gerondin; That the dissolute life of the Priests was the cause,
and because the Cardinals were covetous, proud, luxurious, being a thing known
unto all, that there was neither Pope, Cardinal, nor Bishop, that kept not
their whores; few or none that had not their youth for Sodomy: and therefore it
was an easy matter for the VValdensian Pastors, to persuade the people, that
the Religion of such scandalous persons was not good, since their fruits were
so bad. And presently after, the said Pastor being demanded, what they taught
touching Luxury: They make him to answer, that luxury is no sin, except it be
betwixt the mother and her child. As if it had been possible that the Pastors
could have drawn the people from the Church of Rome by condemning the luxury
of the Priests, if they themselves should teach, that luxury was no sin.
Again, being demanded why the incest of the child with the mother was a sin,
they make him to answer; because God has forbidden it; And being asked, where
he has forbidden it, they make him to say, that Christ Jesus said unto John
before he ascended up into heaven, Guard to dove ser ay failli vna volta non
tornar piu. That is to say, Take heed thou enter not into that place from
whence thou once came. And all this was thus set down and subscribed, not
only by the dictat and appointment of the said Monk, but by the approbation
and signature of the Councellor Ponce, and one Oronce Judge of Briancon. Wherein
appears the private conspiracy, and unjust confederation of the said
Inquisitors, in that they were not content to persecute them with violence, but
to oppress them with calumnies, making the said Pastors to answer so unaptly
and childishly touching those things wherein (as it shall appear in it due
place, that is to say, in their exposition upon the sixth Commandment) the said
Pastors were thoroughly exercised in the Scriptures, and therefore that it is a
plain imposture which they have forged, and an idle tradition, in which
exposition they leave nothing to say against luxury and incontinency of all
that is taught us in the word of God.

This persecution was very extreme: for the Waldenses being condemned by the
Inquisitor as Heretics; Ponce the Counselor, and Oronce Judges, sent them to
the fire without appeal; and that which multiplied the number of those that
were persecuted, was, that whosoever did any way mediat for them, whosoever he
were, whether it were the child for the father, or the father for the child, he
was presently imprisoned, and his indictment framed, as a favorer of
Heretics.

In the year one thousand four hundred ninety four, Anthony Fabri Doctor and
Canon of Ambrun, and Christopher de Salliens Canon Vicar, and Official of the
Bishop of Valence, had Commission from the Pope to commence suit against the
Waldensis in Dauphine, otherwise called Chagnards. Fabri the Inquisitor, and
one Gobandi Notary of Ambrun and Secretary to the said Inquisitors carried to
Ambrun a certain indictment framed against Peironette of Beauregard in
Valentinois, the widow of one Peter Berand, of whom we do not make mention
for her constancy, but because she delivered in her answers many things that
may add some things to this History.

Being therefore demanded whether she had seen, or understood of any of the
Pastors of the Waldensis, she answered at the first, that she had not, being
resolved to answer to all interrogatories negatiuely. The Inquisitors
ordained, that because she had not satisfied their demands, she should be
conveyed to the prison of the Bishop of Valence, who being threatened to be
further urged touching the question, confessed that about some twenty five
years since, there were two men clothed in gray, that came to her husbands
house, and that after supper, the one of them asked her, N'aues vous iamais
auui parlar d'un plen pung de mond, que si non era tot lo monde seria afin.
That is to say, Whether she had heard any speech of a handful of people that
are in the world, without which the world must have an end. Having answered
that she never heard any speech therereof, but of one Monsen Andre, Parson of
Beauregard, who often told her, that there was a small number of people in the
world, without whom the world must perish; and that then he likewise told her,
that he was now come thither, to confer with her about that little flock, and
to give her to understand, that they were the men, that had learnt by the
Commandments of God, how to serve him, and that they traveled about the world
to instruct men, how they ought to adore and honor him, and to reform the
abuses of the Church of Rome. Again, that among other things he told her,
that we ought not to do any thing to another, which we would not have done
unto our selves; That we are to worship one only God, Who is only able to
help us, and not the Saints departed; That we ought not to Swear; That we
are to keep faith in marriage, and to keep holy the Sabbath day, but that
theee was no necessity of observing other Feasts. That Ecclesiastical persons
were too rich, which was the cause why they maintained their strumpets, and
lived scandalously; and that of the Pope he said in his language; Autant crois
and autant maluais es lo Papa coma neugun autre, and per co non ages de
poissansa. That is to say, that the Pope is as bad, or rather worse then any
other, and therefore he has no power. Again, that he taught that there was
no Purgatory, but only Paradise for the good, and hell for the wicked. And
therefore all the singings and suffrages for the souls of of the dead, by the
Priests, avail nothing; nor the walks, and goings and commings of the Priests
about the Churchyards, singing Kirieleison. As also, that it was better to
give to the poor, then to offer unto Priests, and that it was a vain thing to
bow the knee before the images of Saints.

She was sent back to prison, and the next morrow called again: but
persisting in her former speech, she added, that the said Pastors had told
her, that the Priests that received money for the Masses they sing, were like
Judas that sold his Master for silver; and they that gave money for their
Masses, were like the Jews, that bought Christ with money.

These Inquisitors discharged this Peironette, until they were otherwise
advised, having first drawn from her, whatsoever she knew, of the assemblies
of the Waldenses, of such persons as frequented them, of the places and times,
which afterward brought great trouble to the said Churches of the Waldenses,
and gain and prey to the Inquisitors.

In the year of our Lord, 1597.
one thousand four hundred ninety seven, the Archbishop of Ambrun, named
Rostain, would know at his arrival, how things had passed until then, against
the Waldenses of his Dioces, and finding that they that dwelt in the valley of
Frassiniere, had been excommunicated by the Inquisitors that had then framed
their indictme^ts, and that they had delivered them to the secular power,
nothing hindering the execution of the sentences pronounced against them, but
their flight, he would not enter into the said Valley, though he were earnestly
requested, by one Fazion Gay, an inhabitant of the said Valley, saying, that
they had been condemned authoritate Pontificis Romani, and therefore he might
begin his journey unto them inconsulto Pontifice: but when our holy father
laxabit mihi manus (says he) and their absolution shall be plain and apparent
unto me, I will go to visit them. FaZion Gay speaking in the behalf of the
said Inhabitants, that made profession to live like good Catholics (say they)
answered, that the King had released of such punishments, provided that they
lived like good Catholics for time to come.

The Archbishop replied, that he would do nothing until he had sent to the
Pope, and that to that purpose he had deputed a Master in Theology, called
Friar John Columbi, and he would write to the Pope and Cardinals, and send them
a verbal report of what had passed against them, and he would request their
advise, how to carry himself in this business. But he gave them afterward to
understand, that he could receive no answer. Hereupon King Charles the eight
of that name, King of France, being departed this life, the said Archbishop
took his journey to the Coronation of King Lewis the twelfth, in the year one
thousand four hundred ninety eight, 1498.
which being come to the knowledge of the said Inhabitants of Frassiniere, and
knowing too well, that they had no reason to expect, that any thing in their
favor could come from Rome, and that the Archbishop would be easily
entreated, to enjoy those goods that had been confiscated by his predecessors,
and that he would be unwilling to make restitution of those goods which they
had annexed to his Arch-bishopricke, they resolved with themselves to send to
King Lewis the twelfth, and to become humble petitioners unto him, that he
would be pleased, to take some order for the restituti-of their goods, the
which the said Archbishop, the Monks Inquisitors, and diverse others detained
from them. The King committed this business, to his Chancellor and his Counsel:
The Chancellor speaking thereof to the Archbishop, he answered, that the
restitution that they demanded, concerned not himself, because the said goods
were confiscated by the Inquisitors long time before he was called to the
Archbishopric of Ambrun: but there were then at Paris (faith he) the
President of Grenoble, and the Chancellor Rabot, that were able to answer to
the said Article, they being the men that had condemned them.

The Waldenses on the other side, were very earnest that the said Archbishop
namely, and especially might be enjoined to make restitution of their goods,
because many parcels of the said goods were annexed to the demaine of the said
Archbishop, and that whenever they demanded them, he sent to the Pope, to
the prejudice of that, which the late deceased King had ordained.

The grand Counsel having taken knowledge of this business, ordained that
nothing should be innouated, in that which concerned the Waldenses of
Frassiniere, the King having written to the Pope, that there might be
Apostolical Commissaries joined with the said Archbishop as Ordinary, to make
an end of this business for this time.

For the prosecution of the said ordinance, there were named for Apostolical
Commissioners, a certain Confessor of the Kings, and the Official of Orleans,
who came to Ambrun, in the year one thousand five hundred and one, and the
fourth of July. 1501.


Here let the Reader judge of the capacity of the said Archbishop, by those
memorials that he has left, and which we have here written out word for word-

The Gentlemen, (says he) the Confessor, and the Official of Orleans, being
arrived at Ambrun, sent unto me a Post for the Packet to bring the Letter
missiues of the King, to the which being received by me, I obeyed, and sent
unto them to entreat them, that they would be pleased to lodge with me as
Monsieur the Confessor had promised to do at Lion, and presently I sent some
of my people, to offer them a lodging, and sent them of my wine: to whom they
answered, that I should no more send any thing, to the end that they of
Frassiniere, should not have them in suspicion, and that therefore they would
not accept of my lodging. And after dinner I went to their lodging, accompanied
with Monsiuer the Abbot of Boscaudon, some of my Canons, and other Officers,
and to the said Commissioners I offered again my house, doing them honor and
reverence, as to Apostolical and Royal Commissioners, and for the honor of
their charge and persons; Then the said Commissioners presented unto me the
said Apostolical and Royal Commissions, requiring of me, as being joined in
the said Commissions, and as ordinary, to take notice of it. The Commissions
being viewed and read, I presently offered my self, with all honor and
reverence, to give them all the aid and favor I could possibly, and that for
my part, there should nothing be wanting, but that the said Commission should
be fully accomplished, offering unto them all the process and indictments that I
had, as they demanded them, notwithstanding a great part of the said process
were remaining in the great Counsel, from the time of that Monsieur the
Chancellor Adam Fumee (who caused my predecessor and his Secretary to be
arested) at Lion until the said Adam Fumee had the original of the process,
which were about the charge of a moyle, not suffering the said Secretary to
retain any writing, as the said Secretary medio iuramento, in their presence
deposed. Afterward Monsieur the Confessor began to blame those Commissioners,
which in former times had been employed therein. And did charge and admonish
(semel, bis, ter, sub poena excommunicationis latae sententiae, trina and
Canonica monitione praecedente) that I should show, and that incontinently, all
the indictments that I had touching this matter, for he was to spend in this
business but a few days, being to return unto the Court, at the Feast of our
Lady in August to the King, who expected him, as his Confessor,
notwithstanding, that before I had offered to deliver him the said process. But
when I saw that he proceeded against all form of Law, and that he purposed to
proceed against the dignity Episcopal, rather by suspensions then
excommunications, and that I was a Judge as well as he, and more then that,
Ordinary, I asked the Copy of their Commissions, and terminum ad respondendum,
according to the form of the Law written. Then Monsieur the Confessor
answered, that he had used the said Censures and Commands not long before
against the Masters of the Parliament of Grenoble, and that therefore he might
use it against my self.

Replying also unto me, You petty Clerks know nothing but two C. C. Codice,
and Capitulo, and two ff. Digestis, and will take upon you to suppress
Divinity, and that he heard the King speak it out of his own mouth, that the
Archbishop of Ambrun would oppose himself against his Commission, and be an
open accuser of the Waldenses. To whom I answered, that he must pardon me, for
I did not believe but that the King had a better opinion of me, because in this
matter I had never traveled but to a good end, as I always intended to do.
Then Monsieur the Confessor continuing in his discourse; spoke these words; Vos
ad me in modum Scribarum and Pharisaeorum Christum accusantium ad Pilatum
accessistis, cum tantis viris Ecclesiasticis ad terrendum me: sed nihil teneo
sub vobis aut domino vestro, and de nihilo vos timeo. That is to say; You are
come unto me as the Scribes and Pharisees, when they accused Christ before
Pilate, and with so many Ecclesiastical persons, to terrify me, but I hold
nothing under you or your dominion, and I fear you not at all. To which I
answered, that I brought no more with me, then those that were accustomed to
bear me company walking through the City. And suddenly he commanded the
lay people to avoid the chamber, then revoked the sentences which he had
thundered out against me, against all form of law, saying; that it was
expedient to use those rigorous terms in the presence of the lay people, and
especially there being some of the Waldenses present, as more at large touching
the kind carriage of Monsier the Confessor, and of matters above spoken of, it
appears by a public instrument.

Thus you see part of the notes of the Archbishop Rostain set down word by
word, wherein we find sundry falsehoods, as for example: He writ in great
grief, that the said Commissioners, heard not above three or four witnesses,
and we find in the said bundle of writings for remembrance, of the Archbishop
Rostain, a Copy of informations wherein there were four and twenty witnesses
heard and examined.

Again he says, that they asked no other question, but if they were good
Catholics or no, to which being well taught, they answered yea, and with that
answer the Commissioners contented themselves: And yet it appears that they
demanded diverse questions touching the Eucharist, Purgatory, Invocation of
Saints, and diverse other points.

Again he says, that the witnesses were fearful and durst not speak, and
yet it plainly appears, that the witnesses produced, were for the most part
Priests and Monks, of the faction of the Archbishop, exhibited by him.

Again, that they suffered nothing to be set down in writing; whereas it
appears, that there are no Indictments where there is more written, then in
those that were framed by the said Commissioners.

But that which troubled the Archbishop most, was that the said Commissioners
gave sentence of absolution touching Contumacy, sine praeiudicio causae
principalis and iuris cuicunque acquisiti; against which the Archbishop
protested, and would not yield his consent to seal the said sentence,
complaining that Monsieur the Official of Orleans had made known by his
proceedings, that he favored the said Waldenses, especially having said openly
at his lodging at the sign of the Angel in Ambrun, that he desired to be but
as good a Christian, as the worst of Frassiniere.

But the greatest hurt came to himself, for he saw that he must restore
diverse viniards belonging to the said Waldenses, situated at S. Clements, S.
Crespin, and at the place Chanteloube, and diverse inheritances at Chateau-Roux,
which his Predecessor named John, had joined to the Demaine of his
Arch-bishopricke.

The Confessor of the King having reported unto him and to his Counsel, what
he knew touching the Waldenses, and how they were absolved of their contumacy,
did ordain that the goods of the said Waldenses should be restored, whereupon
these Letters following were granted by King Lewis the twelfth of that name.

Lewis by the grace of God, King of France, etc.
FOr as much as it is come to our knowledge, that the Inhabitants of
Frassiniere have endured great troubles and vexations, punishments, and
travels, We desiring to relieve them, and that they should be restored to
their goods, moueables, and immoueables, do by these Presents command all those
that detain the said goods, that incontinently and without delay, they desist
and renounce the said goods, and restore them to the said Suppliants, or their
Atturneies for them, every one in his place and rank. And in case of
opposition, refusal or delay; We having regard to their poverty and misery,
wherein they have a long time, and now are detained, without power to obtain
justice, desiring withal Our heart it should be administered unto them, Our
will is to take notice thereof in Our own proper person, warning all those
that shall oppose themselves, or make delay, to appear before Us at a certain
competent day, etc.

Given at Lion the twelfth of Oct. 1501.

These Letters being executed, it was the opinion of most men, that since the
fairest and best part of the goods of the said Waldenses was possessed by the
Lord Archbishop, that there was great reason, that he should give example
unto others; seeing especially, that that which they held, came unto some of
them as a sallary or fee for their punishments, and by the hands of the
Archbishop John his Predecessor.

The Archbishop Rostain answered, that he held none of the goods of the
Frassinieres: only certain goods had been annexed to his Arch-bishopricke
upon good and just cause, and incorporated to his Church, by his Predecessor,
the said goods being within the territories and jurisdiction thereof, in which
no commandment of the King has ever been accustomed to be executed, and
therefore it is not to be believed, that it comes from the will of the King,
being Protector of the Churches, and following the example of his great
predecessors: But yet nevertheless, the said Archbishop being willing to
please our Lord the King, will be content to yield unto the said Inhabitants
of Frassiniere the said vineyards, upon condition that other the Lords and
Masters of Dauphine, deliver that which they have of the said goods, and then
the Archbishop will be content to restore that which he and his Church do
possess.

Thus these poor people were frustrated of their attempt. For there was not
any one that would restore any thing of that which he detained. And therefore
they summoned before the King and his counsel the said Archbishop, Master
Pons Counselor of the Parliament at Grenoble, Peter de Rames, Esquier, Lord of
Poit, Faix de Rames, the Master of Montainard, and of Argentiere, Arrouars de
Bonne, and diverse other ordinary Atturnies, Priests and Burgeses of Ambrun, and
Briancon. They sent to the Court, and having there more friends and credit,
then the Inhabitants of Frassiniere. Their excuse was received, wherein they
declared, that it was not in their power to restore the said goods, before the
Pope had absolved them.

And the Archbishop protested, that he for his part, was ready to restore all
that his Predecessors had united to his Church, provided that they had the
aforesaid absolution. This occasioned such as were less affected and constant,
to assay this way, and to send to Pope Alexander the sixth of that name, then
Bishop of Rome: But they were compelled rather not to go to Rome, but to fetch
a writ of absolution from the Cardinal Legate in France, George of the title of
Saint Xist; which would suffice, and might be obtained with less charge. For
the obtaining whereof they had the Commissary, the Kings Confessor. They sent
therefore one Steven Roux, who who brought two Bulls, one by which he gave
absolution for Simony, theft, murder, usury, Adultery, dedention of Benefices,
destruction of goods Ecclesiastical, violence against Clerks, by beating them,
unlawful oaths, periuries, Frauds, yea Apostasy, and Heresy, and whosoever
had committed any crime, were it never so heinous, this Cardinal absolved them
from all, by his Apostolical authority.

And forasmuch as his Archbishop might pretend, that the said Bull did not
absolve the said people of Frassinieres, having been condemned by the said
Apostolical authority, by Commissioners and Inquisitors deputed by the Pope,
and therefore his mouth was stopped, he brought another Bull, in which there
was especially this clause; Having power from the Pope to decide or determine
any matter, that any other, that has been deputed by that holy Sea, or
substituted can do, yea where there has been an appeal, absoluing all that
have in any manner been condemned.

This poor man thought he had gotten much; and proceeded far in this business;
but the Archbishop Rostain flouted his Bulls, saying that they were obtained
with too great a price and importunity, and that he must have an absolution
from the Pope himself. And so resolved with himself to restore nothing, and
all the rest followed his example. And notwithstanding they had had absolution
from the Pope, yet they would have restored, nothing for he knew well enough
that in those days, all things were sold at Rome, witness those Latin verses
which were written against the said Alexander the sixth.

Vendit Alexander cruces, altaria Christum,
Emerat ille prius, vendere iure potest.
Pope Alexander sold altars, Christ, and his cross,
He bought them, had he not sold, had lived by the loss.
Again, Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae,
Ignis, Thura, Preces, Coelum est venale, Deusque.
Temples and Priests, Altars and Crowns, they sell for pelf,
Fire, Frankincense, Prayers, heaven, and God himself.
which is to be understood of their breaden god in the Mass.

The Archbishop therefore, was the cause, why others kept still those goods in
their possession, without any restitution; and though some particular persons
were afterward called into question, as namely Le Sieur de Montainar, de
Rames, and others, yet they could never have any remedy.

1560.
In the year one thousand five hundred sixty, the Waldenses of Frassiniere and
Pragela, had their Churches furnished with Pastors, who held them in the
exercise of their religion, at that time wherein they persecuted unto death all
those that made profession of reformation. The President Truchon made an
Oration to the States of Prouence assembled the same year, the sixth of
November, of purpose to exterminate the said Waldenses of Frassinieres and
Pragela, saying, that it was necessary to purge the old and ancient Leven,
likely to make sour the whole Country of Dauphine, if some course were not
taken to prevent it. By these States it was re-resolued by open force to
extirpate them, and by arms, and to this purpose Commissions were given forth
to leuy troops of men, and to pass into the said Valleies: but so soon as
the drum was strooken up, and the men in arms throughout Prouence, the
unexpected death of King Francis the second of that name altered the design,
and afterward the said Waldensian Churches in Dauphine continued, as still
they do by the singular favor of God.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Waldensian Churches in Piedmont, and those persecutions
they endured, that are come to our knowledge.
THE Waldenses have had famous Churches in the Valleis of Piedmont, Angrongne,
la Perouse, the Valley Saint Martin Lucerna, and other bordering places for
time out of mind. It is held for certain amongst them, that they are a part
of the Waldenses of Dauphine, Pragela, Frassinieres, and other places their
near neighbors; and that in time being multiplied in so great abundance, that
the Country could not feed them, they were constrained to disperse themselves
at length and at large, where they might best settle themselves. So dear like
brothers, have they been one to another, and notwithstanding they have been
always oppressed with troubles, yet with a most hearty love and charity, they
have ever succored one another, not sparing their lives and goods for their
mutual conservation.

The first troubles that the Waldenses of Piedmont endured, came from the
report of certain Priests, sent thither by the Archbishop of Turin, who
informed that the people that were committed to their charge, lived not
according to the manners and belief of the Church of Rome, neither offering
for the dead, nor caring for Masses, or absolutions, nor to get any of theirs
out of the pains of Purgatory by any of their usual means. The Archbishops
of Turin have persecuted them, as much as lay in their power, making them
odious to their Princes, who understanding of the good report that their
neighbors gave of their mild and honest conversation, Vignaux in his
memorials fol. 7.
and that they were a simple people, fearing God, of a good carriage, without
deceit or malice, loving integrity and plain dealing, always ready to serve
their Princes, and that very willingly they yielded unto them all dutiful
obedience, and that with alacrity: Being in such grace and favor with the
people their neighbors, that they endeavored to bring into Piedmont to their
service, their young people, and to provide their nurses amongst them to bring
up their young infants; the said Princes continued a long time in a purpose not
to molest them: but the Priests and Monks that were frequent amongst them,
gaining nothing by this their belief, charged them with an infinite number of
Calumnies, and whenever they went into Piedmont upon occasion of business,
they always caught one or other, and delivered him to the Inquisitors, and the
Inquisitors to the executioner; In such manner, that there was hardly any Town
or City in Piedmont in which one or other of them was not put to death. For
Jordan Tertian was burnt at Suse; Hypolite Roussier was burnt at Turin;
Villermin Ambroise was hanged at Mean; as also Anthony Hiun, Hugh Chiampe de
Fenestrelles being taken at Suse, was conveyed to Turin, where his bowels were
torn out of his belly, and put into a basin, and he afterward cruelly
martyred: among which the servants of God, there were some who have maintained
that truth, which they have known for above two hundred and fifty years, and
others above a hundred and fifty. But amongst all the rest, the constancy of
one Catelin Girard is worthy the remembrance, who being upon the block whereon
he should be burnt at Revel in the Marquisate of Saluces, he requested his
executioners, to give him a coupple of stones into his hands, which they
refused to do, fearing he had a purpose to fling them at some one or other,
but he protesting the contrary, at the last they delivered them unto him,
Vignaux in his memorials, fol. 7.
who having them in his hands, said unto them; when I shall have eaten these
stones, then shall ye see an end of that religion for which you put me to
death, and so cast the stones upon the ground.

The fires were kindled until the year one thousand four hundred eighty
eight, 1488.
at what time they resolved to assault them by open force, because, besides
that they perceived that the constancy of those whom they did publicly put to
death, drew a great number of others to the knowledge of God, they likewise
found that by this means they should never come to their purposed design. And
therefore they levied men to join with Albert de Capitaneis, one put in
Commission by Pope Sixtus the fourth, and Innocent the eight. There were
eighteen thousand soldiers mustered, besides a great number of the
Inhabitants of Piedmont, who ran to the pillage from all parts. They marched
all at once to Angrongne, Lucerne, la Perouse, Saint Martin Prauiglerm, and
Biolet, which is in the Marquisate of Saluces, as also they raised troops in
Vaucluson in Dauphine, ouerrunning the Valley of Pragela; to the end that being
bound to their own defense, they might not be able to favor their neighbors,
the Waldensian Churches in Predmont. All this was guided by the singular
providence of God, in that they divided their troops by bands, rather out of
their pride then for their better expedition. For notwithstanding they were all
employed in their own defense, and could not succor one another, yet the enemy
by this division did so diminish their forces, that they were every where
beaten, but especially in the Valley of Angrongne, where they made their most
violent assault. For as this leuy of men could not be raised, without some
advertisement that it was against themselves, so accordingly they prepared
themselves to receive them, keeping themselves to the straight passages, where
few men were able to make any assault, being armed with certain long targets
of wood, that did wholly cover them, and wherein the arrows of their enemies
struck, without any hurt to themselves: The foremost being thus armed and
covered, the rest did good service, and with good advantage, with their bows
and crossebowes under the covert of the said targets, and as the enemy thought
to draw near to the passages, the women and children being spectators, upon
their knees cried out in their own language, O Dio aiutaci, etc. O God help
us. Whereat the enemies making themselves merry, amongst other one Captain
Saquet, counterfeiting the said women, was slain, and cast headlong from the
mountain into a deep bottom, which to this day is called the Gulf of
Saquet. At the same time, a certain Captain named le Noir de Montdeni, cried
out to the women that prayed unto God, i miei, i miei faranno la passada, as
much to say, as the soldiers cried out to them to put them to death, was
killed with the shot of an arrow in the throat; which the soldiers perceiving,
and that the rocks, the stones and the arrows covered them, they betook
themselves all to their heels, and the greatest part of them, cast themselves
down from the rocks. This people observed another effect of the providence of
God, and that is, that the enemies approaching to the strongest place by
nature, which is the Valley of Angrongne, called le Pre de la Tour, where they
might have fortified themselves, and made themselves masters of the said
Valley; God sent so thick a cloud, so dark a fogge, that the enemies could
hardly see one another, insomuch that they had no leisure or means to know the
goodness of the place, or to stay there; whereupon the Waldensis gathering
courage, followed the chase in such manner, that being all dispersed, and not
seeing which way they went, the greatest part fell headlong down the
mountains, and put themselves unto flight, quitting themselves of their arms
and their booties, which they had gotten at their entrance in the Valley, where
they had powered out their wine, their corn, and loaded their servants with
their most precious moueables.

It pleased God to touch the heart of their Prince with some compassion of this
poor people. It was Philip the seventh of that name, Duke of Sauoy, and Prince
of Piedmont; who said, that he would not have that people, that had been
always true and most faithful and obedient unto him, to be rigorously handled
by way of Arms; being contented that a dosen of the principal amongst them,
should come to Pignerol, where he was, to ask pardon for all the rest, for
that they had taken arms in their defense, which he gave them to understand by
a certain Bishop whom he sent to Praisut; they deputed the said dosen, to do
whatsoever his Highness required of them; He received them lovingly, and
forgave them all that was past during the war, paying a certain sum of
money for the charges thereof. And forasmuch as he had been informed, that
their young infants were borne with black throats, and that they had four
rows of teeth, and hairy, he commanded that some of them should be brought to
him to Pignerol, which was presently executed, and seeing them all fair and
perfect creatures, he was much displeased with himself, for that he was so
easily persuaded to believe, that which was reported unto him touching this
people, declaring withal, that his pleasure was, that from thence forward they
should live with the self-same liberties and prerogatives, as in former times,
and as all his other subjects of Piedmont did.

Notwithstanding all this, the Moneks the Inquisitors, sent out process every
day, for as many of them as they could apprehend, especially they kept
themselves in ambush in a certain Convent near unto Pignerol, from whence they
delivered them to the secular power. This persecution endured to the year,
1532.
one thousand five hundred thirty two, at what time they resolved to order
their Churches in such sort, that that exercise which was before performed in
covert, might be known of every one, and that their Pastors should preach the
Gospel openly, that is to say, without any apprehension of persecutions that
might happen unto them.

His Highness was speedily advertised of this change, and much moved
therewith, in such sort, that he commanded one Pantaleon Bersor, to speed
himself into the said Valleys with his troops of men, which he so readily
performed, that before the people were aware of it, he was entered their
Valleys with five hundred men, part on foot, and part on horseback, ransaking,
pillaging, and wasting whatsoever was before them. The people leaving their
plough and tillage, put themselves into their passages, and with their slings,
charged their enemies with such multitudes of stones, and that with such
violence, that they were constrained to fly, and to abandon their prey, many
of them remaining dead upon the ground. This news came presently to his
Highness, being likewise told him, that experience had taught them before,
that it was not the way to reclaim and subdue these people by arms, the
places of their habitation being so favorable unto them, they knowing better
the straites and passages of the Country, then the assailants; and therefore
there was nothing to be gotten, when the skin of one of the Waldenses must be
bought with the loss of the lives of a dosen of his other Subjects. He
thought it therefore not good to molest them any more by arms; but only that
they should be taken by retaile, one by one, as they came into Piedmont, and
examplary justice executed upon them, if they changed not their belief, that
so by little and little they might be destroyed, to the astonishment of all
others that dwell in the said Valleys, and so their ruin might be procured
insensibly, and without the danger of any other the Princes Subjects.

All this hindered not, but that they still persisted in their resolution. And
to end that all things might be done in order amongst them, they assembled
themselves together, out of all their Valleys, to Angrongne, in the year one
thousand five hundred thirty five, 1535.
and the twelfth of September; that is to say, all the heads of every families
with their Pastors; where by of them it was certified, that their brethren the
Waldenses of Prouence and Dauphine, had sent into Germany their Pastors, George
Morell, and Peter Masson to confer with Oecolampadius, Bucer, and other the
servants of God, who there preached the Gospel, touching the belief which
they have had from the father to the son, time out of mind: that they had
found that God had been very merciful and gracious unto us, in that he has
preserved us undefiled in the midst of so many Idolatries and superstitions,
which have infected all Christendom in the ages past, This admonition or
remonstrance given by Occolamp. and Bucer to George Morrel and Pet. Masson is
in the Memor. of the said Morel fol. 5.
under the tyranny of Antichrist of Rome. They have encouraged us by holy
aduertisements and reasons given, and exhorted us not to bury those talents
which God has imparted unto us: finding it an evil thing, that we have so
long delayed the time to make public profession of adhearing to the Gospel,
and causing it to be preached in the ears, and to the knowledge of every one,
leaving the events unto God, of whatsoever it shall please him shall fall upon
us by procuring his glory, and the advancement of the Kingdom of his Son.
And afterward having read the letters of the said Oecolampadius and Bucer,
which were sent unto them, as to their Brethren the Waldenses of Prouence and
Dauphine, the Propositions or Articles following, were ordered, read, and
approved, signed and sworn to by all the assistants, with one mind and
consent, to conserve, observe, believe, and retain amongst them inuiolably,
without any contradiction, as being conformable to the doctrine, which has
been taught them from the father to the son for these many hundred years,
and taken out of the word of God.

ARTICLE I. That Divine Service cannot be done, but in spirit and in truth;
For God is a spirit, and whosoever will pray unto him, must pray in spirit.

II. All that have been, or shall be saved, have been chosen of God before all
worlds.

III. They that are saved, cannot but be saved.

IV. Whosoever holds Free Will, denies wholly the Predestination and the
grace of God.

V. No work is called good, but that which is commanded by God; and no work
is evil, but that which is forbidden by God.

VI. A Christian may swear by the name of God, not any way contradicting that
which is written in the fifth Chapter by Saint Matthew, provided, that he that
swears, take not the name of the Lord in vain. Now that man swears not in
vain, whose oath redoundeth to the glory of God, and the good of his
neighbor. Also, a man may swear in judgment, because he that bears the
office of a Magistrate, be he Christian or infidel, has the power of God.

VII. Auricular Confession is not commanded of God, and it is concluded
according to the holy Scriptures, that the true confession of a Christian
consists in confessing himself to one only God, to whom belongs honor and
glory. There is another kind of confession, which is, when as a man
reconcileth himself unto his neighbor, whereof mention is made in the fifth of
Saint Matthew. The third manner of Confession is, when as man has sinned
publikly, an all men take notice of it, so he confess and acknowledge the
fault publicly.

VIII. We must cease upon the Lords day, from all our labors, as being zealous
of the honor and glory of God: for the better exercise of our charity toward
our neighbors, and our better attendance to the hearing of the word of God.

IX. It is not lawful for a Christian to revenge himself upon his enemy, in
any manner whatsoever.

X. A Christian may exercise the office of a Magistrate over Christians.

XI. There is no certain time determined for the fast of a Christian, and it
does appear in the word of God, that the Lord has commanded, or appointed
certain days.

XII. Marriage is not forbidden any man, of what quality or condition soever he
be.

XIII. Whosoever forbids marriage, teaches a diabolical doctrine.

XIIII. He that has not the gift of continency, is bound to marry.

XV. The ministers of the word of God, ought not to be changed from place to
place, except it be for the great benefit of the Church.

XVI. It is not a thing repugnant to the Apostolical communion, that the
ministers should possess any thing in particular, to provide for the
maintenance of their families.

XVII. Touching the matter of the Sacraments, it has been concluded by the
holy Scriptures, that we have but two Sacramental signs, the which Christ
Jesus has left unto us; the one is Baptism, the other the Eucharist, which
we receive to show what our perseverance in the faith is, as we have promised
when we were baptized, being little infants: As also in remembrance of that
great benefit, which Jesus Christ has done unto us, when he died for our
redemption, washing us with his most precious blood.

These Articles being resolved upon by them, astonished the Priests that were
amongst them to gather up the revenues of their Cures, being out of all hope
to see those people reclaimed, and brought unto the obedience of the Church of
Rome by any force, much less of their own acord; and perceiving the door to
be shut against their gain, they retired themselves without speaking a word.
Upon this their retrait, the Mass vanished of it self in the Valleys of the
said Waldenses; And because they had only the new Testament, and some books
of the old, translated into the Waldensian tongue, they resolved speedily to
send to the press the whole Bible, their books being only manuscripts, and
those but a few. They sent therefore to Newcastle in SuitZerland, Suisse. See
the Ecclesiastical History of the Churches of France, page 37 1536.
where they gave fifteen hundred crowns of gold to a Printer, who brought to
light the first impression of the French Bible which was seen in France: and
incontinently in the year one thousand five hundred thirty six, they sent to
Geneua, one Martin Gonin, to provide a large supply of such books which he
should see to be fit for the instruction of the people: but they were
frustrated of their intent, because this good man was apprehended for a Spy,
passing over the hill de Gap by a certain Gentleman named George Martin, Lord
de Champolion, and so soon as he was known to be a Waldensian, he was sent
to Grenoble, and there kept in prison, In the book of Martyrs of our time,
lib. 3 fol. 111.
and afterward in the nightime cast into the River LyZere, for fear lest
he should speak of his belief before the people: for the Monk Inquisitor,
that delivered him to the secular power, told them, that it was not good that
the world should hare him, because (says he) it is to be feared, that they
that hear him, may become worse then himself.

There happened wars in Piedmont, between King Francis the first of that
name, and the Prince of Piedmont, which fell out happily for these poor
people, for so long as those confusions continued, they were at quiet, until
Pope Paul the third of that name, solicited the Parliament of Turin to take
some violent course against them, in doing justice upon them, as upon
pernicious Heretics, whenever they should be delivered into their hands by
the Inquisitors. This Parliament caused a great number to be burnt at Turin, in
immitation of other Parliaments in France, who burnt in those times, those they
called Lutherans.

They had recourse unto the King, presenting unto him their petition, that they
might not be persecuted by the said Parliament for the profession of that
Religion, in the which they and their ancestors had lived for many hundred
years, and that by the permission of their Princes. But they made it worse
with them then it was before; for the King enjoined them to live, according to
the laws of the Church of Rome, upon pain to be chastised as Heretics. He
likewise commanded the Court of Parliament at Turin, to cause all his Subjects
within their jurisdiction, to profess his religion; Adding withal, that he
did not burn the Lutherans throughout his whole Kingdom of France, to make a
reservation of them among the Alps.

The Parliament endeavored speedily to put the commandment of the King in
execution, and for that cause enjoined them upon pain of their lives, to quit
themselves presently of their Ministers, and to receive Priests to sing Mass,
living after the manner of other the Kings subjects. They answered, that they
could not obey any such commands against the commandment of God, whom in what
belonges unto his service, they would rather obey then men. But had not the
King at that time had other employments elsewhere, without all doubt this
Parliament would have made them do that by force, which they would not be
brought unto by simple commands. They therefore contented themselves to
prosecute them by the Inquisition, and to receive from the Monks, those they
condemned to the fire. But afterward in the year 1555, they increased the
persecution. 1555.
For having condemned to the fire, one Barthelmew Hector a Stationer, who was
executed at Turin, because he died with admirable constancy, insomuch that he
edified the assistants and standers by, in such manner, that he drew tears
from their eyes, and words of compassion from their mouths, justifying him
with a mutual applause, which they gave of his good speeches and prayers unto
God. The Parliament took occasion herupon, to do their best endeavor to
overthrow this profession in the very source, and to use the authority of the
King, to enforce this people to live under the laws of the Church of Rome, In
the Book of the martyrs of our time. lib. 8. fol 122.
or miserably to perish. To this end and purpose, the Parliament of Turin
deputed a certain President of Saint Julian, and a Collateral named de
Ecclesia, to transport themselves unto those places, and there to put in
practice whatsoever they thought good, either to reduce or to exterminate the
said people, with promise to assist them, with whatsoever shall be needful to
this purpose, according to the advice and counsel they should receive from
them.

This President with his Collateral, ttooke their journey to Perouse, and
caused Proclamations publikly to be made in the name of the King, that every
one of the Inhabitants was to go to Mass, upon pain of his life. Afterward,
they came to Pignerol, where they cited many to appear before them. Amongst
others, there appeared a poor simple laboring man, whom the President
commanded to cause his child to be rebaptized, which had lately been baptized
by the minister of Saint John near Angrongne. This poor man requested so much
respite, as that he might pray unto God before he answered him. Which being
granted with some laughter, he fell down upon his knees in the presence of all
that were there, and his prayer being ended, he said to the President, that he
would cause his child to be re-baptised, upon condition, that the said
President would discharge him by a bill signed with his own hand, of the sin
which he should commit in causing it to be rebaptized, and bear one day
before God the punishment and condemnation which should befall him, taking this
iniquity upon him and his. Which the President understanding, he commanded him
out of his presence, not pressing him any farther.

Now having framed diverse indictments against some particular persons of the
said Valleys, and made some collections of whatsoever the President could
imagine might hurt the people, he assayed also to win them by the preachings
of the Monks, whom he brought with him into the Valley of Angrongne. Being
therefore come unto the place where their Temple was, he caused one of his
Monks to preach in the presenee of the people, who made unto them a long
exhortation to return unto the Church of Rome, of which he reported many
things which the people believed not. After that the Monk had said as much as
he would, and that he held his peace, the greatest number of the people
required, that the Pastors that were there present, or some one of them for
all, might be permitted, lovingly and mildly to answer to the discourse that
had been made by the Preacher; but the President by no means would give way
thereunto, whereupon there followed a certain rumor or muttering among the
people, which struck the President and his Monks with an astonishment, in
such sort, that they could have been content to have been elsewhere: but
dissembling their fear, the President retired himself, without a word
speaking, to Turin, whether being come, he related to the Parliament what he
had done, and withal signified unto them the difficulties that were, to win
this people by extremities, because if any attempt should be made to take them
by violence, they were resolved to defend themselves, and the places of their
abode being favorable unto them, it was to be feared, it would cost a great
deal of labor, and much blood would be shed, before they could either be
brought into the Church of Rome, or out of the world. That is was the work of
a King to root them out, and a King of Franc; and therefore it was necessary
to send the reports, and to commit unto his own will and pleasure, the issue
of so troublesome an enterprise. This advice was followed, the indictments and
reports were sent to the King, but as the affairs of the Court cannot be
finished but with long time, there passed a whole year, before there was any
other course spoken of, or taken against them, then that of the Inquisitors,
who always delivered some one or other to the secular power; but the year
being expired, there came from the Court express commands of the King to make
them to do that by force, which they would not be brought unto by words, or
friendly usage. The Parliament re-sent the said President of Saint Iulien, who
so soon as he was arrived at Angrongne, he commanded them in the name of the
King to go to the Mass, upon pain of Confiscation of bodies and goods. They
demanded a Copy both of his commission and his speech, promising to answer him
in such a manner, that he should have reason to rest contented: but nothing
could give the President satisfaction, who still pressed upon them to change
their religion, but in vain. For they answered him, that they were not bound
to such commands, against the commandment of God. He commanded that twelve of
the pricipalln amongst them, with all the Ministers and Schoolmasters should
presently yield their bodies to the prisons of Turin, there to receive such
sentence as reason shall require, and he enjoined the Sindics of the said
Valleys to dismiss and suffer to depart presently all strangers, and from
thence forward not to receive any Preachers or Schoolmasters, but such as
shall be sent them by the Diocesan. They answered, that they could not nor
would not obey any such commands as were against God, and that they would not
make their appearance at Turin, because they could not do it without danger of
their lives, and to be molested for their belief.

This Parliament of Turin was in such sort incensed against them, that as many
as they could cause to be apprehended in Piedmont, and the frontiers of the
Valleies, so many they burnt at Turin; among others M. Ieffrey Varnigle
Minister at Angrongne was burnt in the year one thousand five hundred fifty
seven, 1557.
by whose death at Turin in the place of the Castle, the people were much
strengthened and edified, there being present a great number, that saw him to
persist in the inuocaton of the name of God unto his last gasp.

During these grievous persecutions, the Protestant Princes of Germany did
intercede for them, beseeching King Henry the second, to suffer them to live in
peace, in the profession of that Religion wherein they had lived from the
father to the son for some ages past. The King promised to have regard to
this their request, and indeed they continued quiet, until the peace was made
between the King of France and of Spain, and that the Duke of Sauoy was
restored to his estates, that is to say, in the year one thousand five hundred
fifty nine.

1560.
The year after the said restitution of the Country, the Popes Nuntio reproved
the Duke of Sauoy, for that he followed not the steps of the Kings of France in
his zeal, who affecting the Catholic Romish religion, had with all his power
persecuted the Waldenses and Lutherans of the Valleys of Angrongne, and other
their bordering neighbors; and that if he did not join his forces in what
possibly he could to bring them into the bosom of the Church, or to take them
out of world, that his Holiness should have great reason to suspect him to be
a favorer of them. The Prince of Piedmont promised to use all the means he
could, for their reduction or utter subversion; in pursuit whereof, he
commanded them to go to the Mass, upon pain of their lives, and to see their
Valleys laid open to fire and sword. To which command they not yielding
obedience, he set upon them by open force, and gave the charge of this war,
to a gentleman named le sieur de la Trinite; And in the mean while at the
selfsame time he caused them to be pursued by the Monks the Inquisitors,
Iacomel, and de Corbis.

This war is printed in a treatise by it self. And it is likewise set down in
the 8. book of the history the Martyrs of our times. fol. 532.
But forasmuch as the History of this war, is brought to light elsewhere, we
will not enter into any large discourse thereof, only we may here observe,
that after la Trinite had been well beaten with his troops, seeing that the
Lions pawe could stand him in no steed, he covered himself with the Foxes
skin, telling them that what had passed, had befallen them for want of parley
and communication, rather then for any ill will that his Highness bare unto
them; and that if his soldiers had exceeded their bounds, it was because of
that resistance which they found, and that hereafter he would be an
instrument for their conservation, and as desirous to procure their peace, as
at the beginning he showed himself earnest to procure their trouble. And
therefore he counseled them to send certain of the principal amongst them to
his Highness, by whom he would send his commendatory letters, both to the
Prince, and Madame Margarit Duchess of Sauoy, and only sister to Henry King of
France, and that he did assure himself that his Highness would blot out the
remembrance of all that was past: But yet he thought it necessary, that above
all things they should give some testimony of obedience to their Prince; who in
other places was enforced by the Pope to establish the Mass in all his
territories, and therefore they should permit that the Mass might be song in
Angrongne, which was but a thing indifferent unto them, since he did not
require their presence at it, but only that he might write unto his
Highness, that they were his good and obedient Subjects. And moreover, to the
end, that his Highness might not still persist in his opinion, that any
strange minister did make his abode within his Provinces, that it was in their
power to entreat them, to retire themselves unto Pragela for some few days,
and that afterward when his Highness should be pacified toward them, they
might call them home again. It cost him a great deal of labor to gain thus
much of them; for if we entreat our Pastors to retire themselves (say they) it
will be a counsel of the flesh, and God will not bless it; for our enemies
when they shall have gotten this advantage of us, and that we have no man left
to comfort us, to counsel us, to reprove, to exhort us, they will endeavor no
doubt to the utmost of their power, ever to shut the gates against the return
of our good Pastors, by wose ministry, we have been so worthily instructed, and
fortified against a world of temptations. And therefore to the end we may not
be accused as Rebels for recalling them home again, it shall be better for us
not to deprive our selves at all of the fruit of their ministry, and from hence
forward to be reputed for such in serving of God, as preserve those whom he
has sent to preach his word unto us. He is as powerful to preserve us, as he
has been heretofore in times past, and ungrateful wretches we are to doubt
of his assistance, and not to think that we so miserable a flock, the dogs
being chased away, shall not be devoured by the wolves. Those and diverse the
like were the speeches and motions of those that were most clear sighted, and
more zealous then the rest, but yet this could not hinder others from
entreating their Pastors to retire themselves for some few days to Pragela, a
Valley near unto theirs, and peopled with their brethren the Waldenses of
Dauphine. Here a man might perceive the heavy justice of God pon them, and the
beginning of misery, every one to melt into tears, the rocks resounding and
calamities, with cries and lamentations, when even women and infants, conducted
their Pastors to the high mountains, to pass over to the other part of them.
And from other parts, when they saw the principal amongst them, to take their
journey to Turin, to the midst of their enemies, many presaged the evil that
would overtake them, and it seemed unto them that God had forsaken them, at
that time when they had forsaken him in the person of his servants. It came to
pass even as it had been foretold, by those that could not allow of those
counsels of the flesh. For being arrived at Turin, they were presently locked up
in strong prisons, their indictments framed as against Heretics, the passages
guarded to hinder any that might give advertisement of the usage and
intertainment they received, that were deputed to this service. And in the
mean time, la Trinite told them, that he knew that his Highness had agreed to
all that they demanded, and that he had written unto him, that he detained them
for no other cause, but to assure him of their promises for time to come, to
which purpose he likewise raised a Fort which he built near to Angrongne.
Which made them to think hardly of their affairs, in that they could hear no
news of their poor prisoners, and much less would la Trinite suffer them to
send any thither. In the end, having a long time consulted with themselves what
they should do, seeing a Fort built which might curb and bridle them for ever,
if they should suffer it to be brought to perfection; and on the other side,
fearing if they should enterprise any thing against those that labored
therein, that it should cost them their lives that they sent to Turin, they
were in great and extreme perplexities, not knowing what course to take; for
they found, that they had been mocked by that Prater de la Trinite, and
therefore it stood them upon to commit the event to the providence of God, and
to reconcile themselves to him by prayer and fasting, which when they had done,
they called home their Pastors, implored the assistance of their neighbors of
Pragela, who came unto them with their arms, entered into the Temples, wherein
la Trinite had caused them to build Altars, and to place images, and overthrew
the Altars, and laid them level with the ground, rased up the foundations
themselves, brake down the images, besieged the Fort and took it, killed as
many as made resistance, beat the succors that were sent to the said Fort,
put them to flight and slew a great number of them. The Prince Emanuel
Philibert being much offended herewith, would have revenged himself upon those
that he kept in prison; but Madame Margarite interceeding for them, pacified
the Prince, showing that is was necessary for them to consult with themselves
touching that usage and intertainment, his Highness had given to those that
were deputed, and that seeing themselves in the way to a total destruction,
they had taken this oblique means to relieve and to help themselves. His
Highness therefore by the advice and instigation of the Popes Nuntio, had
enforced the said deputies to go to the Mass, and there to ask pardon of
God, the Pope, and their holy mother the Church of Rome, with promise to live
according to the Laws thereof; and afterward sent them to prison, attending
the perfection of his Fort. But seeing himself frustrated of his expectation,
he followed the course proposed by Madame Margarit, under which they have lived
unto this present, which agreement we do not here insert, because it is
elsewhere set down in their History. True it is, that afterward they suffered
at sundry times, sundry persecutions, which they bare patiently, and with much
zeal. Among the rest, that in the year 1570, 1570.
was very extreme. For their Prince being entered into an offensive league
against the Protestants, with many other Princes of Europe, he began to trouble
and to vex his said Subjects of the Valleys of the Waldenses: First by
forbidding them to have any commerce with the Waldensis of Dauphine, upon
pain of their lives; and secondly to assemble themselves in any Synod or
Consultation, but in the presence of the Governor of Castrocaro; for the
fulfilling whereof, he failed not to be present at the first Synod, which they
called at Bobi. The Pastors and Ancients that were there, signified to the said
Governor, that his assistance in their Synods was no way displeasing unto
them, because the matters that were to be handled, were such, as if the whole
world were a witness unto them, the more should their piety toward their God
appear, and fidelity to wards their Prince, being to deliberate of nothing,
but what might tend to the glory of God, and their obedience to their
superiors: And that forasmuch as his Highness took occasion to distrust
them, it must needs be the false information of some of their enemies, and
therefore assuring themselves in their own consciences, that they had never
deserved it, they could not but take this nouelty for a manifest breach of the
treaty and agreement he had made with them, and and a persecution shaking the
free exercise of their religion. They entreated therefore the Governor of
Castrocaro, to retire himself, and not to molest them by any such innovation,
and swarming from the former treaties, at leastwise until that they having
justified themselves before his Highness, it might be otherwise ordered and
provided by him. The Governor stands still resolved to stay there. The Pastors
and Ancients declare against the said the nouelty; The Governor also for his
part protests, not to enterprise any thing herein, but by the express
commandment of his Highness, and that they should be better content, that he
had that charge then any other, because he was willing to do them any good
might lie in his hour, made a good interpretation of all their actions, and
would not fail to make a true report unto his Highness of the fidelity he
perceived to be in their carriage.

He was therefore admitted into their Synod, at the end whereof, he used this
subtilty, that is, he attempted to sow envy and jealousy amongst the Pastors,
giving good words in general, that he had found their order fair and good,
and that he never had believed, that they had proceeded with such zeal, order,
and charity; but yet there was no reason he should wonder that his Highness
had been jealous and distrustful of strange Ministers, because he knew very
well, that they were more violent in their opinions, then the homebred of the
Country, at leastwise the greatest part; for he made exception of Mr. Steven
Noell, whom he knew (says he) to be a peaceable man, and more affectionated to
the contentment of his Highness; and therefore that since his Highness had
resolved not to permit any stranger to inhabit within his Lands, he could not
believe, that Ministers were more exempted then other men, and therefore to the
end he might not be constrained to use his power and authority, to enforce them
to withdraw themselves out of those Countries, that they should do well, if of
their own accordes, they departed somewhether else, which would be far better
and more honorable for them, then that they should stay, till the Prince
should enforce their departure out of his Countries by banishmnet. They
answered, that they could not believe, that his Highness had any such meaning,
as the Governor would seem to persuade them. But that they might be the
better informed of the truth thereof, they would depute some amongst them to go
to his Highness.

The Governor being much moved, that they would give no credit to his words,
nor do any thing by his persuasions, suffered the soldiers of Castrocaro, to
compass the temple, at what time the Preacher was in the Pulpit, and to do
diverse insolences, shooting off their gunnes, and astonishing those who were
disarmed, and thought themselves surprised. Master Steven Noel was entreated to
write to Madame Margarite, which he did: but the Letters by which Madame
assured them, that the Governor had commandment from his Highness to keep
himself within the limits of the treaty passed betwixt his Highness and the
people, remained still in the hands of the said Governor, and in the mean
time, whilst these things were afoote, the Massacre executed in France in the
year 1572 happened, 1572.
which in such a manner puffed up the pride, and increased the courage of the
said Governor, that there was no means to stay his violences; For the
bone-fires of joy being made throughout all Piedmont, because of this effusion
of blood, this Governor persuaded himself, that he should shortly see the
like persecution in the said Valleys, and therefore the people hearing the
Cannons that were shot off, and the great contentment that his Highness took,
they persuaded themselves that they should not long continue in peace, and
therefore they thought their surest course was, to convey those goods that were
most precious unto them, unto the top of the Alps, into the hollow caves
whereof, they had been accustomed to retire themselves in troublesome times.
His Highness being advertised, that his people were resolved, and ready to
defend themselves, thought it not wisdom to hazard the lives of his other
subjects, to bring them into obedience, and so contented himself, that he had
made them to fear; giving command in the mean time, that whenever upon any
occasion they came into Piedmont, they should be apprehended and executed as
Heretics; whereof the people being advertised, they sought such commodities
as were fit to maintain life in Dauphine, in the Valleys of their brethren of
Pragela and Valcluson. Afterward his Highness and Madame Margarite being
departed this life, Charles Emanuel their son and Prince of Piedmont has
maintained them in peace, under the treaty made with their said Highness, his
father and mother. Notwithstanding the which, the Inquisitors have been always
watchful to apprehend one or other, especially to hinder them from speaking of
their belief, when they came down into Piedmont. For in such a case,
(provided that it appear, that they have held any discourse) they have always
condemned them for teaching strange doctrines, and swaruing from the agreement,
whereby it is enjoined, that they broach no new opinions.

The last that has been persecuted for this cause, was a certain merchant of
Lucerna, whose History we will here insert, because by his constancy he did
much edify the people; and that it may appear unto the world, that the Popes
cease not to show how odious unto them, the doctrine of the Gospel is, and
that if it were in their power to rule the hearts of the Kings and Princes of
Europe at their pleasure, the fires at this present should still be burning in
all those places where they have any power or authority.

It was in the year 1601, 1601.
that Barthelmew Copin a Waldensian of the Valley of Lucerna, was at Ast in
Piedmont with his merchandise, at a Fair that should be the next morrow, and
being at table in the evening at supper, with diverse other Merchants, there was
one that began a discourse of the diversities of Religions, and spoke many
things tending to the dishonor of the Waldenses of the Valleys of Angrongne,
and their bordering neighbors. Copin hearing him to speak of his brethren
less modesty then became those that professed themselves to be Merchants, and
of their Religion, to the dishonor of God, he thought it would be a fault in
himself, if he should make no reply to those blaspemies that he heard: He
therefore answered the party that held this discourse, in favor of his
Religion; And what (says he that had been reprehended by Copin) are you a
Waldensian? He answered, Yea. And do you not believe, that God is in the
Host? No, says Copin. Fie upon you, replies the other, what a false Religion
is yours? My Religion (says Copin) is as true, as it is true that God is God,
and as I am sure I shall die. The next morrow Copin was called before the
Bishop of Ast, who told him that he had been advertised of certain scandalous
discourses and opinions, which but the day before he held in the evening at
his lodging, and that he must acknowledge the offense, if he would obtain
pardon, otherwise he would take order for his punishment. Copin answered, that
he had been provoked thereunto, and howsoever, he had said nothing, that he
would not maintain with the danger of his own life; that he had some goods
in the world, and a wife and children; but he had lost the affection he bare
unto those things, neither were they dear unto him, to the prejudice of his
conscience: And as touching his behavior (says he) if it would please the
Bishop to enquire of the Merchants of Ast, who all knew him, whether he were an
honest man, they would all witness for him, that he had never wronged any man,
in that whole time he had traded and conuersed with them; and that being a
Merchant, he was to be dismissed for that cause, for which he was then in that
place, that is, for traffic, and therefore not to be molested. That if Jews
and Turks were permitted to come to Faires, and to traffic throughout all
Piedmont, much more should he be permitted who was a Christian, especially,
since that in that discourse of Religion he did but answer to a question moved
unto him, and that it was lawful for any man to answer, and to give a reason
of his faith, to whom and in what place soever, even by virtue of that treaty
and agreement between the Waldenses of the Valleys and his Highness, which
forbids them to broach new opinions, but takes not from them the liberty to
answer, to whomsoever shall ask any questions of them.

The Bishop harkened not at all to these allegations, but gave commandment,
that he should be sent to prison. The morrow after, the Bishops Secretary came
to visit Copin, and making great profession of love toward him, he said unto
him, that he would have him know as from his friend, that if he did not
acknowledge his fault, he would be in great danger of his life.

Copin answered him, that his life was in the hands of God, and he would never
desire to preserve it to the prejudice of his glory, and forasmuch as he had
but two or three paces to walk in his journey to heaven, his hearty prayer
unto God was, that he would be pleased to give him the grace, not to turn
back. Some few days after, he was examined by a Monk Inquisitor, in the
presence of the Bishop, who tormented him a long time with sweet and gentle
persuasions, endeavoring to win him by fair words, to the abiuration of his
belief: but Copin always convinced him by the word of God, alleging unto
him, that if he should be ashamed of Christ Jesus, or deny him before men,
Christ would be ashamed of him, and deny him before his Father in heaven. The
Monk ended his disputation with these and the like threatening speeches; Go
thou ways thou cursed Lutheran, to all the devils in hell; and when thou shall
be tormented by those unclean spirits, thou will remember those good and holy
counsels, which we have given thee, to bring thee to salvation; but thou
had rather go to hell, then to reconcile thy self to our holy mother the
Church. It is long ago (says Copin) that I was reconciled to our mother the
Church.

After many violent incounters, they caused his wife and a son of his to come
unto him, promising him liberty, and to depart with them if he would amend his
fault by confessing it. They suffered his said wife and son to sup with him
in prison, which time he spent in exhorting them to patience, the wife for that
she should want a husband, the child a father, but yet should assure
themselves, that God would be their father, and more then a husband; and for
his own part he was not bound to love either wife or children more then
Christ, and that they should hold it to be no small happiness, that it has
pleased God to do him that honor, as to be a witness unto his truth, with the
loss of his life, and that he hoped that God would be so favorable unto him,
as to give him strength to endure all manner of torments for his glory. He
committed to the care and charge of his wife, his son and his daughter which
they had in marriage, enioyning her to bring them up in the fear of God. He
commanded his son to obey his mother, for so he should draw down upon him
the blessing of God, he prayed them to pray for him, that God would be pleased
to strengthen him against all temptations, and so having blessed his son, and
taken leave of his wife, they were dismissed out of prison, and he locked up
where he was before. His wife and child shedding fountains of tears, and
crying out in such a lamentable manner, as would have moved the hardest hearts
to compassion. This good man not being content with what he had said unto them
by word of mouth, writ unto her this Lettre following, the original Copy
whereof she delivered unto us, written and signed with the hand of the said
Copin, the superscription whereof was this: To my loving Companion, Susan
Copin. At the Tower of Lucerna.
MOst dear Companion, I have received much comfort by your coming into this
place, and so much the more, by how much the less I expected it: And I think
it was some comfort to your self, that you had the means to sup with me, as
it came to pass but yesterday being the fifteenth of September, in the year
1601, being Saturday. I know not the cause why this was permitted, but all
things are in the hand of God, and whatsoever were the cause; I do not think
we shall ever eat together again. And therefore pray unto God to be your
comforter, and put your trust in him, who has promised never to forsake those
that trust in him. You are wise, and therefore govern our house in such sort,
that you keep our children Samuel and Martha in obedience, whom I command, by
that authority that God has given me, to be faithful and obedient unto you,
for then God will bless them. For the rest, be not grieved concerning my
self, for if God have appointed, that I am come to the end of my days, and
that it pleases the Almighty God, that I shall render up my soul, which he
has long time lent me, my trust in him is, that out of his abundant mercy, he
will receive it into heaven, for the love of his Son Christ Iusus, by whom I
believe, that our sins are blotted cut, even by his precious death and
passion; And I beg at his merciful hands, that he will accompany me unto
the end, by the powerful assistance of his holy Spirit. Be always careful
to pray unto God, and to serve him, for so God will bless and serve you. Take
no care to send me any thing for these three weeks, and then you may send me,
if you please, some money to pay the Iaylor, and some thing else to succor me,
if I live till then. Remember also that which I have often told you, that is,
that God prolonged the life of King Ezechias for fifteen years; but that he
had prolonged mine a great deal more, for it is a long time ago, that you
have seen me in a manner dead, and nevertheless I am yet alive, and I hope and
hold for certain, that he will still preserve me alive, until my death
shall be better for his glory and mine own felicity, through his grace and
mercy toward me.

From the Prison at Ast, Sept. 16. 1601.



The Bishop of Ast was much troubled, what to determine concerning this poor
man: For if he should let him go, they feared a scandal, and that many would
gather heart and courage, to speak with a loud voice against the Romish
Religion. On the other side, there was a clause in the treaty made between his
Highness and the Waldenses, which cleared him from all offense, in these
words. And if any question shall be moved unto them, touching their faith,
being in Piedmont with other his Highnesses Subjects, it shall be lawful for
them to answer, not incurring thereby any punishment real or personal. Now
he was asked the question, and therefore to be quit from blame: But the Bishop
would not have it said, that he had committed him to prison unjustly. To the
end therefore, that his death might not be imputed unto him, and it might not
be thought, that he sent him away absolved, he sent his indictment to Pope
Clement the eight, to understand what course he should take herein. It could
never be known what answer the Bishop had; but shortly after he was found
dead in prison, not without some appearance, that he was strangled, for fear
least if he should have been publicly executed, he might edify and strengthen
the people by his confession and constancy. After his death he was condemned to
be burnt, and so being brought out of prison, his sentence was read in the same
place, and cast into the fire. And this was the last of the Waldenses, that is
come to our knowledge, that has been persecuted to the death for his belief.

CHAP. V. Of the Waldenses inhabiting in the Valleys of Mean and Maites, and
the Marquisate of Saluces, and the last persecutions that they suffered.
AT what time the Waldenses of Dauphine dispersed themselves in Piedmont, there
were some that made their abode in the Marquisate of Saluces, in the Valleys
Maties and Mean, and the parts thereabouts. These were not forborne during the
grievous persecutions which their brethren of the Valleys of Angrongne, Saint
Martin, and others suffered. All their refuge was to fly into the said
Valleys, namely when the said Governors of the said Marquisate persecuted them
by the commandment of the Kings of France, who condemned to death, within
their Realms all such as made profession of the same belief that they did.
Now the deceased King of Happy memory Henry the Great and fourth of that name,
having given to his Subjects an edict of pacification, the Waldenses that lived
in the Marquisate, inioyed the same privileges, that the other Subjects did of
the same Realm; but when afterward by the treaty with the Duke of Sauoy, la
Bresse was changed for the Marquisate of Saluces, the poor Waldenses were
deprived of the free exercises of their Religion, within the jurisdiction of
the said Marquisate, for at the instance of the Nuntio of Pope Clement the
eight, the free liberty of their Religion was not only interdicted; but by a
new edict all they were banished, that within the said Marquisate, made
profession of any other Religion, then that of the Church of Rome: and for the
better furtherance of their speedy departure, there were sent to the said
Valleys and Marquisate, a great number of Monks Inquisitors, who went from
house to house; examining the consciences of every one, by which means there
were above five hundred families banished, who retired themselves into the
Realm of France, but especially into Dauphine. And to the end, that in those
places into which they were come, it might not be cast in their teeth, that
they were banished out of their Countries, for some wickedness that they had
committed, but that it was only the zeal they bare to their religion, that
had made them wanderers in the world, they made this Declaration following, in
the year 1603. 1603.


The Declaration of the Waldensis of the Valleys Maties and Mean, and the
Marquisate of Saluces, made in the year 1603.
FOrasmuch as time out of mind, and from the father unto the son, our
Predecessors have been instructed and nourished in the doctrine and Religion
whereof from our infancy we have made open profession, and have instructed our
families, as we have learnt of our forefathers; As also that during the time,
that the King of France held the Marquisate of Saluces, it was lawful for us
to make profession, not being disquieted or molested, as our brethren of the
Valleys of Lucerna, la Perouse and others; who by an express treaty and
agreement, made with our Soueraign Prince and Lord, have inioyed unto this
present, the free exercise of the reformed religion; but his Highness being
persuaded by evil council, and ill affected people, rather then his own
will, has resolved to molest us, and to that end has published an edict: To
the end therefore that it may be made known to all men, that it is not for any
crime committed, either against the person of our Prince, or for any rebellion
against his edicts, or the committing of any murders or theft, that we are
thus tormented, and spoiled of our goods and houses; We declare, that being
certainly assured and persuaded, that the doctrine and Religion taught and
followed in the reformed Churches, as well of France, Switserland, Germany,
Geneua, England, Scotland, Denmark, Suedia, Polonia, as other Realms,
Countries, and Signories; whereof we have unto this present time, made open
profession, under the obedience of our Princes and Sovereign Lords, is the
only true doctrine, and Christian religion, ordained and approved of God,
which only can make us agreeable unto him, and conduct us to salvation: We
are resolved to follow it, with the loss of our lives, goods and honors, and
to continue therein the remainder of our lives. And if any shall pretend that
we are in an error, we require him to make us see our error, and offer
incontinently to abjure, and do likewise promise, to follow that which shall be
proved unto us to be the better, desiring nothing so much, as with an assured
and safe conscience, to follow the true and lawful service, which we poor
creatures owe unto our Creator, and by that means to attain to the true and
eternal felicity. But if any shall go about, by force and constraint to cause
us to forsake, and abandon the true way of our salvation, and to enforce us to
follow the errors and superstitions, and false doctrines invented by men, we
desire a great deal rather to abandon our houses, our goods, and lives too. We
therefore humbly beseech his Highness, whom we acknowledge to be our lawful
Prince and Lord, not to suffer us to molested without cause, but rather permit
us to continue so long as we live, and our children and posterity after us, in
that obedience and service, which unto this day we have rendered unto him, as
faithful and loyal Subjects; and so much the rather, because we demand no
other thing of him, but that we yielding faithfully unto him, that which we are
bound unto by the express commandment of God, it may likewise be lawful for
us, to render unto God, that homage and service, which we owe unto him, and he
requires at our hands in his holy word.

Beseeching in the mean time (in the middle of our exile and calamity) the
Reformed Churches to hold us, and acknowledge us, to be true members
therereof, being willing to seal with our blood (if God will have it so) the
Confession of faith made and published by them; which we acknowledge in all
things, and throughout, conformable to the doctrine, taught and written by the
holy Apostles, and therefore truly Apostolical. We promise to live and die
therein. And if so doing, we be afflicted and persecuted, we yield hearty
thanks unto God, who has done us that honor to suffer for his name; leaving
the issue of our affairs, and the justice of our cause, in the hands of his
divine providence, who will deliver us, when and by what means it pleases
him. Humbly beseeching him, that as he has the hearts of Kings and Princes in
his hands, he will be pleased to mollify the heart of his Highness, to take
pity of those, that have never offended him, or purpose to offend him, to the
end he may hold and acknowledge those to be more faithful, loyal, and
obedient to his service, then they are that provoke him to such persecutions.
In the the mean time that he would be pleased to support us in the midst
of these temptations, and strengthen us with Patience and Constancy, to
persevere in the profession of the truth unto the end of our lives, and our
posterity after us,

Amen.
This persecution has continued unto this present time, at the instance of Pope
Paul the fifth, and his Nuntio, who still troubles and vexes this poor
people, by his Monks the Inquisitors. They have made some to alter their
opinions, who had no power to quit themselves of their goods, but have
accommodated themselves to the world: but the greatest number persisted
constant in calling on the name of God, choosing rather to be banished here on
earth, from their native countries, then to be deprived of eternal life;
hating their Possessions, their Country, their Houses, being the places where
they could not inhabit, whithout the denial of Christ and his truth.

CHAP. VI. Of the Waldenses inhabiting in the New Lands, and the persecutions
which they have suffered.
THe New lands of which we are here to speak, are in the Alps, in the
Frontiers of Piedmont, Dauphine, and Prouence, of which the chief City is
Barcelona or Barcelonette. Within the said Lands, there are certain Villages,
which have been peopled by the Waldenses time out of mind, placed in the best
part of the said Lands amongst others Iosiers. These places have continued a
long time, the Princes of Piedmont nothing regarding the abode of the said
peoples within their Provinces: but the Priests made them odious to the world,
because they were unprofitable unto them, by not living after the manner of
other people, who contributed unto them for the living and for the dead; in
such sort, that when his Highness persecuted in his state, those that had quit
themselves of the Laws of the Romish Church, these were not forgotten,
especially when the Governors of the said Valley opposed themselves against
them. These were therefore of the number of those, that were summoned in the
year 1576, to go to the Mass, or to forsake his Highness Country; 1576.
wherein they found not better means to help themselves, then to join
themselves unto others, who being threatened with the same banishment, had
recourse to the Protestant Princes, beseeching them to intercede for them to
their Prince, that he would be pleased, not to trouble them in such manner for
their belief, which they had made profession off, from the father to the
son, for many hundred years; during which time, their Princes have not had
any Subjects, that have yielded unto them more faithful obedience then they,
not giving place unto any other in their duties, submissions, and
contributions, which they have always most willingly paid to their Princes,
as they were still ready to continue, yielding obedience to their commands,
only that that they might not be troubled in their consciences.

The Prince Palatine of the Rhine delegated to the Prince of Piedmont a
Counselor of his State, with certain other honorable personages. Being
arrived at Turin, they saluted his Highness in the name of the said Prince
Palatine, and delivered their Letters of Credence. He was heard by the Prince
Emanuel Philibert, very peaceably. This Councellor gave him to understand, that
the only charity of their Master toward Christians of the same Religion that
he professed, had moved him to mediate for them, that his Highness would be
pleased to suffer them to live peaceably in the exercise of their Religion, not
offering any violence to their consciences: That he would account this benefit
as done unto himself, and he should oblige unto him all the Protestant
Princes of Germany, who likewise made the selfsame request by their mouths.
That he should have God the more favorable, and his Subjects the more
faithful, if he did not show himself inexorable; That the confusions that
have happened in all the States of Kings and Princes, that have indeauoured to
reign and reclaim the souls of their Subjects by arms, and to reduce them
by violence, may make wise all other Princes, which were not yet come to such
extremities; That forasmuch as they that have not used rigorous courses, have
won the hearts of their people to be more faithful unto them, this means
being in his power, they humbly beseeched him to imitate herein the most
debonaire and gentle Princes.

It appeared by his Highness answer, that he took but little pleasure in this
intercession, but much more by the effects that followed. For he answered,
that notwithstanding that for his part he made no enquiry how the Prince
Palatine of the Rhine, and other Princes of Germany, governed their Subjects,
and being a Sovereign Prince, he was not to yield an account unto any, of his
courses and resolutions, yet nevertheless he thanked the said Prince, and all
the rest that were thus charitable toward him, his Estate, and his Subjects,
as to wish their content and peace: but that the miseries and calamities that
have happened amongst them, by the diversity of Religions, had made him to
desire to have in his State but only one, and that must be that which he there
found, and in which he had been always brought up, for fear lest under the
mantle of Religion, and liberty of conscience, he must dispute with his
subjects as a companion, of those things which by just title were in his power
to determine as a Master; as it had happened to other Princes in Europe, that
in this case had no power to rule their Subjects as Soueragines. And that in
might appear unto them, that he loved peace, he had maintained his Subjects
the Waldenses dwelling in his State in the Valleys of the Alps, under an edict
which he caused to be observed vnuiolably. That if without the said Valleys he
had in his State any itching busy spirits affecting novelties, those he caused
to be punished as Rebels. That he thought, that as the said Princes had
compassion of his Subjects, that they might enjoy the exercise of their
Religion, so he assured himself, that they would not take it in ill part, (so
just and judicious they were) if he provided for his surety, and preservation
of his State, by punishing the seditions, that he would inquire, in
consideration of this their intercession, more narrowly into the estate of his
Subjects, making profession of their Religion, and would give them some
refreshing.

And because they had spoken particularly of a certain Minister named Giles,
whom he detained locked up in a dungeon, he caused him to be brought forth and
placed in a chamber, and after inquiry made of what he was accused, that is,
that he had writ to those of Geneua to the prejudice of his service, he set him
at liberty. He disclaimed a certain captain of a Castle of the Valley Mean,
for some thing he had done against the Waldenses of the said Valley, but for
the rest, the Counselor was hardly gone half his way home-ward, but the
persecution grew greater then it was before. Amongst others, the Governor of
the New-lands in the end of November following, proclaimed with the sound of a
trumpet, that whosoever would not within the space of a Month go to Mass,
were to avoid the Lands and Territories of his Highness within that time,
upon pain of confiscation of body and goods. These poor people of the New
lands, they could convey themselves to no place without danger of their lives.
For in Prouence they burnt those whom the Parliament of Aix called Lutherans.
In the Territories of Honorat Earl of Tendes, they were delivered into the
hands of the Executioners. Gonsague Duke of Neuers, commanding for the King of
France, in the Marquisate of Saluces, put them to death. In Dauphine, as many
as the Archbishop of Ambrun could apprehend, so many he caused either to rot
in the dungeons, or to perish in the Tower Brun, with cold and famine; and out
of Piedmont they were banished. There remained no other succor but in the dead
time of winter, to make their passage by night over a high mountain almost
inaccessible, covered with ice and snow, into the Valley of Frassiniere, if
possibly they could. They therefore betook themselves unto the mountain,
about the feast of the Nativity of our Lord, in the coldest time of all the
year: But before they could come to the height thereof, the greatest part of
the women and children were benumbed with cold, and the night ouertaking them,
being in the top of the hill, they were enforced to lie upon the ice, where a
great part of them in the morning were found dead. They that escaped the
danger, retired themselves into the Valley of Frassiniere. Now after that the
houses of these poor people had remained for a time void of Inhabitants, there
was no man that would seize or take possion of their Lands, much less till and
husband them, and therefore their Governors permitted the said Waldenses to
continue there, and to tolerate them, making profession of their belief; only
they were to depart out of the confines of the State of the Prince, for the
exercise of their Religion. They have re-peopled the said Valley. Thus you have
heard as much as is come to our knowledge, touching their sufferings, howsoever
they have been persecuted from time to time, from the father to the son, as
the rest of the Waldenses in Dauphine and Piedmont, but their indictments are
not come to our hands.

CHAP. VII. Of the Waldenses dwelling in Calabria, and the persecutions which
they have suffered.
ABout the year of our Lord 1370, 1370.
the Waldenses of the Valleys of Pragela and Dauphine, grew to so great a
number in so small a Country, that they were enforced to send away a certain
number of their younger people to seek some other Country to inhabit in. In
their travail they found in Calabria certain waste and untilled land, and ill
peopled, but yet very fertile, as they might well judge, by those parts near
adjoining. They therefore finding the Country fit to bring forth corn, wine,
oil of Olives and chestnuts, and that there were hills fit for the breeding
and nourishing of cattle, and to furnish them with fuel and timber fit for
building; they came unto the Lords of those places to treat with them touching
their abode in those Countries. The said Lords received them lovingly, agreed
to their laws and orders, to the great advantage of these new Inhabitants,
came to an agreement with them, touching their Rentes, Tenthes, Toles,
penalties, in case there fall out any differences or offenses amongst them; and
so having assigned unto them certain quarters or parts of the Country, they
returned for the most part of them, to advertise their parents of the good
adventure, that had happened unto them, in a rich country, likely to abound in
all temporal benedictions. They brought back with them from their parents and
friends, whatsoever it pleased them to bestow upon them, to begin their
housekeeping; many of them married, and brought their wives into Calabria,
where they built certain small Towns and Cities, to which their own houses
were as walls, as namely Saint Xist, la Guard, la Vicaricio, les Rousses,
Argentine, Saint Vincens, and Montolieu. The Lords of the said Countries
thought themselves happy, in that they had met with so good Subjects, as had
peopled their Lands, and made them to abound with all manner of fruits; but
principally because they found them to be honest men, and of a good conscience,
yielding unto them all those duties and honors, that they could expect from
the best Subjects in the world. Only their Parsons and Priests complained,
that they lived not touching matter of religion, as other people did, they made
none of their children Priests, nor Nuns, they loved no chaunting, tapers,
lamps, belles, no nor Masses for their dead. They had built certain Temples,
not adorning them with images, they went not on pilgrimage: they caused their
children to be instructed by certain strange and unknown Schoolmasters, to
who^ they yield a great deal more honor then to them, paying nothing unto
them but their tithes, according to the agreement with their Lords: They
doubted, that the said people made profession of some particular belief, which
hindered them from mingling themselves, and joining in alliance with the
natural home-borne people of the Land, and that they had no good opinion of
the Church of Rome. The Lords of those places began to fear, that if the Pope
should take notice, that so near his Seat, there were a kind of people that
contemned the laws of Romish Church, they might chance to lose them, detained
their Priests from complaining of these people, who in every thing else showed
themselves to be honest men, such as had enriched the whole Country, yea and
the Priests themselves, for the only tithes which they received of that great
abundance of fruits, which arise from those lands, out of which in former
times they received no profit at all, were such as might very well give them
reason to bear with other matters; That they were come to inhabit in those
places from far Countries, where perhaps the people were not so much given to
the ceremonies of the Church of Rome; but yet since in the principal they were
faithful and honest, charitable toward the poor, and such as feared God,
they were very willing they might not be molested, by any more particular
enquiry into their consciences. These reasons wrought much with those that bare
them ill will. For the Lords of those places, stopped the mouths of their
murmuring neighbors, who could by no means draw them into any alliance with
them, and who saw their goods, their cattle, and all that they possessed blessed
after a more particular manner then other men's, that they were a temperate
people, wise, not lewd or dissolute, not given to dancing, or haunters of
Tauernes, and out of whose mouths, there did never proceed any blasphemy; and
to be brief, living in a Country where the Inhabitants were given to all
manner of wickedness; they were as precious stones in a common sink, and
therefore both envied and admired, but yet always maintained by their Lords,
who comparing these subjects and vassals with others that they had, could not
satiate themselves with their praises. Thus were they maintained by their Lords
against all envy, and that maugre the Priests, until the year 1560, 1560.
at what time they could no longer defend them against the Popes thunderbolts.

The occasion was, because they then understood, that in their Valleys of
Pragela and Piedmont, there were Pastors, that with a loud voice did preach the
Gospel: For they had sent to Geneua to be furnished with teachers, and they
sent them two, that is to say, Steven Negrin, and Lewis Paschal, who at their
arrival, did their best endeauours to establish the exercise of their
Religion. Pope Pius the fourth of that name, being advertised hereof, the
College of Cardinals was assembled, and presently concluded and resolved upon
the utter ruin and extirpation of this people, who so near the Popes Seat,
durst to plant the Religion of the Lutherans.

The charge of this persecution was given to Cardinal Alexandrin, a violent
man, if there were ever any amongst the Cardinals. He chose two Monks of his
own humor, to be his Informers, that is to say, one Valerio Maluicino, and a
Dominican Monk, named Alphonsus Vrbin, who began with the Inhabitants of Saint
Xist. Being in the place, they assembled the people, giving them good speeches,
and protesting that their coming thither, was not any way to molest them, but
only lovingly to advertise them, that they were not to hear any other
Doctors and teachers, then those which should be given unto them by the
Prelates of their Diocese. That they knew well, that they had received teachers
from Geneua, but by quitting themselves of them, and living hereafter according
to the laws of the Church of Rome, they should have no cause to fear any
thing: but if they presumed to keep their said teachers amongst them, they did
put themselves in danger to lose their lives, their goods and honors, because
they were to be condemned for Heretics. And that they might the better know
who they were, that had wholly forsaken the laws of the Church of Rome, they
caused a bell to be rung to Mass, inuiting the people to go thither; but in
steed of going to the Mass, they quit themselves of their houses, and with
their wives and children that could follow them, they did fly into the woods,
leaving only within the City some few decrepit men and women, and little
children. The Monks dissembled this flight, that they might the better entrap
them all at once. They went to la Guard, not threatening any one of those that
stayed in Saint Xist. Being there, they caused the gates of the Town to be
locked, and the people to be assembled. They told them, that they of Saint Xist
had abiured their Religion, and being gone to the Mass, had asked pardon at
Gods hands, promising them, if they would do the like, that no man should
offer the least hurt that might be. These poor people thinking the Monks had
spoken a truth unto them, they were content to yield to whatsoever they would
have them do: But when they had understood, that their brethren of Saint Xist
had refused to go to Mass, and that they were fled into the woods, they were
ashamed of their weakness, and much displeased with their revolt, and
therefore instantly resolved with themselves, to go with their wives and
children, to their brethren of Saint Xist: but the Lord of the place Saluator
Spinello would not suffer them to retire themselves in so miserable a manner,
promising to defend them against whomsoever; provided (says he) that they
carried themselves like good Romish Catholics. In the mean time the Monks
sent after those of Saint Xist two Companies of foote-men, who ran after these
poor people, as after wild beasts, crying out, Amassa, amassa, that is, kill,
kill. They slew diverse of them. But they that could get to the top of the
mountain, being on the hight of the rocks, entreated they might be heard;
which being granted, they beseeched them to have pity upon them, and upon
their wives and children; that they would call to mind, that they had
inhabited in those Countries, from the father to the son for some ages, and
that in all that time, there was not any that could complain of their
conversation; and yet nevertheless, if they could not continue in their
houses, in that belief wherein they had lived to this present, if they might
be permitted to betake themselves, either by sea or by land, to the protection
of God, with their only persons, and some few commodities; and so retire
themselves whether it should please the Lord to conduct them, they would very
willingly forsake all their goods, rather then to fall into any idolatry,
promising both for themselves and all theirs, never to return to their houses
again. They beseeched them even for Gods cause, not to drive them to such
necessities, as that they must be enforced to defend themselves, for if they
should be once out of all hope of mercy, it would be dangerous for themselves,
wh^ (...) driven them to these extremities. The sould^^^^ the more stirred up
against them, and presently made a violent assault upon them, which bound these
poor people to a just defense, and so being assisted by God, they slew the
greatest part of the Soldiers that pursued them, and put the rest to flight.
The Monks the Inquisitors, writ to the Viceroy of Naples, that he should
speedily send some companies of Soldiers, to apprehend cetaine Heretics of
Saint Xist, and la Guard, who were fled into the woods, and that in so doing,
he should do that which was pleasing to the Pope, and meritorious to himself,
if he shall deliver the Church from such contagion. The Viceroy came himself
with his troops. Being arrived at Saint Xist, he caused to be proclaimed by
the sound of a trumpet, that the place was condemned to be exposed to fire and
sword. But in the mean time before his arrival, the women had leisure to
return to Saint Xist, whether they ran together, to seek for victual to
feed their husbands and children, which were in the wood. The Viceroy caused
it to be proclaimed throughout the Realm of Naples, that all banished people
that would come to the wars against the Heretics of Saint Xist, should be
pardoned all their offenses formerly committed; whereupon great numbers
gathered themselves together, and were conducted to the woods, where the
fugitives of Saint Xist were, and they gave them the chase in so rigorous a
manner, that in the end, after the slaughter of diverse of these poor people,
the rest of them being sore wounded, retired themselves into the caves upon the
high rocks, where the greatest part of them died with famine. The Monks
Inquisitors made show of much discontent, and that they were much displeased
with that which had happened, and being retired to Cossence, where the Sindic
of Saint Xist appeared before them, they wished him speedily to withdraw
himself, for fear lest the Viceroy should know of his being there, and so
apprehend him. This brought those of la Guard a sleep, who being cited by a
public proclamation to appear before the said Inquisitors at Cossence, or
before the Viceroy at Folcade, they were easily persuaded to believe the
promises and fair speeches of the said Inquisitors. For being arrived at
Folcade, there were seventy of them apprehended, and being bound, were brought
to Montaud before the Inquisitor PanZa, who put them all to the rack. Amongst
others, he tormented one Steven Charlin with such violence, that his bowels
brake out of his belly, and all to extort from him, this confession and
imposture, that is, that they sometimes assembled themselves by night to commit
whoredoms, and damnable incestes, the candles being put out. But
notwithstanding his extreme torture, they could never get from him the
confession of so great a wickedness.

There was another called Verminel, who with the extreme pain he endured upon
the rack, promised to go to Mass; The Inquisitor thinking, that since the
torment of the rack, had enforced him to forsake his Religion, that redoubling
the violence thereof, he might draw from this feeble and tired person, the
confession of the former imposture. And so caused him to be tormented in such a
manner, that many times he left him eight hours together upon the rack, but
yet could never get from his mouth so horrible a calumny.

Another named Marcon, being stripped stark naked, was beaten with rods of iron,
afterward drawn through the streets, and burnt with firebrarnds. One of his
sons was killed with knives, the other was brought to a high tower, where
there was offered unto him a Crucifix, with promise that if he would kiss it,
his life should be saved. He answered, that he would rather die, then commit
idolatry, and though he were cast headlong from that tower, as he was
threatened, yet he had rather his body should be broken to pieces here on earth,
then by denying Christ and his truth, his soul should be cast into hell. The
Inquisitor being much enraged with this answer, commanded him to be cast from
the tower, to the end (says he) we may see whether his God will protect him.
Bernard Conte was condemned to be burnt alive, and as he was led to the fire,
he cast to the earth a certain Crucifix, which the Executioner had fastened to
his hands. The Inquisitor hereupon commanded him to be sent back to prison, to
the end his pain might be aggrauated, and so sent him to Cossense, where he
caused him to be covered with pitch, and so burnt. Besides, this Inquisitor
Panza, cut the throats of fourscore, as a butcher does his muttons; afterward
he caused them to be divided into four quarters, and commanded that the high
ways from Montald to Chasteau Vilar should be set with stakes for the space of
thirty miles, and caused a quarter to be fastened to every stake; and in a
place called Moran, he caused to be hanged and strangled, four of the
principal men of la Guard, that is to say, James Ferner, Anthony Palomb, Peter
Iacio, and John Morglia, who died very constantly. A certain young man named
Samson, defended himself a long time against those, that would have apprehended
him; but in the end being wounded, he was taken and led to a high tower, where
he was willed to confess himself to a Priest that was there present, before
he should be cast from the tower, which he refused to do, saying, that he had
confessed himself to God. So the Inquisitor commanded him to be cast over. The
next day the Viceroy passing below by the tower, he found this poor man
languishing, having his bones broken, and imploring the mercy of God, to whom
he gave a kick on the head with his foot, saying, Is this dog yet alive,
cast him out to the hogs.

Threescore women of Saint Xist were brought to the rack, and used with such
violence, that the cords pierced into their arms and legs; in such sort,
that in their wounds there were engendered a great quantity of worms, which fed
upon them being alive, they not knowing how to remedy it, until some one or
other having compassion on them, gave them secretly lyme, which caused them to
fall from them. They died almost all miserably in prison. Nine of the chief
and hansomest amongst them were lost, and it was never known what became of
them, after they were delivered to the Fathers of the Inquisition.

This Inquisitor retired himself to Saint Agathe, where he delivered a great
number to the secular power; and if any man offered to intercede for them, he
caused him to be put to the rack, as a favorer of Heretics; in such sort,
that in the end there was not any that durst to open his mouth in their behalf.

Pope Pius the fourth of that name, sent for their destruction, the Marquis of
Butiane, with promise that if he would do that good office to the holy Sea, as
to clear Calabria of those Waldenses that had there taken footing, he would
give unto his son a Cardinals hat. The Marquis took no great pains to
execute his Commission, for the Monks the Inquisitors, and the Viceroy of
Naples had almost put all to death that they could apprehend, having sent to
the Galleys of Spain the strongest of them, and condemned to perpetual
banishment the fugitives, sold and killed woman and children.

As touching their Ministers, Steven Negrin was sent to prison at Cossence,
were he died with famine: Lewis Paschal was carried to Rome, where he was
condemned to be burnt alive. Pope Pius the fourth, would needs feed his eye
with this last punishment of him, that had maintained him to be Antichrist,
being present at his death with many of his Cardinals. But the Pope could have
wished himself elswere, or that Paschal had been mute, or the people deaf.
For he spoke many things against the Pope out of the word of God, which gave
him a great deal of discontent. Thus did this good man die, calling upon God
with an ardent zeal, that he much moved the standers by, and made the Pope and
his Cardinals to gnash their teeth for anger. Thus have you seen the end of the
Waldenses of Calabria, who were wholly exterminated; For if any of the
fugitives be returned, it is upon condition that they live according the laws
of the Church of Rome

CHAP. VIII. Of the Waldenses inhabiting in Prouence, and the persecutions
which they have suffered.
THe Waldenses inhabiting in Prouence, in the parts of Cabrieres Merindol, la
Cost, and other places near adjoining, have been held for the original
offspring of the Waldenses inhabiting in Dauphine and Piedmont, as it may very
well appear by the families of the same name; as also there are amongst them,
that can prove their progeny or offspring. And upon this occasion it was, that
they of Calabria soiourned in in Prouence, that is, to disburden their Valleys
of the great multitudes of people that were there. And though in the beginning
of their arrival in Prouence, the Country where they made their abode was a
desert, yet they made it in few years fertile and fit (by the blessing of God)
to yield Corn, Wine, oil, of Olives, Chestnuts, and other fruits, and that in
great abundance.

The first persecutions which they suffered, are not come to our knowledge,
notwithstanding we find even at this day, the Commissions that have been given
by the Popes and Anti-popes residing in Auignon, very near to the place of
their abiding, against the Waldenses inhabiting in Prouence; as that of the
Archdeacon of Cremona, See before in the 3. Chap. 1380.
Albert de Capitaneis, and of the Monk friar Minor Francis Borelli, having
Commission against them, in the year 1380, to make inquiry of the Waldenses in
the Diocese of Aix in Prouence, Arles, and Selon. As also when they were
retired into the said Province in the year 1228, 1228.
when the Archbishop of Aix, Arles, and of Narbonne were assembled at Auignon
to give advice to the Inquisitors touching the Waldenses, See Chap. 2.
who then said (as you have heard before) that the Inquisitors had apprehended
so great a number, that there was not only a want of victual to feed them,
but of lyme and stone to build their prisons. It is most certain, that then
the Waldenses of Prouence, dwelling as it were, in the very gates of the Popes
Palace, and about their Earldom of Auignon were not forgotten: But forasmuch
as we have no Copies of instruments, that may make good the said persecutions,
we will insert into this discourse nothing but what we shall be able
sufficiently to prove.

The first persecution is that, whereof we have the History in the time of King
Lewis the twelfth, about the year 1506, That is, 1560.
that this good King being informed, that there were in Prouence a certain
kind of people, that lived not according to the laws of the Church of Rome,
but were an accursed people, committing all manner of wickedness and
villainies, even such, as the very memory of them struck a horror into men's
hearts, and the Christians in the primitive Church had been vpbraided with; he
gave Commission to his Court of Parliament in Prouence to take knowledge
thereof, and to chastise them according to their merit. Whereunto the said
Court having diligently attended, so soon as the King understood, that diverse
innocent persons were put to death, he limited the authority of the said Court,
and would not suffer them to continue their executions, Vesembecius in Oratione
de Waldensibus.
until he were truly informed, what kind of people they were, that to him had
been reported to be so wicked. To this purpose he sent Master Adam Fumee, his
Master of requests, who told him at his return, that what had been given him
to understand, touching the Waldenses of Prouence, was very untrue; for they
were not any way tainted, either with sorcery, or whoredom, but that they
lived like honest men, doing hurt to no man: they caused their children to be
baptized, taught them the Articles of their belief, and the Commandments of
God, they carefully kept the Lords day, and the word of God was purely
expounded unto them. Vesembecius in Orotione de Waldensibus. His auditis Rex
iureiurando addito me, inquit, and caetero populo meo Catholico meliores illi
viri sunt.
A certain Iacobin Monk, named Parui, confessor to the King, witnessed as
much, who by the King was joined in Commission with the said Master of
Requests. Which the King having understood, he said, and bound it with an oath,
that they were honester men then himself, or the rest of his Catholic people.
This persecution being stayed by King Lewis the twelfth, they continued in
peace unto the reign of King Francis the first of that name, and at what time
there was some speech in France of a reformation of Religion, they sent two of
their Pastors, that is to say, George Morel of Frassinieres in Dauphine, and
Peter Masson of Burgundy, to Oecolampadius Minister at Basse; to Capito, and
Martin Bucer at Strasbourg, and to Benthand Haller at Berne, to confer with
them about matters touching their Religion, and to have their advice and
counsel about many points wherein they desired to be better satisfied. The
Letters which Oecolampadius and Bucer sent unto them, are set down at length
in the first Book of this History, the Sixth Chapter, where I endeavored to
make it appear unto the world, that many great personages amongst them, that
made profession of reformation, have given testimony of their piety and
probity; which is the reason why we insert them not again in this discourse,
only we will produce those of the Waldenses in their own language, and
afterward in English.

Saluta Monseignor Oecolampadio.

CAr moti racontant, a sona a nostras oreillas, que aquel que po totas cosas,
etc.

The Letter of the Waldenses of Prouence to Mr. Oecolampadius. Health to Master
Oecolampadius.
FOrasmuch as diverse have given us to understand, and the report is come unto
our ears, that he that is able to do all things, has replenished you with
the blessings of his holy Spirit, as it well appears by the fruits, we who
live far distant from you, have thought good to have recourse unto you, and
with joyful hearts we hope and trust, that the holy Ghost will illuminate us
by your means, and will satisfy us, concerning many things, whereof we are
now in doubt, and are hidden from us, because of our ignorance, and negligence,
and as it is to be feared to our great hinderance, and the people whom we teach
with great insufficiency. For that you may know at once how matters stand; We,
such as we are, weak instructers of this little flock, have remained for
above four hundred years in the midst of sharp and cruel thorns, and yet
in the mean time, not without the great favor of Christ, as all the faithful
can easily testify; for this people has many times been delivered by the
favor and mercy of God, being gored and tormented by the said thorns. And
therefore we come unto you to be counseled and confirmed in our weakness.

They writ another Letter to the same purpose, to Martin Bucer, the which for
breuities sake we omit, wherein they relate, that they had addressed themselves
for the self same cause to their brethren of New Castle, Morat, and Berne,
which shows how careful the Waldenses were, to seek out all manner of
means, that their understandings might be enlightened in the mysteries of piety
for the salvation of their souls, especially seeing, that then they sought the
means to advance and order their Church in the open view of the world, when
the fires were kindled throughout all France, against those of the same
Religion that they were, who in those times were called Lutherans: The greater
therefore that their zeal was, the more they stirred up their enemies against
them, and plunged themselves into the greater dangers. But as all are not
victorious by faith, but there are always some weak, who take counsel of the
flesh, and persuade themselves without reason, that they can crooch and bow
themselves, in those places where God is offended by idolatry, and yet keep
the heart pure and neat unto God; Oecolampadius from thence takes occasion, to
write that which follows, to be delivered to those dissemblers, which walk
not with an upright foot before God.


The Letter of Oecolampadius, written to the Waldensis of Prouence, who
thought they could serve God, by prostituting their bodies before Popish Idols.
Written in the year 1530.
Oecolampadius desires the grace of God the Father, by his Son Jesus Christ,
and his holy Spirit, to his well-beloued Brethren in Christ, who are called
Waldensis.
We understand, that the fear of persecution has made you to dissemble in
your faith, and that you hide it. Now we believe with the heart to
righteousness, and confess with the mouth to salvation; but they that fear
to confess Christ before the world, shall not be received by God the Father.
For our God is truth, without any dissimulation, and as he is a jealous God, he
cannot endure that they that are his, should join together under the yoke of
Antichrist; for there is no communion of Christ with Belial: And if you
communicate with the infidels, in going to their abominable Masses, you cannot
but perceive their blasphemies against the death and passion of Christ: For
when they glory in themselves, that by the means of such sacrifice, they
satisfy God, for the sins of the living and the dead, what can follow, but
that Jesus Christ has not sufficiently satisfied, by the sacrifice of his
death and passion, and consequently that Christ is not Jesus, that is, a
Savior, and that he died for you in vain. If then we have communion at this
impure table, we declare our selves to be one body with the wicked, how
irksome so ever it be unto us. And when we say Amen to their prayers, do we
not deny Christ? What death should we not rather choose? What pain and torment
should we not rather suffer? Nay, into what hell ought we not rather to plunge
our selves, then to witness by our presence, that we consent unto the
blasphemies of the wicked. I know that your weakness is great, but it is
necessary, that they that have learned that they are bought by the blood of
Christ, should be more courageous, and always fear him, that can cast both
body and soul into hell. And what shall it suffice us, to have a care of this
life only? shall that be more precious unto us, then that of Christ? And are
we contented to have tasted the delights of this world only? Crowns are
prepared for us, and shall we turn back again? And who will believe, that
our faith has been true, if it fail and faint in the heat of persecution? Let
us therefore pray unto God to increase our faith. For certainly it shall be
better for us to die, then to be overcome by temptations. And therefore
brethren, we exhort you to diue into the bottom of this business. For if it
to be lawful to hide our faith under Antichrist, it shall be likewise lawful
to hide it under the Empire of the Turk, and with Dioclesian to adore Jupiter
and Venus, nay, it had been lawful for Tobit to adore the calfe in Bethel. And
what then shall our faith toward God be? If we honor not God as we should,
and if our life be nothing but Hipocricy and dissimulation, he will spew us out
of his mouth, as being neither hot nor cold. And how do we glorify our Lord
in the midst of our tribulations, if we deny him? Brethren it is not lawful
for us to look back when our hand is at the plough, neither is it lawful to
give ear to our wives entising us to evil, that is to say, to our flesh,
which notwithstanding it endure many things in this world, yet in the haven it
suffers shipwreck.

These godly admonitions prevailed much for the confirmation of the more weak,
and they came in very good time for those who presently after were sifted with
many tempestuous outrages, and even one of those that brought the Letters made
good use of them, that is to say, Peter Masson, who was apprehended at Diion
where he was condemned to death for a Lutheran. George Morel saved himself
with his letters and papers, and came sound and safe into Prouence, where he
bestowed much pains, and with happy success, in the establishing of the
Churches of the Waldenses, of which the Court of Parliament at Aix did every
day apprehend one faithful member or other, whom they either condemned to the
fire, or sent to the gibbet, or dismissed with marks in their foreheads;
until in the year 1540, 1540.
the Inhabitants of Merindol were summoned, in the person of five or six of the
principal, at the earnest importunity of the Kings Attorney in the Parliament
of Aix, and the solicitation of the Archbishop of Arles, the Bishop of Aix
other Ecclesiastical persons. A sentence was given against them, the most
exorbitant, cruel, and inhumane, that ever was in any Parliament, like in all
things, to that edict of King Assuerus, granted at the instance of Aman,
against the people of God, as it is written in the History of Hester. For
besides that, the men and women that were summoned for contumacy, were
condemned to be burnt alive, by the said sentence, their children and families
outlawed, it was decreed that the place of Merindol should be altogether made
uninhabitable, the woods cut down, two hundred paces round about it, and all
this without any audience or leave granted to any to speak a word.

The King being informed of the rigor of this Edict, sent into Prouence the
Lord du Langeai to inform him of the manners and belief of the said
Waldenses, and understanding that many things were laid to the charge of this
people, which they were not guilty of, King Francis the first of that name,
sent Lettes of grace and favor, not only in behalf of those that had
offended by contumacy, but all the rest of the Country of Prouence, expressly
commanding the Parliament from thence forward, not in that case to proceed so
rigerously, as they had done in times past. These Letters were suppressed. They
that were personally summoned made request, that it might be lawful for them
to answer by a Proctor.

Francis Chai, and William Armand appeared for all the rest, requesting in
their names, that it might be made to appear unto them in what they had erred,
and that by the word of God; being ready to abjure all heresy, if once they
might know that they were fallen into any. And for this cause they delivered
unto them in writing, a confession of their faith, to the end if they found any
thing worthy reprehension by the holy Scriptures, they might be instructed
concerning that which they were to recant; or if they found nothing that they
could reprehend, that they might be no more molested by so many and so grievous
persecutions; for fear lest thinking they made war only against men, it
should appear that they made it against God and his truth, and those that
maintained it.

All their petitions served to no other end, then to provoke them the more; for
the Judges being possessed with an opinion, that they were Heretics, refusing
to take the pains to know and examine the truth, they made all their Acts in
favor of the Priests that accused them. In such sort that when the Cardinal
of Tournon had obtained at a high price Letters from the King for the execution
of the aforesaid Decree, notwithstanding the pardon and reuocation before
obtained, it was executed.

This was in the year 1545, 1545.
that the President of Opede, Governor of Prouence in the absence of the Earl
of Grignan, deputed for Commissioners, the President Francis de la Fon, Honor
de Tributiis, and Bernard Badet Counselor, and the Advocate Guerin in the
absence of the Procurator General. He dispatched sundry Commissions, and
proclaimed the war with sound of trumpet, both at Aix, and at Marseilles. So
the troops being levied, and the five ensigns of the old bands of Piedmont
joined with them, the army marched to Pertuis, and the next day being the
fourteenth of April, they went to Cadenet, and the sixteenth, they began to
set fire to the Villages of Cabrieres, Pepin, la Mothe, and Saint Martin,
belonging to the Lord of Sental, then under age. There the poor laborers
without any resistance were slain, women and their daughters ravished, some
great with child murdered, without any mercy; The breasts of many women were
cut off, after whose deaths the poor infants died with famine, d'Opede having
caused Proclamation to be made upon pain of the with, that no man should give
any relief or sustenance to any of them. All things were ransaked, burnt,
pilled, and there were none saved alive, but those that were reserved for the
Galleys. The seuenteent day, Opede commanded the old bands of Piedmont to draw
near, and the day following he burnt the Villages of Lormarin, Ville Laure,
and Trezemines, and at the same time on the other side of Durance, le Bieus de
la Rocque, and others of the Town of Arles burnt Gensson and la Roque, Opede
being come to Merindol, he found not any there, but only a young lad called
Morisi Blanc, a very simple fellow, who yielded himself prisoner to a
Soldier, with promise of two crowns for his ransom; d'Opede finding none
other upon whom he might wreake his anger, paid the two crowns to the
Soldier, and so commanding him to be bound to a tree, caused him to be slain
with the hargubuse shot: Afterward he commanded the said Town to be pilled,
sacked, and utterly razed and laid level with the ground, where there were
above two hundred houses.

There remained the Town of Cabrieres compassed with walls, which were beaten
with the Cannon; These poor people being sick within, who were about some
threescore boorse or Pesants of the Country, called unto them, that they needed
not to spend so much powder and pains to batter the Walls, because they were
ready to open the gates unto them, and to quit themselves of the place and
Country, and to depart to Geneua, or into Germany with their wives and
children, leaving all their goods behind them, only that their passage might
be free.

The Lord of Cabrieres treated for them, that their cause might be determined
by justice, without force or violence: But Opede being within the Town, he
commanded the men to be brought into a field, and to be cut in pieces with
swords, the valiant executioners striving who could show the best manhood in
cutting off heads, arms, and legs. He caused the women to be locked up in a
barn full of straw, and so put fire unto it, where were burnt many women great
with child. Wherewith a Soldier being moved to compassion, having made an
ouerture for them, they were beaten back into the fire with pikes and
holberds. The rest of these men, that were found hidden in the caves, were
brought into the Hall of the Castle, where they were horribly massacred in the
presence of the said Opede. As for the women and children, that were found in
the Temple, they were exposed to the chief Bands and Ruffians of Auignon, who
slew about eight hundred persons, without distinction of age or sex. About the
end of this execution le Sieur de la Cost, kinsman to Opede, came thither, who
entreated him to send him some men of war, offering to bring all his
soldiers into Aix, and to make as many breaches in the wall as he would;
which was granted by word of mouth, but not wholly performed. For three
Ensigns of footmen were sent thither, who pillaged whatsoever seemed good
unto them, burnt a part of the Town, ravished women and their daughters, and
killed some Boores, not finding any resistance. In this mean time the rest of
those of Merindol and other places, were in great extremities in the mountains
and rocks, persecuted by Opede and his army. They entreated him, that he
would permit them to retire themselves to Geneua, with the rest of their wives
and children, promising to leave behind them all their goods. He answered,
that he would send them all to dwell in the Country of hell, with all the
devils, them, their wives and children, in such a manner, that there should be
no memory left of them.

King Francis being advertised of those cruelties that were executed in pursuit
of the said arrest, was much displeased therewith, in such sort, that at the
very point of death, being wounded with some remorse of conscience, principally
because it had all passed under his name and authority, being sorry because he
could inflict no punishment upon them before his death, that had shed so much
innocent blood, he gave in charge to his son Henry to be revenged on them,
in prosecution whereof, after the decease of his father, he sent out his
Letters Patents in the year one thousand five hundred forty nine, by which he
took unto himself and into his own hands, the cause of the said Waldenses of
Prouence: but there was none but the Advocate Guerin that was hanged, because
he had falsty informed the King, when he kept back the reuocation of the
first retention of the cause of those of Merindoll, whereupon presently
followed the execution of the Arrest of the Court of Parliament of Aix. And all
the rest that were faulty, escaped upon this consideration, that it was to no
purpose to attempt any more against the Lutherans at that time.

Touching the rest that escaped this massacre, some there were that retired
themselves to Geneua, others into Switzerland, others into Germany, and others
continued near thereabouts, tilling their land by stealth; and so by little
and little, returned home to their old habitations, which they built and
repaired at such times as they could by the benefit of the aforesaid Edicts;
and were afterward the seed of many goodly Churches, which at this day are
gathered together, flourishing in all piety and zeal, as other Churches in the
Kingdom of France.


CHAP. IX. Of the Waldenses that did fly into Bohemia, and those persecutions
which they suffered, that have come to our knowledge.
Albertus de Capitaneis lib. de origin Waldensium.

Thuanus in historia sui temporis, pa. 457. Petrus Valdus eorum Antesignamus,
patria relicta in Belgium venit, atque in Picardiam quam body vocant, multos
sectatores n^^tus cum inde in Germaniam transisset per Vandalicas civitates diu
diuersatus est, ac postremo in Bohemia consedit. See what is said of these two
Barbes before in the first book Chap. 9.


Diverse have written, that Waldo at his departure from Lion, came into Dauphine,
and from thence (having erected and ordered some Churches, and laid the
foundations of them, which have been miraculously preserved unto this present
time) he went into Languedoc, and there he left excellent Pastors, who ordered
and instructed those Churches, that afterward cost the Pope and his Clergy so
much to destroy, and from thence he went into Picardy, from whence being
chased, he took his journey into Germany, and from Germany he retired himself
into Bohemia, where (according to the opinion of some) he ended his days. The
Waldenses inhabiting in Dauphine, Piedmont, and Prouence, have had communion
and intelligence with their Brethren retired into Bohemia, for proof whereof
we have the message of Daniel de Valence, and John de Molin Pastors in Bohemia,
who did much hurt to the Churches of that Country, by revealing unto the
adversaries those flocks or companies, which before were hidden and unknown,
because of the great and grievous persecutions that then were.

Vineaux in his memor. fol. 15
We have also a certain Apology of the Waldenses of Bohemia in the Waldensian
tongue, in the form of a Letter, which they wirt to King Ladislaus, whereof the
Inscription is.

Al Serenissimo Princi Rey Lancelao. A li Duc Barons, and a li plus veil del
Regne. Lo petit tropel de liChristians appella per falce nom falsament Pauuers
o Valaes. Gratia sia en Dio lo Pairest en Jesus lo Filli de luy. This Letter
makes proof of the Communion which the Waldenses of Dauphine have had with
those of Bohemia, in that they have had in their language this Letter, which
contains a just Apology against those impostures, and other faults which in
former times have been imputed to the one and to the other, and have been
common with the Christians of the primitive Church. We have also in the same
volume a treatise, the inscription whereof is this. Aico es la causa del nostre
despartiment de la Gleisa Romana. That is to say; This is the cause of our
separation from the Church of Rome. Causes which have been common with all
those, that have withdrawn themselves from that Church, for fear of
participating of her plagues.

The Author of the Catalogue of witnesses of the truth, Flac. Ill. in catal.
test. verit. p. 116.
makes mention of a certain form of Inquisition, which was practiced against
the Waldenses of Bohemia under King John, which was about the year 1330. As
also in another Inquisition this is noted, that the Waldenses of Bohemia sent
into Lombardy to the Waldensian Doctors, those whom they would have trained up
in the profession of Divinity.

Lib. de origin Ecclesiaru^ Bohemiae. pa. 273. Sed cum oppressae tyrannide
Pontificia conuentus publicos nullos haberent neque scripta horum extarent
vlla, ignotae nostris prorsus fuere.

Esrom Rudiger in narrati^ncula de Ecclesijs fratrum in Bohemia Valdenses ad
minimum CCXL. annis originem nostram antecedunt.


In the treatise of the beginning of the Churches of Bohemia, at what time the
doctrine of John Hus was there received, the Pastors, Ancients, and faithful
of Bohemia say, that the Waldensian Churches of Bohemia, had been oppressed by
the tyranny of the Pope, in such manner, that they had no more assemblies, and
that there were no more of their writings to be found in Bohemia.

Esrom Rudiger in his treatise of the Churches of Bohemia, says, that the
Waldenses have had their Churches, at the least two hundred and forty years
before those of the Hussites, and though he confess that their belief was one
and the same, yet he affirms that there was not in their times any memory of
their Churches, but only of those that were in France at Merindoll, and the
places near adjoining. And that when they sent to Bohemia to join themselves
unto them in the confession of their faith, they enquired of them, whether they
made any public profession of the truth: and when they had understood, that
there were some amongst them, that sometimes frequented Papisticall Churches,
and were present at those idolatries that were there committed, they did
bitterly reprehend them for it.

See the Confession of the Waldenses in the Catalogue rerum expetendarum.

Lib. de orig. and confess. Eccl. Bohem.

Scimus quod multi boni viri, and veritatis Euangelica instaurata cult^res and
sectato respij seducti and indicationibus falsis and criminationib.
aduersariorum, pro Valdensibus, nos habeant.

Ibid.

Hoc quidem constat, multum in ipsis lucis fuisse and de plerisque eos recte
sensisse and docuisse, and propter veritatem grauissima perpesso. in Galliae in
primis.

Aeneas Siluius in hls history of the Taborites.


And therefore they that have answered under the name of the Waldenses, and have
brought unto light their confession, which at this day is to be found in the
Catalogue of things to be desired, are not any of the Waldenses, but one of
those that by way of reproach were afterward so called, and they have not been
ashamed of that name, assuring themselves of the purity of their doctrine. And
this notwithstanding, they revive again this common opinion when they affirm
that they know well, that there are many good men, that follow and love the
truth of the Gospel, who being deceived by false marks and notes, whereby
they have described us (say they) have held us for Waldenses.

And even there to, they give this testimony of the Waldenses; that there is in
them much light and knowledge, and that they have well understood and purely
taught many things, yea and that they have suffered much for the truth,
especially in France; And so they desired to be distinguished from them, to the
end that if it were observed, that the Waldenses had done much for the
establishment of the truth in their times, that it might likewise be known,
that the Hussites have not done little in their time.

Aeneas Syluius reports of one James de Misne, and Peter de DreZe disciples
of the Waldenses, that they went into Bohemia in the time of John Hus, and that
having conferred with him, he made profession of their doctrine, and they
themselves deny it not: for thy say that Wicklif was assisted to shake off the
yoke of the Pope, by example of the Waldenses, and that Wicklif was the
instrument which God had used for the instruction of John Hus, who taught in
Bohemia, and that therefore they have thought themselves much bound to the
Churches of the Waldenses, because whatsoever good there has been in the said
Churches, they say, was transported unto theirs; and so have they been in some
sort, the beginning of theirs.

CHAP. X. Of the Waldenses inhabiting in Austria, and the persecutions which
they suffered.
THe number of the Waldenses that inhabited in Austria was very great, who were
there grievously persecuted, as may appear if we had no other proof then the
Chronicle Hirsauge; See the Chronicle of Hirsauge.
where it is observed that about the year one thousand four hundred, there
were burnt a great number in the City of Creme, which is in the said Dukedom
of Austria. But more then that, that which troubled the heads of the
persecuters a great deal more, was the speech of one of them, who being
executed at Vienna, the principal City in Austria, said at his execution,
that there were in that Country, of the same belief that he professed, above
fourscore thousand.

1467.
About the year of our Lord, one thousand four hundred sixty seven, the
Hussites reforming their Churches, and separating them from the Church of Rome,
they understood, that there were in Austria Churches of the ancient Waldenses,
upon the frontiers of Bohemia, in the which there were great and learned men
appointed for Pastors, and that the doctrine of the Gospel flourished amongst
them. That they might know the truth thereof, they deputed two of their
Brethren, amongst their Pastors, and two Ancients, with charge to enquire and
know, what those flocks or co^gregations were, for what cause they had
forsaken the Church of Rome, their principles and progression, that they should
make known unto them the beginnings of their carriage, or demeanor in Bohemia,
and give a reason why they were separated from the Romish Church.

These men being come thither, Ioachimus Came; in hist. de Ecclesiis Fratrum in
Bohemia and Morauia. p. 104.
and having carefully inquired into the state of those Churches of the
Waldenses, and having found them, they told them, that they did nothing but
what was ordained by our Lord Jesus Christ, and taught by his Apostles, holding
themselves wholly to the institution of the Son of God in the matter of
Sacraments.

It contented the Waldenses very much, to understand that there were in Bohemia
a number of people, that had given unto God the glory, and removed from them
the abuse and idolatries of the Church of Rome, exhorting them in the name of
God, to continue in that which they had so well begun, for the knowledge and
maintenance of the truth, and for the estabishment of a good discipline; and in
witness of the great joy they received, and that holy Society and Communion,
that they desired to have with them, they blessed them in praying for them, and
laying their hands upon them.

Afterward the said Waldenses related unto them, how God had miraculously
preserved them, for these many hundred years, notwithstanding the diverse great
and continual persecutions which they had endured; And so they lovingly and
gently took their leave of their said brethren, and at their return related
whatsoever they had seen or done in that their voyage, from whence they
received unspeakable contentment, and from that time forward, there continued a
holy affection and desire to communicate together as often as they could, for
their common edification. In prosecution whereof, the brethren of Bohemia
visited by Letters the Waldenses of Austria, giving them to understand, that
they had received great comfort by their last communication they had with them;
but yet as they desired not to be flattered in any defect or fault whatsoever,
so they could not dissemble without some defect of charity, what they had found
in them, worthy reprehension; And that was, that they yielded to much to their
infirmities, since that having once known the truth, they nevertheless
frequented Papisticall Churches, being present at those idolatries, which they
condemned, basely profaning and polluting themselves, that we are not only
certainly to believe with the heart, but we must likewise make confession with
our mouth to salvation. Moreover they told them of another fault, which they
had taken notice of, and that was, that they were too careful in heaping up
gold and silver, for though the end were good, that is, to help and comfort
them in time of persecution; yet forasmuch as every day brought with it
affliction enough, and that such cares are not befitting those that are to
look only before them, and to lay up a treasure in heaven, they condemned that
which was superabundant in them, and which in the end they would principally
rely upon.

Joachimus Came. in Hist. de Ecclesijs fratrum in Bohemia and Morauia p. 105
The Waldenses of Austria did heartly thank them, entreating them to continue
this holy affection toward them, and for their part to do their best
endeavor to further their communion, and to appoint a day and place of meeting
and conference: for they having a long time known those their defects, which
they had taken notice of, as yet they had not power to provide convenient
remedies for the same, but their hope was, that being altogether, they should
be able better to resolve with themselves, as also touching many other points
of greatest moment. Now when it was even upon the point to send to the place
where they had agreed to meet and to assemble themselves, they began to doubt
that the business might be discovered, and it might be dangerous to all of
them. And besides that, they considered with themselves that they had been
supported, notwithstanding their assemblies and belief were sufficiently
known, and therefore they should put themselves into extreme danger, if they
should join themselves with other people. These considerations made their
former designs and purposes of their mutual communications to vanish away; as
also in the year following, that is, 1468.
in the year one thousand four hundred siixty eight, the persecution
increased against the said Waldenses of Austria, for there were burnt a great
number at Vienna. Among others, the History makes mention of one Steven an
ancient man, who being there burnt, confirmed many with his constancy. They
that would escape this persecution, retired themselves into the coast of
Brandebourg, where they stayed not long, being also there exposed to fire and
sword: Amongst those, there was one named Tertor, Ioach. Came. in hist. de
Ecclesijs fratrum in Bohemia and Morauia. p. 117.
that retired himself into Bohemia where he joined himself to the Churches
of the Hussites, and finding that a man might there remain in peace both of
body and soul, he returned into his Country, and persuaded many to go to
Bohemia, and to inhabit there, who were lovingly entertained; and after that
time there have been no assemblies of the Waldenses in particular, but they
have joined themselves unto the Churches of the Hussites.

CHAP. XI. Of the Waldenses inhabiting in Germany, and the persecutions that
there they suffered, whereof we have the proofs.
NOtwithstanding that incontinently after that Peter Walde with those that
followed him, came into Germany, there was so great a persecution along upon
the Rhine by the incitement and instigation of the Archbishops of Mayence and
Strasbourg, that there were burnt in one day and in one fire, Dubranius in the
history of Bohemia.
to the number of eighteen, yet we find that in the time of the Emperor
Frederic the second, about the year one thousand two hundred and thirteen,
Germany, and especially Alsatia was full of the Waldensis. The searchers were
so diligent and exact, Coistans upon the Revel.
that they were enforced to disperse themselves into other places to avoid the
persecution. This flight turned to the great benefit of the Church, because
hereby many learned Teachers were scattered here and there, to make known unto
the world the purity of their Religion.

1230.
In the year one thousand two hundred thirty, a certain Inquisitor named
Conrad de Marpurg, Vignier in the 1. part of his Bibli. Historiale.
was ordained by the Pope, Superintendent of the Inquisition. He exercised this
charge with extreme cruelty, against all sorts of persons, without any respect
even of the Priests themselves, Trithem. in Chron. Hirsaugiensi. Godefridus
Mon. in Annalibus
whose bodies and goods he confiscated. He tried men with a hot iron, saying,
that they that could hold an iron red hot in their hands and not be burnt, were
good Christians; but on the contrary, if they felt the fire, he delivered them
to the secular power. In these times the Waldenses had in the Diocese of
Treues many Schools, wherein they caused their children to be instructed in
their belief, and notwithstanding all the Inquisitions and persecutions
executed upon their flocks, yet they adventured to preach, Krautz. in
Metropol. l. 8. 18 and in Saxon. l. 8. ca. 16.
calling their assemblies by the sound of a bell, maintaining in publica
statione (says the Historiographer) publikly that the Pope was an heretic;
his Prelates Simonaicall and seducers of the people. That the truth was not
preached but amongst them: and that had not they come amongst them to teach,
God before he would have suffered their faith to perish, would have raised
others, even the stones themselves, to enlighten his Church by the preaching of
the word. Until these times (say they) our Preachers have buried the truth,
and preached lies: we on the contrary preach the truth, and bury falsehood and
lies; and lastly we offer not a feined remission, invented by the Pope, but by
God alone, and according to our vocation.

Matthew Paris an English writer observes, 1220. Math. Paris in Henry 3. anno
1220.
that about the year 1220, there were a great number in a part of Germany,
that took arms, where the Waldenses were cut in pieces, being surprised in a
place of great disadvantage, having on the one side a marish ground, and on the
other the sea, in such sort that it was impossible for them to escape.

1330. Vignier in his third part of his Historical Biblio. in the year 1330.
About the year 1330, they were strangely vexed in many parts of Germany, by a
certain Iacobin Monk Inquisitor, named Echard: but after many cruelties
executed upon them, as he pressed the Waldenses to discover unto him the
reasons for which they were separated from the Church of Rome, being vanquished
in his own conscience, and acknowledging those defects and corruptions which
they alleged to be in the Church of Rome to be true, and not being able to
disprove the points of their belief by the word of God, he gave glory unto
God, and confessing that the truth had overcome him, he became a member of
that Church which he had a long time before persecuted to the death. The other
Inquisitors being advertised of this alteration, were much displeased, and they
sent presently so many after him, that in the end he was apprehended, and
brought to Heidelberg, where he was burnt, maintaining that it was injustice
and wrong to condemn so many good men to death for the righteousness of
Christ, against the inventions of Antichrist.

1391. Krautzin Metrop. l. 8. p. 18. and in Sax. l. 8. cap. 16.
In the year 1391, the Monks Inquisitors took in Soxony and Pomerania four
hundred forty three Waldensis, who all confessed, that they had been
instructed in that belief for a long time by their ancestors, and that their
teachers came from Bohemia.

1457.
In the year one thousand four fifty seven the Monks Inquisitors of the
Diocese of Eisten in Germany discovered many Waldensis, which they put to
death. They had amongst them twelve Pastors that instructed them.

We must not ouerpasse the thirty five Burgesses of Mayence, that were burned
in the Town of Bingue, because they were known to be of the belief of the
Waldensis; nor the fourscore which the Bishop of Strasbourg caused to be
burnt in one fire; nor that which Trithemius recounts, that they confessed in
in those times, that the number of Waldensis was so great, that they could go
from Cologne to Milan, and lodge themselves with hosts of their own
profession, and that they had signs upon their houses and gates, whereby the
might know them.

But the most excellent instrument amongst them, that God employed in his
service, was one Raynard Lollard, who at the first was a Franciscan Monk, and
an enemy of the Waldensis, but yet a man carried with a sanctified desire to
find the way of salvation, wherein he had so profited, that his adversaries
themselves were constrained to commend him. John le Maire in the 3. part of the
diff. of Schisms in the 24. scisme.
For John le Maire puts him in the rank of those holy men, that have foretold
by divine reuellation, many things that have come to pass in his time. This
worthy man taught the doctrine of the Waldensis, was apprehended in Germany by
the Monks Inquisitors, and being delivered to the secular power, was burnt at
Cologne.

This man has writ a Commentary upon the Apocalipse, where he has set down
many things that are spoken of the Roman Antichrist. This was he of whom the
faithful in England were called Lollards, where he taught; witness that Tower
in London which at this present is called by his name Lollards Tower, where the
faithful that professed his Religion were imprisoned.

CHAP. XII. Of the Waldensis that have been persecuted in England.
ENgland has been one of the first places that has been honored for
receiving the Gospel, for not long after that VValdo departed from Lion, there
were many condemned to death as Waldensis, that is to say, eleven years after
the dispersion of the Waldensis of the City of Lion. For Waldo departed out
of Lion, 1163. Math. Paris in his History of England, the said year. 1174.
in the year one thousand one hundred sixty three, and Matthew Paris reports,
that the Monks Inquisitors caused some of the Waldenses to be burnt in
England, in the year 1174. And John Bale makes mention of a certain man that
was burnt at London, in the year 1210, that was charged with no other matter,
1210.

John Basle in the Chronicles of London.

Thomas Walden in his sixth volume of things sacramental tit. 12. chap. 10.


then that he professed the Religion of the Waldenses. Thomas Walden an
English man has writ, that in the time of Henry the second the Waldenses were
grievously persecuted, and that they were called Publicans: And as for those in
whom they found not cause enough to condemn unto death, they marked them in
forhead with a burning key, to the end they might be known of every man. This
belief of the Waldenses was better known in the time of the wars against the
Albingenses, insomuch that (as le Sieur de la Popeliniere has well observed)
the proximity of the lands and possessions of the Earl Remod of TholouZe, La
Popiliniere in his History of France l. 1.
with Guienne, then possessed by the English, and the aliance of the King of
England, brother in law of the said Remond, made the way more easy to the
English, not only to succor one another in their wars; but also to take
knowledge of the belief of the said Albingenses, which was no other but that
of the Waldenses, to the end that they might support them, though the violence
were unjust and extreme against those whom the English were many times
constrained to defend against those who under the pretense of Religion, invaded
his lands. Friar Rainard Lollard was then the most powerful instrument, which
God used by exhortations, and sound reasons, to give knowledged to the English
of the doctrine, for which the Waldensis were delivered to death. This
doctrine was received by Wicklif, as it is noted in the Book of the Beginning
and confession of the Churches of Bohemia, who thereby obtained much help for
the increase of his knowledge in the truth. He was a renowned Theologian in the
University of Oxford, and parson of the parish of Luterworth, in the Diocese
of Lincoln; an eloquent man, and profound Scholar. He won the hearts of many
English, even of most honorable of the land, as the Duke of Lancaster uncle to
King Richard, Henry Percy, Jews Gifford, and the Chancellor the Earl of
Salisbury. By the favor of of these great personages, the doctrine of the
Waldensis, or of Wicklif took footing, and had free passage in England,
until Gregory the eleventh persecuted those that received it with allowance,
by means of his Monks the Inquisitors; the fires being kindled in England for
many years, to stay the course thereof: but it was all in vain, for it has
been maintained there maugre Antichrist, until his yoke was wholly shaken off.
True it is, that the bones of Wicklif were dis-interred above thirty years
after his death, and condemned to be burnt, with such books as his adversaries
could recover; but he had before enlightened so great a number, that it was
beyond the power of his enemies altogether to deprive the Church of them. For
by how much the more they indeauoured to hinder the reading and knowledge of
them by horrible threats, and death it self, the more were the affections of
many sharpened to read them with greater ardency: It is likewise said, that a
certain Scholar having carried into Bohemia one of the books of the said
Wicklif, entitled His Universals, and delivering it to John Hus, he gathered
that knowledge from it, that made him admirable in Bohemia, and edified all
those, who together with him, did very willingly free themselves from the
servile yoke of the Church of Rome. Lib. de Origin and Confess. Eccl. Bohemia.
Wiclesus a Waldensibus adiutus Hussium nostrum excitauit. pa. 264.
From hence it was said to the Husites, that Wicklif had awakened their John
Hus. This Wicklif writ above a hundred volumes against Antichrist or the
Church of Rome, the Catalogue whereof is in the book of the Images of famous
men, that have combated with Antichrist.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Waldenses that did fly into Flanders, and were there
persecuted.
AFter the great persecution of the Waldenses in the time of Phillip the fair,
S. Aldeg. in his 1. Table of the diff. fol. 149. John Dubrauius in the Hstory
of Bohemia. lib. 14.
Historigraphers make mention of their repair into Flanders, whether he
pursued them, and caused a great number to be burnt. And because they were
constrained to retire themselves into the woods, to fly from those that
pursued them, they were called Turlupins, that is, See before l. 1. c. 1.
dwellers with wolves, as you have heard before in that Chapter, where we have
showed what names were given unto them.

Matthew Paris says, that a certain Iacobin Monk, Math. Paris in the life of
Henry 3.
named Robert Bougre, had lived amongst the Waldenses, making profession of
their Religion, but having afterward forsaken them, became a Monk, and a very
violent persecuter, in such sort, that he caused many to be burnt in Flanders.
Now his own friends having taken knowledge, that he much abused the power and
authority of his office, laying to their charge many things whereof they were
innocent, and executing his authority against many that were altogether
ignorant of the belief of the Waldensis, he was not only deprived of the
office of an Inquisitor, but cast into prison, and being convicted of diverse
crimes, was condemned to perpetual prison.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Waldensis that were persecuted in Poland.
ABout the year of our Lord 1330, there were many that made profession of the
Religion of the Waldenses in the Kingdom of Poland. 1330.
The Bishops had recourse to the means established by the Pope, that is to
say, the Inquisition; whereby they deliver many of them into the hands of the
executioner. Flat. Illy. in his Catol. of the wit. pa. 539.
The Author of the Catalogue of the witnesses of the truth has written, that
he has lying by him, the form of the Inquisition, which the Inquisitors made
use off in this persecution.

Vignier in his Biblio. pa. 130. In his History lib. 1.
Vignier says, that at their departure out of Picardy, many of them that were
persecuted there, retired themselves into Poland.

Le Sieur de Popeliniere has set down in his History, that the Religion of
the Waldenses has spread it self almost into all parts of Europe, even amongst
the Polonians, and Lutherans; and that after the year one thousand one hundred,
they have always sowed their doctrine, little differing from that of the
modern Protestants, and maugre all the powers and Potentates that have opposed
themselves against them, they have defended it to this day.

CHAP. XV. That many Waldenses have been persecuted at Paris.
IN the year 1210, 1210. The history of Languedoc. 1. Ferier. fol. 7.
four and twenty Waldensis were apprehended at Paris, whereof some were
imprisoned and some burnt. It happened also, that during the one and twentieth
schism, and during the time of Pope John, the one and twentieth of that name,
the persecution was great throughout all France, against the Waldensis, but
especially at Paris.

Again in the year 1304, the Monks Inqusitors, 1304. 1. Tab. pa. 152.
appointed for the search of the Waldensis, apprehended at Paris a hundred and
fourteen, who were burnt alive, and endured the fire with admirable constancy.

We find also in the Sea of Histories, 1378 The Sea of histories in the year
1378.
that in the year 1378, the persecution continuing against the Waldensis,
there were burnt at Paris in the place de Grieve a very great number

CHAP. XVI. Of the Waldenses inhabiting in Italy, and the persecutions which we
can prove, they have there suffered.
IN the year 1229 the Waldenses were spread abroad in great numbers throughout
Italy. 1229 Sigonius de regno Italico lib. 17.
Valcamonica only they had Schools, and from all parts of their abode they
sent money into Lombardy for the maintenance of the said Schools. Vignier in
the 3 part of his Bibl. hist. Rain. in summa fol. 18.
Rainerius says, that about the year of our Lord, one thousand two hundred
fifty, the Waldenses had Churches in Albania, Lombardy, Milan, and in Romagina;
2250
as also at Vincence, Florence, and Val Spoletine. 1280 Le Sieur de Hail. in
the life of Phil. 3.
In the year of our Lord 1280, there were many Waldenses in Sicile, as le
Sieur de Haillan observes in his History.

1492
In the year 1492, Albert de Capitaneis Inquisitor and Archdeacon of Cremona,
apprehended one of the Pastors of the Waldenses, It appears by the Inditeme^t
of the said Pastor, the orginal whereof is in our hands.
named Peter de Iaeob, passing over a mountain in Dauphine called le Col de
Costeplane, as he was going to Pragela in the Valley of Frassinieres. Being
asked from whence he came, he answered, that he came from the Churches of the
Waldenses in Italy, where he had been to perform his duty to his charge, and
that he had passed by Gennes, where he told them, Genon.
that the Waldensian Pastors had a house of their own, which agrees with that
which Vignaux notes in his Memorials. Vignaux in his memorials fol. 15.
That is, that a certain Pastor, named John of the Valley of Lucerna, was
suspended from the office of a Pastor, for the space of seven years, for some
fault he had committed, and that during the said time, he remained at Gennes,
where (says he) the Pastors had a house, as also they had a fair one in
Florence. Besides all these testimonies of the abode of the Waldenses in Italy,
we have those of Calabria, Chap. 7.
of whom there was question before. The persecutions that they have suffered in
Italy were continual, until they were wholly rooted out. The Emperor
Frederic the second of that name, did grievously persecute them by Edicts, In
the co^stitutio^ which begins Jnconsutilem tunicans.
by the Inquisition, by constitutions, especially by that which condemns
GaZaros, Patarenos, Leonistas, Speronistas, Arnoldistas, etc. where he
bewailes the simplicity of those whom he calls Patereniens, as if he should
say, exposed to passions and sufferings, in that they prodigally yielded their
lives to contempt, affecting martyrdom; whereas if they would peaceably
maintain the faith of the Church of Rome, they might (says he) live peaceably
amongst other men, who acknowledge her to be their mother, and the head of all
the Churches in the world. It was his pleasure that they should be severely and
speedily punished, for fear lest they should farther spread themselves, seeing
also that they had begun to inhabit in Lombardie, and within his Realm of
Sicile, where he commanded they should be persecuted with all rigor, to the
end they might be driven out from thence, and the whole world together.

Roger King of Sicile, made also constitutions against them, and caused them to
be persecuted.

Pope Gregory the 9. did grievously persecute them. Sigonius de regno Italico.
li. 17.
A Legate of his, banished them out of all Italy Cities, and Counties, and gave
command that their houses should be razed. He appointed in the City of Milan
two Preachers, who by the authority of the Archbishop, made a strict enquiry
of the Waldenses, and where they could apprehend any, they caused them to be
brought by the Praetor, to the place where the Archbishop had appointed, and
that at the public charge.

Pope Honorius caused them to be grievously persecuted under the name of
Fraticelli, that is to say, shifting companions: for some do hold, that as
many as were so called in Italy, were no other but Waldenses. In the time of
Boniface 8, they were charged with the same calumnies, as the Waldenses of
Dauphine, and the Christians of the primitive Church. The Monks Inquisitors
have always made in Italy an exact search, that they might deliver them to the
secular power; and not being content to condemn the living, they framed
indictments against the dead, dis-interred their bodies, burnt their bones, and
confiscated their goods.

Paul. Aemil. in Charles the fair.
Paulus Aemilius speaks thus of these shifting fellows. In the time of
Charles le Bell (says he) there were many great spirits and men very learned.
That age flourished in learning, and some there were that were truly holy;
others who endeavoring unseasonably, and without measure to outstrip others,
became wicked; others whose manners and institutions were doubtful; as for the
best and holiest, the wicked of those times bare them a grudge, afflicting
them, not speaking a word, or telling them wherefore: And as for those whom
they called Fraterculos, Shifters, the Preachers condemned them, both by word
and writing, I understand the words but not the sense.
cest escarlotte, ces biens, ceste domination, and taught, that they agreed not
with the Religion of Christ. They were said to be of the same belief with the
Waldenses, because such was their doctrine.

One amongst the rest, named Herman, being buried at Ferrara, See the Sea of
histories in the year 1300.
was condemned twenty years after his death to be dis-interred, and his bones
to be burnt, notwithstanding that whilst he lived, he were accounted a holy
man. Also there was another named Andrew, and his wife Guillaume, that were
dis-interred, and their bones burnt.

CHAP. XVII. That some of the Waldenses did fly into Dalmatia, Croatia,
Sclauonia, Constantinople, Grecia, Philadelphia, Digonicia, Liuonia, Sarmatia,
Bulgaria, and were there persecuted.
THe Monk Rainerius in his book of the form of proceeding against the
Heretics, Rain. de forma haeretica^di. fol. 10.
in that Catalogue that he made of the Churches of the Waldenses, or poor
people of Lion, 1250.
notes that there were in his time, that is to say, in the year 1250, Churches
in Constantinople, Philadelphia, Sclauonia, Bulgaria, and Digonicia.

Vignier says, that after the persecution of Picardie, Vignier in his 3 part
of his historiall Bib. pa. 130. Math. Paris in the life of Hen. 6 king of
England.
were dispersed abroad in Liuonia and Sarmatia.

Math. Paris says, that long since they were gone as far as Croatia, and
Dalmatia, and that they had there taken such footing, that they had won unto
them diverse Bishops: He says moreover, that there was one Barthelmew, who came
from Carcassonne, unto whom they all yielded obedience. And that he styled
himself in his Letters; Barthelmew, the servant of the servants of the holy
faith, and that he created Bishops, and ordained Churches. Here may be some
imposture, in that he attributes to his own person, that which is attributes
to the Pope, that is, that he called himself the servant of the servants, and
yet nevertheless had taken upon him a kind of Soueraingty, contrary to the
order enjoined by the Son of God, and followed, and practiced by his
Apostles. Albert. de Cap. lib. de origin Waldensium. p. 1.
As also in that Albertus de Capitaneis says, that the Waldenses had their
great Master in the City of Aquillia in the Realm of Naples, upon whom they
absolutely depended. For there is not one word in all their writings, that
aims at that end: Only we allege the saying of this Historiographer, to prove
the extent of those places, where the Waldenses exiled themselves, to avoid the
persecution.

Antonin. part. 3 Tit. 2.
Antonin relates, that the Waldenses called in Italy Fratecelli, were in his
time burnt in diverse parts of the world, insomuch that many of them forsaking
Italy, retired themselves into Greece, especially one amongst them of
principal note, named Lewis de Baniere; and that two Monks or gray Friars
were burnt for adhearing unto them, that is to say, John Chastillon, and
Francis de Hereatura.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Waldenses inhabiting in Spain, and that they were there
persecuted.
IN the time of the wars against the Earl Remond of Toulouze, and the Earl
de Foix, and coming when the Waldenses were persecuted by the Popes Legates,
many of them went into Catalogne, Math. Paris in the reign of Henry 3.
and the Realm of Aragon. This is that which Math. Paris sets down, saying,
that the time of Pope Gregory the 9, there were a great number of Waldenses in
Spain, 1214.
and about the year 1214, in the time of Alexander the fourth, who complained
in one of his Bulls, that they had bin suffered to take such footing, and that
they should have so much leisure as to multiply as they had done. For in the
time of Gregory the 9. they so far forth increased in number and credit, that
they ordained Bishops over their flocks, to preach their doctrine, which the
order Bishops taking notice off, there followed a grievous persecution.

CHAP. XIX. The Conclusion of the History of the Waldenses.
BY that which is contained in this first and second Book, it appears that
the Christians called Waldenses, have opposed themselves against the abuses of
the Church of Rome, and for these four hundred and fifty years and upward,
they have been persecuted, not by the sword of the word of God, but by all kind
of violence and cruelties, besides many calumnies and false accusations. Which
enforced them to disperse themselves here and there, where they could have any
abiding, wandering through desert places; and yet nevertheless, the Lord has in
such sort preserved the remainder of them, that notwithstanding the rage of
Satan, they have continued invincible against Antichrist; to whom they have
offered a spiritual combat, destroying him by the blast of the spirit of God.
Crying with a loud voice, not only throughout all Europe, but in many other
parts of the earth, that it was time to depart out of Babylon, lest we
participate of her plagues. This is the people that have enforced themselves to
re-establish the true and pure service of God, by the power of his word, a
contemptible people, even as the filth of the world, by whom nevertheless the
eternal God, has wrought wonderful things, restoring and re-establishing by
them his Church: First in France, afterward, as it were from a new Sion,
causing the rivers of his holy Law, and pure doctrine to distill and drop down
upon the rest of the world, gathering together his elect, by the preaching of
his holy Gospel. And that which is most admirable in this so great a work is,
that the doctrine which they have believed and preached, has been likewise
miraculously preserved amongst them, in the middle of all their grievous and
continual persecutions, which they have suffered for righteousness sake: As
it is also worthy admiration, that their adversaries have kept a register of
the evils, which they have caused them unjustly to suffer. It has been their
glory that they have shed that blood, that cries for vengeance; exiled the
Church for a limited time in the wilderness, and made known by their
Histories, that the Dragon has done but that which was granted unto him, that
is, to make war against the Saints: but being delivered from their great
tribulation, and their robes whitned in the blood of the Lamb, they have been
conducted to the living fountains of water, and God has wiped all tears from
their eyes.

Lavs Deo.
Revelation 21.7. He that overcomes, shall inherit all things,
and I will be his God, and he shall be my son.

FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE ALBINGENSES.
CHAP. I. Who the Albingenses were, what their belief, who were comprehended
under the name of Albingenses, at what time and by whom they have been
instructed, in what esteem their Pastors have been, by whom and in what
Council condemned, how they have increased, what Cities and great Lords have
taken their part: For what doctrine the Papists have hated them and persecuted
them to the death.
THe Albingenses, which we are to speak of in this History, differ nothing at
all from the Waldenses, in their belief: but they are only so called of the
Country of Albi, where they dwelt, and had their first beginning. The Popes
have condemned them as Waldenses; the Legates have made war against them, as
professing the belief of the Waldenses; the Monks Inquisitors, have formed
their Process and Indictments as against Waldenses: The people have persecuted
them, as being such, and themselves have thought themselves honored by that
title, upon the assured knowledge that they had of the purity of their
doctrine, Jacques de Riberia, in Collectaneis vrbis Tolozae.
being the selfsame with the Waldenses: In respect whereof, many
Historiographers call them Waldenses. We therefore will distinguish them, not
by their belief, but by the places of their abode, and by the particular
wars which they have endured for the space of above filtie years. Under this
name, we comprehend all the subjects of the Earls Remonds of Toulouze, father
and son, and the subjects of the Earls of Foix and Coming, and all those
that have taken part with them, that have fought for their Religion, and
suffered the selfsame persecutions.

They received the belief of the Waldenses, a little after the departure of
Waldo from Lion: The instruments that were employed in this work, were Peter
Bruis, one Henry, one Joseph, one Esperon and Arnold Hott; of whom they were
afterward called Pierrebruisiens, or Petrobrusiens, Henriciens, Iosephists,
Esperonists, and Arnoldists: but above all the rest, Henry and Arnold traveled
in the Country of Albi, and that with so good success, that in a short time
there were found but a few, and in some places not any, that would go any more
to Mass, affirming that the sacrifice of the Mass was only invented to
enrich the Priests, and to make them to be more esteemed in the world, as
making the Body of Christ by their words, and sacrificing him to God the Father
for the sins of the living and of the dead; which was an impiety, destroying
the sacrifice of the Son of God, and annihilating the merit of his death and
passion. There were many that gave ear to their reasons in the diocese of
Rhodes, Cahors, Again, Toulouze and Narbonne, Jacques de Riberia in his
collections of the City of Toulouze.
because the Doctors that taught amongst the Waldenses were learned men,
conversant in the reading of the holy Scriptures, whereas on the other side the
Priests, who studied nothing more than the sacrifices of the Mass, and how to
receive their oblations for the dead, were altogether ignorant, and therefore
contemned of the people.

Pope Alexander the third, Claud. de Rubis in his History of the City of Lion.
Lib. 3. pa. 269.
being much moved with anger because he saw many great Provinces to shake off
the yoke of the Romish Church, and to dispense with their obedience, condemned
them for Heretics in the Council of Latran.

Nevertheless, they were in such a manner multiplied, 1200.
that in the year 1200 they possessed the Cities of Toulouze, Apamies,
Montauban, Villemur, Saint Antonin, Hologaray in his History of Foix.
Puech Laurence, Castres, Lambs, Carcassonne, Beziers, Narbonne, Beaucaire,
Auignon, Tarascon, the Count Venecin; and in Dauphine Crest Arnaud and Monteil.
Amar.

And which is more, they had many great Lords, who took part with them, that
is to say, the Earl Remond of Toulouze, Remond Earl of Foix, the Vicount of
Beziers, Gaston Lord of Bearne, the Earl of Carmain, the Earl of Bigorre, the
Lady of Lauaur, and diverse others, of whom we shall make mention in their due
place. And besides all these, the Kings of Aragon and of England, have many
times defended their Earl Remond of Toulouze.

The doctrines that thy maintained against the Church of Rome, were these:

1 That the Romish Church is not the holy Church and Spouse of Christ, but a
Church watered with the Doctrine of Devils; That Babylon which Saint John has
described in the Apocalypse, the mother of fornications and abominations,
covered with the blood of Saints.

2 That the Mass was not instituted by Christ, nor by his Apostles, but that
it is the invention of men.

3 That the prayers of the living profit not the dead.

4 That Purgatory maintained in the Church of Rome, was a humane invention, to
glut and satisfy the covetousness of the Priests.

5 That Saints are not to be prayed unto.

6 That Transubstantiation is the invention of men, and an erroneous doctrine:
And that the adoration of the Bread is a manifest Idolatry.

And that therefore they were to forsake the Church of Rome, wherein the
contrary was affirmed and taught, because a man may not be present at the
Masses, where Idolatry is practiced, nor attain salvation by any other means,
than by Jesus Christ, nor transfer unto the creatures the honor that is due
to the Creator, nor say of the Bread, that it is God, and adore it, as being
God, without the incurring of eternal damnation, for Idolaters shall not
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

For all these things affirmed by them, they have been hated and persecuted to
the death.

CHAP. II. Pope Innocent the third of that name, made show of a desire to win
the Albingenses to the Church of Rome, by preaching and conference. A famous
disputation at Montreal. To what end the Pope permitted disputation in matter
of Religion.
POpe Innocent the third of that name, seemed to be carried with a desire to
reduce the Albingenses unto the Church of Rome, by preachings and reasons, or
to oppress them and utterly root them out, by violence of arms, and by
cruelty of punishments.

But before he would come to extremities, he thought it necessary, for the
better justification of his proceedings, to begin with words, and afterward to
come to blows. He sent therefore amongst them certain Preachers, who
endeavored to draw them by gentle persuasions.

See here how the Compiler of the treasure of Histories speaks of those times.
The Comp. of the Treasure of Histories in the year 1206.
When there came news (says he) to Pope Innoccent the third, that in his
Province of Narbonne, the traitorous Heresy was spread abroad, not only
amongst the poor, but Earls, Barons and Knights; he sent the Abbot of
Cisteaux, and two Monks with him, to preach against those disloyal buggerers.
When they had traveled some little way, preaching throughout the Country,
they came to Mompelier, where they met with a worthy man that was Bishop of
Cestre. This honest man, asked the Abbot of Cisteaux, what he did there. He
answered that the Pope had sent him thither, against those Sodomites, but that
he could not convert them. This good man was nothing astonished at it, but he
still maintained the work of the Lord valiantly, and went on foot to give good
example to others, and they stayed and went on foot with him. Afterward the
Abbot returned to the Chapter, or general assembly, but the Bishop and the two
Monks, passing a long time through the Country and preaching, they converted
many of the meaner sort of people, but of the great ones and richer sort, there
were few or none, that returned to the true faith.

The Abbot came back into the Country, and brought with him another Abbot,
and diverse Monks, and came all on foot; whereupon the Bishop of Cestre began
to think with himself how to return into his Country, but dyed by the way.

The Monks who preached throughout the Country, found the Princes so obdurate
in their malice, that they resolved to stay no longer there, but returned into
their Countries, except one good man, who was called Friar Peter of
Chasteauneuf, who continued preaching with one of his companions.

When the Albingenses knew the intention of the Pope, which was, to pretend
that he was not the cause, why they whom he judged to be wanderers, did not
return to the bosom of the Church of Rome by gentle means, and force of
reason, they began to think that it stood them upon to maintain their belief
by such conference, otherwise they should give occasion to the adversaries to
think, that there was in their Religion some weakness, if there were not any
Pastor that would take upon him the defense thereof. It was therefore concluded
amongst the Albingenses, to give the Bishops to understand, that their Pastors,
or any one of them for the rest, were ready to maintain their belief by the
word of God, provided that the conference were well ordered and moderated; that
is to say, that there may be moderators, that are men of authority, both on
the one side and the other, that may have wherewithal to hinder all tumult and
sedition. Provided also, that it be in a place, unto which there may be free
access, and the place secured for all persons that may assist, or be present
at the said conference. Moreover, that there be some matter or subject chosen
by common consent, not to be given over before it be determined; and that he
that cannot defend it by the word of God, is to be reputed and held to be
vanquished.

The Bishops and Monks did all allow of the said conditions. The place was
Montreal, near Carcasonne, This disputation was the most famous, that has bin
between the Albingenses, and the Bishops and Priests.
the time, in the year one thousand two hundred and six. The Arbitrators
agreed upon by the one part and the other, B. de Villeneufue, and B. Auxerre
for the Bishops: and for the Albingenses, R. de Bot, and Antony Riuiere.

Arnold Hott was the Pastor for the Albingenses, Chassagnon makes mention in
his first book of the History of the Albingenses page 72.
accompanied with those that were accounted fit for such an action: He was the
first that arrived at the place and day assigned: Afterward came the Bishop
Eusus, and the Monk Dominique a Spaniard, with two of the Popes Legates, that
is to say, Peter Chastel and Racul de Just, Abbot of Candets, P. Bertrand Prior
d'Auteriue: as also the Prior de Palats, and diverse other Priests and Monks.

This disputation was sent me from the Albinge^ses, by Mr. Rafin Pastor of the
Church of Realmont in old Manuscripts.
The Theses or general questions proposed by Arnold, were these: That the
Mass, with the Transubstantiation, was the invention of men, not the ordinance
of Christ, nor his Apostles.

That the Romish Church is not the Spouse of Christ, but the Church of tumult
and molestation, made drunken with the blood of Martyrs.

That the policy of the Church of Rome, is neither good, nor holy, nor
established by Jesus Christ.

Arnold sent these Propositions to the Bishop, who demanded a respit of
fifteen days to answer, which was granted him. At the day appointed, the
Bishop failed not to appear, with a long and large writing. Arnold Hott
desired to be heard by word of mouth, saying: That he would answer to all that
was contained in the said writing, entreating his auditorie that it might not
be troublesome unto them, if he were long in answering to so long a discourse.
It was granted that he should be heard with attention and patience, and
without interruption. He discoursed at diverse hours, for four days together,
and with such admiration of those that were present, and readiness for his
part, that all the Bishops, Abbots, Monks and Priests had reason to desire
they had been elsewhere. For he framed his answer according to the points set
down in the said writing, with such order and plainness, that he gave all
that were present to understand, that the Bishop having written much, had
nevertheless concluded nothing, that might truly turn to the advantage of the
Church of Rome against his Propositions.

Afterward Arnold made a request, that forasmuch as the Bishops and himself
in the beginning of their conference, were bound to prove whatsoever they
affirmed by the only word of God, it might be imposed upon the Bishops and
Priests, to make good their Mass, such as they sing it, part by part, to have
been instituted by the Son of God, and sung in the like manner by his
Apostles; beginning at the entrance, unto the Ite Missa est, as they term it:
but the Bishops were not able to prove, that the Mass or any part thereof, was
ordained in such an action, either by Jesus Christ, or his Apostles. With this
the Bishops were much discontented and ashamed. For Arnold had brought them to
the only Canon, which they pretended to be the best part of their Mass,
touching which point he proved, That the holy Supper of our Lord was not the
Mass. For if the Mass were the holy Supper instituted by our Savior, there
would remain after the Consecration all that which was in the Supper of the
Lord, that is to say, Bread: but in the Mass there is no bread; for by
Transubstantiation the bread is vanished away; therefore the Mass (says he)
without bread, is not the holy Supper of the Lord, for there is bread.

Jesus Christ brake bread,

St. Paul brake the bread,

The Priest breaks the body not the bread.

Therefore the Priest does not that which Christ Jesus has done, and St. Paul.

Upon these Antitheses which Arnold made touching the Supper of the Lord, and
the Mass, to prove that it came not from Christ nor his Apostles, the Monks,
Bishops, Legates and Priests retired themselves, not being willing to hear any
more, and fearing lest they should work such an impression in those that were
present, as might shake their belief touching the Mass.

The Monk of the Valley Seruay, in his Hist. of the Albing. chap. 5.
The Monk of the Valley Seruay, endeavors to bring this action into
suspicion, affirming that at what time the Heretical Judges exceeded in
number, seeing the badnesse of their cause, and the wretchedness of their
disputation, they would not (says he) give any judgment thereof, nor deliver
their writings to their adversaries, for fear lest they should come to light,
and render to the Heretics their own. But how should two Legates of the Pope,
the Bishops, Abbots, Monks and Priests, put themselves into any such place,
where they could be thus ouercharged with number? This Monk says in the same
place, that the principal Arch-heretikes came to the Catholics at the Castle
of Montreal, to dispute with them. So that they held then the Castle, and
therefore there was no occasion of doubt, or any such violence. And
furthermore, how could it be that the Bishops should request the moderators to
give judgment in a point of disputation, when they hold that there needs no
other sentence than the Popes, who cannot err? Again, how did the Monk know
that the Albingenses were overcome, if there were no judgment or sentence
given against them? There were, about the same time, many other disputations,
as at Serignan, Pannies, but this was only to delay the Albingenses from
further proceeding. For in the mean time whilst the Bishop of Toulouze, and
the Bishop of Onezimonde disputed at Pamies, and the Popes two Legates, with
Arnold at Montreal, B. of Villeneufue, Arbitrator and Moderator for the
Bishops, signified, That there could be nothing determined or agreed upon, by
reason of the coming of those Armies that were to fight under the badge of the
Cross. This was the subtlety of the Pope, Hilagaray in his Hist. of Foix, pa.
126.
to entertain them in conferences touching matter of Religion, that in the
mean time he might prepare great Armies, to root out (if he could) both
themselves and their Religion.

CHAP. III. The end of the disputation touching Religion, it was not long
continued by the Pope and his Legates. The presence of the Pope to publish the
expedition against the Albingenses. The Earl Remond humbles himself before
the Popes Legate, he is whipped by the Legate, and deprived of his Earldom of
Venessin by the Pope, he is made chief Leader of the Army of those that
fought under the badge of the Cross, at the siege of Beziers.
NOw when Pope Innocent had prepared his Armies of the Cross, So termed
because every one that undertakes the journey, wears on his Cassocke or
Coate-armour, the badge of the Cross.
and had dispersed them here and there about the Countries of the Albingenses,
there were no longer any disputations, except it were with Fire and Faggots,
the chief disputers being the Executioners, and the Monks Inquisitors, the
Harpies or ravenous birds, which the Pope made use of, for the extirpation of
the Albingenses. The pretense of this so famous an expedition was made against
the Earl Remond of Toulouze, about the death of a certain Iacobin Monk, who
was slain by the Albingenses: For the Pope took from thence occasion to send
throughout all Europe Preachers to assemble men together, to take vengeance of
the innocent blood of Friar Peter de Cateauneuf, who had been slain by the
Heretics, promising Paradise to whomsoever would come to this war and bear
arms for forty days. This war he called the holy war, and for which he
gave the selfsame Pardons, the selfsame Indulgences, as he did unto those
who went to the wars of the holy Land, for the conquest thereof. He likewise
termed it, the war for the Crucifixe, and the Army of the Church. And as for
the Earl Remond; hear with what terms he thundered against him in his Bull.
A Bull given at Latran in the year 1208.
We ordain (says he) that all Archbishops and Bishops, are to denounce,
throughout all their Dioceses, the Earl Remond accursed and excommunicated, as
being murderer of a good servant of God, and that with the sound of the Bell,
and the extinction of Candles, every Sunday and Festival days. We promise
moreover to all those that shall take arms, to revenge the said murder,
forgiveness of their sins, seeing that these pestilent Long Slops seek
nothing else but to take away our lives. And forasmuch as according to the Law
of the holy Canons, faith is not to be kept to him that keeps not his faith to
God, we would have all to understand, that every man that is bound to the said
Earl by oath of fidelity, society, alliance, or otherways, by the
Apostolical authority, is absolved from any such bands; and it shall be
lawful for every Catholic man, not only to pursue the person of the said
Earl, but also to hold and possess his land, etc.

And as touching the Albingenses, see how he handles them. We therefore
admonish you more carefully, and exhort you more speedily, as being a matter of
great necessity, etc. That ye endeavor to understand by all the means that
God shall reveal unto you, and study to abolish the Heretical prauitie and
these Sectaries, and that more severely then the Sarasines, impugning them with
a strong hand, and a stretched-out arm, as being worse than they, etc. Driving
them out of the field of the Lord, taking from them their lands and livings, in
which (the Heretics being banished) let Catholic inhabitants be substituted
in their room.

The Pope writ to all Christian Princes to frame themselves for the obtaining
of that pardon against the Albingenses, that they obtained, if they passed
beyond the Seas against the Turks; and particularly the author of the Treasure
of Histories says, That the Pope entreated King Philip and diverse Barons, that
they would undertake with him that enterprise against the Heretics, and get
their pardons: And that the King answered that he was to be excused, by
reason of his wars with the Emperor Otho, and King John of England Of the
Barons (says he) there were many that yielded to the enterprise, for their
pardon.

The Earl Remond, being advertised what was plotted against him in Europe, at
the instance of the Pope, sent unto him, humbly beseeching him not to condemn
him, before he had heard him speak, assuring him that he was no way culpable
of the death of Friar Peter de Casteauneuf, and that it was sufficiently
verified that the murderer was fled to Beaucaire: he complained, of the malice
of his enemies, who had made false informations against him, touching the said
murder: But all was in vain, for before his excuses came to Rome, the troops
of the Croises, that is, those that bear the badge of the Cross upon their
coat armor, were come to power down their vengeance upon him and his lands,
that is to say, the Duke of Burgundy, Earl of Enneuers, the Earl of St. Paul,
the Earl of Auxerre, the Earl of Geneua, the Earl of Poitiers, the Earl of
Forests, and the Earl Simon of Montfort. The Lord of Bar, Ginchard of Beauieu,
and Ganchier of Ioigui. As also the Ecclesiastical persons, who had levied in
their Diocese a number of Pilgrims and wandering people; they were the
Archbishop of Seus, the Archbishop of Rouan, the Bishop of Clermond, the Bishop
of Enneuers, the Bishop of Lizieux, the Bishop of Bayeux, and the Bishop of
Chartres, with diverse others; Pelerins.
every Bishop with the Pilgrims of his jurisdiction, to whom the Pope promised
Paradise in Heaven, but gave them not one penny upon earth, only he did let
them know, that in such a war there were more blows than pardons. This Leuy
of Pilgrims or wandering persons, 1209.
was in the year 1209. There was now a necessity either of opposing violence
against violence, or to come to submissions. The latter was thought the more
easy, but yet dangerous. For to yield himself to the discretion of his
enemies, was to bring himself into the danger of his own ruin. The Count
Remond therefore came to Valence, before the Popes Legate named Milo.

Being entered the toil, he began to excuse himself, saying: That it seemed
strange unto him, that so great a number of men should come in arms against
him, that used no other arms to defend himself, than his own innocence;
that he was much wronged by those that persuaded the people that he was
guilty of the death of the Monk Friar Peter of Casteauneuf; that before they
had thus moved Heaven and Earth, as it were, they should have enquired of the
truth of the fact, and nor condemn any before he were heard: That he had there
many witnesses of the death of the said Monk, slain at St. Giles, by a
certain Gentleman, whom the said Monk pursued, who presently retired himself
to his friends at Beaucaire: That this murder was very displeasing unto him,
and therefore he had done what lay in his power, to apprehend him, and to
chastise him, but that he escaped his hands: That had it been true which they
laid to his charge, that he had embrewed his hands in that blood, yet the
ordinary courses of justice were to be taken against him, and not to have
wrecked their anger upon his subjects that were innocent in this case. And
therefore (says he) to the said Legate, forasmuch as upon an assured trust and
confidence, armed only with the testimony of a good Conscience, I am come to
yield my self unto your hands, what need is there any more of the employment
of these Pilgrims or wandering people, against him whom they had in their own
power? That it was promised him, that when his honesty should be known, they
that were in arms to fight against him, would defend him: And therefore he
humbly entreated the said Legate, to send a Countermand to his Soldiers before
they approached any further into his lands and territories, promising to
justify himself of whatsoever was laid to his charge, in such a manner, that
the Pope and the Church should rest contented: That his own person might serve
for a sufficient pledge for the performance of these his promises.

The Legate answered that the Earl Remond had done well in presenting himself
before him, and informing him of his innocence, whereof he would advertise his
Holiness, and become an Intercessor for him; but yet the business was of such
an importance, that he durst not rely only upon his own knowledge, much less
send back his Soldiers of the Cross, that had cost so much labor, and lost
the gathering together, except he would give such assurances of his words, as
might take away from the Pope and the Church, all show or shadow that he may
hereafter deal falsely with them that put their trust in him. And therefore
he should not think it a difficult matter to deliver into his hands, seven of
the best Castles he had in Prouence (that is to say, in the Count Venessin,
which was then annexed unto Prouence) which should serve for an Hostage.

The Earl Remond knew well the error he had committed, by putting himself
under the batches, but it was too late to be readuised, because the counsels
which the Legate gave him, were as commands. He knew himself to be a prisoner,
and that he must now receive the Law of him, into whose power he had unwisely
cast himself; and therefore he made a show of great willingness to obey to
whatsoever was prescribed by the Legate, acknowledging that both his person and
his processions were at the service of his holy Father, only beseeching the
Legate, that his subjects might receive no more damage by the Soldiers. The
Legate promised all the favor that he desired in this regard, and presently
sent to the County Venessin, Master Theod Canon of Gennes, The Monk of the
Valley Seruay in his History of the Albin. cap. 11. fol. 23.
to put a Garrison into the Castles and places of importance in the said
County, and to give commandment to all the Consuls of the Cities thereof, to
make their repair presently to the said Legate; before whom being come, they
were given to understand, that the Earl Remond had delivered up his Castles to
the guard and power of the Pope, for proof of his fidelity to the Church,
whereof they were to be advertised, to the end likewise that they from thence
forward, should acknowledge themselves to be the lawful subjects of his
Holiness, in case the said Earl Remond should do any thing against the oath
of obedience which he had made to the Pope and to the Church of Rome, in which
case, as already in those times they were discharged of all oaths of fidelity
given in times past to the said Earl, and his lands were confiscated to the
Pope. The Consuls being much astonished to see their Lord thus stripped of all
his lands and possessions, could not refuse in the presence of himself, to do
whatsoever the said Legate required at their hands. But that which did afflict
them most, was, that they saw the Earl Remond conducted to St. Giles, where he
was reconciled to the Pope, and to the Church, with these ceremonies that
follow. First, the Legate commanded the said Earl Remond to strip himself
stark naked, without the Church of St. Giles, having only to cover his
nakedness, a close pair of linen breeches, the rest was all bare, head,
feet, and shoulders. Then he put a Stole (which Priests wear about their
necks) upon his neck, and leading him by the said Stole, he made him to go
nine times about the grave of the deceased Friar Peter de Chateauneuf, who had
been buried in the said Church, scourging him with rods, which the Legate had
in his hand, as long as he went about the said Sepulcher. The Earl Remond
demanded satisfaction for this extraordinary penance, for a sin which he had
not committed, for he had not killed the Monk: The Legate answered him, That
notwithstanding he had not killed him, nor caused him to be killed, yet
forasmuch as this murder was committed, within his territories, and he had
made no pursuit after the murderer, this murder was deservedly imputed unto
him, and therefore that he was to safisfie the Pope and the Church by this his
humble repentance, if he desired to be reconciled to the one and to the other.
It was therefore necessary he should likewise be scourged in the presence of
the Earls, Hilagarey in his History of Foix.
Barons, Marquises, Prelates, and all the people: He made him to swear upon
the Corpus Domini, (as they call it) and certain other relics, which were
brought thither for that purpose, that he should all his life time, be
obedient in all things to the Pope and the Church of Rome; and that he should
make perpetual, mortal and unreconcilable war against the Albingenses,
until they were either utterly exterminated, or brought to the obedience of
the Church of Rome, which to perform, he having solemnly and perforce sworn,
the Legate to honor him the more, and to bind him to do what he had sworn,
made him Captain and Leader of the Soldiers of the Cross, for the siege of
Beziers: Which he did, to the end he might drive the Albingenses into
despair, ever to be defended by him, who having abiured their Religion, had
now power and charge to persecute them.

CHAP. IIII. The perplexity the Earl Remond was in, after his reconciliation:
The siege of Beziers: The intercession of the Earl of Beziers for his City:
The intercession of the Bishop avails nothing: The taking of Beziers, what,
and with what cruelty.
THe Earl Remond was much perplexed about that charge that was given him for
the conducting of the Army of the Soldiers of the Cross before Beziers. For
to carry himself as an enemy against the Albingenses, was to do against his
conscience, and to fight against those whose part he had taken until then, as
a principal motive and Captain. This was to bind himself to the perpetual
servitude of the Pope and his Legates. On the other side, if he should go
about to fly, and to forsake the Army, this were to furnish them with new
matter of persecution; for in such a case they might justly pursue him, as a
perfidious, relapsed and persured person, and that if he should be
apprehended, he should be in danger of loosing his life, goods and friends
altogether: And yet doing that which the charge the Legate laid upon him, bound
him unto, he must be an instrument of the loss of Beziers, and the total
destruction of the subjects of his Nephew the Earl of Beziers, and his Nephew
himself. In this extremity and anguish of spirit, he chose rather to stay in
the Army for certain days, and afterward took his leave of the Legate, and
went to Rome, to humble himself before the Pope, which could not be denied
him. In the mean time they made an approach to the City of Beziers, the
Rams, Slings, Frames, Shedbords, and other engines of war were provided to
give a general escalado, setting to the walls of the City so great a number
of Ladders, that it was impossible to resist the furious assault which the
Pelerins made with all the force and power that they had.

The Earl of Beziers went forth of the City, and cast himself down at the
feet of the Legate Milon, craving mercy for his City of Beziers, and humbly
beseeching him not to inflict the same punishment upon the innocent and the
nocent, which without all doubt must needs come to pass, if Beziers should be
taken by force (which was easy to be done by so great, and so puissant an
Army, such as was then ready to scale the walls in every part of the said
City) that there would be great effusion of blood on both sides, which might
be avoided: That there were within Beziers a great number of good Romish
Catholics that would be subject to the same ruin, contrary to the intention
of the Pope, whose desire was only to chastise the Albingenses: That if it
pleased him not to spare his subjects for the love of themselves, that he would
yet have regard unto him, to his age and profession, since the loss would
light upon himself, being in his minority, and a most obedient servant to the
Pope, as having been brought up in the Romish Church, and in which he would
both live and die. And if he took it ill that such persons as were enemies to
the Pope, had been tolerated within his territories, it ought not to be
imputed unto him, because he had no other subjects but those which his
deceased father had left unto him; and that in his minority, and afterward in
that little time wherein he had been master of his own goods, he could not
as yet, by reason of his incapacitie know this evil, nor minister the remedy,
though it were his purpose so to do; but yet his hope was in time to come; to
give all contentment that might be, both to the Pope and Church of Rome, as an
obedient son both of the one and of the other.

The answer of the Legate was, Chass. in his History of the Albingen. page 107.
That all his excuses prevailed nothing, and that he must do as he may.

The Earl of Beziers returned into the City, and assembled the people
together, giving them to understand, that after he had submitted himself to
the Legate, he mediated for them, not being able to obtain any other thing at
his hands, but pardon, upon condition that they that made profession of the
belief of the Albingenses, should come and abjure their Religion, and promise
to live according to the Laws of the Church of Rome.

The Romish Catholics entreated them to yield to this so great a violence, and
not to be the cause of their death, since the Legate was resolved not to pardon
any, if they lived not all under one and the same Law.

The Albingenses answered, That they would not forsake their Religion for the
base price of this frail life; That they knew well that God was able to defend
them, if it pleased him, and that if he would be glorified by the confession
of their faith, it should be a great honor to them to die for righteousness
sake; That they had rather displease the Pope, who could destroy their bodies
only, than God who could cast both body and soul into Hell fire: That they
would never be ashamed, or deny that Religion, by which they have been taught
to know Christ and his righteousness, or with the danger of an eternal death,
profess a Religion which does annihillate the merit of Christ, and burieth his
righteousness; and that therefore they would covenant for themselves as they
could, and promise nothing contrary to the duty of true Christians.

This being understood, the Romish Catholics sent their Bishop to the Legate,
humbly to entreat him, that he would not include in this chastisement of the
Albingenses, those that were always obedient to the Church of Rome, of whom he
that was their Bishop had certain knowledge, being likewise assured that the
rest were not altogether past hope of repentance, but that they might be won
by gentle means, best befitting the Church, which took no pleasure in the
effusion of blood.

The Legate herewith grew into extreme choler and passion, swearing and
protesting with horrible threats, that if all they that were in the City did
not acknowledge their fault, and submit themselves to the Church of Rome, they
should all taste of one cup, and without respect of Catholic, sex, or age,
they should all be exposed to fire and sword. And incontinently he commanded
that the City should be summoned to yield it self to his discretion; which
they refusing to do, he caused all his engines of war to play, and commanded
an assault and general escalado to be made. Now it was impossible for those
that were within, to resist so great a violence, The Treasure of Hist. in the
taking of Beziers Paul Aemil. page 317.
in such sort, that being thus assaulted, by above a hundred thousand Pelerins,
in the end (says the Compiler of the Treasure of Histories) they within vere
vanquished, and the enemy being entered slew a great multitude, and afterward
set fire to the City, and burnt it to dust.

The City being taken, the Priests, Monks, and Clerks came forth of the
great Church of Beziers, called St. Nazari, with the Banner, the Crosses, their
holy water, bare headed, attired with the ornaments of the Church, and singing,
Te Deum laudamus, as a sign of joy that the Town was taken, and purged of the
Albingenses. The Soldiers who had received command from the Legate to kill all,
ran in upon them, brake the order of their procession, made the heads and
arms of the Priests to fly about, striving who should do best, in such a
manner, that they were all cut in pieces. To excuse this cruelty, disallowed
by some of those that were spectators, they have inserted into the History
these reports; that is to say, That the Pelerins were incensed against the
inhabitants of Beziers, because they had cast over the walls of the City, the
book of the Gospels, crying unto them, See there the Law of your God;
whereupon the Soldiers grew to this resolution, to kill all those they should
find within the circuit of Beziers, that so they might be sure not to spare
those that had thus blasphemed. But how could the Albingenses do any such
thing so impious against the Gospel of our blessed Savior, considering that
one of the principal causes for which they had forsaken the Church of Rome,
was because the Gospel of Christ Jesus, was, as it were buried amongst them,
and the people forbid to read it. And besides one of the great crimes, which
they laid to the charge of the Earl Remond, was, because he carried always
about him the New Testament. To this they added a miracle, and that was, that
Beziers was taken upon the day of Marie Magdalen, because (say they) heretics
speak ill of Magdalin in their law: The Treasure of hist. in the taking of
Beziers.

In the hist. of the Monk Pet. of the Valleis Seruey, of the Albing. chapter 18.


Thus speaks the compiler of the Treasure. Now this imposture is so deuillish,
that I hardly durst commit it to paper, and yet notwithstanding the Monk of
the Valleis Seruay, sets it down at large without doubts or scruples, though
the very thought thereof would make the hair of any man that has but the
least spark of piety to stand on end.

Now the city being burnt, razed and ransacked, the Pilgrims who thought they
merited Paradise by this sacceige and effusion of blood, were speedily
conducted to Carcassonne, before the forty days of fight, which they had vowed
to the Church of Rome, were expired, because then they were permitted every man
to depart to his own home.

CHAP. V. The Siege of Carcassonne, the taking of the town or Borough of
Carcassonne: An assault and general Escalado given to the city: A great
number of the soldiers of the Cross slain: The Intercession of the King of
Aragon for the Earl of Beziers, to no purpose: A stratagem for the taking of
the Earl of Beziers: The flight of the people of Carcassonne, by what means:
The taking of Carcassonne.
THe Earl of Beziers, when he saw that he could obtain nothing of the Legate
in favor of the city of Beziers, having left this charge to the Bishop, to
make trial whether he by any means could obtain pardon for those poor
inhabitants, and in the mean time, because he knew very well that having taken
Beziers, he would not suffer the city of Carcassonne, to continue in peace,
because being strong by nature, the Legate knew there was no storehouse for the
war, nor better place of repose for the Soldiers than that was; he was
counseled to retire himself thither, and speedily to cause it to be
furnished, with whatsoever was fit to maintain a long siege. He put himself
therefore into Carcassonne, being accompanied with me most faithful attendants.

He was followed, as it were, foot by foot, by the Legates army, unto which
there came new Croises or soldiers of the Cross; that is to say, the Bishop of
Agenois, the Bishop of Limoges, of Bazades, of Cohors, and the Archbishop of
Bordeaux, every one, with the Pilgrims of their own Diocese. There likewise
arrived the Earl of Turaine, Bertrand de Cardaillac, and the Lord of
Bastlenau, of Montratier, who conducted the troops of Querci, and of all these
troops the chief Leader was the Earl of Dunoy: There came also a great
number of Prouenceaux, Chassagnon in his hist. of the Albing. lib. 1. page 112.
Lombardes, and Germans, and that in so great a number, that the army of the
Legate Milon, rose to the number of three hundred thousand fighting men, when he
came before Carcassonne.

The situation of Carcassonne is in this manner. There is a city, and a
Bourrough or town. The city is seated upon a little hill, environed with a
double wall: the town is in the plain, distant from the city about two miles.
At that time the city was accounted a place of great strength; and in this city
there dwelt a great number of Albingenses. The Pilgrims thought to have taken
it at the first sight, for they ran with great violence upon the first Rampire,
and filled the ditch with fagots; but they were beaten back with such courage
and resolution, that the ground was covered with the dead bodies of Pilgrims,
round about the city.

The young Earl of Beziers, Lord of Carcassonne, won great honor in this
first days encounter, encouraging his subjects and telling them, that they
must ^^member the usage of those of Beziers; that they were to deal with the
same enemies, who had changed the siege not the humor, nor the will to
extirminate them if they could; That it was far better for them to die
fighting, than to fall into the hands of so cruel and merciless enemies. That
for his own part, he made profession of the Romish Religion, but yet he saw
very well, that this war was not for Religion, but a certain robbery agreed
upon, to invade the goods and lands of the Earl Remond and all his; That they
had greater cause to defend themselves than he, who could loose no more but his
goods and his life, without change of his religion, but they might loose that,
and besides the exercise of their religion too; That he would never abandon
them in so honorable an action, which was to defend themselves against the
invasions of their common enemies, masked with an outward appearance of piety,
and in effect true thieves.

The Albingenses being much animated by the speech of this young Lord, swore
unto him, that they would spend their goods and their lives, for the
preservation of the city of Carcassonne, and whatsoever did concern the said
Lord. The next morrow the Legate commanded an assault, and general escalado to
be made upon the Borough of Carcassonne. The people that were within, very
valiantly defended themselves; but the ladders were so charged with men, and so
near the one to the other that they touched one another, insomuch that they
forced, those within from the walls, and so entered the town, carrying
themselves toward the inhabitants thereof, after the same manner as they had
done before to those of Beziers; for they put them all to the sword and fire.

Whilst those things were in doing, the king of Aragon arrived at the army of
the Legate; and went first to the tent of the Earl Remond, who was constrained
to give his assistance at this siege against his own Nephew. From thence he
went to the Legate, and told him that having understood, that his kinsman the
Earl of Beziers was besieged within Carcassonne, he was come unto him to do
his best endeavor, to make the said Earl to understand, what his duty was
toward the Pope and the Church, which he presumed he should the more easily
do, because he knew well, that the said Earl, had always made profession of
the Romish religion.

The Legate gave him leave, to undertake what he had said. The king of Aragon,
made his approach to the Rampires. The Earl of BaZiers came to parley with
him. The king of Aragon desired to know of him, what had moved him to shut up
himself within the city of Carcassonne against so great an Army of Pelerins.
The Earl answered, that it greatly stood him upon, having so necessary and so
just cause, to defend his life, his goods, and his subjects; That he knew well
that under the pretense of religion, the Pope had a purpose utterly to
overthrow the Earl Remond his uncle, and himself; That he found by that
mediation which he had made for his subjects of Beziers, the Romish Catholics
whereof he would not receive into grace and favor, neither had spared the
Priests themselves, who were are cut in pieces even adorned with their Priestly
ornaments, and under the banner of the Cross: That this example of cruel
impiety, added unto that which had passed in the town of Carcassonne, where
they were all exposed to fire and sword, without distinction of age or sex, had
taught him not to look for any mercy either at the hands of the Legate or his
Pelerins: And that therefore he chose rather to die with his subjects depending
himself, than to be exposed to the mercy of so inexorable an enemy as the
Legate was; And that notwithstanding there were within the city of Carcassonne
diverse of his subjects that were of a contrary religion to that of the Church
of Rome, yet they were such a kind of people as had never wronged any, that
they were come to succor him at his greatest extremity, and for this their good
service, he was resolved not to abandon them, as they had promised for their
part to expose their lives and goods for his defense to all hazard and danger
whatsoever: That his trust was in God (who is the defender of the oppressed)
that he would be pleased to assist them, against that world of men
ill-aduised, who under the color of meriting heaven, have forsaken their
houses, to burn and pill and sack and ransacke, and kill in the houses of
other men, without either reason, judgment or mercy.

The King of Aragon returned to the Legate, who assembled together diverse of his
great Lords and Prelates, to hear and understand what the King of Aragon would
relate unto him, who told him that he found the Earl of Beziers his kinsman
much discontented with the former proceedings against his subjects of Beziers,
and the Town of Carcassonne, which gave him reason to believe, that forasmuch
as they had not spared the Romish Catholics, nor the Priests, that it was not
a war undertaken for the cause of Religion; but under the color of Religion,
a kind of theeuery; that his hope was, that God would give him the grace to
make him know his innocence, and the just occasion he had to defend himself;
that they should no longer hope they would yield themselves to their
discretion, because they saw their discretion was no other, but to kill as many
as should yield themselves thereunto; And that therefore if it would please the
Legate, to grant unto the Earl of Beziers and his subjects some tolerable
composition, that gentleness and mercy would sooner join the Albingenses to
the Church of Rome, than extreme cruelty; and that above all, they should
remember that the Earl of Beziers was young, and a Romish Catholic, who might
do good service for the reducing of those that did any way rely or put their
trust in him.

The Legate answered the King of Aragon, that if he would retire himself a
little, they would consult together of that which should be fittest to be done.

The King being recalled, the Legate gave him to understand, that for his sake,
and in consideration of his intercession, he would receive the Earl of Beziers
unto mercy, and with him some dozen might likewise come forth with their bag
and baggage, if he thought good; but for the people that were within the City
of Carcassonne, they should not depart, but at his discretion, The Monk of the
Valley Seruay, Chap. 20.

Du Hailan in his History of France, touching the siege of Carcassonne.


whereof they should hope well and have a good opinion, because he was the
Popes Legate, and that they should all come forth naked, men, women, maids,
children, without shirts, or smocks, or other covering, to hide their
nakedness: Also that the Earl of Beziers should be delivered to sure guard,
and all his goods to remain to the future Lord of that Country, which should
be chosen for the preservation thereof.

The King of Aragon, though he saw this composition to be unworthy the
proposing to the Earl of Beziers, yet nevertheless thought good to discharge
his office herein, to whom the Earl of Beziers answered, That he would never
come forth upon conditions so seasoned, and so unjust, and that he was
resolved to defend himself with his subjects, by such means as it should
please God to give unto him.

The King of Aragon retired himself, not without show of the great discontent
he received by this unjust proceeding. The Legate hereupon commanded all his
engines of war to play, and that they should take the City by force. But it
was a spectacle little pleasing unto him, for he was an eyewitness of the
loss of a great number of his Pelerins. For they of the City threw down such
a quantity of great stones, with fire, and pitch, and brimstone, and boiling
water, and gauled the assaylant with such infinite numbers of arrows, that the
earth was covered, and the ditches filled with the dead bodies of the Pelerins,
which caused a wonderful noisome stench, both in the Camp and in the City.
This rude unwelcome overthrow caused many of his Soldiers of the Cross to
forage and seek for booty abroad, as having accomplished their term of
forty days, during the which they had gained Paradise, and refusing to
conquer any more, after so fair a purchase, for fear they should change their
former felicity for blows.

The Legate being much troubled to see his company reduced to so small a number,
and being without hope to take that place so important to harbor him, that
hereafter should have the conduct of the Army of the Church; he bethought
himself of a stratagem, which he effected, and it was this: He sent for a
certain Gentleman well-spoken, that was in the Army, telling him that it was
in his power to do a notable piece of service to the Church, whereby besides
the reward he should receive in Heaven, he should in this life be recompensed
according to his merit. And so he told him that he was to approach as near as
he could to the rampires of the City of Carcassonne, and there make some sign
to those that were besieged, that he desired to have some parley with them, and
to speak with the Earl of Beziers, as his kinsman and servant, to whom he
had some thing to say, that might redound to his great honor and benefit, and
all that were within Carcassonne, and that then he should strain his wits, and
do his best endeavor to put him into fears, and to persuade him to have
recourse unto his mercy, and withal, to work him by persuasions, promises and
oaths, with execrations (of which he being the Popes Legate had power always
to acquit and discharge him) to be content to be conducted by him to the
Legate, with assurance to bring him back again safe and sound into Carcassonne.

This Gentleman played his part so well, that he brought with him the said
Earl of Beziers, to speak with the Legate, where the young Earl told him,
that if he would be pleased to carry himself with greater mildness toward
his subjects, he might easily reclaim them as he would himself, and win
the Albingenses to the Church; that the composition which was offered them, was
dishonorable, and ill-befitting those that were to have their eyes as chaste as
their thoughts, and that his people would rather choose to dye, than to be
brought to so great a shame; and therefore he humbly entreated him to be more
merciful unto them, promising to persuade his subjects to accept of any other
condition more tolerable.

The answer of the Legate was: That they of Carcassonne might determine with
themselves, as they thought best, and that he in the mean time should take no
care for them, for he was now his prisoner until Carcassonne were taken, and
his subjects had better learnt their duty.

The Earl being much astonished hereat, protested and auerred that he was
betrayed, and faith was violated, and that he was come thither upon the word
of a Gentleman, given with oaths and execrations, that he would conduct him
back safe and sound into the City of Carcassonne, But being demanded who and
where that Gentleman was, this young Earl was taught that it was no wisdom to
leave his City, upon the warrant of simple words only. He was committed to
the guard and custody of the Duke of Burgongue.

The inhabitants of Carcassonne having understood of the imprisonment of their
Lord, brake out into tears, and were stricken with strange astonishments,
insomuch that they now thought of nothing so much, as how to escape the danger
they were in; but all means of escape (to the outward appearance) were taken
away, for they were shut up on all sides, and the trenches full of men. But one
among the rest told them, that he did remember, that he had heard some ancient
men of the City say, that there was in Carcassonne a certain vaut or channel
under the ground, great and capable, insomuch that men might walk in it
upright, and many together, which continued to the Castle of Cameret, in
Cabiaret, about three leagues from Carcassonne, and that if the entry thereof
might be found, God had provided for them a miraculous deliverance. Hereupon
all the Citizens were employed about this search of the vaut, except the guard,
which were upon the Rampires. At the last, the mouth or entrance thereof being
found, they all began this journey through it, about the beginning of the
night, with their wives and children, carrying only with them, some victuals
for a few days. This remove and departure accompanied with outcries and
gronings, Chass. lib. 2. chap. 14. page 121.
and sorrow to leave their houses and moueables, furnished with all manner of
goods and furniture, to betake themselves to an uncertain course to save
themselves by flight, leading with them their infants, and old decrepit people,
with the pitiful skreechings and outcries of women, was a most heavy and
lamentable spectacle. They arrived the next morrow at the said Castle, and from
thence they dispersed themselves here and there, some to Aragon, others to
Catalongue, others to Toulouze, and other Towns that took part with them,
whither it pleased God to conduct them.

The morrow after in the morning the Pelerins were all strangely astonished,
for that they had heard no noise all that night, but much more because they saw
no man stirring that day. They came near to the walls, but yet with some
doubt, fearing lest it should be a bait to draw them within the toil, but yet
nevertheless finding nothing that might make them any way distrustful, they
mounted the breach, entered the City, and cried out to the Army, that the
Albingenses were fled. The Legate speedily sent to make public Proclamations,
that no man should ceaze upon any body in his own right, but that all should
be carried to the great Church of Carcassonne, from whence afterward all
things should be brought and sold for the benefit of the Pelerins, rewarding
every one according to his merit. And so it was done, and the Earl of Beziers
committed to prison in one of the strongest Towers of Carcassonne.

CHAP. VI. The Legate Milon establishes a Captain of war for the Church; the
Earl Simon of Montfort accepts the charge: The Earl Remond is absolved by
the Pope: The Earl of Beziers dies: The King of Aragon displeased with the
Earl Simon: Diverse revolt from his obedience: He demands of the Prelates a
new supply of the Soldiers of the Cross.
THe City of Carcassonne being in the possession of the Legate, he resolved
with himself to make it a Town of war, an Arcenall against the Albingenses,
and presently he assembled all the Prelates and great Lords which were yet in
his Army, to take counsel how he might make it a place fit to maintain a
war of long continuance in time to come. Besides, he gave them to understand,
that notwithstanding he thought it very necessary, that there should be
always in the Armies of the Church, a Legate of his Holiness, to give
authority to whatsoever should pass, yet nevertheless it was likewise
necessary that there should be a secular. Captain of the war, one that was
puissant, wise, valiant and fearful, absolutely to command all occurrences,
and to expedite all affairs concerning the war, by his prudent guide and
government, it not belonging to the capacity of Ecclesiastical persons to
lead Armies, or to make war; and that therefore they should consult with
themselves, to cast their eyes upon some one of the Lords of the Cross, to
whom the conquered Countries might be committed, and the care for the direction
of this holy war, until it might be otherwise determined by the Pope.

This charge was first offered to the Duke of Burgongue, afterward to the
Earl of Enneuers, and to the Earl of St. Paul, who did all refuse it. Which
the Legate seeing and perceiving it would be a difficult matter to agree in the
nomination of a Captain, with one mutual consent they named two Bishops, with
the Abbot of Cisteaux, Legate of the Apostolic Sea, and four men of Arms, to
whom they gave power to choose him, that hereafter should lead the Army of
the Church.

They named the Earl Simon of Montfort near Paris, notice whereof being given
unto him, he excused himself, alleging his incapacitie and vnhabilities; but
in the end he accepted of it, after that the Abbot of Cisteaux had laid his
commandment upon him, enioyning him by virtue of obedience, to accept of the
said nomination, The Treasure of Histories in the Treat. of Albingenses.
whereupon he promised (says the Compiler of the Treasure of Histories) to
do his best endeavor to vex the enemies of our Lord, for so they term the
Albingenses.

The Earl Simon of Montfort, being General of the Army of the Church, made
his abode at Carcassonne, with four thousand of his Pelerins; which as yet
remained of that great Leuy of three hundred thousand men. Montreal, Fauiaux
and Limons, contributed great sums of money for the Garrison. For they were
not to harbor those Pilgrims that were not bound to any service, their time of
forty days being expired; but such Soldiers as were well affected for the
guard of that place.

In this mean time, the Earl Remond of Toulouze, went to King Phillip
Dieu-donne, to get his letters of Commendation to the Pope, to the end he might
be fully cleared and justified touching the death of the Monk, Friar Peter de
Chasteauneuf, of the which he was iniustly forced to confess himself guilty,
only because the murder was committed within his territories, for which the
Legate Milon had imposed an unjust penance upon. From the Court of the King of
France, he traveled to Rome, where he did immediately receive his absolution of
Pope Innocent the third, as if it had been ready and provided for him. The
Pope received him with all the courtesy that might be, giving him for a
present, a rich Cloak, and a Ring of great price, and granting unto him full
remission and absolution touching the said murder, and declaring that he held
him in this regard sufficiently justified.

The Earl of Beziers being prisoner at Carcassonne, dyed shortly after, the
Earl Simon of Montfort was put in possession of his Lands, not without great
suspicion of poison. The Earl Simon made show to be much grieved therewith,
and caused him to be interred in the great Church of Carcassonne, with great
pomp, and with his face uncovered, to the end that none of his Subjects might
afterward doubt of his death. Presently after he made challenge to the
inheritance and whole estate of the said Earl, by virtue of those donations
which the Legate of the Pope had conferred upon him, and that charge that was
laid upon him for the Church.

In pursuit whereof, he demanded of the King of Aragon, the inuestiture of the
Earldom of Beziers, and the City of Carcassonne. The King of Aragon would
not yield thereunto, bewraying much discontent, to see this house overthrown
under a pretense of Religion. The like discontent did the Duke of Bourgongue
show, at what time the charge of the General was offered unto him, saying,
Chassag, page 126.
That he had Lands and Lordships enough without the accepting of those of the
Earl of Beziers, and the spoiling him of his goods, adding therewithal, that
he had already suffered wrong enough.

All the bordering neighbors of the Earl Simon, began to fear him, upon a
report which he gave forth, that at the spring following, he would have a great
Army of Pelerins at his command, and that then he would chastise those, which
had not acknowledged the authority wherein the Church had placed him. Castres
sent unto him the Keys of their City, by some of their Bourgesses. The Castle
of Pamies was yielded unto him, every one submitted themselves to his command,
round about Carcassonne, and the Vicountie of Beziers. But he received a
back-blow in the midst of his prosperity, which was a presage unto him of
some evil. For the King of Aragon, keeking secretly the Gentlemen of the
Vicountie of Beziers, in breath, encouraged them to bring unto equal terms
this petty-tyrant, who was brought in for the good of another, saying, That if
he were not constrained to have always a world of Pilgrims for his conquests,
he would abuse this his rest, to take heart to invade the goods of all those
that are near adjoining, under a pretense of that charge he has from the
Pope: but if he once knew how dangerous, it would be for him, to want his
Soldiers of the Cross, he would be better advised, considering that it is
not possible, that he should always have so great a number of Pilgrims, that
should always make him fearful; for there must be time for the leuying of
them, time for the conducting of them from far Countries, and if he should
make no use of them within forty days of their arrival, he would be more
weak than before, after the expiration of their Pilgrimage: That to hurt and
hinder him, there can be no better course taken than to keep themselves locked
up in their Garrisons at the coming of the Pilgrims, and at their departure
when they were weak, to set upon him on every part; that at the last he will
be so weary of his great travels, that he will think he has bought at a dear
rate, the good which he believed he had gotten by the title of a Donation of
those that had nothing to give. The King of Aragon added hereunto that he had
never heard of any so unjust a usurpation, for if this war were made to take
away the goods and lives of the Albingensens, by what title had the Legate
confiscated the goods of the Earl of Beziers, who had always lived, and also
died in the belief of the Church of Rome? That he therefore perceived, that
the greatest crime they could find in the said Earl, was, that they found him
to be young, and no way powerful. That if God gave him life, he would make it
appear, that he loved the Earl of Beziers, and that he was his Kinsman, and
would likewise show himself a true friend, to those that had any feeling of
those wrongs and outrages that were offered him. Those hopes to be succored by
the King of Aragon, gave heart and courage unto those, that with great
impatiency bare the dominion and power of the Earl Simon of Montfort, The
Monk of the Valley Sernay. Chap. 33.
in such sort, that the said Earl being one day, gone from Carcassonne to
Montpelier, he found at his return, that diverse had taken Arms, to shake off
their yoke, having besieged certain of his Soldiers in a Tower near to
Carcassonne. He speedily made his return to succor them, but too late, for
not being able to pass a River called Sarasse, and being gone to Carcassonne
to pass by the bridge, the Tower was taken before he came. This small affront
brought him into some contempt, and gave heart to others, to offer the like.
About this time, Captain Boucard for the said Earl Simon at the Castle of
Seissac, attempted the surprise of the strong Castle of Cabaret, whereof
mention has been made heretofore; for this end and purpose, he made his
approach unto the said Castle, as closely as he could. Captain Roger, who was
within the said Castle, for the Earl Remond was come forth with fourscore
horse, to forage and seek for booty: Boucard upon the sudden, and unlooked
for, charged him, and had well-neere discomfited him; but Roger having taken
knowledge of the enemy, doubled the charge upon him in so furious a manner,
that he overcame the troops of Boucard, and brought him Prisoner to that
Castle, which he said he came to surprise.

At this very time, Gerard of Pepios, took part with the Albingenses, and
seized upon Puisorignier, and the Castle of Menerbe. Now the war began to
grow very cruel, for (if it be true that the Monk of the Valleys Sernay has
written) Gerard caused the eyes of all the Soldiers of the Earl Simon, which
he could take to be plucked out, and cut off their ears and their noses with
their upper lip, and sent them all naked to the Earl Simon of Montfort,
leaving one for a guide unto the other, with one eye. On the other part,
whenever the Earl Simon was victorer in any place, he caused a great fire to
be made, and cast into it as many of the Albingenses as he could take. All
they of the Romish Church did as much, that bare Arms for the Albingenses; for
William of Rochford, Bishop of Carcassonne, caused the Abbot of Cisteaux to be
slain, meeting him near unto Carcassonne, his body being found murdered with
six and thirty wounds, and the Monk which accompanied him, with four and
twenty.

Then the City of Carcassonne (says the Monk) and the Soldiers that were in
it, were stricken with such fear, That they had little hope to defend
themselves but by flight, for they saw themselves (says he) environed on all
sides with infinite enemies. From these miseries, which did much move the
patience of the Earl Simon, he took occasion to write, to all the Prelates
throughout Europe, that if in the Spring following, he were not assisted with
new succors of Pilgrims, it was impossible for him to hold out, for his
enemies finding his weakness, took the advantage thereof: witness that after
the last departure of the Pilgrims, he had lost above forty towns and Castles,
of which the people had before brought him the keys, and were now all revolted
from him and the Church, being beyond his power to remedy it for want of men.
He therefore entreated them in the name of God, to give their helping hand,
otherwise he must be enforced to yield up the rights of the Church and the
Country altogether.

Now matters thus standing, the Earl Simon attending new succors, took the
Castle of Beron near Montreal, where he caused the eyes of above a hundred
Albingenses to be pulled out, and cut off their noses, leaving only one with
one eye to be a guide to the rest, and to conduct them to Cabaret. This
stirred up the Albingenses in such sort, Chass. page 136.
that had not succors instantly come, they had shut him up on every side.

CHAP. VII. New succors of Pilgrims come to the Earl Simon, conducted from
France by his Wife; The Earl Simon by them recouereth the Castles of Menerbe
and Terms, and the Town De la Vaur: The Earl Remond is cited before the
Legate; He refuses to appear: Folquet the Bishop of Toulouze ouer-reacheth
him; causes him to lose the Castle Narbonnes: The Legate Milon dies.
IN the year one thousand two hundred and ten, 1210.
the Earl Simon being shut up (says the Treasure of Histories) within
Carcassonne, for want of Pilgrims, he understood that the Countess his Wife,
came from France, and brought with her a great number of Pelerins, which gave
him great comfort, and he went out to meet her.

A pleasant war it was, wherein Priests levied the Soldiers, and a woman
conducted them to the wars.

The Pelerins were employed in the recovery of the Castle of Menerbe, a place
very strong by nature, upon the Frontiers of Spain. This siege was procured by
the entreaty of Ameri, Lord of Narbonne, and the Inhabitants thereof, who
complained that always in former times this place had been as a thorn in
their feet: They yielded themselves for want of water, to the discretion of the
Legate, who caused the Pilgrims to enter the place with the Cross and the
Banner, and singing Te Deum laudamus. The Abbot of Vaux would needs preach to
those that were within the Castle, and to exhort them to acknowledge the Pope,
and to stick to the Romish Church; but they not staying till he had ended his
Discourse, they all of them cried out, The Monk of the Valleys of Sernay, chap.
47. Chass. lib. 3. chap. 7.
saying, We will not forsake our faith, we reject the Romish, you labor but in
vain, for neither life nor death shall make us to abandon our belief. Upon
this answer, the Earl Simon and the Legate, commanded a great fire to be made,
and cast into it a hundred and forty persons, as well women as men, who went
into it with joy, giving thanks unto God for that it pleased him to do them
the honor, to suffer and to dye for his names sake. Thus did these true
Martirs of Christ Jesus finish their frail lives in the midst of the flames,
to live eternally in heaven; And thus did they triumph over the Legate of the
Pope, resisting him to his face, and threatening the just judgment of God upon
the Earl Simon, and that one day he would pay dearly for his cruelties,
howsoever he seemed now to commit them scotfree, yet he would pay for all when
the books should be opened. There were a number of Priests and Monks, that
did exhort them to take pity on themselves, promising them their lives, if
they would live according to the belief of the Church of Rome: There were only
three women that accepted of the condition, that is to say, to live by abiuring
their religion; all the rest died constantly, but they were vanquished by the
allurements of the mother of Richard de Marsiac.

After this expedition, Terms. The Lord of Tholo in the hist. of his times pa.
459.
the Earl Simon besieged the Castle of Terms in the same territory of
Narbonne, a place that seemed impregnable by any force of man. It was taken for
want of water, not by any capitulation: but because having had along time a
great want of water, it rained and they drank of the water which fell into
their Cisternes, not sufficiently purified, whereupon they fell into diverse
diseases. Seeing therefore themselves brought to such an estate, that if they
had been driven to fight, they had had no power to make resistance; they
resolved one night to quit the place; which they did not being descried by any:
The soldiers of the Bishop of Chartres made entry as soon as they perceived
they were all departed, and there set up the ensign of their Bishop.

Amongst other reasons which the Earl Simon used, The Monk of the Valleis
Sernay chapter 51. and so forward.
to animate his Pilgrims, this was the most pregnant, that this place was the
most execrable of all the rest, because there had been no Mass sung there
since the year 1180. that is to say for the space of thirty years.

La Vaur.
The Castle Vetuille de la Vaur, much troubled the Earl Simon. It was besieged
with new troops of Pilgrims, which a little before came from France, whilst
the siege was at Terms, that is to say, the Bishop of Chartres, Chass. lib. 3.
pa. 141. Ologarei in hist. of Foix. page 129.
of Beauuais, the Earl of Dreux, and the Earl of Pontieure. This place was
upon the river of Agotte, about five leagues from Carcassonne, toward
Toulouze, whereof the sister of Aimeri, Lord of Montreal whose name was
Gerande, was Lady. The Legate had taken from the said Lord of Montreal all his
places, which was the cause why he put himself into the city de la Vaur to
defend his Sister. There were within this place many honest men: There came
Pilgrims from all parts to the Legate: From Normandy the troops being
conducted by their Bishops, especially by him of Lisieux; and there came also
unto him six thousand Alemans. The Earl of Foix being advertised which way
they came, went and lay in ambuscado for them, where he overthrew them all, not
any escaping, but a certain Earl, who at the first encounter, ran away to
carry news to the Earl Simon, who pursued the Earl of Foix with fourteen
thousand men, but in vain, for he had before retired himself to Mongiscard.

After six months siege, the city de la Vaur was taken by assault, where all
were put to the sword, except fourscore gentlemen, whom the Earl Simon caused
to be hanged and strangled, and Aimeri was hanged upon a gibbet, higher than
all the rest; and the Lady of Lauar, was cast alive into a ditch; and therein
covered with stones. Chass. lib. 3. page 150.
One only act of humanity we read was done by the troops of the Earl
Simon; and that is, that a gentleman understanding that there were in a house
diverse women and children sick, he begged them of the General, and they were
granted unto him; who conducted them safe and sound out of the city, not being
offered by any man the least indignity that may be.

These were the principal places that the Legate took in the year one
thousand two hundred and ten. 1210.
We must now return to the Earl Remond of Toulouze, who at his return from
Rome with letters of favor from the Pope, gave the Legate Milon to understand,
that he was reconciled unto the Pope, and had received from him his full
absolution, and that he had bestowed upon him some presents. The Treatise of
hist. in the treat. of the Albing.
In the mean time the matter is otherwise set down in the Treasure of
histories, for there it is said, That the Pope writ to the Bishop of Rhodois,
to Master Miles, and Master Theodosius, that if the Earl could purge himself
sufficiently before them, of the death of Friar Peter, and the heresy for
which he was suspected, that they should give him his purgation.

This clause gave authority again to the Legates, to hear the said Earl,
touching the aforesaid business, which was to bring him back again to the
beginning of all his misery. The Earl Simon pressed the Legate to proceed in
the fact of the Earl Remond, either to absolve, or to condemn him, to the end
he might know, whether he should hold him for a friend or for an enemy of the
Pope and of the Church, to be at peace with him, or to make war against him.

The Legate Milon commanded him to appear in his own person, because he would
know once for all, Chass. lib. 3. page 129.
how he and his subjects lived with them, that is to say, with the Earl Simon
and the Church.

The Earl Remond answered, that neither he nor his Subjects had any thing to
do with them, that he had made his agreement and reconciliation with the Pope,
which the Legate could not be ignorant of, to whom he had showed the Bulls, and
therefore he entreated them to forbear any farther to disquiet him, The Earl
Simon and the Legate writ unto him again, that it was very necessary, that he
should make repair unto him to fulfill the contents of the Bulls. He answered
that he had rather take the pains to go to king Philip of France, and to the
Emperor, yea to Rome, to the Pope himself, to complain of the wrongs they
did unto him, than to put himself any more into their hands.

When the Legate saw that he could not win him by Letters, he resolved to play
the fox and to win him by subtleties. They sent unto him Folquet Bishop of
Toulouze, and instructed him how he should carry himself to deceive him: This
was a capable instrument for the premeditated treason. He went therefore to the
Earl Remond, insinuated himself into his favor, with fained protestations of
his desire to serve him, and his great grief to see so little love betwixt the
Legate and himself, wishing that it were in his power to stand him in any steed
therein, though with the loss of his own blood, and offering unto him all
love and assistance: That he had far greater reason to procure the preservation
of his good, than any other person whatsoever: That he would advise him as a
friend, to take from the Legate all pretense of suspicion: That when he had once
showed himself confident of him, they would no longer doubt of his fidelity;
and that even now a fair occasion was offered, to bind the Legate and the
Earl Simon unto him, and that was, that whereas he knew they were shortly to
come to Toulouze, if he would offer unto them his Castle Narbonnes to lodge in,
it would be an excellent testimony of that confidence he had in them and bind
them to love him. The Earl Remond being thus gulled by this Bishop, offered
them his castle: They accepted thereof, and presently placed therein a great
garrison. The word was no sooner slipped the Earls mouth, but he was sure he
should repent it, but it was now too late to recall it. He cursed his own
imprudency, and his friends and subjects, his too great facility; for he saw
them incontinently to fortify his Castle, that it might serve them for a
canesson and bridle for his own subjects: As also from the time of their
entrance into that place, he found that they grew bold to speak all the ill
they could of the Earl Remond, and that with open mouth; saying that he had
mocked the Pope, giving him to understand that which was false, and promising
that which he would never perform, insomuch that he was as great an heretic
as he was before his abiuration.

That in the ruin and punishment of the Earl Remond, the destruction of the
Albingenses did consist: but on the contrary, though the ground were covered
with the dead bodies of the Albingenses, if the Earl Remond should remain,
they would always bud and spring up again, and therefore it was resolved to
exterminate and utterly to destroy the house of Remond from the bottom to the
top. But when men purpose that which God has otherwise disposed, they come
many times short; So it was with the Earl Simon, who was frustrated of this
hope, by the sudden unexpected death of the Legate Milon, which changed the face
of the affairs of the said Earl Milon: for he was feign to spend many years
in the ruinating of that house of the Earl Remond and his adherents, which he
had promised to do in a few days.

CHAP. VIII. Theodosius succeeds the Legate Milon: proceeds against the
Earl Remond, excommunicateth him, and frames very violent articles against
him: The Earl Remond retireth himself from St. Giles and Arles with the king
of Aragon, lest they should be apprehended by the Legate: Simon besieges
Montferrand: Baudoin reuolteth: The king of Aragon allieth himself with the
Earl Simon.
1211.
IN the year of our Lord 1211. Thodize gave the Earl Remond to understand,
that he should have what was just and right touching his affairs, and with
fair words persuaded him to come to St. Giles. Being there he ripped up the
business touching the murder of the Monk Friar Peter de Chasteauneuf from the
beginning, without consideration of any precedent justification, and
excommunicated the said Earl Remond, not as being guilty of the death of the
said Monk, but because he had not driven the Albingenses out of his country
as he was bound by promise. The Earl Remond having felt the blast of the said
excommunication, retired himself to Toulouze, not speaking a word, before the
Legate had means to publish the sentence.

The Bishop of Toulouze knowing he was excommunicated, sent one to certify
unto him, that he was to depart out of the city of Toulouze, so long as the
Mass was singing, because he might not say Mass, there being an
excommunicated person within the city. The Earl Remond being much moved with
the audacious boldness of the Bishop, sent a Gentleman, one of his followers
to tell him, that he was to depart and that speedily out of his territories,
upon pain of his life. The Bishop departed and sent to the Provost of the
Cathedral Church, and to the Canons, that they were to depart with them, and
that with the Cross, and the Banner, and the Host, and for the greater
devotion, they should go barefoot and in procession. In this equipage they
arrived at the Army of the Legate, where they were received as Martyrs
persecuted for the Mass, even with tears of the Pilgrims, and the general
applause of every one.

The Legate thought now that he had sufficient cause to prosecute the Earl
Remond, as a relapse and impenitent man, but yet he desired much to get hold of
him, because if he could once apprehend him, he would quickly make him to
conclude that business as the Earl of Beziers did. To this purpose, he
flattered him by Letters, full of testimonies of his great love toward him,
and by this means drew him once again to Arles. The Earl entreated the King
of Aragon that he would be there to hinder (if need should be) any foul play
that might be offered. Being come to the place, the Legate commanded the King
of Aragon, and the said Earl Remond, that they should not depart the city,
without his leave upon pain of indignation, and to be prosecuted as rebels to
the Church. Some friend of the Earls used the means, to give him a sight of
the Articles of the Sentence, which the Legate had a purpose to publish against
the said Earl Remond, which were these that follow.

That the Earl of Toulouze shall incontinently dismiss and casheere all his
men of Arms, not retaining any one of them.

That he shall be obedient, and subject to the Church, of which he shall repair
the damages, and satisfy all costs and charges.

That throughout all his lands, no man shall eat more than two sorts of flesh.

That he shall expel out of his countries and territories, all the heretics
and their allies.

That he shall deliver into the hands of the Legate, and the Earl of Montford,
all those that shall be named unto him, to do with them as they please, and
that within one year.

That no man within his lands, noble or ignoble, shall wear any apparel of
great price, but black and course clokes.

That all the strong places and castles of defense, belonging unto him, shall
be overthrown and laid even with the ground.

That no Gentleman of his shall remain or dwell in any City or Castle, but
shall make his abode, in the fields and country houses, as a villager.

That he shall not leuy in his lands any tolles, but those that have been of
old time imposed.

That every master of an house, shall pay yearly to the Legate four Toulouzian
pence.

That when the Earl of Montford, or any of his people shall pass through his
countries, they shall pay nothing for any thing they take or spend.

That having performed all things, as above, he shall travel beyond the Seas,
to make war against the Turks, never returning again into these parts, but
by the commandment of the Legate.

That after all these things, the Legate and the Earl of Montfort should
restore unto him, all his Lands and Signories, when it should please them.

These Articles being communicated to the King of Aragon, he found them so
unjust, that he would stay no longer in that place, but counseled the Earl of
Toulouze presently to mount on horseback, for fear lest they should ceaze
upon his person, even to the full execution of those Articles, who it should
seem went about to enrich themselves by his spoils. And forasmuch as the said
King of Aragon had persuaded the said Earl that he should put no more
confidence in the Legate and Earl Simon, he cast in his teeth his too great
facillitie, saying unto him in Gascongne tongue: Pla bous an pagat, that is to
say, They have well paid you.

The Legate and the Earl Simon being much discontented that this prey had
escaped their hands, and knowing that he would no more suffer himself to be
abused and ouer-reached by words, they endeavored to get that by force, which
either by fair words or foul they could not. Whereupon they went presently
and besieged the Castle of Montferrand, into which the Earl Remond had put the
Earl Baudoni his brother, with the Vicount of Montelar, Remond of
Pierregourde, and Pons Roux of Toulouze, and diverse other valiant men to defend
that place, which he knew to be of great importance. After some breach and
assaults, the Earl Simon being out of all hope to win this place by force of
Arms, desired to speak with the Earl Baudoni, which having obtained, he told
him that his brother made it appear unto the world, that he had desire to
undo him, in that he had shut him up in so paltrie a place, which he very
well saw he could not long defend, for that at the arrival of that world of
Pilgrims, which were now marching toward him, he would quickly know, how
great an oversight it was to lock up himself within so weak a hold: That if
he did attend any violent assault of these Pilgrims, there would be no more
place for mercy. That if he would yield himself and the place, he would
leave it to his guard for the Church, and besides, he would make him, for the
time to come, a partner of his conquests, with such advantage, that he should
shortly be a greater man, and in greater authority than his brother, who had
procured unto himself, by his rebellion, his utter overthrow. That he could
never have power sufficient to resist the force of so many Kings, Princes and
Potentates, who sent their people to this war, rewarded by their own zeal,
without any charge of the Church. That every man would commend and admire this
his retreat, besides that happiness he should gain unto himself, by
consecrating himself to the service of God and his Church, and acquitting
himself of that people amongst whom there was not any that was not judged by
the Church worthy to be condemned to the fire. The Earl Baudoni suffered
himself to be carried by the promises and fair speeches of the Earl Simon,
and so delivered up the place, and put himself into Bruniquel, a place very
strong which belonged to the Earl Remond, and promised never to bear Arms,
but in defense of the Church. These two places drew with them, to the Earl
Simons part, the places of Rabasteins, Gaillac, Montague, La Guarda, Pech,
Selsas, La Guipia, St. Antonin, with other places near adjoining.

The Earl Remond being much astonished to see himself betrayed, and abandoned
by his own brother, bewailed his misfortunes at Toulouze, where from day to
day he attended to be invested; when upon the surcharge of these evils, he
understood that the Legate and the Earl Simon, had won unto them the King of
Aragon, his one and only prop upon earth, under God. The mean to work it was
this: The Legate writ unto him, that he should win great commendation, and do
greater service to the Pope and to the Church, if he would once again become a
mediator for the peace of the Church. And to that end they entreated him to
come to Narbonne, where they hoped to lay a good foundation. He took his
journey thither, where the first thing they proposed, was, to make some
agreement betwixt the Earl of Foix, and the Church, and the Earl Simon. A
premeditated design again to spoil the Earl Remond of his succors.
Afterward they gave him to understand, that the Earl Simon desired to live
with him, as with his best kinsman and friend that he had in the world, and for
this cause he was very willing to join in alliance with him, if he would be
pleased to accept of a daughter of the Earl Simons, to marry with his eldest
son. And such conditions they proposed unto him, that he was content that his
son should marry the daughter of the said Earl Simon; in regard of which
alliance, the King of Aragon, gave to the Earl Simon the inuestiture of the
Earldom of Beziers, which before he would never agree unto, nor to that of
Carcassonne, which he likewise at the same time obtained. But that which did
most hurt the Earls of Toulouze, and of Foix, was, that they caused the King
of Aragon to swear, that he would no more favor the Albingenses, but carry
himself as a Neuter in this war betwixt the Church and them.

The Earl Simon having gotten that which he desired, that is, to alienate the
King of Aragon from the Earls of Toulouze, and of Foix, he took his time to
bend his forces both against the one and the other.

CHAP. IX. The Earl Simon besieges Toulouze, makes a spoil and is beaten, he
raises the siege: Aimeri is taken prisoner: The Earl of Toulouze is succored,
and by whom: The Earl Simon makes war with the Earl of Foix, who goes in
person to speak with the Legate, but obtaines nothing: The King of Aragon
animateth the Earl of Foix, and his son Roger, and intercedeth for them in
vain.
THe first attempt that the Earl Simon made, after his alliance with the King
of Aragon, was the siege of Toulouze, being strengthened with a great multitude
of Pilgrims, which the Bishop of Toulouze went to leuy in France, whilst the
Legate Thedize, and the Earl Simon did delay the Earl Remond, under the shadow
of a treaty of peace with him. Being arrived at Montandran, upon the borders of
Garonne, near to Toulouze, Chas. lib. 3. chapter 14 pa. 162.
the Earl Remond made a sallie out of Toulouze, with five hundred horse, and
footmen a great number, and came as far as the bridge, in hope to gain it,
or to break it down.

There was at that bridge a great fight, and many there died both on the one
side and the other. In the end, the Earl Remond sounded a retreat, whereupon
the enemy took heart, passed the bridge, and pursued the Earl Remond, even
to the gates of Toulouze: The Earl Remond made so sudden and so furious a
reincounter upon them, that he beat back his enemy unto the bridge, which was
not large enough to receive them, so that they were almost all slain before
they were at the foot thereof. Aimeri the son of the said Simon of Montfort,
was taken prisoner.

The Earl Simon seeing this loss, and his son taken prisoner, animated his
Pilgrims to the combat. They endeavoring to be revenged of this overthrow, ran
into the ditches, set up their ladders, but they were valiantly repulsed. The
ditches were filled with the dead bodies of the Pilgrims, and the Earl Simon
was beaten from his horse. In the midst of this conflict, arrived the Earl
of Champagne, with a great number of Pilgrims, and he came in good time to be
well beaten. The Earl Simon commanded them all to go to the spoil, whereupon
the Pilgrims ran into the Vineyards, Orchards and Gardens, cut down all
trees that bare fruit, plucked up the Vines by the roots; at what time the
President of Ageues came forth of Toulouze, with a great number of the
inhabitants thereof, who seeing them to spoil their possessions, ran upon
the Pilgrims with violence, scattered here and there through the fields, and
slew a great number of them. On the other side the Earl of Foix conducting
some troops of horse and foot, slew as many as he met with. The Earl of Bar
held his troops in better order, and seeing the disorder especially of those
that were flying away, he cried out, a Bar, a Bar; which the inhabitants of
Toulouze understanding, charged them so bravely, before any of them could
gather themselves unto him, that he was discomfited with the rest. The Earl
Remond retired his troops into Toulouze, and commanded solemn thanks to be
given unto God, for so admirable a victory over his enemies.

The fame of the Earl Remonds victories being spread abroad, there came unto
him diverse succors, from all the parts round about him, for they were all
weary of the troops of the Pilgrims, and willingly offered both their goods
and their lives to drive them out of the Country. Chass. lib. 3. chap. 14.
page 169.
The Earl Simon being in some scarsitie of victual, because the ways whereby
they should be relieved, were stopped, was constrained to raise his siege. And
besides the Earl of Chalons, the Earl of Bar, The Monk of the Valley Sernay.
Chap. 79.
and certain other German Earls, retired themselves, their quarantaines or
forty days being expired; but yet he would not be altogether idle that
Autumn: He therefore marched into the Countries of the Earl of Foix, to
refresh the rest of his Army, and to possess himself of some places. He
went as far as the Town of Foix, made spoil of all that was about it, and
then set fire to the Town. Being at Panies, the Legate took the one half of
the Army to accompany him to Roquemaure, where he went to pass the winter,
and in his way being in the Earldom of St. Felix of Caraman, he took the
Tower of Cassas, and about one hundred men therein, and caused them all to be
burnt alive, and laid the place level with the ground. In the mean time the
Earl Simon ruinated the Countries of the Earl of Foix, as long as the said
Earl kept his bed, being visited with a grievous sickness, during the which,
his servants that were about him, durst not tell him of his losses; that is to
say, of Pamies, Sauerdun, Mirepoix and Prissant, which had been likewise
battered, a place very strong near Carcassonne. Being recovered of his
sickness, and understanding what havoc the Earl Simon had made of his
houses, and what ruin his poor subjects had endured, he went to the Army,
and desired to speak with the General, and thus he delivered his mind unto
him.

The inconstancy of tottering fortune (my masters and most renowned Lords) is
the cause why I am not astonished to see my self thus infinitely afflicted by
this cruel Stepmother. Hologoray in his Hist. of Foix. page 133.
I have heretofore braued mine enemies, fought in the field amongst those that
would resist my power, entertained the great and mighty Monarchs as my
friends: None have threatened me, much less offended me, neither could my sword
ever bear it. I have been employed in public negotiations, which carry with
them, as their attendants, infinite discommodities, neither have I gotten any
dishonor thereby, and I should have held my labor ill employed, if they had not
bin upon worthy occasions, never having desired to be accounted an honest man,
by those unworthy and unjust means that some men purpose unto themselves. For
he that is not an honest man, but because other men should know him to be so,
and that he might be the better esteemed after knowledge taken thereof: he
that will not do good, but upon condition that his virtue may be known by
other men, he is not the person from whom any great service can be expected.
We must (says the Maxim) go to war out of duty, and attend the reward
which is never wanting to all honorable actions, be they never so secret; yea,
even our virtuous cogitations, being the only contentment which a conscience
well ordered receives in it self for well doing. Having therefore (my masters
and friends) my courage still lodged in a firm and assured place, against all
the assaults of Fortune, and my conscience clear in this, that I never gave
you any occasion to rise up against me, I have made no doubt to appear before
you in this assembly, and to bring with me my head, not my treasures, to expose
them to the mercy of the Soldier, or my commodities, to plant them as Barriers
about my lands and territories, which you have begun without reason to bring
into a lamentable estate, to be judged by your Counsel, and according
thereunto, to condescend to that which shall be determined. For I had rather
never to have been borne, than to survive my reputation, neither can I suffer
that honor and glory, which in my younger years I have justly won, to be
extinguished. Have you ever known me to be an enemy to the Realm of France?
If it be so, let me lose both life and honor, with shame and dishonor. And
who dares speak it to my face? Have I conspired against the Church? What have
I done, that any man should have that conceit of me? And do you think, that
for the poor remainder of this fantastical imaginary life which I have to
live, I will lose the essential life, and purchase to my self, to please any
man's appetite, an eternal death? The wise men of the world have proposed to
themselves a more honorable and just end, to so important an enterprise. There
is no man of honor that chooses not rather to lose his honor than his
conscience. It is that which I hold to be the dearest lewell within my
Cabinet. Keep me I pray you in that range which the Kings of France have given
me, that is, to be thought faithful, as they have heretofore censured me,
when they have had occasion to deal in the affairs of my House, to the end
(says he) that being offended, I be not constrained to defend my self, and to
offend you, which shall be much against mine own will and intention. And this
by oath I vow unto you.

Roger the son of the Earl of Foix was much afflicted with the submission of
his father, as being an action too base for the greatness of their house. The
King of Aragon did likewise distaste it. For notwithstanding he were allied to
the Earl Simon, yet he did not fear to let him understand, that he could not
approve of his usurpations under the pretense of religion.

The Earl Simon on the other side, Holag. page 133.
said with a loud voice.

That the conquests were just and lawful: that he had his right from the Pope:
that there was no other purchase, but that which he won with the sword: that
he had an Army to answer whomsoever should oppose himself against it, were
it the King of Aragon, and of strength sufficient to defend himself against
whomsoever.

The King of Aragon writ to the Earl of Foix, that forasmuch as the Legate, and
the Earl Simon had deceived him, in not restoring those lands and places,
which they had promised him to restore, that he should no longer put any trust
in them, since the intent of the Earl Simon was too well known. That is, that
he endeavored to make himself great and rich with the goods of another, under
a pretense of Religion, if his ambition and avarice were not stayed, by the
common arms and intelligence of those, whom he had already spoiled of their
goods, and of all others that do but understand, that having begun with
their neighbors, he will likewise desire to folllow that course without end,
the covetous desires of men being endless. That he knew very well that he did
not seek his alliance, out of any desire he had to be honored thereby, but
only to hinder him from succoring those whom he desired to strip out of all
they had. He likewise exhorted by letters, Roger the son of the Earl of
Foix, to fortify himself against the unjust usurpations of Montfort,
otherwise every man would laugh at him; that the Earl Somon was but weak,
accompanied with a few Pilgrims, ready out of discontents to retire themselves:
that he should therefore enter the field, and he should quickly find who
would assist him.

The Earl Remond being much afflicted with the alienation of the King of
Aragon, by the marriage of his son with the daughter of Simon of Montfort,
thought it necessary to do his best endeavor to regaine him, by another
marriage. He offered therefore his only son and heir in marriage to a daughter
of his; unto which motion, the King of Aragon yielded his consent. The Monk of
the Valley Sernay, Chap. 67.
The Earl Simon was much displeased herewith. The Monk says, That this
marriage made the King of Aragon very infamous, and much suspected, considering
that the Earl of Toulouze, was a manifest persecuter of the Church.

The King of Aragon knowing the murmurings of the Earl Simon, did not fear
with open mouth, to publish his purpose and intent to defend the Earl of
Toulouze, and of Foix. That the one was his Brother in Law, the other his
Subject. That he did assure himself of a day, that God would give them, to
make him repent his unjust conquests.

The Earl Simon being aduertized of the threats of the King of Aragon,
entreated him to blot out those bad impressions, which he had conceived of him,
and that he would make him the judge, and stickler of the difference that was
betwixt him and the Earl of Foix: The Earl of Foix on the other side,
entreated the King of Aragon to yield thereunto; who obtained of the Earl
Simon the restitution of all his Lands and Territories, except Pamies. Which
exception, when his son Roger understood, he presently said he would none of
that; but he knew very well how to recover that with his sword, which very
unjustly he had taken from him by foul play, and false pretenses. Whereupon he
entered the field, foraged, took his occasions seasonably, and bestowed his
time with such incredible diligence, in all his exploits, that he made the
Army of the Cross to feel the bloody effects of his valor. On the other
side, the Earl of Toulouze took the advantage of the time, nourishes those
sparkles of division, seeks to win the love of the Earl of Foix, and they
make between them and their allies, a league offensive and defensive, against
the Earl Simon their common enemy, and assemble themselves at Toulouze, to
bind it by oath, and so they prepare themselves for the war, every one
contributing according to his ability toward an action of such importance.

CHAP. X. The siege of Castlenau d'Arri: the retrait of the Earl Simon: The
Earl of Foix offers him battle: The King of Aragon intercedeth for the
Earls of Toulouze, of Foix, and Coming; he writes for them, to the Council
de la Vaur, and obtains nothing. The King of Aragon defies the Earl Simon,
they make leuies both on the one side and the other; but the Earl Simon
advancing himself, takes diverse places.
Holagary in his h^st. of Foix.
THE first exploit of this war which the Confederates undertook, was the
siege of Castlenau d'Arri, whether they marched in this order. The Vauntgard
was conducted by the Earl of Foix, and Prince Roger his son. The maine
battle by Remond Earl of Toulouze. The rereward by the Prince and Lord of
Bearn. This Army was composed of fifty thousand foot, and ten thousand horse,
and besides that, the City of Toulouze was furnished with a good and strong
garrison, and all munitions and instruments of war. The Earl Simon put
himself into Castlenau d'Arri. The situation of this place was good, and the
Castle one of the best; and there were in the City many Soldiers and great
Captains, and great store of munition for a long siege. The Earl of Foix made
his approach, lodged himself near the rampires, where he framed many
fabrics. In the mean time the enemy sallied forth of the City, and put
themselves very rudely and resolutely upon an Army of the Vauntguard, but they
were with such courage repulsed, that diverse remaining dead within the
trenches, the rest retired to bethink themselves of a better course. The
Subburbs were taken by the besiegers. The Earl Roger was there wounded with a
stone, cast from the City by one of their Engines. The Earl of Toulouze
encamped himself upon a little hill, right over against the Castle,
intrenching and enuironing himself with railes and barriers. The Prince of
Bearn lay on the other side of the City. The Army of the Albingenses
increased daily, upon a report given forth that the Earl Simon was there shut
up, so great a desire had every one to see his ruin. And because there were
too many of the Albingenses at this siege, it was thought good that the Earl
Remond should take a part of the Army to surprise certain small holds and
Castles, which were somewhat disaduantagious to the Army. He took Puylaurens,
Albi, Rabasteins, Gaillac, Montagut, and Sauerdun.

The Earl Simon began to see his ouer-sight, to suffer himself to be enclosed
within Castlenau d'Arri, and that inasmuch as he was the General, it was fit
he should be at liberty, to provide for all other places depending upon his
authority. He left within the place, Guy de Leuis, called the Marshall of
Faith, and to the end he might slip out the better, he caused a sally to be
made upon the besiegers, engaging certain troops, whilst he in the mean time
might make his escape.

The Earl Remond being advertised of the departure of the Earl Simon, was
much offended therewith, more for shame, than for any ill he conceived
thereof: because the report had been every where spread abroad that the
General was in the Cage, and that he should not come forth but bare-headed,
the halter about his neck, and begging mercy. They complained one of another.
The Earl of Foix, that they had left him without succor in so dangerous a
flight. The Earl Remond, that he would put himself into so great danger,
without knowledge given unto any.

In the end they resolved to raise the siege, because of Winter, and a great
leuy of Pilgrims marching toward them, whose lives the Earl Simon did not
greatly tender, because he had the Popes Bull, that whosoever should lose his
life in that war, should go presently to Paradise, as neat from all sin,
as a Hen-roost from ordure. The Earl Simon was strangely puffed up with pride,
making himself merry with that great preparation of war, altogether
unprofitable to the Albingenses, especially that they had suffered him to make
an escape, being twelve to one. Upon this retrait, they in Castlenau would
needs follow the Army; but it cost them dear. For Roger made a furious
return upon them, killing many of them, and beating them back even to the
gates of the City.

The Monk of the Valley Sernay tells this Fable; That notwithstanding there
were a hundred thousand fighting men in the Army of the Albingenses, yet they
of Castlenau d'Arri went forth to their Vintage, and gathered their Grapes as
if there had been no enemy before the City, and that their servants went to
water their Horses, half a league from the City, the Albingenses not dating
to charge them. See here the truth of a Monkish Historiographer. So likewise
when he falls into outrages, they are without measure or end. In this Discourse
he grows very chollerick, against one Sauari of Mauleon, President to the King
of England at Guienne, who had conducted some troops before Castlenau d'Arri,
in favor of the Albingenses, he calls him Infidel, Expugner of the Church, a
dangerous poison, a wicked forlorn person, enemy to God, the Prince of
Apostasy, artificial in cruelties, the author of all perverseness, a
diabolical man, nay the Devil himself. Doubtless he had either given him a
hard chase, or his style is very Monkish.

After this retreat, all the Lords of the Albingenses retired themselves into
their quarters. The Earl of Foix understanding that the Earl Simon was gone
to Pamies, where he much troubled his Subjects, he departed from Toulouze with
two thousand men, and came to the gates of Pamies, offering battle to the
Earl Simon, but he would by no means harken thereunto, finding his Pilgrims
too weak. And doubting that at the Spring following the Albingenses would take
the field; the Earl Simon all the Winter thought of nothing so much, as to
strengthen the places which he held, to maintain the sieges. Among the rest
being desirous to provide for Faniaux, a place of great importance; Roger
perceiving it, lay in Ambush in such manner, and to such purpose, that he
discomfited all those that brought either victuals or munitions.

In the mean time, the Earl Simon, who doubted nothing so much as the King of
Aragon, caused the Legate to write unto him, that he should no more meddle with
the affairs of the Albingenses, except he would entangle himself in the same
miseries with them, and include himself in the same excommunication. He
likewise caused Philip King of France to write unto him, entreating him not to
favor those that were enemies to the Pope and to the Church: The Legate
likewise caused him to write to the Pope, touching the same matter.

These entreaties of the Pope, and the French King, were unto him as express
Commands, and therefore when the Earl of Foix, Toulouze and Coming, pressed
him to assist them, he told them he would do it; but it was fit he should
first do his endeavor to obtain that by gentle and peaceable means, which by
war could not be obtained without danger. That the Legate was in counsel with
all those of his part, that he would write unto them, and that if he could not
obtain what he desired by Letters, he would enforce them to do him reason by
Arms. He writ therefore to the said Council, beseeching them to end these
deadly wars, enterprised under a pretense of Religion, offering for the
Earls, their obedience to the Pope and the Church of Rome, but yet that they
should never promise any peace before restitution was made unto the said
Earls, of all their lands and goods. The Council de la Vaur returned this
answer.

The Monk of the Valley Sernay, fol. 113.
We have understood the requests that heretofore you have made in the behalf
of the Earl of Toulouze, his son and his Counsel, the Earl of Foix, and of
Coming, and the Lord of Bearne, wherein you name your self the humble and
devoted son of the church; for which we give thanks to our Lord God, and to
your Highness. Assure your self, that in respect of that love you bear to
the Church, we give our best attention unto them with our ears, and receive
them with gladness from our hearts; but touching the answer we are to make to
your Greatness, and the request made by the Earl of Tolouze, his Counsel and
his son, we certify you that the cause and denotation thereof belongs to our
Sovereign Father, having reserved it to his Holiness. You may call to mind
if you please, the infinite offers, grants and graces, which our holy Father
the Pope has offered unto him, after innumerable cruelties and horrible
outrages. You may likewise remember the kind entertainment, which he found in
the Archbishopric of Nerbonne, by the Abbot of Cisteaux, and Legate at
Montpelier two years since; as also the offers which were made unto him, which
he would not accept of: Which grace and favor he so much scorned, that he made
it appear confidently, and with all often, that he was not only enemy to God,
but to his Church, for which cause he has deserved to be banished for ever
from God, his Grace, and his Church. Touching the requests of the Earl of
Foix, Coming, and Lord of Bearne; they have infringed the oaths given by
them, and in stead of accommodating themselves to that kind and courteous
admonishment, they are filled with that abominable heresy, for which to their
great shame and ignomie, they were excommunicated. And this is all the answer
we can give to the demand of your Greatness. Given at La Vaur 15. Kalend.
Febr. 1212. 1212.


The King of Aragon being much moved with this answer, sent again to the
Counsel, demanding truce for the said Earls, until they had received an
answer from the Pope, but it was denied.

The Earl of Foix was well contented, that the Council had yielded nothing to
the requests of the King of Aragon, because he must have been engaged by
promise for him, that he should acknowledge his tenure of the Pope and the
Church of Rome; And which was more, seeing that the King persisted in this
opinion, that such promises were to be made, to re-obtaine their goods, to the
end they might never engage themselves for that they could not perform,
knowing that the King of Aragon, the Earl of Toulouze, and Coming, were
assembled at Toulouze to provide for their affairs, he came thither; and thus
he spoke unto them.

Holagaray in his hist. of Foix
Sir, and you my Masters and Friends; Forasmuch as ambition can teach men both
valor and temperancy, and avarice can plant in the heart, of a Shopboy brought
up in the shade and in idleness, an assurance to depart from his household
harth, and to commit himself to the billows of the Sea, and the mercy of
angry Neptune in a small and frail vessel, it shall be great weakness, and
litherly negligence in us, who by the renowned Acts of our Trophies are known
even to the Confines of Arabia, if we shall now come by a servile and
treacherous acknowledgement to overthrow the Tables and Registers of our
valors so highly elevated. No, no, mine arm shall never consent thereunto, we
are not now in bondage. I and my son choose rather to make trial of the
inconstant hazard of war, than to bring upon us and ours so great and so
notable an infamy. And therefore, for the honor of God quit us of that shame,
that men take no notice of our lamentable estate, mourning and sighing after
our losses, like Distaffe-bearers. If we must needs bow, let it be when we have
first done the parts of good and brave Captains. It is an aduenturous and high
enterprise, (you will say) but it was resolved upon by your selves, Que ie voy
maintenant les ressors qui lui donnent le branle de sa cheute. Fare ye well.
Sir, We yield not our consent in any thing; Come what come may.

The King of Aragon was much moved with this discourse of the Earl of Foix,
wherein he lays an imputation upon him, that he was the cause of their
ruin, because he had animated them against the Legate and the Earl Simon, and
that now he left them as a prey, by procuring a peace worse than a bloody
war. You have Sir (says he) opened a door to our enemies, to tyrannize
over us, if they had accepted of it, and to a glory more great, than they
could hope to attain by Arms, for we had been all their Subjects, without
any other charge, than your own instant request. As for my self (says he) I
had rather have given my self the stab, than to have drunk of that cup. And
after many examples produced by him of those that have changed a miserable life
for a present death, killing themselves before they would serve for Trophies to
their enemies, he continued his discourse as follows.

For mine own part, I had rather follow these great Spirits, than having so
often given testimony of my valor for another, prefer life before honor by
being lazy and negligent in a business that concerns my self. And though
Fortune deny me all means, to make opposition against that wrong that another
shall offer me, yet my courage will never give way, that I should make my
self the speech of the people, or a triumph for men more unworthy than my
self. This their denial of what you demanded, does comfort me, and it vpholds
our honor, for we must either have broken our faith, or played the Cowards like
needy beggars, and lived a life more cruel, more intolerable, than any
torment of Phalaris; like miserable men yielding our necks to the yoke of the
enemy, and confessing our selves beaten, sell our own liberty, and our
childrens after us, and that for ever. Good God what a blow were this Sir? For
as much therefore as the tempest is grown so great, and we are driven to so
extreme a necessity, embrace us in your arms, be our head, serving us for an
example, a watchtower, a conduct: So shall we engage our wills and our lives,
to show our selves your most humble servants in time of need, and valorous
Soldiers when occasion shall be offered. And though I be now worn with
years, yet never had I greater courage or better resolution.

The Earl Remond on the other side, entreated the King of Aragon not to
abandon their cause, offering unto him both his goods and his life, to fight
under his authority.

The King of Aragon being overcome with these entreaties, and moved with
compassion toward the afflicted, in the end took arms, and sent this ticket
of defiance, to the Earl Simon by two Trumpetters. Endeavor without delay to
execute the will of the Pope, or to fight with your Lord, and if you fall into
my hands, you shall pay for it. It is your duty, and I will have it so, and I
rather desire it, than to put my self to the charge of a great Army for your
ruin.

The Earl Simon made good use of this Letter of defiance, for he sent it into
diverse parts of Europe, showing by the Bishops and Monks that preached the
Croisade, that the care was not now for the Earl of Toulouze, Foix, Coming,
or the Prince of Bearne, but for a puissant King, who had made himself the
General of the Albingenses, and that if he were not assisted extraordinarily,
the cause of the Church was at an end; and therefore he entreated all good
Christians, especially the King of France, to give his best assistance in these
holy wars, and extreme necessity.

On the other side, the King of Aragon writ to the King of France, that the
Earl Simon of Montfort had a spirit puffed up with high conceits, far
exceeding both the capacity of his understanding, and his forces; That al his
intentions were no other than plaisterings, under the pretense of Religion, and
in the mean time he intended nothing so much as to be a King in deed, and
Simon by name. He beseeches the King by Letters and by his Agents, that he
would not interpose himself in this war, neither on the one part, nor the
other. Which he obtained of the King, insomuch that it troubled him to see his
Subjects continually drawn to the shambles of this war of the Albingenses,
under a pretense of the Popes pardon, and to see so many of his great Lords his
Kinsmen so vexed by the Earl Simon. When the Earl Simon understood, that the
King of France was made a Neuter, he was much afflicted therewith, having now
no other recourse but to the threats of the Legate to excommunicate him, if he
should proceed any farther. The Legate sent him an Embassage and Letters. The
King of Aragon returned this answer; Go speedily and tell your Master that I
will come and see him, and give him an answer with ten thousand fighting men,
and will him to defend himself, for I will teach him to play with his Peer.

The Monk of the Valleis Sernay. Chap. 89.
Every one makes preparation. The Earl Simon sent into France, to the
Archdeacon of Paris, and Master Jacques de Vitri, to preach the Croisade. The
King Phillip Anguste would not have this Leuy to be made in his Realm: but
yet nevertheless, there went a great number from Auuergne, Normandy, and
about Lion. The Pilgrims arrived before the King of Aragon had prepared his
Army, which gave great advantage to the Earl Simon, for he took in the
mean time Grave, came into the Earldom of Foix, took Tudelle of the
Albingenses, Chass chap. 17. page 177.
and slew all that he found in it, without distinction of age or sex, besieged
St. Antonin, and took it, and caused thirty of the principal of that place
to be hanged and strangled, and that in cold blood, and after he had granted
them their lives, and permitted the Convent of Monks that was in that place,
to be sacked and ransacked. He besieged Penes, and received it by composition,
as he did likewise Marmande: He ceased upon the Castle of Biron near the Sea.
The Earl Simon caused Martin Alquay to be tied to the tail of a horse, and
to be dragged through his Army, and afterward hanged him, because he had
before delivered up the place to the Earl Remond. Moreover, the Castle
Sarrazin and Again were yielded to the Earl. Moissac opened the gates to the
Soldiers of the Cross, and all this did the Earl Simon, before the King of
Aragon or his Army did appear.

CHAP. XI. The exploits of the Earl Simon before the King of Aragon had
prepared his Army: The King of Aragon would come to no composition with the
Earl Simon, being weakened: The City of Muret taken by the King of Aragon:
Battle given: The King of Aragon is slain, and his Army dissipated.
IN the year of our Lord, one thousand two hundred and thirteen, and the
thirteenth of September, the King of Aragon with the Earl Remond of Toulouze,
Remond Earl of Foix, and the Earl of Coming, and Prince of Bearne, appeared
in the field with their Army, composed of seven thousand horses, and thirty
thousand foot. They took Muret a little City upon the borders of the
Earldom of Foix, seated upon Garonne, but they took not the Castle. The
Earl Simon was of opinion, that that was the place where the Army of his
enemies should waste and spend it self, because the Castle was good and
strong, and that if he made resistance for some time, it would of it self be
scattered and overthrown. He therefore put himself into that Castle, with
some small number of his most expert and valorous Soldiers, and furnished it
with munition, and gave by his presence such assurance unto the besieged, that
they thought themselves invincible, of such power is the good opinion that the
Soldiers have of their Captain, to confirm those that are most weak.

There were some that began to enter into consideration of the proceedings of
the King of Aragon, in that he would not accept of a composition so
aduantagious for himself and the Lords of the Albingenses, as the Earl Simon
had offered him, when he saw the inequality of their forces. For the Earl
Simon had not above seven hundred men on foot, and five hundred horse. It is
not good to assault a man, that has no hope to escape but by arms, for there
is not a more violent Schoole-mistris than necessity. But the King of Aragon
thought it no time to smoothe and to flatter, after so many insolent brauados
against his Lord, of which the Monk has noted some; The Monk of the Valleis
Sernay. Chap. 126.
as where he says, that he writ certain letters unto him, without any
salutation, containing these terms, that if he continued in his obstinate
defiance, he returned the defiance upon himself, and that from thence forward
he held not himself bound to do him any service, and that he doubted not, by
the help of God, to defend himself against him and his confederates.

The King of Aragon having these insolent speeches engraven in his memory,
thought him unworthy of any grace or favor in this his weakness, especially
imagining that this his submission might only be to avoid this dangerous
shocke, and to attend his Pilgrims, that he might afterward be more insolent
than before: that at other times when the Earl Simon was in his greatest
height, followed with a hundred thousand men, it was his manner always to
scoff at the submissions of the Earl Remond of Toulouze, and of Foix, and
that it were therefore great weakness not to return like for like: that he
would afterward mock them, if they should have compassion of him that never
had pity of any: that since he had so long time taken his pleasure to provoke
the Lords to be his enemies, he should have furnished himself with greater
numbers of Soldiers, and such as might have more sollid pay than the Popes
pardons, that might not leave him at his greatest need, nor be persuaded like
Pilgrims, that there was nothing more to be gained: for he that has gotten
Paradise (as the Pope would make men believe in his Bulls) has nothing else to
get but blows if he desire any thing more, as they use to do who continue in
this war after their quarantaines, their forty days are spent.

The King of Aragon therefore thought it was fit he should take his advantages
against a man so malicious and so insolent. But none can promise himself the
victory, but the eternal, who is the God of war, for neither the number of
men, nor the equipage or furniture can give the victories, but only God, who
many times makes his power to appear in the weakness of men.

Their Armies were ranged in this manner. The Earl of Foix, and his son
Roger, lead the Vauntgard of the Army of the King of Aragon, consisting of
three thousand horse, and ten thousand foot, bowmen, and Pikemen, which were
the surest arms in those times. The Earl Remond of Toulouze commanded the
battle, assisted by the Earl of Coming, and the Prince of Bearne, wherein
there were above four thousand horse, and twenty thousand foot, without any
reereward.

The Vauntgard of the Earl Simon was conducted by Guy de Leuis Marshall of the
Faith, consisting of five hundred horse, and three hundred foot. The Earl was
in the battle with a thousand horse, and four hundred men on foot, almost all
French, without any reereward.

The King of Aragon made his turns and returns in the head of his Army;
which was thought to be a great oversight, because the General of an Army
must not carry himself like a Captain of Arquebuziers, nor run his Curuets
to be seen, because in the loss of him, consists the loss of the battle,
and the Country which he defends; but he is to keep himself in the heart of
the Army, to direct by his judgment, as occasions fall out, the whole body of
the Army, which is not to stir but by his command and direction. The Earl
Simon quite contrary, came down from the Castle of Muret with a slow pace,
shut up (as it were) and in good order: The King of Aragon seeing him, thought
he came rather to cast himself down at his feet, than to fight. The King of
Aragon had lodged his Army in a place very aduantagious and favorable. They
join battle, and presently the Vantgard of the Earl Simon was almost cut in
pieces, and it went so ill with him and his, that it seemed unto him that that
was the place whither God had called him, to pay with usury, for all his
fore-passed cruelties and insolences, to his own shame; when the King of
Aragon in the head of his Vauntgard approached for his total ruin and
destruction; for being come near to an ambush of four hundred Harquebusiers
which the Earl Simon had placed in certain old decayed houses, he was wounded
to death, and fell from his horse. Whereupon they fell presently into such a
disorder and astonishment, that do what the Earl Remond of Toulouze, of Foix
and Coming, what they could to stay this cowardly Army, they could prevail
nothing with them, but were enforced themselves to follow the trace, and to
commit themselves to the hazard and event of this shameful retreat, flying
directly to Toulouze. The Earl Simon taking the advantage of his victory, and
following the chase, even to the gates of Toulouze, slew so many men in this
days fight, that himself was moved with compassion, grieuing for the hard hap
of his Lord the King of Aragon, and causing a search to be made among the
dead, commanded him to be interred, not in the ground which they call holy,
because he was excommunicated, but in a field nere to St. Granier.

The Bishops, Priests and Monks, which were within the Castle of Muret, from
whence they might behold from far the event of this days journey, have had a
Monk that gives them the whole commendations of this so renowned a victory,
The Monk of the Valleis Sernay, chap. 127.
affirming that it was obtained by the benediction which the Bishop of Coming
gave to the Army with the Cross, promising to the Pilgrims Paradise, without
any pain of Purgatory, and that if they died in that fight, they should all be
received into heaven as Martyrs. As also he says, that all the
Ecclesiastical persons that were within the place, retired themselves to a
Church all the time of the Combat, and that they prayed with such ardency, that
they seemed by their cry rather to houle than to pray.

He that writes the History of Languedoc says, The History de Lang. fol. 12.
that they got the advantage because they had received the benediction from the
Bishops, and had adored the wood of the true Cross in the hands of the Bishop
of Toulouze.

On the other side, the Albingenses acknowledged that they saw herein an
extraordinary proof of the judgment of God, in that the king of Aragon,
attributed at that time, more to his own power and providence, than the help
and succors of the eternal God. But yet for all this, they lost not their
courage, though they had lost in this journey, fifteen thousand fighting men,
neither did they despair of the justice and goodness of their cause, it not
being the first army that has been discomfited in a just quarrel, nor the
first bad cause, that has been maintained with victory. So four hundred
thousand men of Israel, were beaten by twenty six thousand of the children of
Benjamin, who maintained a bad cause, and slew in two battles two and forty
thousand men. Judge 20. Judge 20. 1 Samuel 4.
So the Philistines being uncircumcised Idolaters, got the better in two
battles against the Israelites, and slew of them, thirty four thousand men,
and took the Ark of God. So Jonathan was slain by the Philistines. 2 King. 23
So Josiah who was zealous of the service of God, received his deadly blow
fighting against the king of Egypt at Megiddo. So king John having an army of
sixty thousand men, was discomfited and taken prisoner by the Prince of Wales,
who had not above eight thousand men, notwithstanding the cause of the king of
France were very just, defending himself against his enemy, who assaulted him
in his own country.

The war of the Albingenses increased; for the Earl Simon thought it was
necessary he should pursue his enemies being half dead and overthrown, and
the Albingenses for their part, knew that they must of necessity defend
themselves, or be vanquished and brought into thraldom.

CHAP. XII. Pope Innocent the third, sent against the Albingenses a new Legate
named Bonauenture. Prince Lewis the son of Philip took on him the Cross,
and caused Toulouze and Narbonne to be dismantled, and the walls laid even
with the ground.
THe Earl Simon being puffed up with this victory, sent one to summon the
Earl of Toulouze, Foix, and Coming, and the Prince of Bearne, to deliver
unto him, the keis of those cities and castles that they possessed, and that
they should subscribe to what it pleased the Legate, or resolve miserably to
perish.

He received no answer, but every one betook himself to his own territories,
there to provide the best they could possibly for their affairs. The Earl
Remond retired himself to Montauban, and writ to those of Toulouze, from
whence he was but then departed, that he understood that Rodolph the Bishop of
Arras was coming with a great number of Pilgrims, and therefore, forasmuch as
he saw, that they had no means to defend their city, against so great a force,
that they should treat and grow to some composition with the Earl Simon,
reserving only their hearts unto himself, until God should give means, to
free them from those miseries wherein they were plunged, by the insatiable
avarice of their common enemy. In the mean time, he, the Earl of Foix,
Coming, and the Prince of Bearne, did their endeavors to trouble and to
infest the enemies Armies, with all the power they could for their common good.
The city of Toulouze deputed six of the principal men of the city, to offer
to the Earl Simon, the keys of Toulouze. He received them honorably and
commanded them not to depart from him without his permission. In the mean
time, he writ to Lewis the son of king Philip, that since the battle of
Muret, they of Toulouze offered to yield themselves unto him, but his desire
was that he should have the praise of that conquest being only worthy of
himself. King Philip his father would not heretofore permit, that he should
war against the Albingenses, because he had promised the King of Aragon, to
carry himself as a neuter betwixt both, but now hearing of the death of the
said King of Aragon, he suffered him to go. The Prince being at Toulouze, the
city was delivered into his hands, and presently, the Legate, having assembled
the Bishops of his rank, it was concluded that the pillage should be granted
to the Pilgrims, and that the city should be dismantled, the Castle of Narbonne
excepted; which was incontinently executed, contrary to the promise which had
been given them, that nothing should be altered within the city. This good
use did the Earl Simon make of the presence and forces of Prince Lewis, for
otherwise, he durst not have enterprised the saccage and dismantling of this
goodly and great city, without the endangering of his fortunes, were his
forces never so great.

At this very time arrived Bonauenture the Popes new Legate, and of those that
took on them the Cross the Bishop of Beauuois, the Earl of Saint Paul, the
Earl of Sauoy, the Earl of Alencon, the Vicount of Melun, Matthew de
Montmorenci, and other great Lords that accompanied him. The Legate seeing so
many Pilgrims, began to fear lest Prince Lewis should dispose of diverse places
which the Albingenses held, to the prejudice of the Popes authority, under
whose name all those conquests were made; for the avoiding whereof he sent unto
all those places that held for the said Albingenses, the absolution and
safeguard of the Church, in such sort that the Prince thinking to make an
assault upon any of them, they produced their absolution, and showed that they
were under the protection of the Church. And this Legate grew so audacious as to
tell Prince Lewis, that since he was become a soldier of the Cross, he was
subject to his commands, because he did represent the person of the Pope, whose
pardons he was come to obtain, by obeying the Church, not by commanding as the
son of a King, reproching him besides, that the King his father made no
account to contribute to the extirpation of the Albingenses, when the time and
season served and there was best opportunity: but now after those victories
miraculously obtained, he came to gleane the ears of that glory, which was due
unto those only that had prodigally spent their lives for the Church. The
Prince dissembled this audacious boldness. Narbonne was dismantled by the
agreement of the said Prince, which neither the Legate nor the Earl Simon,
would not have durst to enterprise without his presence. The Bishop of Narbonne
did what he could, to hinder the dismantling of it, affirming that it did much
import, that a place in the frontiers of Spain should be preserved with the
walls and rampires thereof: but the Earl Simon and the Legate were very
instant to the contrary, and they obtained their desires.

Here ends the good fortune of the Earl Simon, for in the end of this leuy
of Pilgrims which Prince Lewis brought with him, he had enough to do to defend
himself from blows; notwithstanding the Albingenses were also wearied with
continual wars, and visited from time to time with new expeditions, insomuch
that they sunk under the burden of them. Now forasmuch as this war changes
countenance in the person of the chief Leaders, and that from hence forward we
shall speak more of the son of the Earl Remond of Toulouze another Remond,
and of Roger the son of the Earl of Foix, then of the old Earls: We here
make a second book of the actions of the children succeeding their fathers
miserably afflicted only for that they had; for in effect there was not any of
these great Lords, that was deservedly assaulted for Religion, for many times
they had their recourse to the Pope, as to the fountain of all their evils,
and in all respects to a poor remedy, never bringing with them from Rome,
other thing than good words, with very dangerous effects.

The end of the first book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF the WALDENSES, called ALBINGENSES,
containing the wars which they maintained after the year one thousand two
hundred and thirteen, until they were utterly exterminated.
CHAP. I. The war is renewed against the Earl of Foix: the Aragonians make
hostile incursions upon the Lands of the Earl Simon: he is discomfited by the
Earl of Foix: Simon is called into Dauphine: The Legate Bonauenture persuades
the Earl of Foix and of Toulouze to go to Rome: they further their cause
nothing at all: the son of the Earl Remond came from England thither, but in
vain.
THE Prince Lewis son of Philip King of France, 1213.
his quarantine or forty days being expired, retired himself, not without
much discontent, to see, in those wars against the Albingenses, so much
tyranny. The Earl Simon endeavored to get a pardon for those last Pilgrims come
from France against the Earl of Foix. Hologaray in his Hist. of Foix, page 157.
He besieged the Castle of Foix, but with his great loss; for there died
before it many gallant men. Having lain before the City ten days, he raised
his siege, finding to his great cost that the place was inexpugnable. The Earl
Simon his Brother kept his quarter at Varilles: the Earl of Foix vnlodged him,
slew with his Lance the said Brother of the Earl Simon, and put to flight his
whole troop. This was a counterpoise to Monfort his prosperity, which had
made him ouer-insolent. And as one unhappy chance comes seldom alone, even
then when he did grind his teeth against the Earl of Foix, swearing that he
would make him fly over the Pereney mountains; a messenger brought him
tidings of the arrival in the Earldom of Beziers, and about Carcassonne, of
diverse troops of Arragonians, and Catalans, who put all they met to sword and
fire, saying, That they would revenge the death of their good King Alphonsus:
He was therefore advertised, that if he did not speedily succor them, the
whole Country would be lost. He departed therefore from Foix with great
diligence. Idem. fol. 158.
The Earl of Foix, who better knew the streights and by-waies of his Country
than he, stopped his passage, and lay in ambush for him in a place so fitting
for his overthrow, that he slew a great part of his troops, without any
Alarm. He saved himself with a few of his people. Being come to Carcassonne,
it was well for him, that he found not a man to speak a word unto, for the
Arragonians had retired themselves; Whereas had they attended his coming, they
might easily have discomfited him, considering the small number that were with
him. At this very time, other Letters were brought unto him, whereby he was
called into Dauphine, where there was one Ademar of Poitiers, and one Ponce of
Monlaur, who hindered the passage of the Pilgrims, who came down by the River
Rhosne, and were conducted by the Archbishops of Lion, and Vienne. There were
likewise the Cities of Monteil-Aimar and Crest Arnaud, who took part with the
Albingenses, who were a great hindrance to the Pilgrims. Simon came to treaty
and composition with Ademar of Poitiers and Monlaur, not having power to
encounter so many enemies.

Again, he was given to understand, that the Arragonians were returned about
Carcassonne; and thither he came and was well beaten, insomuch that he was
constrained to, shut up himself within Carcassonne, having not wherewithal to
keep the field, before he had new supply of Pilgrims to succor him. Seeing
at the last that he got nothing of the Earl of Foix by arms, he had recourse
to his ordinary wiles and subtilties, hoping to work his ruin, under a
pretense of amity. He caused therefore the Legate Bonauenture to write unto
him, that he had compassion on him, for that he was so obstinate in so great a
war, to his great charge, and the loss of the blood of his Subjects, which
if he would he might end in a short time, by taking his iourny to Rome, and
declaring his innocence to the Pope; that he would give him his best assistance
as far forth as possibly he could, to procure the restitution of all his Lands.
But yet it was very necessary that the Church should have some gages of his
fidelity, that is, that he should deliver into his hands the Castle of Foix,
the one and only means to take away all shadow and show of false play, and
that incontinently after his return it should be restored unto him with the
rest of his houses.

He suffered himself to be cheated and gulled by these promises, delivered
unto him the Castle of Foix, and took his journey to Rome: but if he went a
fool thither, a fool he returned. For the Legate had written to Rome, to the
Conclaue and to the Pope, that the Earl of Foix was one of the most dangerous
Heretics that was amongst the Albingenses, a man of great courage and
valiant, and most to be feared: that if he were subdued, the Earl of Toulouze
would be much weakened; that he had gotten from him the means to do any hurt,
by obtaining by fair words those places, which the Church would never have
gotten by arms, namely the Castle of Foix, and that they were to take heed
that they made no restitution of his lands, which if they did, it would be
impossible that the Church should ever bring the Albingenses to their utter
ruin. The Pope was willing enough to join in his overthrow, but because he
came unto him with submissions, he feared least it might be a means to hinder
others from ever putting any confidence in the Pope. He was prodigal of his
Crosses, his Bulls, and his Words, but in effect he commanded his Legate, that
he should not restore unto him those places, until he had given good proofs
of his obedience and justification. Presently upon his return he addressed
himself to the Legate, to enjoy the effect of his fair promises. The Legate
gave him to understand, that his hands were bound by the Pope, because there
were some clauses in his Bulls that did bind him to a new proceeding, and to
know in good earnest what his innocence was; but yet he should assure himself
of his affection, and that he should not attribute to him, if he received not
his full content, and that he would do his best endeavor to make love and
friendship betwixt the Earl Simon and himself. The Earl of Foix, by little
and little withdrew himself, fearing to be arrested, walking about the fields
and houses of his Subjects (as for his own, they were all in the hands of the
Earl Simon:) There he cursed his own facility, to suffer himself to be
gulled by a Priest, bites his fingers for anger to see himself so blockishly
abused, after so many tricks and stratagems played against him. The Earl of
Toulouze, and the King of Aragon, resolve to make a leuy of their Subjects, and
presently to build a Fort at Montgranier, a place very strong by nature. In a
few days they made it a place of defense by the means and labors of their
poor subjects, who bewailing their own miseries and their Lords, traveled day
and night very willingly, to bring the work to an end. This place being built,
he put therein a garrison, and left there his son Roger. The Earl Simon besieged
it, and in the end took it by famine. The composition was, that Roger should
not bear arms for one whole year against the Church. An Article that
troubled much this valiant Lord. For he withdrew himself for the same year
into a house, where he counted the months and the days, till the time was
expired wherein he might either die valiantly in fight, or vanquish his
enemies. And to this purpose he many times conferred with the son of the King
of Aragon lately slain, how he might carry himself to find a means to be
revenged of his Fathers death.

The Legate Bonauenture in the mean time, uses the same subtletie with the
Earl Remond of Toulouze; He persuades him to go to Rome, to determine his
affairs with the Pope more peaceably, than with the Earl Simon, The Monk of
the Valley Sernay. Chap. 133.
especially because he was charged with the death of his own Brother, the
Earl Baudoin, taken in the Castle d'Olme, in the Country of Cahors, because he
had there borne Arms against him; an action that had made him odious both to
God and men, and which his enemies did exaggerate, to the end they might stir
up the Pilgrims, to take vengeance on him, saying, That at the very point of
death they had denied him a Confessor, and that the said Bodoin prayed unto God
that he would raise up some good Christians to revenge the wrong done unto him
by his brother, as by another Caine.

The son of the Earl of Toulouze, named also Remond, understanding that his
Father was to take his journey to Rome, he went with letters from his Uncle,
the King of England, to the Pope, entreating him to do justice to his brother
in Law. The young Lord had been brought up until then in England, where he
could no longer spend time, seeing his Father oppressed with wars and
continual travels, he therefore resolved to use his best endeavors for his
deliverance, either by composition or by arms. The cause of the Earl Remond
was debated before the Pope. There was a Cardinal that maintained, Idem. Chap.
152.
that great wrong had been offered those Lords, who had many times given of
their best lands to the Church, to witness their obedience. The Abbot of St.
Vberi also took their part, with great courage and resolution. The Earl
Remond likewise defended his own cause, charging the Bishop of Toulouze, with
many outrages, and that if he had been constrained to defend himself, he
must accuse those that had driven him to that necessity, for had he not made
resistance, he had long ago been utterly overthrown. That the Bishop of
Toulouze had many times caught unto him the fairest of his revenues, and being
never satisfied, did still continue to vex him, parting his goods with the
Earl Simon of Montfort; and that their only avarice had been the cause of
the death of ten thousand men of Toulouze, and of the pillage of that fair and
great City, a loss which could never be repaired. The Charterie of Lion did
also show unto the Pope, that the Bishop of Toulouze had always kindled the
fire, and warmed himself at the flame.

Arnaud de Villemur did also present himself before the Pope, demanding
Justice, for that the Legate and the Earl Simon had invaded his lands, he knew
not wherefore, since he had never bin but obedient to the Church of Rome,
relating at large the evils, murders, saccages, robberies, burnings, which the
said Legate and Earl, under the cloak of the service of the Pope and the
Church, had done; and therefore it was necessary that that mask should be
taken away, which would otherwise turn to the dishonor of the Pope and the
Church, and some speedy course should be taken, for the establishing of peace,
and procuring the good of the Church.

Remond of Roquefeuil of the Country of Querci, Chass. lib. 4. Ibid.
related also many villainies committed by the said Earl of Montfort, beginning
with that which had been done against the Earl of Beziers, whom he caused
miserably to die in prison, invaded his Lands, and ruinated his Subjects, and
so proceeded to all that had passed against the other Lords, who were
constrained to defend themselves against his violences.

The Pope was much moved with these outrages and would willingly have done some
justice, but that it was told him, that if he should cause the Earl of
Montfort, to make restitution of that which was taken for the service of the
Church, that he should not from hence-forward, find any that would fight
either for the Pope or the Church: As also, that if he should determine the
restitution, yet the Earl Simon had reason, not to give over his hold, until
he were fully satisfied for his travels and expenses.

The Pope returned these affairs to the Legate, commanding him in general
terms, to restore the Lands to all those that showed themselves faithful to
the Church, and as touching the son of the Earl Remond, The Monk of the
Valleis Sernay, Chap. 152.
his pleasure was, that that Land that the Earl Remond had in Prouence, that
is to say, The Earldome of Venisse should be reserved either in part or all for
the maintenance of his son, provided that he gave good and assured
testimonies of his loyalty and good conversation, showing himself worthy of
divine mercy.

They being returned, demanded of the Legate the execution of their Bulls,
requiring the restitution of their Lands. The Legate answered, that he had
certain restraints, for the determining whereof there needed some time; that
therefore they should in the mean time show fruits worthy their amendment, and
that then they should receive what the Pope had decreed, otherwise not.

When the Earls saw how they were deluded, they resolved to come to blows.

CHAP. II. Remond the son of the Earl Remond took Beaucaire: The Bishop of
Tholouze betrayeth the Citizens of Thoulouze: The Earl Simon uses the
Inhabitants of Tholouze very ill: They defend themselves to his confusion: A
new expedition: Remond takes Thoulouze: Simon of Montfort comes thither, and
after many combats, he is in the end slain with a stone cast by a woman: His
army is put to flight.
THe first exploit of war of Remond, the the son of the Earl Remond, was
the taking of Beaucaire, where he made himself Master of the City:
afterward having almost famished those in the Castle, the Earl Simon being no
way able to succor them, made a composition for those that were within it,
that is, that they should depart, only carrying with them their baggage and
necessary furniture. The Earl Simon lost at that place a hundred Gentlemen,
which he laid in ambush, near the City, which they within perceiving, made a
salley forth, and cut them in pieces. The young Earl Remond won great
renown at this siege, and gave the Earl Simon to understand, that his son
Aimeri should have in this young Lord, a thorn in his foot, that should make
him smart as much, as in his time he had given cause of trouble and vexation to
his father. The Earl Montfort went from hence to rauage and make spoil at
Thoulouze. The Bishop was gone thither before, and told the Consuls and
Principal of the City, that they were to make their appearance before the
Earl Simon. They went unto him, but to their great loss, for they were no
sooner come before the Earl, but he commanded them all to be bound with
cords; whereof some taking notice, that had means to escape to the City, an
alarm was given within the City, so hot, that before his arrival all the
people were in arms: but being entered by the Castle Narbonne, they recovered
certain Towers which were yet remaining, and put themselves into certain
places, and having already begun to pillage near the Castle Narbonne, the
people fortified themselves, and gave the chase with such violence to those
Boothaylers and Fire-houses, who had already set fire on some houses, that they
drove them to the Castle of Narbonne. The Earl Guy came upon the very instant
of this combat, to the succor of his brother the Earl Simon, but after he had
fought a while, he was feign in the end to fly to his brother. A great part
of the people of the Earl Simon were enforced to retire themselves to St.
Steuens, and the Tower of Mascaro, and the Bishops house, where a great number
were slain. The Bishop, who knew that he had been the cause of this
misfortune, having counseled the Citizens to make their appearance before the
Earl Simon, and the Earl Simon to cease upon them, still continuing his
treasons, went forth of the Castle Narbonnes, ran into the streets, crying
out unto the people to pacify themselves, for the Earl determined to end
these differences with mildness and gentleness, and that they should not
refuse the ways of peace. He alleged so many matters unto them, that in the
end they gave care unto him, and were willing to hearken to a reconciliation,
seeing themselves dismantled and brought under the subjection of a Castle and
strong garrison, and knowing too well, that at the first succors of the
Pilgrims, their City would be exposed to pillage. When they were to know the
conditions of their peace, the first Article was: That the Earl Simon would
yield to nothing, before all the Inhabitants had carried their arms to the
Towne-house. This point was hardly obtained, but at the last they yielded unto
it: which being done, the Earl Simon caused his people to make their approach,
and so being seized on the Towne-house against a people disarmed, and having
conuayed their Armor to the Castle Narbonnes, he imprisoned the principal
men of the City, and caused them to be sent out of Thoulouze whither he
thought good, being so uncivilly used, and with such inhumane cruelties, that a
great number died by the way. Thus was Toulouze dispeopled of it principal
Inhabitants, and the rest put to their ransom, whereby the Earl Simon did
greatly enrich himself. And shortly after returning from the Country Bigorre,
where he could not take the Castle of Lourde, he discharged his choler upon
this poor City, permitting it to be pillaged by his Pilgrims, and then caused
the rest of the Towers that were yet about the City to be beaten down.

In this mean time, the poor Earl of Toulouze was at Mountauban, who
understanding of the bad usage of his miserable subjects, for certain months
could not but bewail their lamentable estate with sighs and tears.

At this time, that is to say, in the year one thousand, 1214.
two hundred and fourteen, See Paulus Aemil. in the life of Philip Ang.
the Legate held a Council at Montpelier, for the renewing of the Army of the
Church, and to confirm the authority of the Earl Simon. The Monk of Sernay
says, that he was there declared Prince of all the conquered Countries of the
Albingenses, The Monk of the Valleis Sernay, chap. 146.
and that by a common consent, they sent Barnard Archbishop of Ambrun to the
Pope, to petition his Holiness, in the name of the Prelates who were present at
that Council, that the Earl Simon of Montfort might by him be pronounced Lord
and Monarch of all the conquered Countries of the Albingenses, which was done.

The Council sent unto him to come and receive this dignity of Prince and
Monarch. He entered into the City, and being in the Church of our Lady des
Tables, where the Prelates of the said Council were to pronounce their sentence
in favor of the said Montfort, they heard a rumor in the City. They sent to
know what the matter was: It was told them, that the people had understood,
that the Earl Simon of Montfort was within the City, and that thereupon they
betook themselves to their arms, purposing to kill him, as being their
capital enemy. He was advised to steal away along by the walls of the City,
and to save himself, for fear lest the whole Council suffered with him. He
went therefore on foot, without company, lest he should have been known at
the Gate, and so he escaped this great danger. So that he saw himself in one
hour honored almost as a God, chosen and saluted Prince and Monarch, and to
fly disguised, and to hide himself like a base scundrell, for fear of the
rascal people.

In regard of the resolution of this Council, the Pope ever writ unto him, The
Monk of the Valleis Sernay, Chap. 148.
as to a Monarch, stiling him, The active dexterious Soldier of Jesus Christ.
The invincible defender of the Catholic faith. And in the year one thousand
two hundred and fifteen, 1215.
he sent him a Bull, dated the fourth of the Nones of April, by which he
gives him authority to keep all those lands he had gotten under his power,
granting unto him the revenues, profits and power to administer justice,
considering (says the Pope) that you neither can, nor ought to make war at
your own charge. This the Popes bounty of another man's purse, in a business
where he had nothing to give, made him to go to the King of France, to be
invested into the Dukedom of Narbonnes, the Earldom of Toulouze, together
with all the lands, which the Soldiers of the Cross had conquered and taken
from those they call Heretics, or the Protectors of them, which he obtained of
the King to hold in fee. The Monk says, The Monk of the Valleis Sernay,
Chap. 153.
it was not possible for him to relate the honor which was done unto him upon
his way going to France, there being neither City nor Town through which he
passed, where the Clergy and people came not to see him, crying out, Blessed
is he that comes in the name of God. For such and so great (says he) was the
devour Religion of the people toward him, that there was not any that thought
not himself happy to touch the hem of his garments.

In the year one thousand, 1216.
two hundred and sixteen, The Monk of the Valleis Sernay, Chap. 161.
he returned from France with an hundred Bishops, who had caused this
expedition of the Cross to be preached in their Bishoprikes, being resolved
with this great Army to make himself Master, Prince and Monarch, of all those
lands which the Pope had given him. And to make it apparent that he had not
treated or made any agreement with Girard Adememar, or Guitaud Lord of
Monteil-Aimar, nor with Aimar of Poitiers, but until such time as he had
power to devour them, he passed the Rhosne at Viuiers, and besieged
Monteil-Aimar. Guitaud or Girard made great resistance; but when the
Inhabitants saw the great Army of Pilgrims, they entreated their Lord to come
to composition, for fear lest the City should be pillaged. Which he did,
though it were with the loss of his Castle. From thence he went and besieged
the Tower of Crest-Arnaud, belonging to Aimar of Poitiers. He that commanded
within, did yield it up out of cowardlinesse, for otherwise it had been
impossible the Pilgrims should have taken it. Afterward the Earl Simon gave a
daughter of his to a son of the said Poitiers, and there was peace concluded
betwixt the said Poitiers and the Bishop of Valence, against whom he had a
long time before made cruel war. A little before, the Earl Simon had
married one of his sons to the daughter of Dauphin of Viennois, and another
to the Countess of Bigorre. All which alliances did fortify him much against
his enemies. All men trembled before him, and with this great Army of Pilgrims
that followed him, he took Pefquieres near to Nysmes, and Bezonce, and put
all to the sword he found within, not sparing the women. He took his way to
Toulouze, to pillage and to raze it, and to seek the Earl of Toulouze, even
to the center of the Earth, if he were there to be found; at which time he
received letters from his wife, aduertising him that he should speedily come
to deliver her from the hands of the Earl of Toulouze, who had besieged her in
the Castle Narbonnes, that he was very strong and had all the people at his
devotion, who had received him with great applause, crying out with a loud
voice, Long live the Earl of Toulouze. That he was accompanied with his
Nephew, the Earl of Coming, Gaspar de la Bar, Bertrand de Iorda, Engarrand
of Gordo, Lord of Caraman, Armand de Montagu, and Estephe de la Valette, all
brave and valiant men and well accompanied.

This was about the end of the year one thousand two hundred seventeen, 1217.
that the Earl Remond entered into Toulouze, the Drum beaten, the Ensigns
displayed, and the Trumpets sounding. The people pressing to cast themselves
down at his feet, to embrace his legs, and to kiss the hem of his garment,
and killing as many as they found in the City, that took part with the Earl
of Montfort. Whereas, had the Earl Simon come directly to Montauban, at his
return from France, the Earl Remond could not have told what to have done,
but he stayed at Monteil-Aimar and Crest Arnaud, and Besince, and Pasquieres,
and made delays about the marriages so long, that the Earl had time to gather
his troops together, and to prepare himself for a strong assault. In such
sort, that when he was advertised that he was at Toulouze, the greater part
of his Pilgrims were returned into France. But yet it was necessary he should
go to Toulouze with those forces that he had: for his wife was in danger to be
lost. And he that had been the death of so many women and children, was
doubtful what would become of his, falling into the hands of his enemies.

The Earl Remond created an officer, which they called Vignier, or Provost, to
whom all were bound to obey, upon pain of death. This was the first Vignier
that was established at Toulouze. His charge was to provide for the defense of
the City, to keep the Moates or Ditches clean, to repair the breaches, to
appoint to every one his quarter, and his Captain, especially in times of
combat. There came from all parts, troops of succors to the Earl Remond of
those that desired consideration for the violencies of the Earl Simon.

The Earl Guy was one of the first in the combat, for his brother the Earl
Simon, but he was beaten and put to flight: The Archbishop of Aix, and of
Armagnac, with their Pilgrims retired themselves without fight. The Earl Simon
being come, made show to besiege Toulouze: but the frequent issues of those
that were within, gave him to understand, that it was not for his good. He
assembled therefore the Prelates and Lords, to take advise of what was to be
done. The Legate perceiving the Earl Simon somewhat astonished, said unto him.
Fear nothing, for in a short time we shall recover the City, and put to
death, and destroy all the Inhabitants; and if any of the Soldiers of the
Cross shall die in this pursuit, they shall pass to Paradise as Martyrs, and
hereof they shall assure themselves. To whom one of the great Captains
answered, Monsieur Cardinal, you talk with great assurance, but if the Earl
believe you, it will be little for his profit. For you and all the other
Prelates, and men of the Church, have been the cause of all this evil and
ruin, and will be yet more if he believe you.

It was no time for Monsieur the Cardinal to be offended with this audacious
reply, but he must needs sup up this censure. The resolution was, that there
should be no more any assault given, but that the City should be besieged on
the side of Gascongne. For which cause the Earl of Montfort caused one part of
his Army, to pass the River Garonne, toward St. Soubra, now they within the
City made so blunt a salley, and to such purpose, that they put their enemies
to flight. During this combat, came the Earl of Foix with his fresh troops,
as well of his subjects, as Nauarreans and Catalans, who violently set upon the
Earl Montfort, pursuing him even to the brinke of Garonne, where with
affrightment and precipitation, they cast themselves in heaps into their
Boats, and many were drowned in the River. The Earl Simon also fell in, all
armed, with his horse, and hardly escaped.

The Earl Remond caused a general assembly to be made at St. Saornin,
wherein he exhorted the people to give thanks unto God for this happy
beginning of victory, which they had obtained against their enemies, which was
a testimony of Gods love, and that they should hope for better: he exhorted
every one to give their helping hands to build and to prepare, and to cause
their warlike engines to play against the Castle Narbonnes, because this place
being last by the enemy, their total ruin must needs follow, and being once
recovered by them, they should be in safety. In a very short time were their
wooden engines to cast stones, their Slings, their Mangonnels to dart their
Arrows, their Fowlers, Crossebowes and other Instruments which were in use in
those times prepared, and all of them mounted against the Castle Narbonnes;
which made those to tremble that were within.

The Earl Montfort being at Montolieu, took counsel how to carry himself in
this tedious siege, and against enemies so animated. The Bishop of Thoulouze
said unto him, to comfort him, that he was to take a good heart unto him, for
Monsieur the Cardinal had sent letters and messengers throughout the world, to
give him succors, and that shortly he should have so many people, that he
should not want power to do what he would. The abouenamed Robert de Pequigni
answered him, that he spoke his pleasure, and that if the Earl of Montfort
had not believed him nor any such, he had not been in those troubles that now
he was, but he had been at peace within Toulouze, and that he was the cause
of that danger they now were in, and of the death of so many people as were
continually slain by the wicked counsel that he had given.

After many combats, the winter grew on, and stayed the course of the
besiegers, who withdrawing themselves to covert where they could about
Toulouze, expected with good denotation, and much impatiencie, new succors of
Pilgrims. The Earl Remond on the other side, enclosed the City with a
Rampire, and fortified himself against the Castle Narbonnes, and prepared to
receive the Pilgrims whenever they should present themselves unto them. In
this mean time he sent his son to seek for succors. In the end, 1218.
about the Spring time, in the year one thousand two hundred and eighteen,
there came to the Earl Simon, an hundred thousand Soldiers of the Cross, and
to the Earl Remond, great succors from Gascongne, conducted by Narcis de
Montesquiou. As also the young Remond of Toulouze, and Arnaud de Villemur
brought unto him goodly troops. This great multitude of Pilgrims being come,
the Legate and the Earl Simon thought good they should earne their pardon,
knowing that at the end of forty days, this great cloud of Pilgrims would
vanish. They therefore commanded them, instantly to give a general scalado,
which was deferred to the next morning, by which time they had other work to
do; for the very first night of their arrival, putting their confidence in
their great multitude, they kept no good guard. Which the Earl of Toulouze
perceiving, made a salley out upon them, and that with so good success, that
the next morning all the field was covered with dead bodies. The Toulouzains
being weary with killing, returned to give thanks unto God for his assistance.

The Earl Simon entered the Castle Narbonnez, to descrie whether from thence
there were any way to invade the City, but finding none, it much troubled him,
whereupon two of his Lords of the Cross, gave him advice to come to some
honorable agreement. The Cardinal Bertrand told them, there needed no speech
of that, and that the Church could save them in despite of them, if they spoke
any thing to the advantage of the Albingenses. One amongst them answered: And
where find you (Monsieur Cardinal) that without cause and reason, you should
take from the Earl Remond and his son, that which belongs unto them. If I
had understood as much as I now know (says he) I had never made this voyage.

The whole Country was enemy to the Earl Simon, which was the cause of the
famine in his Army; but on the contrary, there was within Toulouze all plenty
and abundance. Tpon St. John the Baptists Eve, betimes in the morning, the
troops of the Earl Remond went forth of Toulouze, crying out Auignon,
Beaucaire, Muret and Toulouze, killing as many as they encountered. A Soldier
ran to the Earl Simon and told him that the enemy was come forth; to whom
he answered, that he would first see his Redeemer, and then see his enemy.
Diverse others came unto him, crying out, We are undone, if no man will come
out and command the Army which did fly before the Toulouzains. He again
answered, that he would not stir a foot from the Mass, though he were there
to die, before he had seen his Maker; insomuch, that had not the Priest that
sung the Mass clipped and curtolled it a little, for fear lest his ears should
have been clipped, he had been taken or slain before the Altar. Hear what
Noguiers says: Noguiers in his Hestory of Toulouze. lib. 3. chap. 10.
At this so violent a shocke, the Earl Simon being mounted his horse, his
horse was wounded in the middle of his head with an Arrow, which the horse
feeling, got presently the bit between his teeth, in such sort, that Montfort
could never stay him, but he carried him here and there in dispite of
himself, which a Soldier of the City seeing, assuring himself of him, shot
him with his Crosse-bow through the thigh, with which wound Montfort lost great
store of blood, and finding himself much payned therewith, entreated the Earl
Guy his brother, to lead him forth of the press, to stench his blood. In the
time whilst he was talking with his brother, a stone out of a sling or
engine, whereout stones or arrows were darted, which a woman (thinking nothing
let fly) hit Montfort, yet talking with his brother, and parted his head from
his shoulders, so that his body fell dead to the ground. It was (says he) a
wonderful thing, and thereby may his successors consider, that they maintained
an unjust quarrel, not to punish those that were wandered from the faith, for
that had been a thing very commendable and commodious; but to oppress his
own vassals, heaping on them miseries upon miseries, to ravish women and their
daughters, to the end they might utterly ruin and confound them all,
especially doing the duty of vassals, and to retain the goods of another, who
though he were an Heretic, as Montfort supposed, yet nevertheless in the
twinkling of an eye, he might be better advised, and amend his life. But as I
think (says he) a covetous desire to reign blinded him, which we may
easily judge, by the bad usage, oppressions and extortions which he executed
against the innocent people of Toulouze, who honored him, cherished, and wished
him prosperity, as to their Lord. This skirmish and discomfiture was in June,
the day after the feast of St. John the Baptist, in the year 1218. 1218.


Thus you see how Noguiers, the Historiographer of those times has spoken of
this man, as of one that was carried with passion and insatiable covetousness:
But that which was worthy the observation, is, that he was not overthrown, but
at that very instant, when by three diverse Councels, he had been proclaimed
the Monarch of his conquests, the Captain of the Armies of the Church, the
son, the servant, the favorite thereof, the defender of the faith. Adored of
the people, feared of the great, the terror of Kings. Thus you see, Judges 9.
that as that ambitious Paracide Abimelech was slain with a piece of a
Millstone which a woman cast from a Tower, which brake his skull; so this
destroyer of the people, ruiner of Cities, deuourer of the states of other men,
was slain with a stone from a sling, Chass. lib. 4 c. 11.
flung by a woman, as some Historiographers have observed.

On the the other side the Monk cries out in this manner: The Monk of the
Valleis Sernay. Chap. 165.
who is he that can write or hear (says he) that which follows? that can
recite it without grief? that can lend his ears without sighs and gronings?
who, I say, will not dissolve and consume away to nothing, seeing the life of
the poor to be taken away? he, who being laid in the dust, all things are
trampled under foot? and by the death of whom all is dead? Was he not the
comfort of the sorrowful, the strength of the weak, a refreshing to the
afflicted, a refuge to the miserable? He had some reason to speak thus; for he
being dead, all his Army was dissolved and scattered abroad. The Legate
Bonauenture had only leisure to tell Aimeri of Montfort, that he was named by
him and the Bishops that were present, Successor of the conquests and charges
of his father the Earl Simon, and instantly they betook them to their heels,
flying with all the Bishops of the Cross to Carcassonne, not staying in any
place, so great was their astonishment, fearing to be pursued. The Pilgrims
disbanded themselves, saying they were no longer bound to any fight, their
forty days being almost expired. In the time of this confusion, the Earl
Remond sallied out of Toulouze, and gave so furious a charge upon the Enemy,
that he made them to forsake their trenches, and slew a great number of
Pilgrims, who were without conduct, and without courage, insomuch that they
killed and cut in pieces all that were in the Camp of Montelieu, and did a
great deal of hurt and hinderance to those that were encamped at St. Sobra:
There remained the Castle Narbonnes, which as yet held for the Legate. Aimeri of
Montfort as speedily as he could gather as many of his troops together as he
was able, in this so great a rupture and confusion, and making haste to the
Castle, got out the Garrison by a false door, and so fled after the Legate,
carrying the body of his father with great speed to Carcassonne. And it was
well for him, that the Earl Remond pursued him not, for the fear thereof was
sufficient to kill the Pilgrims that accompanied him. But the Earl Remond
retired himself with his troops, to provide for the preservation of the City
and the Castle Narbonne, unto which the enemy had set fire when they left it.
Moreover, he caused the Bell to be tolled, Chass. lib. 4. c. 11. page 222.
to gather the people together, to give thanks unto God in their Temple, for
the happy and miraculous victory which they had obtained, for that this
audacious Cyclops was overthrown, that had exposed them many times to pillage,
razed their walls, beaten down their rampires, destroyed their Towers,
violated their wives and daughters, killed their Citizens, cut down their
trees, spoiled their land, and brought their whole Country to extreme
desolation.

CHAP. III. The Earl Remond recouereth all that the Earl Simon had taken from
him in Agenois: The Earl of Foix takes Mirepoix from Roger de Leni: The Earl
of Coming his lands, which one named loris, detained from him: An
aduantagious encounter for the Albingenses in Lauragues: Expeditions of small
effect after the death of the Earl Simon. The Prince Lewis took Marmande, and
returned into France, having summoned Toulouze to yield it self.
THe Earl Remond followed the victory, making himself Master of the Castle of
Narbonnes, and fortifying it against the Pilgrims, which he knew very well
would come the year following, in the mean time he sent his son into
Agenois, who brought unto the obedience of his father Condon, Holagaray in his
history of Foix. 162.
Marmande, Aguillon, and other places adjoining. On the other side, the Earl
of Foix besieged Mirepoix, summoned Roger de Leni to restore it unto him,
telling him that he was not now to hope any longer in the Earl Simon, for he
was dead: that it must content him that he had now long enough and unjustly
kept that which was his. That if he changed his patience into fury, he would
lose both his life and Mirepoix altogether. It troubled much the Marshall of
the Faith (for that was the vain title which the Legates had given him) to
yield up this place; but in the end he delivered it into the hands of the Earl
of Foix.

The Earl of Coming had also his right of one Ioris, to whom the Legates had
given all that the Soldiers of the Cross had taken in his Countries; for he
took them all from him, yea, life and all.

1219.
At the spring of the year following, 1219. Almaric or Aimeri of Montfort, came
into Agenois, with some troops of Soldiers of the Cross, to recover that
which his father had there possessed, and for this cause he besieged Marmande.
The young Earl Remond of Toulouze, went to succor the besieged, when the
Earl of Foix writ unto him that he had gotten a great booty in Lauragues,
both of people and beasts, but he feared he should not bring it to Toulouze,
and not be fought withal by the way, by the Garrison of Carcassone, and
therefore he entreated him to succor him. Young Remond took his journey
toward him, and came in so good an hour to the Earl Foix, that being upon
the point of losing his booty, being followed by the Vicount of Lautrec, and
the Captains Faucant and Valas. Being come to the combat, Chass. lib 4. chap.
13.
the said Foucant and Valas encouraged with a loud voice their Pilgrims,
saying, that they fought for Heaven and for the Church: The young Earl Remond
hearing it, cried unto his as loud as he: Courage my friends, for we fight for
our Religion, and against thieves and robbers, under the name of the Church:
They have robbed enough, let us make them vomit it up again, and pay the
arrerages of their thefts, which they have heretofore freely committed. And
hereupon they gave the Charge. The Vicount of Lautrec fled, Foucant was taken
prisoner, and all their troops cut in pieces. Seguret a Captain and professed
robber was taken and hanged in the field upon a tree. Thus victorious, and
laden with booty, they came to Toulouze with their prisoners and cattle. The
siege of Marmande continued, but unprofitably, and without any advantage. For
Almaric having caused a general assault to be made, the inhabitants defended
themselves with such valor and resolution, that the ditches were full of the
dead bodies of the Pilgrims. This was at that time when the great expedition of
Prince Lewis arrived, who brought with him thirty Earls. An expedition for
the leuying whereof, the Legate Bertrand writ in these terms to King Philip:
Fail you not to be in the quarters of Toulouze for the whole month of May, in
the year 1219. with all your forces and powers, to revenge the death of the
Earl Montfort, and I will procure that the Pope shall publish and preach the
Croisade, or expedition of Christians, throughout the world, for your better
aid and succors. Thus you see how the Legate commands the King of France. His
son arrived at Marmande, and summoned those within to yield. They compound
with him, and he promises them their lives. Almaric complains thereof,
saying, That they were not worthy of life, that took away his Fathers. He
assembleth the Prelates, declares unto them the discontent which he received by
this composition, in that life was granted unto those, who were the murderers
of his Father. The Prelates were all of opinion, that notwithstanding the word
given, they should all die. Prince Lewis his will was, that the composition
should hold. Almaric nevertheless, caused his troops to slip into the City,
with charge to kill all, men, women and children. They do it, whereat the
Prince being offended, departed from the Legate and Almaric, and passing along
summoned those of Toulouze to yield. They defend themselves against him. He
receives news of the death of his father, which caused him to retire. Thus
you see all the effects of this great expedition, which should have buried all
the Albingenses alive, and vanished without any assault given.

CHAP. IIII. The war of the Albingenses changes countenance, because of the
death of Pope Innocent the third; of the change of the Legate; the death of the
Earl Remond of Toulouze; of the disease of Remond Earl of Foix, and the Lady
Philippe de Moncade, mother to the Earl of Foix, and of the Monk Dominick.
THe Legate Bertrand Bonauenture, being weary of the long labors of this war,
and perceiving that therein the danger was greater, than either the pleasure or
the profit, took occasion under a pretense of his decrepit age, to retire him
self to Rome; even at that time, when Pope Innocent the third being departed,
Pope Honorius his successor, who had not managed this war by his authority,
from the beginning thereof, knew neither the importance thereof, nor what
direction to give, and therefore had need to be informed by his Legate, touching
the means of the continuance thereof, and the commodity that might arise unto
his Seat. Bonauenture entreated him to depute another Legate, and told him, that
the necessity of this war was such, that it concerned not only the loss of
all those Lands of the Albingenses, which were conquered, because they might be
easily recovered by them, if no opposition were made, but also the ruin of the
Church of Rome, because the Doctrine of the Waldenses and Albingenses, did
directly shake the authority of the Popes, and overthrow the Statutes of the
Church: That this war had been very chargeable, and cost them dear, for
within the space of fifteen years and less, there had died above three
hundred thousand soldiers of the Cross, that at diverse times had come to end
their lives in Languedoc, as if there were not enough elsewhere to bury them,
or as if there were a necessity in those times, to be borne in France, and to
dye encountering the Albingenses. That all this would be lost, if they continued
not to spend and weaken them, until they were utterly destroyed. The Pope
delegated one named Contat, who went thither.

Now albeit Almeric were very valiant, yet he had not gotten that authority
which his Father had, who had made himself, at the charges of the Albingenses,
a great Captain, loved of the Soldier, of an admirable valor, patient in
affliction, invincible in his travels, diligent in his enterprises, foreseeing
and providing, for the necessities of an Army, affable; but of an
unreconcilable enmity against his enemies, because he hated them only to
have their goods, and that he could not have but after their death, which he
procured and hastened as much as he could, and that under the mantell of a
plausible pretense of religion. His son was a true inheritor of the hatred of
his father; but slow and sluggish, loving his ease, and no way fit for an
action of great importance. Besides, he was deprived of the Monk Dominique, of
whom his Father had made very profitable use: for lodging him in the conquered
Cities, he gave him in charge to finish that destruction by his inquisition,
which he could not do by wars. 1220.
He died in the year 1220. the sixth of August, so rich that notwithstanding he
were the author of an order mendicant, that is to say, of Iacobin Monks, or
Iacobins, yet he made it known before his death, that a scrip well ordered was
better than a rent ill assigned; for he left many houses and much goods,
showing thereby that he used his scrip but for a show and outward appearance of
poverty; but in effect he thought it good, to have wherewithal to live
elsewhere, witness the Protection which the Earl Simon gave him a little
before his death, whereof this is the tenure.

Simon by the Grace and providence of God, Duke of Narbonnes, Earl of
Toulouze, Vicount of Licestre, Beziers, and Carcassonne, wishes health and
dilection. After the History of the Monk of the valley Sernay.
We will and command you to have a special care to keep and defend the houses
and goods of our most dear brother Dominick, as our own. Given at the siege
of Toulouze, December. 13.

The death of this Monk was a great comfort to the Albingenses, who had
persecuted them with such violence, but yet they were more weakened by the death
of the Earl Remond of Toulouze, the Earl Remond of Foix, and the Lady
Philippe of Moncade, Wife to Remond Earl of Foix.

The Earl Remond of Toulouze died of a sickness, much lamented of his
Subjects, if ever man were. He was just, gentle, valiant and courageous, but
yet too easy to give ear unto those that gave him counsel for his ruin. He
was carried at the first by a true love and charity only toward those his
Subjects, that made profession of the Religion of the Albingenses, but
afterward having been basely and dishonorably handled by the Legates of the
Pope, he knew both the cruelty of the Priests, and the falsehood of their
doctrine, by those conferences that had been in his presence with the Pastors
of the Albingenses. His Epitaph was written in two Gascon verses.

Non y a home sur terre, per grand Segnor que fout,
Qu'em iettes de ma terre, si Gleisa non fous.
He that writes the History of Languedoc, says, That he died a sudden death,
and that he was carried into the house of the Friars of the Hospital S. John,
and that he was not buried, because he died an excommunicate person. There was
showed not long since at Toulouze a head, which some did believe was the head
of the Earl Remond, which was said to be always without a sepulture; but
there is no likelihood that he that died amongst his own, and being Ruler over
them, should not have so much credit after his death, as to be put into a
Sepulcher: Holaga. page 164
that he that by his valor had restored all his Subjects to their houses, and
their City to it former greatness, he whose death they lamented as a Father,
should be cast out like a Dog. It is neither true nor has it any resemblance
of truth, that they should deny him this last office of charity, which they
have not refused to bestow upon their greatest enemies, for it was never heard
of that the Albingenses have denied scpulture unto any.

As touching the Earl of Foix, Remond, he was a Prince of whom the History
gives this testimony, that he was a Patron of Justice, clemency, prudence,
valor, magnanimity, patience and continency; a good Warrior, a good Husband,
a good Father, a good Housekeeper, a good Iusticer, worthy to have his name
honored, and his virtues remembered throughout all generations. When this good
Prince saw that he was to change the earth for heaven, he defied death an
assured constant carriage, and took comfort in forsaking the world, and the
vanities thereof, and calling his son Roger unto him, he exhorted him to
serve God, to live virtuously, to govern his people like a Father, under the
obedience of his Laws, and so gave up the ghost. His Wife the Lady Philippe of
Moncade, followed him shortly after, not without suspicion of poison, by some
domestical enemy of the Albingenses, whose religion she professed with all
devotion. A Princess of a great and admirable providence, faith, constancy,
and loyalty. She uttered before her death many excellent sentences, full of
edification, as well in the Castilian tongue, as the French, in contempt of
death, which she received with a marvelous grace, fortifying her speeches with
most Christian consolations, to the great comfort and edification of all that
were present, and in this estate she changed her life.

All these deaths made a great alteration in the wars of the Albingenses, both
on the one side and the other.

CHAP. V. Almaric of Montfort restored to King Lewis the eight, the conquered
Countries of the Albingenses: the siege of Auignon: the King appoints a
Governor in Languedoc. The war continues against the Albingenses: Toulouze is
besieged: a treaty of peace with the Earl Remond and the Toulouzains.
ALmaric of Montfort had not the fortune of his Father in the wars of the
Albingenses. For he had neither King Philip Auguste, who permitted the levy of
the Pilgrims, nor Pope Innocent the third to appoint them. Moreover, there was
neither City nor Village in France, where there were not widows and
fatherless children, by reason of the passed wars of the Albingenses. And
besides all this, the Prelates were many times put into great fears, by those
cruel combats that were ordinarily made, and many of them left behind them
their Miters, and some Abbots their Crosses. The speech of the expeditions of
the Cross was not so common. This was the cause why Almaric did not long enjoy
his conquered Countries, wherewith being much afflicted, he went into France,
Inuentory of Serres, in the life of Lewis the eight.
and delivered up unto Lewis the eight of that name, King of France, all the
right that he had to the said Countries, which the Pope, the Councels of Vaur,
Montpelier, and Lotran had granted unto him: and in recompense thereof, King
Lewis created him Constable of France, 1224.
in the year 1224.

To put himself into possession, King Lewis the eight came into Languedoc, and
coming to the gates of Auignon, he was denied entrance, because professing the
Religion of the Albingenses, they had been excommunicated, and given by the
Pope to the first Conqueror: for then Auignon was no chief City of the
Earldome of Venessin, as at this present, but belonged to the King of Naples
and Sicily. The King being much moved with this denial, resolved to besiege
it, which continued for the space of eight months, in the end whereof they
yielded themselves about Whitsontide, 1225.
in the year 1225.

During this siege, almost all the cities of Languedoc, acknowledged the king
of France, by the mediation of Mr. Amelin, Archbishop of Narbonne. The King
established for Governor in Languedoc, Imbert de Beauieu, and took his way to
France: but he died by the way at Montpensier in September, in the year 1226.

The young Remond, Earl of Toulouze, was bound by promise to the king, to go
to receive his absolution of Pope Honorius, and afterward he should give him
peaceable possession of all his lands: but the death of the king in the mean
time happening, he saw the Realm of France in the hands of king Lewis, a
child and in his minority, and the regency in the power and government of his
mother. He thought that having to deal with an infant king, and a woman
regent, he might recover by force that which he had quit himself of by
agreement. He therefore resolved to take arms, being encouraged thereunto, by
the succors of the Albingenses his subjects, who were in great hope to
maintain their part in strength and vigor, during the Nonage of the King of
France, but they were deceived in their project. For though Lewis the ninth
were in his minority, yet he was so happy as to have a wise and a prudent
mother, if ever there were any. For King Lewis the eighth, before his death,
had appointed her the Tutrix or Gardianesse of his son, and Regent of the
Realm, knowing very well her great capacity and sufficiency. Besides Imbert de
Beauieu maintained the authority of the king in Languedoc, took arms, and
made opposition against the Earl Remond, and the Albingenses. The History of
Languedoc, fol. 31.
The Queen sent him diverse troops, by the help whereof he recovered the
Castle de Bonteque, near to Toulouze, which was a great hinderance to Imbert
and his portizans. All the Albingenses that were found within the Castle were
put to death; and a certain Deacon, with others that would not abjure their
Religion, by the commandment of the said Imbert, Amel the Popes Legate, and the advice of Guyon Bishop of Carcassonne, they were burnt alive, 1227.
in the year 1227. suffering death with admirable constancy.

The more the persecution increased, the more the number of the Albingenses
multiplied, which Imber of Beauieu perceiving, he went to the Court to let them
understand, that without succors, he could no longer defend the country, and
the places newly annexed to the Crown and patrimony of France, against the
Albingenses and the Earl Remond. In the mean time whilst he was absent, the
Earl Remond took the Castle Sarrazin, one of the strongest places that Imbert
had in his keeping, and holding the field did much hurt to his enemies.

1228.
Imbert came from France, at the spring of the year one thousand two hundred
twenty eight, accompanied with a great Army of the Cross, in which there was
the Archbishop of Bourges, the Archbishop of Aouch and of Bordeaux, every one
with the Pilgrims of their jurisdiction.

The Earl Remond retired himself into ToulouZe where he was presently shut
up, and all the country round about, even harvest and all spoiled and wasted.
Being brought to this extremity, Hist. of Lang. fol. 33.
the Abbot of Grandselue, named Elias Garin, came from Amelin the Popes Legate,
to offer peace to the Earl Remond and the Toulouzains. He was received with
great joy, offering peace and plenty to those that were almost famished, and
wearied with war. Nevertheless the wisest amongst them, who better foresaw
the event of things, knew well enough that so soon as they had gotten the
Earl Remond into their hands, they would make use of him to persecute them,
that they would establish the inquisition and kindle their fires again, and so
utterly destroy them both bodies and souls: but the reasons of these men were
overcome by the importunate cries of the common people almost famished, who
could not see the time wherein they were fettered with the halter, that should
strangle them. Besides the enemy wanted not people in Toulouze, that were
willing to terrify the Earl Remond saying, that he was not now to deal with
Americ of Montfort, but with a king of France, who had power sufficient to
overthrow him: that continual fevers kill men, and long wars would at the
last bury them all. The Earl Remond passed his word to the Abbot to be at a
certain day at Vasieges, there to resolve upon that which was to be done, to
bring the peace to a perfection. In the mean time a truse was agreed upon with
the Toulouzains, for certain days. The Earl Remond came at the day to the
place appointed, and so did the Abbot of Grandselue. After much discourse and
communication touching a peace, the Abbot made him believe, that it would be
for his greater advantage to be in France, than in that place; and that
forasmuch as the business concerned the King, that it was necessary that the
Queene-mother being Tutrix unto him, and Regent of France, should be present,
and that more would be done in a few days, than in a whole year, the
business requiring so many iournies and goings and commings, which
peradventure would be long and unprofitable: and so pawned his faith that
hereby he should receive all contentment. Being vanquished by these promises,
he consented to come into France, whethersoeuer the Queene-mother should
appoint. Meaux was the place she made choice of, and his time was appointed. He
came thither, but he was no sooner arrived, but he repented, and acknowledged
his great oversight, in that he had given credit to the words of a Priest,
especially knowing that his deceased father, had always sped so ill by
trusting to those that hold this for a maxim, that Faith is not to be kept
with Heretics, or their favorers. That he being held for such a one, had no
reason to look for better success.

There was therefore now no more question of treaties or communications, but of
submission to whatsoever should be enjoined him. He had now no longer freedom
of speech, but he was carefully guarded, for fear least he should fly to the
Albingenses. The Historiographer of Languedoc, The Hist. of Lang. fol. 34.
though in other matters much animated against the Albingenses, yet he could
not write of this without commiseration, so lamentable was the condition of
this Lord. These are his words.

It was a lamentable thing (says he) to see so brave a man, that was able,
for so long a time, to make resistance against so many people, to come in his
shirt and his linen breeches, bare foot to the Altar, in the presence of two
Cardinals of the Church of Rome, the one the Legate in France, the other the
Legate in England. But this is not all the ignominious punishment that was
inflicted, but he notes besides, that of so many conditions of that peace,
every one of them (says he) had been sufficient for the price of his ransom,
if the king had been in the field making war against him.

CHAP. VI. The Articles of the treaty of the Earl Remond of Toulouze, with
the Popes Legate, Amelin, and the Queen mother of Lewis the ninth, King of
France.
IT was an easy matter to finish this treaty, These articles are to be found
in the Biblioth of Peers, Tom. 7.
because the Articles were proposed to the Earl Remond, with this condition,
that they should be signed by himself without reply.

Article 1. That after the Earl Remond, shall have asked pardon, according to
the order appointed, that is to say, bareheaded, barefoot, in his shirt, with a
torch in his hand, for all that he had done against the Church; he shall
promise to defend the faith, and drive away all Heretics, out of his lands and
territories.

Article 2. That he should pay to the Church as long as he lives, every year
three Marks of Silver.

3. That he should give once and incontinently the sum of six thousand Marks
of Silver for the reparations of the Cities, Castles and houses, that had been
either by himself or his father destroyed and ruinated during the wars past.

4. That he should give for the reparation of Moustier and the maintenance and
nourishment of the Monks of Cisteaux, two thousand Marks of Silver.

5. For the Monks of Cleruaux, five hundred Marks of Silver.

6. For those of Grand Selue, and the reparation of their Moustier, a thousand
Marks of Silver.

7. For the Church of Belle Perch, three hundred Marks of Silver.

8. For the reparation of the Castle Narbonnes, six thousand marks of Silver,
and that the Legate should keep it for ten years in the name of the Church.

9. For the maintenance of four Masters in divinity, two Doctors of the Canon
Law, two Masters of Art, and two Masters Gramarians, who should read every one
in his quality, every day, to such scholars as should come to Toulouze, the
sum of four thousand marks of Silver, whereof every Master in Divinity
should have twenty five Marks of Silver by the year, for the term of ten
years, the Doctor of the Law should have fifteen Marks by the year, during
the space of ten years: The Master of Arts, ten Marks.

10. That he should take the Cross, at the hands of the Legate, to go beyond
the seas, to make war against the Turks and Sarazins, and should go to
Rhodes, where he should stay for the space of five years, from whence he
should bring a certificat from the great Master of Rhodes.

11. That from thenceforward, he should enterprise nothing against the Church.

12. That he should make war against the Earl of Foix and his allies, never
making peace with them but by the leave of the Legate.

13. That he should overthrow and demollish, all the walls, towers and
fortresses of Toulouze, as the Legate shall ordain and appoint.

14. That he should utterly subvert and pull down from the bottom to the top,
thirty five cities or Castles, of which these that follow should be of the
number, that is to say, Fauiaux, Castelnau d'Arri, la Bastide, Auignonnet, Pech
Laurence, Saint Paul, La Vaur, Rebasteins, Guaillac, Montagut, Hautpec, Verdun,
Castle Sarrazin, Montauban, Again, Sauerdun, Condon, Auterine, and others that
shall be named unto him by the Legate, which hereafter he shall not reedifie
without his leave.

15. That if any of his, hold any fortress, he shall cause him to raze it, or
otherwise make war against him at his own proper costs and charges.

16. That he shall deliver into the hands of the Legate, Pen d'Agenes, and all
the other places before mentioned, for the term of ten years, which if he
cannot recover and enjoy, he shall win by war. And if within the space of
two years he cannot make himself Master thereof, he shall make his voyage
beyond the seas, as has been said before, and yield his right of the said
Pen to the Templers, procuring them to come over to conquer it; which if they
will not undertake, it is the Legates pleasure, that the king of France do
conquer it; And if he will not hold it, having taken it, that he cause it to be
utterly razed and overthrown, in such sort, that it be impossible ever
hereafter to reedifie it.

17. That for the accomplishment of all this, he is to yield himself prisoner
at the Lonure in Paris, into the hands of the king, from whence he shall not
depart, until he have first caused a daughter of his, to be brought to
Carcassonne, and committed to the custody of the king, in the hands of such as
shall be deputed thereunto.

18. That he shall likewise deliver to the said Legate, the Castle Narbonnes,
and Pen d'Agenes, and the other places. That he shall cause the walls of the
city, that are over against the Castle Narbonnes to be demolished and beaten
down, and the ditches that were betwixt them to be filled up, to the end that
a man may pass and repasse freely without fear of any thing; and that all
this should be done, before he went out of prison. All which being performed,
the Legate gave him his absolution and delivered it in writing.

Thus you see the conditions of the treaty of the Earl Remond, with the Popes
Legate. The Reader may judge, what, and how great the troubles and afflictions
of this Prince were: but this was but the beginning of miseries to the poor
Albingenses, for from hence did the great persecution proceed, whereby they
were utterly rooted out, as it will appear hereafter.

CHAP. VII. Pecuniary penalties laid upon the Albingenses: The Earl Remond
constrained to make statutes against the Albingenses: A Council at Toulouze
against the Albingenses, wherein they were forbidden the reading of the
Scriptures: Other constitutions against them: The Earl Remonds daughter
brought to Paris.
THe subjects of the Earl Remond, being advertised of this dishonorable and
disaduantagious treaty of their Lord, were much displeased and grieved
therewith, to see themselves upon the very brinke of their total destruction;
because that thereby their own Lord was bound to do his best endeavors for
their extirpation; and they saw besides that a new heir, their sworn enemy.

First, for the more easy payment of those sums, These statutes of the Earl
Remond are to be found in the book of Ramerius, De modo examinandi Hereticos.
fol. 130.
which he was bound to pay to the Conuents, and others, they cause him to
ordain, that every one of his subjects, that make profession of the belief of
the Albingenses, shall furnish him with a Mark of silver. Which was to
persuade him, that he should not think this imposition to be strange, because
the Albingenses only were to pay the said sums: As also by this means they
made proof of all his subjects; for as soon as they found any that refused to
pay the said Mark, it was a kind of inquisition, whereby to take notice of
all those that afterward were to be persecuted. And that they that persisted
in their Religion, should be punished and condemned to death, their goods
confiscated, their last wills and testaments to be of no force, so that their
children nor any of the kindred should ever recover their inheritances.

That their houses should be utterly razed and destroyed.

Item, he ordains that all they that shall deny the Inquisitors their
houses, granges and woods, or shall defend the Heretics, deliver them when
they should apprehend them, and refuse to give aid and assistance to the
Inquisitors, or to defend them when they shall require it, or shall not use
their best endeavors to keep those that are taken by the said Inquisitors,
shall be corporally punished, and their goods confiscate.

Item, that they that are suspected of Heresy, shall swear to live in the
Catholic faith, and abjure their Heresy, and if they shall refuse to do it,
they are to endure the same punishment that the Heretics do. That if after
the oath taken, it do appear, that they have received, favored, or counseled
any Heretic, they shall undergo the punishment that the Council has
ordained.

Item, we ordain (says he) that if it shall appear that any that has
offended, shall die an Heretic, and that it shall be lawfully proved before
the Bishop; that all his goods be confiscated, and that the houses wherein they
shall inhabit, after the treaty of peace made at Paris, or shall dwell in
hereafter, shall be utterly razed.

Thus you see what they caused the Earl Remond to ordain, and to seal unto,
and at the same time they began to destroy and overthrow by peecemeale, those
they could never make to staggar in gross, being united together.

Moreover, to give the better authority to the Inquisition, they called a
council at Toulouze in the year 1229. 1229.
whereat the Archbishop of Narbonnes, Bourdeaux, Auch, and diverse other Bishops
and Prelates were present, wherein amongst other Articles that were concluded
upon, this one shows by what Spirit, these Prelates were led.

The seventh Article of the Council of Toulouze.
We forbid (say they) the permission of the books of the old and new Testament
to all Lay People, except peradventure they will have the Psalter or some
Breuiarie for the Divine office, or the Prayer book of the blessed Virgin
Marie for devotion. Forbidding expressly that they have not the said books
turned into the vulgar tongue,

Pope Gregory the ninth did also make constitutions, at the same time against
the Albingenses; and especially because he would stop the mouths, of the
Pastors of the Albingenses, who discredited their humane inventions. He
ordained that all and every one of the Lay People, of what quality or office
soever should be interdicted from preaching.

King Lewis the ninth, made also statutes, conformable to those of the Earl
Remond, as also the Emperor Frederick which we produce not, that we may not
weary the reader, and so much the ^a^her because all of them proceeding from
one source, he that has seen the one, has seen al: for they al tend to no
other end, but to make the Kings, Princes, Emperors and Potentates of the
world, to seal and set to their hands to whatsoever they found fitting, to
persecute those that resisted the ordinances of the Popes, neither did they
dare to refuse to do it, upon pain that the selfsame constitutions should
be executed against them.

Now after the treaty made with the Earl Remond; he remained a prisoner
until the payment of the sums specified therein; and in the mean time,
Master Peter de Colmieu Vice-Legat, took his journey to Toulouze, to bring the
City under the obedience of the King, and caused the Walls to be razed, and
the Towers to be beaten down, to the end they might have no more means to
rebel against the King. He brought likewise to the Queene-mother Joan the only
daughter of the Earl Remond, being of the age of nine years, to the end she
might be brought up with her, until she were of years sufficient to marry
Alphonsus, brother to King Lewis. The remouall of this young Princess did much
afflict the subjects of the Earl Remond, for seeing that this change of
domination would bring with it an alteration of their peace, as it came to
pass.

CHAP. VIII. The Earl Remond of Toulouze solliciteth the Earl of Foix, to
range himself under the obedience of the Pope: What practices he uses to make
him forsake the part of the Albingenses, and he suffers himself to be
handled by the Popes Legate.
THe Earl of Foix, of Comminges, and the Prince of Bearne, were yet to be
conquered, or won by practices. The Legate Colmieu thought the Earl Remond a
fit instrument to work the latter of the two, and therefore he commands him
to write to the Earl of Foix, That he should follow his example, or resolve
miserably to perish. He writ unto him in loving terms: That the union that
had always been betwixt their houses, did bind him to procure their good as
his own, that if he did not yield himself into the bosom of the Church of
Rome, he saw such a tempest like to fall upon him, that it must needs
ouerwhelme him: That having so great an enemy as a King of France, he could
not possibly stand out: He therefore entreated him to receive his counsel,
and withal, the gift that he bestowed on him, for a farther proof of his
love, that is, if he would conform himself to this submission, to the Pope
and the Church of Rome, he would hold him from this day forward, quit of that
homage which he anciently did unto him for the Earldom of Foix. He likewise
entreated him to procure the like submission from the Earl of Coming, and
the Prince of Bearne.

The Answer of the Earl of Foix was, That he could not forsake his part nor
his belief, in a time wherein he should give men occasion to think that he
had more fear than reason, and that it was necessary for so fruitful a
change, such as they expected of him, that the truth should overcome, not the
allurements of promises, nor the violence of arms: That he would see that
world of Pilgrims come that was threatened, and he did trust in God, that he
should make them to know the justice of his cause, and deplore the temeritie of
their vow.

The Earl Remond was not satisfied with this answer, much less the Legate, who
found another way to win him unto them. And that was, that there were within
his lands and territories, and about the said Earldom, subjects of his, who
being frighted with an apprehension of their ruin, should entreat him to have
compassion both of himself and his poor subjects, who should doubtless be
overthrown by this last violence. And at the very same time, he caused the
Earl Remond of Toulouze, to write to the principal men of the Countries of
the said Roger Earl of Foix; that there was an excellent opportunity offered
their Lord, if he made not himself unworthy thereof by his obstinacy: that
it was the only means to make them live in perfect peace: that they should
persuade him, whilst the occasion and time served, before the expedition of
the Cross were on foot.

The subjects of the Earl of Foix, partly for their own interest, partly for
fear, lest their Lord being strooken in years, without wife and children,
should leave them to the mercy of the first Conqueror, if he should depart
this life without a lawful heir; they joined together in humble supplication
to their Lord, at the instant reasons and persuasions of the said Earl of
Toulouze. They obtained by their requests and tears, that which the Earl of
Toulouze could not by threats, prayers nor promises: for he promised them,
that he would treat with the Legate for their peace, and would accept thereof
for their good and contentment.

The Pope was advertised of the intention of the Earl of Foix, and therefore
he joined with the first Legate in the Earldom of Foix another, that is to
say, the Cardinal of St. Ange, accompanied by the Archbishop of Narbonnes, de
Folae, Guillaume de Torration, Bishop of Couserans, Bernard de la grace, Peter
Abbot of Bolbonne, John Abbot of Comelonge, William Abbot of Foix, Peter de
Thalames, the Legates Lieutenant, Lambert de la Tour, and diverse others. Being
arrived at St. John de Berges, in the Earldom of Foix, there appeared also
the Earl of Foix, with the Nobility and principal men of the Land.

The Legate related to the Earl of Foix, the great contentment that the Pope
had, Holagaray in the life of Roger Earl of Foix.
to hear that after so many combats and bloody wars, there was hope to
finish them in peace: that he was come to conclude that, and to bring it to
effect, that was begun in behalf of the Pope: that there remained nothing
but to know what his resolution was, and to receive from him the promises and
oaths of fidelity to the Church, which are requisite in such a case.

The Earl Roger replied to the Legate and the rest that were present, as
follows.

Messieurs, I have long since bid Rhetoric a dieu, having made profession to
plead my cause, and to make my entries with engines and spears, which must be
my excuse, if like a Soldier I utter my intentions. My Cousen, the Earl of
Toulouze, has procured (for which I thank him) that my enemies will now be
pleased with reason, to hear the causes of our leuies, and why we have taken
Arms, which to this present would never be granted; as also he desires that
we should give over the pursuit of those that desire to wrong us, upon an
assurance (says he) that the King of France shall maintain every one with
Justice and Equity. Truly, I confess, that I never desired any thing more
than to maintain my liberty, being as yet (as it were) in the swaddling clouts
of my freedom. Our Country owes only one simple homage to the Earl of
Toulouze, for raising it to an Earldome, but it acknowledges no other Master
but my self: and as for the Pope, I never offended him; for he has never
demanded any thing at my hands, as a Prince, in which I have not obeyed him.
He is not to intermeddle with my Religion, since every man is to have it free.
My Father has always recommended unto me this liberty, to the end that being
settled therein, though the heavens shake I might look upon them with a
constant and assured countenance, and a persuasion that they could never hurt
me. Nothing troubles me but this: For in consideration that the Earl of
Toulouze holds me discharged of that homage, which he pretends to belong unto
him, I am ready lovingly to embrace the King, and to do him service in the
same condition, under the dependence of my other rights, which maintain me in
Regal authority in that Country. It is not fear that makes me stagger or
yield to your desires, and that constraines me to humble my will and desires to
the earth, or dunghill-like to submit my self to your appetite, but being
provoked by that benign and generous fear of the miseries of my Subjects, the
ruin of my Country, the desire not to be accounted mutinous, braine-sicke,
and the firebrand of France, I yield my self to this extremity; otherwise I
would be as a wall without breach or escalado, against the brauest of mine
enemies. I give you therefore a gage of my affection, for the good of the peace
in general. Take my Castles of Foix, Mongaillard, Montreal, Vicdesos, Lordat,
whilst that I yield him that homage that you demand.

As for the Earl of Coming, and the Prince of Bearne, it was impossible they
should continue firm in their resolutions, to make resistance, being destitute
of these two props, the Earls of Foix and Toulouze: For they were but weak,
both in money and men. Behold then the end, to the outward appearance of the
Albingenses, 1234.
when in the year 1234. there arose a certain bastard of the Earl of
Beziers, who took arms for the Albingenses, or craved their assistance, to
revenge the death of his deceased Father.

CHAP. IX. The last war of the Albingenses by Trancauel, Bastard of the Earl
of Beziers: The progression thereof: The last expedition, levied against the
Albingenses: A treaty between the Legate Amelin, and the said Trancauel: The
end of the war.
MAtthew Paris an English Writer says, Matthew Paris history of England, in
the year 1234.
That in the year 1234 the wars began again against the Albingenses, and
that there came a great Army of the Cross against them, yea, that they lost
above a hundred thousand men all at once, with all their Bishops that were in
that battle, and that none escaped.

He was no doubt misinformed; For the Historiographer of Languedoc, who
relates all that passed in those times, has made no mention thereof, neither
is it likely that he would have forgotten so famous a victory over the
Albingenses, whom he hated to the death. True it is, that at what time the
Earl of Toulouze, of Foix, Coming, and the Prince of Bearne took part with
them, and were their Leaders; Trancauel the Bastard of the Earl of Beziers
deceased, did not appear, but as a private man of small importance, but when
the Albingenses were destitute of all support, there were that awakned this
Soldier, and made him to know, that if he would have any feeling of the
outrages done unto his Father, deprived of his lands unjustly, betrayed,
imprisoned, and poisoned, that they would give him the best assistance they
could. Whereupon he took the field, said, That he would revenge the death of
his Father, and win that by the sword that had been taken from him by
in-iustice. He was assisted by a number of valiant Captains; that is to say,
Sieur Oliuier de Fumes, Bertrand Hugon de Serrelongue, Bernard de Villeneufue,
Iordain de Satiat, all brave Leaders, who had a number of men at their command;
and before the enemy took any notice of his design, he seized upon the
Castles of Montreall, Saixac, Montolieu, Limous, and others.

Peter Melin the Popes Legate, and Bishop of Toulouze, being much astonished to
see those that took part with the Albingenses, whom he thought to be utterly
buried, to spring up again, he had presently recourse to the ordinary means
of the Pope and his Agents, that is, presently to cause the pardon of sins to
be preached, to whomsoever would fight under the banner of the Cross, a kind
of pay of less value, but more common in those times. The Archbishop of
Narbonnes animated also the people of his Diocese to go to make an end of
that poor remainder of the Albingenses that were left.

These Priests with their troops, presented themselves before the gates of
Carcassonne. The City received them, but when they came to the Town the gates
were shut against them. Amelin made a speech unto those that showed themselves
upon the rampires, telling them that he was come thither for their
preservation. They thanked him, but they told him withal, that if he did not
instantly retire himself, they would give him the chase. Upon this conference
came Trancauel, who set so hotly and valiantly upon the troop of Pilgrims that
accompanied the Legate, that he chased them, beating and killing them, till he
came to the gates of the City of Carcassonne, and the Legate had enough to do
to save himself: but that which offended him most, was, that the gates of the
Town were opened to Trancauel, who lodged therein, and made it his principal
retrait, from whence he every day hurt and hindered the Pilgrims of the City,
in such sort, that they hardly durst come forth of the gates. And whenever he
heard of any troops of Pilgrims to come, he went to meet them, laying ambushes
for them, and many times overthrew them before they could join themselves to
the Legate.

This man kept the field, until the year 1242. 1242.
because when any Pilgrims were required to go against a Bastard of the
diseased Earl of Beziers, every one did believe the forces that were levied
within the Principality, might suffice for the destruction of so weak an
enemy: but Amelin writ to the Pope, that if in good earnest he caused not the
expedition of the Cross to be preached in many places of Europe, that the
Church was like to receive a great loss by this last enemy, who had revived
the part of the Albingenses, and was more cruel, and more subtle, than any
other that had maintained them unto this time.

Innocent the fourth caused the expedition of the Cross to be published in
diverse parts of Europe. Trancauel being advertised, that a very great Army of
Pilgrims was prepared to come against him, finding himself not strong enough
in the Town of Carcassonne, retired himself to Realmont, whither the Pilgrims
followed him and besieged him. He courageously resisted them, and having many
times discomfited the Pilgrims, in the end Amelin seeing there was nothing to
be gotten of a man, whom when they thought him fast shut up, would be many
days journey from them, gathering new forces, he entreated the Earl of Foix
to use his best endeavors, to bring him to some peaceable design, and to
treaty with him; which he performed with such success, that he promised never
to bear Arms, either against the Legate or the Church of Rome. Here you see
the last attempt which we find the Albingenses have made, and the last
expedition of Pilgrims levied against them. All the pursuit against them
afterward, was made by the Monks the Inquisitors, who kindled their fires more
than ever; And so taking this poor people disarmed, and singling them out by
retaile, it was impossible for them any longer to subsist. And if at any time
they happened to set upon the Inquisitors, it was but to give them a more
sensible apprehension of their extreme violencies, whereof we have a notable
example in the Chapter following.

CHAP. X. Many Monks Inquisitors, and Officers of the Inquisition slain, and
for what cause: Pope Innocent the fourth uses the Earl Remond disgracefully:
The Earl Remond goes to Rome, and why: He takes his journey to Rhodes, dies at
Milan.
1243.
IN the year one thousand two hundred forty three, the Earl Remond having
satisfied his pecuniary penalties, and being returned to his Subjects; certain
of the Country complained of the unjust proceeding of the Monks Inquisitors,
who without any difference entangled in such sort all sorts of people, that
there were not almost any that they condemned not either for Heretics, or
Favorers; or Kinsfolk, or allies of Heretics; not being content to proceed
against those that made public profession of the belief of the Albingenses,
in such sort, that under the cloak of the Inquisition office, they committed
strange theeueries This accusation against the Inquisitors was before the Earl
Remond, in the presence of five Inquisitors, and four Officers of the
Inquisition, that is to say, The History of Languedsc, Chap. 4. fol. 40.
before William Arnaldi, Monk Inquisitor, and two other Iacobin Monks; Also
one Remond de l'Escriuain Archdeacon of the Church of Toulouze, and the Prior
of Auignonnet de Cluze, and Peter Arnaldi, Notarie of the Inquisition, and
three other of Auignonnet, in the Diocese of Toulouze.

The Monks Inquisitors would reply, and make some use of that which had been
informed, to frame their inditements against those that had thus accused them,
to the impeachment of their honor, terrifying them with threats, which made
those that had thus moved their patience, to enter into consideration with
themselves, that since they must fall into the snare of the said Inquisitors,
and so be utterly undone, it was better for them to deliver themselves this
once, and that they should teach others to carry themselves more advisedly. So
growing still more eager and violent in their discourse, they came to blows.
But the Monks Inquisitors and their Officers were ouermatched, for there were
slain (as the Historiographer of Languedoc reports) nine, that is to say, The
five Monks above specified, and the four Officers. True it is, that this
Writer does aggrauate the Fact, and he would have men believe, that it was a
premeditated treason, wherein he shows himself to be partial and passionate.

The Earl Remond did very well make it appear, that he was no way consenting
to this riot, for he made an exact search and inquiry after the Authors of
this sedition, but yet do what he could, he could not free himself from
suspicion. The same Historiographer says, that the atrocitie of the fact,
constrained the Authors to take Arms, and to begin again a kind of war;
but there is not any Writer that makes mention thereof; and therefore to be
considered of before it be believed. Pope Innocent the fourth came to Lion
about that time. He sends out his thunderbolts against the murderers, and he
looked not upon the Earl Remond with a good countenance, who was uncivilly
rejected in that request that he made unto him, touching a dispensation for the
marriage of his Cousin Beatrix, daughter of the Earl Berenger, Earl of
Prouence.

The same Historiographer says, that in the year 1247. the Earl Remond took
his journey to Rome, 1247. The hist. of Languedoc. fol. 41.
that he might be permitted to bury the bones of his father in holy ground,
and that it was denied him, because he died an excommunicate person. 1249.
He likewise says, that in the year one thousand two hundred forty nine,
when the Earl Remond purposed to take his voyage to Rhodes, he died at Milan
of a continual fever.

CHAP. XI. Alphonsus brother to the king St. Lewis takes possession of the
goods of the last Earl Remond of Toulouze: The persecution continues against
the Albingenses, unto the time that the Gospel was received in France, and
then the greatest part of those places where the Albingenses inhabited
presently received the reformation.
THe change of their Lord altered the condition of the Albingenses, for the
Earl Remond being departed this life, Alphonsus brother to the king St. Lewis,
took possession of all the lands, goods and revenues of the said Earl, and
consequently all the ill will that the Pope and other ecclesiastical persons
bare to the house of the Earl of Toulouze did cease. And as touching the
places which he was to yield up contained in the treaty, there needed no
farther speech of that, because Alphonsus being free from all suspicion of
falsehood to the Pope or the Church, he peaceably enjoyed whatsoever belonged
unto him. But one hand washes another; and therefore as by those wars that
the Church undertook against the Earl of Toulouze, Alphonsus was become
Master of the goods of the Earl Remond, so was he bound, to do his best
endeavors, that the Pope might be honored in his countries. For this cause he
strengthened the Inquisition, witness the Monk Rainerius, who was Inquisitor
in the year 1250. 1250.
who has left us in writing the whole form of their proceeding, whereof we
have the transcript in the second book of the history of the Waldenses. In
this hist. of the Waldenses. chapter 2. lib. 2.
Pope Alexander the fourth authorized the said Inquisition by letters which we
have in our hands.

The continuance of this persecution, by the said Inquisition is proved in the
year 1264. 1264.
by the constitutions of Pope Clement the fourth. Also in the year 1276. 1276.
under John the two and twentieth; they were persecuted with all manner of
rigor, witness the letters of the said Pope against them. And by this record
that follows, it appears that in the year 1281. 1281.
under Martin the fourth, there was a persecution moved in the quarters of
Albi, and that there were at that time a great number that made profession of
the Religion of the Albingenses.

AN EXTRACT OF THE Privileges of the City of Realmont. To the honor of God
the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, creator of all things, visible and
invisible, and of the glorious mother of God, who only has destroyed all
heresies.
WE William de Gourdon, Captain, and President of Carcassonne and Beziers,
do make known unto all men, that we command in the name of our most excellent
Lord Philip by the grace of God, king of France; near the Castle of Lombes in
the Diocese of Albi, called Realmont, for the exaltation of the Catholic
faith, and the extirpation of all wicked heresies, and the benefit of our Lord
the King, and his subjects, that the dens and lurking corners of all that
either join in belief with Heretics, or favor them to be quite rooted out
by this Colonie all and at once, and that by the command and authority of the
King.

And as for the innumerable numbers of children of Heretics and fugitives,
because the peruersitie of Heretics is so damnable, that we are not only to
punish themselves but their posterity; We ordain that the children of
Heretics which of their own will and good motion shall not be reduced
(forsaking their errors) to the purity of the Catholic faith, and the unity
of the Church, shall not be admitted to the city of Realmont or the territory
thereof in any sort whatsoever, to any place of honor or public office. Which
shall likewise be observed against the fugitives for heresy, who before their
departure shall not of their own accord willingly be reclaimed. Also they that
shall give credit unto Heretics, concealing them or favoring them, after they
are made known and declared to be such by the Church, shall be banished for
ever from the city of Realmont, and all their goods confiscated, and their
children wholly excluded from all honors and public dignities, except some
one amongst them do make known such Heretics, and do join in the search
and inquisition of them.

Thus you see the very last instrument which has come to our hands for the
proof of the persecution against the Albingenses. Though it be very certain
that they have been continually persecuted by the Inquisition, though their
enemies could never prevail so far against them, but that they still lay hid
like sparkles under the ashes, desiring once again to see that which their
posterity has enjoyed, that is the liberty to call upon God in purity of
conscience, without any constraint to yield to any superstition or Idolatry,
and so secretly instructing their children in the service of God, the fruit of
their piety, took life again, when it pleased the Lord that the light of his
Gospel should appear amongst the palpable darkness of Antichrist, for then
many of those places that had made profession to receive the faith of the
Albingenses, have received with greediness the doctrine of the Gospel, and
namely the city of Realmont, where the precedent thunderbolts were darted, and
notwithstanding that great distance of time, during the which they appeared
not, yet the eternal God has not given over his work, and to make manifest
that he can preserve his faithful, even in the midst of the confusion of
Babylon as Diamonds in a dunghill, wheat amongst the straw, gold in the midst
of the fire. And notwithstanding the enstruction have not passed from the
father to the son, until the time of the restoration, yet the goodness of
God cease not to be wonderful, in that many of those places where this first
dew of Gods grace has fallen, have been abundantly enriched with his heavenly
benedictions in these latter times; An excellent provocation doubly to obliege
them to love the truth which has bin freely manifested unto them, and to bring
forth fruits worthy thereof. As it should be an extreme grief to those places
that have neglected and rejected it, that God has abandoned them and left them
to their own sense, even in that darkness which they loved, revenging the
contempt of his word, by the ignorance thereof, and suffering those to perish
in their error, that have preferred it before the truth.

CHAP. XII. The conclusion of this History of the Albingenses.
IT is an easy matter to gather by the contents of this History of the
Albingenses, that the people inhabiting in the Country of Albi, Languedoc, and
diverse other places near adjoining, have made profession of the selfsame
Religion, that they have that elsewhere were called Waldenses, and the rather
because their adversaries themselves have affirmed, that they have persecuted
them as Waldenses. As also that the greatest troubles that have lighted upon
them, have been procured by the Priests, whose corruptions they have descryed
and discovered their abuses, maintaining against the Church of Rome, the
Gospel of Christ Jesus in it purity, refusing to yield to those Idolatries
that bare sway in those times; but above all, detesting the Mass, and the
invention of Transubstantiation, shaking the authority of the Popes dominion,
as being abusiue and tyrannical, having no resemblance of the well-befitting
humility of the true Pastors of the Church, or conformity to the doctrine and
vocation of the Apostles, but rather an excess and riot, befitting those that
love the world and perish with the world. By which liberty which they took
unto themselves to reprehend those that believed the right of all redargution
to belong only to themselves, they have been charged with diverse faults, and
condemned for rash inconsiderate people, profane secular persons, who had
thrust themselves into the office of teaching, when with silence they should
rather learn. And the Popes not being able to win them to the obedience of
their commands, nor to convince them of error by the word of God, they have
persecuted them by their Monks Inquisitors, who have delivered to the secular
Magistrate, as many as the said Monks could apprehend, and forasmuch as this
way was somewhat too slow to cut them off, and to see the end of them, the
Popes have drawn their swords against them, have armed their Cardinals and
Legates, and driven to these bloody wars the Kings and Princes of the earth,
giving Paradise for a recompense to whomsoever would bear arms against them,
and adventure his life for the extirpation of them for forty days together.
Many great Lords have been desirous to know the cause of that unreconcilable
enmity of the Pope, against their subjects, and having perceived that passion
carried those that were offended for the truth, they have maintained their
cause, being grounded upon this reason, That when they should be convinced of
this errror by the word of God, they would give the glory unto God. From hence
have proceeded those cruel wars wherein a million of men have lost their
lives. In the mean time, even then when it seemed that all truth was buried in
the ground, and that the Dragon had overcome, God raised in diverse of those
places, where this grace had been known and received, many goodly Churches
wherein his name is purely inuocated, maugre the Devil and all his adherents.
To God therefore, who has begun to destroy the son of perdition by the
blast of his Spirit: To the Son of God who has bought us with his precious
blood, be all honor and glory, for ever and ever. So be it. *

FINIS.
THE THIRD PART OF THE HISTORY OF THE WALDENSES AND ALBINGENSES.
THE FIRST BOOK: Containing the Doctrine and Discipline that has been common
amongst them.
The Catechism or manner of instructing their Children, which the Waldenses
and Albingenses have used, in manner of a Dialogue, where the Pastor asks the
question, and the Child answers; set down jointly in their own proper
Language, in the French Copy, for the more Authority.

CHAPTER I. The learned Reader desirous to see the Original, may have recourse
to the French Book, where it is faithfully set forth in their own old
Language.
Lo. Barba. Si tu fosses demanda qui sies tu. Respond. L'Enfant. Creatura de
dio rational and mortal, etc.
The Pastor.
Question. WHat art thou?

Answer. A creature of God, reasonable, and mortal.

Q. Why has God created thee?

A. To the end I should know and serve him, and that I might be saved by his
grace.

Q. In what does thy salvation consist?

A. In three essential virtues, which do necessarily belong to salvation.

Q. Which be they?

A. Faith, Hope, and Charity.

Q. How do thou prove it?

A. The Apostle says in the 1 Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 13.13. These
three things remain, Faith, Hope, and Charity,

Q. What is Faith?

A. According to the Apostle, Heb. 11.1. It is the substance of things hoped
for, the evidence of things not seen.

Q. How many kinds of Faith are there?

A. There are two sorts of Faith, that is, a lively, and a dead Faith.

Q. What is a lively Faith?

A. That which works by Charity.

Q. What is a dead Faith?

A. According to Saint James, That Faith which is without works, is dead.
Again, Faith is nothing without works: Or, a dead faith, is to believe there
is a God, and to believe those things concerning God, and not to believe in God.

Q. What is thy Faith?

A. The true Catholic and Apostolic Faith.

Q. What is that?

A. It is that which in the Apostles Symbol is divided into twelve Articles.

Q. What is that Symbol?

A. I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

Q. By what means can thou know that thou beleeuest in God?

A. By this. Because I know that I have given my self to the observation of
the Commandments of God.

Q. How many Commandments of God are there?

A. Ten, as it appears in Exodus and Deuteronomy.

Q. Which are they?

A. Hearken O Israel, I am the Lord thy God. Thou shall have no other Gods but
me. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven, etc.

Q. Upon what do all these Commandments depend?

A. Upon the two great Commandments, that is to say; Thou shall love God above
all things, and thy Neighbor as thy self.

Q. What is the foundation of these Commandments, by which every one ought to
enter into life, without which foundation no man can worthily fulfill the
Commandments?

A. Our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the Apostle says, in the first to the
Corinthians, None can lay any other foundation but that which is laid, even
Jesus Christ.

Q. By what means may a man attain to this foundation?

A. By Faith: So says Saint Peter, 1 Epist. 2.6. Behold, I lay in Sion a
chief corner stone, elect, precious, and he that believes in him, shall not
be confounded. And our Savior says; He that believes in me shall have
eternal life.

Q. How do thou know that thou beleeuest?

A. Because I know him to be true God, and true man, who was borne, and
suffered, etc. for my redemption, and Justification; and that I love him, and
desire to fulfill his Commandments.

Q. By what means may a man attain to the Essential virtues, that is to say,
Faith, Hope, and Charity?

A. By the gifts of the holy Ghost.

Q. Do thou believe in the holy Ghost?

A. I do believe: For the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son,
and is a person of the Trinity, and according to the Divinity, is equal with
the Father and the Son.

Q. Do thou believe God the Father, God the Son, God the holy Ghost, to be
three Persons: Then there are three Gods.

A. No, there are not three.

Q. But yet thou have named three?

A. That was by reason of the difference of the Persons, not of the Essence of
the Divinity: For though there be three Persons, yet there is but one Essence.

Q. After what manner do thou adore, and serve that God, in whom thou
beleeuest?

A. I adore him by an exterior and interior adoration: Exterior, by the bowing
of the knees, the lifting up of the hands, the inclination of the body, with
hymns and spiritual songs, fasting, invocation: but inwardly by a holy
affection, a will ready to do what he pleases, and I serve him by Faith,
Hope, Charity, in his Commandments.

Q. Do thou adore and serve any other thing as God?

A. No.

Q. Wherefore?

A. Because of his Commandment, whereby he has straightly commanded, saying;
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. As also, I
will not give my glory to another. Again, I live says the Lord: Every knee
shall bow unto me. And Christ Jesus says: There shall be true worshippers, who
shall worship the Father in spirit and truth: and the Angel would not be
adored by Saint John, nor Saint Peter by Cornelius.

Q. After what manner do thou pray?

A. I pray according to that Prayer that was taught us by the Son of God, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Q. Which is the other substantial virtue belonging of necessity to salvation?

A. It is Charity.

Q. What is Charity?

A. It is a gift of the holy Ghost, whereby the soul is reformed in will,
illuminated by Faith, whereby I believe all that I ought to believe, and hope
whatsoever I ought to hope.

Q. Do thou believe in the holy Church?

A. No, for that is a creature: but I believe there is a Church.

Q. What is that thou beleeuest touching the holy Church?

A. I say that the Church is considered after a twofold manner; the one in it
substance, the other in it Ministry: Considered in it substance, by the Church
we understand, the holy Catholic Church, which contains all the Elect of
God, from the beginning of the World to the end, in the grace of God, by the
merit of Christ, assembled by the holy Ghost, ordained from the beginning to
eternal life, the names and number of whom is known only to God, who has
elected them; And lastly, in this Church there remains no excommunicated
person: But the Church considered according to the verity of the Ministry,
are the Ministers of Christ, with the people subject unto them, or committed to
their charge, using their Ministry by Faith, Hope, and Charity.

Q. By what marks do thou know the Church of Christ?

A. By fit and convenient Ministers, and by the people who participate in the
truth of that Ministry.

Q. How do thou know the Ministers?

A. By the true apprehension of faith, by sound doctrine, by the life of good
example, the preaching of the Gospel, and the due administration of the
Sacraments.

Q. By what marks do thou know the false Ministers?

A. By their fruits; by their blindness, by their wicked works, by their
perverse doctrine, and by their unfit disorderly administration of the
Sacraments.

Q. How may we know their blindness?

A. When they, not knowing that truth which belongs of necessity to
salvation, they observe humane inventions, as the Commandments of God, of whom
that is verified that the Prophet Esaias speaks, and that has been alleged
by our Savior Christ Jesus, Mat. 15. This people honor me with their lips,
but their heart is far from me; but they serve me for nothing, teaching the
doctrine and commandments of men.

Q. By what means or marks are wicked works made known?

A. By those manifest sins of which the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. saying,
that they that do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

Q. By what marks is false doctrine known?

A. When men teach against Faith and Hope, as diverse kinds of Idolatries,
worshipping the reasonable, sensible, visible, or invisible creature: for it is
the Father only, with his Son and the holy Ghost, that must be served, and
no other creature. But contrarily we attribute to man, and to the work of his
hands, or to his words, or to his authority, in such manner, that men being
blinded, think that God is a debtour unto them for their false religion, and
covetous Simony of Priests.

Q By what marks is the disorderly administration of the Sacraments known?

A. When the Priests know not the intention of Christ in the Sacraments, and
teach that all grace and truth is included in them, by the only outward
ceremonies, and lead men to the participation of the Sacraments, without the
truth of Faith, Hope, and Charity. It is the will of the Lord, that all his
should take heed of false prophets, saying, Beware of false prophets. And
again, Beware of the Pharisees, that is to say, of their leven and false
doctrine. And again, Believe them not, follow not after them. David hates all
such persons, and therefore he says, I hate the congregation of the wicked.
And the Lord commands us to withdraw our selves from among such people,
Numbers 16.26. Depart from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of
theirs, lest you be consumed in all their sins. And the Apostle, 2. Cor.
6.14. Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers, for what fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteousness, and what communion has light with
darkness? What concord has Christ with Belial, or what part has he that
believes with an Infidel. And, What agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separated, says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. Again, in the
2. These. 3.12. We command and exhort you, by our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly. And in the 18.
of the Revel. 4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

Q. By what marks may we know those that are not in the truth of the Church?

A. By their public sins and erroneous faith; for we are to fly such
people, least we be contaminated with their sins.

Q. By what things ought thou to communicate with the holy Church?

A. I must communicate with the Church in regard of the substance, by Faith, by
Hope, and by Charity, and by the observation of the Commandments, and by
final perseverance in that which is good.

Q. How many Ministerial things are there?

A. Two, the Word, and the Sacraments.

Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Two, that is to say, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

Q. What is the third virtue necessary to salvation?

A. Hope.

Q. What is Hope?

A. It is a certain expectation of the grace and glory to come.

Q. By what means do we hope for grace?

A. By the Mediator Jesus Christ, of whom Saint John speaks, Chap. 1.17.
Grace came by Jesus Christ. And again, We beheld his glory full of grace and
truth, and we have all received of his fullness?

Q. What is Grace?

A. It is Redemption, Remission of sins, Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification.

Q. By what means do we hope for this Grace in Christ?

A. By a lively faith, and true repentance, Jesus Christ saying, Repent, and
believe the Gospel.

Q. From whence does Hope proceed?

A. From the gift of God, and his promises: and therefore says the Apostle, He
is able to accomplish whatsoever he promises: for he has promised himself,
that at what time soever a sinner shall know him, and repent him of his sins,
and hope that he will have mercy, pardon, and justify, etc.

Q. What are the things that divert a man from this hope?

A. A dead faith, the seducing of Antichrist to any other then Christ, that is
to say, to Saints, and the power of that Antichrist in his authority, words,
benedictions, Sacraments, relics of the dead. The teaching men to have hope,
by those means that directly oppose themselves against the Truth, and against
the Commandments of God, as Idolatry after diverse manners, and Simoniacall
wickednesses, etc. Abandoning the fountain of living water given by grace, to
run after broken cesterns, adoring, and honoring, and serving the creature,
by Prayers, and Fastings, and Sacrifices, Donations, Offerings, Pilgrimages,
Inuocations, etc. Trusting thereby to attain grace, which none can give, but
God alone in Christ Jesus. So that in vain they travel, and lose their silver
and their life, and doubtless not only this life present, but that which is to
come; for which cause it is said, that the hope of felons shall perish.

Q. And what say you of the blessed Virgin Mary? For she is full of grace, as
the Angel testifies, Hail Mary full of grace, etc.

A. The blessed Virgin has been, and is full of grace in her self, but not
to communicate unto others: for her Son only is full of grace to bestow on
others, as it is said of him; And we all receive of his fulness grace for grace.

Q. Do thou not believe the Communion of Saints?

A. I believe there are two things in the which the faithful do communicate,
the one is substantial, the other Ministerial: They communicate in the
substantial by the holy Ghost, in God by the merit of Jesus Christ. But they
communicate in the Ministerial or Ecclesiastical, by the Ministry duly
exercised, that is to say, by the Word, by the Sacraments, and by Prayer. I
believe the one and the other of these two Communions of Saints. The first
only in God by the Spirit, the other in the Church by Christ.

Q. In what does life eternal consist?

A. In a lively working faith, and perseverance therein. Our Savior says,
John 17.3. This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: And he that perseuereth to the end shall
be saved. Amen.

A confession of sins, common both with the Waldenses and Albingenses. CHAP.
II. O Dio de li Rey, and Segnor de li Segnor, yo me confesso a tu, car yo soy
aquel peccador que tay mot offendu, etc.
O God of Kings, and Lord of Lords, This confession is taken out of the Book
of the Waldensec, entitled New comfort.
I confess my self unto thee, for I am that sinner, that has grievously
offended thee, by mine ingratitude. I cannot excuse my self, because thou have
showed me what is good and what is evil. I have known what thy power is, and
have understood thy wisdom; I have taken notice of thy Justice, and seen thy
goodness; and therefore all the evil that I have done proceeds from my own
corruption. O Lord forgive me, and give me repentance, for I have contemned
thee by my pride and presumption, I have given no credit to thy wisdom, nor
obeyed thy Commandments, but I have transgressed them all; for which I am
sorry, and much displeased with my self. I have not feared thy Justice, nor
thy Judgments, but I have committed many wickednesses, even from my cradle
unto this day, neither have I loved thy great bounty and goodness as I
should, and as thou have commanded me; but I have given too great a trust unto
the devil, by the frail corruption of my nature; I have followed pride and
hated humility; and if thou pardon me not I am undone, so deeply is sin
rooted in my heart. I am so carried away with the love of riches and
vainglory, affecting the praise of men, that I bear but little love unto
those, to whom by their good deeds I am most obliged. If therefore thou forgive
me not, there remains nothing for my poor soul but everlasting perdition.
Anger reigns in my heart, because I have not endeavored to alaye it, envy
fretteth me because I have no charity. O Lord forgive me for thy goodness
sake. I am rash, lazy, and sluggish to do that which is good; hardy and bold
to do evil, and more then diligent. O Lord vouchsafe me thy grace, that I
may not be of the number of the wicked. I have not showed my self thankful
for that good thou have done unto me, and given unto me out of thy love, as I
ought, and as thou have commanded me; for I have been always, by the
perverseness of my nature, disobedient unto thee in all things. O Lord forgive
me, for I have not served thee, but contrarily I have greatly offended thee. I
have been too careful to serve my body, and mine own will, in many vain
thoughts and wicked desires, wherein I have taken pleasure. I have blinded my
body, and exercised my thoughts and imaginations against thee in many
wickednesses, and I have sought after many things against thy will. Have pity
on me and give me humility. I have cast up mine eyes to behold the vain
delights and pleasures of this world, and I have turned them away from thy
countenance. I have given ear to the sound of vanity, and to wicked speeches,
and it has been a grievous thing unto me to understand thy Law and thy
Discipline. I have committed many sins, especially in my understanding, for
the stench of wickedness has been more pleasing, then the divine sweetness
of thy celestial honors; for adoring the evil, I have therein taken greater
contentment, because I have committed many sins, and omitted much good that I
should have done, and not acknowledging my faults, I have endeavored to cast
them upon another. I have not been temperate in my eating and drinking. I have
many a time and often returned wrong for wrong, and therein I have taken greatest
pleasure. I have a wounded body and soul. I have stretched out my hands to
touch vanity, and I have labored to possess the goods of another man, and to
mischief my neighbor. My heart has delighted in that I have said, and much
more in many other vain delights and pleasures. O Lord pardon me and give me
chastity. I have ill employed the time that thou have given me, and I have
followed during my younger years, my vanities and pleasures. I have wandered
from the right way, and have given an ill example by my lightness. I know but
little good in my self, and I find much evil. I have displeased thee by my
wickedness, and condemned mine own soul, and hated my neighbor. O Lord
preserve me that I be not condemned. I love my neighbor for my temporal
benefit. I have not carried my self faithfully, when there has been any
question of giving and receiving, but I have had respect unto the persons,
according to mine affection. I have loved the one too much, and too much hated
the other. I have taken too little joy and comfort in the good of the godly,
and too great delight in the sin of the wicked. And besides all the evil
that I have committed in times past unto this present day, I have not had any
repentance, or distaste of my sins, answerable to my manifold offenses. I
have many a time and often returned to that wickedness I have committed, and now
confessed, for which I am heartily sorry. O Lord God, thou know that I have
confessed my self unto thee, and that there are yet in me many wickednesses,
which I have not recounted unto thee, but thou know the wicked thoughts, the
wicked words, the wicked works that I have committed unto this day, O Lord
forgive me, and give me time in this life to repent me of my sins, and
vouchsafe me the grace in time to come, so to hate those sins I have committed,
as that I never offend in that kind any more, and that I may so love virtue and
keep it in my heart, that I may love thee above all things, and fear thee in
such sort, that when the hour of death shall come I may do that that shall be
pleasing unto thee. And give me such affiance in thee at the day of Judgment,
that I neither fear the devil, nor any other thing may affright me, but
receive me, and set me at thy right hand, without offense, free from all sin.
Good Lord let all this come to pass according to thy good pleasure, for thy
Son Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

An Exposition of the Waldenses and Albingenses upon the ten Commandments of
the Law of GOD. CHAP. III. An Exposition of the first Commandment. Lo premier
Commandment de la Ley de Dio es aquest. Non aures Dio straing deuant mi. Exodus
20. etc. Thou shall have no other Gods but me.
ALl they that love the Creature more then the Creator, Taken out of the Book
of the Waldenses, entitled, The Book of virtues, page 197.
observe not this Commandment: That which every man honors and serves more
then GOD, that unto him is God. And therefore says Saint Chrysostom upon
Matthew: The evil to which a man is a servant, is to him a God. So that if any
man shall say, I cannot know, whether I love more or less GOD, or the thing
God forbids me to love; let him know, that what a man loves least, in a case
of necessity, is that which he is most willing to loose; and that which he
loves, is that which he keeps and preserves. As it is the manner of
Merchants to do, if when they are in danger of drowning, they willingly cast
their Merchandise into the Sea, to save their lives, they love their lives
better then their Merchandise: So think thou with thy self, that if upon any
occasion, thou had rather loose thy temporal things, or receive any loss or
hinderance in them, as in thy Money, thy Houses, thy Cattle, thy Wife, thy
Children, yea, thine own body, then commit any sin by which thou must loose
God, then doubtless thou love God more then all things above mentioned. But
contrarily, if thou had rather sin, then loose these temporal things,
then certainly thou do adore and serve these things more then God, and thou
art an Idolater. And this does our Savior affirm in the Gospel, The rest
touching this Commandment, is before in the 1. Book of the History of the
Waldendes; Chap. 4.
saying; If any man come unto me, and hates not his Father and his Mother, his
Wife and Children, his Brothers and Sisters, yea, and his own soul, he
cannot be my Disciple. All such offend against this Commandment, etc.

An Exposition of the 2. Commandment. Tu ne te fer as image taillee, etc. Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc.
THou shall make thee no Image, cut out of stone or wood, or any other thing,
which may be cut into any figure, or picture, or in any other manner
whatsoever, that is in Heaven above, as the Angels, the Sun, the Moon, the
Stars; nor in the Earth beneath, as Men, and other Creatures, as the
Egyptians do: nor in the waters, as the Fish: For the Philistines served
Dagon, which was an Idol, which had a head like a Fish: Nor under the Earth, as
the Devils; as they of Acheron, who worshipped Beelzebub. Thou shall not
worship them; by doing them outward reverence, nor serve them with inward
reverence. Neither shall thou do any work that may tend to the honor and
reverence of them. So he manifestly forbids to make any graven Image of any
thing, to the end to serve and adore it. And therefore it is wonderful, that
there are some that frame unto themselves Figures and Images, and attribute
unto them by their ignorance, and against the Commandment of God, the honor
and reverence which belongs to one only God.

Object. But there are some that say, that Images are Laymens Books, who not
being able to read in Books, may see that upon a wall, which they cannot
read.

Answer. To whom we may answer, that the Lord says to his Disciples, in the
fifth Chapter of Saint Matthew; Ye are the salt of the Earth, the light of the
World. For the life and conversation of the Pastors ought to be the Book of
their Flocks. And if a man should grant that they are Books, yet they are
false, and ill written. For if Lay People shall take example by those Images
and figures of the lives of Saints, it is most certain that it is impossible.
For the Virgin Mary was an example of humility, poverty, and chastity, and they
adorn her Image, rather with vestments of pride, then humility. So that the
Lay People do not read in their habits humility, but pride and avarice, if
they conform themselves to the said Books corrupted, and ill written. For the
Priests and the people in these days, are covetous, proud, and luxurious, and
therefore they cause their Images to be pictured like themselves. And therefore
says David, Thou think foolishly that I am like unto thee.

Object. But there are others that say; We worship the visible Images, in
honor of the invisible God.

Answer. This is false. For if we will truly honor the Image of GOD, by doing
good unto men, we serve and honor the Image of GOD: For the Image of GOD is in
every man, but the resemblance or likeness of God, is not in all, but only in
those where the thought is pure, and the soul humble. But if we will truly
honor God, we give place unto the truth; that is to say, we do good unto
men that are made after the Image of God: we do honor unto God, when we give
meat to those that hunger, drink to those that thirst, and cloth to those
that are naked. And therefore what honor do we give unto God, when we serve
him in a stock, or a stone; when we adore idle Figures without souls, as if
there were some divinity in them, and contemn man, who is the true Image of
God? Saint Chrysostom upon Matthew says; That the Image of God cannot be
painted or pictured in gold, but figured in man. The Money of Caesar is gold,
but the money of God is man. And therefore if the Jews were commanded under
the Law, that they should destroy all the figures and Images, and addict
themselves to one only God; as it is written in the first Book of the Kings.
But Samuel said to all the House of Israel: If you turn unto the Lord with all
your heart, and remove from you all your strange Gods, and keep your heart
unto the Lord, and serve him only, he will deliver you from the hands of the
Philistines. Much less then ought Christians to depend upon such signs and
Images which the Jews did not; but they ought rather to lift up their
affections unto Christ, who sits at the right hand of God.

An Exposition of the 3. Commandment. Tu ne prendras point le nom du Seigneur
ton Dieu en vain, etc. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain, etc.
IN this Commandment, we are forbidden to swear falsely, vainly, and by
custom, as it is written, Leuit. 19. The man that is accustomed to swear,
shall be filled with iniquity, and the plague shall not depart from his house.
An oath confesses God to know the truth, and it is to confirm a thing
doubtful; for an oath is an act of Gods service: and therefore they that
swear by the Elements do sin. This is the reason why Christ Jesus
forbids us to swear by any thing, neither by the heaven, nor by the earth;
or any thing else, but that our speech be, Yea, yea, and No, no, and
whatsoever is otherwise is sin. And Saint James in the fifth Chapter of his
Epistle says. Above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven,
neither by the earth, neither by any other oath, lest ye fall into condemnation.

An Exposition of the 4. Commandment. Souuienne toy du iour du repos, etc.
Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc.
THey that will keep and observe the Sabbath of Christians, that is to say,
Sanctify the day of the Lord, must be careful of four things: The first is
to cease from all earthly and worldly labors: The second, not to sin: The
third, not to be idle in regard of good works: The fourth, to do those things
that are for the good and benefit of the soul. Of the first it is said, In
six days shall thou labor and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh
is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no manner of work:
and in Exodus it is said, Keep my Sabbath, for it is holy; he that polluteth
it shall die the death: and in the Book of Numbers we read that one of the
children of Israel being seen to gather sticks upon the Sabbath day, he was
brought unto Moses, who not knowing what course to take therein, the Lord said
unto Moses; This man shall die the death, all the people shall stone him with
stones, and he shall die. God would that his Sabbath should be kept with such
reverence, that the children of Israel durst not to gather Manna therein, when
it was given them from heaven.

The second thing which we are to observe, is, to preserve our selves from
sin, as it is said in Exodus, Remember to sanctify the day of rest, that is,
to observe it, by keeping thy self carefully from sin. And therefore says
Saint Augustine, It is better to labor and to dig the earth upon the Lords
day, then to be drunk, or to commit any other sins; for sin is a servile
work, by which a man serves the devil. Again, he says that it is better to
labor with profit, then to range and roame abroad idly: For the day of the
Lord was not ordained to the end that a man should cease from worldly good
works, and give himself unto sin; but to the end he should addict himself
to spiritual labors, which are better then the worldly, and that he repent
himself of those sins he has committed, the whole Sabbath throughout: for
idleness is the Schoolmasters of all evil. Seneca says, It is a sepulcher
of a living man.

The fourth thing is to do that which may be good and profitable to the soul;
as to think on God, devoutly to pray unto him, dilligently to hear his Word
and Commandments, to give thanks unto God for all his benefits, to instruct
the ignorant, to correct the erroneous, and to preserve our selves from all
sin, to the end that saying of Esaias might be accomplished; Repent you of
your sins, and learn to do good: for rest is not good, if it be not
accompanied with good works.

An Exposition of the 5. Commandment. These Commandments tell us how we are
to carry our selves toward our neighbors. Non sentend tant solament de la
reuerentia de fora, etc. Honor thy father and thy mother, etc.
We are not to understand these words, as if the question were only touching
outward reverence, but also concerning matter of complement, and things
necessary for them: and therefore we are to do that which is enjoined in this
Commandment, for that honor which is due unto fathers and mothers: for we
receive from them three excellent gifts, that is to say, our Being, our
Nourishment, and our Instruction, which we are never able fully to recompense.
The Wiseman says, Honor thy father, and forget not the sorrows of thy
mother: Remember that by them thou have had thy being, render then a recompense
answerable to the price they have given thee: and therefore having regard to
that natural being which we have received from our father and mother, we are
to serve them in all humility and reverence, after a threefold mannet. First
with all the power of our bodies, we are to support their bodies, and to yield
them the service of our hands. As the wise man speaks; He that fears God,
will honor his Father and his Mother, and will serve them as his Lords that
have begotten him. Again, we must serve our Fathers and Mothers with all our
power, never debating or questioning with them with hard and bitter speeches;
but we must answer them humbly, and hearken lovingly to their reprehensions.
Proverbs 1.8. My son hear the instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the
Law of thy Mother. He that shall curse his Father and Mother, his Lamp shall
be put out in the midst of darkness. We must likewise honor them, by
administering unto them things necessary for this life. For Fathers and Mothers
have nourished their Children with their own flesh, their proper substance;
and Children nourish their Parents with that which is without their flesh,
being impossible they should restore unto them those benefits they have
received of them.

And touching the instruction we have received of our Parents, we must obey
them in whatsoever shall tend to our salvation, and to a good end. Ephesians. 6.
Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right. Of which obedience,
Christ has given us an example, as it is in the second Chapter of Saint Luke:
And he went down with them, and was obedient to his Father and Mother. And
therefore honor first thy Father that has created thee; then thy Father that
has begotten thee, and thy Mother that has borne thee in her womb, and has
brought thee forth, to the end thy days may be prolonged upon the Earth, and
that perseuering in that which is good, thou may pass out of this world to
an everlasting inheritance.

An Exposition upon the 6. Commandment. En aquest Commandament es dessen du
specialment l'homicidi, etc. Thou shall not kill.
MVrder is especially forbidden in this Commandment: but more generally, to
hurt our Neighbor in any manner whatsoever, as with words, detractions,
injuries, or deeds, as to strike our Neighbor. Of the first sort it is said,
Matthew 5.22. Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in
danger of judgment. And Saint James says, Chapter 1.20. The wrath of man
works not the righteousness of God. And Saint Paul, Ephesians. 3. Let not the
Sun go down upon your anger. He that is angry with his brother without
cause, is worthy of judgment; but not he that is angry upon just occasion.
For if a man should not be angry sometimes, the doctrine were not profitable,
neither would the judgment be discerned, nor sin punished. And therefore
just anger is the Mother of discipline, and they that in such a case are not
angry, sin: for that patience that is without reason, is the seed of vices,
it nourishes negligence, it suffers not only the bad to swerue, but the
good too: For when the evil is corrected, it vanishes. So that it is plain,
that anger is sometimes good, when it is for the love of righteousness, or
when a man is angry with his own sins, or the sins of another man. Thus
was Christ angry with the Pharisees. The other sort of anger is wicked, which
proceeds from a desire of revenge, which is forbidden. Vengeance belongs unto
me (says the Lord) and I will revenge.

An Exposition upon the 7. Commandment. Loqual Commandament defend tota non
licita cubititia, etc. Thou shall not commit adultery.
THis Commandment forbids all unlawful lust, and pollution of the flesh, as
it is said in the fifth by Saint Matthew: He that looks upon a woman, and
lusts after her, has already committed adultery with her in his heart. And
in the fifth of the Apostle to the Ephesians, it is said: This ye know, that no
whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, shall inherit the Kingdom
of God. And in the 1 Corinthians 6.9. Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor
unclean persons, shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. And in the 5. Chapter:
If any man that is called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, etc. Eat
not with such a one. Now as there is a corporal whoredom, so there is a
spiritual; that is to say, when a man separateth himself from God.

An Exposition of the 8. Commandment. En aquest Commandament es deffendu
totalment furt et fraud de cosas stragnas, etc. Thou shall not steal.
IN this Commandment we are forbid all manner of theft, and all unlawful
means, to get unto our selves the goods of another by fraud or avarice, or
injury, or violence: For they are not only thieves, that take the goods of
another, but they that command them, that receive thieves into their Houses,
and that buy stolen goods, and make profit of them wittingly. All they that
do such things, and they that consent thereunto, they shall suffer equal
punishment: or if thou find any thing, and restorest it not, thou have robbed
thy Neighbor; for thou art bound to make restitution of that thou have found.
They that deprive their subjects of their goods and commodities, as Lords use
to do, imposing unjust charges and taxations, ouer-burthening the poor by
their wicked inventions, and if they refuse to do it, they imprison them, and
many times torment them even to the death, and so take from them their goods
unjustly, they are thieves. Of these the Prophet Esaias speaks, Chapter 1.23.
Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of Thieves, and follow after
rewards. They are also Thieves that retain the wages of the labourer by fraud.
Of such it is said in the 19 of Leuiticus, The wages of him that is hired,
shall not abide with thee all night until the morning. And as Saint James
speaks in his fifth Chapter, Ye that have heaped treasure together for the
last days, Behold the hire of the Laborers, which have reaped down your
fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries, and the cries of them
which have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of Hosts. They play
the thieves that hurt the weal public, as Coyners, in the weight, number,
value, and generally all such as falsify their weights and measures, and
diverse Merchandises; these are called robbers of the common good, and such
according to the Law are to be put to death in boiling oil. They are Thieves
that labor to get by fraud, that deceive men in their wares and merchandise,
selling bad for good. Also Gamesters, who inuit others to gaming, who play out
of avarice, the root of all evil, rapine, lying, vain and idle speeches,
oaths, blasphemies against God, ill example, the loss of time. Thus by
playing, a man winds himself unjustly into the goods of another man.

An Exposition on the 9. Commandment. En aquest Commandment non es solament
deffendu la messogna, ma tota offensa, etc. Thou shall not bear false witness
against thy Neighbor.
IN this Commandment, we are not only forbidden to lie, but all offenses that
may be done unto our Neighbors, by false or fained words or works. For all
such as love lying, are the Children of the Devil, as also they that impeach
the honor of their Neighbor by lying, or bear false witness for the wicked.
He that bears false witness, says Saint Augustine, wrongs these three.
First God, whose presence is thereby contemned. Secondly the Judge, who is
deceived by him that lies. And thirdly he wrongs the Innocent party, who is
oppressed by his false witness. All detractors sin against this
Commandment. A detractor or slanderer is compared to an open sepulcher, as
David speaks, Their mouth is an open sepulcher. There is no grave so
loathsome unto God, as the mouth of a slanderer. And this was that that made S.
Ambrose to say, that a thief is more to be boren-with then a detractor; for
the one robs a man of his corporal substance only, the other of his good
name. The slanderer deserves to be hated of God and man. The stroke of the
whip makes marks in the flesh, but the stroke of the tongue breaks the
bones.

An Exposition of the 10. Commandment. En aquest Commandment es defendua la
Cubititia de tui li ben, etc. Thou shall not covet, etc.
IN this Commandment is forbidden the covetous desire of all goods, that is,
of wife, servants, fields, vineyards, houses, etc. As also the concupiscence of
the eyes, and of the flesh. The lust of the flesh, is like a running water, but
the lust of the eyes is like earth, by reason of our earthly affections. And as
of water and earth, there is made a material dirt, so of concupiscense is made
the spiritual dirt and dunghill of the soul, which makes a man odious unto
God, From hence arises the pride of life, which like a violent wind
disquieteth the soul, and turns this earthly lump into dust.

The conclusion of the Exposition of the Commandments. Aquesti son li dies
Commandament de la Ley, etc.
THese are the ten Commandments of the Law, whereof the first concern our
duty to God, the latter toward; our neighbor. And whosoever will be saved,
must keep these Commandments. Many excellent blessings are promised to those
that keep these Commandments, and to those that transgress them, many
grievous and horrible maledictions. As Deuteronomy. 28. If we truly acknowledge our
sins, we know that we are far from God: For salvation is far from
sinners, and the knowledge of sin brings us to repentance, for no man can
repent that knows not his sin. The first degree to salvation is the
knowledge of sin; and therefore acknowledging our fault, we approach with
confidence to the throne of the grace of God, and confess our sins: for he
is faithful and just to pardon our sins, and to cleanse us from all
iniquity, and to bring us to the life of grace. Amen.

A brief Exposition of the Waldenses and Albingenses of the Apostles Creed,
confirming the Articles thereof by express passages of the Scripture. CHAP.
IIII. Nos deuen creyre en Dio Pair tot Poissant, etc.
We must believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, which
God is one Trinity, as it is written in the Law, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear O Israel,
the Lord our God, is one Lord. And the Prophet Esaias, I am Lord, and there is
none other, neither is there any God but I: And Saint Paul, in the 4. to the
Ephesians. There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and one Father of
all. And Saint John, 1. Epist. 5.7. There are three that bear record in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. And
in the Gospel by Saint John it is said, Chap. 17.11. That the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost are one; when our Savior says, That they may be
one, as we are one. Again, we must believe that this holy Trinity has
created all things visible, and that he is Lord of all things celestial,
terrestrial, and infernal, as it is said in Saint John, Chap. 1.3. All things
were made by him, and without him was not any thing made, that was made: And in
the Revelation it is said, Chap 4.11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive
glory, for thou have created all things, the heavens, the earth, and the sea,
and the fountains of water. And the Prophet David says, And thou, O Lord,
have founded the earth in the beginning, and the heavens are the works of thy
hands. And again, The heavens are framed by the word of the Lord, and all the
powers thereof by the breath of his mouth. All these, and diverse other
testimonies and reasons drawn from the Scriptures, do affirm that God
created all things of nothing, whatsoever they be.

Again, we must believe that God the Father has sent his Son from heaven
unto earth, and that for our sakes he has taken upon him our flesh in the
womb of the Virgin Mary for our salvation; as the Prophet Esaias speaks, Chap.
7.14 Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and his name shall be
Emanuell; which is God with us. And the Lord says in the Gospel, that this
has been accomplished, saying, I am come from my Father into the world; and
again, I have left the world, and go to my Father. And again, Saint John
says, Chap. 1.14. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us. And in the
first Epistle of John 5.20. We know that the Son of God is come, and that
he has taken our flesh upon him for us, and is raised again from death for
us, and has given us understanding, that we may know him that is true, and
we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true
God and eternal life. And in the fourth to the Galatians 4. When the fullness
of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the
Law, to redeem them that were under the Law: who by the commandment of God
the Father, and his own free will, was lifted up upon the altar of the cross,
and crucified, and has redeemed mankind with his own blood; which having
accomplished, he arose from death the third day, having dispersed in the world
a light everlasting, like a new sun, that is, the glory of the resurrection,
and heavenly inheritance, which the same Son of God has promised to give to
all those that in faith serve him. For ascending up unto heaven the fortieth
day after his resurrection, and the tenth after his assention, he sent the
holy Ghost from heaven to comfort his Apostles, and to replenish his Church
with the same Spirit. We must believe that the same God has chosen unto
himself a glorious Church, without spot or wrinckle, or such like thing, as
Saint Paul speaks, to the end it should be holy and undefiled, according to
the commandment of the Almighty; Be ye holy, for I am holy. And in the fifth of
Saint Matthew; Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect: for nothing
that does commit abomination shall enter into the Kingdom of God, but only
they that are written in the Book of life, as it is said in the Revelation.

We must believe the general resurrection, of which our Savior speaks in
the Gospel of Saint John; The hour shall come when all they that are in their
graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that have done
evil, to the resurrection of Judgment. And Saint Paul says in the first to
the Corinthians, that all shall arise, and all shall be changed. And Job says,
Chap. 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth; and though after my skin, worms destroy this body,
yet in my flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes
shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me.

We must believe the general Judgment upon all the children of Adam, as the
Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament do affirm. As our Savior
promises in the 25. of Matthew. 31. When the Son of man shall come in his
glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of
his glory; and before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall
separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the
goats; and he shall set the sheep on his right hand and the goats on the
left. And Jude in his Epistle, Verse. 15. Behold the Lord comes with ten
thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all. And the Prophet Esaias
says, The Lord comes in judgment with the Ancients of his people, and with
his young men also. These things are set down in the Old and New Testament, and
especially the four Evangelists, and the Prophets witness it in many places.

CHAP. V. An Exposition of the Waldenses and Albingenses upon the Lords Prayer.
Taken out of a Book of the Waldenses, entitled, The treasure of faith.
SAint Augustine being requested by a spiritual Daughter of his, to teach her
to pray, has thus said; and written: That multitudes of words, are not
necessary in prayer. But to pray much, is to be fervent in prayer. And
therefore to be long in prayer, is to present things necessary in superfluous
words. To pray much, is to solicit that we pray for with a seemly decency and
affection of heart, which is better done by tears, then by words; because God
who sees the secrets of our heart, is more moved with a deep groan or sigh,
by plaints and tears that come from the heart, then by a thousand words. But
many there are in these days that resemble the Pagans, to whom Christ would
not have his Disciples to be like; for they think and believe that they shall
be the rather heard for their many words in their prayers: whereby it comes to
pass, that they loose much time under a pretense of prayer. Job says, and
besides experience makes it good, that a man is never in the same estate in
this life, but he is now disposed to do one thing, and presently to do
another. And therefore there is no man that can keep his mind, his spirit,
bent and attentive to prayer, a whole day or a whole night together, except God
give the especial assistance of his grace. And if a man has not his heart
settled upon that which he speaks, he loses his time, because he prays in
vain, and his soul is troubled, and his mind wandering another way. And
therefore God has appointed to his servants other exercises, virtuous,
spiritual, and corporal, wherein a man may ordinarily exercise himself,
sometimes in one, sometimes in another, either for themselves, or their
Neighbors, having their hearts lifted up unto God, with all their power, in
such sort that they may not be idle. And therefore that man that lives well,
according to the will of God, and the Doctrine of his Saints, prays always.
For every good work is a good prayer unto God. And as for thou that read,
know that all the prayers of the old and new Testament, do agree with this;
and that no prayer can be pleasing unto God, that has not a reference some way
or other unto this. And therefore every Christian ought to apply himself to
understand and to learn this prayer, which Christ himself has taught with
his own mouth.

Now it is necessary that he that is heard of God, be agreeable unto him, and
know those benefits he has received from him. For ingratitude is a wind that
dries up the Fountain of the mercy and compassion of our God. And therefore
if thou will pray, or ask any thing at Gods hand, think with thy self before
thou ask, what and how great benefits thou have received from him, and if thou
can not call them all to mind, yet at the least forget not to beg that
grace, that thou may be bold to call him Father. And think and know in how
diverse a manner he is thy Father: for he is the Father of all Creatures
generally by creation, for he has created them all. He is a Father by
distribution, for he has ordained them, and disposed them all in his due
place, as being very good. By preservation; for he has preserved all
Creatures, that they fail not in their kind, amongst which his Creatures thou
art one. And besides, he is the Father of mankind by redemption, for he has
bought him with the precious blood of his Son, the Lamb without spot: By
instruction, for he has taught him by his Prophets, by his Son, and by his
Apostles and Doctors, and that after a diverse manner, the way to return into
Paradise, from whence we were driven by the sin of our first Father Adam. By
chastisement, for he chastises and corrects us in this life diverse ways, to
the end we may return unto him, and not be condemned eternally in another
life.

Lo teo nom sia sanctifica. Hallowed be thy Name.
THy Name, amiable to Christians, and fearful to the Jews, to Paynims, and
to the wicked. Of this name says the Prophet, O Lord, thy Name is admirable,
and wonderful. O our Father which art in Heaven, we humbly beseech thee, that
thy Name which is holy, be sanctified in us, by purity of heart, by the
contempt of the flesh and the world, and that by an assured perseverance of thy
love, we may be holy as thy name is holy, which we bear, and by which we are
called Christians. For which cause, let it be and dwell always in us, that we
may addict our selves to holiness and righteousness.

Lo teo regne vegne. Thy Kingdom come.
YOu must understand that God the Father has two Kingdoms, the one of glory,
life eternal; the other of grace, the life Christian. And these two Kingdoms
are joined together, in such manner, that betwixt them there is no middle, but
the point of death. But according to the order of divine Justice, the Kingdom
of grace is before the Kingdom of glory. And therefore they that live in the
Kingdom of grace, by which we are to pass, if we will enter the Kingdom of
glory, without doubt they shall reign in the Kingdom of glory; and no man can
reign there by any other means. And therefore Christ our Lord says unto his
Disciples, Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof,
that is, the Kingdom of grace and virtue, as Faith, Hope, Charity, and the
rest. But forasmuch as you cannot perform this of your selves, without the
heavenly grace, beg it at Gods hands, saying; O our Father which art in Heaven,
thy Kingdom come; that is to say, the love of virtue, and the hatred of the
World.

La toa volunta sia faita, enaimi es faita en cel fia faita en terra. Thy will
be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
A Man cannot affect, desire, or do any better thing in this life, then to
endeavor with all his wit and understanding, and with all his heart, to do the
will of God, as the Angels do it in Heaven. Now to do the will of God, is to
renounce himself; that is to say, his own proper will, and to dispose and
employ that which is in his own soul and heart, or that is without him, in
things temporal, according to the Law of God, and the Doctrine of the Gospel
of Christ Jesus. And to be well content with whatsoever it shall please God to
do or permit, both in adversity and prosperity. Many there are who think they
are to be excused, because they know not the will of God. But these men deceive
themselves. For the will of God is written, and plainly manifested and proved
by the word of God, which they will not read or understand. And therefore
says the Apostle, Conform not your selves unto those that love the World, but
be reformed and renewed in the truth of your understanding, to the end you may
know what is the will of God. And again, this is the will of God, even your
sanctification. There is no work that is little, if it be done with a willing
and fervent affection. And our Savior teaches his Disciples both by words and
examples, that the will of God must be done, not theirs; saying, I am come into
the world, not to do my will, but to do the will of my Father who has sent
me. Again, being near his passion, and seeing the torments of death which he
was to endure, as he was man, he cried out, O my Father, if it be possible, let
this Cup pass from me; but yet not my will, but thy will be done. To be
brief, we must thus pray in all our affairs. O our Father which art in
Heaven. Thy will be done in us, by us, and of us in Earth, as it is done by the
Angels in Heaven, without idleness continually, without fault uprightly,
without humane desire, doing that which is good, leading a virtuous and a pure
life, obeying our superiors, and contemning this World.

Dona nos lo nostre pan quotidien enchoi. Give us this day our daily bread.
We may here understand two kinds of bread, Corporal and Spiritual. By
Corporal bread we are to understand our meats and drinks, and clothing, and
all things necessary for the body, without which we cannot live naturally. The
Spiritual Bread is the Word of God, the Body of Christ, without which the
Soul cannot live. And of this Bread Christ spoke unto his Disciples; Whosoever
shall eat of this bread, shall live eternally. And therefore it is the duty
of every man, in all humility to ask this Bread at Gods hands, who can give
it him, saying, O our Father, do us the grace and favor, that we may obtain
by our just labor, the bread that is necessary for our bodies, and to use it
with sobriety and measure, yielding thee always thanks and praises, and that
we may charitably bestow some part of them upon the poor. Moreover we beseech
thee that thou will be pleased, so to deal with us, that we may use this
bread with sobriety to thy glory, and the good both of body and soul. For the
Prophet Ezekiel says, Chap. 16.49. That fullness of bread, and abundance of
idleness, was the cause of the iniquities and abominations of Sodom, which
were so great in the sight of God, that he sent down fire and brimstone to
consume them. Whereupon a certain learned Father says, that costly apparel,
superfluity in diet, play, idleness and sleep, fatten the body, nourish
luxury, weaken the spirit, and lead the soul unto death; but a spare diet,
labor, short sleep, poor garments, purify the soul, tame the body,
mortify the lusts of the flesh, and comfort the Spirit.

The spiritual Bread is the Word of God. Of this Bread the Prophet speaks;
Thy bread quickens me. And Christ says in the Gospel; Verily I say unto
you, that the hour comes, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear him shall live. And this is found true by this
experience: That is, that many being dead in their sins, hearing the
Preaching of the Word of God, have departed, quickened, and raised, by the said
Word of God, and betaken themselves to true repentance which gives life. This
bread of the Word illuminateth the soul, according to that of David, Psalm.
119.130. The entrance of thy word gives light, it gives understanding to the
simple; that is to say, to the humble, to the end they may know what to believe
and to do, what to fear, to fly, to love, to hope. This bread delights the
soul more then honey and the honey-combe. And therefore faith the Spouse,
Canticles 2.11. Let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy
countenance is comely. There is another Spiritual Bread, and that is the Body
and Blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In the Sacrament, they that
receive it worthily, receive not only grace, but Christ the Son of God
spiritually, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom.

Pardonna a nos li nostre debit o pecca, coma nos per donnen a li nostre
debtor o offendadors. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us.
IT should not seem, or be, grievous to any man to forgive his neighbor
those offenses he has committed against him. For if all the offenses which
have been, or can be committed against all the men in the world were put into
a balance, they would not weigh so much, being put altogether, as the least
offense committed against God: but the pride of man will not suffer men to
think hereof, neither to pardon their neighbors, nor to receive their pardon
from God. But a good Christian suffers and gently pardons, beseeching God,
that he may not make requital according to the evil his debtors, or such as
have offended him, have deserved, and that he will give them grace to know
their fault, and withal true repentance, to the end they may not be damned;
and the wrongs done unto him, he accounts as dreams, in such manner, that
he thinks not of repaying them according to their merits, nor desires to
revenge himself, but to do them service, and to converse with them as before,
yea, and with greater love then if they were brethren. And therefore he that
out of the cruelty of his heart, will by no means forgive his enemy or
debtour, cannot hope for pardon at Gods hand, but rather eternal damnation.
For the Spirit of God has spoken it, and it is true: He shall have Judgment
without mercy that is not merciful to others. The affection and the will that
thou have toward thy debtour, is the same which God has in his place and
rank, and thou can hope for no other.

Non nos amenar en tentation, etc. And lead us not into temptation, etc.
We are not to pray unto God, not to suffer us to be tempted: For the
Apostle Saint Paul says, None shall be crowned but he that fights against
the world, the flesh, and the devil. And Saint James says, that he is blessed
that endures temptation. For when he has past his trial, he shall receive
a crown of life. For no man can resist the power of the devil without the
grace of God. We must therefore pray, with all humility and devotion, and
continual requests unto our heavenly Father that we fall not into
temptations, but so as that combating with them, we may get the victory, and
the Crown, by and through his grace, which he has prepared to give unto us.
We are not to believe that he does sooner hear, or more willingly, the Devil
then the Christian; and according to that which the Apostle Saint Paul says,
God is faithful, who suffers us not to be tempted above our power.

Mas desliora nos del mal, etc. But deliver us from evil, etc.
THat is to say, Deliver us from a wicked will to sin: from the temporal and
eternal pains of the devil: that we may be delivered from his infinite
toils and trumperies. AMEN. This last word notes unto us, the fervent desire
of him, that prays that that thing may be granted unto him that he asks.
And this word Amen, is as much as if he should say, So be it, and it may be
put after all our Petitions.

What the Waldenses and Albingenses have believed and taught touching the
Sacraments. CHAP. VI. Sacrament second lo dire de Sanct Augustine, etc.
A Sacrament, according to the saying of Saint Augustine, in his Book of the
City of God, is an invisible grace represented by a visible thing. Or a
Sacrament is a sign of a holy thing. There is great difference betwixt the
bare Sacrament, and the cause of the Sacrament, even as much as between sign
and the thing signified. For the cause of the Sacrament is the Divine grace,
and the merit of Jesus Christ crucified, who is the raising of those that were
fallen. This cause of the Sacrament, is Powerfully, Essentially, and by
authority in God, and in Jesus Christ Meritoriously. For by the cruel Passion
and effusion of his Blood, he has obtained grace and righteousness unto all
the faithful. But the thing it self of the Sacrament, is in the soul of the
faithful, by participation, as Saint Paul speaks; We have been made
partakers of Christ. It is in the Word of the Gospel, by annunciation, or
manifestation. In the Sacraments, Sacramentally. For the Lord Jesus has lent,
or given these helps of the outward Sacraments, to the end the Ministers,
instructing in the faith, should so accommodate themselves to humane
weakness, as that they might the better edify the people by the Word of the
Gospel.

There are two Sacraments: The one of water, the other of nourishment, that is
to say, of Bread and Wine.

The first is called Baptism, that is to say in our language, the washing with
water, either of the river or the fountain, and it must be administered, In the
name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; to the end that first,
by the means of the grace of God the Father, beholding his Son, and by the
participation of Jesus Christ, who has bought us, and by the renewing of the
holy Ghost, which imprinteth a lively faith in our hearts, the sins of those
that are Baptized, are pardoned, and they received into grace, and afterward
having perseuered therein, are saved in Jesus Christ.

The Baptism wherewith we are Baptized, is the same wherewith it pleased our
Savior himself to be Baptized, to accomplish all righteousness, as it was
his will to be Circumcised, and wherewith he commanded his Apostles to be
Baptized.

The things that are not necessary in Baptism, are the Exorcismes, the
breathings, the signs of the Cross upon the Infant, either the breast or the
forehead, the salt put into the mouth, the spittle into the ears and
nostrills, the unction of the breast, the Monks Cowle, the anointing of the
Chresme upon the head, and diverse the like things, consecrated by the Bishop,
as also the putting of the Taper in his hands, clothing it with a white
vestment, the blessing of the water, the dipping of it thrice in the water: All
these things used in the administration of the Sacrament, are not necessary,
they neither being of the substance, nor requisite in the Sacrament of
Baptism, from which things many take occasion of error and superstition,
rather then edification to salvation.

Now this Baptism is visible and material, which makes the party neither
good nor evil, as it appears in the Scripture, by Simon Magus, and Saint
Paul. And whereas Baptism is administered in a full congregation of the
faithful, it is to the end that he that is received into the Church, should be
reputed and held of all for a Christian brother, and that all the Congregation
might pray for him, that he may be a Christian in heart, as he is outwardly
esteemed to be a Christian. And for this cause it is that we present our
children in Baptism; which they ought to do, to whom the children are
nearest, as their parents, and they to whom God has given this Charity.

Of the Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ.
AS Baptism which is taken visibly, is as an Enrolement into the number of
faithful Christians, which carries in it self protestation and promise to
follow Christ Jesus, and to keep his holy Ordinances, and to live according to
his holy Gospel; So the holy Supper and Communion of our blessed Savior, the
breaking of bread, and the giving of thanks, is a visible communion made with
the members of Jesus Christ. For they that take and break one and the same
bread, are one and the same body, that is to say, the Body of Jesus Christ, and
they are members one of another, ingrafted and planted in him, to whom they
protest and promise to persevere in his service to their lives end, never
departing from the faith of the Gospel, and the union which they have all
promised by Jesus Christ. And therefore as all the members are nourished with
one and the same viands, and all the faithful take one and the same Spiritual
Bread, of the word of Life, the Gospel of Salvation; So they all live by one
and the same Spirit, and one and the same Faith.

This Sacrament of the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, is called in
Greek, Eucharistia, that is to say, Good Grace: of this does S. Matthew.
testify in his 26. Chap. saying, Jesus took bread and blessed it, and brake
it, and gave it to his disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my body. And S.
Luke Chap. 22. This is my body which is given for you, this do in remembrance
of me. Likewise he took the Cup, and blessed it saying, This cup is the new
Testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

This Sacrament was instituted by divine ordinance, perfectly to signify unto
us, the spiritual nourishment of man in God, by means whereof the spiritual
life is preserved, and without which it decays, the truth it self saying; If
you eat not the flesh of the Son of man, and drink not his blood, there
shall be no life in you. Concerning which Sacrament, we must hold that which
follows, by the testimony of the Scriptures. That is, that we must confess
simply and in purity of heart, that the bread which Christ took in his last
Supper, which he blessed, brake, and gave to eat to his Disciples, that in the
taking thereof, by the ministry of his faithful Pastors, he has left a
remembrance of his Passion, which in it own nature is true bred, and that by
this Pronowne, This, is demonstrated this sacramental proposition. This is my
Body, not understanding these words Identically, of a numerall Identity, but
Sacramentally, really, and truly, but not measurably. The same body of Christ,
sitting in heaven at the right hand of his Father, unto whom every faithful
Receiver must cast up the eyes of his understanding, having his heart elevated
on high, and so eat him spiritually, and sacramentally by an assured faith.
The same we are to understand of the Sacrament of the Cup.

Saint Augustine says, that the eating and drinking of this Sacrament, must be
understood spiritually. For Christ says, The words that I speak, are spirit
and life. And Saint Jerome says, The flesh of Christ is to be understood after
a twofold manner, either spiritually; of which Christ says, John 6.55. My
flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed: Or it is to be understood
of that flesh, which was crucified and buried. Of the spiritual eating Christ
says; He that shall eat my flesh, and drink my blood, is in me, and I in
him. There is also a twofold manner of eating, the one sacramental, and so
both good and bad do eat; the other spiritual, and so the good only do
eat. And therefore says Augustine, What is it to eat Christ? It is not only
to receive his body in the Sacrament, for many do eat him unworthily, who
will not dwell in him, nor have him to dwell in them; but he eats him
spiritually that continues in the truth of Christ. And therefore to eat the
sacramental Bread, is to eat the Body of Christ in a figure. Jesus Christ
himself saying, Nevertheless, as often as you do this, you shall do it in
remembrance of me. For if this eating were not in figure, Christ should be
always bound to such a thing, for it is necessary that the spiritual eating
should be continual: As Saint Augustine speaks; He that eats Christ in
truth, is he that believes in him. For Christ says, that to eat him, is to
dwell in him: In the celebration of this Sacrament, Prayer is profitable, and
the preaching of the Word in the vulgar tongue, such as may edify, and is
agreeable to the Evangelical Law, to the end, that peace and charity might
increase amongst the people; but other things that are in use in these days in
the Church of Rome, and those that are members thereof, belong not at all to
the Sacrament.

What the Waldenses and Albingenses have taught touching Marriage. CHAP. VII.
Marriage is holy, In the Book entitled, The Spiritual Almanacke, fol. 50.
being instituted of God in the beginning of the World. And therefore it is an
honorable thing, when it is kept as it ought in all purity, and when the
Husband, who is the head of Wife, loves her, and keeps her, and carries
himself honestly toward her, being faithful and loyal toward her: and that
the woman for her part, who is made to be a help unto man, be subject to her
Husband, obeying him in whatsoever is good, and honoring him as God has
commanded her, taking care of his Household affairs, keeping her self not
only from ill-doing, but all appearance of evil, continuing faithful and
loyal unto him, and both of them perseuering in that which is good, according
to the will of God, taking pains together to get their living by honest and
lawful means, wronging no man, and instructing those children which God has
given them, in the fear and doctrine of the Lord, and to live as our Lord has
commanded them.

Prayer and fasting is profitable, when there is question of the celebration of
Matrimony, and the reasons, and instructions, and aduertisements touching the
same. But the Imposition of hands, and the Ligatures made with the Priests
stool, and other things commonly observed therein, and by custom, without the
express word, they are not of the substance, nor necessarily required in
marriage.

As touching the degrees prohibited, and other things that are to be observed
in matter of Matrimony, we shall speak, when we come to the discipline.

Taken out of the Book entitled, The Spiritual Almanacke.
What the Waldenses and Albingenses have taught, touching the visitation of the
Sick. CHAP. VIII. El besongna que aquel que porta la parola de Dio lo nostre
Seignor en tota diligenza.
IT is necessary that he that is the Messenger of the Word of God, should
inuit, and draw every one to our Lord and Savior, with all labor and
diligence, both by the good example of his life, and the truth of his Doctrine;
and it is not sufficient that he teach in the Congregation, but also in their
Houses, and in all other places, as Christ and his Apostles have done before
him, comforting the afflicted, and especially those that are sick. He must
admonish them touching the great bounty and mercy of God, showing that there
can proceed nothing but what is good, from him that is the Fountain of all
goodness, and that he that is Almighty, is our merciful Father, more careful
of us, then ever Father or Mother has been of their Children; telling them,
that though a Mother may forget her Child, and the Nurse him to whom she has
given suck, and which she has boren in her womb, yet notwithstanding our
heavenly Father will not forget us, doing all things for our benefit, and
sending all things for our greater good, and if it were more expedient for us
to enjoy our health, we should have it. And therefore we are to submit our
wills to his will, and our lives to his conduct and direction, and assuredly
believe that he loves us, and out of his love, he chastises us. Neither must
we respect the grief or poverty we endure, nor think that God hates us, and
casts us off; but rather we must think, that we are the more in his grace
and favor, nothing regarding those that flourish in this World, and have here
their consolation, but looking upon Christ Jesus, more beloved of his Father
then any other, who is the true Son of God, and yet has been more afflicted
then we all, and more tormented then any other. For not only that bitter
passion that he suffered, was very hard and grievous unto him, but much more in
regard that in the midst of his torments, every one cried out against him,
like angry dogs, belching out against him many villainous speeches, doing
against him the worst they could, in such sort, that he was constrained to cry
out in his torments, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And finding the
hour of his passion to draw near, he grew heavy unto the death, and prayed
unto his Father, that that Cup might pass from him, insomuch that he did sweat
water and blood, because of that great heaviness and anguish of heart which he
should endure in this cruel death.

And therefore the sick man must consider with himself, that he is not so ill
handled, nor so grievously tormented, as his Savior was, when he suffered for
us, for which he is to yield thanks unto God, that it has pleased him to
deliver us, and to give this good Savior unto the death for us, begging mercy
and favor at his hands in the name of Jesus. And it is necessary that we have
with all this perfect confidence and assurance, that our Father will forgive us
for his goodness sake. For he is full of mercy, slow to anger, and ready to
forgive.

And therefore the sick party must recommend, and commit himself wholly unto
the mercy of his Lord, to do with him as shall seem good in his eyes, and to
dispose both of his body and soul, according to his good will and pleasure.
Also it shall be necessary to admonish the sick person, to do unto his
Neighbor, as he would have his Neighbor do unto him, not wronging any man,
and to take such order with all that are his, that he may leave them in peace,
that there may not be any suites, or contentions amongst them after his death.

He must also be exhorted to hope for salvation in Jesus Christ, and not in
any other, or by any other thing, acknowledging himself a miserable sinner, to
the end he may ask pardon of God, finding himself to be in such a manner
culpable, that he deserves of himself eternal death. And if the sick party
shall be stricken with a fear of the judgment of God, and his anger against
sin and sinners; he must put him in mind of those comfortable promises,
which our Savior has made unto all those that come unto him, and from the
bottom of their heart call upon him, and how God the Father has promised
pardon, whenever we shall ask it in the name of his Son, and our Savior
Christ Jesus. These are the things wherein the true Preacher of the Word ought
faithfully to employ himself, to conduct the party visited to his Savior.

And when he is departed this life, he must give heart and courage to the
suruiuers, by godly exhortations, to the end they may be comforted to praise
God, and to conform themselves to his holy will; and whereas in former times
it has been the manner to cause the poor and desolate widow to spend much
silver, having lost her Husband, upon singers, and ringers, and eaters, and
drinkers, whilst she sits weeping and fasting, wronging hereby her
fatherless Children; to the end that loss be not added to loss, it is our
duty, taking pity on them, to aid them with our council and with our goods,
according to that ability that God has bestowed on us, taking care that the
Children be well instructed, to the end, that living like Christians, according
to the will of God, they may labor to get their living, as God has ordained
and commanded.

CHAP. IX. The Conclusion of this Book.
BY that which is contained in this Book, and what has been faithfully
gathered out of the Books the Waldenses have left unto us, it appears that
the Doctrine which they maintain in these days, that make profession of
reformation, has been maintained by them, many ages before they that are
enemies thereunto, would take notice of it, there being nothing in all that is
delivered, that does either repugne the Word of God, or is not altogether
conformeable to that which is taught in the reformed Churches. For the
Waldenses and Albingenses have known the necessity of instructing their
children, by making use of such familiar Catechismes as have been practiced in
the Primative Church. They have confessed their sins to one only God, with
terms of true humility, proofs of great zeal, and a holy confidence in the
mercy of God, by his Son and our Savior Christ Jesus. They have acknowledged
the Law of God, for the only rule of their obedience, and confessing
themselves to be far distant from that perfection which ought to be in us,
to appear unblameable before the face of God; from their imperfection they
have taken occasion to have recourse to the only righteousness of the Son of
God, our Redeemer, the Law being as a Looking-glass, to make them know their
stains and blemishes, and to send them to Christ Jesus the true lauor or
washing poole. They have called upon God in their necessities, by, and through,
one only Jesus Christ our Savior. They have received the Sacraments, with
faith and repentance, and without alteration. They have entered the state of
Matrimony, as ordained by God, holy and honorable; and finally, they have not
been ignorant, with what charity they were to comfort, and to visit, and to
exhort their sick, and such as are in any adversity. And what has there been
in all these, that for these they should be condemned to death as Heretics;
especially seeing that with the goodness and purity of their Doctrine, they
have lived religiously, under a holy Discipline, which the Book following will
make good unto us.

Luke 21.23. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE THIRD PART OF THE HISTORY of the Waldenses and
Albingenses; containing the Discipline under which they lived.
CHAPTER I. De la Disciplina. La Disciplina conten en si tota doctrina Moral
segond l'enseignament de Christ, etc.
Of Discipline.
DIscipline contains in it all Moral Doctrine, according to the Institution
of Christ and his Apostles, showing after what manner every one ought to live
in his vocation by faith, and to walk worthily in true holiness and
righteousness.

There are many instructions in the Book of God, touching this Discipline,
showing not only, how every man ought to live in his own particular estate, of
what age or condition soever he be; but also what must be that union, consent,
and band of love, in the communication of the faithful. And therefore if any
man desire the knowledge of these things, let him read what the Apostle has
said in his Epistles, and he shall find at large, and especially in what
manner every one is bound to keep himself in unity, and to walk in such
sort, that he be not a scandal and an occasion of falling to his neighbor,
by wicked words or actions; and in what manner he is bound, not only to fly
what is evil, but also the occasions of evil: and whenever any man has
failed therein, how he may be reformed and come to amendment of life.

By many such general instructions, the reclaimed people newly brought unto
the Faith, must be taught, to the end they may walk worthily in the house of
the Lord, and that they make not his house a den of thieves, by their wicked
conversation, and toleration of evil.

CHAP. II. De li Pastor. Tuit aquilli liquol deuon esser receopu Pastor dentre
de nos, etc.
Of Pastors.
ALL they that are to be received as Pastors amongst us, whilst they are yet
with their own people, they are to entreat ours, that they would be pleased
to receive them to the Ministry, and to pray unto God, that they may be made
worthy of so great an office: but yet know that these Petitioners make this
request, to show their humility.

We set them their task, causing them to learn by heart, all the Chapters of
Saint Matthew, and Saint John, and all the Epistles that are Canonical; a good
part of the writings of Solomon, David, and the Prophets.

Afterward having gotten some good testimony of their sufficiency, they are
received with imposition of hands into the Office of Teachers.

He that is admitted in the last place, shall not do any thing without the
leave and allowance of him that was admitted before him: As also he that is
first, shall do nothing without the leave of his companion, to the end, that
all things with us might be done in order.

Diet and apparel is given unto us freely, and by way of alms, and that with
good sufficiency, by those good people whom we teach.

Amongst other powers and abilities which God has given to his servants, he
has given authority to choose Leaders to rule the people, and to ordain Elders
in their charges, according to the diversity of the work, in the unity of
Christ; which is proved by the saying of the Apostle, in the first Chapter of
the Epistle to Titus; For this cause have I left thee in Creete, that thou
should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every
City, as I have appointed thee. Whenever any of our said Pastors commits
any foul sin, he is thrust out of our company, and forbid to preach.

CHAP. III. Del' Enseignament de li filli. Li filli liqual naisson a li pairons
carnals deuon esser rondu, etc. Of the Instruction of Children.
CHildren borne of their carnal Parents, must be made spiritual unto God, by
discipline and by instruction, as it is said in the 30 of Ecclesiast. 1. He
that loves his son, causes him often to feel the rod, that he may have joy
of him in the end, and that he knock not at the door of his Neighbor. He
that chastises his son, shall have joy in him, and shall rejoice of him
among his acquaintance. He that teaches his son, grieueth his enemy, and
before his enemies he shall rejoice of him. Though his Father dye, yet he is
as if he were not dead, for he has left one behind him that is like unto
himself: whilst he lived, he saw, and rejoiced in him, and when he dyed, he
was not sorrowful. For he left behind him an auenger against his enemies, and
one that shall require kindness to his friends. Despair not of thy child
when he is unwilling to receive correction, or if he prove not speedily good;
for the Labourer gathers not the fruits of the Earth so soon as it is sown,
but he attends a fitting time.

A man must also have a careful eye over his Daughters. Have thou Daughters?
Keep them within, and see they wander not. For Dina the Daughter of Jacob, was
corrupted by being seen of strangers.

CHAP. IIII. De li Preyre, de la Collectas, and de li Concili. Regidors son
eslegi del poble et Preyre, etc. Of the Elders, of the distribution of Alms,
and Ecclesiastical Synodall Assemblies.
We choose amongst the people those that are to govern, and of the Elders,
according to the diversity of their employment, in the unity of Christ.
According to that of the Apostle, in the first of the Epistle to Titus, I have
left thee in Creete, that thou should set in order the things that are
wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I have appointed thee. The silver
that is given for the relief of the people, is by us carried to the aforesaid
Council, and is there delivered for the common use in the presence of all, and
afterward taken by those that are in authority, and part of that silver is
given to those that are to travel any long iourneyes, to employ as they shall
think fittest, and part unto the poor.

Our Pastors do call Assemblies once every year, to determine of all affairs
in a general Council.

CHAP. V. De la Correction Ecclesiastica. Semeillament deuon esser faict,
corrections per enduction de temors, etc. Of Ecclesiastical Correction.
SO likewise corrections are to be used, to hold men in fear, to the end that
they that are not faithful, may be punished, and separated, either for their
wicked life, or erroneous belief, or their want of Charity, or any of these
evils that are found together in any one. Now, that it is necessary to use such
corrections, our Savior tells us, saying; If thy brother trespass against
thee, rebuke him betwixt thee and himself, and if he repent, forgive him, Luke
17. The Apostle confirms the same, saying to the Galathians; If a man be
taken in any sin, you that are spiritual, instruct him in the spirit of
meekness.

But forasmuch as all receive not these corrections in charity, our Lord
teaches our spiritual guides, what course they should take, saying; If he
hearken not unto thee, take with thee one or two, for in the mouth of two or
three, shall every one be justified. Our Lords meaning is, if the fault be not
published and known by diverse; but not so if the sin be manifest and made
known to every man: In such a case, the chastisement must be made manifest
too. The Apostle tells us as much, in the first of Timothy, 5.20. Them that
sin, rebuke before all, that others also may fear.

CHAP. VI. De l' Excommunication. Ma car tuit en aital reprennament non volon
auec assai esmendament ni abandonnar lo mal, etc. Of Excommunication.
But when such will not amend their lives by any of these admonitions, nor
leave their wicked ways, Christ teaches us what we are to do against such:
If they will not hearken thereunto, tell the Church; that is to say, the
Guides, whereby the Church is ruled and preserved, that he may be punished,
especially for contumacy. This the Apostle confirms, 1 Cor. 5.3. I verily, as
absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already, as though I were
present, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together,
and my Spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ. As also in the 11.
verse, If any man that is called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an
Idolator, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, I say, eat not with
any that is such a one, but put away that wicked person from amongst you. And
again, If there be any one that will not obey our word, signify that man by
an Epistle, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed; yet count him
not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother, and as our Savior says; let
him be unto thee as a Pagan, or a Publican; that is to say, let him be deprived
of all aid of the Church, and of the Ministry, and the company of the Church,
and of union.

CHAP. VII. Del Marriage. Le Marriage se deo far second li gra liqual Dio a
permes, etc. Of Marriage.
Marriages are to be made according to the degrees permitted of God, but not
according to those he has forbidden: but we are to make no scruple of
conscience of those of the Pope, though a man have paid him no silver for a
dispensation. For that which God has not forbidden, may be done without the
Pope. The band of holy Matrimony must not be made without the consent of the
Parents of both parties; for Children belong to their Parents.

CHAP. VIII. De la Tauerna. La Tauerna es fontana de pecca, Eschola del Diauol,
etc. Of the excess and disorders which are commonly committed in Tauernes.
A Tavern is the Fountain of sin, the School of the Devil; it works
wonders, fitting the place. It is the custom of God to show his power in his
Church, and to work miracles; that is to say, to give sight to the blind, to
make the lame to go, the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, but the devil
does quite contrary to all these in a Tavern. For when the Drunkard goes to
the Tavern, he goes upright, but when he comes forth he cannot go at
all, and he has lost his sight, his hearing, his speech. The Lectures that
are read in this School of the devil, are Gluttonies, Oaths, Periuries,
Lyings, Blasphemies, and diverse other villainies. For in a Tavern are
quarrels, slanders, contentions, murders, and Tauerners that suffer them, are
partakers of their sins, and that wickedness they commit. For he that would
speak as much evil of their Parents, as they suffer men to speak of God, and
the glorious Virgin, and the Saints in Paradise, and all for a little gain by
the sail of their wine, they would never endure it so peaceably. And therefore
it is said in Ecclesiasticus, that the Tauerner shall not be freed from sin.

CHAP. IX. Del Bal. Lo Bal es la procession del Diauol, and qui intra en la
Bal, etc. Against Dancing.
A Dance is the Devils procession, and he that enters into a Dance, enters
into his possession. The devil is the guide, the middle, and the end of the
Dance. As many paces as a man makes in dancing, so many paces does he make to
go to hell. A man sins in dancing diverse ways; as in his pace, for all his
steps are numbered; in his touch, in his ornaments, in his hearing, sight,
speech, and other vanities. And therefore we will prove, first by the
Scripture, and afterward by diverse other reasons, how wicked a thing it is to
dance. The first testimony that we will produce, is that which we read in the
Gospel, Mark 6. It pleased Herod so well, that it cost John the Baptist his
life. The second is in Exodus 32. When Moses coming near to the congregation,
saw the Calfe, he cast the Tables from him, and brake them at the foot of the
mountain, and afterward it cost three and twenty thousand their lives.
Besides the ornaments which women wear in their dances, are as crowns for
many victories which the devil has gotten against the children of God. For
the devil has not only one sword in the dance, but as many as there are
beautiful and well adorned persons in the dance. For the words of a woman are
a glittering sword. And therefore that place is much to be feared, wherein the
enemy has so many swords, since that one only sword of his may be feared.
Again, the devil in this place, strikes with a sharpened sword, for the women
come not willingly to the dance, if they be not painted, and adorned, the which
painting and ornament, is as a grindstone, upon which the devil sharpeneth his
sword. They that deck and adorn their daughters, are like those that put dry
wood to the fire, to the end it may burn the better: For such women kindle the
fire of luxury in the hearts of men; as Sampsons Foxes fired the Philistims
corn, so these women, they have fire in their faces, and in their gestures and
actions, their glances and wanton words, by which they consume the goods of
men. Again, the devil in the dance uses the strongest armor that he has,
for his most powerful arms are women, which is made plain unto us, in that
the devil made choice of the woman to deceive the first man; So did Balaam,
that the children of Israel might be rejected. By a woman he made Sampson,
David, and Absolon to sin. The devil tempts men by women, three manner of
ways, that is to say, by the touch, by the eye, by the ear: By these three
means he tempts foolish men to dancings, by touching their hands, beholding
their beauty, hearing their songs and music. Again, they that dance, break
that promise and agreement which they have made with God in Baptism, when
their Godfathers promise for them, that they shall renounce the devil, and all
his pomp; For dancing is the pomp of the devil, and he that danceth
maintains his pomp, and sings his Mass. For the woman that fingeth in the
dance, is the Prioresse of the devil, and those that answer are the Clerks,
and the beholders are the Parishioners, and the music are the Belles, and the
Fiddlers the ministers of the Devil. For as when Hogs are strayed, if the
Hog-heard call one, all assemble themselves together; So the devil causes one
woman to sing in the dance, or to play on some Instrument, and presently all
the dancers gather together. Again, in a dance a man breaks the ten
Commandments of God. As first, Thou shall have no other Gods but me, etc. For
in dancing a man serves that person, whom he most desires to serve, and
therefore says Sant Ierom, Every man's God is that he serves and loves best.
He sins against the second Commandment, when he makes an Idol of that he
loves. Against the third, in that oaths are frequent amongst dancers. Against
the fourth, for by dancing the Sabbath day is profaned. Against the fifth, for
in the dance, the parents are many times dishonored, when many bargains are
made without their counsel. Against the sixth, A man killes in dancing, for
every one that stands to please another, he killes the soul as often as he
persuades unto lust. Against the seventh; For the party that danceth, be it
male or female, commits adultery, with the party they lust after. For he
that looks on a woman and lusts after her, has already committed adultery
in his heart. Against the eighth Commandment a man sins in dancing, when he
withdraws the heart of another from God. Against the ninth, when in dancing
he speaks falsely against the truth. Against the tenth, when women affect the
ornaments of others, and men covet the wives, daughters, and servants of their
neighbors.

Again, a man may prove how great an evil dancing is, by the multitude of
sins that accompany those that dance; for they dance without measure or
number: And therefore says Saint Augustine, The miserable dancer knows not,
that as many paces as he makes in dancing, so many leapes he makes to hell.
They sin in their ornaments after a fiue-fold manner. First, by being proud
thereof. Secondly, by inflaming the hearts of those that behold them. Thirdly,
when they make those ashamed that have not the like ornaments, giving them
occasion to covet the like. Fourthly, by making women importunate, in demanding
the like ornaments of their husbands. And fifthly, when they cannot obtain them
of their husbands, they seek to get them elsewhere by sin. They sin by
singing, and playing on Instruments; for their songs bewitch the hearts of
those that hear them with temporal delight, forgetting God, uttering nothing
in their songs, but lies and vanities. And the very motion of the body which is
used in dancing, gives testimony enough of evil.

Thus you see, that dancing is the devils procession, and he that enters into
a dance, enters into the devils possession. Of dancing, the devil is the
guide, the middle, and the end; and he that enters a good and a wise man into
the dance, comes forth a corrupt and a wicked man. Sarah that holy woman,
was none of these.

CHAP. X. En qual modo lo poble se deo aver a aquilli que son de fora. Non amar
lo mond. After what manner a man must converse with those that are without.
NOt to love the world. To fly evil company. If it be possible to have peace
with all. Not to contend in judgment. Not to revenge. To love our enemies. To
be willing to suffer labors, slanders, threats, contempts, injuries, all
manner of torments for the truth. To possess our weapons in peace. Not to be
coupled in one yoke with Infidels. Not to communicate with the wicked in their
evil ways, and especially with those that smell of Idolatry, referring all
service thereunto, and so of other things.

Encar en qual maniera li fidel debian regir li lor corpse. Non seruir a li
desirier mortal, etc. Again, in what manner the faithful ought to rule their
bodies.
NOt to serve the mortal desires of the flesh. To keep their members that
they be not arms of iniquity. To rule their outward senses. To subject the
body to the soul. To mortify their members. To fly idleness. To observe a
sobriety and measure in their eating and drinking, in their words and the cares
of this life. To do the works of mercy. To live a moral life by faith. To
fight against the desires. To mortify the works of the flesh. To give
themselves in due times to the exercise of Religion. To confer together
touching the will of God. To examine diligently the conscience. To purge and
amend and pacify the spirit.

FINIS.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE THIRD PART OF THE HISTORY of the Waldenses and
Albingenses; This Book of Antichrist is in an old manuscript, wherein there
are many Sermons of the Pastors, dated the year 1120, and therefore written
before Waldo, and about the time of Peter Eruis, who taught in Languedoe, where
he was burnt at Saint Giles, before Waldo departed from Lion. And this
Treatise was afterward preserved by the Waldenses of the Alps, from whom we
had it, with diverse others.
Containing a refutation of sundry Doctrines of the Church of Rome.
As the smoke goes before the fire, the battle before the victory, so the
temptation of Antichrist before glory.

CHAPTER I. A Treatise of the Waldenses and Albingenses, of Antichrist.
ANtichrist is the falsehood or untruth of eternal damnation, covered with an
outward appearance of the truth, and the righteousness of Christ and his
Spouse, opposite to the way of truth, righteousness, faith, hope, and charity,
and to the moral life, and ministerial verity of the Church, administered by
false Apostles, and obstinately defended, by both powers Ecclesiastical and
secular: Or Antichrist is a delusion, which hides the truth of salvation from
things substantial: or it is a fraudulent contradiction against Christ and his
Spouse, and every faithful member. It is not any special person ordained, in
any degree, or office, or ministry, but it is that falsehood it self, which
opposes it self against the truth, which covers and adorneth it self with
beauty and piety, out of the Church of Christ, as with names and offices, and
Scriptures, and Sacraments, and diverse other things. That iniquity that is
after this manner, with all the Ministers thereof, great and small, with all
those that follow them with a wicked heart, and hood-winked eyes; this
congregation, I say, thus taken altogether, is called Antichrist, or Babylon,
or the fourth Beast, or the Whore, or the man of sin, or the son of
perdition.

The Ministers are called, false prophets, lying teachers, the Ministers of
darkness, the spirit of error, the Apocalipticall whore, the mother of
Fornication, clouds without water, trees without leaves, dead and twice rooted
up, waves of a troublesome sea, wandering stars, Balaamites, and Egyptians.

It is called Antichrist, because being covered and adorned under the color of
Christ, and of his Church, and the faithful members thereof, it oppugneth the
salvation purchased by Christ, and truly administered in the Church of Christ,
whereof the faithful are partakers, by Faith, Hope, and Charity. Thus it
contradicts the truth, by the wisdom of the world, by false religion, by
counterfeited holiness, by spiritual power, secular tyranny, riches,
honors, dignities, and the delights and delicacies of the world.

Forasmuch therefore as it is manifest to every one, that Antichrist cannot
come in any form or fashion whatsoever, but so as that all these things, above
mentioned must be joined together to make a perfect hypocrisy and falsehood,
that is to say, with the wise of the world, the Religious, Pharisees, Ministers,
Doctors, with the secular power, with the people of the world joined all
together, who then altogether make the man of sin and error fully complete.
For notwithstanding Antichrist were long since conceived, in the Apostles
times, yet it was then in the infancy, and it wanted members both inward and
outward. And therefore it was the more easily known and destroyed, and kept
under, and being but rude and rusticall, as yet was dumb. For it had not the
wisdom, nor the reason to excuse it self, to define and pronounce sentence.
It had not as yet Ministers without truth, it wanted humane Laws and Statutes,
and outwardly it had no religious followers: And therefore though it were
fallen into error and sin, yet it had nothing wherewith to cover its
villainy, and the shame of error and sin, for having neither riches, nor
doctations, it could not win Ministers for service, nor multiply and
preserve, and defend its own; for it was destitute of secular power and help,
and could not enforce or constrain any from the truth to falsehood. And
forasmuch as many things were wanting, it could not pollute nor scandalize any
with its trumperies, and therefore being as yet tender and feeble, could
obtain no place in the Church. But afterward growing in its members, that is
to say, in its blind Ministers, and hypocrites, and the vassals of the World,
it is grown to a perfect man, in the fullness of age, that is to say, when the
spiritual and secular lovers of the World, blind in faith, were multiplied in
the Church with all power. These being wicked and willing to be entreated and
honored touching things spiritual, they have covered their majesty, malice,
and sins, by making use of the wise men of the World, and the Pharisees, to
this purpose, as it is said before. Now this is a great wickedness, to cover
and to adorn that iniquity, worthy excommun^cation, and to establish it by
such a means as cannot by man be given to man, but belongs only unto God,
and to Jesus Christ, as he is Mediator. Most deceitfully and by rapine to take
these things from God, and to transfer them to it self and it works, seems
to be a great robbery, as when it attributes to it self the power to
regenerate, to forgive sins, to distribute the graces of the holy Spirit, to
make Christ, and other the like things. And in all these, to cover it self
with the cloak of authority, and of the Word, deceiving by this means the
rude people, who follow the World, separating themselves from God, and the true
Faith, and the reformation of the holy Spirit, from true repentance, and the
powerful operation of perseverance in good, forsaking charity, patience,
humility, and that which is worst of all, departing from the true hope, and
putting their trust in the vain confidence of the World, making themselves
servants to ceremonies, which make for these things, fraudulently causing the
people to fall down and to worship the Idols of the World, under the name of
Saints and relics, in such sort, that men wandering wickedly from the way of
truth, think they serve God, and do well, and so they are moved to hatred and
malice against those that love the truth, commit diverse murders of souls, as
the Apostle speaks truly. This is that complete man of sin, which exalts
himself above all that is called God, and that oppugneth all truth, who sits
in the Temple of God, that is, in the Church, showing himself as if he were
God, who is come with all falsehood and lying for those that perish. And
forasmuch as he is truly come, we need no longer expect him, for he is
already old by the permission of God, yea, he is already in the wayne, and his
power and authority much diminished: for the Lord has long since slain this
man of sin, with the breath of his mouth, by sundry good and godly persons,
giving them a power contrary to his, and those that love him, and has brought
unto naught his place, and his possessions, and divided this City of Babylon,
in which all manner of wickedness is in his full strength and vigor.

What the works of Antichrist are.
THe first work of Antichrst, is to take away the truth, and to change it into
falsehood and error and heresy. The second, to cover falsehood with the
truth, and to confirm an untruth, by seeming faith, and by virtue, and to
mingle falsehood with things spiritual, amongst those people that are subject
unto him, whether it be by means of his Ministers or the Ministry. Now this
twofold manner of proceeding contains a perfect and most accomplished
malice, which could not be in any tyrant or powerful Potentate from the
beginning of the world until the time of Antichrist. Neither has Christ had
any enemy before this which could so change the way of truth into falsehood; or
that had power to pervert those that make profession either of the one or the
other; that is to say, of truth or falsehood. In such sort that our holy Mother
the Church with her true children, is trodden underfoot, especially for the
true service of God and the Ministry thereof, insomuch that she and her
members break out into those mournful complaints of the Prophet Jeremy; How
does the City fit solitary that was full of people? How is she become a
widow, that is, destitute of the truth of her Spouse? She that was great
among the nations, because of that power she had over sin and error; and
the Princess among the Provinces, by that part she had in the world, and the
things in the world. Mourn, and behold with a careful eye and thou shall
find all these things accomplished even in these times. For the holy Church is
reputed a Synagogue, and the Synagogue of the wicked, is acknowledged to be
the mother of those that believe in God and obey his Laws. Falsehood is
Preached for truth, wrong for right; Injustice is held for Justice, error for
faith, sin for virtue, vanity for verity.

Object. But what other works proceed from these first?

Answer. These that follow.

The first work is, that he turns that service and worship which is only
proper and due unto God, to himself and his works, and to the poor creature,
reasonable and unreasonable, sensible and insensible. Reasonable, as to men,
hee-Saints and shee-Saints, that are departed out of this world: Unreasonable,
and to Images, carrion or relics. His works are the Sacraments, especially
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which he adoreth as God, and as Jesus Christ,
serving things blessed, and consecrated, and forbidding the worship of the
only God.

The second work of Antichrist is, that he robs Christ of his merit, with
all the sufficiency of grace, righteousness, regeneration, remission of
sins, sanctification, confirmation in grace and spiritual nourishment; and
imputes and attributes it to his authority, and to the form of words, and to
his works, and to Saints, and to their intercession, and to the fire of
Purgatory, drawing the people from Christ and his conduct unto the things
aboue-named, to the end men should not seek the things of Christ, nor by
Christ, but trust only to be saved by the works of their hands, and not by a
lively faith in God, and his Son Christ Jesus, and his holy Spirit, but by
the will and works of Antichrist, for so he teaches that all salvation
consists in his works.

The third work of Antichrist consists in this, that he attributes the
renewing by the holy Ghost to an outward dead faith, and baptizeth children
into that faith, and that by it we have the Baptism and the regeneration, and
therein he gives Orders and Sacraments, and in it he groundeth all
Christianity, which is repugnant to the Spirit of God.

The fourth work of Antichrist is, that he has ordained and placed all
Religion and Sanctity of the people in the Mass, and has patched together
many ceremonies, whereof some are Judicial, some Heathenish, some
Antichristian. To the hearing whereof, leading the congregation and the people,
he depriues them of their spiritual and Sacramental food, and separateth
them from the true Religion, and the Commandments of God, and withdrawes them
from the works of mercy by his Offertory, and by his Mass he sets the
people in a vain hope.

The fifth work of Antichrist is, that he does all his works, to the end he
may be seen of men, that he may solace himself in his insatiable avarice,
that he may make gain of all things, and do nothing without Simony.

The sixth work of Antichrist is, that he gives way to all open and apparent
sins, without any Ecclesiastical sentence, neither does he excommunicate
the impenitent.

The seventh work of Antichrist is, that he neither rules nor defends his
unity by the Word and power of the Spirit of God, but by the secular power, and
he adds unto his aid things spiritual.

The eight work of Antichrist is, that he hates and persecuteth, and puts
to death the members of Christ. These are in a manner the principal works
which he does against the truth, for all of them can by no means be written
or numbered. Let it suffice for this present that we have noted the more
general, and shall likewise set down by what works this iniquity is covered.

First and principally by an outward confession of Faith; whereof the Apostle
says, They confess they know God with their mouths, but they deny him in
their hearts.

Secondly, he covers his iniquity by length of time, and in that he is
maintained by certain Sages, and religious Monks, and Virgins, and Nuns,
and Widows, and other women of austere life. As also by the people without
number, of whom it is said in the Revelation: And power was given unto him over
every Tribe and Language, and Nation, and all the Inhabitants of the Earth fell
down and worshipped him.

Thirdly, he covers his iniquity with the spiritual authority of the
Apostles, against which the Apostle says; We can do nothing against the
truth, and power there is none given us to destruction.

Fourthly, he covers his iniquity with many miracles, of whom the Apostle
says, 2 These. 2.9. Whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power
and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceiueablenesse of
unrighteousness.

Fifthly, by outward holiness, prayers, fastings, watchings, and almesdeeds:
against which the Apostle says; Having the appearance of godliness, but
denying the power thereof.

Sixthly, he covers his iniquity with certain words of Christ, and the
writings of ancient Fathers, and with Councels, which they do so far forth
observe, as that they may no way hinder their wicked lives and pleasures.

Seventhly, by the administration of the Sacraments, viz. of Penance, by which
they disgorge and vomit up all their errors.

Eighthly, by corrections, and verbal preachings against vice; for they say,
and do not.

Ninthly, they cover their iniquity, by the virtuous life of some, that live
dissemblingly, others truly. For the Elect of God, who will and do that which
is good, are detained as in Babylon, and are as gold wherewith Antichrist
covers his vanity, not permitting them to serve the only God, or to put
their trust in Christ alone, or to embrace the true Religion. These things and
diverse others, are as the mantell or cloak of Antichrist, wherewith he
covers his lies and malice, to the end he may not be rejected as a Pagan, and
under which he proceeds dishonestly, and like a whore.

We are now to show, both out of the Old and New Testament, that a Christian is
bound by the Commandment of God, to separate himself from Antichrist. For the
Lord says in the 52. of Esaias 11. Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence,
touch no unclean thing, go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that
bear the vessels of the Lord: For ye shall not go out with have, nor go by
flight, etc. And the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 50.8. Remove out of the midst of
Babylon, and go forth out of the Land of the Caldeans, and be as the
hee-goates before the flocks. For lo, I will raise, and cause to come up
against Babylon an assembly of great Nations, from the North Country, and they
shall set themselves in army against her, from thence she shall be taken. And
Numbers 16.21. Separate your selves from among this Congregation, that I may
consume them in a moment: And again in the 26 verse. Depart from the Tents of
these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, least ye be consumed in all
their sins. And again, Leuit. 20.24. I am the Lord your God, and have
separated you from other people: Ye shall therefore put difference between
clean beasts, and unclean, and you shall not make your souls abominable, by
beast, or by foul, nor by any manner of living thing that creeps on the
ground, which I have separated from you as unclean. Again, in the 34. of
Exodus: Take heed to thy self, lost thou make a Covenant with the inhabitants
of the land, for fear lest when they go a whoring after their Gods, and do
sacrifice unto their gods, and one call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice:
And thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a
whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods.
This is likewise manifest in the New Testament, John 12. That the Lord came
into the world, and suffered death, to the end he might join all the children
of God in one. And for this truth of the unity, and separation of others, it is
said, Matthew. 10.34. Think not I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to
send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against
the mother in law; And a man's foes shall be they of his own household. And this
division he has commanded, saying, If there be any that forsakes not father
and mother for my sake, etc. Again, Beware of false prophets which come to you
in sheep clothing. Again, Beware of the leven of the Pharisees. Again, Take
heed lest any seduce you, for many shall come in my Name and shall seduce many.
And therefore if any one shall say unto you, here is Christ, and there is
Christ, believe him not. And Revel. 8.4. he admonishes with his own voice,
and commands all that are his to go out of Babylon, saying, Come out of her
my people, that you be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of
her plagues: For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities. The Apostle affirms the same, 2. Cor. 6.14. Be ye not unequally
yoked together with unbelievers, for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness, and what communion has light with darkness; And what
concord has Christ with Belial, and what part has he that believes with an
Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? And therefore
go out of her, and separate your selves from her, says the Lord, and touch no
unclean thing, and I will be unto you in the place of a father, and you shall
be unto me as sons and daughters, says the Lord. Again, Ephesians. 5.7. Be
not ye therefore partakers with them; for ye were sometimes darkness, but
now are ye light in the Lord. Again, 1. Cor. 10.20. I would not that ye
should have fellowship with devils: ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and
the cup of devils. And again, 2. These. 3.6. We command you, brethren, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every brother
that walks disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us.
For your selves know how ye ought to follow us: And in the 14. verse. And if
any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company
with him, that he may be ashamed. And Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness. And 2. Tim. 3.1. This also know, that in the
last days, perilous times shall come: And Verse 5. Having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away.

By these places above repeated, the malice of Antichrist does manifestly
appear. So it is likewise commanded by the Lord, that we separate our selves
from him, and to join our selves to the holy City, Jerusalem. And therefore we
that have knowledge of these things, the Lord having revealed them unto us by
his servants, believing this revelation delivered in the Word, being admonished
by the Commandments of the Lord to separate our selves from him, inwardly and
outwardly, because we believe him to be Antichrist, and have conversation and
unity of will and sincere intention, purposing to please God, that we may be
saved, by the aid and assistance of our Lord we join our selves to the truth
of Christ, and of his Spouse, how little soever it be in the eye of the world,
so far forth as our understanding shall direct us. And therefore we have
determined with our selves, to make known to the world, what are the causes of
our departure, and what our congregation is, to the end that if the Lord shall
give the knowledge of the selfsame truth, they that have received it should
love it, together with our selves: And that if peradventure they be not
sufficiently illuminated, they may receive comfort and assistance by this
means, and be watered by the dew of heaven. And if this grace be given more
abundantly, and in a higher measure to any other, we desire in all humility to
be better instructed by him, entreating our faults and defects may be
amended. These things then that follow are the causes of our separation.

Be it known to all in general, and every particular person, that the cause
of our separation, is for the essential verity of Faith, and the ministerial.
The Essential verity of Faith, is the inward knowledge of one true God, and
the unity of Essence in three persons, which knowledge flesh and blood has not
given. As also for the decent and convenient service due to one only God; for
the love thereof above all things; for sanctification and the honor thereof
above all things, and above all names; for a lively hope by Christ in God; for
regeneration and inward renouation by faith, hope, and charity; for the merit
of Jesus Christ, with all sufficiency of grace and righteousness; for the
participation or communion with all the Elect; for remission of sins; for
holy conversation; and for the faithful accomplishment of all the
Commandments in the faith of Christ; for true repentance; for perseverance
unto the end, and for life everlasting.

The Ministerial verities are these: The outward Congregation of Ministers,
with the people subject in place, time, and truth, by the ministry of the truth
above mentioned, directing, establishing, and preserving the Church; the said
Ministers by faith, and an integrity of life, showing themselves obedient, and
giving themselves courageously to the practice and usual carriage of our
Savior over the flock.

The things which the Ministers are bound to do, for the service of the
people, are these: The Evangelical Word; the Sacraments annexed to the Word,
which certify what the intention and understanding has been; confirm the
hope in Christ, and in the faithful the ministerial communion of all things,
by the Essential verity. And if there be any other ministerial things, they
may all be referred to the aboue-named. But of these singular verities, some
are essentially necessary to the salvation of man, others conditionally. They
are contained in the twelve Articles of our Faith, and in diverse writings of
the Apostles. For Antichrist has long since reigned in the Church by divine
permission.

The errors and impurities of Antichrist, are these; that is to say, diverse
and innumerable Idolatries against the Commandments of God and of Christ, by a
service given to the creature, and not to the Creator, visible and invisible,
corporal and spiritual, understanding or sensible, natural, or made and
framed by some art, and under the name of Christ; or hee-saints or shee-saints,
or relics, which creature is served by faith, by hope, by gestures, by
prayers, by pilgrimages, by almesdeeds, by offerings and sacrifices of great
charge. The which creature they serve, adore, honor after a diverse manner, with
songs, orations, solemnities, and celebrations of Masses, vespers, complines,
to the selfsame creatures, with prayer books for certain hours, vigils,
feasts, purchasing of grace, which is essentially in one only God, and in
Jesus Christ meritoriously, and is obtained by faith only, and by the holy
Ghost.

For there is no other cause of Idolatry, then the false opinion of grace, of
truth, of authority, invocation, intercession, which this Antichrist has taken
from God, and attributed it to his ceremonies, authorities, the works of his
hands, and to Saints, and to Purgatory. And this iniquity of Antichrist, is
directly against the first Article of our Faith, and the first Commandment of
the Law.

In like sort, the disorderly love of the World, which is in Antichrist, is
that from whence do spring all the sins and wickedness that is in the
Church, in those that are the Leaders, and Rulers, and Officers thereof, who
sin without controlement against the truth of faith, and the knowledge of God
the Father; witness Saint John, who says; He that sins, knows not God:
for if any man love the world, the charity of the Father is not in him. The
second iniquity of Antichrist consists in the hope which he gives of pardon,
grace, righteousness, truth, and eternal life; as not being in Christ, or in
God by Christ, but in men living and dead, in authorities, ecclesiastical
ceremonies, in benedictions, sacrifices, prayers, and other things above
mentioned; not by true faith, which brings forth repentance by charity, and a
departure from evil, and cleaving to that which is good. Now Antichrist
teaches us not to place our hope and confidence in such things, that is to
say, regeneration, spiritual confirmation, or communion, the remission of
sins, sanctification, eternal life; but to hope in his Sacraments, and his
wicked Simony, by which the people are abused in such sort, that they make sale
of all things, and invent many ordinances old and new, to bring silver into
their chests, promising that if any man do this or that, he shall obtain
grace and life. And this double iniquity is called in Scriptures, adultery and
fornication. And therefore such Ministers as lead the brutish people into
these errors, are called the Apocalipticall Whore. And this iniquity is
against the second Article, and the second and third Commandment.

The third iniquity of Antichrist consists in this, that he has invented
(besides those aboue-named) other false religions and orders, and Monasteries,
giving hope to obtain grace, by building oratories for Saints; as also by
devout and frequent hearing of the Mass, by the receiving the Sacrament, by
Confession, (though seldom with a contrite heart) by satisfaction, by
fastings, and emptying the purse, by professing himself a member of the Church
of Rome, by making vows, and giving themselves to orders of Capouches and
Cowles, which against all truth they affirm that men are bound unto. And this
iniquity of Antichrist is directly against the eight Article of our Belief, I
believe in the holy Ghost.

The fourth iniquity of Antichrist consists in this, that notwithstanding he
be the fourth Beast described by Daniel, and the Apocalipticall whore, he
nevertheless adorneth himself, with authority, power, dignity, offices,
Scriptures, and compares himself, and makes himself equal to the true and
holy Mother the Church, in which there is salvation Ministerially, and not
elsewhere, in which there is the truth of life and Doctrine, and of the
Sacraments. For if he should not thus cover himself and his wicked Ministers,
being known for manifest sinners, he would soon be forsaken and abandoned of
every one. For Emperors, and Kings, and Princes, thinking him to be like to
the true and holy mother the Church, they have loved and endowed him, contrary
to the Commandment of God. And this iniquity of Ministers, and subjects, and
such as are brought up in error and sin, is directly against the ninth
Article: I believe in the holy Catholic Church. And thus much touching the
first part.

Secondly, as they that are partakers of the only outward ceremonies ordained
by the invention of men, do believe and hope, truly to perform their
Pastoral duties and cures, provided only that they be shaven, like sheep,
and anointed like walls, and blessed by touching the Book, and the cup, with
their hands, and so publish themselves to have taken the order of Priesthood as
they should: So likewise (as it has been said before) the people that are
subject unto them do communicate by words, by signs, by outward exercises,
and by their diverse gestures and actions think they participate of the truth
it self, drawn from thence. And this is against the other part of the ninth
Article: I believe the Communion of Saints. It stands us therefore upon to
depart from the most wicked Communion of Monks, whereunto carnal men are
drawn, causing them for covetousness to put their trust in things of naught,
yea though they be luxurious and covetous, only to the end men should give
them, and then they tell them that they participate of their poverty and of
their chastity.

The fifth iniquity of Antichrist consists in this, that he fayneth and
promises remission of sins, to such offenders, as have no true sorrow and
contrition for their sins, and cease not to persevere in their wickedness:
and that in the first place, he promises remission of their sins, because
of their auricular confession, and humane absolution in their Pilgrimages, and
all for money. And this iniquity is against the eleventh Article of our faith:
I believe the forgiveness of sins. For that is in God by authority, in
Christ by ministration, Faith, Hope, Charity, Repentance, Obedience to the
Word; and in man by participation.

The sixth iniquity is, that they hope even to their lives end, in the
aboue-mentioned iniquities, and especially in extreme Unction and devised
Purgatory, in such sort that the ignorant and rude people persevere in their
error, by giving them to understand, that they are absolved from their sins,
though they never depart from them of their own free wills, but hope thereby
to have forgiveness of their sins, and life everlasting. And this iniquity
is directly against the eleventh and twelfth Article of our Faith.

CHAP. II. Of invented Purgatory.
THe Purgatory which diverse Priests and Monks seek to advance and teach as an
Article of our Faith, with many lies and fables, is this. They affirm that
after this life, and after the Ascension of Christ into heaven, the souls
especially of those that shall be saved, not having satisfied in this life for
their sins, endure sensible pains, and are purged in Purgatory after this
life, and that after they are purged, they come out of Purgatory, some sooner,
and some later, and some not until the Day of Judgment; which souls, all the
faithful may and ought to help after they are departed this life by the band
of charity, by Prayers, Fastings, Almsdeeds, and Masses. Touching which
Purgatory, to satiate their avarice, many have invented diverse uncertain
things, which they have taught and preached, saying, that such souls are
tormented in the said Purgatory, some to the neck, some to the middle; and
they say that sometimes, they sit and eat at table, and make bankets,
especially at the Feast of all Souls, when the people are offering liberally
upon their Sepulchers. And they say that sometimes they gather the crummes
under the rich men's tables. By this means, and diverse other the like dreams,
avarice and Simony is increased and multiplied, their Cloisters advanced, their
sumptuous Temples are built and enlarged, their Altars multiplied beyond
measure, and infinite numbers of Monks and Canons, have invented diverse other
things touching the deliverance, and unbinding the said souls, bringing
thereby the Word of God into contempt. Thus the people are strangely mocked and
deceived touching their souls, as also in their substance, inasmuch as they
are made to put their trust in things uncertain, whilst in the mean time the
faithful hide themselves, for when they refuse to preach and teach the said
Purgatory, as an Article of their faith, they are cruelly condemned to death
and Martired.

It is therefore fitting we should speak of this Purgatory, and plainly give
the world to understand what we think thereof.

First therefore we say, that the souls of those that are to be saved, must in
the end be purged from all their pollution, according to the Ordinance of God,
as it appears in the 21. of the Revelation: There shall in no wise enter into
heaven any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or
makes a lie. Now we know that the Scriptures have set down many and diverse
means to purge those that are in this present life, of all their sins. But
Saint Peter tells us in the 15. of the Acts 9. that faith purifieth the
heart, and that faith is sufficient to purge away the evil, without any
outward help; as appears by the thief at the right hand of Christ, who
believing and confessing his sins was made worthy of Paradise. The other
manner of purging the Spouse of Christ by repentance, is touched in Esaias, Chap.
1.16. Wash ye, and make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from
before mine eyes, cease to do evil. And presently after: Though your sins
be as skarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they be red like crimson,
they shall be as wool. In which words the Lord offers himself to all that
do truly repent, according to the manner aboue-mentioned, and they that have
been sinful shall be made as white as snow. There is likewise mention made of
another kind of purging of sin, in the third of Saint Matthew, where it is
said, He has his fan in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor,
and gather his wheat into the garner. The which words Chrysostom expounds of
the floor of the Church and the fire of tribulation. And not only does the
Lord purge by tribulations, but he likewise purifieth his Spouse here in this
life by himself; as Saint Paul speaks, Ephesians. 5.25. Christ has loved his
Church and given himself for it; That he might sanctify and cleanse it, with
the washing of water by the Word, that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it
should be holy and without blemish. Where the Apostle shows that Christ has
so loved his Church, that he would not cleanse it by any other washing, but
his own Blood, and that not so as that it should not be sufficient but in
such a manner, as that there should not remain therein any uncleanness, but
that it should be a glorious Church, in such sort that there should be
therein neither spot nor wrinckle, nor any such thing, but that it should be
holy and undefiled. And this testimony of washing the Spouse of Christ in his
Blood, is not only current here upon earth, but in heaven too, by those that
have obtained the actual washing, of whom it is said in the Revelation, Chap.
7. These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb; Therefore are they before
the Throne of God, and serve him day and night. Thus you see how many purgings
may be gathered out of the Scriptures, to prove that they that travel in this
life, are here purged of their sins.

In the third place, we think it a great deal the surer way, that every man
do so live in this present world, that he may have no need afterward of any
purgation. For it is a great deal better to do good in this present life,
then afterward to hope for an uncertain help. And it is a surer course, that
what good a man hopes shall be done unto him by others after his death, he do
it himself whilst he lives, being a more happy thing to depart a freeman,
then to seek his liberty, after he is bound.

Moreover besides that which has been hitherto spoken, we say that there is
no place in Scripture to be found, nor amongst the Doctors grounded upon the
Scriptures, that does make good unto us that the faithful are any way bound by
any necessity to believe, or publicly to confess, as an Article of their
faith, that there is any such place as Purgatory after this life, wherein after
the ascension of Christ into Heaven, the souls, especially of those that shall
be saved, not having satisfied in this life for their sins, endure sensible
pains when they are departed of their bodies, and thereby are purged: of which
souls some depart out of Purgatory sooner, some later then others, and some a
little before others at the day of Judgment. And first as touching the
Scriptures, no man can prove it by them. For it is manifest, that if a man
shall read the whole Law, he shall never find therein, any one place of
Scripture that binds a Christian necessarily to believe as an Article of his
faith, that there is after this life, any place called Purgatory, as some do
affirm. And there is no place in the whole Volume of the Book of God which
does so much as name it, neither was there ever any soul found that has
entered the same Purgatory and came out again.

There is no man bound therefore to believe it, or to hold it to be an Article
of our faith. For confirmation hereof Saint Augustine in his Book, entitled,
A thousand words, writes thus: We believe according to the Catholic faith, and
divine authority, that the Kingdom of heaven is the first place wherein
Baptism is received; The second is that wherein such as are excommunicates and
strangers to the Faith of Christ, endure everlasting torments: As for a third
place, we are altogether ignorant of any, neither do we find it in the
Scriptures. The same Saint Augustine in the same place, upon these words, They
shall not inherit the kingdom of God, writes thus. O my brethren, let no man
deceive himself, for there are only two places and a third is not to be
found; For he that deserves not to reign with Christ, shall without all
doubt perish with the devil. And to this purpose, Saint Chrysostom writing
upon those words in the 12. by Saint Matthew; The Kingdom of heaven is like
unto a man that is an householder, says thus: The man that is the father of the
family, is Christ, unto whom heaven and earth are as a house; but his families
are celestial and terrestrial, for whom he builds a house with three
Chambers, that is, hell, heaven, and earth. The Combatants are they that dwell
upon the earth, the vanquished in hell, and the Conquerours in heaven. Let us,
says he, that are in the middle room, take heed, we descend not to those
that are in hell, but rather mount upward to those that are in heaven.

By these authorities you may plainly see, that there are only two certain
places, after the ascension of Christ into heaven, into which the souls
departed out of their bodies do go, and that there is no third place, neither
can it be found in the Scriptures.

And therefore, forasmuch as in the whole Law of God, there is no express
mention of any such place as Purgatory is, and the Apostles have given us no
instructions touching the same; and the Primative Church, governed by the
Apostles, according to the Gospel, have left us no Ordinances or
Commandments; but that Pope Pelagius, five hundred fifty eight years after
Christ, did ordain (as we may read) that the dead should be remembered in
the Mass, it follows, that since there is no express proof thereof in the
Law of God, there is no necessity to believe the said Purgatory, as an Article
of our faith, or that there is any such place after this life.

But here is matter of doubt, because men in these days, are strangely
affected to the help and aid of the dead, notwithstanding that in all the
Scripture there be nothing expressly taught, except in the Book of Macchabees,
which is no part of the Old Testament, nor Canonical. And that neither Christ
nor the Prophets, nor the Apostles, nor the Saints near their time, have ever
taught to pray for the dead, but have rather carefully taught that the people
that live unblameably shall be Saints. And therefore answering to the doubt
aboue-mentioned, we say that the principal cause of this doting affection,
proceeds from the deceit, and trumperies, and avarice of the Priests, who
have not taught the people as the Prophets of Christ, nor as his Apostles, to
live well, but to offer much, and to place their hope of deliverance, and
happiness, in Purgatory.

CHAP. III. Of the Invocation of Saints.
We are now to speak of prayer unto Saints, which certain great Masters,
with their followers preach unto the people, extolling and publishing it with
great diligence, as an Article of their Faith; affirming that the Saints that
are in their celestial Country, are to be prayed unto by us, in the self
same manner, as the Priests were accustomed to do, and other of the people by
their instruction, enioyning them many other things, as helps to their
Invocation. By which Invocation, authorization, and magnification, the people
carnally and erroneously believe it; Imagining that as it is the manner and
practice before earthly Kings when they are angry, that such as are not in
choler should intercede for them, and pacify their anger: so the people
think it is so with God; that is, that the Saints do appease the wrath of
God, when he is angry with sinners.

But we are not to believe any such thing; for if it were so, there could be
no true conformity between the will of the Saints, and the will of God: for it
should seem that the Saints are not angry with those, against whom God is
moved to anger. Secondly, by this magnification and invocation of Saints, the
people fall into Idolatry, putting their trust more in Saints then in God, and
serving them with greater affection then the only God; which they show by the
effects, by the ornaments of their Altars, which are most precious, by their
excellent Music, the multiplication of their Tapers, and by other
solemnities. By which means the simple people are induced to think, that the
Saints are more merciful then God, because they free him from damnation, by
those prayers they make unto God, whom God had condemned. Beside this, to
maintain these things, the simple people are taught, that the Saints desire
that men should offer oblations unto them, and take pleasure in their praises,
and that they mediate principally for those that offer incense unto them, and
other honors; all which things we are to abhor, and carefully to fly.

Of this Invocation therefore we are now to speak, and to make known what our
opinion is touching this prayer unto Saints. And first let us see what
Invocation is. Invocation is a desire of the whole understanding, and soul,
sent unto God by the voice, and by prayer.

Secondly, we know and believe that the man Christ Jesus, is Mediator between
God and man, and Advocate to God the Father, who has paid for our sins,
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for
them. Heb. 7.25. No man comes to the Father but by him. And whatsoever ye
shall ask in my name, that will I do, says he; John 14.13. Who gives to all
abundantly, and reproacheth no man; Iam. 1, He is our Advocate to God the
Father, and he forgiueth our sins. He offers himself unto us by all
means, before we offer our selves unto him. He is at the door, and he
knockes, that we may open unto him, he shuts out all Idolatry, being at the
right hand of his Father in Heaven, and his will is, that all the faithful have
him in their minds, and look only unto him; for all the care of the
faithful must tend unto Christ by thought and affection, and must imitate him
that is above. According to that which is said; If you be risen again with
Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ is sitting at the right
hand of God. He is the door, by which whosoever shall enter, shall be saved.
No man comes to the Father, but by me, says he.

We believe in the third place, that the Saints are not proposed unto us to
worship, but to imitate. Saint Paul says; Be ye followers of me, as I am of
Christ. Saint Peter would not suffer himself to be worshipped by Cornelius,
nor the Angel by Saint John the Evangelist. And therefore says Saint
Augustine in his Book of true Religion. O ye Religious, says he, give not
your selves to the service of the dead; for if they have lived holily, they are
not such as seek for honors, or desire to be served by us, but by him, by
whom they are illuminated, they rejoice that we are their companions. And
therefore they must be honored by imitation, and not adored by Religion. All
these things duly considered, we say, that there is not any man borne of other
body then Christ, which may be adored, or can be the true Advocate and Mediator
betwixt God and Men, or Intercessor for sinners with God the Father, but he
alone; neither is it necessary that they should be inuocated by the prayers and
intercessions of the living. It is he that by special privilege obtaines
whatsoever he demands for mankind, whom he has reconciled by his death. He
is the one and only Mediator betwixt God and man, the Advocate, and
Intercessor to God the Father for sinners, and in such sort sufficient, that
the Father denies not any man what he demands in his name, but for the love
of him, he hears those that pray unto him, or demand any thing at his hands
by him. For being near unto God, living by himself, be prays always for
us. For it was necessary that we should have such a sovereign Sacrificer, as
was holy, innocent, without blemish, separated from sinners, and exalted above
the Heavens, the first Son begotten of his Father, which only Son being
above all men, has power and authority to sanctify the other, to pray and to
mediate for them. Saint Augustine writes concerning Christ in his 64 Psalm,
saying; Thou art the Sacrificer, thou art the Sacrifice, thou art he that
offers, and thou art the offering. Jesus is not entered into places made with
hands, which were figured correspondent to the true, but he is entered into
Heaven it self, even now to appear for us before the face of God.

1 John 1.1.
Of him it is that Saint John says; We have an Advocate with the Father, even
Jesus Christ the righteous. And Saint Paul says; Romans 8.33.
That Jesus Christ who dyed for us, is also risen again, and sits at the
right hand of God, making intercession for us.

And therefore he is but a fool that will desire any other Intercessor. For
Christ is always living, and prays to God the Father for us, and is always
ready to succor those he loves. And therefore if we keep our selves to that
he has said, we need not desire any other Saint to be our Mediator, because
he is more gentle and more ready to help, then any other can be. Add hereunto
that the mind of him that prays wandereth, and is confounded with the
multitude of Saints to whom he prays, when the affection is removed from
Christ, and therefore is much weakened, being divided amongst many. Howsoever,
many there are that think that when the prayer is directed to one only, a man
has that only one for a Mediator, whereas more give more spiritual help. But
the Church would increase a great deal more, if it knew not this multitude of
intercessions now invented. And therefore it is a great folly to forsake the
Fountain of living waters, and to go to troubled waters, and such as are
afar of. This then does plainly appear, that a man cannot obtain any thing
of God, but by the Mediator Christ Jesus. In the second place it shall be more
expedient to worship Christ among those that are simply men; for he is a good
and benign Mediator, even in the highest degree, both in the one and the other
extremity. Thirdly, if we keep our selves unto his Word, we need not address
our selves to other Saints for intermedlers, since that he is more ready to
help us, then other Saints, being ordained of God for this purpose; that is,
to the end that the intercession might be made by him, that is more merciful
then all others; for he knows for whom there is reason he should pray: for
he has shed his blood for them, which he will never forget, having graven
them in the palms of his hands. Fourthly, in the primitive Church, their
prayers for spiritual aid, were made only to Christ as a Mediator. Fifthly,
then did the Church profit and increase a great deal more then now it does in
these times, wherein men have found many intercessions, which are as so many
clouds without water, darkening Christ the Son of Righteousness, who is the
true Intercessor. For many expecting spiritual comforts, are forsaken in their
vain hopes. For though so it be that God is just, and we unjust, and
insufficient of our selves, yet it is he that pardons our sins, both passed
and present. For he gave himself for our redemption, that is to say, he has
been the Sacrifice by which our pardon has been obtained: God has sent his
Son, to the end he might pardon our sins, he is the remedy against sin,
to the end we should not fall into despair. We must have recourse to Christ
our Advocate, who continually defends our cause, beseeching his Father for
us, whom we have not only for an Advocate, but for a Judge too. For the
Father has given all judgment to the Son, and consequently, all penitent
sinners have great reason to hope that he that is our Judge, is our Advocate.
This faith is grounded upon Christ, as upon a strong Rock, upon which all the
Saints of God have rested themselves, until the man of sin had power to
bring in new intercessions of Saints; which faith all the Saints have professed
living here, and unto this day do confess, that they are not saved by
oblations, or the intercession of any other God, but by him they have obtained
Heaven; of whom it is said in the Revelation, Chap. 5.9. Thou art worthy to
take the Book, and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people,
and Nation; and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests. You see how their
humility and thankfulness does still resound upon the Earth, when they
acknowledge that they are entered into that place wherein they are, by his
blood, and confess that they have received all their good by him, and
whatsoever they enjoy so long as they remain in this life; that they receive
no good thing, but by their good Mediator and Intercessor Christ Jesus.

CHAP. IIII. Of Baptism, and the other Sacraments of the Romish Church.
THe things that are not necessary in the administration of Baptism, are the
Exorcismes, breathings, the sign of the Cross upon the forehead and breast of
the infant, the salt put into his mouth, spittle into his ears and nostrills,
the anointing of the breast, the Monks Cowle, the unction of the Crysome upon
the crown of his head, and all other things consecrated by the Bishop, as the
putting the Wax candle into his hands, the clothing him with a white garment,
the blessing of the water, and so forth. All these things used in the
administration of this Sacrament, are not necessary, they neither being of the
substance, nor required in the Sacrament of Baptism, from which things many
take occasion of error and superstition, rather then edification to salvation,
and according to the opinion of some Doctors, there is neither power nor
profit in them.

Of the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord.
THe eating of the Sacramental Bread, is the eating of the Body of Christ in a
figure, Christ himself having said, As often as ye shall do this, do it in
remembrance of me: for if this were not to eat in a figure, Christ should be
bound to be eaten continually; for this spiritual eating is almost always
necessary; as Saint Augustine speaks, He eats Christ in truth, that
believes in him. And Christ says, that the eating is to dwell in him. In the
celebration of this Sacrament, these things are profitable; Prayer, Love, the
Preaching of the Word in the vulgar tongue, and other things whatsoever they
be, that are ordained to this purpose, according to the Evangelical Law, to
the end that love and charity may grow and increase amongst the people. But
other things besides the consecration of the Eucharist, as those that the
Priests use in the Mass, or that the Clerk sings to the Queere, from the
beginning to the end, and the ornaments which the Priests use at this present
in the Church of Rome, they belong of necessity to the Sacrament of the Supper
of the Lord.

Of Marriage and Orders.
PRayer and fasting are profitable, when there is any question of the
celebration of Matrimony, and the instructions and aduertisements touching the
same. But the imposition of hands, and those Ligatures made with the Stole, and
other things that are commonly observed therein, by humane custom, without the
express Word of God, are not of the substance, nor necessarily required in
marriage.

As for Orders, we are to understand by them, that power which is given of God
unto man duly to administer to the Church the Word and Sacraments. But we have
nothing in the Scriptures that makes good any such Orders, but only the
custom of the Church. And the letters testimonial, the anointing of the
hands, the donation of the seniture and violl into his hands, and other things
commonly observed herein, without the express Word, are not of the substance
thereof, nor necessarily required in the taking of Orders.

Of the Crysome or Confirmation.
We are now to speak of the Crysome, which at this present is called a
Sacrament, having no ground for it in the Scriptures; First that it should be
consecrated by a Bishop, and made with Oil of Olives, and Balsome, applied to
the forehead of the man baptized in the figure of the Cross, and with these
words: I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, and confirm thee by the
sign of salvation, In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost;
which is done with imposition of hands, and with white vestments bound to the
head: This is that which they call the Sacrament of Confirmation, which was
never ordained by Christ or his Apostles. For Christ the pattern and president
of the whole Church, was not confirmed in his own person, neither did he
require at his Baptism a Crysome, but the water only. And therefore this
Sacrament cannot be necessary to salvation, whereby a man blasphemeth the Name
of God, and is brought in by the motion of the devil, to the end the people
might be deceived, and deprived of the faith of the Church, and that he might
the rather put his trust and confidence in these solemnities.

Of extreme Unction.
THe seventh Sacrament of the Romish Church, is the extreme Unction of the
sick, which they go about to prove by that saying of Saint James. But we
find not that it has been ordained by Christ or his Apostles. For if this
corporal Unction were a Sacrament, as they would have men believe, Christ, or
his Apostles would not have been silent in the manifestation of the execution
thereof; which being well considered, we should not dare to hold and confess,
as an Article of our faith, that this Sacrament was instituted by Christ and
his Apostles.

Of Fasts.
THere is a twofold Fast, Spiritual and Corporal. The Spiritual is to
abstain from sin; The Corporal from meats and drinks. But a Christian
has liberty to eat at all times, and to fast every day, provided that he fast
not superstitiously, as a virtue of continency.

Note also that there are certain Fasts, which are not to be observed, or
commended by the faithful, but rather to be abhorred; as the Fasts of the
Scribes and Pharisees, which are ordained by Antichrist, and smell of Idolatry:
The Fasts of Heretics, and superstitious persons, which are observed by
Enchanters, Sorcerers, Negromancers, and the Fasts dedicated to creatures, not
to the Creator, which are not grounded upon the Law of God: Disorderly Fasts,
observed with delicate viands of highest price, as fish, figs, raysons,
almonds, which the poor are deprived of, and the rich glut themselves with,
whereby the alms is withdrawn from the poor, whereas if they did fast so, as
afterward to feed upon common diet of lower price, they might the better
provide for their families and the poor.

Moreover, Fasts consist not in the abstayning from corporal viands, as if
they were unclean, for all things are clean to those that are clean, and we
are to refuse nothing that is taken with thanksgiving, for that is sanctified
by the Word of God and by Prayer. 1. Tim. 4.4.
All these Fasts aboue-mentioned, are rejected and detested by the faithful,
and for the not-obseruation of these no man is to be blamed.

FINIS.

