THE FIRST PART OF THE CONSIDERATION OF HVmane Condition:

VVHERIN IS CONTAINED the Moral Consideration of a man's self: as what, who,
and what manner of man he is.

Written by I.P. Esquier.

Amo vt invenio.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard,
at the sign of the Bible. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HIS VERY ESPECIAL GOOD LORD, THOMAS Baron of
Buckhurst, Lord Treasurer of England, one of the LL. of her Majesty's most
Honorable privy Counsel, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter, and
Chancellor of the University of Oxford, I.P. wishes increase of honor and
eternal faelicitie.
IN the forefront of this small and slender building, many things are wanting
(Right Honorable, and my most honored Lord) which through the distraction of
business, the shortness of time, and the unskillfulness of the builder could not be
finished, as it was purposed. For the same fortune falls out many times unto
writers of books, as does unto Builders of houses: when as in both, at the
beginning of the work, they, which frame the first foundation and plot, do
propose unto themselves less labor and expense of time, then in the end they
must bestow, before it be fully finished: So, sometimes they are constrained to
leave their well-begunne labors without any end, or else rudely and roughly
to finish the same. Such is the conclusion in the first part of this poor
cottage of Consideration, which I have builded like an unexperienced workman,
and which I have presumed humbly to offer unto your Lordships Honorable
patronage, not so much for the worth of the work, as to testify the
acknowledgement of my most zealous faith and affection unto your Lordshippe,
being thereunto bound by your Lordships honorable favor and furtheraunces. For
which I can yield no other offering, but the fruits of this my yet unperfected
labors, with the continuance of my vowed devotion (next to my most gracious
Sovereign) to do your Lordship service. And so I humbly end, with my prayers
for your Lordships preservation and increase of honors.

Haroldston the 16. of November. 1600. Your Lordships most bounden, and ever to
be commanded, I.P.

To the indifferent and friendly Reader.
I Know that they, which publish any thing in writing unto the world, do
submit themselves unto common censure. And I am not ignorant, that as it is
more easy to find a fault in things done, the^ to do the same so
substantially, as no fault shall be found therewith: so is it more easy to
amend, then to make. If therefore I have erred in any thing (as I acknowledge
no such excellency in me, but that I may easily mistake) Let accustomed
community of erring excuse me amongst others. For, humanu^ est errare. And if
he that pervseth this Tracte, do find any faults therein, I shall desire the
direction of his better judgment to amend them; which I vvillesteeme as a very
great favor. I commend this first part of Consideration to thy honest and
discreet construction. It contains the Moral Consideration of a man's self.
There are three other points of Consideration by me intended to be
published: the next whereof is the Political Consideration of those things,
that are under us. The third is the Natural Consideration of those things,
that are about us. The fourth and last is the Metaphysicall Consideration of
those things, that are above us. This first, which is here published, I have
offered as a taste of my labors, and a trial of thy good or ill allowance;
if it be accepted with as good meaning, as it was offered, and that the
honorable Personage, to whom this is dedicated (and to whom all the rest of
my labors are due do not direct the contrary; I will proceed as speedily,
as conveniently I can, to publish the rest. But if this yield thee any
distaste, or be disliked; it is but so much labor lost in that, which is al
ready done, and so much labor saved, in that, which should be hereafter done.
So as thou wishest well, farevvell.

From my house at Haroldstone the 16. of November. The well willer of them,
that wish well. JAMES PERROTT.

THE CONSIDERATION of humane Condition.
CHAP. 1. How necessary, and what Consideration is.
PLants have but a Vegetative faculty, and beasts have but a Sensitive power to
produce those effects which nature (or rather the guider of natures works)
has ordained them to execute in their several kinds: but man alone (above
all the rest) has the most excellent help of Reason to order his affections,
and govern his thoughts, and his deeds. Why should not man then (so far.
exceeding all other creatures in this most admirable and powerful gift of
Reason) expel thereby all the perverse passions, the beastiall lusts, and the
fond desires of the mind: which many times make him inferior to the most
vile and most contemptible creatures of the world? If we would know the reason
of this so great an evil, it is because he does seldom accompany his actions
with Consideration, which is the chief ruler and governesse under Reason: for
where Consideration does not first open the door, and make the first entrance
into any action of account, there commonly the success is such as breeds but
sorrow, shame, and confusion: and where due Consideration comes before, and
with our deeds, it is seldom seen there, but that the event falls out
according to our expectation. This being so, it were not amiss to look
somewhat into this glass of Consideration, therein to behold (as near as we
may) the map and character of humane Condition.

And because consideration is found to be a matter of so great moment in
directing the course of every man's life, as that it may justly be called the
loadstone of man's life: it were convenient first to know what this
consideration is, before we endeavor to judge of the effects thereof.

Consideration (as Thomas Aquinas does define it) is the operation of the
understanding, Consideration.
or the process of Reason pertaining to the contemplation of the truth.
Consideration therefore is more general, Cogitatio^. Meditation.
and more profitable then is Cogitation, or Meditation. For Cogitation is but a
particular power of collecting individual intentions: and Meditation, but an
inward beholding, busied in the inquisition of things: but this our
Consideration, is the operation of all the understanding: as has been already
defined. Contemplation. Deliberation.
Likewise some allege that Contemplation belongs only to divine things.
And Deliberation properly appertains to humane and political matters: but
this our Consideration does comprehend both, or at the least is conversant in
both.

CHAP. 2. Why some men are more given to Consideration then others.
THe causes that some men are more deliberate, and more consideratiue in their
actions then others, are diverse: either proceeding from the well or evil
situation of the interior senses; or arising from the good, or badde
constitution of their complexions; or coming of the company that they most
commonly keep, and the exercise that they do chiefly use.

As touching the first, The first cause.
which is the situation and due proportion of the interior senses: how much
that does avail to the attaining of Consideration, by this we may conceive;
that as the senses have their several seats in the brains, so do they receive
their temperature, according to the temperature of that part, wherein they are
placed, and there-after are men made apt or unapt to enter into due
Consideration.

As for example, the first of the interior senses (which both Philosophers and
Physicians do call the common sense, 1. Common sense.
because it is common to all the exterior senses to convaigh their shapes and
forms unto it) is placed in the forepart of the brain, having a several cell
or room, in which the five nerves (coming from the five exterior senses) do
meet, if this be not conveniently moist, and of a convenient quantity, it
cannot receive the right shape of these, and consequently the other senses
cannot concur to consider aright thereof.

The second sense is called the Imaginatiue sense, 2. Imaginatiue sense.
Although Aristotle makes no mention of this Imaginatiue sense, yet I thought
good herein to follow other Philosophers, who do make this distinct from the
other three.
which also is placed in the forepart of the brain next unto the Common
sense: and the office thereof is to contain and retain the forms of those
things, which the exterior senses do present unto the Common sense: for that
the Common sense of it self consists merely of moisture, which is apt to
receive, but not to retain: and this Imaginatiue sense is composed of
dryness, which conserveth the figures of things more firmly: therefore if
this sense has not also his right quality and condition, the true obiectes of
things sensible cannot be well conserved to be considered of.

The next is called the Fantasy (or as some say) the Estimatiue sense, which
is placed in the middle part of the brain, betwixt the Common sense and the
Memory: this sense serves to compose, to devide, and to distinguish of the
shapes, which are presented unto the Common sense, and preserved by the
Imaginatiue sense; 3 Pha^tasie.
and this sense is seated in the middle part of the head, as a cel to receive
those figures from the Common sense and Imaginatiue, as to take them again out
of the Memory being the storehouse of the head: it is composed of heat, by
which it is in much motion, and into it do resort all the moving spirits, but
if it do exceed an ordinary temperature of heat, it makes too much motion
in the brain, and leaves no liberty to a settled Consideration.

The last of the interior senses, is the Memory, 4 Memory.
which is placed in the hinder part of the head: the cell and situation of
this sense is more dry, and somewhat harder then the rest of the brain,
because (as it was said before) that drynes is the cause of Retention, so
this sense being made to retain the shape of things, which are delivered
from the Common sense unto the Imaginatiue, but also the Memory must retain
the shapes of intentions, which the Imaginatiue does present unto it: so as
it is truly termed the Treasury of the mind: and therefore if the Memory
have not his just proportion of drynes neither exceeding nor vvanting much
thereof, then it cannot retain well; and so the Consideration (which is not
only a Messenger, but as it were a Counselor betwixt the Memory and the rest
of the Senses) cannot receive his right course.

The second cause, The second cause,
which we said first did much help, or hinder our Consideration, is the
Constitution of the four Complexions according to the operation of the four
Elements in man's body: for the Philosophers affirm that the temperature of the
mind, follows the temperature of the body: and the temperature of the body
consists in the Composition of the four Complexions, which receive and
participate the qualities of the four Elements; as for example; sanguine
Complexion does participate with the Element of the air, which is by nature
hot and moist: these two qualities in the sanguine Complexion do work this
operation, that it causes a ready conceit, but it does divert the mind from
any deep Consideration.

Phlegmatic Complexion, consisting of cold and moisture, has this property,
that by reason of over much coldness, it does dull the spirits, whereby they
cannot aptly conceive; and because of much moisture, it cannot retain what is
received: therefore it is unapt for Consideration.

choleric which does consist of heat and drynes is somewhat more apt to
conceive then the Phlegmati^cke, and yet in that the heat is not mixed with
either cold or moisture to qualify the same, it does not plant any firm
leisure to consider what is to be done.

melancholicke Complexion, that is made of cold and drynes, (which in their
natures do make a better mixture of moderation) does plant a firm leisure to
consider what is to be done, and therefore is fittest for Consideration.

Besides this absolute predomination of each of these first four Qualities in
men's bodies, whereby they are made either apt or unable for Consideration
sometimes; there is a mixture of the Complexion in one body in such sort that
it can hardly be said which of two has the greatest power or predominancy,
and then there is many times the best temperature in the body, and consequently
the mind is more apt for Consideration and the life of man is longer
preserved. As for example; when the choleric and phlegmatic Complexions
are so mixed, that the choleric has some what the superior power, and the
phlegmatic is proportioned unto it, then the drynes of the one does somevvhat
qualify the overmuch moistnes of the other, whereby this temperature makes
a man more apt for Consideration. So sanguine and melancholy, being mixed in
such sort as the sanguine in some small degree does surmount the melancholy, it
makes a more even proportion of the four first Qualities in one body: by
which composition (and as they call it a Communicating of the contrary
qualities in the four Elements) there is made a reconciliation of their
contrary effects, and a conjunction of their forces, whereby the mind of man
is more fit for Consideration. The third cause.


The third cause which helps or hinders Consideration is (as has been
before alleged) the Company, which we keep, and the Studies which we use:
for though these fore-recited causes may be great helps or hindrances to our
Consideration, as the situation of the senses, and the constitution of the
complexions, as being instrumental causes of Consideration, yet these may be
aptely disposed, and yet Consideration in some sort may be wanting. For as we
see instruments, which are excellently composed, and have in themselves a
very sweet sound, if they be well tuned and well played on; yet if he
that should play thereon does not perform his part; either by reason of the
company, with whom he is, and does more attend their actions, then his own
play; or else, by means of some other actions he has in hand, does not
exquisitely use and exercise his skill; then the instrument, on which he
plays, loses the sweetness of his sound, and the true use thereof: so is
it in the use of Consideration; for although the interior senses be well
seated, and the complexions well composed, which are as instruments of the
mind, yet if the mind it self be not by good company and good exercise well
settled to Consideration, these instruments loose the sweetness of their
sound, and the effects of Consideration by them cannot have a right course.
For proof hereof; first, to begin with company and conversation of good or
evil men, how much the one helps and the other hinders Consideration, we
may see by the example of sundry young men, who of their own dispositions
have been civil, discreet, and well inclined to Consideration, until that
they coming into evil company have by imitating their light behavior been
brought to be altogether careless and inconsiderate: Eccles. 13.
It is true, that he which touches pitch, shall be defiled therewith, and
that he, which keeps ill company, shall be in the end carried from all good
consideration. Psalm. 18.
For with the good (as it is said) then shall learn goodness, and with the
perverse thou shall be perverted. Again we see on the other side, that the
company and conversation of grave, learned and considerate men does much move
us unto the consideration of their behavior, and by their example we learn
the like to become considerate as they are: and by the counsel of such grave
men many times the rash and unstaid humors of youth are tempered and tuned to
the right mean and measure of Consideration: as Catoes grave conversation was
not only a lantern, but also a lesson (for all those that knew him) to learn
consideration.

Now lastly for exercise, The fourth cause.
how that does help or hinder the course of our Consideration, we may
conceive it by knowing that exercise is of two sorts; either of the body, or
of the mind: the exercise of the body we call Labor, the exercise of the mind
we call Study. For the first, which is the exercise of the body, we find that
this being moderately used makes the body strong and healthy, whereby the
mind is also made more free to fulfill his functions, especially in the
course of Consideration: but if the body be over-laboured, it breeds a
weariness and a weakness in the parts thereof, whereby also the mind is
molested, and less at liberty to enter into Consideration what ought to be
done. Likewise for Study, it has the like or greater operation, then Labor
has, in making the mind fit or unfit for Consideration: because we have it in
daily experience, that moderate Study does inlighten the mind, and kindle the
pure bright-shining fire of Consideration. Yea many times it has the power to
divert men's minds from evil cogitations, and to convert them unto the due
consideration of themselves and of those things, that belong unto them.
Xenoph de dict. and fact. Socrat.
As Socrates said unto a skilful Physiognomer, who told him that he was a man
of a wicked disposition, (whereat others laughed knowing the contrary) it is
true said Socrates which thou tellest me that by nature I was wicked and of a
lewd condition, but by my study, learning, and consideration, I have corrected
those evil conditions. So we see that moderate Exercise, and moderate Study
do much avail to the attaining of Consideration, and of those good conditions
which do follow Consideration. But on the contrary, immoderate Study does much
spend the spirits and weaken the brain, whereby the course of due
Consideration is very much hindered.

CHAP. 3. Unto what we should apply the scope of our Consideration.
NOW having said somewhat how necessary, and what consideration is, as also
what things do most help or hinder this Consideration; it comes next in
order to show unto what we ought chiefly to bend the course of our
Consideration. Wherein we may behold by the example of other men's behaviors,
that most men are very careful and do use very great Consideration in the
compassing of those things which they do desire most. As for example, the
covetous man does labor all the power of his Consideration to attain unto
riches. The ambitious man does enter into Consideration of no onething so much,
as how to come to preferment, and to obtain dignities and honor. The
lascivious man does strain the stringes of his Consideration only to compasle
his pleasures. So that these men (and others of all conditions) seem to use no
Consideration in any thing, but only on that, which they desire most, and about
which they apply all their care and industry, leaving all other things, as
matters (in their opinions) of no moment: when as perchance that, which they
so much seek after, and do so carefully employ all their Considerations
about, in other men's constructions may be of no such consequence, and worthy of
no great Consideration: As the covetous man does admire why the ambitious do
bend their whole Consideration about the seeking of honors, great authority,
great names and pre-eminence: which the covetous accompteth but as blastes of
wind, blown away with the breath of men's mouths: on the other side, the
ambitious man reckons of the covetous man, but as of one, that is base
minded, because he bestows all his Consideration to procure him wealth
without using the same to any other purpose then to pinch himself and his
poor neighbors, not knowing who shall enjoy them after his decease, or
whither he shall have them himself as long as he lives. Likewise the
lascivious man laugheth at both the covetous man and the ambitious: and they
both as much at him, whom they deem altogether vnconsiderat, in that he has
no other Consideration of any matter, which does concern him most, but only
his vain pleasure, which they can say he does most commonly purchase with
repentance of his time misspent, his health decayed and his hability consumed:
so that we see most men do mislike the course of other men's Considerations,
and few do take the right course themselves of due Consideration, because al
do aim at an end, which they think should be good unto themselves: but
there is a goodness, which is in appearaunce only, but not indeed: and there
is a goodness on truth, and on substance, without vain show. Now to the
attaining of this goodness (which is true goodness indeed) ought our
Consideration to be directed: and for effecting thereof, Bernard de Consid ad
Eugen. We ought to consider four things.
we must follow the course and counsel of Bernard in his four books of
Consideration written to Eugenius, whom he wills to consider chiefly
these four things: first, thy self: next, those things that are under
thee: then, those things that are about thee: and lastly, those things that
are above thee. In considering thy self (says he) thou must learn to know,
What thou art: Who thou art: and, What manner of man thou art.

In considering What thou art, thou shall find in Nature that thou art a man,
that is Reasonable and Mortal: being Mortal, thou may be sorry: but being
Reasonable, thou haste cause to mittigate thy sorrow.

In the consideration of thy self Who thou art, thou must find out the
perfect foote-steppes of thy parentage, thy calling, and thy hability.

In considering What manner of man thou art, thou shall seek out thy natural
inclination, thy conditions, qualities, and the course of thy life. In this
sort does Bernard begin a brief, apt, and an excellent entrance into the
most profitable points of Consideration. First, he begins with that
point of Consideration which concerns the Knowledge of thy self, being the
beginning of all true knowledge, and without this no knowledge or consideration
can profit thee, be it of matters never so exquisite, or of mysteries never so
high. For as it does concern every man to learn what is done at home, before
he go abroad: so does it behoue him to know himself, before he look into
others. It is true that many men seem to know many things, and yet, not
knowing themselves, they know nothing at all: or at least, they know
nothing in that, which does most avail them.

Concerning these circumstances of Consideration, Chrysostom goes somewhat
farther in words, though not much farther in effect, then Bernard does. He
says, that it does behooue euerte wise man to consider what himself is,
what is within him, what is belovve him, what is above him, what is
against him, what is before him, and what is after him: all which
Considerations (says Chrysostom) bring forth a fowre-folde fruit: as;
Profit to thy self, Charity toward thy neighbors, Contempt of the world,
and the love of God. This division though it differ some what in words from
the former, yet it is the same in substance and effect.

CHAP. 4. The Consideration of thy self what thou are in thy Creation.
IT is necessary to prosecute the first division of the points of
Consideration, laid down by Bernard, some what more particularly then he did,
because he applied all his exhortations therein unto the person and profession
of Eugenius, then Pope of Rome, as particular instructions for his place and
calling. Therefore it were not amiss in this our Consideration of humane
condition, to amplify somewhat on the condition of humane estate in general,
and of every kind of estate in particular (as near as we may) without offense
of any, and yet for the instruction of all: observing still and strictly those
members of division, which this learned Father has laid down, to direct us
unto the perfectest points of Consideration. To this purpose it behooves to
begin with the Creation of man, wherein we may consider what he is: whereof,
if any do ask the Philosophers, they will deliver diverse contrary opinions:
And to begin with Anaximander he alleged, that man was first made of the
earth and of water, which two Elements (as he affirmed) were tempered and
shaped with the heat of the sun. Then Empedocles conceived that all the
members of man were made of the earth, and that all the other Elements (as he
coniectured) did concur to frame and fashion the same: as the fire to give
heat, the water to yield moisture, and the air to send spirit unto the
rest. But omitting all vain conjectures, and such like fabulous inventions of
Prometheus fire, Deucalions stones, which the Poets fained to be the causes,
or the causers of man's Creation: let us level first (in the consideration of
man's Creation) with the more certain grounds of Philosophy in this point,
and then conclude with the undoubted verity of the sacred history.

Some Philosophers do define Creation to be a process or a progression from
that which was not, to that which is: or else, from nothing, to something; when
as yet there were no matter to be presupposed out of which it might be made.
This opinion, as it is contrary to that of other Philosophers, which said that,
1. Phys. c. 4.
Ex nihilo nihil fit; that is, of nothing, nothing is made: so it draws
nearest to the truth, and agrees best with the infallible authority of the
holy Scripture, which says that the world was made of nothing, Genesis 1.1.
Eccl. 10.9.12. Wisd. 11.14
by the word of the ever-living word, without any other foreknowne matter
save only Gods word, his will, and his wisdom: and of this nothing (made
something) was man at the first created, as holy writ does testify: for he
was made of no other moulde then of the dust of the earth, a weak and slender
beginning for a high and hauty mind, but most fit, to set forth the great
might, of the almighty Creator.

CHAP. 5. The Consideration of thy self what thou art in thy Conception, and
natural Constitution.
THe next Consideration after thy Creation, is, the Consideration of thy
Conception, and of thy natural Procreation, and Constitution of body: wherein,
if thou will know what thou art: first consider that by the fall of thy first
Parents (who were purely Created without any Corruption) their disobeying of
their Creators commandment, caused the curse to fall on them, and on their
posterity: whereby not only they but, for their sake, the earth and all other
creatures were subject to the curse, so that of a pure Creation (by man's
transgression) became an vnpure Generation. And that thou may farther
consider what thou art in this kind of generation (or as we call it Conception)
learn that generation is a beginning to be that, which it was not, but by way
of mutation of one form into another.

Now to come more near unto the Consideration of thy self what thou art in
this thy Generation or Procreatio^; if one should ask thee, how thou wast
conceived? and how thou came into the world? thou will (it may be) answer,
even as other men did, and do: I was begotten of my father, and borne of my
mother. Yea but how is that? not to rip up the secrets of nature (for that would
rather savor of immodesty, then farther thee in the due Consideration of thy
self what thou art:) thou may know that thou had but a mean beginning of
Conception (be thy birth never so great) and know thou, that thou had no
other means of Procreation, then the meanest man living, for thou wast
(whatsoever thou art) conceived without honor, delivered with vvo, and that
with the great danger of her, that brought thee into the world: so that, though
we omit the manner of thy first fourming in thy mothers womb (where of thou
ought to take no pride) yet Pliny the most excellent natural Philosopher,
Plin. nature. hist. lib. 7.
and most exquisite Secretary of natures works, will tell thee; that beasts
are not bound in chains, when they are borne, but thou man art most unhappily
borne with thy hands and thy feet bound, beginning the world with punishment:
O madness of man (says he) thinking that of these beginnings he is borne to
be proud, when as the first hope of strength, and the first, gift of time
makes him like to a four feoted beast: for he is forced on his arms and
legs, being not otherwise able to stand or go: This says Pliny of thy
birth. But if thou will enter farther into Consideration of thy natural
Constitution of body after thou art borne, thou shall find that as thou art
borne naked, so thou do still of thy self remain naked, having by nature no
other covering or any defense save only thy bare body, but that thou do
borrow helps of other creatures, which thou accoumptest but as base and vile:
for thou cloathest and keep thy self warm with garments made of wool,
being but the covering of silly sheep: with skins, the natural garments of
bruit beasts: thou deckest thy self with silk, being but the excrements of
poor worms; with flowers, being but the overgrovving of vvilde fields: with
stones, being but the of-scowring of the earth, of the sea, and of rocks: all
which the needy naked man does borrow of beasts, and of other creatures, to
cover, to maintain, and to adorn his weak and al wanting body. But thou, not
being content to use the help of those natural creatures for the supply of
thy natural defects, do yet therewith take occasion to grow provvde; like the
beggar, who having borrowed a new coat, should therewith presently fall into
liking of himself and scorn all the rest of his fellow beggars. So does the
naked vnconsiderat man borrow of birds, feathers; of beasts, skins, wool,
with other coverings; of both birds and beasts, the flesh to feed him; he
borrows savours and ornaments of flowers; of fruits, sustena^ce; of those
things which come out of the earth, beauty etc. And having al these helps not
of himself, but of other creatures, he uses them as instruments to increase
his pride, rather then to sustain his necessities. This might serve in the
Consideration of thy self, what thou art according to thy natural
Constitution of birth and of body, to teach thee how vveake, and how
unprovided, how mean, and how needy thou art by nature: whereby thou may
profitably learn humiliation, and to abate that provvde conceit, which good
success and prosperity might plant in thee.

CHAP. 6. The Consideration of thy self what thou art in the fruition of this
short and uncertain life.
AFter thy birth and constitution of body, the Consideration of this life's
fruitio^ craveth place: wherein if thou will know, what thou art, consider first
how short this life is. Touching this it is true, which one says, that nothing
does deceive men so much, as that they are ignorant how short a space they
have to live, and therefore do always promise unto themselves a longer time
to live. And as an unseasonable year does either parch the leaves of trees by
reason of excessive heat and drought, so that they wither and fall away, or by
extreme cold are consumed, or by blustering storms are blown of: so does
any extraordinary distemperature either of heat or cold, drynes or moisture
destroy, or at the least indaunger the life of man. And if thou doubt hereof,
the Physicians will tell their opinions plainly, that there are four
faculties by which the life of man is maintained, and that if any of these
four faculties do miss his force and operation, then man's life presently
perishes. The first, is the Attractiue faculty, by which the nourishment is
drawn into the parts nourished: that consists of heat and drines: and if
any of these two do abound or be deficient, then presentely the Attractiue
loses his office, and the life of man is mightily indaungered.

Retentiue,whereby the nourishment attracted is retained until it be digested:
this consists of cold and drines; and if either of these qualities be not
always rightly proportioned, the Retentiue faculty fails of his force, and
then the life of man is likewise in peril.

Digestive faculty,by which the attractiue and the retained nourishment is
digested: this consists of heat and moisture, the which two qualities, if
they be not well conditioned, then also the life of man cannot long continue.

Expulsive faculty,by which all superfluities are eiected: this consists of
cold and moisture, which if they be not moderately mixed, then the expulsive
faculty cannot perform his force, and so the excreaments which should be
expelled, do turn into inward corruption, whereby the life of man is soon
cut of.

Lastly if any of these four faculties have not his due effect, then the
stomach (in which is the Nutritive appetite) does decay: or the liueor, in
which the subtle matter is separated from the gross, is defective: or the
members to be nourished, are not nourished by way of the veins, through the
which humor and moisture are conveyed: or the arteries, by which the vital
spirits are led. In all this it does appear how short the life of man is,
and how soon it is cut of by sickness, besides many other (almost
innumerable) means, which are instruments to shorten his life. If then there
be so many means to inda^mage and indaunger man's life, and so few to preserve
it, how can there be any reckoning made of the length of it? but that with the
Princely Prophet and Prophetical Prince King David it may be deemed to be but
as a spanne long; or, Psalm. 59.6. Psalm. 90.9.
like to a tale which is told, and suddenly ended; to a bubble upon the water
soon broken; to a miste, which quickly vanishes; to a ship, which saileth
so speedely, thaa it cannot be seen which way it went; and to an arrow, or a
bird flying in the air. Many such sharp similitudes have been set down by
them, that have duly considered the shortness of man's life. And surely though
some live a little longer then other, and most men do hope or at least desire
to live long: yet every man does see that he which lives longest, does but
borrow (as it were) a small time of his fellows, and in that little time, that
he lives longer then others, he still hasteneth unto his end: for as a man,
which is in a ship sailing on the seas, whither he sit, stand, or walk,
the ship still goes on her way, and he that is in her, goes with her: so
man howsoever he be busied in this world, whether idle or occupied, whether
asleep or awaking, time passes away, and his life in, and with time, yea even
in a moment of time is cut of. For if the longest liver in the world be asked
how long he esteems the time, or how soon it is past since he was borne, he
will answer it seems unto him but as yesterday: except it be one, whose
life has been full of miseries, to him (perchance) every day will seem a
moonth, and every moonth a year, Psalm. 90.10.
and the time to long that he has lived, David the Prophet tells us that
the age of man is three score years and ten, and if he live any longer, it
is rather to be reckoned a vexation, then a life: this is a short time, for a
man to live no longer, and yet if every one might attain to these years, the
life of man might be said to be of some length. But if it were possible to
record the years of every man that dies, we should find in that large
Register of men's lives, that where one man ariueth to the age of threescore
years end ten, there are a hundredth which do not see half so many: there dye
many more in their infancy, then in their ripe years; and more in youth, then in
old age: all which shows how short this life is, and what thou art in the
Fruition thereof. Add unto this the Uncertainty thereof, wherein thou may
quickly conceive how many and sundry sorts of casualties thy life is subject
unto, which makes that more uncertain then the wind, that is, ever mutable
and full of alteration. To confirm this, if we should go about to reckon how
many instruments death has to bring every man's life to an unexpected end, the
best memory would rather fail to reckon up the several engines that death
uses to destroy man's life withal, then that death would want means to work
a sudden and an uncertain end of man's life.

This may be prooved by diverse examples of men of all degrees, sorts, and
conditions, who in their best strength and chiefest time of their health and
prosperity have been suddenly set upon by the uncertain executioners of
death, when they least suspected them or thought thereof. Aul Ge Lib. 15. Cap.
20.
As for example; The famous greek Poet Euripides (being in good health) supped
with Archelaus; after the which, as he returned home, when he thought himself
least in danger of death, he was suddenly, and that on a trice, torn to
pieces with dogs and so found by trial, how uncertain this life is.

Caesar (who had past infinite perilles in the wars) was (by Brutus and
Cassius) slain suddenly in the Senate house, Plutarch. in vita C. Caesaris.
where he thought his life to be most safe, and least suspected the danger of
death: so approving (by his untimely end) the uncertainty of every man's life.
Q. Curtius writting the history of Alexander the great, reports that when he
had conquered the world and death to, as it seemed to himself, he was, coming
to Babylon, caught suddenly by death, and made to know and confess that
uncertain is the life of man: though he were so great a monarch. T. Hostilius,
the third King of Rome, Plutarch in vita Numae.
when he supposed himself safest and freest from deaths darte, was
strictken on the soddaine with a thunder bolte, and his house burn to ashes
with the lightening. Tarquinius Prtscus also the 5. King of Rome was, sitting
at dinner, (when he least dreamed of death) choked with the boane of a fish,
and died thereof that night: all which may well witness how short, and how
uncertain the life of man is. Seneca called the Destinies, Cic. Lib. de natura
deor.
and Cicero supposed to be the daughters of Herebus and Nox, whom they affirm
to be very much busied about the life of man: their names are Clotho, Clotho
colu^ gestat, Lachesis irahit, Atropos occai.
Lachesis, and Atropos: the first does weaue the threede of life, the second
does lengthen it a little, and the last does clean cut it of: but the last of
the three has the quickest hand in her works; for what the other two do
frame for a time, that she does undo in the moment of time: and the threede of
life, though it should be somewhat long in spinning, yet it is cut of in the
twinkling of an eye, and when we think it is stron. gest, then comes
Atropos unawares to perform and play her part. Death has also three
principal servauntes, which he imployeth much, and often about this business,
and they as diligently put in execution and perform what he commands for
the shortening and soon cutting of, of the life of man, whose names (as
casualty, infirmity, and old age) gave sufficient proof and testimony that
short oftentimes, and most uncertain is the life of man, and what accoumpt we
should make of it, and what man is in the fruition thereof.

CHAP. 7. The Consideration what thou art in the fruition of so painful a
life.
THis Consideration concerning man's life, is of the grievous pains and
miserable torments, which very often and most commonly do accompany thy self:
as, Sickness in thy body, Sorrows and passions of the minds, the Vakndnesse of
friends, the Envy of enemies, the Deceipte of flatterers, and other vvorldely
Mishappes, which breed such multitudes of miseries, as are almost impossible
to be named, and very hard and painful with patience to be endured.

And first for the grievous pains that Sickness breeds and brings unto
the body, we see, and daily experience tells us, that many men are so
tormented therewith, that their whole life from the cradle to the grave is but
the drawing of an everfainting breath, and (as it were) a lingering death, or
rather a painful life, more grievous then death it self. As the fish Clupea
(which when the moon increases, is white, and when it does decrease,
becomes black, growing to any greatness, kills himself for the pains
of those prickles, that come out of his own sides; so men possessed and paid
with sickness do change both color and complexion as Clupea does, or as the
moon waxes and waneth: and when they grow to any years, the prickles of
their pains is the cause of their death. If we should seek for examples to
show how that many men have been mightily tormented with sickness, we might
easily find and see an endless sea of instaunces to confirm this conclusion,
wherein we will not wade much to weary the Reader, but rather refer him to
consider of the cruel experiment that poor miserable men do make thereof,
who pining with continual sickness languish all their lives long from their
mothers breasts till they be borne of four, and brought to their last and
long home: only, and for a taste herein, I will set before him a fevve (of
many) such examples as the holy scriptures offer unto us. Mephibosheth the
son of Jonathan, 2. Sam 4.4. Math. 9.
the son of Saul, was lame of both his legs, and led a lingering
languishing life all his days. Iirus daughter waste with sickness, and the
woman of Canaans daughter vexed with a Devil, had ended their days with
dolor and grief, if CHRIST, at the humble suite and petition of their
parents, Mar. 5.
had not showed mercy unto both. Mark makes mention of a miserable woman,
whose body with sickness was wonderfully weakened, and whose wealth
with Physicians was waste, her issue of blood continually increasing, so
that in twealue years she never had ease one day. What what shall I speak of
that woman, whom her infirmities had bowed together? and of whom Christ
said, Luc. 13.
that Satan had bound her for eighteen years. Ioh. 5.1.
The poor man that lay at the poole of Bethesda keapt his bed eight and
thirty years not able to help himself till Christ healped him. The same was
the state of Agbarus King of Edessa, Eusebius. Lih. 1. Cap. 14.
of whom Eusebius makes mention: it were to long, and an infinite labor
for me to lay down all that might be remembered to this purpose: let him that
would know more, ask the Physician how many sundry sorts of diseases he
seems to know, though he seldom cures most of them, all which are
ordained for the punishment of sinners, Job. 1.
and are inflicted upon miserable men in all ages. Only I will end with poor
and patient Job whose life during his trial was much more grievous then death,
whose children were destroyed suddenly, whose, goods were taken from him
violently, whose body was diseased straungly, whose wife vpbraided him
wickedly, whose friends rebuked him sharply; what greater Cross could be laid
on man? bereast of children, chap. 2.
spoiled of goods, abused by his wife, condemned by his friends, sore in body,
sick in mind, what misery may be compared here with? was it any marvel that
he desired his death, Cap. 10.18.
or rather that he had never been borne?

Now, how painful the life of man is, which is subject unto so much sorrow, we
may perceive it by the visage, and see it in the estate of their bodies who are
overwhealmed therewith. For most commonly their bones are dried up, and their
bodies there by made like unto an anatomy: whereof grew that old Adage, which
advises a man not to eat up his heart, signifying that such as are troubled
with much sorrow, consume away, even as if they had eaten up their own
hearts, and end their lives with supping up that sour potion. How painful
man's life is, that is possessed with sorrow, may well be perceived, and that
every man has his part thereof, is pregnant to be proved, for that is true
which the Poet testifies thereof, speaking to man thus: Quocunque aspiceres,
gemitus, luctusque sonabant:
Formaque non taciti funeris intus erat.
that is, Which way so-e're thou look about,
There sighs and sobbes do sound:
It is no silent burials shape,
That in thy self was found.
These verses do well declare how that man's life is full fraught with cares
and sorrows. Care men have to prevent perils as they are coming toward
them, and they sorrow when they see that they cannot overcome those, which are
already befallen them: so that sorrow sits (as it were) on every side, and
at every hand, before and behind man; whereby his life is environed with
perpetual pains.

And as for the pains, or deadly torments rather, that by means of external
evils (as, the unkindness of friends, the envy of enemies, and, the deceipte
of flatterers) do inseparably accompany man's life, they are to too well known
to every man both in their own particular experience, and also in the examples
of others. For the first, it is most true, and not doubted of by any, that the
greatest calamity that can happen to a man, and may most grieve and molest a
faithful friend, is to be unfaithfully dealt withal by him, whom he accounted
and esteemed for his best friend: this made the poor Poet thus pitifully to
complain of his friends unfaithfulness, Omnia iam fient, fieri quae posse
negabam,
Et nil est de que non sit habenda fides:
Hac ego vaticinor, quia sum deceptus ab illo
Laturum misero quem mihirebar opem.
that is, All things shall be, which once I deemed could never be done:
And naught there is, to which my faith shall not be won.
This I foretell, because I was deceived by him,
Who unto me I thought would succor bring.


By this it should seem that the poor miserable banished Poet felt nothing
more grievous amiddest all his miseries in his exile, then the deceipte of his
reputed friend: whereby also this is made manifest, that great is the
grief, and much is the pain that falshoode in friendship procures a man.

The painful tormente that an envious enemy works a man is little
inferior, nay rather it equalleth the former. For this adversary, set on rage,
and inflamed with ire, T. Liuius.
is resolved (as an vnextinguishable fire) to consume the life, the honor and
the whole estate of him that is envied: and who is he that is truly virtuous
which is not subject to envies jaws? Val. Max. Lib 4. Tit. de amicit. Xen.
in Paed. Cyri. l. i.
And as Xenophon says, he is in very evil case whom no man envieth:
neither could he in his days remember any virtuous man that was not cruelly
stunge with this poisoned and most venomous serpent: whereby we may well
note how that man's life is much tormented with envy.

Lastly, of the deceit of flatterers, hew far forth it tormenteth man's
mind, this at the first is not seen of most men, but lies hid as a padde
in the straw. For the flatterer covers his knavery with the cloak of good
counsel; and shaddovveth his subtle devise by soothing and smoothing of him,
whom he is about to deceive, evermore praising and commending his actions,
how evil soever; and dispraising the works and deeds of others, how good
soever; as he finds his humor, and may best feed the fantasy of him that
he follows, until he have vvonne him to work his own woe, and in the end
brought him to the deep dungeon of utter destruction: then (but commonly to
late) men repent them that ever they knew such companions: and are weary of
them, when they perceive how that they have brought them sorrow, shame, and
confusion, to vex, grieve and torment their minds continually and as long as
they have days to live: neither is this the least adversary, though last set
down here, that troubles and disquieteth the life of man.

By these and such other means, more then can well be manifested, to man's
life (fraught with anguish and pain) is made so loathsome unto himself, 1.
Kin. 19.4.
that who is he which with Elyas does not wish to die, and confess that he
is not better then his fathers: whose bodies be at rest, as he would be? and
says not with Paul: Cupio dissolui, Phil. 1.23.
and esse cum Christo, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ? For
that were to a Christian heart advantage in deed. By the rules of Christianity
we should learn truly to be contented with all crosses and calamities
which happen unto us in the course of this life; yet our natural corruption is
such, as it will not suffer us to endure troubles with patience. This, that
has been said, may in some sort suffice to show (though not fully and
perfectly) how paineful, how tormenting, and how full of cares the course of
this life is: and serves fitly to stir and move thee to consider and weigh
well with thy self what thou art in enjoying of so short, so uncertain,
and so painful a life, as this is.

CHAP. 8. The Consideration what thou art in thy death, and manner of dying.
THe last Consideration of this first part, is; concerning thy death: we mean
not here to discourse, but cursorilie, of the difference betvveene corporal
and spiritual, temporal and eternal death, best beseeming the pens and
pains of great and grave Divines, but only to speak of the death of the body
most familiar and best known to all men. It is an old saying and very true:
that as sure as man is borne, so sure he is to die. Some said that death is
three fold, but rather might have said, and that more soundly, and more
truly, that it has three degrees: the first Natural, the second Criminal,
the third Judicial. For the first, which is Natural or the dissolution of
nature, this (as is said before) as it is common to all men, and no man is
exempted from it, so it has in it many things seeming very fearful, and
procuring much amazement, which yet ought not to be feared at all: as when
death draws near (sending before him his habinger Sickness) he presents
unto the sick man a gastfull countenance, and lean bones without flesh: yea
he does offer to his remembrance the loss of all his goods and honors, his
departure from his friends, the sequestring of his soul from his body, and
the seperating of himself from the world and from all things in the world,
how dear and delightful soever unto him: whereby the senses are all
over-loaden and burdened with sorrovv; according to the saying of the Poet:
Mill modis lethi miseros mors vnafatigat.
that is, A thousand kinds of deaths and more,
Death has at hand, to work mansvvoe.
All which, beheld of the mere natural man in the grimme visage of death
(as it were in a looking glass) seem very dread full; but of these chiefly,
the love of this life makes him most of all to fear death, and yet to him
that is truly wise the sad sight of death yields no such hideous aspect or
coffeehouse, but rather moves him to remember and make good use of that
excellent saying of Seneca: Sen. epist. 62.
Before old age I had care to live well, that I might in old age die well,
that is willingly. For to die willingly, is to die well: which if a man
would consider and put in practice, then needed he not to fear this natural
death of the body. Full well said the Heathen Philosopher, Cice. in some Scip.
that unless God should free man from the keepers (or from that prison) of the
body, there could be no passage into heaven. Though death do dissolve this
temporal and momentary life from the body; yet if a good death follow a good
life, it adds a longer life unto this temporal and transitory life, and it
takes away all cares and calamities from the body and life of man, in so much
that such a death may aptly be called the end of labors, the conservation of
victory, the gates of life, and the entrance into everlasting felicity. Thus
may the virtuous, discreet, and considerate man learn to know what he is
concerning the first degree of death, which we call natural, or the
dissolution of nature. As touching the second degree of death, which we call
Criminal, or the death of offense, this unto many men seems nothing
fearful, although it ought more to be feared then the first. The first degree
of Natural death every man must yield unto, and pay undoubtedly as a due
debte to Nature, or rather to the Creator of Natures works: but the second
degree of death, which is the death of offense, as it begone and brought in
that first death which we term Natural; so is it, or it ought to be much
more feared then the same. For one of the Fathers says, Aug. sup. Genesis
that Adam and Eve began to dye in the same day that they did receive the
law of death; that is when they offended first, and that by one man's
offense, death came unto all men. This death of offense which is cause first
of the Natural, then of the Judicial death, ought therefore most of all to be
feared; yet we see, and that to to commonly, how men make small reckoning of
this death and do least dread it, else vvoulde they not be so proane and
ready to run on headlong, and to commit those offenses, that do procure
death, and perpetual destruction. This death of offense, or the offense it
self, which causes death, ought to be very much feared. For though men,
while they live, do lightly and little regard it; yet it brings with it to
torment them (when they are a dying) shame horror and confusion.

Judgment: this has three stepps or stairs by which it mounteth either to
eternal happiness, or else descends unto endless pains and torments. For
Judgment is said to be of three sorts: of our selves; of men; by the Creator
of man. For the first Judgment of our selves concerning our deaths and of our
deserts of death, this is inward and contained in the Conscience of every
man, which Conscience when it gives judgment against a man, it makes him
feel the pains of death in life, and it figureth unto him the perpetual
pains which he shall endure after death. An heathen Philosopher could say
that a guilty conscience is like to an ulcer in the body. Plut de animi
tranquillitate.
For it leaves sorrow and grief wounding him and feastering in his heart and
mind continually. When reason can relieve the mind moved otherwise to
sadness, nothing can ease the galling and torture of a guilty Conscience; Ovid
lib 1. de Ponto Eleg. 1.
which caused the comfortless Poet to confess and say: Paenitet, o si quid
miserorum creditur vlli,
Paenitet, et facto torqueor ipse meo.
that is, I do repent, if any wretched wight,
Might credit have, or be beleud in this:
It grieveth me, and galleth day and night
My woeful heart, that I have done amiss.
This is the fruit, and only ease I find,
A guilty deed, yealde to a galled mind.
Therefore this Judgment of our selves in our own consciences, that we have
not only deserved this temporal but an eternal death, is (without it be
eased by perfect Penitence) a double death unto us.

of men: whereon death also does depend. As the judgment of our selves is
internal, and in our own consciences: so the judgment of men is external,
depending upon exterior proofs and probabilities, whereby they give their
judgment of life and death. And although that the judgment of men, be not
alvvaies true in their difinitiue sentence, and decree of men, how they have
deserved either to live or dye; because that they which are the ludges, whither
with authority or without, may mistake the laws by the which they judge: or
else those, that produce proofs unto them, may either wilfully or ignorantly
misinforme and misguide them: yet it behooves every wise man discreetly to
submit himself unto that sentence of the Law, which limitteth unto him
either life or death. Demosth. Con And
For as the excellent Orator affirmed, it is not lawful to malign magistrates
though they be wicked and evil: the reason thereof is, because that they,
when they do give judgment of life and death, are the substitutes of him, who
is the author of life and death. And, if thou vvilt dye well, avoid and
eschevve all evil deeds, which are the occasions of this judgment of men,
which deem and judge thee worthy of death. For this judgment of death does
commonly follow the evil actions of a badde life.

the final Judgment, follows death, at the latter daic, when the universal
judgment of mankind shall be, and either eternal life or eternal death
insueth. Of this I purpose to speak but as an occurrent by the way. Then
shall be the beginning of glory to the good, and to the wicked of shame and
confusion: then shall be the separation of the sheep from the goats, of the
corn from the cockle; and of the blessed from the accursed. After this, then
they, that receive the sentence of life, shall never dye or fear death any
more: and those, which are appointed to dye, can never hope for life again:
whatsoever some men have dreamed of this matter, whereof we purpose not here
to entreat. This last degree of death, or difference between life and death,
has in it either much fear or much joy: fear to the wicked in respect of
former offenses, but joy unto the faithful in their hope of enjoying future
happiness, which follows after a virtuous life and a godly end. Lactan. in
divinis inst. Lib. 6. cap. 4
And as Lactantius alleges: if it be asked of us, vvhyther death be good or
evil, we must aunsvvere, that this or that man's death is good or bad, as his
life was either good or bad which he had lead before. For if thy life be
good, then will thy death also be good unto thee: but if thy life be evil,
then likewise is death evil unto thee.

The Conclusion of this first part of the first point of Consideration
concerning thy self, What then art.
BY this little touch or light handling of Consideration, herein (gentle Reader)
tendered unto thee, (if thou have read over the same with good regard) thou
may thereby make some trial concerning the knowledge of thy self, what
thou art in thy Creation, in thy Procreation and byr the, in thy Life, and in
thy Death. All which, if thou do well and advisedly consider, thou shall find
that to be true, Bernardus. in senten
which Bernard affirms, that man is sick of a threefolde malady; in the
beginning, in the middle, and in the ending; that is, in his birth, in his
life, and in his death. For his birth is vnpure, his life is perverse, and his
death dangerous. His birth it is vnpure, by reason of our first parents fall,
and the daily offenses of our natural parents, Psalm. 51.5.
which moved the Psalmist (well weighing it) to say that in sin he was
conceived. His life is perverse, because that by nature he is proane to all
evil actions. His death is dangerous, because his life is vicious. There is
in our birthe, a beginning of sorrow: there is in our lives, a continuance of
the same: and there is in our deaths, either a dissolution, or else a
perpetual possession thereof.

The end of the first Section of the first part of Consideration.

The Consideration THE SECOND SECTION OF the first part of the Consideration of
humane Condition.
CHAP. 1. The Consideration of thy self, who thou art.
NOw having said somewhat concerning the first part of the first point of the
Consideration of thy self, which is, What thou art: it is necessary that we
proceed. farther to the second part of this first point of Consideration;
which is, Who thou art. The Consideration whereof does contain in it the
remembrance and reknowledgement of thy parentage, lineage, and descent: the
knowledge of thy state of body, of thy wealth, calling, dignity and wisdom.
To the goodness and greatness of which gifts the Philosophers in former
times have attribured a great part of ma^s felicity; fortune; body; Mind.

By the true Consideration of thy self, who thou art in the possession of
these blessings, thou may learn to know, that if thou have any, or all of
them, thou art yet no otherwise happy in them, then according as thou do use
them: for if it be true, that there is a difference between using and enjoying
of things; in that we are said properly to use only those things that are
temporal; Pet. Lumb. Lib. 1.
and to emote those things that are eternal: thou may consider that thy
parentage, thy health, thy dignities, and thy wisdom being things temporal and
transitory, are then only to be used of thee here for a time, and that but for
very short time; for thou may by no means enjoy the^ always. This, well
po^dered and thought upon, will soon bring thee to the knowledge of thy self,
Who thou art. For there is nothing that lets and hinders a man more from
the knowledge of himself, then the opinion and fond conceipte he has of the
goodness, greatness, and durablenesse of those worldly blessings, which he does
possess, and so entirely affect. Therefore to vveede out the overweening
opinion thereof, we will first begin with thy lineage and parentage, and so
bring thee by little and little into the consideration of thy self, who thou
art. Art thou descended of a noble family, or of a base lineage? if thou be
noble borne, then commonly pride and presumption catch hold and lay such
violent hands on thy will, thy affection, and thy understanding, that they
can hardly be removed from thee, till they have removed thee from the
knowledge of thy self, who thou art. For thy presumptuous pride and
selfeliking affection will make thee believe that thou art much better, then
indeed thou art. This makes men many times to measure their own greatness of
birth as they do their shadows, which always seem bigger then their
bodies, and by degree it draws them to believe that their birth and
parentages are far better then the birthes and parentages of any others are,
or may be.

Q. Curt.
As, Alexander the great, after he had obtained many and notable victories,
could not then be contented to be called any longer the son of Philip King of
Macedon, but would needs be accounted the son of Jupiter Hammon, and so be
deemed to have been descended from the Gods. Sabor King of Persia called
himself King of Kings, partaker of the planets, Herodotus Lib. 2. H
and, brother to the Sun and Moon. Hanno the Carthaginian caused birds to
be taken, and taught to say, Hanno is a God: which birds were afterward cast
abroad in diverse places, that they might publish this his feined Deity unto
the people.

Even so commonly we see that many of noble birthe and great parentage
persuade themselves that they exceed all others in estimation of blood and
lineage: whereas they might consider with themselves that how noblye soever
they are borne, their Nobility has a beginning, not by their own, but by their
Ancestors deserts and virtues; wherefore if that there be not in them good
parts and properties aunswereable to the behavior and good qualities of their
Elders, and their own birthes, then are they but a blemish to their Elders,
and a stain to their names, and honors. We see the fairest and richest
silks, when once they receive any blemish or stain, they are more disfigured
and in greater disgrace then cloth, or other matter of less moment and
reckoning: even so is it in the estimation of Nobility. For a fault in a man of
great birth and parentage is more noted, and breeds unto him greater disgrace
and dishonor, then the same should do unto a man of less and lower dignity.
It is not enough to be borne of high blood, without virtue aunswerable to that
birth: neither with reason may a noble man, because he is honorably descended,
challendge love, estimation, and honor of the actions accomplished by his
Ancestors, unless his own carriage be correspondent and aunswerable to
theirs, Sen. in Here. fur.
and to his own calling: for Seneca says, and that very truly, that, be
which braggeth of his kindred, commends that which concerns others. Ovid.
lib. 13. Meta.
And the Poet speaking to the same purpose said very well.

Nam genus, et proaves, et quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco.
that is.
What kindred did, or Elders ours,
And what we have not done,
I call not ours:it scarcely has
Us any credit won.
This caused a Gentle man of great worth and worthiness, S. Philip Sidney.
as any that has lived in our age, to add this mote underneath his coat of
arms: Vix ea nostra voco. Who although he might most deservedly have claimed
unto himself as much honor as ever any of his Ancestors have had, yet he
would not appropriate their virtues (which could not be called his) unto
himself: for he had rather gain glory by his own noble and worthy acts,
then be accoumpted renowned for the greatness of his Ancestors, how near and
how dear soever unto him. As his noble mind is worthy of memory in all ages,
and his heroical acts never to be committed to oblivion: so are they (which
degenerate from their Elders, or do disgrace and dishonor the honorable
actions of their Ancestors) to be accoumpted worthy (if not of all shame) yet
of a place in Lethes lake to lie in perpetually. Q. Pompeius Praetor of Rome did
most stoutely and wisely carry himself, when he did interdict and dishinherite
the son of Q. Fabius Max. from the use and benefit of all his fathers goods,
because he did degenerate from the virtues of his noble father, and spent that
most luxuriously, which his father had most honorably gotten. There was a law
amongst the Rhodians, that what son soever followed not the footsteps of
their fathers virtues should be dishinherited: which law if it were kept, and
did continue in force amongst us this day, it would make many a son go
without goods, and leave his fathers living for others to inherit. For out
days make experience of that, which the Poet spoke, and applied to former ages.

Aequat rara patrem soboles, Honter.
sed plurimi ab illis
Degenerant, pauci superant probitate parentem. Odyss. 1

that is,
Few sons are found of fathers minds,
Or equal them in virtues acts:
The greatest sort grow out of kind;
Who does regard his fathers factes?
Children seldom seek indeed,
Their sires (in goodness) to exceed.
Now again on the other side, if thy birth and parentage be mean, then most
commonly art thou drawn to despair of having any great advaunceme^t, although
thou do deserve it well: for Envy always follows Virtue, and that most of
all, when it is placed in one of mean Parentage. For usually those, that hold
themselves better in birth, will contemn and envy their inferiors in blood,
although they be far their superiors in virtue and desearte. But this
should not dismaye him that deserves well, to expect the reward of his
deserts, how mean soever ever his birth be. For we find it in experience
true, and the examples are infinite, how men, whose parents were mean and
poor, have (for good parts in them) been preferred to very high and great
dignity. As David, a shepherd, yet afterward anointed King of Israel. Psalm.
78.
Tamberlane the son of a poor shephearde in Scythia, and, as some say, a
shephearde himself, by his valor and prowess became King of Persia, and was
a very mighty Monarch. The father of Sforce Duke of Millaine was a poor man,
who lived by husbandry in Catiniola, a small town or village situate near
unto Ravenna: and yet his son for his worth and worthynes so highly advaunced
to so great a dignity. Many examples might be brought to the same purpose, of
such as in former times, yea and in this latter and more ungrateful age of the
world have gotten by their virtues great preferments and high advauncements,
though their births have been but very base: of whom we omit further to
speak, because we purpose not to disgrace or offend any, but rather to commend
virtue, and to wish the advauncement thereof in all. Yet by the way of advice we
could wish such as be of mean parentage, and so preferred to high places, to
beware of al swelling conceipte of pride, which to to often has infected many.

And so if the noble borne have care of his carriage, and avoid presumption in
the estimation of his honorable descent: and the mean man shun despair or
doubt of obteining advauncement by reason of his birth, and to lofty a conceit
in his prosperous estate, then shall either of them consider well and wisely
who, and what he is in his descent, and by his parentage.

CHAP. 2. The Consideration of thy self, who thou art in the state of thy
body.
THE next Consideration is of thy self who thou art in the state of thy
body: wherein consists the estimation of thy health, of thy strength and of
thy beauty: in considering whereof thou shall find who thou art in possessing
health or sickness, strength or weakness, beauty or deformity, wherein if
Nature has bestovved on thee her gifts liberally and friendly, she gives
thee no better gift then the Poets feign that Paris gave to Venus, or the
reward that he received of her again. For when she strove with Juno and
Pallas for the golden ball, which was to be given to her whom Paris deemed
fairest of the three; Paris bestowed the ball on Venus, and with al continual
contention with the other twain: and she rewarded him again with Helen which
was his utter confusion. This fable was not devised without very good
signification and a certain moral or meaning, what molestations many times
follow the friendly course of Nature in them, that are healthy, strong, and
beautiful in body. For if thou have thy health, then thou art commonly
careless of thy diet, and so fallest often to surfette, or else to use some such
exercise. as may indaunger thy health. For he that doubts not of his health,
dare eat of many dishes, and (as Seneca says) eating of many meats bringes
many diseases: Sen. ad Luc. Ep. 99 Jd^m, Rhet. 10.
and in an an other place, whatsoever (says he) birds do fly, or fishes
svvimme, or beasts do run, they are buried in our bellies. If thou ask
(says he) why we dye so suddenly? it is because we live by the death of
so many creatures: and they that have most strength, are most boldest to
devour most creatures, whereby most commonly they abate their health, and
consume that which they would fainest pamper and feed, even their bodies.
The exercises also, which strong bodyed men are most given unto, do withdraw
many times to to many of such, from the better exercises of the mind. For
seldom is it seen, that men of much might are much given to the study of
liberal sciences, or the meditation of divine things: which moved Xenocrates to
exhort men that they should not exercise the body much without the mind, nor
the mind altogether without the body; for the first best beseems wrastlers
and such rude people; the second belongs unto Idle persons; the first
breeds strong and sturdy ignorance; the second begets studious dullness:
but they that are apt and fit for best things, are indifferently exercised in
both body and mind. For those men, that have strong bodies, for the most part
have weak minds, because they so much exercise the strength of their bodies,
that they seldom or never regard the study of the mind: Sen. ep. 81.
how vveake, says Seneca, are they in mind, whose strength of body we
do much marvel at? so that natural strength draws on unnatural effects,
and defectes of things most to be desired to be in men. If thou have also
beauty and comeliness of body, this blessing eftsoons makes thee in the
enjoying thereof many times miserable and unfortunate. For it makes provvde
such as enjoy it, and provokes others to unlawful lusts and wicked desires,
coveting the accomplishment of their fleshly appetites, and sensual pleasures,
through the abuse of others beauty, which is the nourisher and procurer of
pride, as the Poet tells thee, when he says:

Fastus inest pulchris, Ovid fast. 1.
sequiturque superbia formam.
which is,
Disdain does dwell in beauties bower,
And pride with beauty has great power.
It is to often tried, that they, which are by nature beautiful, make their
external beauty of the body to be the betraier of the inward beauty of the
mind: whereby we see what inconveniences do follow the health, strength,
and beauty of the body.

Now contrariwise, if thou art either naturally subject to sickness, or
accidentally weak; if thou art by nature, or by casualty deformed, what
anguish, grief, and torments of mind these defectes and blemishes do bring
with them, every one either feels and finds in himself, or at the least
may see and perceive it in others. Therefore to temper those intemperate
affections, which usually abound in such as abuse the blessings of the body:
and also to avoid the inconveniences, which do pursue the wants of those
natural blessings of the body, thou ought to conssider, that if the Creator
of natures vvroks has bestowed the blessings of health, strength, and beauty
upon thee, that he bestowed not them to that end upon thee, that thou
should grow provvde of them, or abuse thy body, or devise how to make
others enamored with thy beauty, and the rather for it vnlavvfully to desire
thee. For thou haste received these svveete blessings to another end: even
that to the ableness of thy body thou should join the vvillingnes of thy
mind, to do those comely and commendable deeds, which do beautify both
the body and the mind, and which last longer then the soone-fading blossoms
of beauty, the vveake and ever-slyding staff of strength, and then thy health,
which is more uncertain then all the rest; for it is soon impaired and very
quickly brought to utter decay. If then thy beauty fade, thy strength fail,
and thy health consume and wear away; dismay not thy self, but rather be
armed with patience. For as long as the mind is endued with reason, and good
resolution, no sickness or afflictions can bring the body so vveake, or so out
of shape, but that a mind prepared with patience and directed by virtue may
very well endure. Infirmities may be a mean to subdue, or at least to move
us to sustain stoutly all dislikes and discontentmentes of such defects and
effects in nature. Which Consideration (with the circumstaunces of the same)
concerning thy health and sickness, thy strength and weakness, thy beauty
and deformity if thou bear alvvaies in thy mind, and make good use thereof,
thou shall consider of thy self aright, and soon know what, and who thou
art in the state of thy body.

CHAP. 3. The Consideration of thy self what, and who thou art in the state
of thy wealth and riches.
THe Consideration of thy wealth and riches does contain two circumstaunces
to be conceived of thee, and to be carried continually in thy remembrance. The
first is of thy wealth and possessions, how thou haste gotten them: the
second is, how thou do use them. For by these two courses of getting and
using thy wealth and goods, they are made either good or evil unto thee.
Sometimes men do get their goods well, by honest and lavvfull means, yet may
they use them evil: but they do seldom, or almost never, that get their
goods by evil means, turn their goods so gotten unto good uses.

Now first, for the obtaining and getting of riches vvhither it be by lawful,
or by unlawful means: it is to be considered that if thou haste riches,
lands, or any kind of liuelyhood, thou have either gotten it by inheritance,
by gift, or by thine own industry. If thy goods and possessions come unto thee
by inheritance, and that thou haste sufficient by thine ancestors to
mainetaine thy estate, then, the more thou have the less should be thy care
and toil in travailing to augment thine abundance, seeing that by
inheritance thou haste sufficient to sustain necessity, and to mainetaine thy
calling: and yet this competency should not breed a carelessness in thee to
preserve that unto thy posterity, which thy predecessors carefully procured
for thee. But such commonly is the condition of man's nature, that he alvvaies
does desire an alteration of his estate, which makes him, that has great
possessions left him by his parents (not knowing or considering what pains
they used in the obtaining of it) to be careless how he consumes it: he
having no experience how hardly it was had at the first, foreseeth not how
uneasily it is recovered when it is gone, or what the lack and loss of it
is, when it is misspent. We see many times that a prodigal son succeeds a
miserable father: who, when he comes to plenty (not by his own, but by
his parents industry) never cease to seek mean, to spend that which
others have gotten for him, being drawn by delighte to lavish in expenses,
with a vain opinion of getting fame, and procuring friends, or other
prefermentes by his liberality, as he thinks; but more truly by his
prodigality, as others do think, and as himself shall find when all is
gone, and when it is to late to grovve thriftie. The reason of this is, that
things which are hardly had, are sought with greatest desire, and kept
with greatest care: and on the contrary side, we commonly see that when
wealth or almost any other vvorldly benefit is bestowed on men freely, or
that they obtain it without any great labor or difficulty, they then least
esteem it, and are soonest vvonne to depart from it. Therefore to shun both
these extremities of prodigality, and misery, in administering and bestowing of
thy goods and possessions, which come to thee by inheritance, use this
mediocrity, that plenty make thee not prodigal, nor poverty cause thee to be
miserable: the mean in this, as in other things (though it be hard to
attain unto) is the safest and the profitablest course, when it may be
compassed and well kept: as the Poet says.

Horat lib. 1. sermon. sa^. 1.
Est modus in rebus, sunt eerti denique fines,
Quos vltra citraque nequit consistere rectum.
which is,

There is a golden mean in things,
And certain bounds are pight.
Beyond, beside, or short of which
Cannot consist the Right.
Then if a man grow to wealth, or great living by other men's gifts, such as
were not his parents, or from whom he could not expect the same as an
hereditary right; which happens diverse times unlooked for to many: wealth so
obtained, works like effect as that does, which is had by inheritance; that
is, it makes him that comes so suddenly and with so small travail to his
abundance, to take the less care in keeping of it, or in spending it well;
for such a one commonly will verify the old proverb, which says, light come,
light go: So did Caius Caligula, who consumed great treasures gathered together
by Tiberius the Emperor. For it is reported of him, that he spent seave^-score
thousand Sestertia in one year. So did Cleopatra the last Queen of Egypt,
who at a supper, which she made to M. Antonius, putting an excellent pearl
into tarte vinegar, wherein being resolved, drank it, being esteemed at
Centies Sesteria which is of our money 50000.li.

Many such we have in these our days bearing the like prodigal minds, though
they have not the like means and ability: who are as ready to spend all their
wealth, whither by gift or by inheritance, yea and that as vainly as
Heliogabalus, by wearing of precious stones in their shoes: or as Caesar the
son of Pope Alexander the sixth, who spent every day two hundred crowns in
banqueting, maintained a multitude of parasites, whom he fed and apparelled
on his own proper cost, and keapt in pay eight thousand soldiers continually:
all which prodigally and vamely he spent and consumed during his fathers days.
Have not diverse heirs, and such as have large legacies in our days, spente
as lavishly what they had, as their parents got the same wickedly? to whom
may well be applied what the Poet writ of Canna, saying unto him thus: Mart.
epig. lib. 9.
Nam tu ( dum metuis, ne quid post fatarelinquas)
Hausisti patrias luxuriosus opes.
which is Thou have consum'de thy fathers wealth,
To feed thy lustful mind:
For fear least thou should after death,
Leave ought of it behind.


Now touching the getting and spending of those possessions, which do accrue
unto thee by thine own pains and industry: the goods so gotten, as they are
obtained by thine own indevours, so Desire was the mother, Pains the father,
and Care the nurse of the newborn babe, Wealth: which many times makes such
as brought forth and nourished so unnatural a child, like unto the viper,
which with the birth of her own young ones, is always bereaved of her own
life. Therefore in the getting and using of thy riches and wealth remember these
rules, that the goods, which are evil gotten, do not bring so much present
profitte, pleasure, and prosperity, as they do cause future dangers, Ambr.
sup. Luc. Lib. 8.
and yet the fault is not in the wealth, but in them, that have wrongfully
gotten it, or in them, that cannot use their wealth well. For that is true,
which one says, Osorius.
that by how much the more any thing is in his own nature excellent, by so
much the more is the abuse thereof pernicious and dangerous. So it is not the
lawful use, but the unlawful abuse of riches and wealth, that is always
condemned. Neither are the opinions of Crates, Antisthenes, and other
Philosophers of their judgment, good and to be followed therein, who would not
have any wealth (but gave away their goods) thinking that they would be
hindrances to their desired happiness: wherein they were deceived, seeing that
riches in themselves are neither good nor evil, but become such, as they are
used: good to the good, and badde to the evil and wicked: Ambr, vt Sup.
to the good they are good helps to virtue and to virtuous actions: to the
badde they are goades to prick forward, and supporters to mainetaine all
evil and wicked actions: they make not a man the better that has them,
except they be well used, more then a golden bitte makes a horse the better
that bears it: and to use them well is to enjoy them: as to use them evil, is
to abuse them. The good or evil use of them also consists in the estimation
that we make of the same. For if we grow once into to great a liking and love
of our goods, then they steal away the heart of him, that has them, and make
him a slave to his own substance, according to that which the Poet says:
Ovid. fact. 1
Creverunt et opes, et opum furiosa cupido,
Et cum possideant plurima, plura petunt.
That is, As riches does increase with men,
So furiousely they rage:
Still craving more, the more they have:
What may their lust assagwe?


So that they do, as the Tragedian testifies, drink poison in gold: Sen. in
Thy.
or as Midas, whom the Poets fained to have desired of the Gods one petition,
the which being granted him, he wished that whatsoever he might touch should
be turned into gold; which he obtaining purchased nothing thereby but his
own destruction. For when he should feed, his (...) (by reason of his former
request) beco^ming so hard a me^^^^^, might well choke his, but never nourish
him. This was set down to signify how much harm they procure unto themselves
which purpose nothing but the heaping of wealth without regard, how it is
gotten or how it shall be spent. For it is true that Iuvenall says, Tantis
parta malis, curamaiore, metuque
Servantur: misera est magus custodia census.
that is, Ill gotten goods, are kept with greater care and fear:


Great charge of wealth the misers heart does break and tear. Besides the
wrongful getting of them, and the great care that he has in keeping of them,
there is as great danger in the evil using of the^: either in not using the^
at al, but hording the^ up to the hurt of many: or else in employing of the^
otherwise, the^ they ought to be employed. They that have great store of goods,
and use them not at al, keep them cloase, either because they know not what to
do with them, or else because they cannot find in their hearts to deparr with
them. For the first sort they are like unto them that have good horses in their
stables (as Isocrates says) and know not how to ride the^, whereby for want of
use they become altogether vnprofirable. And as for the second sort, that have
no desire to use their goods, though they know how to do it; they are not very
unlike unto the she-Ape which makes so much of her young-ons, that, with
continual clasping of the^, she many times crusheth them to death: so these
covetous creatures (that know how to use their good, and will not) do so claspe
it, and hide it in their coaffers, that with the cloase keeping thereof they do
(as it were) crush it to death, for that they bury it in the sepulcher of
forgetfulness, and unprofitableness. So then it is the estimation that we
make of riches, which makes a man either happy or unhappy in the getting, in
the having, and in the using of his goods. For unless his mind be his
moderator therein, there is no law, but the law of Reason, that can limitte his
desires. Plutarch. in Vit. Lycurgi.
Lycurgus made a law among the Lacedaemonians to take away their coin of
gold and silver, allowing them only coin made of iron; thinking that he
thereby should have brought them to despise and contemn coin by the baseness
of that metal; yet all this could not banish covetousnes out of the city.
For, their minds being basely bent, they were as well in love and liking with
the baser, as with the better mettalls. Take away from a man all his wealth,
yet you cannot take from him his covetousness. For that remains still in his
mind. If he has little, he desires much, if he have much, he desires
more: so that desire is the fuel, that sets his mind still on fire. If
some men doubt why GOD gives plenty of goods unto the badde, who knows not
how to use them; and takes it from the good, that can use them well;
Augustine will aunsvvere them that if GOD should give his temporal
blessings only unto the good, August. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 12.
the evil vvoulde think that he ought to be glorified only for this and
nothing else. Again, if he should give them unto the evil and wicked
only, the vveake vvoulde be affraide to be converted, least that they
thereby should want. If it should be taken from the evil, then they
vvoulde think that this only should be their punishment. From the good he
often takes it, that they should desire better things; which they have not
common with the wicked. Now that thou may make a right use of this
Consideration, in waighing how thou have gotten, and how thou do spend
thy wealth, observe always this, that in thy reasonable care to obtain
sufficiency, thou keep unto thy self a safe conscience not to wrong them,
with whom thou do deal: and that thou grovve not into to much love with
thy wealth; in the dispensation thereof thou ought also to use Justice unto
thy self in observing these four circumstaunces, to Whom, VVhou,
Wherefore, and How thou bestovvest thy wealth; which if thou perform,
then have thou well considered, who thou art in the state of thy wealth.

CHAP. 4. The Consideration of thy self, who thou art in the state of thy
calling and Authority.
FOr the Consideration of thy self who thou art in thy calling and dignity;
either thy estate is honorable and worshipful, or mean. Two enemies unto an
honorable estate. The first enemy.
If it be honorable, then have thou two great adversaries to assail thee; the
one without thee; the other within thee: that without thee is Envy: that within
thee, is pride. Thy external enemy, Envy, is ever feeding and gnawing on thy
felicity, so that it is impossible for thee to escape Envies jaws; and that
especially, if by thy virtues thou be advanced and brought to an higher
calling. For then thou shall be sure to be set upon on al sides by this
external enemy. Arist. lib. 2. Top. and 2 li. Eth. ca 7.
For Envy is (as it is defined) a grieving and a grudging at other men's
prosperity and happiness. There are certain degrees, by which Envy does work
against the^, that are envied by reason of their high callings come unto by
their good deserts. Ad Heren.
Of such Cicero says, that they by other men's dispraise do hunt after their
own commendations. T. de Orat.
which they bear, grieving at the excellency of another man, and therefore
seek his confusion. Cicero says, that men do many times envy their equals,
and their inferiors. For when they find themselves left behind, they are
grieved that they are out-gone by them: and very often do they envy their
superiors, and that the more vehemently, by how much more highly they esteem
or reckon of themselves, and in their judgment do pass the equality of
common right by reason of the height of their dignity and fortunes. So we see
that too high a calling is accompanied with Envy, but chiefly, when arrogancy
and hauty behavior is joined with it. And although that Envy, this external
enemy, is very dangerous, yet is it never so hurtful unto a high estate or
calling, as is the internal adversary pride. For the foreign foe, Envy, The
second enemy.
may be easily prevented, because he comes commonly to bid the battle
with his banners displaied, so that he may thereby be discerned to be an enemy,
and being known, may the more easily be withstood. But the domestical and
inward enemy, Pride, does more secretly assail thee, and stir up civil
wars within thine own city and within thine own self: he comes
unawares to thee when thou know not of his coming: or if thou haste
knowledge thereof (which is but seldom) yet he comes not in the appearaunce
and likeness of an enemy, but as a friend. For he makes thee believe that
he comes to mainetaine thine honor, reputation, and credit: and therefore,
not fearing or suspecting him, thou can the more hardly resist him. And
pride, this inward enemy, is so much the more perilous (as one says) then
other enemies, because other vices have power in our evil doings; Aug. lib.
de not. and gratia.
but this does proceed and takes strength and full growth of our good
actions and best deeds.

Besides these two forenamed adversaries, A third enemy.
an high estat or calling has yet another enemy no less dangerous then the
two former, which is, the flattery and dissimulation of Parasites: and surely
there is no man advaunced to any great calling, but shall be attended with such
hypocrites, which are rather followers of his fortunes, then of himself; and
are always ready to applaude even his vvorst actions, as honorable and
virtuous: whereby they blindefolde him, and in the end drown him in the deep
and dangerous pit of misbeliefe: neither will such soothing fellows give him
any encouragement to undertake any virtuous action or laudable exercise. For
they hold that no policy, since they find it best to follow him in his own
humors, which they take to be the only way to come by his love and favor:
so that by these means great states, and men of high place and calling are
soonest corrupted in their conditions: and as, when they do amiss, few men
dare tell them their faults; so their flatterers will be ready to make their
faults seem no faults unto them: whereby such followers make them worse then
of themselves they would be.

Now to vvithstand these strong assaults, and to save thy self from such
dangerous invasions of three so mighty impediments to the knowledge of thy
self in the state of thy calling, as are Envy, Pride, and Flattery; use these
weapons to defend thee: against Envy, use Virtue; against Pride and Ambition,
use humility; and against Dissimulation, use Discretion, to make difference
between faithful and flattering followers, and this may be a mark for any
generous mind, among such as follow him. The faithful and such as desire his
honor and credit, will not spare to tell him his faults; but the flatterer
will footh him in all his doings. This if thou carry in thy remembrance, and
put in practice, then have thou well considered who thou art in, thy estate and
calling.

THE THIRD SECTION OF the first part of the Consideration of humane Condition.
CHAP. 1. The Consideration of thy self what manner of man thou art, first as
touching thy learning.
THe third and last point of Consideration concerning the knowledge of thy
self is, what manner of man thou art. For as the second point of
Consideration (which is, who thou art) does appertain to the knowledge of of
the body, with the ornaments that do belong to the outward estate thereof: so
this last point of Consideration (which is, what manner of man thou art) does
chiefly contain the true understanding of those things, which do adorn the
inward estate of the mind. To attain to the true knowledge whereof, it
behooves to have the helps of the intellectual, moral, and theological
virtues. Lib. 6. Eth. ca 3.
The intellectual virtues are said of Aristotle to be five viz. Art,
Prudence, Science, Sapience, and Intelligence. Intelligence is defined to be
the habit of principles; Science is said to be the habit of conclusions, lib
6 Ethic. Eth. ca. 6. and cap. 3.
by which we learn to distinguish truth from falsehood. By these, to gither
with Art, Prudence, and Sapience (which are also parts of the intellectual
habit, of some called the intellectual virtue) we learn those grounds that
do lead us to the more perfect rules of pacifying our inordinate passions.
For it is said that knowledge and learning do mollify men's manners. Ovid.
lib. 2. de Pont.
But thou ought chiefly to know what kind of Art, and what knowledge it
is, that can amend the mind of man, and then to follow the same. For there are
some Arts, that when they be learned with great labor, yet are more hurtful
the^ profitable: and there are some Arts (as they are oftentimes used)
unnecessary, and some altogether unlawful. Logic and Rhetoric, when he
that has some insight in them; has not yet Reason how to use them: so that he
makes himself like to the prattling and prating Pie, Ovid. de Ph.
whereof the Poet speaks thus: Picaloquax varias modulatur gutture voces
Scurrils strepitu quic quid et audit, ait.
which is, The prattling Pie faines every kind of voice,


And what she hears, she speaks with chattering noise. These Arts are not in
themselves unnecessary, although for want of the right use of them, they may be
made unnecessary and unprofitable. as Music and the like: yet I know that the
lovers and practisers thereof, will frame reasons to prove the profitte and
necessity of them. Astrology which some call Medicinary, wherein they would
seem to set down the certain times of death, and life; of barennesse, and
plenty; of war, and peace; of marriages, of pestilence, and the like future
accidents. This Art in it self, is both unnecessary, unprofitable, unlawful,
and uncertain. For, as Cornelius Agrippa (one that was much given to that
study in his youth, Corn. de van scien.
and very excellently well seen therein) says: Astrology has nothing in it
else but mere trifles, Poets fables, much and monstrous forgery and faining,
wherewith they have imagined that the heaven is replenished. Hier de not.
Of whom another learned man says, that these be they, which lift themselves
up against the knowledge of all that is done, promising unto themselves a
fained knowledge, and referring the event of all things unto the rising,
falling, and course of the stars, following therein their Mathematical
errors. But we will leave these, as unlawful and altogether uncertain; and
not worthy to be reckoned or esteemed of as an Art. Lib. 6. Cap 4.
Aristotle does define an Art to be a habit of doing with true reason. That
therefore which has no truth, nor true principles or certain grounds, can be
no Art. But, to come unto those Arts which are both profitable and necessary,
we may do well to consider first, that Arts are either liberal, or
illiberall and Manuary. The liberal are said to be the Seven sciences; and
they may be called liberal, because they require a liberal mind to be
bestowed on them, that is free from other cares, free from passions, free from
sordiditie. The other Arts, which are Manuary, although they do not so much
adorn the mind of man, yet are they necessary for the use of man, and they
sustain his necessities, keeping him from idleness, which is the cancker of the
mind: yet omitting those Manuarie Arts, as matters that do not of themselves
much beautify the mind, we will say somewhat concerning the knowledge of
the other Arts, which are called the liberal Sciences, whereby it shall be
seen what manner of men they are, that attain to the knowledge of them, and
to be perfect Artistes. And first, as touching the obtaining of those Sciences;
it has been a question between Philosophers of former ages, whither
knowledge, virtue, Whither virtue and knowledge be in us by Nature.?
and science were in us by nature, or that it came unto us by study and
exercise: wherein Platoes opinion was disallowed and rejected of Aristotle and
others. For Plato his position was this, that the soul and mind of man was at
his first creation adorned and invested with all science, virtue, and
knowledge, but that by reason of the infirmities of the body, it is (as he
said) dulled and darkened with forgetfulness and ignorance: so that whatsoever
man learneth afterward it is but (as it were) a calling to remembrance,
Scientia (ait Plato) est reminiscentia: scire est reminisci.
and a renewing or restoring of that, which first he knew. But Aristotle, that
famous Philosopher, is an adversary to this opinion. For he does not
acknowledge any such absolute excellency in nature: but confesses that there
are in man by nature certain seeds and sparkles of knowledge. And we are
said to know, Arist lib. 2. Ethic. cap. 1.
and to have science by Definition, and Demonstration. The Definition, and
Demonstration we do gather from Particulars. Omnis doctrina et om.
For out of Individualls we gather the Definition of the Special: and out of
the Specialls, we gather the definition of the General. But these Definitions
and principles of demonstration are not found or settled in the first frame and
foundation of Naturc. For by help of the Phantasy, which does stir up and
offer unto the mind the Ideas or imagination of things, the Mind does gather
the essence and qualities of things, which was not at the first perceived or
planted therein. It may be conceived that Plato imagined that there should be
absolute knowledge in man by nature, by reason that he read (as some have
supposed) the first book of Moses, vz. Genesis, whereof his works do savor
somewhat: and finding therein that man at the first was created absolutely
good, Genes. Cap. 1
according to the likeness of him that created him, he was moved to imagine and
think (as you have heard) that he knew althings at the first, never
remembering, or little regarding to examine further of his fall: and how Man,
desiring to know good and evil (whereof he was ignorant, and therefore knew
not all things) did thereby loose that light of knowledge, which was originally
ingraffed in him; whereby also all his posterity were and are plunged in the
sea of ignorance, as a punishment paid on them, and on us all for our first
Parents disobedience. And although that Aristotle seems to refute Platoes
reason of man's perfect knowledge by Nature, yet he himself affirms that all
Doctrine and all discipline proceeds out of a praeexestent knowledge. Arist.
Lib. 1. Poster. Cap. 1
Whereby he might seem in some sort to consent with Platoes conclusion. Yet
this is to be understood that, that knowledge, which we have is praeeistent,
yet not in us, but in them, from whom we do receive it. Which is made
plain by an other plaice in the same Author, where he says: that, that
doctrine and science proceeds from man unto man according to the comparison
which the teacher has unto him that is taught: Idem. lib. 1. Poetriae.
this is a proof that it comes not by Nature, but by instruction.

But now to to conclude this point of Consideration of knowledge and learning,
we ought to know that the beginning and ending of true knowledge and learning
is to know our selves. Therefore by how much more thy knowledge and learning
does abound, by so much more ought thy humility to exceed: least, forgetting
thy self, thy knowledge and thy learning do little benefit thee. Which rules
if thou always remember, then have thou considered thy self aright what
manner of man thou art touching thy knowledge and learning.

The consideration of thy self what manner of man thou art in thy wisdom.
CHAP. 2.
HAVING considered thy self. What manner of man thou art concerning thy
knowledge in learning, as in Arts and sciences: it comes next in course that
thou should consider what manner of man thou art in thy wisdom (for
Wisdom is said also to be one of the intellectual Habites) and this by some
is divided into two parts, that is; into prudence and sapience. Prudence (as
they affirm) is the knowledge of humane affairs only; Aug lib. de Trin.
Cicer. lib. 4. Tusc.
but Sapience pertains to the knowledge of things both divine and humane:
which is the cause that we imitate divine things, and all humane inferior
matters are lead by the force thereof. Therefore if some men esteem Prudence
(which is commonly called Policy) to be the chiefest part of Wisdom: yet
how short this Prudence or humane policy is of that true wisdom, which
contains the knowledge of things divine and humane, we may measure it in
this, that by how much the heavens are higher then the earth; by so much the
knowledge of heavenly things is more worthy, and more excellent then the
knowledge of humane affairs and earthly things. Plut. lib. de morals vertute.
Prudence also is imperfect and uncertain being (as a wise Philosopher
affirms) many times drowned in things full of errors and of turbulency, and
it is constrained to be coupled with things casual, to use Consultation in
matters doubtefull, which being done, it must use the help of things
unreasonable for assistaunce. As touching the parts of Prudence, which are
reakoned to be Reason, Understanding, Circumspection and the like, as they are
good helps to furnish and set forth the praise of Prudence; so are they but
seldom seen to some and concur altogether in one: or if any one does
attain to that excellency of Prudence, so as he do possess all the parts
thereof, yet does it serve but to set before him heaps of cares, and
Labyrinthes of difficulties: so that the works of Prudence and humane Policy
may very well be compared to the Spyder, who takes great pains, and uses
great art (in her kind) to vveaue her web, which when it is finished, does
serve to no other use, but to catch some few little fearful flies: as for the
great flies they either go by the weak web, or through it without any
danger at all: and many times after all the pains taken therein, either the
violence of winds, or of some other foul weather on the soddaine does deface
and destroy that well-wrought web. So falls it out full often with the
workma^ship of humane Policy. For when a man by Prudence and humane Policy
has fashioned some cunning, fine, or artificial web (fair to the outward
appearance of the world) and that withal the devises, that a curious and a
painful conceit can frame; yet (in a manner) it is but as if it were a
work to catch flies in the air, or (in deed) fools with vain allurementes
upon the land: as for the greater flies, which are as strong and cunning as
the Spider her self, they will catch the Spider as sone, or rather, then the
Spider shall intercept or entangle them. Admit thou (oh worldly Politic
man, whosoever thou art) that thou have wouen thy web with the threede of
Prudence very strongly, procuring thy self great patrimonies, honorable
alliance, preferments many, and high advancements: yet perchance on the
sudden, and when thou think least of it, some sudden storms of ill
fortunes will fall upon thee, and so tumble thee in thy well-wrought web of
Prudence and Policy, that it will be all to rent and torn in pieces: or what
thou dreamest least of, the last Conqueror Death, he comes, and (as an
unplacable enemy) breaks in pieces thy whole web so prude^tly wrought and so
politiquely finished to thine own content, to the great joy of thy friends,
and to the wonder and admiration of most men. But least we should be thought to
set aside all estimation, and to make no accoumpt of Prudence, or humane
Policy, which in worldly matters carries so great a stroke amongst men, it
were not amiss to examine the parts of Prudence and to estimate thereby the
value thereof: and they are reakoned by some to be, Reason, Circumspection,
Counsel, and the like. Macrob. in Com. somn. Scip.
Now Reason as it is a part of Prudence (for Reason sometimes is taken for the
principal faculty of the soul and so it is the subject of Prudence and other
Intellectual Virtues) is the discourse of the understanding by which the
universal principles of things that may be done, are applied unto particular
things which are to be done, though diverse and uncertain. And so Reason and
Understanding are not distinguished as two diverse powers, but as two diverse
acts of the same power. For, to reason, is to proceed from one understanding
unto another, yet every kind of Reasoning is not that part of Prudence, which
we speak of in this place, because, if we take Reasoning largely in that
sense, as it is a proceeding from principles unto conclusions, as in
Syllogismes, and in the Art of arguing either Rhetorically, or Logically; this
is rather to be reackoned as an Art of Reasoning, then Reason it self. For if
Reason did consist in speaking eloquently, or in disputing subtly, then the
idle Rhetoricia^, and the subtle Sophyst should be most possessed, and best
endued with Reason; and consequently, should enjoy chiefly that part of
Prudence. Isidorus says, that Discretion is the provident fore-seer in judging
the causes of things, Isidor. in Sin
and the reason of moderating men's minds: according to which application
Reason is applied or defined by him to be, the order of doing things proceeding
from their cause, as, what, in what place, and, how thou should do, speak,
and understand.

Next unto Reason, Tho Agu. Sec. 2.
Circumspection claims a place in the effects and operation of Prudence:
which is defined to be the attention of circumstances in moral matters: and
if it be an attention of circumstances, then it must consider what does belong
unto place, person, and time: and not so much to follow the time in all
things. For that were irreligious, although some Politicians prescribe that as
a good rule, and very requisite to be observed of prudent men: but to yield
unto necessity is a rule, which both Reason and Circumspection does teach us,
because we are not thereby constrained to forsake the bounds and law of
honesty. In this, Conjecture comes in as an harbinger, to lodge the
Circumstances of our Circumspection, and to prepare the way to Election, as
what, when, and how, things ought to be done: neither may there be too much
Circumspection used (for that it oftentimes turns to jealousy, or suspicion
without cause) and as the Comoedian concludes: Plaus. in Cap.
he, that is most circumspect, least he be deceived, is scarce circumspect
mough, when he is most circumspect, and this provident man, when he is most
careful, is most commonly caught. After Circumspection comes Counsel,
bringing with it the Conclusion of Prudence. For after Counsel there is
nothing to be performed but the execution thereof, which is the end and event
of things. Cic. lib. 1. Rhet. Jdem lib. 2.
This Counsel is called the inquisitiue appetite of doing things thought upon
with Reason: and the same author says, that it is the subtle foreseeing of
the mind in causes to be examined or governed: to the attaining whereof Seneca
gives singular precepts, Senecatract. de virtute.
saying; if thou desire to be prudent, intend and extend thy foresight to
future things, and ponder what may come to pass: let those things that must
needs be done of thee, be (as it were) before thee always and in thy sight,
For he that is wise, says not, I thought this could not be; he doubts not
what shall happen, but expects and looks for it; he does not suspect it,
but he does look and provide to prevent it: seek therefore (says he) if thou will prove wise in deed, the cause of every thing, and having found the
beginning, consider and bethink with thy self what may be the end thereof.
These precepts that concern Counsel (though they are excellent) yet
notwithstanding are easier to be given, then to be followed or put in practice
and accomplished: this is the substance of all difficult matters and such as
have need of Consultation; wherein we find by common experience that every
man can more readily, and with words more liberally advise another man what he
should do, then if the case did concern himself. For anxiety and doubt of
doing that, which a man may damage himself by, does diverse times so distract
his senses between fear and forethinking, that his judgment thereby is much
and mightily darkened. In Counsel therefore, whether it be for a man his own
self, or for his friend a due Deliberation of any thing in doubt is always
requisite. For, as Seneca says, there are two things, Sen. in Proverb.
which are contrary and adverse to good Counsel, that is festination, or
overmuch haste; and Anger, or choler. And the same author advises every man
to deliberate long of that thing, which he must do and perform, though it were
but once.

If thou will understand, what manner of man thou art in owing and possessing
of Prudence or worldly Policy, or whither thou be happy or unhappy in having
thereof, let this be unto thee as a certain rule, that it is, as all other
worldly blessings are unto thee. Gold is good, if it be turned to good uses:
yea it is also evil, and makes thee evil to, if thou do not use it well. Such
is the effect of Prudence or humane Policy: it works also according as thou
do use it. For as Seneca says, if a prudent man exceed his bounds, Sen.
lib. de benef.
he shows himself to be a subtle searcher of things hidden; a finder and
a follovver of al faults, evil, full of pride, crafty, an enemy to innocence,
a commender of crimes, and in conclusion, accounted of by all men as of a lewd
person, ungodly, and very wicked. And this is true, that men, which are by
nature politic and well practiced, or of great experience in vvorldly
matters, if they follovv not a right course, apply their hearts and vvittes to
that which is good, keeping themselves within the compass of honesty and a
good Conscience, they are of all people most pernicious and most dangerous to
converse, or to be dealt vvithall.

CHAP. 3. The Consideration of thy self, what manner of man thou art touching
the perturbations of the mind.
THe Mind of man may be compared unto a compass or a card, by which the
seamen do direct their course. Which if it be truly drawn, and the points
thereof perfectly observed; then the passengers most commonly do come safe and
quietly unto the haven and harbor, where they would be, but if the Pilote do
not place his compass aright, and perfectly observe the points thereof, then
usually the ship, wherein he saileth, is driven out of the right course, and
happily runs against the rocks. Such is man's estate in this miserable
world, which is the sea, wherein he saileth: his mind is his compass, and if
that be not uprightly placed and directed by the points of Reason, then the
compass serves to no use, but he is carried a wrong way with the violent
storms of passions and perturbations of the mind against the rocks of
miseries and many misfortunes in this world. Seeing the^ that a quiet, a
settled, and a contented mind is the only mean and compass to carry us from
the crosses and calamities of this world, and to convay us unto the harbor and
haven of happiness: seeing also that the Perturbations of the Mind do much
hinder the true course of tranquillity and of felicity in this life: It were
not amisle to examine the entra^ces and passages by which these Perturbations
do overwhelme the mind of man, which being found out, it will be the more easy
to avoid the inconveniences and dangerous effects thereof.

Diverse and very doubtful have bin the opinions of ancient Philosophers
concerning the Perturbations of the mind, as what they should be, and from
whence they should proceed? whether they were only active or passive
qualities, or else mixed of both? what the number of them should be? Whether al
kinds of perturbations were to be rejected? with diverse other such doubts,
wherein they did much dister. And because it does very much concern the
knowledge of man's self what manner of man he is, to be informed touching the
perturbations of the mind, we will say somewhat therein.

Zeno, being the principal of of the Stoicke Philosophers does define. Cicero
lib. 4. Tuscu. quest
Perturbation (as Cicero alleges) to be an averse commotion of the mind
contrary to Reason. This definition some others have seemed to dislike. For
they say that every kind of Perturbation is not altogether averse and contrary
unto Reason, although most kinds of Perturbations be void of Reason. Which
Aristotle affirms, when he says that A virtue is conversant about pleasure
and grief. Arist. lib. 2. Ethic cap. 3.
Also Epicurus alleges that the chief felicity of man consists in
pleasure, wherein he is misconceiued of many; for he places this pleasure
wholly in virtue and virtuous actions, and not in the pleasures of the body, as
diverse do untruly understand him. Neither do the strict rulers of Theology
absolutely take away all kinds of Perturbations from the mind of man, for as
Saint Augustine says, August. de Civita. Dei.
the citizens of the holy and heavenly city do fear, desire, grieve, and
rejoice, and yet because their love is right, they have also their affections
upright.

Likewise the heroical virtues as fortitude and magnanimity have some of the
Perturbatio^s of the mind, as their instruments for the objects of them: as
honor, glory, and victory are never obtained or attempted but through the
prosecutio^ of some of those Perturbations. But least our meaning might be
mistaken, and that some should suppose that we go about to allow all the
Perturbations. of the mind as either necessary or tolerable, we will
distinguish of Perturbations, and consider of their course either in respect of
the subject, in which they are, or the obiectes, about which they are
co^versant, and the end, to which they tend. The subjects, in which they are,
are of two sorts: Creatures wanting Reason, as beasts, which by natural
instinct do fear that which may be hurtful unto their kind, and they desire
that, which is for the preservation of their kind. And in them these
Perturbatio^s are not against Reason, although the subjects, in which these
Perturbations are, be void of Reason. But the Stoickes affirm that there are
no Perturbations in beasts, yet the Peripatetickes and the Academickes allege
the contrary, that beasts have by Nature a proanes to pleasure and grief, to
love and hatred, following and forsaking: all which are properly called
Perturbations. The next subject, in which these Perturbations are, may be Man
himself, and the Perturbations, wherewith he is possessed, may be either
tolerable; or intolerable, according to the objects, about which, and the
end, to which they are directed. And there is some kind of Perturbations in
man not only void of Reason, but contrary to Reason. As when a man naturally
endued with Reason, does usually yield unto unreasonable actions, following his
Concupiscible Appetite in lust, or the like vain Pleasures; or else the
Irascible Appetite in anger, vengeance and the like, being proane through the
instigation of these Perturbations to do that, which tends unto the
destruction of his own kind: and these Perturbations are not only contrary
to Reason, but even altogether raised and blotted out of Reasons books. There
is an other kind of Perturbation in man (as it may in some sort so be called)
which yet works with, and by Reason, as that Delight, and Joy, which we take
in virtue, and virtuous actions; and that Displeasure and Offense, which we
conceive at the^ that do vitiously behave themselves. In this here is Delight,
and Displeasure, which are reackoned as Perturbations, and yet the grounds of
them proceed from Reason, and work with Reason, or at the least, not contrary
to Reason.

Now next for the number of the Perturbations, they have bin always left
uncertain, Plato. de Repub. li. 9.
and not agreed upon. For Plato would have them to be innumerable, when as he
does call the Concupiscible Appetite, a beast of many heads. For it contains
desire, delight, love, Cicero. lib. 4. Tuscul.
pleasure, and others almost infinite. Cicero according to the opinion of the
Stoickes affirms that there are four first heads of the Perturbations,
under which the rest are placed, as grief, fear, joy, and lusts, He says in
that place that there are contained under grief, Envy, Emulation,
Oblectatio^, Bewailing, Carefulnes, Affliction, Desperation and such like.
Under fear he puts Sloth, Shame, Terror, Astonishment, and the like. Under
pleasure he places Delectation, Desire, and many other, so that he sets
down no certain number of the Perturbations, although he allows, as it were
certain roots, out of which the rest should spring But yet most do consent,
that there are two foundations or fountains, from whence the rest of the
Perturbations do proceed; that is, the Concupiscible and the Irascible
Appetites: the Perturbations following the Concupiscible Appetite, are love,
hatred, desire, delectation, and sorrow: so likewise the Perturbatio^s which
appertain to the Irascible Appetite, are hope, desperation, fear, boldness,
disdain, presumption, and the like.

What manner of man thou art therein, know that there is no man living
absolutely free and clear from all these Perturbations of the Mind, and
although some men are more subject unto them then others are, yet there is not
any, that is not molested with some of them. Notwithstanding, it is more usual
to men of some age and estate to be incombred with some particular
Perturbations, then to others. Also they are more incident to one sex then to
an other. Likewise they come to some by Nature, and to other some by Accident.
As for exampleahe Concupiscible Appetire with his several branches is more
common, and yet not so continual as is the Irascible. For to love, to hate, to
desire, to delight, to dislike, are things common to al men, though not at all
times. And they come more by Accident the^ by Nature: And yet sometimes by both.
But the Irascible Appetite with his particular parts does much possess many
men by Nature; as some are from their cradell fearful: some are by Nature
angry and washpish; some are always impacient: some are never but
presumptuous and the like. As touching the Perturbations proceeding from the
Irascible Appetite, some have affirmed that they come of hot blood, stirred up
about the heart, which does kindle and inflame the spirits with an
immagination of anger and offense. And (as one says) there are five degrees,
by the which men are stirred up to wrath and anger; the first is, Man against
himself: the second is man against man: the third is against his superior
power, as God: the fourth is against his inferiors, as beasts and other
creatures without reason: the fifte is against things without life. madness,
then anger. For it is like his condition, that throws stones into the air
upright, and stands still, until they fall upon his own head.

Somewhat should be said as concerning the cause and course of the
Concupiscible Appetite, but because we desire to avoid tediousnes, and that
the shortness of time allows no large discourse, I will conclude with some
short precept for the avoiding of these two perilous Appetites of the mind;
which are the Irascible and the Concupiscible Appetite. Therefore if thou will
shun those two so cruel adversaries unto a co^te^ted mind, as are the
Concupiscible and Irascible Appetite, thou must first learn what manner of man
thou art in suffering or in suppressing of these Appetites of the mind; thou
must call unto thy remembrance and knowledge the use of Intellectual, Moral and
Theological Virtues.

Next in place (but before in operation and effect) are the Moral virtues,
which do incline and invite men to do things honest and lavvful: these do help
much to quiet the Perturbations of the mind and to make a man know what
manner of man he is. But especially the sour Moral virtues, which are called
Cardinal virtues, do much further the conquering of those Passions: as
Temperance, Prudence, Fortitude and Justice. They are called Cardinal virtues,
a Cardine, signifying the hindge of a door: because as on the hindge the gate
is turned, shut and opened; so the heart of man, which is the hindge of the
door in doing all good actions, is opened to things honest, and shut against
things dishonest by force of these virtues. And although those four, called the
Cardinal virtues, be of greatest force, yet all the rest do serve in some sort
to govern the Perturbations of the Mind, and to make a man know what manner
of man he is: As Magnificence, Magnanimity, Liberality, Modesty, Mansuetude,
Vrbanitie, Affability. Whereof some do respect the body with the Mind, some
do direct the Mind most.

Those, which require the bodies assistaunce (although they have wholly the
minds direction) are Fortitude and Magnanimity: some belong unto the
government of the senses as Te^pera^ce unto the two senses of Touching and
Tasting. But Continency appertains to the moderating of all the senses. Some
others do serve for direction of manners, as Affability in words or speech;
Vrbanitie or civility in deeds. So by the help of those Moral virtues thou
may learn to master the Perturbations of the Mind appertaining either to
the Co^cupiscible or srascible Appetite. For by Fortitude thou may overcome
Fear: by Mansuetude thou may conquer Impatience, anger, and such like; by
Temperance and Continency thou may subdue Immoderate desires, as lust and
such other like passions and Perturbations of the mind, where with men are
much overwhelmed. Yet because Virtue is said to be a mediocrity betwixt two
vices having the excess on the one side, Arist. lib. 2. Lib.
and the defect on the other; how hard then it is always to keep the Mean
and not to fall on either side, every man may easily see and know. For as we
see travelers, who have a long journey to make, sometimes do meet with many
ways in one place, some turning on the right hand, some on the left, and
others going outright: yet of al these ways there is but one, which is the
right way, and that often seems to be the unlikeliest way, when that, which
leads to his iournies end, is not so beaten a way, nor so much bending (as
the passenger persuaded himfelse) unto his right course: so fares it with them
that travel in the tedious journey of this life: the world is our high way,
which has in it many by-pathes, and the poor passingers, that travel
therein, are diverse times distracted, and in much doubt for the choice of their
way. For the fairest way in appearaunce is not always (nay it is seldom) the
right way: Xenoph. lib. 1. Paed. Cyr.
and the wrong ways are much more beaten and much more easy to find then the
true way. For if a man will follow the foot steps of others example, he shall
find a broad-beaten path, which is commonly the vvorst, and the vvrong way.
It is not the mediocrity, but it is the way that leads unto the excess, or
to the defect. Therefore since it is so hard a matter to find the right way in
conquering the Perturbations of the mind, it behooves every man (if he will
be master over his own Affections) to call unto his aid (besides the
Intellectual and Moral virtues before named) the Theological virtues, which
are Faith, Charity, Piety, Patience, and the like: by the power whereof (and
the permission and assistance of him that grants them) he may well manage his
own mind, and all the Perturbations thereof. But because the consideration
hereof appertains to the knowledge of those things, that are above, it must
be lest unto that last point of Consideration.

In the mean time thou may (by that little which has bin here laid down)
learn somewhat concerning the knowledge of thy self (which is the first of
the four principal points of Consideration) and in this thou have seen
somewhat, what, who, and what manner of man thou art.

FINIS.

