AN EXPOSITION OF THE SYMBOL OR CREED OF THE APOSTLES, ACCORDING TO THE TENOVR
OF the Scriptures, and the consent of Orthodoxe Fathers of the Church: By
William Perkins.

They are good Catholics, which are of sound faith and good life.

August. lib. quaest. in Matthew. cap. 11. Printed by John Legatt Printer to the
University of Cambridge. 1595. And are to be sold at the sign of the Sun
in Paul's Churchyard in London.

TO THE RIGHT honorable, Edward Lord Russell, Earl of Bedford. Grace, and
peace, etc.
RIght Honorable, excellent is the saying of Paul to Titus, To the pure all
things are pure: Tim 1.15.
but to the impure and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their minds and
consciences are defiled. In which words he determines three questions. The
first, whether things ordained and made by God may become unclean or no? his
answer is, that they may: and his meaning must be conceived with a
distinction. By nature, things ordained of God are not unclean: for Moses in
Genesis says, that God saw all things which he had made, and they were very
good: yet they may become unclean either by law, or by the fault of men. By
law, as when God forbids us the things which in themselves are good; without
whose commandment, they are as pure as things not forbidden. Thus for the
time of the old Testament God forbad the Jews the use of certain creatures;
not because they were indeed worse then the rest, but because it was his
pleasure upon special cause to restrain them, that he might put a difference
between his own people and the rest of the world, that he might exercise
their obedience, and advertise them of the inward impuritie of mind. Now this
legal impuritie was abolished at the ascension of Christ. By the fault of men
things are unclean when they are abused, and not applied to the ends for which
they were ordained. The second question is; to whom things ordained of God are
pure? he answers, to the pure: that is, to them whose persons stand justified
and sanctified before God in Christ in whom they believe: Act. 15.10. 1. Tim.
4.3.
who also do use Gods blessings in holy manner to his glory and the good of
men. The third question is, who they are to whom all things are unclean? his
answer is, to the unclean: by whom he understands all such I. whose persons
displease God, because they do not indeed believe in Christ: II. who use not
the gifts of God in holy manner, sanctifying them by the word and prayer: III.
who abuse them to badde ends, as to riot, pride, and oppression of men, etc.
Now that to such, the use of all the creatures of God is unclean, it is
manifest: because all their actions are sins, in that they are not done of
faith: and a man's person must first please God in Christ, Romans 14.23.
before his action or work done can please him. Again they use the blessings
and creatures of God with evil conscience, because so long as they are forth
of Christ, they are but usurpers thereof before God. For in the fall of the
first Adam we lost the title and interest to all good things: and though God
permit the use of many of them to wicked men; yet is not the former title
recovered but in Christ the second Adam, in whom we are advanced to a better
estate then we had by creation.

Hence it follows necessarily; that, to omit all other things, Nobility
though it be a blessing and ordinance of God in it self, is but an unclean
thing, if the inioyers thereof be not truly ingrafted into Christ, and made
bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. The blood unstained before men, is
stained blood before God by the fall of Ada^, if it be not restored by the
blood of Christ the lamb of God. And hence it follows again, that Nobility
must not dwell solitary, but combine her self in perpetual fellowship with
hearty love and sincere obedience of pure and sound religion; without the
which all pleasant pastimes, all sumptuousnes of building, all bravery in
apparel, all glistering in gold, all delicate fare, all delightful music,
all reverence done with cap and knee, all earthly pleasures and delights that
heart can wish, are but as a vanishing shadow, or like the mirth that begins in
laughing and ends in woe. A happy thing were it, if this consideration might
take place in the hearts of all noble men: it would make them honor God that
they might be honored of God with everlasting honor: 1. Sam. 2.22, 26. Psalm.
2.12.
and it would make them kiss the son least he be angry, and they perish in
the way.

I speak not this, as though I doubted of your Lordships care in this very
point: but mine only meaning is to put you in mind, that as you have begun to
clean unto Christ with full purpose of heart; so you would continue to do it
still, and do it more: and withal to manifest the same to the whole world, by
honoring Christ with your own honor, Prove. 3.9, 10.
and by resembling him specially in one thing, in that as he grew in stature
and years, Luke 2.25.
he also grew in grace and favor with God and men. And for this very cause
(without any consideration of earthly respects) I further present unto you an
Exposition of an other part of the Catechism, namely the Symbol or Creed of
the Apostles: which is indeed the very pith and substance of Christian
religion, taught by the Apostles, embraced by the ancient fathers, sealed by
the blood of Martyrs, used by Socrat. hist. ec^. l. 5. c. 10.
Theodosius the Emperor as a means to end the controversies of his time: and
hereupon it has bin called the August. de Temp. ser. 119.
rule of faith, the Ambr. sermon. 38.
kaie of faith. And furthermore I hope that your Lordship will accept the same
in good part; the rather because you vouchsafed when you were in Cambridge to
be an hearer thereof when it was taught and delivered. Thus craving pardon for
my boldness, I take my leave, commending your L. and yours to the protection
of the Almighty. Ann. 1595. April 2.

Your Lordships to command, William Perkins.

The Contents of the book.
The Creed. page 1. Faith. 3. God. 19 The three persons. 25 The Father. 31
Gods omnipotency. 43 The Creation. 52. and 58 Gods counsel. 54 The creation
of heaven. 68 The creation of Angels. 73 The creation of man. 81 Gods
providence. 91 Adams fall. 106 The covenant of grace. 118 The title Jesus. 122
The title Christ. 129 The title Son. 136 The title Lord. 145 The Incarnation
of Christ. 148 Christ's humiliation. 174 Christ's passion. 176 Christ's
arraignment. 182 Christ's execution. 226 Christ's Sacrifice. 260 Christ's
triumph. 270 Christ's burial. 287 The descension of Christ. 297 Christ's
exaltation. 305 Christ's Resurrection. 307 Christ's ascension. 333 Christ's
sitting at the right hand, etc. 351, 363 Christ's intercession. 355 Christ's
kingdom. 367 The last judgment. 372 Of the holy Ghost. 397 The Church. 420
Predestination. 423 The mystical union. 477 The communion of Saints. 506 The
forgiveness of sins. 516 The resurrection of the body. 521 Life
everlasting. 532
THE RESOLVTION OF THE CREED.
(...): One, of the Actions of faith, which are To believe in God: which has
three parts: I. To believe God as he has revealed himself in his word. II.
To acknowledge him in particular to be my God. III. To put my confidence in him.
To believe a thing: and this action has two parts: I. To acknowledge the
thing. II. To apply the thing to my self; as to believe the Church is to
acknowledge the Church, and that I am a member of it.

The second the Object, which is God, distinguished into 3. person. I. The
first is described by his I. Name, Father. II. Attribute, Almighty. III.
Work, Creator of heaven and earth.
II. The second is described by his I. Titles, which are four. I. Jesus. II.
Christ. III. His Son. IIII. Our Lord.
II. Incarnation, and it has 2. parts: The conception, where consider the
parts The personn all union. The sanctification of that mass or lump whereof
the body of Christ was framed.
The cause efficient, the H^gh^st.
The birth, where is mentioned the mother of Christ, described by her Name;
Mary. Quality; a virgin.

III. Estate afterward of Humiliation set down Generally in these words,
Suffered under, etc. where is noted the time of his suffering when P. Pilat was
president of Jury. By parts, which are 4. I. His crucifying. II. His death.
III. His burial. IIII. His descending into hell.

Exaltation having 3. parts. I. His resurrection. II. His ascension. III. His
sitting at his fathers right hand: and it is set forth by the Place, Heaven.
The effect, his coming to judgment.



III. The third person described by his name, Holy Ghost, enfolding his office.
The Church, described by his Qualities, Holy. Catholic.
Prerogatives which are 4. I. Communion of saints. II. Forgiveness of sins.
III. Resurection of the body. IV. Life everlasting.





AN EXPOSITION OF THE CREED.
I believe in God, etc.

NO man justly can be offended at this, that I begin to treat of the doctrine
of faith without a text; though some be of mind, that in Catechizing the
minister is to proceed as in the ordinary course of preaching, only by
handling a set portion of scripture: and therefore that the handling of the
Creed being no scripture, is not convenient. Indeed I grant, that other course
to be commendable: yet I doubt not, but in Catechizing the minister has his
liberty to follow or not to follow a certain text of scripture, as we do in
the usual course of preaching. My reason is taken from the practice of the
Primitive Church; whose Catechism (as the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews shows) was contained in six principles or grounds of religion,
which were not taken out of any set text in the old Testament: but rather was
a form of teaching gathered out of the most clear places thereof. Hence I
reason thus: Heb. 6.1, 2, 3.
That which in this point was the use and manner of the Primitive Church, is
lawful to be used of us now: but in the Primitive Church it was the manner to
Catechize without handling any set text of scripture: and therefore the
ministers of the Gospel at this time may with like liberty do the same: so
be it they do confirm the doctrine which they teach with places of scripture
afterward.

Now to come to the Creed, let us begin with the name or title thereof. That
which in English we call the Apostles Creed, in other tongues is called
Symbolum, that is, a shot or a badge. It is called a shot, because as in a
feast or banquet every man pays his part: which being all gathered, the whole
(which we call the shot) amounts: and so out of the several writings of the
Apostles arises this Creed or brief confession of faith. It is a badge,
because as a soldier in the field by his badge and livery is known of what
band he is, and to what captain he does belong: eue^ so by this belief a
Christian man may be distinguished and known from all Jews, Turks, Atheists,
and all false professors: and for this cause it is called a badge.

Again it is called the Creed of the Apostles, not because they were the
penners of it, conferring to it besides the matter Ruffin. in expos. Symb. and
Hierony. ad Pam.
the very style and frame of words, as we have them now set down. Reason. I.
there are in this Creed certain words and phrases which are not to be found in
the writings of the Apostles, and namely these: He descended into hell; the
Catholic Church. The latter whereof no doubt Pacianus epist. 1. ad Sympro.
first began to be in use, when after the Apostles days the Church was
dispersed into all quarters of the earth. II. Secondly if both matter and
words had been from the Apostles, why is not the Creed Canonical scripture,
as well as any other of their writings? III. The Apostles had a summarie
collection of the points of Christian religion which they taught, and also
delivered to others to teach by; consisting of two heads, faith and love: as
may appear by Paul's exhortation to Timothy, 2. Tim. 1.13.
wishing him to keep the pattern of wholesome words: which he had heard of him
in faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus. Now the Creed consists not of two
heads but of one, namely of faith only and not of love also. Wherefore I
rather think, that it is called the Apostles Creed because it does summarily
contain the chief and principal points of religion, handled and propounded
in the doctrine of the Apostles: and because the points of the Creed are
conformable and agreeable to their doctrine and writings.

And thus much of the Title. Now let us hear what the Creed is? It is a sum
of things to be believed concerning God and concerning the Church, gathered
forth of the scriptures. For the opening of this description. First I say, it
is, a sum of things to be believed, or an abridgement. It has been the
practice of teachers both in the new and old Testament to abridge and contract
summarily the religion of their time. This the Prophets used. For when they had
made their Sermons to the people they did abridge them and penned them briefly:
setting them in some open place, that all the people might read the same. So
the Lord bad Habakuk to write the vision which he saw, and to make it plain
upon tables, that he may run that reads it. Hab. 2.2.
And in the new Testament the Apostles did abridge those doctrines, which
otherwise they did handle at large, as may appear in the place of Timothy
before named. 2. Tim. 1.13.
Now the reason why both in the old and new Testament the doctrine of religion
was abridged, is that the understanding of the simple, as also their memory
might be hereby helped, and they better enabled to judge of the truth, and to
discern the same from falsehood. And for this end the Apostles Creed being a
summary collectio^ of things to be believed, was gathered briefly out of the
word of god Aug. sermon. 119. de temp. Cassian. li. 6. de Incarnat. domini.
for the helping of memory and understanding of men. I add that this Creed is
concerning God and the church. For in these two points consists the whole
sum thereof. Lastly, I say, that it is gathered forth of the scripture, to
make a difference between it and other writings, and to show the authority of
it.

There be two kind of writings in which the doctrine of the church is handled,
and they are either divine or Ecclesiastical. Divine, are the books of the
old and new Testament penned either by Prophets or Apostles. And these are not
only the pure word of God, but also the scripture of god, because not only the
matter of them, but the whole disposition thereof with the style and the phrase
was set down by the immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost. And the authority
of these books is divine, that is, absolute and sovereign, and they are of
sufficient credit in and by themselves needing not the ^estimony of any
creature, not subject to the ce^sure either of me^ or angels, binding the
co^scie^ces of all me^ at all times, and being the only fou^datio^ of faith,
and the rule and cano^ of all truth.

Ecclesiastical writings are all other ordinary writings of the church
consenting with scriptures. These may be called the word or truth of God, so
far forth as their matter or substance is consenting with the written word of
God: but they cannot be called the scripture of God because the style and
phrase of them was set down according to the pleasure of man. And therefore
they are in such sort the word of god, as that also they are the word of men.
And their authority in defining of truth and falsehood in matters of religion
is not sovereign, but subordinate to the former: and it does not stand in the
authority and pleasures of men and councels, but in the consent which they have
with the scriptures.

Ecclesiastical writings are either general, particular, or proper. General,
are the Creedes and confessions of the Church dispersed over the whole world,
and among the rest the Creed of the Apostles, made either by the Apostles
themselves, or by their hearers and disciples, apostolical men, delivered to
the Church, and conveyed from hand to hand to our times. Particular writings
are the confessions of particular Churches. Proper writings, are the books and
confessions of private men. Now between these we must make difference. For the
General Creed of the Apostles, (other universal Creeds in this case not
excepted) though it be of less authority then Scripture; yet has it more
authority then the particular and private writings of Churches and men. For it
has been received and approved by universal consent of the Catholic Church
in all ages, and so were never these: in it the meaning and doctrine can not be
changed by the authority of the whole Catholic Church: and if either the
order of the doctrine or the words whereby it is expressed, should upon some
occasion be changed, a particular Church of any cuntry can not do it, without
Catholic consent of the whole Church: yet particular writings and co^fessions
made by some special Churches may be altered in the words and in the points of
doctrine by the same Churches without offense to the Catholic Church. Lastly
it is received as a rule of faith among all churches to try doctrines and
interpretations of scriptures by, not because it is a rule of it self, for
that the scripture is alone; but because it boroweth his authority from
scripture with which it agrees. And this honor no other writings of men can
have.

Here some may demand the number of Creeds. Answ. I say but one Creed, as
there is but one faith: and if it be alleged that we have many Creedes, as
besides this of the Apostles, the Nicene Creed, and Athanasius Creed, etc. I
answer, the several Creedes and confessions of Churches contain not several
faithes and religions, but one and the same; and this called the Apostles Creed
is most ancient, and principal: all the rest are not new Creedes in substance,
but in some points penned more largely for the exposition of it, that men might
better avoid the heresies of their times.

Futther, it may be demanded, in what form this Creed was penned? Answ. In
the form of an answer to a question. The reason is this. In the Primitive
Church, when any man was turned from Gentilisme to the faith of Christ, and was
to be baptized, this Cyril. Catec. 1. Mystag. Tertull. de resurrect. Orige^.
bo^. 5. in Nu^.
question was asked him, What beleeuest thou? then he answered according to the
form of the Creed, I believe in God, etc. And this manner of questioning was
used even from the time of the Apostles. When the Eunuch was converted, by
Philip, he said, What does let me to be baptized? Philip said, If thou do
believe with all thine heart, thou may. Then he answered, Act. ^.38.
I believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God. By this it appears, that
although all men, for the most part, amongst us can say this Creed, yet not
one of a thousand can tell the ancient and first use of it: for commonly at
this day of the simpler sort it is said for a prayer, being indeed no prayer:
and when it is used so, men make it no better then a charm.

Before we come to handle the particular points of the Creed, it is very
requisite that we should make an entrance thereto by describing the nature,
properties, and kinds of faith, the confession and ground whereof is set
forth in the Creed. Faith therefore is a gift of God, whereby we give assent
or credence to Gods word. For there is a necessary relation between faith and
gods word. The common property of faith is noted by the author of the Hebrews,
when he says, Faith is the ground of things hoped for: and, Hebr. 11.1.
the demonstration of things that are not seen. For all this may be
understoode, not only of justifying faith, but also of temporary faith, and
the faith of miracles. Where faith is said to be a ground, the meaning is, that
though there are many things promised by God, which men do not presently enjoy,
but only hope for; because as yet they are not: yet faith does after a sort
give subsisting or being unto them. Secondly it is an evidence or demonstration
etc. that is, by believing a man does make a thing as it were visible, being
otherwise invisible and abse^t.

Faith is of two sorts: either common faith, or the faith of the elect: as Paul
says, he is an Apostle according to the faith of Gods elect: which also is
called faith without hypocrisy. The common faith is that, Tit. 1.5.
which both elect and reprobate have, and it is threefold. I. is historical
faith, which is, when a man does believe the outward letter and history of the
word. It has two parts; knowledge of Gods word, and an assent to the same
knowledge: and it is to be found in the devil and his angels. Iam. 2.19.
So S. James says, the devils believe and tremble. Some will say, what a faith
have they? Answ. Such as thereby they understand both the Law and the Gospel:
besides they give an assent to it to be true: and they do more yet, in that
they tremble and fear. And many a man has not so much. For amongst us, there
is many a one, which has no knowledge of God at all, more then he has learned
by the common talk of the world: as namely, that there is a God, and that he
is merciful, etc. and yet this man will say, that he believes with all his
heart: but without knowledge it can not be that any should truly believe and
therefore he deceives himself. Quest. But whence have the devils historical
faith? were they illuminated by the light of the spirit? Answ. No: but when the
Gospel was preached, they did acknowledge it, and believed it to be true, and
that by virtue of the relics of Gods image, which remained in them since
their fall. And therefore this their faith does not arise from any special
illumination by his spirit, but they attain to it by the light of nature,
which was left in them from the beginning.

The second kind of faith is Temporary faith: so called because it lasts but
for a time and season, and commonly not to the end of a man's life. This kind of
faith is noted unto us in the parable of the seed, that fell in the stony
ground. And there be two differences or kinds of this faith. The first kind of
temporary faith has in it three degrees. The first is, to know the word of God
and particularly the Gospel. The second, to give an assent unto it. The third,
to profess it, but to go no further: and all this may be done without any
love to the word. This faith has one degree more then historical faith.
Examples of it we have in Simon Magus, Acts. 8.13. who is said to believe,
because he held the doctrine of the Apostle to be true* and withal he
professed it: and in the devils also, who in some sort professed, that Christ
was the son of the most highest, and yet looked for no salvation by him,
Mark. 5.7. Act. 19.14. And this is the common faith that abounds in this land.
Men say they believe as the prince believes, and if religion change, they will
change. For by reason of the authority of princes laws, they are made to
learn some little knowledge of the word: they believe it to be good, and they
profess it: and thus for the space of thirty or forty years they will hear
the word preached, and receive the sacraments, and yet be as void of grace as
ever they were at the first day: and the reason is, because men do barely
profess it, without either liking or love of the same. The second kind of
temporary faith has in it five degrees. For by it first a man knows the word.
Secondly, he assenteth unto it. III. he professes it. IIII. he rejoices
inwardly in it. V. he brings forth some kind of fruit: and yet for all this
has no more in him, but a faith that will fail in the end; because he wants
the effectual application of the promise of the gospel, and is without all
manner of sound conversio^. This faith is like corn in the house top, which
grows for a while, but when heat of summer comes, it withers. And this
is also set forth unto us in the parable of the seed, which fell in a stony
ground, Luke 8.13.
which is hasty in springing up: but because of the stones, which will not
suffer it to take deep root, it withers. And this is a very common faith in
the Church of God: by which many rejoice in the preaching of the word, and for
a time bring forth some fruits accordingly with show of great forwardness,
yet afterward shake of religion and all. But (some will say) how can this be a
temporary faith, seeing it has such fruits? Answ. Such a kind of faith is
temporary, because it is grounded on temporary causes which are three. I. A
desire to get knowledge of some strange points of religion. For many a man
does labor for the five former degrees of temporary faith, only because he
desires to get more knowledge in scripture, then other men have. The second
cause is a desire of praise among men, which is of that force that it will make
a man put on a shevve of all the graces, which God bestows on all his
children, though otherwise he want them: and to go very far in religion;
which appears thus. Some can very bitterly weep for the sins of other
men, and yet have neither sorrow nor grief for their own: and the cause
hereof is nothing else but pride. For he that sheddes tears for another man's
sins, should much more weep for his own, if he had grace. Yet thus are
many men disposed even of pride and nothing else. Again, a man for his own
sins will pray very slackly and dully, when he prays privately: and yet
when he is in the company of others will pray very fervently and earnestly.
From whence is this difference? surely often it springs from the pride of
heart and from a desire of praise among men. The third cause of temporary
faith is profit, commodity, the getting of wealth and riches. These make man to
receive religion, and if other religion come, they will receive it asvvell as
this. But such studies not the gospel, because it is the gospel, but because
it brings wealth, peace, and riches with it. And these are the three causes of
temporary faith.

The third kind of faith is the faith of Miracles: when a man grounding
himself on some special promise or revelation from God, does believe, that
some strange and extraordinary thing, which he has desired or foretold,
shall come to pass by the work of God. This must be distinguished from
historical and temporary faith. For Simon Magus had both these kinds of
faith, Acts. 8.19.
but yet wanted this faith of miracles, and therefore would have bought the same
of the Apostles for money. Yet this faith of miracles may be in hypocrites, as
it was in Judas, and at the last judgment it shall be found to have bin in
the wicked and reprobate; which shall say to Christ, Lord, in thy name we have
prophesied, Mat. 7.22. 1. Cor. 13.2.
and cast out devils, and done many great miracles.

And thus much for the three sorts of common faith: Now we must come to the
true faith, which is the faith of the elect. It is thus defined: Faith is a
supernatural gift of God in the mind, apprehending the saving promise with all
the promises that depend on it. First, I say, it is a gift of God, Phil. 1.29.
to confute the blind opinion of our people, that think that the faith whereby
they are to be saved, is bred and borne with the^. I add that it is a gift
supernatural; not only because it is above that corrupt nature in which we
are borne, but also because it is above that pure nature, in which our first
parents were created. For in the state of innocence they wanted this faith,
neither had they then any need of faith in the same God as he is Messiah: but
this faith is a new grace of God added to regeneration after the fall, and first
required in the covenant of grace. And by this, faith differs from the rest
of the gifts of God, as the fear of God, the love of God, the love of our
brethren, etc. for these were in man's nature before the fall, and after it they
are but renewed: but justifying faith admits no renewing. For the first in
grafting of it into the heart, is in the conversion of a sinner after his fall.

The place and seat of faith (as I think) is the mind of man, not the will:
for it stands in a kind of particular knowledge or persuasion, and there is no
persuasion but in the mind. Paul says indeed, that we believe with the
heart, Romans 10. but by the heart he understands the whole soul without any
limitation. Some do place faith partly in the mind, and partly in the will,
because it has two parts; knowledge, and affiance: but it does not stand
greatly with reason, that one particular and single grace should be seated into
diverse parts of the soul.

The form of faith is, to apprehend the promises, Gal. 3.14. that we might
receive the promise of the spirit through faith. and John 1.12. to receive
Christ, and to believe, are put one for another; and to believe, is to eat and
drink the body and blood of Christ. To apprehend properly, is an action of
the hand, which lays hold of a thing, and pulls it to it: and by resemblance it
agrees to faith, which is the hand of the soul, receiving and applying the
saving promise.

This apprehension of faith, is not performed by any affection of the will, but
by a sound and particular persuasion, whereby a man is resolved that the
promise of salvation belongs unto him. Which persuasion is wrought in the mind
by the holy Ghost, 1. Corint. 2.12. And by this, the promise which is general
is applied particularly to one subject.

By this, saving faith differs from all other kinds of faith. From
historical; for it wants all apprehension, and stands only in a general
assent. From temporary faith, which though it make a man to profess the
Gospel and to rejoice in it, yet does it not thoroughly apply Christ with his
benefits. For it never brings with it any thorough touch of conscience or
lively sense of Gods grace in the heart. And the same may be said of the rest.

The principal and maine object of this faith is, the saving promise, God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes
in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life. But some will say, Christ
is commonly said to be the object of faith. Answ. In effect it is all one to
say the saving promise, and Christ promised, who is the substance of the
covenant. Christ then as he is set forth unto us in the word and sacraments, is
the object of faith. And here certain questions offer themselves to be skanned.

The first, What is that particular thing which faith apprehends? Answ. Faith
apprehends whole Christ God and man. For his Godhead without his manhood,
and his manhood without his Godhead does not reconcile us to God. Yet this
which I say must be conceived with some distinction according to the difference
of his two natures. His Godhead is apprehended not in respect of his essence or
nature, but in respect of his efficacy manifested in the ma^hoode: his manhood
both in respect of the substance it self, and also in respect of the efficacy
and benefits thereof.

The second, In what order faith apprehe^ds Christ? Ans. First of all it
apprehends the very body and blood of Christ: and secondly the virtue and
benefits of his body and blood: as a man that would feel in his body the
virtue of meat and drink, must first of all receive the substance thereof.

To go forward. Besides the mayn promise, which co^cernes righteousness and life
in Christ, there be other particular promises touching strength in temptations,
comfort in afflictions, and such like, which depend on the former: and they
also are the object of justifying faith: and with the very same faith we believe
the^, wherewith we believe our salvation. Thus Abraham by the same faith
wherewith he was justified, believed that he should have a son in his old age.
Ro^. 4.19.22. And Noe by that faith whereby he was made heir of righteousness,
believed that he and his family should be preserved in the flood. And hereupo^
it comes to pass that in our prayers, besides the desire of things promised,
we must bring faith whereby we must be persuaded, that God will grant us such
things as he has promised: and this faith is not a new kind or distinct faith
from justifying faith. Thus we see what saving faith is.

Whereas some are of opinion, that faith is an affia^ce or confidence, that
seems to be otherwise: for it is a fruit of faith, Ephesians. 3.12.
and indeed no man can put any confidence in God, till he be first of all
persuaded of Gods mercy in Christ toward him.

Some again are of mind, that love is the very nature and form of faith: but
it is otherwise. For as confidence in God, so also love is an effect which
proceeds from faith. 1. Tim. 1.5. The end of the law is love from a pure heart
and good conscience and faith unfeigned. And in nature they differ greatly.
Christ is the fountain of the waters of life. Faith in the heart is as the
pipes and ledds that receive in and hold the water: and love in some part is as
the cock of the co^duit, that lets out the water to every co^mer. The property
of the hand is to hold; and of it self it cannot cut: yet by a knife or other
instrument put into the hand, it cuts: the hand of the soul is faith; and his
property is to apprehend Christ with all his benefits, and by it self it ca^ do
nothing else: yet ioyn love to it, and by love it will be effectual in all good
duties. Gal. 5.6.


Now to proceed further: first we are to consider, how faith is wrought: 2.
what be the differences of it. For the first, faith is wrought in and by the
outward ministry of the gospel accompanied by the inward operation of the
spirit, and that not sudde^ly, but by certain steps and degrees: as nature
frames the body of the infant in the mothers womb, 1. by making the brain and
heart, 2. by making veins, sinews, arteries, bones. 3. by adding flesh to
them al. And the whole operation of the spirit stands in two principal
actions. First, the enlightening of the mind: the second, the moving of the
will. For the first, the holy Ghost enlightens men's minds with a further
knowledge of the law then nature can afoard; and thereby makes them to see the
sins of their hearts and lives with the ouglines thereof, and withal to
tremble at the curse of the law. Afterward the same spirit opens the eye to
understand and consider seriously of righteousness and life eternal promised in
Christ. This done, then comes the second work of the holy Ghost, which is the
inflaming of the will, that a man having considered his fearful estate by
reason of sin, and the benefits of Christ's death, might hunger after Christ;
and have a desire not so much to have the punishments of sin taken away, as
Gods displeasure: and also might enjoy the benefits of Christ. And when he has
stirred up a man to desire reconciliation with God in Christ, then withal he
gives him grace to pray not only for life eternal; but especially for the
free remission and pardon of all his sins: and then the Lords promise is,
Knock and it shall be opened, Matthew. 7.7.
seek and ye shall find. After which he further sends his spirit into the
same heart that desires reconciliation with God, and remission of sins in
Christ, and does seal up in his heart the lively and plentiful assurance
thereof.

The differences and degrees of faith are two: I. a weak faith: II. a strong
faith. Concerning the first, this weak faith shows it self by this grace of
God, namely an unfeigned desire, not only of salvation (for that the wicked and
graceless man may have) but of reconciliation with God in Christ. This is a
sure sign of faith in every touched and humbled heart, and it is peculiar to
the elect: and they which have this, have in them also the substance of true
saving faith: which afterward will grow up to a strong faith. Reasons, I.
Promise of life everlasting, is made to the desire of reconciliation, Psalm.
10.17. Lord, thou have heard the desire of the poor. Psalm. 143.6. My soul
desires after thee, as the thirsty land. Psalm. 145.19. He will fulfill the
desire of them that fear him. Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. Revel. 22.6. J will give
unto him which is a thirst of the well of the water of life freely. II. The
hungring desire after grace is a sanctified affection: where one affection is
sanctified, all are sanctified: where all are sanctified, the whole man is
sanctified: and he that is sanctified, is justified and believes. III. God
accepts the will and desire to repent and believe, for repenting and believing
indeed: wherefore this desire of reconciliation (if it be soundly wrought in
the heart) is accepted even as faith before God. But carnal men will say, If
faith, yea true faith show it self by a desire of reconciliation with God in
Christ for all our sins, then we are well enough, though we live in our
sins: for we have very good desires. J answer, That there be in many men
sundry fleeting motions and desires to do good things which grow to no issue
or head, but in time vanish as they come. Now such passions have no soundnes in
them, and must be distinguished from the desire of reconciliatio^ with God,
which comes from a bruised heart, which brings always with it reformation of
life: therefore such as live after the couse of this world, and think
notwithstanding that they have desires that are good, deceive themselves.

Now faith is said to be weak, when a man either fails in the knowledge of
the Gospel; or else having knowledge, is weak in grace to apply unto
himself the sweet promises thereof. As for example, we know that the Apostles
had all true saving faith (except Judas) and when our Savior Christ asked
them, Matt. 16.16.
whom they thought that he was; Peter in the person of the rest, answered for
them all, and said: Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God: for which our
Savior commended him, and in him, them all, saying: Thou art Peter, and upon
this rock, (that is, upon Christ, which Peter did profess in the name of them
all) will I build my Church. And yet after we shall find in the Gospel, that
they are called men of little faith. Mat. 8.26. and 16.8.
Now they failed in knowledge of the death of Christ, and of his passion, and
resurrection; and were carried away with a vain hope of an earthly kingdom.
And therefore when our Savior showed them of his going down to Jerusalem and
of his sufferings there, Peter a little after his notable confession began to
rebuke Christ, and said, Master, have pity on thy self, this shall not be
unto thee. And until he had appeared to them after his death, they did not
believe his resurrection.

Again, weak faith though it be joined with knowledge, yet it may fail in the
applying or in the apprehension and appropriating of Christ's benefits to a man's
own self. This is to be seen in ordinary experience. For many a man there is
of humble and contrite heart, that serves God in spirit and truth, yet is not
able to say without great doubtings and wauerings; I know and am fully assured
that my sins are pardoned. Now shall we say, that all such are without faith?
God forbid. Nay, we may resolve our selves, that the true child of God may have
a hungring desire in his heart after reconciliation with God in Christ for all
his sins with care to keep a good conscience, and yet be weak some time in
the apprehension of Gods mercy and the assurance of the remission of his own
sins.

But if faith fail either in the true knowledge, or in the apprehension of
Gods mercies, how can a man be saved by it? Answ. We must know that this weak
faith will as truly apprehend Gods merciful promises for the pardon of sin,
as strong faith, though not so soundly. Even as a man with a palsy hand can
stretch it out as well to receive a gift at the hand of a king, as he that is
more sound, though it be not so firmly and steadfastly.

The Church of Rome bears men in hand, that they are good Catholics, if they
believe as the Church believes; though in the mean season they can not tell
what the Church believes. And some Papists commend this faith by the example of
an old devout father, who being tempted of the devil, was asked how he
believed, he answered that he believed as the Church believed: being again
asked how the Church believed, he answered, as I believe: whereupon the devil
(as they say) was faint to depart. Well, this fond and ridiculous kind of
faith we renounce, as being a means to nozle men in blindness, superstition, and
perpetual ignorance: yet withal we do not deny but that there is an
implicit or foulded faith; which is, when a man as yet having but some little
portion of knowledge in the doctrine of the Gospel, does truly perform
obedience according to the measure thereof; and withal has care to get more
knowledge, and shows good affection to all good means whereby it may be
increased. In this respect a certain ruler, who by a miracle wrought upon his
child, was moved to acknowledge Christ for the Messiah, and further to submit
him self to his doctrine, Ioh. 4.53. and 42.
is commended for a believer, and in the like case the Samaritanes.

And thus much of weak faith: which must be understood to be in a man not all
the days of his life, but while he is a young babe in Christ. For as it is in
the state of the body, first we are babes and grow to greater strength as we
grow in years; so it is with a Christian man. First he is a babe in Christ,
having weak faith, but after grows from grace to grace, till he come to have
a strong faith: example whereof we have in Abraham, who was strong and perfect
both in knowledge and apprehension. This strong faith is, when a man is endued
with the knowledge of the Gospel and grace to apprehend and apply the
righteousness of Christ unto himself for the remission of his own sins: so as
he can say distinctly of himself and truly, that he is fully resolved in his
own conscience, that he is reconciled unto God in Christ for all his sins,
and accepted in him to life everlasting. This degree of faith is proper to him
that begins to be a tall man and of ripe years in Christ. And it comes not
at the first calling of a man unto grace. And if any shall think that he can
have it at the first, he deceives him self. For as it is no nature: first we
are babes, and then as we increase in years, so we grow in strength: so it
is in the life of a Christian; first ordinarily he has a weak faith, and
after grows from grace to grace, till he come to stronger faith: and at the
last he be able to say, he is fully assured in his heart and conscience of the
pardon of his sins and of reconciliation to God in Christ. And this assurance
arises from many experiences of Gods favor and love in his life and
preservation, which brings a man to this, that he is fully persuaded, that God
is his God, and God the father his father, and Jesus Christ his redeemer, and
the holy Ghost his sanctifier.

Now howsoever this faith be strong, yet is it always imperfect, as also our
knowledge is; and shall so long as we live in this world be mingled with
contrary unbelief and sundry doubtings more or less. A great part of men
amongst us, blinded with gross ignorance, say they have faith, and yet indeed
have not. For ask them what faith they have, they will answer, they believe
that God is their father, and the Son their redeemer, etc. ask them how long
they have had this faith, they will answer, ever since they could remember:
ask them whether they ever doubt of Gods favor? they will say, they would not
once doubt for all the world. But the case of these men is to be pitied: for
howsoever they may persuade themselves, yet true it is, that they have no sound
faith at all: for even strong faith is assaulted with temptations and
doubtings: and God will not have men perfect in this life, that they may
always go out of themselves, and depend wholly on the merit of Christ.

And thus much of these two degrees of faith. Now in whom so ever it is,
whether it be a weak faith, or a strong, it brings forth some fruit, as a
tree does in the time of summer. And a special fruit of faith, is this
confession of faith, I believe in God, etc. so Paul says, With the heart a man
may believe unto righteousness, Romans 10.10.
and with the mouth man confesses to salvation. Confession of faith is, when a
man in speech and outward profession does make manifest his faith for these
two causes. I. That with his mouth outwardly he may glorify God both in body
and soul. II. That by the confession of his faith, he may sever himself from
all false Christians, from Atheists, hypocrites, and all false seducers
whatsoever. And as this is the duty of a Christian man, to make profession of
his faith; so here in this Creed of the Apostles, we have the right order and
form of making it set down, as we shall see in ha^dling the parts thereof.

The Creed therefore sets down two things concerning faith, namely the action
of faith and his object, which also are the parts of the Creed. The action in
these words, I believe: the object in all the words following, in God the
Father almighty, maker etc. And first let us begin with the action.

I believe in God.) We are taught to say, I believe, not we believe, for two
causes. First (because as we touched before) in the Primitive Church this
Creed was made to be an answer made unto a question, which was demanded of
every particular man that was baptized: for they asked him thus; What do thou
believe? then he answered, I believe in God the Father, etc. and thus did every
one of years make profession of his faith: and it is likely that Peter alluded
hereunto, saying, 1. Pet. 3.21.
the stipulation or answer of a good conscience makes request to God. The
second cause is, howsoever we are to pray one for another, by saying, O our
father, etc. yet when we come to years, we must have a particular faith of our
own: no man can be saved by another man's faith, but by his own, so it is said:
The just shall live by his faith. But some will say, this is not true. Habac.
2.4.
For children must be saved by their parents faith: the answer is this; the
faith of the parents does bring the child to have a title or interest to the
covenant of grace and to all the benefits of Christ: but yet it does not apply
the benefits of Christ's death, his obedience, his merits, and righteousness unto
the infant: for this the believer does only unto himself and to no other.
Again some may say, if they do not apprehend Christ's benefits by their
parents faith, how then is Christ's righteousness made theirs? Answ. By the
inward working of the holy Ghost, who is the principal applier of all graces,
whereas faith is but the instrument. And this is true, men of years are
justified by their own faith; and the infa^t by some other special working of
Gods holy spirit.

Furthermore, to believe signifies two things; to conceive or understand any
thing, and withal to give assent unto it to be true: and therefore in this
place, to believe signifies to know and acknowledge that all the points of
religion which follow, are the truth of God. Here therefore we must remember,
that this clause (I believe) placed in the beginning of the Creed, must be
particularly applied to every article following. For so the case stands, that
if faith fail in one maine point, it fails a man in all: and therefore faith
is said to be wholly copulative. Fides est tota copulativa.
It is not sufficient to hold one article, but he that will hold any of them
for his good, must hold them all: and he which holds them all in show of
words, if he ouerturne but one of them in deed, he ouerturnes them all.

Again, to believe is one thing, and to believe in this or that is another
thing: and it contains in it 3. points or actions of a believer. 1. to know a
thing: 2. to acknowledge the same: 3. to put trust and confidence in it. And in
this order must these three actions of faith be applied to every article
following which concerns God. And herein is contained a special matter. For
always by adding them to the words following, we do apply the article unto
our selves in a very comfortable manner. As I believe in the father, and do
believe that he is my father; and therefore I put my whole trust in him, and so
of the rest.

Now we come to the object of general faith, which is either God or the
Church; in handling of both which, I will observe this order. I. I will speak
of the meaning of every article. II. Of the duties which we ought to learn
thereby. III. And lastly, of the consolations which may be gathered thence.
Concerning God, three things are to be considered. And first by reason of
manifold doubtings that rise in our minds, it may be demanded, whether there be
a God? many reasons might be used to resolve those that have scruple of
conscience: otherways we are bound to believe that there is a God without al
doubting. As for those Atheists which confidently avouch there is no God, by
Gods law they ought to die the death: nay, the earth is too good for such to
dwell on. Malefactors, as thieves and rebels, for their offenses have their
reward of death: but the offense of those, which deny that there is a God, is
greater; and therefore deserves the most cruel death.

The second point follows, namely what God is? Answer. Moses desiring to see
Gods face, was not permitted but to see his hinder parts: Exodus 32.
and therefore no man can be able to describe God by his nature, but by his
effects and properties; on this or such like manner: God is an essence
spiritual, simple, infinite, most holy. I say first of all, that God is an
essence, to show that he is a thing absolutely subsisting in himself and by
himself, not receiving his being from any other. And herein he differs from
all creatures whatsoever, which have subsisting and being from him alone.
Again I say that he is an essence spiritual, because he is not a kind of
body, neither has he the parts of the bodies of me^ or other creatures, but is
in nature a spirit invisible, not subject to any of man's senses. I add also,
that he is a simple essence, because his nature admits no manner of composition
of matter or form or parts. The creatures are compounded of diverse parts, and
of variety of nature, but there is no such thing in God: for whatsoever thing
he is, he is the same by one and the same singular and indivisible essence.
Furthermore he is infinite; and that diverse ways: infinite in time, without
any beginning and without end: infinite in place; because he is every where and
excluded no where, within all places, and forth of all places. Lastly he is
most holy, that is, of infinite wisdom, mercy, love, grace, goodness, etc. and
he alone is rightly termed most holy, because holiness is of the very nature
of God himself; whereas among the most excellent creatures it is otherwise. As
for example, a man is one thing, and the holiness of man is another. Thus we see
what God is: and to this effect god describes himself to be Iehova Elohim; Exodus
3.6, 14. 1. Tim. 1.17.
and Paul describes him to be a King everlasting, immorall, invisible, and
only wise, to whom is due all honor and glory for ever.

The third point is, touching the number of Gods, namely whether there be more
Gods then one or no. Ans. There is not, neither can there be any more Gods then
one. Which point the Creed avouches, in saying, I believe in God, not gods:
and yet more plainly the Nicene Creed and the Creed of Athanasius, both of
them explaning the words of the Apostles Creed on this manner, I believe in one
God. Howsoever some in former times have erroneously held, that two Gods were
the beginning of all things, one of good things, the other of evil things:
others, that there was one God in the old testament, an other in the new:
others again, namely the Valintinians, that there were 30. couple of gods: and
the heathen people (as Augustine records) worshipped 30. thousand gods: yet
we that are members of Gods Church, must hold and believe one God alone, and no
more, Deuteronomy. 4.39. Understand this day and consider in thine heart, that Jehovah
he is God in heaven above and upon the earth beneath: there is none other. Ephesians.
4.8. One God, one faith, one baptism. If it be alleged that the Scripture
mentions many gods, because Psalm. 82.6.
Magistrates are called gods, Exo. 4.16.
Moses is called Aarons god, 2. cor. 4.4.
the devil and all idols are called gods. The answer is this: They are not
properly or by nature gods, for in that respect there is only one God: but
they are so termed in other respects. Magistrates are gods, because they be
Vicegerents placed in the room of the true God, to govern their subjects:
Moses is Aarons god, because he was in the room of god to reveal his will to
Aaron: the devil is a god, because the hearts of the wicked would give the
honor unto him, which is peculiar to the everliving God: idols are called
gods, because they are such in men's conceits and opinions, who esteem of them
as of gods. Therefore Paul faith, an idol is nothing in the world, 1. Cor.
8.4.
that is, nothing in nature subsisting, or nothing in respect of the divinity
ascribed unto it.

To proceed forward, to believe in this one God, is in effect thus much. 1.
to know and acknowledge him as he has revealed himself in his word: 2. to
believe him to be my God: 3. from mine heart to put all mine affiance in him.
To this purpose Christ says, This is eternal life to know thee the only
God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Ioh. 17.2.
Now the knowledge here meant, is not a bare or general knowledge, for that
the devils have, but a more special knowledge whereby I know God not only to
be God, but also to be my God, and thereupon do put my confidence in him.

And thus much of the meaning of the first words, I believe in God, etc. Now
follow the duties which may be gathered hence. First of all, if we are bound
to believe in God, then we are also bound to take notice of our natural
unbelief, to check our selves for it, and to strive against it. Thus dealt
the father of the child that had a dumme spirit, Lord, (says he) J believe,
Lord help mine unbelief. And David, Marc. 9.2, 4.
Why art thou cast down my soul? and why art thou so disquieted in me? wayt
on God. Psalm. 42.12.
And that which our Savior Christ said once to Peter should a man say every
day to himself: O thou of little faith, why have thou doubted? But some may
say, wherein stands our unbelief? Answer. It stands in two things I. In
distrusting the goodness of God, that is, in giving to little or no affiance
to him; or in putting affiance in the creature. For the first, few men will
abide to be told of there distrust in God: but in deed it is a common and rife
corruption: and though they soothe themselves never so, yet their usual
dealings proclaim their unbelief. Go thorough all places, it shall be found
that scarce one of a thousand in his dealings makes conscience of a lie: a
great part of men gets their wealth by fraud and oppression and all kind of
unjust and unmerciful dealing. What is the cause that they can do so? Alas,
alas, if there be any faith, it is pinned up in some by-corner of the heart,
and unbelief bears sway as the lord of the house. Again, if a man had as
much wealth as the world comes to, he could find in his heart to wish for an
other, and if he had two worlds, he would be casting for the third, if it
might be compassed: the cause hereof is, men have not learned to make God their
portion, and to stay their affections on him: which if they could do, a mean
portion in temporal blessings would be enough. Such men will not yeilde that
they do indeed distrust the Lord, unless at some time they be touched in
conscience with a sense of their sins, and be thoroughly humbled for the
same: but indeed distrust of Gods goodness is a general and a mother sin,
the ground of all other sins, and the very first and principal sin in
Adams fall. And for the second part of unbelief, which is an affiance in the
creature, read the whole book of God, and we shall find it a common sin in
all sorts of men, some putting their trust in riches, some in strength, some in
pleasures, some placing their felicity in one sin, some in an other. When
King Asa was sick, 2. chron. 16.12.
he put his trust in the Physicians, and not in the Lord. And in our days the
common practice is, when crosses and calamities fall, then there is trotting
out to that wise man, to this cunning woman, to this sorcerer, to that wisard,
that is, from God to the devil, and their counsel is received and practiced
without any bones making. And this shows the bitter root of unbelief, and
confidence in vain creatures; let men smoothe it over with goodly terms as
long as they will. In a word, there is no man in the world, be he called or
not called, if he look narrowly unto himself, he shall find his heart
almost filled with manifold doubtings and distrustings, whereby he shall
feel him self even carried away from believing in God. Therefore the duty
of every man is, that will truly say that he believes in God, to labor to
see his own unbelief and the fruits thereof in his life. As for such as say
they have no unbelief, nor feel none; more pitiful is their case. For so
much the greater is their unbelief.

Secondly, considering that we profess our selves to believe in God, 2. Duty.
we must every one of us learn to know God. As Paul says, How can they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard? Romans 10.14.
and how can they hear without a preacher? therefore none can believe in
God but he must first of all hear and be taught by the ministry of the word
to know God aright. Let this be remembered of young and old. It is not the
pattering over of the belief for a prayer, that will make a man a good
believer, but God must be known of us and acknowledged as he has revealed
him self partly in his word and partly in his creatures. Blind ignorance and
the right use of the Apostles Creed will never stand together. Therefore it
stands men in hand to labor and takes pains to get knowledge in religion,
that knowing God aright, they may come steadfastly to believe in him.

Thirdly, because we believe in God, therefore another duty is to deny our
selves utterly, 3. Duty.
and to become nothing in our selves. Our Savior Christ requires of us to
become as little children, if we would believe. The beggar dependes not on the
relief of others till he find nothing at home: and till our hearts be purged
of self-love and pride, we can not depend on the favor and goodness of God.
Therefore he that would trust in God, must first of all be abased and
confounded in him self, and in regard of him self be out of all hope of
attaining to the least spark of the grace of God.

Fourthly, in that we believe in God, and therefore put our whole trust and
assurance in him: we are taught, 4. Duty.
that every man must commit his body, his soul, goods, life, yea all that he
has into the hands of God, and to his custody. So Paul says, I am not
ashamed of my sufferings, for I know whom I have believed, 2. Tim. 1.12.
and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him
against that day. A worthy saying: for what is the thing which Paul committed
unto the Lord? surely his own soul and the eternal salvation thereof. But
what mooues him to trust God? surely his persuasion whereby he knows that God
will keep it. And Peter says: 1. Pet. 4.19.
Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit their souls to him
in well doing as unto a faithful creator. Look as one friend lays down
a thing to be kept of another: so must a man give all that he has to the
custody of God. Fevve or none can practice this, and therefore when any evil
befalls them either in body or in goods, or any other way, then they show
them selves rather beasts then men in impatience. For in prosperity they
vvoulde not trust in God, and therefore in adversity when crosses come, they
are void of comfort. But when a man has grace to believe and trust in God,
then he commits all into Gods hands: and though all the world should perish,
yet he would not be dismaide. And undoubtedly if a man will be thankful for
the preservation of his goods, or of his life, he must show the same by
committing all he has into Gods hands, and suffer him self to be ruled by
him.

Comforts.
Now follows the consolations and comforts which Gods Church and children
reap hereby. First, he that believes in God, and takes God for his God, may
assure him self of salvation, and of a happy deliverance in all dangers and
necessities. When God threatened a plague upon Israel for their idolatry, 2.
Chron. 34.27. 2. Chr. 32.
good king Josiah humbled him self before the Lord: and he was safe all his
days. And so King Hezekiah, when Senacherib the king of Ashur offered to
invade Judah, he trusted in the Lord, and prayed unto him, and was delivered.
Whereby we see, if a man trust in God, he shall have security and quietness,
2. chron. 20.20.
as Iehosaphat said to the men of Judah. And our Savior Christ when he was
upon the cross, and felt the whole burden of the wrath of God upon him, cried,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. And it appears in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, that Christ was heard in that he feared: Heb. 5.7.
whereby we are given to understand, that they shall never be utterly forsaken
that take God for their God. Psalm. 22.
And King David having experience of this, uses most excellent speeches for
this end, to show that the ground of his comfort was, that God was his God.
And it is said that Daniel had no manner of hurt in the Lions den; Dan. 6.23.
because he trusted in the Lord his God. And contrariwise, such as distrust
God are subject to all miseries and judgments. The Israelites in the
wilderness believed not God, and trusted not in his help, therefore God was
angry, Psalm. 78.21, 22.
and his fire was kindled in Jacob, and wrath came upon Israel.

God, the Father Almighty.

Some have thought that these words are to be coupled with the former without
distinction, as if the title of God had been proper to the first person the
Father, and not common to the rest: and thus have some heretics thought. But
indeed there must a pause or distinction be made, that the name or title of God
may be set in the forefront, as common to all the three persons following. For
that is the very intent of the order of this Creed, to teach us to believe in
one God, who is distinct into three subsistances or persons called the Father,
the Son, the Holy Ghost. And here offers it self to be considered even one
of the greatest mysteries of our religion: namely, that God is the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost: and again, that the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost are one and the same God. Some at the first may possibly say, that this
cannot stand because it is against all reason that one should be three, or
three one. The answer is, that indeed if one and the same respect be kept, it
is not possible, but in diverse considerations and respects it may. And thus
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are three, namely in person; and
again, they three are one, not in person, but in nature. By nature is meant, a
thing subsisting by it self, that is common to many: as the substance of man
consisting of body and soul common to all men, which we call the humanity of a
man, is the nature of man. By person is meant, a thing or essence subsisting by
it self, not common to many, but incommunicable: as among men, these
particulars, Peter, John, Paul, are called persons. And so in the mystery of
the Trinity the divine nature is the godhead it self simply and absolutely
considered; and a person is that which subsisteth in this godhead, as the
Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost. Or again, a person is one and the same
godhead not absolutely considered, but in relation, and as it were, restrained
by personal or caracteristicall proprieties: as the Godhead or God begetting
is the father, God again considered not simply but so far forth as he is
begotten is the Son; and God proceeding of the Father and the Son, the Holy
ghost. And if any man would conceive in mind rightly the divine nature, he must
conceive God or the Godhead absolutely: if any of the persons, then he must
conceive the same godhead relatiuely with personal proprieties. Thus the
godhead considered with the propriety of fatherhood or begetting is the father:
and co^ceiuing the same godhead with the propriety of generation, we conceive
the son, and the godhead with the propriety of proceeding, and we conceive
the Holy Ghost. Neither must it seem strange to any that we use the names of
nature and person to set forth this mystery by: for they have been taken up by
common consent in the primitive Church, and that upon weighty consideration to
manifest the truth, and to stop the mouths of heretics: and they are not used
against the proper sense of the scriptures, nay they are therein Heb. 1.3. Gal.
4.8.
contained. Thus we see how it comes to pass that the three things signified
by these names, Father, Son, holy Ghost, are each of them one and the same
God. And this mystery may well be conceived by a comparison borrowed from light.
The light of the sun, the light of the moon, and the light of the air for
nature and substance are one and the same light: and yet they are 3. distinct
lights. The light of the sun being of it self and from none, the light of
the moon from the sun, and the light of the air from them both. So the
divine nature is one, and the persons are three, subsisting after a diverse
manner in one and the same nature.

And for the further clearing of the point, we must yet further mark and
remember two things: namely, the union and the distinction of the persons. The
union is, whereby three persons are one not simply, but one in nature, that is,
coessentiall or consubstantiall; having all one godhead. For the father is God,
the son is God, and the holy ghost is God: now there are not 3. distinct
Gods, but one God, because there is one God and no more in nature; considering
that the thing which is infinite is but one and is not subject to
multiplicatio^: and the Father is this one God, as also the Son and the holy
ghost. And as these three persons are one in nature, so whatsoever agrees to
God simply considered, agrees to them all three. They are all coequall and
coeternall: all most wise, just, merciful, omnipotent by one and the same
wisdom, justice, mercy, power. And because they have all one godhead,
therefore they are not only one with another, but also each in other, the father
in the son, and and the son in the father, and the holy ghost in them both.
And we must not imagine that these three are one god, as though the father had
one part of the godhead, the son an other part, and the holy ghost a third.
For that is most false, because the infinite and the most simple godhead is not
subject to composition or division: but every person is whole god, subsisting
not in a part, but in the whole godhead: and the whole entire godhead is
communicated from the father to the son, and from both father and son to
the holy ghost. But some may yet say, that this doctrine seems to be
impossible; because three creatures, as for example, Peter, Paul, Timothy being
three persons, and so remaining, cannot have one and the same nature, that is,
the same body and the same soul. Ans. Three or more me^ may have the same
nature Specie.
in kind, but the truth is, they cannot possibly have a nature which shall be one
and the same Numero.
in number, in them all three. For a man is a substance created and finite, and
the bodies of men are quantities, and therefore divisible and separable one from
another. Hereupon it comes that the persons of men are not only distinguished
by proprieties, but also divided and sundred one from another. And though
Peter, Paul, Timothy, have all one common and universal form, yet they three
are not one man, but 3. men. Now it is otherwise with the divine nature or
godhead which is uncreated and infinite, and therefore admittes neither
composition nor division, but a distinction without any separation: so as the
three persons subsisting in it, shall not be three gods, but one and the same
god.

Yet further some will object, that it is truly said of the father, that he is
god, but the same godhead is not in the son, nor in the holy ghost; for the
son and the holy ghost have their beginning from the father. Answer, The
son and the holy ghost have not a beginning of their nature or of their
godhead from the Father, but of their person only: the person of the Son is
from the Father; and the person of the Holy ghost, is both from the Father and
from the Son: but the Godhead of all three persons is uncreate and
unbegotten, and proceeding from none. Yet some may say, both the Son and the
Holy Ghost have received from the Father all their attributes, as wisdom,
knowledge, power, etc. Now he that receives any thing from another, is in that
respect inferior to him that gives it: and therefore the son and the Holy
ghost are not God as he is. Ans. We must know, that, which the Son receives
of the Father, he receives it by nature, and not by grace; and he receives
not a part but all that the Father has, saving the personal propriety. And
the Holy Ghost receives from the Father and the Son by nature and not by
grace: and therefore though both the Son and the Holy Ghost receive from the
Father, yet they are not inferior to him but equal with him. And thus much is
necessary to be learned of the union between the three persons in Trinity,
whereby they being three have all one and the same godheade.

The second point to be considered is, that though these three have but one
godhead, and all make but one God: yet they are distinguished one from another:
for the Father is the Father, and not the Son, nor the Holy Ghost: the Son
is the Son and not the Father nor the Holy ghost: and the Holy Ghost is the
Holy ghost, not the Father nor the Son. This distinction of the persons is
notably set forth unto us in the baptism of our Savior Christ: where it is
said, Matt. 3.16, 17.
that when Jesus was baptized, he came out of the water: there is the second
person: and the Holy ghost descended upon him in the form of a dove: there is
the third person: and the Father the first person pronounced from heaven, that
he was his beloved Son in whom he was well pleased. And we must not
conceive this distinction in such manner as though these three, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost were three names of one God. For the three persons do not in
name or word, but really in truth distinctly subsist in the same divine nature.
Neither must we imagine that the three persons are three forms or differences
of one god, as some heretics have dreamed, who taught that the father alone is
God, and that he is called a Father in one respect, the Son in another, and
the Holy ghost in a third. For this were nothing else but to make the
personal proprieties to be nothing but imaginary accidents, which indeed, or
at the least, in man's conceit, might come and go, and be either in the persons
or forth of them. For the personal relations though in (...).
mind they may be distinguished from the divine essence, yet (...).
indeed they are one with it. But some will say, if they make this
distinction, there is rather a quaternitie then a trinity: for the godhead is
one, the father an other, the son a third, and the holy ghost a fourth. Thus
some heretics have objected against the distinction of the trinity: but it is
untrue which they say* for the godhead must not be severed from the father, nor
from the son, nor from the holy Ghost: for the father is God or the whole
godhead, so also is the son and the holy ghost: and the godhead likewise is
in every one of these three persons, and every one of them subsisting in the
godhead, and the godhead must be conceived to be in them all, and not as a
fourth thing out of them. And therefore we must still maintain, that these 3.
persons are distinguished and not divided, as three men are divided in being
and substance: for this division can not be in them, because all three have one
divine nature and one godhead. This is the mystery of all mysteries to be
received of us all, namely, the trinity of the persons in the unity of the
godhead. This doctrine must be retained and holden for these causes. I. because
by it we are able to distinguish this true God from all false Gods and Idols.
II. Because among all other points of religion this is one of the chiefest,
being the very foundation thereof. For it is not sufficient for us to know God
as we can conceive of him in our own imagination: but we must know him as he
has revealed him self in his word. And it is not sufficient to salvation to
believe in God confusedly, but we must believe in one god distinct into three
persons, the Father, the Son, the holy Ghost: yea and more then this, we must
hold and believe that God the father is our father, the son our redeemer, the
holy ghost our sanctifier and comforter. Well then, if we must in this manner
believe in god, then we must also know him: for we can have no faith in the
thing which is utterly unknown. wherefore if we would believe in the father,
son, or holy ghost, we must know them in part, Ioh. 17. This is life eternal
to know thee the only God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Ioh. 14.17.
The world can not receive the spirit of truth because it has neither seen
him nor known him. 1. Ioh. 2.23. Whosoever denies the son has not the
father. Thirdly, this doctrine directs us in worshipping God aright: for unity
in trinity, and trinity in unity is to be worshipped: one God must be
worshipped in the father, in the son, and in the holy ghost: and if we
worship God the father without the son and the holy ghost: or if we worship
the son without the father and the holy ghost: and the holy ghost without the
father and the son, we worship nothing but an Idol. Again, if we worship the
3. persons not as one God, but as three gods, then likewise we make three Idols.

Note further, that of all the three persons, the first person the father is
set in the first place, and is described to us by three things. I. by his title
that he is a father. II. by his attribute that he is Almighty. III. by his
effect, that he is maker of heaven and earth: of these in order as they lie in
the Creed. And first of the title (father.) It may seem that he has some
prerogative over the son and the holy ghost, because he is set before them:
but we must know he is set before them neither in regard of time, nor of
dignity, for therein all three are equal; but in regard of order only. The
father is the first, the son the second, and the holy ghost the third: as may
appear by this similitude. If three Emperors equal in dignity should meet
all in one place, being equal also in power and majesty, if all three should
sit down, though one be no better then an other; yet one of them must needs
sit down the first, and another in the second place, and then the third: but
yet we can not say, that he which sat down first is the chiefest. And so it
is in the Trinity, though none be greater or above another; yet the Father is
in the first place, not because he is before the son, or the holy ghost in
dignity or honor, but because he is the fountain of the deity, the son
being from him, and the holy ghost from them both.

Now let us come to the title of the first person. The meaning.
The name Father in Scriptures is ascribed either to God taken indefinitely,
and so by consequente to all the three persons in Trinity: or particularly to
the first person alone. For the first, God is a Father properly and
principally, according to the saying of Christ, Call no man father upon earth,
for there is but one your father which is in heaven: that is, Mat. 23.9.
principally: whereas earthly parents, whom we are commanded to worship and
honor are but certain images or resemblances of our heavenly father, having
this blessing that they are fathers from him. And hereupon this title agrees in
men, not simply, but so far forth as God honors them with fatherhoode in
calling them to be fathers, whereas god himself receives this honor from
none. God is termed a father in respect both of nature and grace. He is a
father in regard of nature, because he created and governs all things. In
this regard he is called the Heb. 12.9.
father of spirits, and Luke 3.38.
Adam is called the Son of God. He is a father in respect of grace, because
we are regenerate by him, and accepted to be his sons by adoption thorough
the merit of Christ. And in this respect the second person as well as the
first is called Esa. 9.6.
a Father, and said to have an offspring Esa 53.10.
or seed and Esa. 8.18.
children. But when the name of Father is given to the first person, (...) is
done upon a special consideration, because he is a father by nature to the
second person begetting him of his own substance before all worlds. By this
it appears, that out of the title of the first person, we may fetch a
description thereof on this manner. The Father is the first person in Trinity,
begetting the son. Now to beget is the personal propriety whereby he is
distinguished from the other two. If it be said that the creatures do beget,
and that therefore to beget is not proper to the father: the answer is, that
in this point there are many differences between God the father and all
creatures. First the father begets the son before all eternity: and
therefore God the Father begetting, and the son begotten are equal in time,
whereas in earthly generation the father is before the son in time. Secondly,
God the father begets his Son by communicating unto him his whole essence or
godhead, which can not be in earthly parents, unless they should be abolished
and come to nothing. Whereas nevertheless, God the Father giving his whole
nature to his son, retains the same still, because it is infinite. Thirdly,
the father begetts the son in himself and not forth of himself: but in
earthly generation the father begetting is forth of the child, and the child
forth of the father. And that must not trouble us which heretics allege
against this doctrine, namely, that if the father who is of one nature with the
son, did beget the son, then he did beget himself: for the godhead of the
father does not beget either the godhead or the person of the son: but the
person of the father begets the person of the son, both which in one godhead
are really distinct.

Thus we see what the father is. Now to believe in the father, is to be
persuaded, that the first person in Trinity, is the father of Christ, ^er.
3.4*19. Matthew. 6.4.
and in him my father particularly, and that for this cause I entend and desire
for ever to put my trust in him.

The duties which we may learn hence are manifold. And here we have occasion
offered first of all to consider who is our father by nature. Job. 17.14.
I shall say to corruption (says Job) thou art my father* and to the worm,
thou art my mother seeing god vouchsafes this great prerogative to them that
love him, that he will be their father: therefore Job in consideration hereof
would have every man to have recourse to his own natural condition, to see
who is his father by nature. Job says, corruption is his father: but if we
mark the condition of our nature, we shall further see every man is by nature
the child of wrath, and that Satan is his father: for so long as a man walks
in his sins (which every man does by nature) so long does he show himself to
be the lively child of the devil. And thus Christ reasons against the
Scribes and Pharisees. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your
father ye will do. And true it is, John. 8.44.
that no child is so like his father that begat him, as every man by nature
is like the devil: and the whole tenor and course of his natural life
without grace is a lively resemblance of the disposition of Satan. Secondly,
every one that believes God to be a Father, and in Christ his father, 2. Duty.
must as a good child be obedient to his fathers will. So Solomon says, A
wise son makes a glad father. How? Prove. 10.1.
by doing his will: and therefore when one told our Savior Christ that his
mother and breethren stood without, desiring to speak with him, he said,
Mat. 12.50.
Whosoever shall do my fathers will which is in heaven, the same is my
father, my sister, and mother: where we may note, that he that will have God
the Father to be his Father, and Christ Jesus his brother, must do the will of
God the father. And hence God says, If I be a master, where is my fear? If I
be a father, where is my honor? Mal. 1.6.
Where is plainly taught this second duty; that if God be our father, then
as good children we must shevve obedience unto him: but if we be
disobedient unto him, then we must know, that that former saying of Christ
will be verefied upon us: that because men do the lusts of the devil:
therefore they are the children of the devil. But least this fearful
sentence be verefied of us, it is the duty of every man that makes this
confession, that he believes God to be his father, first to labor to know
Gods will; and secondly, to perform continual obedience unto the same. Like
unto a good child that would feign please his father, and therefore is always
ready to do the best he can. And without doubt that man which unfainedly takes
God for his father, is then most grieved, when as by any sin he displeases
him, and no other cross or calamity is so grievous unto him. The greatest
grief that the prodigal son had, was that he had offended his father by
sinning against heaven, and against him: the same also must be our grief: and
all our care set on this, how we may be obedient children to this our loving
father. Thirdly, that man that believes God to be his father, 3. Duty.
must imitate and follow him: for it is the will of God that his children
should be like unto himself. Now we follow God especially in 2. things. I. In
doing good to them that persecute us: so says our Savior Christ, Mat. 5.45.
Pray for them that hurt you, that you may be the children of your father which
is in heaven: for he makes the sun to rise on the evil and on the good,
and sends rain on the just and unjust. II. Our heavenly father is merciful:
for he is a father of the fatherless: Psalm. 68.5.
and therefore he that will be a son of this father must be merciful to his
poor breethren, as Job says of himself, I was the eyes to the blind, and I
was the feet unto the lame: Job. 29.15, 16. 4. Duty.
I was a father unto the poor. Fourthly, seeing we believe God to be our
father, we are hereby taught only to use moderate care for the things of this
life: for if a man know himself to be the child of God, then he also knows
that God will provide for him, as we know in a family the father provideth for
all. Now God is a father, and his Church is his family; therefore if thou will
be a member of Gods Church, and a child of God, thou must cast thy care on god,
Mat. 6.26.
and follow the counsel of Christ: Be not to careful for your life what ye
shall eat, or what ye shall drink. And mark his reason drawn from the point
which we have in hand. The fowls of the heaven (says he) they neither sow nor
reap, nor carry into barnes: and yet your heavenly father feeds them: are
not ye much better then they. But alas, the practice of the world is
contrary: for men have no care for the knowledge of Gods word, nor the means
of their salvation: all their minds are set on the things of this life: when
as Christ says, First seek the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness
thereof, and all these things shall be ministered unto you. If you should see a
young man provide for himself, and no man else for him, we would say, surely
his father is dead: even so, when a man's care is set wholly both day and night
for the things of this life, it argues that God has either cast him off, or
else that he takes him for no father of his. Fifthly, if God he our father, then
we must learn to bear any cross patiently that he shall lay upon us, either
in body or in mind, 5. Duty.
and always look for deliverance from him* for whom the Lord loves, them
he chastises: and if ye endure chastising (says the Apostle) God offers
himself unto you as unto children: Heb. 12.7.
which may appear more plainly by this comparison. If two children should
fight, and a man coming by, should part them, and after beat the one, and
let the other go free: every man that sees this will say, that that child
which he beats is his own son. Even so, when God chastises us, he
shows himself unto us as a father, if we submit our selves. Now if our
earthly fathers corrected us, and we gave them reverence, taking it patiently:
should we not much rather be in subjection to the father of spirits that we
may live. Therefore the conclusion is this: if we displease God, be ye sure, he
will correct us; and when his hand is upon us we must not murmr against him,
but bear it with a mild spirit: and furthermore, when we are under the
cross, we must always look for deliverance from this our father only. If a
son when he is beaten should flee to his fathers enemies for help and
counsel; it would argue that he were but a graceless child. Sundry and
diverse calamities and crosses befall men in this life, which they can not
brook; and therefore it is a common practice of many among us in these days,
when Gods hand is upon them, to go for help to the devil; they seek for
counsel at witches and wise men, (as I have said) but let them look unto it,
for that is the right way to double their misery, and to show themselves
lewd children. Lastly, if we confess and believe god to be the father of
Christ, 6. Duty.
and in him our father also; then in regard of our conversation, we must not
frame our selves like unto the world: but the course of our lives must be in
righteousness, and true holiness. Paul exhorts the Corinthians to separate
themselves from Idolaters, 2. Cor. 6.18.
alleging the place out of the old Testament, where the Lord bids the
Israelites to come out from Idolaters, Isa. 22.11.
and to touch no unclean thing: and the reason follows out of Jeremy, Ier.
31.1.
that if they do so, then God will be their father, and they shall be his
children, even his sons and daughters: which reason Paul urges in the next
chapter to this effect: 2. Cor. 7.1.
considering we have these promises, that therefore we should cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and grow up unto holiness
in the fear of the Lord: where, if we mark the place diligently, we shall
find this lesson, that every man who takes God for his father, must not only
in this sin of Idolatry, but in all other sins separate himself, that men
by his godly life may know whose child he is. But some will say, this
exhortation is needless amongst us; for we have no cause to separate our
selves from others, because all amongst us are Christians, all believe in God
and are baptized, and hope to be saved by Christ. Answer. In outvvard
profession, I confess, we carry the show of Christians, but in deed and
truth, by our lives and conversations, very many among us deny Christ: for in
every place the common practice is, to spend the time in drunkenness and
surfeiting, in chambering and wantonness; yea, great is the company of those
that make a trade of it: take this conversation from many men, and take away
their lives. And on the Lords day it may be seen both publicly and
privately, in houses and in the open streets, there is such revel, as though
there were no God to serve. In the six days of the week, many men walk
very painefully in their callings: but when the Lords day comes, then every
man takes license to do what he will: and because of the princes laws, men
will come formally to the Church for fashions sake: but in the mean time, how
many do nothing else but scorn, mock, and deride, and as much as in them
lies, disgrace both the word and the ministers thereof? so that the common
saying is this: oh he is a precise fellow, he goes to hear Sermons, he is too
holy for our company. But it stands men in hand to take out a better lesson,
which is, if we will have God to be our father, we must show our selves to be
the children of God by repentance and newness of life: he can not be but a
graceless child, that will lead a rebellious life flat against his fathers
mind. Let us then so behave our selves, that we may honor our father which is
in heaven, and not dishonor him in our lives and callings: rather let us
separate our selves from the filthiness of the flesh, loathing those things
which our father lotheth, and fleeing from those things which our father
abhors.

And thus much for the duties. Now follow the consolations which arise from
this point. Consolations.
But first we are to know that there are three sorts of men in the world. The
first are such as will neither hear nor obey the word of God. The second sort
are those which will hear the word preached unto them but they will not obey:
both these sorts of men are not to look for any comfort hence. Now there is a
third sort of men, which as they hear Gods word; so they make conscience of
obeying the same in their lives and callings: and these are they to whom the
consolations that arise out of this place do rightly belong, and must be
applied unto.

First therefore, seeing God the father of Christ, and in him the father of all
that obey and do his will, is our father, here note the dignity and
prerogative of all true believers: for they are sons and daughters of God as
says S. John, So many as received him to them he gave a prerogative to be the
sons of God: even to them that believe in his name. Ioh. 1.12.
This privilege will appear the greater if we consider our first estate; for
as Abraham says, We are but dust and ashes, and in regard of the deprauation
of our natures, Gen 18.27.
we are the children of the devil: therefore of such rebels to be made the
sons of God, it is a wonderful privilege and prerogative, and no dignity
like unto it. And to enlarge it further, he that is the son of God, is the
brother of Christ, and fellow heir with him; and so heir apparent to the
kingdom of heaven: and in this respect, is not inferior to the very angels.
This must be laid up carefully in the hearts of Gods people, to confirm them
in their conversation among the company of ungodly men in this world.

Secondly if a man do endeavor himself to walk according to Gods word,
then the Lord of his mercy will bear with his wants: for as a father spares
his own son, so will God spare them that fear him. Mal. 3.17. Psalm. 103.13.
Now a father commands his child to write or to apply his book: though all
things herein be not done according to his mind, yet if he find a readiness
with a good endeavor, he is content, and falls to praise his child's writing or
learning. So God gives his commandment, and though his servants fail in
obedience; yet if the Lord see their hearty endeavor, and their unfeigned
willingness to obey his will, though with sundry wants, he has made this
promise and will perform it, that as a father spares his son, so will he
spare them. If a child be sick, will the father cast him off? nay, if thorough
the grievousnesse of his sickness he can not take the meat that is given him,
or if he take it, and for faintness pick it up again, will the father of the
child thrust him out of doors? no: but he will rather pity him. And so when a
man does endeavor himself through the whole course of his life to keep Gods
commandments, God will not cast him away, though through weakness he fail
in sundry things and displease God. This prerogative can none have, but he that
is the child of God: as for others when they sin, they do nothing else but
draw down Gods judgments upon them, for their deeper condemnation.

Thirdly hence we learn, that the child of God can not wholly fall away from
Gods favor, I do not say, that he can not fall at all: for he may fall away
in part, but he can not wholly: and so often as he sins, he depriues himself
in part of Gods favor. David loved his son Absolon wonderfully, but Absolon
like a wicked son played a lewd pranck, and would have thrust his father out
of his kingdom: And David although he was sore offended with Absolon, and
showed tokens of his wrath, yet in heart he loved him, and never purposed to
cast him off. Hereupon when he went against him, 2. Sam. 18.5.
he commanded the Captains to entreat the young man Absolon gently for his
sake. And when he was hanged by the hair of the head in pursuing his father,
then David wept and cried. O my son Absolon, my son Absolon, would God I
had dyed with thee, Absolon my son. And so it is with God our heavenly
father, when his children sin against him, and thereby loose his love and
favor, and fall from grace, he forsakes them: but how far? Surely he shows
signs of anger for their wickedness, and yet indeed his love remains toward
them still: and this is a true conclusion, the grace of god in the adoption of
the elect is uncha^geable, and he that is the child of God can never fall away
wholly or finally. On the contrary, that is a bad and comfortless opinion of
the Church of Rome; Torren. confess. Aug.
which holds that a man may be justified before God: and yet afterward by a
mortal sin, finally fall from grace and be condemned.

Fourthly, the child of God that takes god the father for his father, may
freely come into the presence of god, and have liberty to pray unto him. We
know it is a great privilege to come into the chamber of presence before an
earthly prince: and few can always have this prerogative though they be great
men: yet the kings own son may have free entrance, and speak freely unto
the king himself, because he is his son. Now the children of God have more
prerogative then this: for they may come into the chamber of presence, not of
an earthly king, but of Almighty God the king of kings, and as they are the
sons of god in Christ, so in him they may freely speak unto God their father
by prayer. And this overthrows the doctrine of such as be of the Church of
Rome, which teach and hold, that a man must come to speak to god by prayer
through the intercession of saints: for say they, the presence of god is so
glorious, that we may not be so bold, as of our selves to speak unto him; but
needs must have the intercession of others.

Lastly, God will provide for all his Church and children all things needful
both for their bodies and souls: so our Savior Christ bids his disciples take
no thought what they should eat, or what they should drink, or wherewith they
should be clothed, adding this reason, For your heavenly Father knovveth all
your wants. And if we take thought, it must be moderate, and not distrustful:
it is a part of the fathers duty to provide for his family and children, and
not the children for the father. Now shall an earthly father have this care for
his children: and shall not our heavenly father much more provide for those
that fear and love him? Nay mark further, in Gods Church there be many
hypocrites which receive infinite benefits from God, by reason of his elect
children with whom they live: and we shall see this to be true, that the
wicked man has ever fared better for the godly man's cause. Sodom and
Gommorrha received many benefits by reason of righteous Lot: and when the Lord
was purposed to destroy Sodom, he was feign to pull Lot forth of the city:
for the text says the angel of the Lord, Genesis 19.22.
could not do any thing till he was come out of it. So also in Paul's
dangerous voyage toward Rome, all the men in it fared better for Paul's
company: for the Lord told Paul by an angel, that there should be no loss of
any man's life, for the Lord had given to him all that sailed with him. Act.
27.24.
And undoubtedly if it were not for some few that fear God, he would pour
down his vengeance upon many nations and kingdoms, there is such excess of
wickedness in all sorts. Again, if the Lord do thus carefully provide for
his children all kind of benefits; what a wonderful wickedness is this, for
men to get their living by ungodly means: as usury, carding, dicing, and such
like exercises. If a man were persuaded that God were his father, and would
provide sufficiently both for his body and soul; so that using lawful means
he should ever have enough: out of all doubt he would never after the fashion
of the world use unlawful and profane means to get a living. But this
prooveth, that howsoever such men say, God is their father, yet indeed they
deny him.

And thus much of this title, father, the first thing whereby the first person
is described. Now follows the second point, namely his attribute of
omnipotency in this word almighty. And whereas the father is said to be
almighty, it is not so to be understood as though the Son were not
almighty, or the holy Ghost not almighty: for every property and attribute
(save the personal properties) is common to all the three persons. For as God
the Father does impart his Godhead unto the Son, and to the holy Ghost; so
also he does communicate the proprieties thereof to them.

God is omnipotent two ways: I. Because he is able to do whatsoever he will.
II. Because he is able to do more then he will do. For the first, that God is
able to do whatsoever he will, David says: Our God is in heaven, and he does
whatsoever he will: for there is nothing that can hinder God; but as he
wills, so every thing is done. Secondly, that God can do more then he
wills to be done, it is plain where John Baptist says: Matthew. 3.9.
God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham: though God can
do this thing, yet he will not do it. So likewise when Christ was betrayed,
the Father could have given him more then 12. legions of Angels to have
delivered him out of their hands, but yet he would not: and the like may be
said of many other things. The father is and was able to have created another
world, yea a thousand worlds; but he would not, nor will not. And likewise
Christ being upon the cross, was able at their bidding to have come down,
and saved himself from death; but he would not: and therefore this is true,
the Lord can do any thing that he wills to be done actually, yea and more
then he will. But some will say; God can not do some things which man can do,
Ti^. 1.2. 2. Tim. 2.13.
as God can not lie, nor deny himself* and therefore he is not omnipotent.
Answ. Although some have thought God could do these things; and that he did
them not, because he would not: yet we must know and believe that God can
neither lie, nor deny himself: indeed man can do both, but these and many
other such things, if he could do them, he could not be God. God indeed can
do all things which show forth his glory and majesty: but such things as
are against his nature, he can not do, as for example: God can not sin, and
therefore can not lie: and because he can not do those things, therefore he is
omnipotent: for these and such like, are works of impotencie: which if God
could do, he were but an impotent God. Secondly, he can not do that which
implies contradiction: as when a thing is, to make it at the same time to be,
and not to be: as when the sun does shine, to make it at the same instant to
shine and not to shine. And therefore false is the doctrine of the Church,
which in their transubstantiation make the body of Christ, (whose esse^tiall
property is to be only in one place at once) to be circumscribed, and not to
be circumscribed; to be in one place, and not to be in one place.

And thus much for the meaning. Now follow the duties whereunto we are moved
by this doctrine, of Gods omnipotency. Duties.


First, whereas God the Father is said to be Almighty, we are taught true
humiliation: Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, 1. Pet. 5.7.
says Peter: where he gives an exhortation to humility, and alleges the
cause, because God is almighty. To make this more plain: Every one of us was
borne in sin, and by nature we are most wretched in our selves: now what an
one is God? Surely he is able to do whatsoever he will, yea and more then he
will, and is able to destroy such as rebel against him every moment. Therefore
our duty is, to cast down our selves for our sins in his presence. This
true humiliation was that, which our Savior Christ would have brought the
young man in the Gospel unto, when he bad him go sell all that he had, and
give to the poor. Therefore whosoever thou art, take heed thou must: for if
thou run on in thy wickedness, and still rebel against God, it is a thousand
to one at length he will destroy thee. For he is an almighty God, and able to
do whatsoever he will: his hand is mighty, it boots not a man to strive with
him: for he was never yet ouermastered, and for this cause we must needs cast
down our selves under his hand. It is a fearful thing (says the holy Ghost)
to fall into the hands of the living God: Heb. 10.31.
therefore if we would escape his heavy and terrible displeasure, the best way
for us is, to abase our selves, and be ashamed to follow our sins. Christ
bids us not to fear him that is able to kill the body, and can go no
further: but we must fear him that is able to cast both body and soul into
hell fire. Mat. 10.28.
Example of this we have in David, who when he was persecuted by his own son
Absalon, he said unto the Lord, If he thus say, 2. Sam. 15*26.
J have no delight in thee, behold here I am, let him do to me as seems good
in his eyes. But some will say, I will live a little longer in my sins, in
lying* pride, Sabbath-breaking, in swearing, dicing, gaming, and wantonness: for
God is merciful, and in my old age I will repent. Answ. Well, soothe not thy
self: but mark, usually when God holds back his hand for a season, he does,
as it were, fetch a more mighty blow, for the greater confusion of a
rebellious sinner; therefore humble, submit* and cast down thy self before
God, and do not strive against him: his hand is mighty, and will overthrow
thee. Though thou had all learning, wisdom, might, riches, etc. yet (as
Christ said to the young man) one thing is wanting, that thou should be
humbled; and until thou be humbled, nothing is to be looked for, but Gods
judgment for sin.

Secondly, seeing God is almighty; we must tremble and fear at all his
judgments, we must stand in awe, quake, and quiver at them: as the poor
child does, when he sees his father come with the rod. Example of this we
have often in Gods word: as when the sons of Aaron offered strange fire
before the Lord, he sent fire from heaven, and burned them up. Lev. 10.3.
Now Aaron he was very sorry for his sons: but when Moses told him, that the
Lord would be glorified in all that came near him, then the text ^aith, Aaron
held his peace. So also we read that the Apostles reproved Peter, for
preaching unto the Gentiles: Act. 11.18.
but when Peter had expounded the things in order which he had seen, then they
held their peace, and glorified God. As also David says: I h^ld my tongue, O
Lord, because thou did it. Psalm. 39.10.
Isaiah says, In hope and silence is true fortitude. Isa. 50.
If a man be in trouble he must hope for deliverance, and be quiet and patient
at Gods judgments. But the practice of the world is flat contrary. For men
are so far from trembling at them, that they will pray to God that plagues,
curses, and vengeance may light upon them, and upon their seruan^s and
children. Now the Lord being a mighty God, often does answearably bring his
judgments upon them. Again, many carried with impaciencie, wish themselves
hanged or drowned: which evils they think shall never befall them: yet at the
length God does in his justice bring such punishments upon them. Nay further in
all ages there are some, which do scorn and mock at Gods judgments. Hereof
we had not far hence a most fearful example. One being with his companion
in a house drinking on the Lords day, Anno 1592. in Camebridgeshire.
when he was ready to depart thence, there was great lightning and thunder:
whereupon his fellow requested him to stay, but the man mocking and jesting at
the thunder and lightning, said (as report was) it was nothing but a knave
cooper knocking on his tubbs, come what would, he would go: and so went on his
journey; but before he came half a mile from the house, the same hand of the
Lord which before he had mocked, in a crack of thunder stroke him about the
girdlestead, that he fell down stark dead. Which example is worthy our
remembrance, to put us in mind of Gods heavy wrath against those which scorn
his judgments: for our duty is to tremble and fear: and it were greatly to
be wished, that we could with open eye behold the terriblenesse and
fearfulness of Gods judgments: it would make a man to quake and to leave off
sin. If a man pass by some high and dangerous place in the night when he
cannot see, he is not afraid; but if ye bring him back again in the day, and
let him see what a stiepe and dangerous way he came, he will not be brought to
go the same way again for any thing: so it is in sinning; for men living in
ignorance and blindness, practice any wickedness, and do not care for Gods
judgments: but when God of his goodness brings them back, and opens their
eyes to see the downfall to the pit of hell, and the judgments of God due to
their sins: then (they say) they will never sin as they have done, but
become new men, and walk in the way to eternal life.

Thirdly, we are taught by the Apostle Paul, that if we be to do any duty to
our brethren, as to relieve them, we must do it with cheerfulness: for he
labors to persuade the Corinthians to cherefull liberality; and the reason
of his persuasion is, because God is able to make all grace to abound toward
them. 2. Cor. 6.7, 8.
Where also this duty is taught us, that seeing God is omnipotent and
therefore able to make us abound, therefore we must give cherefully to our
poor brethren which want.

Fourthly, whereas there are many in every place, which have lived long in
their sins, eue^ from their cradle; some in wantonness, some in drunkenness,
some in swearing, some in idleness, and such like: out of this place, to all
such there is a good lesson, namely that every one of them do now become new
men, and repent of all their sins, for all their life past. For mark what
Paul says of the Jews, which cut off from Christ through unbelief, and have
so continued in hardness of heart, and desperate malice against him, almost 16.
hundredth years: Romans 11.23.
If (says he) they abide not still in unbelief, they may be grafted into
their olive again: and his reason is this, because God is able to graft them in
again. Even so though we have lived many years in sin, (and sure it is a
dangerous and fearful case for a man to live 20, 30, or 40, years under the
power of the devil:) yet we must know that if we will now live a new life,
forsake all our sins, and turn to God, we may be received to grace, and be
made a branch of the true olive, though we have borne the fruits of the wild
olive all our life long. But some will object, that they have no hope of Gods
favor, because they have been so grievous sinners, and continued in them so
long. Answ. But know it, whosoever thou art, God is able to graft thee in; and
if thou repent, he will receive thee to his love and favor. This must be
observed of all, but especially of such as are old in years, and yet remain
ignorant without knowledge; they must turn to the Lord by repentance:
otherwise, if they continue still profane and wicked, they must know this,
that their damnation comes post have to meet them, and they to it.

Consolations.
And thus much for the duties. Now follow the consolations which Gods Church
reap from this, that God the father is omnipotent. First, the wonderful power
of God serves to strengthen us in prayer unto God; for he that will pray
truly, must only pray for those things for which he has warrant in Gods word:
all our prayers must be made in faith, and for a man to pray in faith, it is
hard: therefore a special means to strengthen us herein, is the mighty
power of God. This was the ground and stay of the leaper whom our Savior
Christ cleansed: Lord (says he) if thou will, Matthew. 8.
thou can make me clean. And in the Lords prayer, when our Savior Christ
has taught us to make six petitions; in the end he gives us a reason, or
motive to induce us to stand upon, and to wait for the benefits before craved,
in these words: Thine is the kingdom, thine is the power, etc.

Secondly, hence we learn this comfort, that all the gates of hell shall never
be able to prevail against the least member of Christ. I do not say they shall
never be able to assault, or tempt them, for that may be: but they shall never
overcome them. How (will some say) may we be resolved of this? I answer, By
reason of faith: for if a Christian man do believe that God the father, and in
Christ his father, is almighty, no enemy shall ever be able to prevail
against him. So S. John reasons: Little children, ye are of God, and have
overcome them, 1. Ioh. 5.4.
that is, all false teachers, because greater is he that is in you, that is,
Christ Jesus by his holy spirit, who is God, and therefore almighty, then he
that is in the world, that is, the spirit of Satan: therefore you need not
to fear. So David compares him self to a silly sheep, and says: Though I
should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, that is, Psalm. 23.
as it were in the mouth of the lyo^, yet I will fear none evil: why so?
because the Lord is with him: thy rod (says he) and thy staff comfort me.

Thus much for the benefits. Now whereas it is said the first person is a
father, as also almighty: join these two together, and hence will arise
singular benefits and instructions. First, whereas we are taught to confess,
that the first person is a father almighty, we and every man must learn to
have experience in himself, of the mighty power of this almighty father.
Why, will some say, that is nothing, for the devil and all the damned souls
feel the power of the Almighty? True in deed they feel the power of God*
namely as he is an almighty Judge condemning them* but they feel not the
power of an almighty father: this is the point whereof we must learn to have
experience in our selves. Paul prays that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ
the father of glory, Ephesians. 1.19.
would give unto the Ephesians the spirit of wisdom, to see what is the
exceeding greatness of his power in them which believe, according to the working
of his mighty power which he wrought in Christ. Which place must be considered:
for here the Apostle would have us have such a special manifestation of Gods
power in our selves, like to that which he did once show forth in Christ. But
how did Christ see and find the power of God as he was man? Answ. Diverse ways:
I. On the cross he died the first death; which is the separation of body and
soul: and he suffered the sorrows of the second death. For in his soul he
bare the whole wrath of God, and all the panges of hell, and after was buried
and laid in the grave, where death triumphed over him for the space of three
days. Now in this extremity God did show his power, in that he raised Christ
from death to life. And look as his power was manifested in Christ the head:
so must it be manifested in all his members: for every man has his grave,
which is natural sin and corruption, which we draw from our first parents,
and look as a man lies dead in the grave, and can move neither hand nor
foot: so every man by nature lies dead in sin. Now as God did show his
power in raising Christ from death: so every one must labor to have this
knowledge and experience in him self of the mighty power of God, in raising
him from the grave of sin to newnes of life. For thus Paul makes a special
request, that he might know Christ, and the virtue of his resurrection, that
is, Phil. 3.^0.
that he might feel in him self that power whereby Christ was raised from
death to life, to raise him also from the bondage of his sins to a new life
more and more. Furthermore, when Christ was upon the cross, and all the gates
of hell were open against him, then did* he vanquish Satan; he bruised the
serpents head, and as Paul says, he spoiled principalities and powers, and
made a show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in the cross: Col.
2.15.
he overcame the devil, and all his angels by the power of his almighty
father, and by his own power as he is God. And even so must Christian men
labor to find the same power in themselves of this almighty father, by which
Christ did triumph over sathan^ that by it they may tread him under their
feet, which men can never do by any power in themselves. Again, Christ
prays that that cup might pass from him: and yet he says; Luke 22.42.
Not my will, but thy will be fulfilled. For it was necessary that Christ
should suffer. And this request was heard, not because he was freed from death:
but because God his father Almighty gave him power and strength in his
manhood to bear the brunt of his indignation. Now look as this power was
effectual in Christ Jesus the head, to make him able and sufficient to bear
the panges of hell: so the same power of God, is in some measure effectual in
all the members of Christ, to make them both patient, and of sufficient
strength to bear any affliction, as Saint Paul says: being strengthened with
all might through his glorious power unto all patience and long suffering with
ioyfulnes. Col. 1.11.
And this is a notable point which every one ought to learn: that whereas they
confess God to be their almighty father, they should here withal labor to
feel and have experience in themselves, that he is almighty in the beginning
and continuing of grace unto them, and in giving the^ power and patience to
suffer afflictions. Further, Christ Jesus when the work of our redemption was
accomplished, Ephesians. 1.20, 21.
was lifted up into heaven, and set at the right hand of God in heavenly
places, far above all principalities and powers, etc. even by the power of
his father: well, as this power was made manifest in the head: so must it be in
the members thereof. Every child of God shall hereafter see and feel in
himself the same power, to translate him from this vale of misery in this
life, to the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore to conclude, we have great cause to
be thankful and to praise God for this privilege, that he shows his power
in his children in regenerating them, in making them die unto sin, and to
stand against the gates of hell, and to suffer afflictions patiently: as also
that he translates the^ from death to life. And every one should show his
thankfulness in laboring to have experience of this power in himself, as Paul
exhorts us in his epistles to the Colossians and Ephesians: yea, read all his
epistles, and we shall find he mentions no point so often as this, namely the
mighty power of God, manifested first in Christ, and secondly in his members:
and he accounts all things loss that he might know Christ, and the virtue of
his resurrection. Phil. 3.10.
This point is the rather to be marked, because his power in the matter of
grace is not to be seen with eye; and few there be in respect that have felt
the virtue thereof in themselves: for the devil does mightitily show his
contrary power in the greatest part of the world, in carrying them to sin and
wickedness.

Secondly, hence we learn that which Paul teaches, namely to know, Romans 8.28.
that all things work together for the best unto them that love God. God is
almighty, and therefore able to do whatsoever he will: he is also a father; and
therefore is willing to do that which is for our good. But some will say, we
are subject to many crosses, yea to sin: what? can our sins turn to our
good? Ans. If God almighty be thy father, he will turn thine afflictions, yea
thy sins which by nature are evil, beyond all exspectation unto thy
salvation. And this God will do to all such as be obedient unto him: yet no
man must hereupon presume to sin.

Thirdly, whereas we believe that God is a mighty father, it serves to
confirm Gods children in the promises of mercy revealed in his word. The
chiefest whereof is, that if men will turn from their sins, and believe in
Christ, they shall not perish, but have life everlasting. I know some men will
make it an easy thing to believe, especially those which never knew what
faith meant. But such persons need no means of confirmation of faith:
therefore let all those which have tasted of the hardness of attaining unto it,
learn how to stablish their wavering hearts in the promises of God, by the
consideration of these two points: God is a father; and therefore he is
willing: he is also almighty, and therefore he is able to perform his
promises. He that will be truly resolved of Gods promises, must have both these
settled in his heart, and build on them as on two foundations.

It follows, Creator of heaven and earth] We have spoken of the title of the
first person, and of his attributs: now we come to speak of his effect, namely
the creation: but before we come to it, we are to answer a certain objection
which may be made. At the first it may seem strange to some, that the work of
creation is ascribed to the first person in Trinity the father: whereas in the
Scripture it is common to them all three equally. And first that the father is
Creator, it was never doubted: as for the second person the Son, that he is
Creator, Ioh. 1.3.
it is evident: all things are made by it, that is, by the Son, who is the
substantial word of the father, and without it was made nothing that was made.
And again, it is said, that God by his Son made the world. As for the holy
Ghost, Heb. 1.2.
the work of creation is also ascribed unto him, and therefore Moses says,
the spirit moved upon the waters: and Job says: Genesis 1.2.
his spirit has garnished the heavens: How the^ is this peculiar to the
father, being common to all the three persons in trinity? I answer, the actions
of God are twofold: either inward, or outward. The inward actions are those,
which one person does exercise toward another: as the father does beget the
son, and this is an inward action peculiar to the father: for all inward
actions are proper to the persons from whom they are. So the Son does
receive the godhead from the father; and the holy Ghost from the^ both; and
these are inward actions peculiar to these persons. So likewise for the father
to send his son, it is an inward action proper to the father, and cannot be
communicated to the holy Ghost: and the son to be sent by the father only is
a thing proper to the son, and not common to the father, or to the holy
Ghost. Now outward actions are the actions of the persons in the Trinity to
the creatures: as the work of creation, the work of preservation, and of
redemption. These and all such actions are common to all the three persons: the
father creates, the son creates, and the H. Ghost creates: and so we may
say of the works of government, and of redemption, and of all outward actions
of the persons to the creatures. But some again may say, how then can the work
of creation, being an outward action of God to the creature, be peculiar to the
first person the father? I answer, the work of creation is not so proper to the
first person the father, as that it cannot also be common to the rest: for all
the three persons jointly created all things of nothing; only they are
distinguished in the manner of creating. For the father is the cause that
begins the work, Basil. de spir. sanct. c. 16.
the son puts it in execution, the holy Ghost is the finisher of it. And
again, the father creates by the Col. 1.16. Romans 11.36.
son and by the H. Ghost: the son creates by the holy Ghost, and from the
father: the H. Ghost creates not by the father, nor by the son; but from the
father and the son. And this is the reason why the work of creation is
ascribed here unto the father, because he alone creates after a peculiar
manner, namely by the son, and by the holy Ghost: but the son and the holy
Ghost create not by the father but from him.

Thus having answered the objection, we come to speak of the creation it
self. In handling whereof, we must withal treat of the Counsel of God, as
being the cause thereof, and of the Government of the creatures, as being a
work of God whereby he continues the creation. And the order which I will
observe, is first to speak of the Counsel of God, and secondly of the
exequution of his Counsel, which has two special branches, the first the
creation, the second the preservation or government of things created.

The Counsel of God, is his eternal and unchangeable decree, whereby he has
ordained al things either past, present or to come, for his own glory. First I
call it a decree, because God has in it set down with himself and appointed as
sovereign Lord, what shall be, what shall not be. I add further, that al
things whatsoever come under the compass of this decree; as Paul says, He
works al things according to the counsel of his will. Ephesians. 1.11.
And our Savior Christ says, that a sparrow cannot fall on the ground without
the heavenly father: Mat. 10.29. verse. 30.
yea further, he tells his disciples, that the very hairs of their heads are
numbered, meaning that they are known and set down in the counsel of God. And
considering that God is King of heaven and earth; and that most wise, yea
wisdom it self; and most mighty, yea might and power it self: it must needs
b^ that he has determined how all things shall come to pass in his kingdom,
with all their circumstances, time, place, causes, etc. in such particular
manner, that the very least thing that may be, is not left vnappointed and
undisposed.

The counsel of God, has two properties, eternity, and unchangeableness. It
is eternal, because it was set down by God from everlasting before all times,
as Paul says, God has chosen the Ephesians to salvation before all worlds.
Ephesians. 1.4. 2. Tim. 1.9. Mal. 3.6. Iam. 1.17.
And he says of himself, that he was called according to the purpose of God,
which was before all worlds. Again, the same counsel once set down, is
unchangeable. God says, I am Jehovah, and I change not. With God (says S.
James) there is no variablenes, nor shadow of change. Now such as God is, such
is his decree and counsel. And he being unchangeable, his counsels also are
unchangeable.

Gods counsel has two parts, his foreknowledge, and his will or pleasure. His
foreknowledge, whereby he did foresee all things which were to come. His will,
whereby in a general manner he wills and ordaines whatsoever is to come to
pass: and therefore such things as God altogether nilleth, can not come to
pass. Now these two parts of the counsel of God must be joined together, and
not severed. Will without knowledge is impotent, and foreknowledge without will
is idle. And therefore such as hold that God does barely foresee sundry
things to come, no manner of way either willing or decreeing the issue and
event of them, do bring in little better then Atheism. For if we say that any
thing comes to pass either against Gods will, or God not knowing of it, or not
regarding it, we shall make him either impotent or careless, and raze the very
foundation of Gods providence.

And this decree of God must be conceived of us as the most general cause of
all things subsisting: being first in order having all other causes under it,
and most principal, ouerruling all, ouerruled by none.

Thus we see what is to be held touching Gods counsel: now for the better
clearing of the truth, three objections of some difficulty are to be answered.
First may some man say, if God decree and ordain all things whatsoever, then
he decrees and ordains sin. But God decrees not sin in as much as it is
against his will: and therefore he decrees not all things. Answ. We use not to
say, that God does simply will or decree sin, but only in part, adding with
all these caueats. I. That God wills and decrees sin, not properly as it
is sin, but as it has in it sundry regards and respects of goodness, so
farforth as it is a punishment, or chastisme^t, or trial, or action, or
Quatenus habet rationem entis, no^ quatenus habet rationem defectus.
has any existe^ce in nature. II. God can so use evil instruments, that the
work done by them being a sin, shall nevertheless in him be a good work:
because he knows how to use evil instruments well. If it be further alleged,
that God wills no wickedness, Psalm. 5.5. we must know, that Gods will is
twofold, general, and special. General, whereby God wills and decrees
that a thing shall be: and by this kind of will he may be said to will sin; and
that without sin. For though he decree it thus, yet he does not instill
wickedness into the heart of any sinner, and his decree is only for a most
excellent end. For in regard of God which decrees, it Bonum and vt sit malum.
Aug. Euchr. ad Laur. cap. 101*
is good that there should be evil* To this purpose Augustine says
excellently, By an unspeakable manner it comes to pass, that that which is
against Gods will, is not without his will. Voluntate permissiva vult:
approba^^va non vult.
Now the special will of God is that whereby he wills any thing in such manner,
that he approoueth it, and deliteth in it. And thus indeed we can not say
without blasphemy, that God wills sin. Thus then we see in what manner and
how farforth God may be said to decree sin.

Again it may be objected thus. If all things be determined by the
unchangeable decree of God, then all things come to pass by an unchangeable
necessity: and men in their actions have no freewill at all, or liberty in
doing any thing. Ans. This must be learned as a certain rule, that the
necessary decree of God, does not abolish the nature of the second causes, and
impose necessity upon the will of man, but only order and incline it without
any constraint, to one part. As for example: when a people is gathered
together to hear Gods word, there is none of them but they know that they
come thither by Gods providence (and in that respect necessarily) yet before
they come, they had all freedom and liberty in themselves to come or not to
come: and Gods eternal counsel did not hinder the liberty of our wills, in
coming or not coming, nor take away the same: but only incline and turn
them to the choice of one part. An other example hereof we may have in our
Savior Christ, whose state and constitution of body, if we regard, he might
have lived longer: yet by the eternal counsel of God, he must die at that
place, at that time, at that hour where and when he died. Whereby we may see,
that Gods counsel does not hinder the will of man; but only order and dispose
it. Which answer being well marked, we shall see these two will stand together:
the necessary and unchangeable counsel of God, and the free will of man. And
again, that the same action may be both necessary and contingent: necessary
in regard of the highest cause, the counsel of God; not necessary but
contingent in respect of the second causes as among the rest, the will of man.

Thirdly, some will yet object against this doctrine, that if all things come
to pass according to gods unchangeable decree, then what needs the using of
any means? what needs the preaching of the word, and receiving of the
sacraments? what needs any laws, princes, magistrates, or government? what
needs walking in men's ordinary callings? all is to no end: for let men play
or work, sleep, or wake; let him do what he will, all is one: for Gods
eternal counsel must needs come to pass: therefore it may seem in vain for
men to busy themselves about such things. Ans. But we must know, that as God
has appointed all things to come to pass in his eternal and unchangeable
counsel; so in the same decree, he has together set down the means and ways
whereby he will have the same things brought to pass: for these two must never
be severed: the thing to be done, and the means whereby it is done. We may
read in the Acts in Paul's dangerous voyage toward Rome, an Angel of the Lord
told Paul, Act. 27.
that God had given him all that sailed with him in the ship: now the
soldiers and mariners hearing this, might reason thus with themselves; Seeing
God has decreed to save us all, we may do what we will, there is no danger,
for we shall all come to land alive: but mark what Paul says, except these
abide in the ship, ye cannot be safe: ver. 31.
where we may see, as it was the eternal counsel of God to save Paul, and all
that were with him: so he decreed to save all by this particular means of
their abode in the ship. King Ezechias was restored to his health, and received
from God a promise that he should have 15. years added to his days, 2. King.
20.
and the promise was confirmed by sign: now, what does he? cast off all
means? no: but as he was prescribed, so he applies a bunch of dry figs to
his sore, and uses still his ordinary diet. Therefore it is gross ignorance
and madness in men to reason so against Gods decree; God in his unchangeable
counsel, has decreed and set down all things how they shall be; therefore I
will use no means, but live as I list: nay rather we must say the contrary;
because God has decreed this thing or that to be done: therefore I will use the
means which God has appointed to bring the same to pass.

Now follows the Creation, which is nothing else but a work of the blessed
Trinity, forming and framing his creatures which were not before, and that of
nothing. The points to be known concerning the creation, are many. The first,
is the thing by which God did begin and finish the creation. And we must
understand, that at the first God made all things, without any instrument or
means, and not as men do which bring to pass their business by servants and
helps; but only by his word and commandment: as the Psalmist says, He
commanded, and all things were made. In the beginning God said, Psalm. 148.3.
Let their be light, and there was light: and by the same means was the
creation of every creature following. Genesis 1.3.
The very power of the word and commandment of God was such, as by it that
thing was made and had a being, which before was not. It may be demanded, what
word this was by which God is said to make all things. Ans. The word of God in
scripture is taken 3. ways: for the substantial word: for the sou^ding or
written word; for the operative or powerful word. The substa^tial word, is the
second person begotten of the substance of the father. Now howsoever it be
true, that God the father did create al things by his word, that is, by his
Son: yet does it not seem to be true that by these words [ God said, let
there be, this or that] that the Son is m^nt. For that word which God gave
out in the creation was in time, vvheras the Son is the word of the father
before all times: and again, it is a word common to the three persons
equally, whereas the So^ is the word of the father only. Furthermore, it is
not like that it was any sou^ding word standing of letters and syllables, and
uttered to the creatures after the usual manner of me^, that was the cause of
the^: it remains therefore that all things were made by the operative word,
Heb. 1.3.
which is nothing but the pleasure, vvil, and appointment of God, and is more
powerful to bring a thing to pass, then all the means in the world beside.
For Gods vvilling of any thing is his effecting and doing of it And this is
proved by David, when he says, He spoke the word, and they were made: he
commanded, and they were created. Hence we must take out a special lesson,
needful to be learned of every man. Look what power God used and shevved
in making the creatures when they were not, the same power he both can and
vvil show forth in recreating and redeeming sinful me^ by the precious blood
of Christ. By his word he created man's heart when it was not; and he can and
will as easily create in any of such a new heart, Psalm. 51.10.
specially when we use the good means appointed for that end. As, when
Christ said to dead Lazarus, Ioh. 11.44.
Lazarus come forth, he arose and came forth of his grave, though bound hand
and foot: so when the Lord speaks to our dead hearts by his word and spirit,
we shall rise forth of the graves of our sins and corruptions. In the
creation of the great world, God said let there be light, and presently
darkness gave place: and the same he ca^ do to the little world, that is, to
man. We are by nature darkness, and let God but speak to our blind
understandings, our ignorance shall depart, and we shall be enlightened with the
knowledge of the true God and of his vvil: as Paul says, 2. Cor, 4.6.
God that commanded the light to shine out of darkness is he which has shined
in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, God made all creatures, without motion, labor, or defatigation; for
his very bidding of the work to be done, was the doing of it. And this thing
no creature can do, but God only, though unto Adam labor was without pain
before the fall.

Thirdly, the matter and the first beginning of all creatures was nothing, that
is, all things were made, when as there was nothing whereof they might be made,
as Paul says, God calls those things which be not, as though they were.
Romans 4.17.
And indeed in the first creation, al things must be made either of the essence
of God or of nothing: but a creature can not be made of the essence of God, for
it has no parts, it is not divisible, and God made all things that were made
out of himself or his own essence: the conclusion then is, that the framing
of the creatures in the beginning, was not of any matter, but of nothing. This
must teach us to humble our selves: Many there be that stand upon their
ancestors: but let them here look whence they came first, namely, as Abraham
says of himself, of dust and ashes. And what was this dust and ashes made of?
Surely of nothing: wherefore every man's first beginning is of nothing. Well
then, such men as are carried away with their pedigree and descent, if they
look well into it, they shall find small cause to boast or brag. And this
consideration of our first beginning must move us to true humiliatio^ in our
selves.

Fourthly, God in framing his creatures, in the beginning made them good: yea,
very good. Now the goodness of the creature is nothing else, but the perfect
estate of the creature, whereby it was conformable to the will and mind of the
Creator allowing and approouing of it when he had made it: for a creature is
not first good, and then approoved of God: but because it is approoved of God,
therefore it is good. But wherein will some say, stands this goodness of the
creature? I answer, in three things. I. in the comeliness, beauty, and glory
of every work in his kind both in form and constitution of the matter. II.
in the excellency of the virtue which God has given to it: for as he has
appointed every creature for some especial end: so he has fitted and
furnished it with sufficient power and virtue for the accomplishing of the same
end. III. in the exceeding benefit and profitablenesse that came by them to
man. But since the fall of man this goodness of the creature is partly
corrupted and partly diminished. Therefore when we see any want, defect or
deformity in any of them, we must have recourse back again to the apostasy
of our first parents, and remember our fall in them, and say with a sorrowful
heart, this comes to pass, by reason of man's most wretched sin which has
defiled heaven and earth, and drawn a curse not only upon himself, but upon
the rest of the creatures for his sake, whereby their goodness is much defaced.

Fifthly. the end of creation, is the glory of God, as Solomon says, God made
all things for his own sake: yea even the wicked for the day of evil. Prove.
16.4.
And God propounds this principal end to himself, not as though he wanted
glory, and would purchase it unto himself by the creation; for he is most
glorious in himself, and his honor and praise being infinite, can neither be
increased nor decreased: but rather that he might communicate and make manifest
his glory to his creatures, and give them occasion to magnify the same. For
the reasonable creatures of God beholding his glory in the creation, are moved
to testify and declare the same among men.

The sixth shall be touching the time of the beginning of the world, which is,
between five thousand and six thousand years ago. For Moses set down
exactly the computation of time from the making of the world to his own
days: and the Prophets after him have with like diligence set down the
continuance of the same to the very birth of Christ. But for the exact account
of years Chronologers are not all of one mind. Some say there be 3929. from
the creation to Christ's birth, as Beroaldus: some 3952. as Hierome and Bid:
some 3960. as Luther and Io. Lucidus: some 3963. as Melancthon in his Chronicle
and Functius: some 3970. as Bullinger and Tremellius: some toward 4000. as
Buntingus. Now from the birth of Christ to this day are 1592. years, and
adding these together, the whole time amounts. And God would have the very
time of the beginning of the world to be revealed, 1. that it might be known
to the Church, when the covenant of grace was first given by God to man, and
when it was afterward renewed, and how Christ came in the fullness of time,
Gal. 4. 2. that we might know that the world was not made for the eternal and
everliving God, but for man. 3. that we might learn not to set our hearts on
the world and on the things therein which have beginning and end, but seek for
things eternal in heaven. And before the time which I have named began, there
was nothing beside God, the world it self and all things else were uncreated.
Some men use to object and say, What did God do all that while before the
world was? how did he employ himself? what was he idle? Answer. The Jews to
this bad question make as badde an answer. For they say he was continually
occupied in making many little worlds, which he continually destroyed as he made
them, because none pleased him till he made this. But we must rather say, that
some things are revealed which God did then, as that he decreed what should
come to pass when the world was: and that the^ the blessed persons in Trinity
did take eternal delight each in other. If any man will needs know more, Prove.
^.30.
let him hear what Moses says, Secret things belong to the Lord our God,
Deuteronomy. 29.2^.
but things revealed to us and to our children for ever: and let him mark what
one eluding the question, answered: namely, August. lib. 1. confess. c. 12.
that God was making hell fire to burn all such curious persons as will needs
know more of God then he has revealed to them: for where God has not a mouth
to speak, there we must not have an ear to hear: therefore we must let such
curious questions pass.

Seventhly, some may ask in what space did God make the world? I answer. God
could have made the world, and all things in it in one moment: Genesis 1.
but he began and finished the whole work in six distinct days. In the first
day he made the matter of all things and the light: in the second the heavens:
in the third day he brought the sea into his compass, and made the dry land
appear, and caused it to bring forth herbs, plants, and trees: in the fourth
he made the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars in the heaven: in the fifth day
he made the fishes of the sea, the fowls of the heaven, and every creeping
thing: in the sixth day he made the beasts of the field, and all cattle, and
in the end of the sixth day he made man. Thus in six distinct spaces of time,
the Lord did make all things: and that especially for three causes. I. to
teach men that they ought to have a distinct and serious consideration of every
creature: for if God had made the world in a moment, some might have said, this
work is so mistical, that no man can speak of it. But for the preventing of
this cavil, it was his pleasure to make the world and all things therein in
six days: and the seventh day he commanded it to be sanctified by men, that
they might distinctly and seriously meditate upon every work of the creation.
II. God made the world, and every thing therein in six distinct days, to
teach us, what wonderful power and liberty he had over all his creatures: for
he made the light when there was neither Sun nor Moon, nor stars: to
shevve, that in giving light to the world, he is not bound to the Sun, to any
creature, or to any means: for the light was made the first day: but the
Son, the Moon, and the Stars were not created before the fourth day.
Again, trees and plants were created the third day: but yet the Sun, Moon,
and the Stars, and rain which nourish and make herbs, trees, and plants to
grow were not created till after the third day: which shows plainly, that
God can make trees, plants, and herbs to grow without the means of rain, and
without the virtue and operation of the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars.
III. he made the world in six distinct days, and framed all things in this
order, to teach us his wonderful providence of his creatures: for before man
was created he provided for him a dwelling place, and all things necessary for
his perpetual preservation, and perfect happiness and felicity. So also he
created beasts and cattle: but not before he had made herbs, plants, and
grass, and all means whereby they are preserved. And if God had this care
over man when as yet he was not: much more will God have care over him now
when he is, and has a being in nature.

And thus much concerning the points of doctrine touching the creation. The
duties follow. And first by the work of creation we may discern the true
Jehovah from all false gods and idols in the world. This Esaiah makes plain,
bringing in the Lord reasoning thus: I am God, and there is no other God
besides me. How is that proved? thus: I form the light, and create
darkness, I make peace, and create evil: Isa. 45.6, 7.
I the Lord do all these things. If a man ask thee how thou know the true
God from all false gods: thou must answer, by the work of ^^eation: for he
alone is the maker of heaven and earth, and all things in them. This property
can not agree to any creature, to any man, saint, or Angel: nay, not to all
men and all Angels they can not give being to a creature which before was
nothing. Secondly, whereas God the Father is the Creator of all*things, and
has given unto man reason, understanding, and ability, more then to other
creatures, we are taught to consider and meditate of the work of Gods
creation. This the wise man teaches us, saying, Consider the work of God. And
indeed it is a special duty of every man which professes himself to be a
member of Gods Church, Eccles. 7.15.
as he acknowledges God to be the Creator, so to look upon his
workemanshippe and view and consider all creatures. A skillful workman can
have no greater a disgrace, then when he has done some famous thing* to have
his friend pass by his work, and not so much as look upon it. If it be
demanded for what end must we look upon the work of Gods creation? I
answer, that in it we may see and discern Gods power, wisdom, love,
mercy, and providence, and all his attributes, and in all things his glory.
This is a most necessary duty to be learned of every man: we think nothing
too much or to good to bestow on vain shows, and plays, idle sportes and
pastimes, which are the vanities of men, and we do most willingly behold
them: in the mean season utterly neglecting and contemning the glorious work
of Gods creation. Well, the Lord God has appointed his Sabbath to be
sanctified not only by the public ministry of the word, and by private
prayer, but also by an especial consideration and meditation of gods
creatures: and therefore the duty of every man is this, distinctly and
seriously to view and consider the creatures of God; and thereby take occasion
to glorify his name, by ascribing unto him the wisdom, glory, power, and
omnipotency that is due unto him for the same.

Thirdly, we must give God the glory in all his creatures, because he is the
creator of them all. So in the Revelation the four and twenty Elders fall
down before him, and say, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and
honor, Revel. 4.11.
and power: giving this reason: for thou have created all things, and for thy
wills sake they are and have been created. Read the Psalms 147. and 148.
both which tend to this, that God may be praised, because he is the Creator
of all things, and therefore must have all the glory. We know, that when
men behold any curious work of a cunning and skillfull craftesman,
straightway they will leave the work, and inquire after him that made it,
that they may praise his skill. The same is our duty in this case, when we
come abroad, and behold every where in all the creatures the admirable and
unspeakeable wisdom, goodness, and power of God, then we must make have
from the creature, and go forwards to the Creator, to praise and glorify
him: and herein must we shevve our selves to differ from brute beasts, in
that in the use and view of Gods creatures, we do return due glory, praise,
and honor unto the creator.

Our fourth duty is set down by the Prophet Amos, who moving the people to
meet God by repentance, adds a reason taken from the creation: Amos. 4.^.
He that fourmeth the mountains and creates the winds, which declares unto
man what is his thought, which makes the morning darkness, etc. the Lord God
of hosts is his name. The meaning of the Prophet is this, God is a terrible
judge, and we are as traitors and rebels against him: therefore the best way
that we can take is this: he is coming to judgment, let us therefore meet him
and fall down before him, and humble our selves under his mighty hand. And the
holy ghost by the prophet would move the people to meet God by serious
repentance, by a reason framed thus: If God who is their judge, be able to
create the winds, and to form the mountains, and to make the morning darkness:
then he is also able to make an eternal judgment for their confusion. And
therefore all such as be impenitent sinners, let the^ prepare themselves to
turn unto him: and surely if men had grace to lay this to their hearts, they
would not live so long in their sins without repentance as they do: nay
rather, they would prepare themselves to meet him in the way before he come to
judgment, because he is a creator, and therefore able to bring infinite
punishments upon them at his pleasure, and to bring them to nothing as he made
them of nothing. And let them know it, whosoever they be that go forward in
their sins, that God the creator whenever he will, can open hell to
devour them: and that he can show him self as mighty in his judgment to
men's destruction, as he was in the beginning in giving us a being when we
were nothing. Wherefore notable is the practice of David, who ineures himself
to the fear of god by the consideration of his creation, saying, I am
fearfully and wonderfully made, etc. Psalm. 139.14.


Lastly, those which have bin impenitent sinners all their life past* must not
only learn to repent for their sins; but also endeavor to perform
obedience unto gods word. God is a creator, and the thing created should in
all respects be conformable to his will: for David says, Thine hands have
fashioned me, and framed me, Psalm. 119.73*
give me understanding therefore that I may learn thy co^mandeme^ts. And good
reason, for there is no man of any trade, but he would feign have all that he
makes and deuiseth to be used: but yet so as the use thereof must be
conformable to the will of the maker. For this cause Moses that faithful
servant of God says, that the people of Israel dealt wrongfully with the
Lord, why? For he has created them, and proportioned them, he is their father
and he bought them: yet they have dishonored him by corrupting themselves
toward him by their vice. All creatures in heaven and in earth do the will
of the Creator, except man, and the devil and his angels: for the Sun, the
Moon, and the stars, they keep that course which God has appointed them:
but man though he be bound to do the will of God, because god is his Creator,
yet he rebels against him. The potter if in tempering his clay he can not make
and frame it according to his mind, at length he will dash it in pieces: so
God, he creates man, not that he should do his own will, but gods will:
and therefore that man whosoever he be that follovveth the lusts of his own
wicked heart, and will not be brought to be conformable to gods will, but
continues rebellious still, the Lord in his wrath will confound him
eternally. Therefore it stands every man in hand to yield himself pliable
unto gods will, and to endeavor to obey it by keeping a good conscience
before god and all men, and by vvalking faithfully in his calling: otherwise
the end will be confusion. If a man have a trade and other men come into his
shop, and use such instruments as be there to a wrong end, though they were
their own, yet it would grieve him to see it: so god created all things for
his own use, and for the accomplishing of his will: but rebellious man
conformes himself to the devils will, and thereby no doubt he grievously
offends god.

And thus much of the duties. Now in the third place follow the consolations
unto Gods Church and people. Consolations. 1. Pet. 4.19.
First as S. Paul says, God is a creator, yea a faithful creator. The
properties of a faithful creator are two. I. he will preserve his creature:
no man is so tender over any work as he that made it, for he can not abide to
see it any way abused. Now God being a faithful creator, tenderly loves all
his creature. So Job reasons with God, that he will not cast him off,
because he is the work of his hands. II. God will bear with his creature,
Job. 10.3.
to see whether it will be brought to any good end and use before he will
destroy it. And to use the former comparison: The potter will turn and work
the clay every way to make a vessel unto his mind: but if it will frame no
way, then he will cast it away and dash it against the wall. And so God who
created man and still preserves him, and uses all means to make him
conformable to his will, before he cast him away. The Lord did long strive
with men in the old world, to turn them from their wickedness: but when
nothing would serve them, it is said, Genesis 6.3.6.
It repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth. Amongst us every one
is the creature of God: now if we shall rebel against this our creator, it
may be, he will bear with us for a time: but if we continue therein, and do
not turn to him by repentance, he will bring upon us a final destruction both
in body and soul. Yet I say, before he do this he will try all means to
preserve us, and turn us unto him: and afterward, if nothing will serve, then
he will show forth his power in men's confusion: and therefore it stands us in
hand to look unto it.

Secondly, look what power the Lord did manifest in the creation of all
things, the same power he both can and will make manifest in the redemption of
mankind. In the beginning God made all things by his word; and so likewise he
is able still to make by the power of his word, of a wicked man that is dead in
sin, a true and lively member of Christ: which the Prophet Isay signifies
when he says, The Lord that created the heavens and spread them abroad, he
that stretches forth the earth and the body thereof, etc. Isai. 45.5, 6.
I the Lord have called thee in righteousness. This must not encourage evil
men in their wickedness, but it serves to comfort the people of God,
considering that the same God which once created them, is also as able to save
them: and will show himself as mighty in their redemption, as he did in
creating them of nothing.

And thus much of the Creation in general. Now it follovveth that we come to
the handling of the parts thereof. For it is not said barely that God is a
creator; but particularly that he is a creator of heaven and earth: of both
which we will speak in order: and first of the creation of heaven. Heaven] in
Gods word it signifies all that is above the earth: for the air wherein we
breath is called Heaven. And according to this acception of the word, there
are three heavens, as Paul says, He was taken up into the third heaven. The
first of these Heavens is that space, 2. Cor. 12.2.
which is from the earth upvvard unto the firmament, where the stars are.
Thus we read often in the Psalms, the birds which fly in the air betvveene
the earth and the stars, are called the fowls of the heaven: and when God
sent the floode to drown the old world, Moses says, the windows of heaven
were opened: Genesis 7.11.
meaning, that God powered down rain from the clouds abundantly, for the
making of a floode to drown the world. The second heaven is that which
contains the Sun, the Moon, and the stars: so Moses says, that God in
the beginning created the Sun, the Moon, Genesis 1.14.
and the Stars, and placed them in the firmament of heaven. Besides these two
heavens, there is a third which is invisible: and yet it is the work of Gods
hands: and it is that glorious place where Christ in his manhood sits at
the right hand of the father: and whether the souls of the faithful departed
are carried, and placed: and in which at the end of the world shall all the
elect both in body and soul, have perfect joy and bliss in the glorious
sight and presence of God for ever. But for the better conceiving the truth,
we are to scanne and consider three questions. First, whether this third
heaven be a creature; for many have thought it was never created, but was
eternal with God himself: but it is a gross error contrary to Gods word.
Heb. 11.10.
For the Scripture says, Abraham looked for a city (meaning the heavenly
Jerusalem, this third heaven) having a foundation whose builder and maker is
God. Further, if it be eternal, it must either be a creator or a creature:
but it is no creator, for then it should be God: and therefore it must needs
be a creature. But some will say, the Lord is eternal, and this third heaven
has always been the place of the Lords abode, and therefore it is also
eternal. Answer. True it is that God does show his glory and majesty in
the third heaven: but yet that cannot obtain his godhead: as Solomon says,
Behold the heavens, and the heavens of heavens are not able to contain thee.
1. King. 8.27.
Wherefore though God does manifest his eternal glory in this third heaven:
yet it does not follow that therefore it should be eternal: for he needs no
place to dvvell in: for he is every where filling all things with his presence
excluded from no place. The second question where this third heaven is?
Answer. There are some protestants say, it is every where: and they hold this
opinion, to maintain the real presence of the Lords body in or about the
Sacrament. But if it were every where, then hell should be in heaven which no
man will say: but heaven indeed is above these visible heavens which we see
with our eyes: so the Apostle says, Ephesians. 3.7.10.
Christ ascended on high far above all heavens, etc. And again it is said
of Steven, that being full of the holy ghost, He looked up steadfastly into
the heavens, Acts. 7.55, 56.
and saw them open, and the son of man standing at the right hand of God.
Thirdly it may be demanded, why God created this third heaven? Answer. God
made it for this cause, that there might be a certain place, wherein he might
make manifest his glory and majesty to his elect angels and men: for the
which cause it was created a thousand fold more glorious then the two former
heavens are* in which respect it is called Paradise, Luke 23.
by reason of the joy and pleasure arising from Gods glorious presence. And our
Savior Christ calls it the house of God his father; Ioh. 14.2.
because into it must be gathered all Gods children. It is called the kingdom
of heaven, because God is the King thereof, and rules there in perfect glory.
True it is, God has his kingdom here on earth: but he rules not so fully and
gloriously here, as he shall in heaven: for this is the kingdom of grace, but
that is the kingdom of his glory, where he so reigns, that he will be all
in all, first in Christ, and then in the elect both Angels and men.

Now follows the duties whereunto we are moved principally in consideration of
the making of the third heaven. First, if God created it especially for the
manifestation of his glory unto men, that at the end of this world, by the
fruition of Gods most glorious presence, there they might have perfect joy and
felicity: we have occasion here to consider the wonderful madness of the
world that reigns every where among men, which only have regard to the
state of this life, and cast all their care on this world: and never so much as
dream of the joyful and blessed estate which is prepared for Gods children in
the highest heaven. If a man having two houses, one but a homely cottage, and
the other a princely palace, should leave the better, and take all the care
and pains for the dressing up of the first, would not every man say, he were
a mad man? yes undoubtedly. And yet this is the spiritual madness that
reigns every where among men: for God has prepared for us two houses, one is
this our body which we bear about us, which is an house of clay, as Job
says, We dvvell in houses of clay whose foundation is dust, Job. 4.19.
which shall be destroyed before the moth: 2. Pet. 1.14.
and as Peter says, a Tabernacle or tent, which we must shortly take down;
and wherein we abide but as pilgrims and strangers. 1. Pet. 2.12.
Again, the same God of his wonderful goodness has provided for us a second
house in the third heaven, wherein we must not abide for a time and so depart:
but for evermore enjoy the blessed felicity of his glorious presence. For all
this mark a spiritual frenzy possessing the minds of men; for they employ
all their care and industry for the maintaining of this house of claye, whose
foundation is but dust: but for the blessed estate of the second house, which
is prepared for them in the kingdom of heaven, they have no regard or care.
They will both run and ride from place to place day and night, both by Sea
and land: but for what? Is it for the preparing of a mansion place in the
heavenly Jerusalem? Nothing less, for they will scarce go forth of the door
to use any means whereby they may come unto it: but all their study is to
patch up the ruins and breaches of their earthly cabbine. Now let all men
judge in their own consciences, whether as I have said, this be not more then
senseless madness? Again, the body is but a tabernacle, wherein we must rest
as it were for a night, as a stranger does in an Inn, and so away: but the
second house is eternal in the heavens, an everlasting seat of all felicity.
And therefore our duty is above all things, to seek the kingdom of heaven
and the righteousness thereof as Christ himself bids us. Matt. 6.33.
And if the Lord have there prepared such a place for us, then we must in
this world use all good means, whereby we may be made worthy the fruition of
it: and also fit and ready at the day of death to enter into it: which at the
day of judgment we shall fully possess both in soul and body, and there
reign eternally in all happiness with God Almighty our creator, the father,
the son, and the holy ghost. But some may say, how shall a man so prepare
himself that he may be fit for that place? Answer. This the holy ghost
teaches us: for speaking of this heavenly Jerusalem, he says, There shall
enter into it none unclean thing, neither whatsoever works abomination or
lies: Revel. 22.
The means then to make our selves fit, is, to seek to be reconciled to God
in Christ for our sins past, and withal, to endeavor to have an assurance
of the free remission and pardon of them all in the blood of Christ. And as
touching that part of life which is to come, we must remember what S. John
says, 1. Ioh. 3.4.
Every one that has this hope purifieth himself: meaning, that he which has
hope to reign with Christ in heaven, uses the means whereby he may purify
and keep himself from sin, as also he says after, that he which is borne
of God keeps himself and the wicked one touches him not. Signifying, 1.
Ioh. 5.18.
that all such persons as are truly justified and sanctified, carry such a
narrow and strait watch over the whole course of their lives and
conuersations that the devil can never give them deadly wounds, and wholly
overcome them. Now the man that is resolved in his conscience of the pardon of
his sin for the time past, and has a steadfast purpose in his heart to keep
himself upright, and continually to walk in righteousness and true holiness
all the days of his life: this man, I say, is prepared and made fit to enter
into the heavenly Jerusalem: come death when it will, he is ready. And
howsoever he must not look for heaven here upon earth, yet he is as it were
in the suburbs of this heavenly city: and at the end of this life, the king
thereof the Lord Jesus will open the gates and receive him into his kingdom:
for he is already entered into the kingdom of grace, being prepared also,
one day when God will to enter into the kingdom of glory. To conclude this
point, let every man in the fear of God, be moved hereby to set his heart to
prepare him self; that when God shall call him hence, he may be fit to
enter into that glory. Secondly, seeing God has prepared the third heaven
for us, it teaches every man in this world to be content with the estate
wherein God has placed him, whether it be high or low, rich or poor: why so?
because here he is but a pilgrim, and lives in a cottage of clay, and in a
tent wherein he must abide but a while, as a pilgrim does, oftentimes carrying
his house about with him; and we shall in better sort accept the afflictions
which God sends us in this life; if we remember that there is prepared for us a
place of joy, which must be our resting place and perfect felicity for
evermore. This was the practice of the children of God, especially of Abraham:
for when the Lord called him out of his own country, he obeyed, and by
faith abode in the promised land, Heb. 11.9, 10.
as in a strange country, as one that dwelled in tents with Isaac and
Iaakob, heirs with him in the same promise: and the reason follows, for he
looked for a city having a foundation whose builder and maker is God. They
believed that these things which the Lord promised, were shadows of better
things: and hereon stayed them selves, being well content with that estate
whereto god had called them. So Paul was contented to bear the afflictions
which God had laid upon him, and his reason was, 2. Cor. 4. end. and 5. verse.
1.2.
Because (says he) we look not on things which are seen, but on things
which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal. And in the next chapter: We know
(says he) that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, we
have a dwelling given us of God, that is, an house not made with hands, but
eternal in the heavens. And for this cause his desire was rather to remoove
out of this body, and to be with the Lord.

And thus much concerning Heaven. Now follows the second part of Gods
creation in these words, And Earth] Earth signifies the huge mass or body
standing of sea and land, on which we live, and all things that be in or
upon the earth whatsoever: as Paul says, For by him were created all things
that are in heaven or in earth, etc. Col. 1.16.
In other Creedes which were made since this of the Apostles, being expositions
of that; there is added Maker of all things visible and invisible. Here we
have occasion to speak of all creatures, but that were infinite: therefore I
will make choice of these two, good Angels and Men.

I. That Angels had a beginning it is no question: for Paul says, Col. 1.1^.
that by God all things were created in heaven and earth, things visible and
invisible, whether thrones, principalities or powers. And in respect of the
creation, angels are called the sons of God. Job. 38.7
But the time and day of their creation can not be set down further then this,
that they were created in the compass of the six days. For Moses says,
Thus, namely in the compass of the first six days, the heavens and the earth
were fashioned, and all the host of them: that is, all variety of creatures
in heaven and earth serving for the beauty and glory thereof: whereof no
doubt the Angels are the principal.

II. Touching the nature of angels, some have thought that they are nothing but
qualities and motions in the minds of men, as the Sadduces and the Libertines
of this time: but the truth is, that they are spirits, that is, spiritual and
invisible substances, created by God, and really subsisting: for the scripture
ascribes unto them such kind of actions which can not be performed by the
creatures, save only such as be substances: as to stand before the throne of
God, to behold the face of the Father, to carry men's souls to heaven, etc. yet
must we not imagine that they are bodily substa^ces consisting of flesh and
bone. And though they took upon them visible shapes and forms, and did eat
and drink in the company of men, Luke 24.4.
and thereupon are called Men in scripture: yet they did this by divine
dispensation for a time, that they might the better perform the actions and
businesses among men, to which they were by God appointed. And the bodies of
men which they assumed, were no parts of their natures united to them, as our
bodies are to us; but rather they were as garments are to us, which they might
put off and on at their pleasure. If any shall ask, whence they had these
bodies, the answer is, that either they were created of nothing by the power of
God, or framed of some other matter subsisting before. If again it be asked
what became of these bodies when they laid them down, because they used them
but for a time, the answer may be, that if they were made of nothing, they
were again resolved into nothing: if made of other creatures, that then they
were resolved into the same bodies of which they were first made; though indeed
we can define nothing certainly in this point.

III. Angels are reasonable creatures of excellent knowledge and understanding,
far surpassing all men save Christ. Their knowledge is threefold: natural,
revealed, experimental. Natural, which they received from god in the
creation. Revealed, which God makes manifest to them in process of time,
whereas before they knew it not. Thus God revealed to Gabriel the mystery of
the seventy weeks, Dan. 8. and 9. And in the Apocalypse many things are
revealed to the Angels that they might reveal them to us. Experimental
knowledge, is that which they get by observing the dealings of god in the whole
world, but specially in the Church. Ephesians. 3.10^
And thus Paul says, that to principalities and powers in heavenly places is
the manifold wisdom of god by the Church.

IV. And as the knowledge, Psalm. 103.20.
so also the power of the good Angels is exceeding great. They are able to do
more then all men can. Therefore Paul calls them mighty Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
August. de Trin. l. 3. c. 3.
Yea their power is far superior to the power of the wicked angels, who
since the fall are under them and cannot prevail against them.

V. The place of the abode of Angels, is the higest heaven, unless they be
sent thence by the Lord, to do some thing appointed by him. This our Savior
Christ teaches when he says, that the angels of little ones do already
behold the face of the father in heaven. And the wicked angels before their
fall were placed in heaven, for they were cast thence.

VI. That there be certain distinctions and diversities of angels, it is very
likely, because they are called thrones and principalities and powers, Cherubim
and Seraphim. Col. 1.16*
But what be the distinct degrees and orders of angels, and whether they are to
be distinguished by their natures, gifts, or offices, no man by Scripture can
determine.

VII. The ministry of angels to which the Lord has set them apart is
threefold, and it respects either God himself, or his Church, or his
enemies. The ministry which they perform to God, is first of all to adore,
praise, and glorify him continually. Thus the Cherubims in Esaies vision cry
one to another, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of hosts: Isa. 6.2.
the world is full of his glory. And when they were to publish the birth of
the Messiah, they begin on this manner, Luke 2.14.
Glory to God in the highest heavens, peace on earth. And John in his vision
heard the angels about the throne, crying with a loud voice, Worthy is the
Lamb, etc. to receive power, riches, and strength, wisdom, and honor, and
glory, and praise. Apoc. 5.11*
And indeed the heighest end of the ministry of angels is the glory of God.
The second, is to stand in Gods presence, evermore ready to do his
commandments, as David says, Praise the Lord, Psalm. 103.20.
ye his Angels that excel in strength that do his commandments in obeying
the voice of his word. And here is a good lesson for us. We pray daily, that
we may do the will of God as the Angels in heaven do it: let us therefore be
followers of the holy angels in praising God and in doing his commandments as
they do.

The ministry of angels concerning the Church, stands in this, that they are
ministering spirits for the good of them which shall be heirs of salvation.
Heb. 1.14.
The good is threefold; in this life, in the end of this life, and in the
last judgment: again, the good which they procure to the people of God in
this life, is either in respect of body or soul. In respect of the body, in
that they do most carefully perform all manner of duties which do
necessarily tend to preserve the temporal life of Gods children, even from the
beginning of their days to the end. David says, that they pitch their tents
about them that fear the Lord. Psalm. 54.8. Genesis 16.7.
When Agar was cast forth of Abraham's family, and wandered in the wilderness,
an angel comes unto her and gives her counsel to return to her mistres and
humble her self. When Elias fled from Iesabel, he was both comforted, 1. Kin.
19.
directed, and fed by an angel. And an angel bids the same Elias be of good
courage and without fear to go to King Achazias and reprove him. 2. King. 1.
Angels bring Lot and his family out of Sodom and Gomorrha, before they burn
the cities with fire and brimstone. Genesis 19.
When Jacob feared his brother Esau, he saw angels coming unto him: and he
plainly acknowledges that they were sent to be his protectours and his guides
in his journey. Abraham being persuaded of the assistance of Gods angels in
all his ways, Genesis 32.1, 2.
said to his servant, The Lord God of heaven, who took me from my fathers
house, Genesis 24.7.
etc. will send his angel before thee. The wise men that came to see Christ,
are admonished by Angels to return another way: Matt. 2.12, 13.
and Joseph by the direction of an angel fled into Egypt, that he might
preserve Christ from the hands of the cruel tyra^t* Exodus 14.19. and 23.20.
Dan. 3. and 6.
the te^ts of the Israelites was guarded by angels. The 3. children are
delivered from the fiery furnace, and Daniel out of the lyo^s den by angels.
When Christ was in heaviness they ministered unto him and comforted him: Matt.
4.11. Act. 12.
and they brought Peter out of prison and set him at liberty.

Again, the Angels procure good unto the souls of the godly, in that they are
maintainers and furtherers of the true worship of God, and of all good means,
whereby we attain to salvation. The law was delivered in mount Sina by angels:
and a great part of the Revelation of John. Act. 7. Apoc. 5.2.
They expound to Daniel the 70. weeks. They instruct the Apostles touching the
return of Christ to the last judgment. Angels forbid John to worship them,
Apoc. 19. and 22. Act. 5.20.
but to worship God the creator of heaven and earth. They set the Apostles out
of prison, and bid them teach in the temple. An angel brings Philip to the
Eunuch that he may expound the scriptures to him. Lastly, they reveal the
mysteries and the will of God, as to Abraham that he should not kill his son
Isaac, to Marie and Elizabeth the nativity of John Baptist, Luc. 1.
and of Christ our Savior, and all this they do according unto the will of God,
Gal. 1.8. Beside all this, Luc. 15.7, 10.
angels rejoice at the conversion of sinners by the ministry of the Gospel.
And for the Churches sake, they protect not only particular men, but even
whole nations and kingdoms.

The ministry of Angels in the end of this life, is to carry the souls of
the godly into Abraham's bosom, as they did the soul of Lazarus. Luc. 16.
Matt. 28.31.
And in the day of judgment to gather all the Elect that they may come before
Christ, and enter into eternal fruition of glory both in body and soul.

The third and last part of the minsterie of angels, concerns Gods enemies; and
it is to execute judgments on all wicked persons and impenitent sinners. Thus
all the first borne of Egypt are slain by an angel. Exodus 12. Ios. 5.
When Joshua was about to sack Ierico, an angel appeared unto him as a
captain, with a drawn sword to fight for Israel. When the host of Senacherib
came against Israel, 2. Kin. 19.15.
the angel of the Lord in one night slew an hundred eighty and five thousand.
Because Herod gave not glory unto God, the angel of the Lord smote him so as
he was eaten up of lice and died.

And thus we see what points we are to mark touching the good Angels. Now
follows the use which we are to make in regard of their creation. First,
whereas they are Gods ministers to inflict punishments upon the wicked, here is
a special point to be learned of us; that every man in the fear of God take
heed how he lives and continues in his sins, for the case is dangerous
considering that God has armies of angels, which stand ready every where to
execute Gods heavy judgments upon them that live thus. When the people of
Israel had sinned against the Lord, Moses says, they were naked, that is, open
to all the judgments of God; Exodus 32.25
even destitute of the guard of his good Angels. VVretched Balaam that wizard
went to Balaac to curse the children of Israel: and as he went, it is said, the
angel of the Lord stood in his way with a drawn sword: and if the ass had not
been wiser then his master, the angel had slain him. Whereby it appears,
that when we rush on into the practice of any sin, we do as much as in us
lies to cause God to send down his judgments upon us for our sins; and
that by the ministry of his angels. Secondly, we are taught another lesson by
Christ himself: See (says he) that you despise not one of these little ones:
now mark his reason: Matt. 18.10.
for I say unto you, that in heaven their Angels do always behold the face of
my father. By little ones he means young infants which are within the
covenant; or others which are like to young infants in simplicity and
innocence of life and humility. And Christ will not have them to be despised.
A duty very needful to be stood upon in these times. For now adays if a
man carry but a show of humility, of good conscience, and of the fear of
God, he is accounted but a silly fellow, he is hated, mocked, and despised on
every hand. But this ought not to be so. For him whom God honors with the
protection of his good angels, why should any mortal man despise? And it
stands mockers and scorners in hand to take heed whom they mock. For though
men for their parts put up many abuses and injuries, yet their angels may take
just revenge by smiting them with plagues and punishments for their offenses.

Thirdly, seeing angels are about us, and serve for the good of men, we must
do whatsoever we do in reverent and seemly manner, as Paul gives counsel to
the Philippians; Brethren, says he, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, Phil. 4.8.
just, pure, and pertain to love, of good report: if there be any virtue, if
there be any praise, think on these things: many men do all their affairs
orderly for avoiding shame; but we must do the same upon a further ground,
namely because Gods holy angels wait on us. And considering that men have care
to behave themselves well when they are before men: what a shame is it for a
man to behave himself unseemly either in open or in secret, he then being
before the glorious angels. Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.10.
that the woman ought to have power on her head, because of the Angels, that
is, not only the ministers of the Church, but Gods heavenly angels, which
daily wait upon his children, and guard them in all their ways.

Fourthly, this must teach us modesty, and humility: for the angels of God,
are very notable and excellent creatures; and therefore they are called in the
Psalms Elohim, Psalm. 8.5.
gods: yet how excellent so ever they be, they abase themselves to become
guardiens and keepers unto sinful men. Now if the angels do so abase
themselves; then much more ought every man to abase and humble himself in
modesty, and humility before God; and what so ever our calling is, we must
not be puffed up but be content. This is a necessary duty for all, but
especially for those which are in the schools of the Prophets: whatsoever
their gifts or birth be, they must not think themselves too good for the
calling of the ministry. And if God have called us thereunto, we must be
content to become servants unto all in the matter of salvation; though the me^
be never so base or simple: for no man does so far excel the basest person
in the world, as the glorious angels of God do exceed the most excellent man
that is: therefore seeing they vouchsafe to become servants unto us, we must
not think our selves to good to serve our poor brethren.

And thus much of the duties. Now follow the consolations that arise from
this, that God has given his glorious angels to serve for the protection and
safeguard of his Church and people. If men's spiritual eyes were open, they
should see the devil and his angels, and all the wicked of this world to fight
against them: and if there were no means of comfort in this case, then our
estate were most miserable. But mark; as Gods servant has all these wicked
ones to be his enemies: so he has garrisons of angels that pitch their tents
about him, and defend him from them all. So David says, He shall give his
Angels charge over thee, and they shall keep thee in all thy ways that thou
dash not thy foot against a stone: Psalm. 91.
where the Angels of God are compared to nurces, which carry little children in
their arms, feed them, and are always ready at hand, to save them from
falls and many other dangers. When the king of Syria sent his horses and
chariots to take Elisha the Lords prophet, because he revealed his counsel to
the king of Israel: his servant saw them round about Dothan where he was, 2.
Kin. 16.17
and he cried, Alas, master, what shall we do? then Elisha answered, Fear
not: for they that be with us, are more then they that be with them: and he
besought the Lord to open his servants eyes, that he might see: and the Lord
opened his eyes, and he looked and behold, the mountains were full of horses
and charriots of fire round about Elisha. So likewise not many years ago, our
land was preserved from the invasion of the Spainyards, whose huge Navy lay
upon our sea coasts: but how were we delivered from them? surely by no strength
nor power, nor cunning of man; but it was the Lord, no doubt, by his Angels
that did keep our coasts, and did scatter our enemies, and drown them. Let
enemies rage, and let them do what they will, if a man keep himself in the
ways which God prescribes, he has gods angels to guide and preserve him:
which thing must move men to love and embrace the true religion, and to
conform themselves in all good conscience to the rule of Gods word. For when a
man does not so, all the angels of God are his enemies, and at all times ready
to execute Gods vengeance upon him: but when me^ carry themselves as dutiful
children to God, they have this prerogative that Gods holy Angels do watch
about them, and defend them day and night from the power of their enemies, even
in common calamities and miseries. Before God sends his judgments on
Jerusalem, an angel is sent to mark them in the foreheads that mourn for the
abominations of the people. Ezech. 9.4.
And this privilege none can have, Exo. 12.23. with 1. Cor. 5.7.
but he whose heart is sprinkled with the blood of Christ, and that man shall
have it unto the end.

And thus much of the creation of Angels. Now it follows to speak of the
creation of Man: wherein we must consider 2. things: I. the points of doctrine:
II. the uses. For the points of doctrine. First, Man was created and framed by
the hand of God, and made after the image of God: for Moses brings in the Lord
speaking thus, Genesis 1.26.
Let us make man in our image, etc. in the image of God created he them, which
also must be understood of Angels. The image of God, is nothing else but a
conformity of man unto God, whereby man is holy, as God is holy: for Paul
says, Ephesians. 2.24.
Put on the new man which after God, that is, in Gods image, is created in
righteousness and true holiness. Now I reason thus: wherein the renewing of the
Image of God in man does stand, therein it was in the beginning: but the
renewing of Gods image in man does stand in righteousness and holiness: therefore
Gods image wherein man was created at the beginning, was a conformity to God
in righteousness and holiness. Now whether Gods image does further consist in the
substance of man's body and soul, or in the faculties of both, the Scripture
speaks nothing. This Image of God has two principal parts: I. wisdom: II.
holiness. Colos. 3.10.
Concerning wisdom Paul says, Put ye on the new man which is created in
knowledge, after the Jmage of him which created him. This wisdom consists in
three points: I. in that he knew God his creator perfectly: for Adam in his
innocence knew God so farforth as it was convenient for a creature to know his
creator. II. He knew Gods will so far forth as it was convenient for him,
to show his obedience thereunto. III. He knew the wisdom and will of his
creator touching the particular creatures: for after Adam was created, the
Lord brought every creature unto him, presenting them unto him as being lord
and king over them, that he might give names unto them. Whereby it appears
that Adam in his innocence did know the nature of all creatures; and the
wisdom of God in creating them, else he could not have given them fit names:
and when God brought Eve unto Adam, he knew her at the first, and said, This
is now bone of my bone, Genesis 2.23.
and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called woman, etc. The second part of Gods
image in man, is holiness and righteousness; which is nothing else but a
conformity of the will and affections, and of the whole disposition of man
both in body and soul, to the will of God his creator. Yet we must remember
that Adam in his innocence had a changeable will, so as he could either will
good or evil: he was created with such liberty of will, as that he could
indifferently will either. And we must not think that the will of the creature
was made unchangeably good: for that is peculiar to the will of God, and hereby
is the Creator distinguished from the creature.

And here two things offer them selves to be considered. The first, why the man
is called the image of God, and not the woman. 1. Cor. 11.7.
Answer. He is so called, not because holiness and righteousness is peculiar to
him which is common to both: but because God has placed more outward
excellency and dignity in the person of a man then of a woman. The second,
how Christ should be called the image of God. Ans. Col. 1.16.
He is so called for 2. causes. First, because he is of the same substance with
the father; and therefore is his most absolute image, and as the author of the
Hebrews says, the brightness of his glory and the ingraued form of his
person. Heb. 1.3.
Secondly, because God being invisible does manifest himself in Christ; in
whom as in a glass we may behold the wisdom, goodness, the justice and mercy
of God.

The second point to be considered in the creation of man, is the dignity of
his person: for David says, thou have made man little inferior to the
Angels, Psalm. 8.5.
and crowned him with glory, and worship. This dignity stands in four
points. I. A blessed communion with the true God: for Paul speaking of the
Gentiles which were not called, says they were strangers from the life of God.
Ephesians. 4.18.
Where by the contrary we may gather, that our first parents in their
innocence lived the life of God, which is nothing else but to lead such a life
here on earth, as that the creature shall have a blessed and immediate
fellowship with God, which stands in this, that before the fall of man, God
revealed himself in a special manner unto him, so as his very body and soul
was a temple and dwelling place of the Creator. This fellowship between God
and man in his innocence, was made manifest in the familiar conference which
God vouchsafed to man: but since the fall, this communion is lost: for man
cannot abide the presence of God. And therefore when Peter had fished all
night, and caught nothing, our Savior bad him cast down his net to make a
draught, Luke 5.8.
who did so; but when he saw the great multitude of fishes that were taken, at
this sight beholding but as it were some sparks of the glorious majesty of
God in Christ, he fell down at his feet, saying, Lord, depart from me, for I
am a sinner. The second point wherein man's dignity consists, is that man was
made lord and king over all creatures, as David says, Thou have made him to
have dominion in the works of thy hands: Psalm. 8.6.
and therefore God having created him in his image, he bids him rule over
the fishes of the sea, Genesis 1.28.
over the fowls of the heaven, and over every beast that moves upon the
earth: and afterward he brought them all to him, as to a sovereign lord and
king to be named by him: and answeareably every creature in his kind gave
reverence and subjection unto man before his fall, as unto their lord and
king. Where by the way we must remember, that when we see any creature that
is hurtful and noisome unto man, and would rather devour him then obey him;
it must put us in mind of our sin: for by creation we were made lords and
kings over all creatures, and they durst not but reverence and obey us: but the
rebellion of man unto God is the cause of the rebellion of the creatures unto
us. The third part of man's dignity by creation is, that before his fall he had
a wonderful beauty and majesty above all creatures in his body: whereupon
David says, The Lord has crowned him with glory and worship. Psalm. 8.
And in the renewing of the covenant with Noe, God says, Genesis 9.2.
That the dread and fear of man shall be upon all creatures: which now though
it be but small, yet it plainly shows what was the glory and majesty of
man's person at the first. The fourth dignity of man's estate in innocence is,
that his labor was without pain or weariness: if he had never fallen he
should have labored in the garden* but so as he should never have been
wearied therewith. That it is so, it is plain, for when Adam had fallen, God
said, In the sweat of thy face, shall thou eat thy bread: now if the pain
in labor come after as a curse upon man for his transgression, then before his
fall man felt no pain in his affairs. And in these four things consists
man's dignity which he had in the creation.

Now in the third place follows man's calling before his fall: which is
twofold: I. particular: II. general. Man's particular calling was to come into
the garden of Eden, to keep it, and to dress the trees and fruits thereof.
This shows unto us a good lesson, that every man must have a particular
calling wherein he ought to walk: and therefore such as spend their time
idly in gaming and vain delights, have much to answer to God at the day of
judgment. This will not excuse a man to say then, that he had land and living
to maintain himself, and therefore was to live as he list, for even Adam in
his innocence had al things at his will, and wanted nothing, yet even then God
employed him in a calling: therefore high and low, none must be exempted, every
man must walk in his proper calling. Adams general calling, was to worship
his Creator, to which he was bound by the right of creation, considering the
moral law was written in his heart by nature. Which is signified in the
decalogue; where the Lord requires worship and obedience of his people, because
he is Jehovah, that is, one which has being in himself, Exodus 20.2.
and gives being to all men by creation. For the better understanding of this
point, we are to consider three things. I. The place where Adam did worship.
II. The time. III. The sacraments. For the first, God ever since the beginning
had a place where he would be worshipped, Genesis 28.17.
and it is called Gods house, which then was the garden of Eden. For it was
unto Adam a place appointed by God for his worship, as Church Assemblies are
unto us: where also the Lord at time did in a special manner show himself
unto his creature. Touching the time of Gods worship, it was the seventh day
from the beginning of the creation, the Sabbath day. And here we must note,
that the keeping of the Sabbath is moral. Some indeed do plead that it is
but a ceremony; yet falsely: for it was ordained before the fall of man, at
which time Ceremonies signifying sanctification had no place. Nay mark
further: Adam in his innocence was not clogged with sin as we are: and yet
then he must have a set Sabbath to worship God his creator: and therefore much
more need has every one of us of a sabbath day, wherein we may sever our
selves from the works of our callings, and the works of sin, to the worship
of God in the exercise of religion, and godly meditation of our creation. This
point must be learned of us, for when no occasion is offered of business, then
men will formally seem to keep the sabbath: but if their come occasion of
breaking the sabbath, as traffic, gaming, and vain shows, then sabbath
farewell, men will have their pleasures, let them worship God that will. But
let us remember in the fear of God, that who so ever continues in the breach
of this law being moral, God will no less pour forth his punishments upon
them, then for the breach of any other commandment: the consideration whereof,
must move every man to a reverent sanctifying of the Lords day.

Now for Adams sacraments, they were two: the tree of life: and the tree of
knowledge of good and evil: these did serve to exercise Adam in obedience unto
God. The tree of life was to signify assurance of life for ever, if he did
keep Gods commandments: the tree of knowledge of good and evil, was a
sacrament to show unto him, that if he did transgress Gods commandments, he
should die: and it was so called, because it did signify that if he
tra^sgresse this law, he should have experience both of good and evil in
himself.

Now in the fourth place follows the end of the creation of man, which is
twofold. First, that there might be a creature to whom God might make
manifest him self, who in a special manner should set forth and acknowledge
his wisdom* goodness, mercy, in the creation of heaven and earth, and of
things that are in them, as also his providence in governing the same.
Secondly, God having decreed to glorify his name in showing his mercy and
justice upon his creature, hereupon in time creates men to show his mercy in
the salvation of some, and to show his justice in the just and deserved
damnation of other some. And therefore he has appointed the creation specially
of man, to be a means of manifestation and beginning of the execution of his
eternal counsel.

Thus much concerning man's creation in general. The special parts of man, are
two; body, and soul. And the reason why the Lord would have him stand on
these two parts is this: Some creatures made before him were only bodily, as
beasts, fishes, fowls: some spiritual, as Angels: now man is both; spiritual
in regard of his soul, corporal and sensible in regard of his body; that
nothing might be wanting to the perfection of nature. If it be alleged that
man consistes of three parts, body, soul, and spirit; because Paul prays
that the Thessalonians may be sanctified in body, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
soul and spirit: the answer is, that the spirit signifies the mind whereby
men conceive and understand such things as may be understood: and the soul is
there taken for the will and affections; and therefore these twain are not two
parts, but only two distinct faculties of one and the same man.

The body of man at the first was formed by God of clay or of the dust of the
earth, not to be the grave of the body, as Plato said, but to be an excellent
and most fit instrument to put in exequution the powers and faculties of the
soul. And howsoever in it self considered, it is mortal; because it is
compounded of contrary natures called Elements: yet by the appointment of God
in the creation, it became immortal till the fall of man.

As for the soul, it is no accidentarie quality, but a spiritual and
invisible essence or nature, Zach. 12.
subsisting by it self. Which plainly appears in that the souls of men have
being and continuance as well forth of the body as in the same; and are as
well subject to torments as the body is. And whereas we can and do put in
practice sundry actions of life, sense, motion, understanding, we do it only
by the power and virtue of the soul.

Hence arises the difference between the souls of men, and beasts. The souls
of men are substances: but the souls of other creatures seem not to be
substances: because they have no being out of the bodies in which they are: but
rather they are certain peculiar qualities arising of the matter of the body,
and vanishing with it. And it may be for this cause that the soul of the beast
is said to be in the blood; Genesis 9.5.
whereas the like is not said of the soul of man.

And though men's souls be spirits as angels are, yet a difference must be
made. For angels can not be united with bodies so as both shall make one whole
and entire person; whereas men's souls may: yea the soul coupled with the
body is not only the moouer of the body, but the principal cause that makes
man to be a man.

The beginning of the soul is not of the essence of God; unless we will make
every man's soul to be God: neither does it spring of the soul of the parents,
for the soul can no more beget a soul, then an angel can beget an angel. And
Adam is called a living soul, and not a quickening soul. And earthly fathers
are called the fathers of our bodies, 1. Cor. 15. Heb. 12.
and not of our souls. It remains therefore as being most agreeable to the
Scriptures, that the souls of men are then created by God of nothing, when
they are infused into the body.

And though the souls of men have a beginning, yet they have no end, but are
eternal. And when they are said to die, it is not because they cease at any
time to subsist or have being in nature, but because they cease to be
righteous or to have fellowship with God.

Whereas our bodies are Gods workmanship, we must glorify him in our bodies,
and all the actions of body and soul, our eating and drinking, our living and
dying, must be referred to his glory; ye^ we must not hurt or abuse our
bodies, but present them as holy and living sacrifices unto God. 1. Cor. 16.31.
Romans 12.1.
And whereas God made us of the dust of the earth, we are not to glory and
boast our selves, but rather to take occasion to praise the great goodness of
God, that has vouchsafed to honor us being but dust and ashes. And after
that man is created, what is his life? alas, it is nothing but a little breath:
stop his mouth and his nostrils, and he is but a dead man. By this we are put
in mind to consider of our frail and uncertain estate, and to lay aside all
confidence in our selves: Esaias 2.22.
and for this cause the Prophet Esaias teaches us to have no confidence in man,
because his breath is in his nostrils. Again, let us mark the frame and shape
of man's body. Al other creatures go with their bodies and eyes to the
ground-ward; but man was made to go upright: and whereas all other creatures
have but four muscles to turn their eyes round about, Columb. l. 5. cap. 9.
man has a fifth to pull his eyes up to heaven-warde. Now what does this teach
us? surely that how so ever we seek for other things, yet first of all and
above all, we should seek for the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness
thereof: and that our whole desire should be set to enjoy the blessed estate of
Gods children in heaven. Secondly, it teaches us in receiving Gods creatures,
to return thankfulness unto* God by lifting up the heart to heaven for the
same. These are very needful and profitable lessons in these days; for most
men in deed go upright: but look into their lives, and they might as well
go on all four: for in their conversation they set their whole hearts upon
the earth, as the beast does, and their eyes upon the things of this world:
hereby they do abase them selves, and deface their bodies, and being men make
themselves as beasts: we shall see great numbers of men that run and ride
from place to place, to provide for the body, but to seek the kingdom of
heaven where their souls should dwell after this life in joy for ever, they
will not stir one foot.

Thirdly, man's body by creation, was made a temple framed by Gods own hands
for himself to dwell in: 1. Cor. 6.15.
therefore our duty is to keep our bodies pure and clean, and not to suffer
them to be instruments whereby to practice the sin of the heart. If a man had
a fair house wherein he must entertain a prince, and should make hereof a
swinestie, or a stable, would not all me^ say, that he did greatly abuse both
the house and the prince: even so man's body being at the first made a palace
for the everliving God; if a man shall abuse it by drunkenness, swearing,
lying, fornication, or any uncleanness, he does make it in stead of a temple
for the holy Ghost, to be a s^ie or stable for the devil. For the more filthy
a man's body is, the more fit it is to be a dwelling place for sin and Satan.

Fourthly, man by creation was made a goodly creature in the blessed image of
God: but by Adams fall men lost the same, and are now become the deformed
children of wrath: our duty therefore is, to labor to get again our first
image, and endeavor our selves to become new creatures. If a noble man should
stain his blood by treason, after his death the posterity will never be at
rest, till they have got away that spot: Man by Adams fall, is become a limme
of the devil, a rebel and traitor against Gods majesty: and this is the
state of every one of us: by nature we are at enmity with God, and therefore
we ought to labor above all things in the world, to be restored in Christ to
our first estate and perfection, that so we may become bone of his bone, flesh
of his flesh, being justified and sanctified by his obedience, death, and
passion.

Fifthly, man was created that there might be a way prepared, whereby God might
show his grace and mercy in the salvation of some, and his justice in the
deserved damnation of others for their sins: and in the creation of man Gods
eternal counsel begins to come into exequution. Hereupon it stands us in hand
to make conscience of every evil way, being repentant for all our sins
past, and having a constant purpose never to sin more as we have done, that
by our good conversation here in this life we may have assurance that we be
eternally chosen to salvation by the Lord himself.

Lastly, whereas we have learned that the soul of man is immortal, we are
hereby taught to take more care for the soul, then for the body. For it can
not be extinguished. When it is condemned, even then it is always in dying,
and can never die. But, alas, in this point the case is ^lat contrary in the
world: for men will labor all their life long to get for the body, but for
the soul they care little or nothing at all, choose it whether it sink or
swim, go to heaven or to hell, they look not to it. This does appear to be
true, by the practice and behavior of men on the Lords day: for if the number
of those which come to hear Gods word, were compared with those which run
about their worldly wealth and pleasure, I fear me the better sort would be
found to be but a little handful to a huge heap, or as a drop to the Ocean
sea, in respect of the other. But will thou go an hundred mile for the
increase of thy wealth, and delight of thy body? then think it not much to go
ten thousand miles (if need were) to take any pains for the good of thy
soul, and to get food for the same.

And thus much for the duties. Now follow the consolations. Although by reason
of the fall of man we can have but little comfort now: yet the creation does
con^^rme the unspeakable providence of God over his creatures, but especially
over man, in that the Lord created him the sixth day: and so before he was
made prepared for him a Paradise for his dwelling, and all creatures both for
his use and comfort. And if he were thus careful for us when we were not, then
no doubt he will be much more careful for us at this present, in which we live
and have being. Nay, mark further, since the fall man eats and drinks in
quantity a great deal, which in common reason should rather kill him, then
turn to the strength and nourishment of his body: yet herein does the
wonderful power of the Creator most notably appear: who has made man's
stomach as a lymbecke or still to digest all meats that are wholesome for his
nourishment and preservation.

And thus much for the Creation. Now in these words, Maker of heaven and earth]
is more to be understood then the work of creation, namely Gods providence in
governing all things created, as he appointed in his eternal decree: and
therefore Saint Peter says, God is a faithful creator, that is, God did not
only make heaven and earth, and so leave them, as masons and carpenters leave
houses when they are built: but by his providence does most wisely govern the
same. Now therefore let us come to speak of Gods providence. And first of all
the question offers it self to be considered, whether there be any providence
of God or no: for the minds of men are troubled with many doubtings hereof.
And to make the question out of all doubt, I will use four arguments to
confirm the providence of God. The first is the testimony of the scripture,
which ascribes the event of all particular actions, even such as are in
themselves casual, as the casting of lots and such like to the disposition of
God: Prove. 16.33.
which also teaches that even men themselves, which are endued with reason and
understanding have need to be guided in all things and governed by God; Pro.
20.24. Ier. 10.23.
and blames those that deny Gods providence. Why say thou, O Jacob, and
speak, O Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, Isai. 40.27.
and my judgment is past over by my God? The second argument may be taken from
the order which appears in the whole course of nature. First to begin with
families; there is to be seen an eutaxy or seemly order, in which some rule
and some obey: and the like is to be found in towns, cities, cuntries, and
kingdoms: yea even in the whole world: in which all things are so disposed,
that one serves for the good of another. Trees and herbs, and grass of the
fields serve for beasts and cattle: and beasts and cattle serve for men:
the heavens above serve for them which are beneath: and all the creatures which
are above and beneath serve for God. This argues that God is most wise and
provident in ordering and disposing all things whatsoever. The third argument
is taken from the conscience specially of malefactors. Suppose a man that
commits a murder so closely that no man knows thereof; and that the party
himself is free from all the danger of law: yet shall he have his own
conscience to accuse, upbraid, and condemn him, yea even to freight him out of
his wit:, and to give him no more rest then he can find upon the rack or
gibbet. Now this accusation and terror of conscience is nothing else, but the
forerunner of an other most terrible judgment of God, who is Lord of all
creatures and Judge of all men. And this also proves the providence of god.
For if the conscience can find a man out, and lay his faults to his charge,
how much more shall god himself the creator of the conscience see and
consider all his doings. The fourth and last argument is this. The prophesies
of things to come should be uncerten or false, if god governed not the world.
But now considering things many years ago foretold, come to pass in the same
manner as they were foretold by the Prophets and Apostles: hereby we must
certainly conclude that there is a providence of god whereby all and every
thing is governed.

Against the providence of god sundry things be alleged. The first and
special is, that providence and disorder, confusion and order can not stand
together. Now in the world there is nothing but disorder and confusion in
seditions, treasons, conspiracies, and subuersions of kingdoms: where also
sin and wickedness prevails. Answer. It is true indeed there has been
confusion in the world ever since the fall of man and angels: and it arises
not from God, but from them alone: who as they did at the first transgress the
will of God, so they do what they can to turn all upside down. Now then
confusion and disorder is only in respect of the devil and his instruments:
but in regard of God in the very midst of all confusion there is order to be
found: because he can and does dispose it to the glory of his own name, and
to the good and salvation of his chosen, as also to the confusion of his
enemies.

Again it may be objected that with ungodly and wicked men all things go
well, and contrariwise with the godly all things go hardly. For through the
world none are more molested and more under outward misery then they: but if
there were any providence of God then it should be otherwise; the godly should
flourish, and the wicked perish. Ans. The consideration of the outward estate of
men in the world, was to David an occasion of a sore temptation. For when he
savv the wicked to prosper always, and their riches to increase, he brake forth
and said, Certainly I have cleansed my heart in vain, Psalm. 73.13, 14.
and vvashed mine hands in innocence. Now if we would repel this temptation,
as David afterward did, then we must go into the Lords sanctuary with him and
learn to be resolved in these points. Verse. 17.
I. Though the godly be laden with miseries, yet even that, by the especial
providence of God, turns to their great good. For every man since the fall of
Adam is stained with the loathsome contagion of sin. Now the child of God
that is truly regenerate, and must be fellow heir with Christ after this life
in the kingdom of glory, must in this life be cast into the Lords furnace,
that in the fire of affliction he may more and more be scoured and purified
from the corruption of his nature, and be estranged from the wickedness of the
world. II. The prosperous success of the wicked, their spoils, their
revenues, and all their honor turns to their greater woe and misery in the
end: as does appear in Jobs history, and in the examples of the Chaldeans, of
David's enemies, and of Dives and Lazarus.

Thirdly it may be objected that many things came to pass by chance, and
therefore not by gods providence: because chance and providence cannot stand
together. Ans. We must distinguish between chance and mere chance. Chance is,
when any thing comes to pass, the cause thereof being unknown not simply but in
respect of man: and therefore in regard of me^ which know not the reason of
things, we may say there is chance: and so the spirit of God speaks. Time and
chance comes to them all. And again, Eccles. 9.11. Luke 10.31.
By chance there came down a priest the same way. Now this kind of chance is
not against the providence of god, but is ordered by it. For things which in
regard of men are casual, are certainly known and determined by god. Mere
chance is when things are said or thought to come to pass without any cause at
all. But that must be abhorred of us as ouerturning the providence of God.

Thus seeing it is plain that there is a providence, let us in the next place
see what it is. Providence is a most free and powerful actio^ of god whereby he
has care over al things that are.

Providence has 2. parts; knowledge and government* Gods knowledge is,
whereby all things from the greatest to the least are manifest before him at
all times. As David says, His eyes will consider: his eye l^ddes will try
the children of men, Psalm. 11.4. Psalm. 113.6.
And again, He abaseth himself to behold the things that are in the heaven
and the earth. And the Prophet Hanani said to Asa, 2. Chr. 16.9.
The eyes of the Lord behold all the earth. And S. James says, From the
beginning of the world God knows all his works. Act. 15.18.
This point has a double use. First, as S. Peter says, it must move us to
eschew evil and do good: why? Because, says he, the eyes of the Lord are
upon the just, 1. Pet. 3.11.
and his covntenance against evil doers. Secondly it must comfort all those
that labor to keep a good conscience. For the eyes of God behold all the
earth to show himself strong with them that are of perfect heart toward
him. 2. Chr. 16.9.


Government is the second part of Gods providence, whereby he orders all
things and directs them to good ends. And it must be extended to the very
least thing that is in heaven or earth, Mat. 6.26. Deuteronomy. 15*4. Mat. 10.10.
as to the sparrowes, and to oxen, and the hairs of our heads. And here we
must consider 2. things, the manner of government, and the means.

The manner of government is diverse according as things are good or evil. A
good thing is that which is approved of God. As first of all the substances of
all creatures; even of the devils themselves: in whom whatsoever is remaining
since their creation is in it self good. Secondly, the quantities, qualities,
motions, actions, and inclinations of the creatures in themselves considered
with all their events are good. Again, good is either natural or moral.
Natural, which is created by God for the lawful use of man. Moral, which is
agreeable to the eternal and unchangeable wisdom of God, revealed in the
moral law.

Now God governs all good things two ways. First by sustaining and
preserving them that they decay not: secondly by moving them that they may
attain to the particular ends for which they were severally ordained* for the
qualities and virtues which were placed in the Sun, Moon, Stars, trees,
plants, seeds, etc. would be dead in them and be unprofitable, unless they
were not only preserved, but also stirred up and quickened by the power of God
so often as he imployes them to any use.

Evil is the destruction of nature: and it is taken for sin or for the
punishment of sin. Now sin is governed of God by two actions: the first is
an operative permission. I so call it, because god partly permits sin, and
partly works in it. For sin as it is commonly taken has two parts; the
subject or matter, and the form of sin: the subject of sin is a certain
quality or action; the form is the anomie or transgression of Gods law. The
first is good in it self, and every quality or action so far forth as it is
a quality or action is existing in nature, and has God to be the author of
it. Therefore sin though it be sufficiently evil to eternal damnation, yet
can it not be said to be absolutely evil as God is absolutely good, because
the subject of it is good, and therefore it has in it respects and regardes
of goodness. In respect of the second, that is the breach of the law it
self, God neither wills, nor appoints, nor commands, nor causes, nor
helps sin, but forbids, condemns and punishes it: yet so, as by
withal he willingly permits it to be done by others, as men and wicked
angels, they being the sole authors and causes of it. And this permission by
God is upon a good end: because thereby he manifests his justice and mercy.
Thus it appears that in original sin, the natural inclination of the mind,
will, and affections in it self considered, is from God, and the ataxie or
corruption of the inclination in no wise from him, but only permitted: and
that in actual sin the motion of the body or mind is from God, but the
euilnes and disorder of the motion is not from him, but freely permitted to be
done by others. As for example in the act of murder, the actions of moving the
whole body, of stirring the several joints, and the fetching of the blow
whereby the man is slain, is from God; for in him we live, move, and have our
being: Acts. 17.28.
but the disposing and applying of all these actions to this end, that our
neighbors life may be taken away and we thereby take revenge upon him, is not
from God, but from wicked men and the devil.

Gods second action* in the government of sin, is after the just permission
of it, partly to restrain it more or less according to his good will and
pleasure, and partly to dispose and turn it against the nature thereof to the
glory of his own name, to the punishment of his enemies, and to the
correcting and chastisement of his elect.

As for the second kind of evil called the punishment of sin, it is the
execution of justice, and has God to be the author of it. And in this respect
Esai says, that God creates evil: Isai. 45.7. Amos. 3.
and Amos, that there is no evil in the city which the Lord has not done.
And God as a most just judge may punish sin by sin, himself in the mean
season free from all sin. And thus the places must be understood in which it
is said, Neh. 9.37. Exo. 4. and 7. Isai. 19.14. Romans 1.28. 2. These. 2.11. 1.
Kin. 22.22.
that God gives kings in his wrath, hardens the heart, blinds the eyes,
mingleth the spirit of errors, gives up men to a reprobate sense, sends
strange illusions to believe lies, sends evil spirits giving them commandment
to hurt, and leave to deceive, etc.

Thus having seen in what manner God governs all things, let us now come to
the means of government. Sometimes God works without means, thus he created
all things in the beginning; and he made trees and plants to grow and flourish
without the heat of the sun or rain: sometimes he gouernes according to the
usual course and order of nature, as when he preserues our lives by meat and
drink: yet so, as he can and does most freely order all things by means
either above nature or against nature, as it shall seem good unto him. As when
he caused the sun to stand in the firmament, Ios. 10. Isai. 38. Dan. 3. 1.
King. 18. Exodus 17. 2. King. 2. 2. King. 6. Jonas. 2. 2. King. 5. Mat. 9. Ioh.
9.
and to go back in Achas dial: when he caused the fire not to burn the three
children: when he kept back dew and rain three year in Israel: when he
made waters to flow out of the rock: when he caused Elias cloak to divide
the waters of Jorden: when he caused iron to swim: when he preserved Jonas
alive three days and three nights in the whales belly: when he cured diseases
by the strength of nature incurable, as the leprosy of Naaman; the issue of
blood, and blindness, etc.

Among all the means which God uses, the special are the reasonable
creatures, which are no passive instruments, as the tool in the hand of the
workman, but active, because as they are moved by God, so again being
indu^d with will and reason, they move themselves. And such instruments are
either good or evil. Evil, as wicked men and angels. And these he uses to
do his good will and pleasure, even then when they do least of all obey him.
And considering that the ^inning instrument which is moved by God does also
move it self freely without any constraint on Gods part: God himself is free
from all blame, when the instrument is blameworthy. In directing the
instrument God sins not: the action indeed is of him, but the defect of the
action from the instrument: which being corrupt, can it self do nothing but
that which is corrupt; God in the mean season by it bringing that to pass
which is uerie good. The whole cause of sin is in Satan and in us: as for
god, he puts no wickedness into us, but the evil which he finds in us he
mooues, orders, and gouernes, and bends it by his infinite vvisdome, when and
in what manner it pleases him, to the glory of his name, the evil instrument
not knowing so much, nay intending a far other end. As in the mill the horse
blind-folded goes forward, and perceiues nothing but that he is in the
ordinary way, whereas the miller himself vvhippes him and stirs him
forward for another end, namely for the grinding of corn. And this is that
which we must hold touching Gods providence over wicked men and angels: and
is stands with the tenor of the whole bible. Joseph's breethren sold him into
Egypt very wickedly even in the testimony of their own consciences: yet
Joseph having respect to the counsel and work of god, which he performed by
his brethren, says, that the Lord sent him thither. And the Church of
Jerusalem says, Genesis 45.
that Herod and Pontius Pilate did nothing in the death of Christ but that
which the hand and counsel of God had determined to be done: Act. 4.28.
because, though they wickedly intended nothing but to shevve their malice and
hatred in the death of Christ: yet God propounding a further matter by them
then ever they dreamed of, showed forth his endless mercy to man in the work
of redemption. On this manner must all the places of scripture be understood, 2.
Sam. 12.11. 2. Sam. 24.1. 2. Sam. 16.11. Isai. 10.5. and 13.6. 2. Ch^. 11.4.
in which it is said, that god gave the vviues of David to Absolon: that God
moved David to number the people: that he commanded Shemi to rail on David:
that the Medes and Persians are his sanctified ones: that the revolt of the ten
tribes was done by God, etc. By all these examples it appears, that we must
not sever gods permission from his will or decree, and that we must put
difference between the evil work of man, and the good work of God which he
does by man: and the whole matter may yet be more clearly perceived by this
comparison. A thief at the day of assise is condemned, and the magistrate
appointes him to be executed; the hangman owing a grudge to the malefactor,
uses him hardly and prolongeth his punishment longer then he should. Now the
magistrate and the hangman do both one and the same work: yet the hangman for
his part is a murderer, the magistrate in the mean season no murderer but a
just judge putting justice in execution by the hangma^. So God though he use
evil instruments, yet is he free from the evil of the instruments.

And further we must here mark the difference which must be made in gods
using of all kinds of instruments. When he uses good creatures, as angels, he
works his will not only by them but also in them: because he inspires them
and guides them by his spirit, so as they shall, will, and do that which he
wills and intends. As for evil instruments, he works by them only and
not in them; because he holds back his grace from them and leaves them to
themselves, to put in practice the corruption of their own hearts.

Thus much of the parts of Gods providence: now follow the kinds thereof. Gods
providence is either general or special. General is that which extendes it
self to the whole world and all things indifferently, Act. 17.28. Heb. 1.3.
even to the devils themselves. By this providence God continues and
mainetaines the order which he set in nature in the creation, and he preserues
the life, substance, Job. 37* and 38. Psalm. 104.
and the being of all and every creature in his kind.

The especial providence is that, which God shows and exercises toward his
Church and chosen people, Isa. 43.1. Zach. 2.8.
in gathering and guiding them, and in preserving them by his mighty power
against the gates of hell. And therefore Gods Church here upon earth is called
the kingdom of grace, in which he shows not only a general power over his
creatures, but withal the special operation of his spirit in bowing and
bending the hearts of men to his will.

Thus much concerning the doctrine of Gods providence. Now follows the duties.
First seeing there is a providence of God over every thing that is, we are
hereby taught to take good heed of the transgression of the least of Gods
commandments. If men were persuaded that the prince had an eye every where,
doubtless many subjects in England would walk more obediently to the laws of
the land then they do: and durst in no wise work such vilanies as are daily
practiced. Well, howsoever it is with earthly princes, yet this is least
wanting in God: he has an eye every where: wheresoever thou art there god
beholds thee, as David says, God looked down from heaven upon the children
of men, to see if there were any that would understand and seek God. Psalm.
53.2.
Therefore except thou be brutish and past shame, take heed of sin. If men
had but a spark of grace, the consideration of this would make them loath the
practice of wickedness. Eliah says to Ahab, As the Lord God of Israel lives
before whom I stand, 1. King. 17.2.
there shall be neither dew nor rain these 3. years. Where the Prophet
confirms his speech with an oath saying, As the Lord of hosts lives it shall
be so. and least Ahab should think he made no conscience what he said, he
adds this clause, that he stood in the presence of God. As if he should say:
howsoever thou think of me, yet as it stands me in hand so do I make
conscience of my word: For I stand in the presence of God, and therefore know
it, as the Lord lives there shall be no rain nor dew these three years. So
Cornelius having an eye at gods providence, does move himself, and all his
household to a solemn hearing of the word of God delivered by the mouth of
Peter, saying, that they were all present before God, to hear all things
commanded of him. Acts. 10.33.
As these men had regard to Gods providence, so we likewise must behave our
selves reverently, making conscience of our behavior both in words and works:
because wheresoever we be, we are in the presence of God. Secondly, if there be
a providence of God over every thing, then we must learn contentation of
mind in every estate: in adversity under the cross when all goes against us
we must be content, because Gods providence has so appointed. So David in the
greatest of his griefs was dumb and spoke nothing; his reason was, Psalm. 39.9.
because thou Lord did it. And when Shemei cursed David, Abisha would have
had the king to have given him leave to have slain him: but David would not
suffer it, but said, He curses even because the Lord has bidden him curse
David: 2. Sam. 16.10
who dare then say, wherefore have thou done so? In whose example we may see a
worthy pattern of quietness of mind. When a cross comes, it is a hard
thing to be patient: but we must draw our selves thereunto by consideration of
Gods especial providence. Thirdly when outward means of preservation in this
life do abound, as health, wealth, honor, riches, peace, and pleasure, then
we must remember to be thankful; because these things always come by the
providence of God. So is Job thankful both in prosperity and adversity: The
Lord, says he, gave, Job. 1.22.
and the Lord takes away: blessed be the name of the Lord. Indeed to be
patient in every estate and thankful to God is a very hard matter: yet will
it be more easy, if we learn in all things that befall us in this life, never
to sever the consideration of the things that come to pass from Gods
providence. For as the body and the soul of man (though we see only the
body) are always together, as long as a man lives: so is Gods providence
joined with the thing done: wherefore as we look on the thing done, so we must
also in it, labor to see and acknowledge Gods providence. As for example: a
man's house is set on fire, and all his goods consumed; this very sight would
make him at his wits end: but now as he beholdes this event with one eye, so
with the other eye he must at that very instant look upon Gods blessed
providence. When a man beholdes and feels the loss of friends, he will be
soon grieved, if he be not a very stock or stone: yet that he may not be
overwhelmed with grief, he must ever with one eye look at the pleasure of
God herein. This practice will be an especial means to stay the rage of any
headstrong affection in all our afflictions. In the world the manner of men
is, if health, wealth, and ease abound to think all is well: but if crosses
come, as loss of friends, and loss of goods, then men cry out, as being
straught of their wits: the reason is, because they look only at the outward
means, and shut up Gods providence in them, and can not see into the good will
and providence of God out of all means. Again, when a man is stored with
riches, honor, wealth, and prosperity, he must not barely look on them, but
behold withal Gods goodness and blessing in them: for if that be wanting, all
the riches in the world are nothing. Likewise in receiving thy meat and drink
thou must look further into the blessing of God upon it: which if it be away,
thy meat and thy drink can no more nourish thee then the stone in the wall.
And the same must we do in every business of our callings: which if men
could learn to practice they would not so much t^ust to the means, as
honor, wealth, favor, etc. but to God himself. The Lord by the Prophet
Habaccuc reprooueth the Chaldeans for offering sacrifices unto their nets:
which sin they committed, because they looked only upon outward things: Hab^.
and like blind moles had no power to see further into them, and to behold the
work of God in all their proceedings. And this is the very cause why we
are unthankefull for Gods benefits: for though we behold the bare creatures,
yet are we so pore-blinde that we can not discern any blessing and
providence of God in them. Therefore let us learn to look upon both jointly
together, and so shall we be thankful unto god in prosperity, and patient
in adversity with Job and David. This lesson Paul learned: I can be abased
(says he) and I can abound every where, in all things I am instructed, Philip.
4.12, 13.
both to be full, and to be hungry: and to abound, and to be in want.

Fourthly, seeing gods prouiden^e disposes all things, we are taught to
gather observations of the same, in things both past, and present: that we may
learn thereby to be armed against the time to come. Thus David when he was
to encounter with Goliath, gathered hope and confidence to himself for the time
to come, by the observation of Gods providence in the time past: for, says he,
when I kept my fathers sheep, 1. Sa^. 17.37.
I slevve a Lion and a bear that devoured the flock: now the Lord that
delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he
will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistim.

Fifthly, because Gods providence disposes all things, when we make lawful
promises to do any thing, we must put in, or at the lest conceive this
condition ( if the Lord will) for S. James says, Iam. 4.15.
that we ought to say, If the lord will, and if we live, we will do this or
that. This also was David's practice: for says he to all the congregation of
Israel, 1. Sam. 13.2.
If it seem good to you, and if it proceed from the lord our god, we will send
to and fro.

Sixthly, seeing Gods providence is manifested in ordinary means, it behooves
every man in his calling to use them carefully: and when ordinary means be at
hand, we must not look for any help without them, though the Lord be able to
do what he will without means. Ioab when many Aramites came against him, he
heartened his soldiers though they were but fevv in number, 2. Sam. 10.12..
Mat. 4.6.
bidding them be strong and valiant for their people, and for the cities of
their God, and then let the lord do that which is good in his eyes. And our
Savior Christ avouches it to be flat te^pting of god for him to leap down
from the pinnacle of the temple to the ground, whereas there was an ordinary
way at hand to descend by stairs. Hence it appears, that such persons, as
will use no means vvherby they may come to repent and believe, do indeed no
more repent and believe, then they ca^ be able to live which neither eat nor
drink. And thus much of the duties. Now follovv the co^solatio^s: first, this
very point of gods special providence is a great comfort to gods church: for
the lord moderateth the rage of the devil and wicked men, that they shall not
hurt the people of God. David says, Psalm. 16.8.
The Lord is at my right hand, therefore I shall not (...). And when Joseph's
breethren were afraid for selling him into Egypt, he comfort them saying,
that it was God that sent him before them, for their preservation. Genesis 45.7.
So king David when his own soldiers were purposed to stone him to death, he
was in great sorrow; but it is said, he comforted himself in the Lord his
God. 1. Sam. 30.6.
where we may see that a man which has grace to believe in God, and rely on his
providence in all his afflictions and extremity:, shall have wonderful peace
and consolation.

Before we can proceed to the articles which follow, it is requisite that we
should entreat of one of the greatest works of Gods providence that can be;
because the opening of it gives light to all that insueth. And this work is a
Preparation of such means whereby God will manifest his justice and mercy.
It has two parts, the just permission of the fall of man, and the giving of
the covenant of grace. For so Paul teaches when he says, That God shut up
all under unbelief that he might have upon al. Romans 11.32. Galat. 3.22.
And again, The scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by
the faith of Christ Jesus should be given to them that believe.

Touching the first, that we may rightly conceive of man's fall, we are to
search out the nature and parts of sin. Sin is any thing whatsoever is
against the will and word of God: as S. John says, Sin is the transgression
of the law. And this definition Paul confirms when he says, ^. Ioh. 3.4.
(...). Romans 3 20. and 4.15. and 5.13.
that by the law comes the knowledge of sin: and, where no law is, there
is no transgression: and, sin is not imputed where there is no law.

In sin we must consider three things: the fault, the guilt, the punishment.
The fault is the anomie or the inobedience it self, and it comprehends not
only huge and notorious offenses, as idolatry, blasphemy, theft, treason,
adultery, and all other crimes that the world cries sha^e on: but every
disordered thought, affection, inclination: yea, every defect of that which the
Law requires.

The guilte of sin is, whereby a man is guilty before God, that is bound and
made subject to punishment. And here two questions must be skanned: where man
is bound? and by what? For the first, Man is bound in conscience. And hereupon
the conscience of every sinner sits within his heart as a little judge to tell
him that he is bound before God to punishment. For the second, it is the order
of divine justice ^et down by God which binds the conscience of the sinner
before God: for he is Creator and Lord, and man is a creature, and therefore
must either obey his will and commandment, or suffer punishment. Now then by
virtue of Gods law, conscience binds over the creature to bear a punishment
for his offense done against God: yea it tells him, that he is in danger to be
judged and condemned for it. And therefore the conscience is the Lords
Sergeant to infourme the sinner of the bond and obligation whereby he is
always bound before God.

The third thing which follows sin is punishment, and that is death. Romans
6.23.
So Paul says, The stipend of sin is death: where, by death we must
understand a double death, both of body and soul. The death of the body is a
separation of the body from the soul. The second death is a separation of the
whole man, but especially of the soul from the glorious presence of God. I say
not simply from the presence of God, for god is every where: but only from
the joyful presence of Gods glory. Now these two deaths are the stipends or
allowance of sin: and the least sin which a man commits, does deserve
these two punishments. For in every sin the infinite justice of god is
violated: for which cause there must needs be inflicted an infinite punishment,
that there may be a proportion between the punishment and the offense. And
therefore that distinction of sin which papists make namely, that some are
in themselves venial, and some mortal is false, and hereby confuted:
otherwise in respect of men sins are either venial or mortal. Venial to
the elect, whose sins are pardonable in Christ: but to the reprobate all
sins are mortal.

Nevertheless we hold not all sins equal, but that they are greater or
less according to the diversity of obiectes and other circumstances.

Thus much of sin in general: now we come to the parts of it. The first
sin of all that ever was in man, is the sin of Adam, which was his
disobedience in eating the forbidden fruit. Romans 5.5.
In handling whereof sundry points are to be opened, but let us begin with
the causes thereof.

The outward efficient cause was the devil. And though he be not named by
Moses in the history of the fall, yet that is not to trouble us: for we must
not conceive otherwise of the serpent, then of the instrument and mouth of the
devil. For it is not likely that it being a brute creature should be able to
reason and determine of good and evil, of truth and falsehood. Now in this
temptation the devil shows his malice and his fraud. His malice, in that,
whereas he can not ouerturne god himself, yet he labors to disturb the
order which he has set down in the creation, and especially the image of god
in the most excellent creatures on earth, that they may be in the same
miserable condition with himself. His fraud, first in that he begins his
temptation with the woman being the weaker person, and not with the man, which
course he still continues: as may appear by this, that Exodus 22.18. a witch
named in the feminine ge^der, Mechash shepha.
more women are entangled with witchcraft and sorcerie then men. Secondly he
shows his fraud, in that he proceeds very slily and intangles Eve by
certain steps and degrees. For first by moving a question he draws her to
listen to him, and to reason with him of gods commandment. Secondly, he
brings her to look upon the tree and wishly to vievve the beauty of the
fruit. Thirdly he makes her to doubt of the absolute truth of gods word and
promise, and to believe his contrary lies. Fourthly, having blinded her mind
with his false persuasions, she desires and lusts after the forbidden
fruit and thereupon takes it, eats it, and gives it to her husband.

The inward cause, was the will of our first parents, even in the
testimony of their own consciences, as Solomon says, This have I found that
God made man righteous, Eccles. 7.31.
but they have found many inventions. But it may be objected that if Adam were
created good, he could not be the cause of his own fall, because a good tree
can not bring forth evil fruit. Answer. Freedom of will is four fold: 1.
freedom to evil alone: this is only in wicked men and angels, and is indeed
a bondage: the second is freedom to good alone, and that is in God and the
good angels: the third is freedom to good in part, joined with some want of
liberty by reason of sin: and this is in the regenerate in this life: the
fourth is freedom either to good or to evil indifferently. And this was in
Adam before his fall, who though he had no inclination to sin, but only to
that which was acceptable to God: yet was he not bound by any necessity, but
had his liberty freely to choose or refuse either good or evil. And this is
evident by the very form of Gods commandment in which he forbids Adam to
eat the forbidden fruit: and thereby shows that he being created righteous
and not prone to sin, had power to keep or not to keep the commandment:
though since the fall both he and we after him can not but sin. Wherefore
Adam being allured by Satan, of his own free accord changed himself and fell
from God. Now then, as the good tree changed from good to evil brings forth
evil fruit: so Adam by his own inward and free motion changing from good to
evil brings forth evil.

As for God, he is not to be reputed as an author or cause any way of this
sin. For he created Adam and Eve righteous, indewed them with righteous
vvilles: and he told them what he would exact at their hands and what
they could perform: yea he added threatenings, that with the fear of
danger he might terrify them from sin. Some may say, whereas God foresavv
that Adam would abuse the liberty of his will, why vvoulde he not prevent
it. Answer. There is a double grace, the one to be able to will and do that
which is good, the other to be able to persevere in vvvilling and doing the
same. Now God gave the first to Adam, and not the second. And he is not to be
blamed of us, though he confirmed him not with new grace, for he is debtor to
no man to give him so much as the least grace; whereas he had already given a
plentiful measure thereof to him. And God did hold back to confer any
further grace upon just cause. I. It was his pleasure that this fact should be
an occasion or way to exercise his mercy in the saving of the elect, and his
justice in the deserved condemnation of impenitent sinners. And unless Adam
had fallen for himself and others; there should have bin found no misery in
men, on whom God might take pity in his son, nor wickedness which he might
condemn; and therefore neither manifestation of justice, nor mercy. II.
Again, it was the will of God in part to forsake Adam, to make manifest the
weakness of the most excellent creatures, without the special and continual
assistance of God. III. There is a double liberty of will, one is to will good
or evil: this belongs to the creature in this world, and therefore Adam
received it. The other, is to will good alone. This he wanted, because it is
reserved to the life to come. And though he knew no cause of this dealing of
God, yet is it one step to the fear of God for us to hold that good and
righteous which he appoints or wills: and not to square the works and
judgments of God by our crooked reason. And yet to come to reason it self.
Who can here complain of God? Can the devil? but God did not cause him to
tempt or deceive our first parents. Can Adam and Eve? but they fell freely
without any motion or instigation from God, and their own consciences accused
them for it. Can the posterity of Adam? but the elect receive more in Christ
then they lost in Adam: and the reprobate, overwhelmed with the burden of their
own sins and thereupon receiving nothing but due and deserved damnation can
not find fault. But some may further reply and say, he that foreseeth an evil
and does not prevent it, is a cause of it: but God did foresee the fall of man,
and did not prevent it. Answer. The rule is generally true in man, that the
foreseer of an evil not preventing it, is in some sort a doer of it* for it is
the sentence of the law of God, to which man was bound from the first creation.
But God is above all his laws, and not bound to them: he is an absolute lord
and lawgiver; and therefore his actions are not within the compass of laws,
as men's are. Whereupon it follows, that though he did foresee man's defection,
yet is he free from all blame in not preventing of it. For with him there be
good causes of permitting evil.

And though God be no cause of man's fall, yet must we not imagine that it came
to pass by chance or fortune, whereas the least things that are come to pass
with Gods providence; neither was it by any bare permission without his decree
and will: for that is to make an idle providence: neither did it happen against
the will of God, he utterly nilling it: for then it could not have bin unless
we deny God to be omnipotent. It remains therefore that this fall did so
proceed of the voluntary creation of Adam, August. Enchir. ad Laur. c. 99.
as that God did in part ordain and will it, not as it was a sin against his
commandment, but as it was further in the counsel of God a way to exequute
his justice and mercy. Against this which I say, diverse things are objected.
First, that if Adam did that which God in any respect willed, then he did not
sin at all. Answ. He that wills and does that which God wills for all
that sins; unless he will it in the same manner with God and for the same
end. Now in the permitting of this fact, God intended the manifesting of his
glory: but our first parents intending no such thing, sought not only to be
like but also to be equal with god. Secondly, it is alleged that Adam could
not but fall necessarily if God did decree it. Answ. Adams fall that came not
to pass without Gods decree, and therefore in that respect was necessary; was
nevertheless in respect of Adams freewil contingent and not necessary: Gods
decree not taking away the will but only ordering it. Lastly, it is alleged
that Gods will is the cause of Adams will, and Adams will the cause of his
fall, and that therefore Gods will shall be the cause of the fall. Answer. It
must be granted that Gods will is a moving cause of the wills of evil men;
yet mark how: not as they are evil wills simply, but as they are wills: and
therefore when God inclines the evil will of his creature to his good purpose,
he is nothing at all entangled with the defect or evil of his will.

Touching the time of the fall, the received opinion in former ages has bin
that our first parents fell the same day in which they were created, and
therefore Augustine writes that they stood but six hours. And though we can
not determine of the certain time, yet in all likelihood was it very short. For
Moses presently after that he had set down the creation of man, without the
interposition of any thing else, comes immediately to the fall. And considering
the nature of the devil is without ceasing to show his malice, no doubt he
took the first occasion that possibly might be had to bring man to the same
damnation with himself. And our Savior Christ says, that the devil was a
manslayer from the beginning, Ioh. 8.
namely from the beginning nor of the creation of the world, or of time, but of
man. And Eve says, we shall eat of the fruit of the trees* of the garden, it
may be, Genesis 3.2.
insinuating that as yet she had not eaten when the devil tempted her.

Touching the greatness of man's fall, some have made a small matter of it,
because it was the eating of an apple or some such fruit. But we must not
measure the greatness or the smalnes of a sin by the object or matter
whereabout it is occupied, but by the commandment of God, and by the
disobedience or offense of his infinite majesty. And that this fact of Adam
and Eve was no small fault, but a notorious crime and Apostasy in which they
withdraw them selves from under the power of God, nay reject and deny him,
will appear if we take a view of all the particular sins that be contained
in it. The first is unbelief, in that they doubted and distrusted of the
truth of Gods word which he spoke to them. The second is contempt of God,
in that they believed the lies of the devil rather then him. For when God
says, In the day that ye shall eat thereof, ye shall die the death, Genesis 3.4.
it is as nothing with Eve: but when the devil comes and says, Ye shall not
die at all* that she takes fast hold on. The third is pride and ambition. For
they did eat the forbidden fruit that they might be as gods, Genesis 3.5.
namely as the father, the son, the holy Ghost. The fourth is unthankfulness.
God had made them excellent creatures in his own image: that is nothing with
them to be like unto him, unless they may be equal unto him. The fifth is
curiosity, whereby they affected greater wisdom then God had given them in
the creation, and a greater measure of knowledge then God had revealed to them.
The sixth is reprochful blasphemy, in that they subscribe to the sayings of
the devil, in which he charged God with lying and envy. The seventh is
murder. For by this means they bere^ue themselves and their posterity of the
fellowship and graces of Gods spirit, and bring upon their own heads the
eternal wrath of God. The eight is discontentation, in that they sought for an
higher condition then that was, in which God had placed them. In a word, in
this one single fact is comprised the breach of the whole law of God. And we
should often think upon this, that we may learn to wonder at the just
judgments of God in punishing this fall, and his unspeakable goodness in
receiving men to mercy after the same.

And here we must not omit to remember the largeness of Adams fall. Sins are
either personal, or general. Personal are such, as are peculiar to one or
some few persons and make them alone guilty. General, that is common to all
men: and such is Adams fall. It is a sin not only of the person of one man
but of the whole nature of man. And Adam must be considered not as a private
man, but as a root or head bearing in it all mankind: or as a public person
representing all his posterity, and therefore when he sinned, all his
posterity sinned with him; as in a Parliament whatsoever is done by the
burgess for the shire, is done by every person in the shire. As Paul says, By
one man sin entered into the world, Romans 5.1^.
and so death went ouerall for as much as all have sinned. And here lies the
difference between Adams fall and the sins of men, as Cains murder, which
makes not the posterity of Cain guilty, because he was never appointed by God
to be the root of his posterity, as Adam was: and therefore his sin is
personal, whereas Adams is not. Yet this which I say, must not be understood
of all the sins of Adam, but only of the first.

From the fall of Adam, springs original sin, not only as a fruit
thereof, but also as a just punishment of it. And after the foresaid fall, it
is in Adam and his posterity, as the mother and root of all other sin: yet
with this distinction, that actual sin was first in Adam, and then came
original, but in us first is original sin, and then after follows actual.

Original sin is termed diversely in Scriptures, as the flesh, the old man,
because it is in us before grace: Hebr. 12.1. Romans 7.13.
concupiscence, sin that is ready to compass us about, the sinning sin:
and it is commonly termed original, because it has bin in man's nature ever
since the fall, and because it is in every man at the very instant of his
conception and birth, as David plainly says, Behold, I was borne in iniquity,
and in sin has my mother conceived me: Psalm. 51.5.
not meaning properly his parents sin (for he was borne in lawful marriage)
but his own hereditarie sin, whereof he was guilty even in his mothers
womb.

But let us search the nature of it. Considering it has place in man, it must
be either the substance of body or soul or the faculties of the substance, or
the corruption of the faculties. Now it cannot be the substance of man
corrupted: for then our Savior Christ in taking our nature upon him, should
also take upon him our sins, and by that means should as well have need of
a redeemer as other men: and again, the souls of men should not be immortal.
Neither is it any one or all the faculties of man. For every one of them as
namely the understanding, will, affections, and all other powers of body or
soul were in man from the first creation, whereas sin was not before the
fall. Wherefore it remains that original sin is nothing else but a disorder
or evil disposition in all the faculties and inclinations of man, whereby they
are all carried inordinatly against the law.

The subject or place of this sin, is not any part of man, but the whole
body and soul. For first of all, the natural appetite to meat and drink,
and the power of nourishing is greatly corrupted as appears by diseases,
aches, surfetts, but specially by the abuse of meat and drink. Secondly, the
outward senses are as corrupt, Psalm. 119. 1. Ioh. 2.16.
and that made David to pray that God would turn his eyes from beholding of
vanity: and Saint John to say, whatsoever is in the world is the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life. Thirdly, touching the
understanding, Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. 2. Cor. 3.5.
the spirit of God says, that the frame of the heart of man is only evil
continually: so as we are not able of our selves to think a good thought. And
therefore withal, the will of man and his affections are answerably corrupt;
and hereupon the doctrine of Christ is, that we must renownce our own wills.
Lastly, all man's strength in good things is nothing out of Christ.

The propagation of this sin, is the deriuing of it from Adam to all his
posterity, whereby it runs as a leprosy over all mankind. But in what
manner this propagation is made, it is hard to define. The common opinion of
Divines is, that it may be done two ways. The first is this. God when he
created Adam in the beginning, set down this appointment and order touching
the estate of man, that whatsoever Adam received of God, he should receive it
not only for himself, but for his posterity, and whatsoever grace of God he
lost, he should loose not only to himself, but to all his posterity. And
hereupon Adam when he sinned, he did deprive first of all himself, and then
secondly all his posterity of the image of God; because all mankind was in
his loins when he sinned. Now then upon the former appointment, when the
souls of men are created and placed in the body, God forsakes them, not in
respect of the substance of the soul or the faculties, but only in respect of
his own image, whereof the souls are deprived; after which follows the
defect or want of righteousness, which is original sin. And God in depriving
man of that which Adam lost, is not therefore to be thought to be the author or
maintainer of sin, but a just judge. For this deprivation of the image of
God, so farfoorth as it is inflicted by him upon mankind, it must be conceived
as a deserved punishment for the sin of Adam and all men in him which they
pulled upon themselves. The second way is, Romans 5.12*
that the corruption of nature is derived from the parents in generation by the
body; for as sweet oil poured into a fustie vessel, loses his pureness and
is infected by the vessel: so the soul created good, and put into the corrupt
body, receives contagion thence. And this conjunction of the pure soul with
the corrupt body, is not against the goodness of God; because it is a just
punishment of the sin of all men in Adam. It may be this which has bin said
will not satisfy the minds of all. yet if any will be curious to search
further into this point, let them know that there is another matter which more
concerns them to look unto. When a man's house is on fire, there is no time
then to inquire how and which way and whence the fire came, but our duty is
with all speed and expedition to use all good means to stay it. And so
considering that our whole natures are really infected and poisoned with the
loathesome contagion of original sin, which is a weight sufficient to press
down the soul to the gulf of hell, it stands us in hand a thousand fold more
to the use means whereby it may be taken away, then to dispute how it came.

Some may allege against the propagation of sin, that holy parents beget
holy children, which are void of original sin, because it stands not with
reason, that parents should conveigh that to their children which they them
selves want, namely the guilt and the punishment and the fault of sin in
part. Answer. I. Men are not in this life perfectly holy. For sanctification is
but in part, and therefore they cannot possibly beget children pure from all
sin. Secondly, parents beget children as they are men, and not as they are
holy men; and by generation they derive unto their children nature with the
corruption thereof, and not grace which is above nature. Take any corn, yea
the finest wheat that ever was, wi^now it as clean as possibly may be:
afterward sow it, weed it also when it is sown, and reap it in due time, and
carry it to the barn; when it is thresht, you shall find as much chafe in
it as ever was before: and why? because God has set this order in the creation
that it shall spring and grow with the stalk, ear, blade, and all: so
likewise though the parents be never so holy, the children as they come of them
are conceived and borne wholly corrupt, because God took this order in the
creation, that whatsoever evil Adam procured, he should bring it not only on
himself, but upon all his posterity: by virtue of which decree, the
propagation of sin is continued without any interruption, though parents
themselves be borne anew by the spirit of God.

And here we must not omit to speak of the quantity or greatness of original
sin, for the opening whereof we must consider three points. The first, that
original sin is not diverse, but one and the same in kind in every man, as
the general and common nature of man is one and the same in all men. The
second, that this sin is not in some men more, in some men less, but in
every man equally, as all men do equally from Adam participate the nature of
man, and are equally the children of wrath. Some, it may be, will say, that
this can not be true, because some men are of better natures then others are:
some of disposition cruel and severe, some again gentle and mild; some very
licentious and disordered, some very civil. Answer. The differences that be in
men that want the fear of God, arise not of this that they have more or less
original corruption; but of the restraint and limitation of man's corruption.
For in some God brideleth sin more then in others, and in them is found
civility: and again in some less, and in such the rebellion of nature
breaks forth unto all misdemeanour. And indeed if God should not keep the
untoward dispositions of men within compass, otherwhiles more, otherwhiles
less, as it shall seem good unto his majesty: impiety, cruelty, injustice,
and all manner of sins would break out into such a measure that there should
be no quiet living for men in the world, and no place for Gods Church. And thus
it is manifest that although all men be not equal in the practice of
wickedness, yet they may be equal in the corruption of nature it self. The
third point is, that Original sin is so huge and large every way, that it
may truly be termed the root or seed not of some few sins, but of all
sins whatsoever, even of the very sin against the holy Ghost. We must not
imagine it to be an inclination or prones to one or two faults; but a prones to
all and every sin that is practiced in the world; and that in all persons
young and old, high and low, male and female. It is a most horrible villainy for
a man to kill his father, or his mother, or his child: yet some there be that
do so: at the hearing whereof we use to wonder, and to testify our dislike by
saying, that the doers thereof were wicked and devilish persons, and it is
truly said. Nevertheless we must understand that although we abstain from
such heinous practices, yet the very root of such sins, that is, a
disposition unto them, is found in us also. Julian the Apostata both living and
dying blasphemed Christ. Herod and Pontius Pilate and the wicked Jews
crucified him, and Judas betrayed him. Men use to say that if Christ were now
alive, they would not do so for all the world. But let us better consider of
the matter. The same natural corruption of heart that was in the^, is also in
us, we being the children of Adam as well as they: and by the force of this
corruption, if Christ were now living on earth, thou would, if like occasion
were offered, either do as Judas did in betraying him, or as Pilate did,
deliver him to be crucified, or as the soldiers, thrust him through with their
spears, or as Julian, pierce him with all manner of blasphemies, if God
withhild his graces from thee, and leave thee to thy self. In a word, let men
conceive in mind the most notorious trespass that can be, though they do it
not, nor intend to do it, nor never do it: yet the matter, beginning, and
seed thereof is in themselves. This made Jeremy say, The heart of man is
deceitful and wicked above all things, who can know it? Ier. 17.9.
It is like an huge sea the banks whereof cannot be seen, nor the bottom
searched. In common experience we see it come to pass, that men protestants to
day, to morrow papists* of Christians, heretics; now friends, but presently
after foes; this day honest and civil men, the next day cruel murderers. Now
what is the cause of this difference; surely the hidden corruption of the
heart, that will thrust a man forward to any sin when occasion is offered.
This point must be remembered and often thought upon.

From original sin springs actual, which is nothing else but the fruit of
the corrupt heart, either in thought, word, or deed.

Thus much touching man's fall into sin by Gods just permission: Now follows
the good use which we must make thereof. First by this we learn to acknowledge
and bewail our own frailty. For Adam in his innocence being created
perfectly righteous, when he was once tempted by the devil, fell away from
God: what shall we do then in the like case which are by nature sold under
sin, and in our selves a thousand times weaker then Adam was? Many men there
be that mingle themselves with all companies, tell them of the danger thereof,
they will reply that they have such strong faith that no bad company can hurt
the^. But, alas, silly people, Satan bevvitcheth them, and makes them to
believe falsehood to be truth: they know not their miserable estate. If Adam,
says Bernard, had a dovvnefall in Paradise, what shall we do that are cast
forth upon the dunghill? Let us therefore often come to a serious consideration
of our own weakness, and follovv vvithall the practice of David, who being
privy to himself touching his own corruption, prays to God on this
manner, Knit my heart to thee, Psalm. 86.11.
O Lord, that I may fear thy name. Secondly, we learn hereby absolutely to
submit our selves to the authority of God, and simply to resolve our selves
what soever he comma^ds is right and just, though the reason of it be not known
to us. For Eve condiscended to listen to the speech of the serpent, and without
any calling she reasoned with it of a most v^^ightie matter, and that in the
absence of Adam her head and husband, namely of the truth and glory of God:
and hereby was brought to doubt of Gods word, and so ouerturned. Thirdly, if
all men by Adams fall be shut up under damnation, there is no cause why any of
us should stand upon his his birth, riches, wisdom, learning, or any other
such gifts of God: there is nothing in us that is more able to cover our
vileness and nakedness, then figgetree leaves were able to cover the offense of
Adam from Gods eyes. We stand under the wrath of God by nature, and cannot
attain to everlasting life of our selves. Wherefore it does stand every one
of us in hand to abase our selves under the hand of God, in that we are become
by our sins the very basest of all the creatures upon earth, yea utterly to
despair in respect of our selves, and with bleeding hearts to bewail our own
cases. There is no danger in this: it is the very way to grace: none can be a
sound member of Christ till his conscience condemn him, and make him quite ont
of heart in respect of himself. And the want of this is the cause why so few
perceive any sweetness or comfort in the Gospel: and why it is so little loved
and embraced now adays. Lastly, if all mankind be shut up under unbelief,
the duty of every man is, to labor in using all good means whereby we may be
delivered from this bondage, and to pray to God with David, Create in me a
clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. And cry out with
Paul, O wretched man that I am, Psalm. 51.10. Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from this body of death! And we must never be at rest
till we have some assurance in conscience that in Christ we have freedom from
this bondage, and can with the Colossians give thanks that we are delivered
from the power of darkness, Coloss. 1.13.
and translated into the kingdom of Christ. This should be the affection of
every man, because the spiritual thraldom under sin is of all miseries most
loathsome and burdensome. And in this respect the day of death should be unto
us most welcome, because it does unloose us from this miserable estate, in
which we do almost nothing but displease God. For this is the greatest grief
that can be to the children of God, by their sins to offend their merciful
father. And as for all those which feel not the weight of their natural
guiltines and corruptions, but lie slumbring in the security of their hearts,
they are therefore the more miserable, in that being plunged in the gulf of
all misery, yet they feel no misery.

Thus much of the permission of the fall of man: Now we come to the Covenant
of grace. Which is nothing else but a compact made between God and man
touching reconciliation and life everlasting by Christ. This covenant was first
of all revealed and delivered to our first parents in the garden of Eden,
immediately after their fall by God himself, in these words, The seed of the
woman shall bruise the serpents head: Genesis 3.15.
and afterward it was continued and renewed with a part of Adams posterity, as
with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, etc. but it was most fully revealed and
accomplished at the coming of Christ.

In the Covenant I will consider two things, the parties reconciled between
whom the covenant is made, and the foundation thereof. The parties are God and
man. God is the principal, and he promises righteousness and life eternal in
Christ: Man again binds himself by Gods grace to believe and to rest upon the
promise. Here it may be demanded why man is more in the covenant then angels.
Answ. The will of God in this point, is not revealed unless it be because
angels fell of themselves, not moved by any other: but man did fall by them.
Again it may be asked, whether all mankind were ever in the covenant or no?
Ans. We cannot say that all and every man has bin and now is in the covenant,
but only that little part of mankind which in all ages has bin in the Church
of God; and has by faith embraced the covenant. as Paul plainly avouches, The
scripture (says he) has concluded all under sin, Gal. 3.20.
that the promise of the faith of Jesus Christ should be given [not unto all
men] but to the^ that believe. Without faith no man can please God: Heb. 11.6.
and therefore God makes no covenant of reco^ciliation without faith. Again
since the beginning of the world there has bin always a distinction between
man and man. This appears in the very tenor of the words of the covenant made
with our first parents, where God says he will put difference between the seed
of the woman and the seed of the serpent: meaning by the seed of the woman,
Christ with all the elect who^ the father has given unto him, who shall bruise
the serpents head, and tread Satan under their feet. Romans 16.20
And by the seed of the serpent he means wicked me^ that live and die in
their sins, as Saint John says, he that commits sin is of the devil.
1. Ioh. 3.8.
And according to this distinction in times following was Abel received into
the covenant, and Cain rejected: Genesis 6.3.
some were the sons of God in the days of Noe, some the sons of men: In
Abraham's family, Ismael is cast out, Genesis 17.21.
and the covenant established in Isaac: Jacob is loved, Esau is hated. And this
distinction in the families of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Paul approoueth, Romans
9.
when he makes some to be the children of the flesh, and some other the
children of the promise. And again, the Jews a people of God in the covenant,
the Gentiles no people. For Paul makes it a privilege of the Jews to have the
adoption, and covenants, and the service of God, and the promises belonging
unto them: Romans 9.3, 4.
where as he says of the Ephesians that they were alients from the
commonwealth of Israel, and were strangers from the covenants of promise, and
had no hope, and were without Christ and without God in the world. Ephesians. 2 12*
And the same may be said of the whole body of the Gentiles excepting here and
there a man, who were converted and became Proselites. And this is manifest in
that they wa^ted the word and the sacraments, and teachers. And this saying of
the Prophet Ose, I will call them my people which were not my people: Romans 9.24.
and her beloved which was not beloved, is alleged by Paul to prove the
calling of the Gentiles. Some do allege to the contrary, that when the
covenant was made with our first parents, it was also in the^ made with all
mankind, not one man excepted: and that the distinction and difference between
man and man arises of their unbelief and contempt of the covenant afterward.
Answ. Indeed in the estate of innocence Adam by creation received grace for
himself and his posterity: and in his fall he transgressed not only for
himself but for all his posterity: but in receiving of the covenant of grace
it can not be proved that he received it for himself and for all mankind:
nay the distinction between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent,
mentioned in the very first giving of the covenant, shows the contrary: for if
after the fall all and every part of mankind were received into the covenant,
then all men without restraint should be the seed of the woman, bruising the
serpents head, and the serpent should have no seed at all. And again, all men
cannot be charged with unbelief and contempt in respect of the covenant, but
only such persons as have known it, or at the least heard of it. And
therefore sundry heads of the nations may be charged with unbelief, as Cain,
Cham, Iaphet, Ammon, Moab, Ismael, Esau, Madian; for they being near to the
fathers heard the promises concerning Christ, offered sacrifices, and observed
external rites of the Church, but afterward fell away from the sincere worship
of the true God to idolatry and all manner of wickedness, and became enemies of
God and his people. But we plainly deny, that there was or could be the like
unbelief and contempt of Gods grace in their posterity, which for the most
part never so much as heard of any covenant; their ancetors indeauouring
always to bury and extinguish the memory of that which they hated. It is
objected again, that the covenant was made with Abraham and with all mankind
after him, Because (says the Lord) thou have obeyed my voice, in thy seed
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. Genesis 18.22.
Answ. Paul gives a double answer, first that the place must be understood of
many nations: secondly that it must be understood not of all nations in all
ages, but of all nations of the last age of the world. For, says he, the
scripture foreseeing that God would justify the gentiles through faith
preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, Gal. 3.8.
saying, in thee shall all the nations be blessed. Well, to conclude this
point, in the making of the covenant there must be a mutual consent of the
parties on both sides, and beside the promise on Gods part, there must be also
a restipulation on man's part; otherwise the covenant is not made. Now then, it
must needs follow that all unbelievers co^temning grace offered in Christ are
out of the covenant, as also such as never heard of it; for where there is no
knowledge, there is no consent: and before the coming of Christ the greatest
part of the world never knew the Messiah, nor heard of the covenant; as Paul
says to the learned Athenians, the time of this ignorance God regarded not:
but now he admonishes all men every where to repent. Act. 17.30.


The foundation and groundworke of the Covenant is Christ Jesus the Mediator,
in whom all the promises of God are yea and a men, and therefore he is called
the angel of the covenant, Malac. 3.8. Isa. 49.8.
and the covenant of the people to be made with all nations in the last age.
Now then that we may proceed at large to open the substance of the covenant,
we are in the next place to come to that part of the Creed which co^cerns the
second person in trinity, set down in these words, And in Jesus Christ his
only Son, etc. from which words to the very end of the Creed, such points
only are laid down as do notably unfold the benefits and the matter of the
covenant. Now the second person is described to us by three things, 1. his
titles, 2. his incarnation, 3. his twofold estate. his titles are in number
four. I. Jesus. II. Christ. III. his only son. IV. our Lord. His incarnation
and his twofold estate are set down afterward.

To come to his titles, the first is Jesus, to which if we add the clause I
believe, on this manner, I believe in Jesus, etc. the article which we now have
in hand will appear to be most excellent; because it has most notable
promises annexed to it. When Peter confessed Christ to be the son of the
living God, he answered, upon this rock will I build my Church, Mat. 16.16.
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And again, He that
confesses that Christ is the son of God, God dwells in him, 1. Ioh. 4.15.
and he in God. And again, Act. 10.44.
To him give all the Prophets witness that through his name all that believe in
him shall receive remission of sins. Paul says, Act. 16.31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved and all thy household. Thus
then the confession in which we acknowledge that we believe in Jesus Christ,
has a promise of fellowship with God and of life everlasting. But it may be
objected, that every spirit (as S. John says) which confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh is of God. 1. Ioh. 4.2.
Now the devil and al his angels and unbelievers do thus much: therefore why may
not they also have the benefit of this confession. Ans. By spirit in that place
is neither me^t angels nor me^, nor any creature, but the doctrine which
teaches that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh; and it is of God, because it
is holy and divine and has God to be the author of it. As for the devil and his
angels they can indeed confess that Christ the son of God was made man, and
a wicked man may teach the same; but unto the confession whereunto is annexed a
promise of eternal life, is required true faith, whereby we do not only know
and acknowledge this or that to be true in Christ, but also rest upon him:
which neither Satan nor wicked men can do. And therefore by this confession
the Church of God is distinguished from all other companies of men in the
world which believe not as Panyms, heretics, Atheists, Turks, Jews, and all
other infidells.

This name Jesus, was given to the son of God by the Father, Matt. 1.21. Luke
1.31.
and brought from heaven by an angel unto Joseph and Marie: and on the day
when he was to be circumcised, as the manner was, this name was given unto him
by his parents, as they were commanded from the Lord by the angel Gabriel. And
therefore the name was not given by chance, or by the alone will of the
parents, but by the most wise appointment of God himself.

The name in Hebrew is Iehoschua, and it is changed by the Grecians into Jesus
which signifies a Savior. And it may be called the proper name of Christ,
signifying his office and both his natures, because he is both a perfect and
absolute Savior, as also the alone Savior of man, because the work of
salvation is wholly and only wrought by him, and no part thereof is reserved
to any creature in heaven or in earth. As Peter says, For among men there is
no other name given under heaven whereby we may be saved but by the name of
Jesus. Act. 4.12.
And the author to the Hebrews says, That he is able perfectly to save them
that come unto God by him, Heb. 7.12.
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. If any shall object, that
the promises of salvation are made to them which keep the commandments: the
answer is, that the law of God does exact most absolute and perfect obedience,
which can be found in no man but in Christ, who never sinned: and therefore it
is not given unto us now that we might by our selves fulfill it, and work out
our own salvation, but that being condemned by it, we might wholly depend on
Christ for eternal life. If any further allege, 2. Tim. 4.8.
that such as walk according to the commandments of God, though their
obedience be imperfect, yet they have the promises of this life and of the life
to come. The answer is, that they have so indeed, yet not for their works, but
according to their works which are the fruits of their faith, whereby they are
joined to Christ, for whose merits only they stand righteous and are
acceptable before god; And whereas it is said by Peter, that baptism saves
us. 1. Pet. 3.21.
his meaning is not to signify that there is any virtue in the water to wash
away our sins and to sanctify us, but that it serves visibly to represent
and confirm unto us the inward washing of our souls by the blood of Christ.
It may further be said, that others have been Saviors beside Christ as Iosuah
the son of Nun, who for that cause is called by the same name with Christ.
Answ. Heb. 4.8.
Joshua after the death of Moses was appointed by God to be a guide to the
children of Israel which might defend them from their enemies and bring them to
the land of Canaan: but this deliverance was only temporal, and that only of
one people. Now the son of God is called Jesus, not because he delivers the
people of the Jews only, or because he saves the bodies of men only, but
because he saves both body and soul, not only of the Jews but also of the
gentiles, from hell, death, and damnation. And whereas Prophets and ministers
of the word are called Saviors; it is because they are the instruments of God
to publish the doctrine of salvation which is powerful in men's hearts, Obed.
v. 21. 1. Tim. 4.1^.
not by any virtue of theirs, but only by the operation of the spirit of
Christ. Lastly, it may be objected that the father and the holy ghost are
Saviors, and therefore not only the Son. Answer. True it is, that in the
work of salvation all the three persons must be joined together, and in no
wise severed: the Father saves, the Son saves, the holy ghost saves: yet
must we distinguish them in the manner of saving: the Father saves by the
Son; the Son saves by paying the ransom and price of our salvation; the
holy ghost saves by a particular applying of the ransom unto men. Now
therefore whereas the son paies the price of our redemption and not the
father or the holy ghost, therefore in this special respect he is called in
Scriptures and entitled by the name of Jesus and none but he.

By this which has been said, the Papists are faulty two vvayes. First,
that they give too much to the very name of Jesus: for they write in plain
terms, that the bare name it self being used has great power and does drive
away devils, Thyrraeus. de demon. these. 567.569.
though the parties that use it be void of good affection: whereas indeed it
has no more virtue then other titles of God or Christ. Secondly, they are
faulty that they give too little to the thing signified. For Christ must
either be our alone and whole Savior or no Savior. Now they make him but
half a Savior, and they join others with him as partners in the work of
salvation, when they teach, that with Christ's merits must be joined our works
of grace in the matter of justification, and with Christ's satisfaction for the
wrath of God, our satisfaction for the temporal punishment; and when they add
to Christ's intercession the intercession and patronage of saints, especially
of the virgin Mary, whom they call the queen of heaven, the mother of mercy,
vvithall requesting her, that by the authority of a mother she would command
her son. Officium B. Mariae reform. a Pio 5. Pontif.
If this doctrine of theirs may stand, Christ can not be the only Savior of
mankind, but every man in part shall be Jesus to himself.

But let us go on yet further to search the special reason of the name, which
is notably set down by the Angel. Thou shall (says he) call his name Jesus,
for he shall save his people from their sins. Mat. 1.21.
In which words we may consider 3. points. I. Whom the son of God shall
save. II. By what? III. From what? For the first, he shall save his people,
that is, the elect of Jews and Gentiles: and therefore he is called the
Savior of his body. Ephesians. 5.23.
We must not here imagine that Christ is a Savior of all and every man. For
if that were true, then Christ should make satisfaction to Gods justice for
all and every man's sins: and gods justice being fully satisfied he could not
in justice condemn any man: nay, all men should be blessed because
satisfaction for sin and the pardon of sin depend one upon another inseparably.
Again, if Christ be an effectual Savior of all and every particular man,
why is any man condemned? It will be said, because they will not believe;
belike then man's will must over rule Gods will, Actus primae causae ordinat
actum secundae causae.
whereas the common rule of divines is, that the first cause orders the
second.

The means of salvation by Christ are two: his merit, and his efficacy. His
merit, in that by his obedience to the law and by his passion, he made a
satisfaction for our sins, freed us from death, and reconciled us unto God.
Some may object, that the obedience and the passion of Christ being long ago
ended, can not be able to save us now: because that which he did 1500. years
ago may seem to be vanished and come to nothing at this day. Answer. If
Christ's obedience be considered as an action, and his passion as a bare
suffering, they are both ended long ago: yet the value and price of them
before God is everlasting: as in Adams fall the action of eating the forbidden
fruit is ended, but the guilt of his transgression goes ouerall mankind, and
continues still even to this hour, and shall do to the end of the world in
those which shall be borne hereafter. The efficacy of Christ is, in that he
gives his spirit to mortify the corruption of our natures, that we may die
unto sin and live to righteousness, and have true comfort in terrors of
conscience and in the pangs of death.

The evils from which we are saved are our own sins, in that Christ freeth
us from the guilt and the punishment and fault of them all, when we believe.

Thus much for the meaning of this title Jesus. Now follow the uses which
arise of it. First of all, whereas we are taught to make confession that the
son of God is Jesus, that is, a Savior: hence it must needs follow, that we
are all lost in our selves. And indeed before we can truly acknowledge that
Christ is our Savior, this confession must needs go before, that we are in
truth, and therewithal do feel our selves to be miserable sinners under the
wrath of God, utterly lost in regard of our selves: for Christ came to save
that which was lost. Mat. 18.11.
And when he talked with the woman of Canaan, he checked her and said, he was
not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Christ Jesus came to
pour oil into our wounds: Mat. 15.14.
Christ came to set them at liberty which are in prison: and to place them in
freedom that are in bondage. Now a man cannot pour oil into a wound, before
there be a wound, or before it be opened, and we feel the smart of it. And
how can we be set at liberty by Christ, except we feel us in our selves to be
in bondage, under Hell, death, and damnation? When the disciples of Christ
were upon the sea in a great tempest, Mat. 8.25.
they cried, Master, save us, we perish. So no man can heartily say, I believe
Jesus Christ to be my Savior, before he feel, that in himself he is utterly
lost and cast away without his help. But after that we perceive our selves to
be in danger and to be overwhelmed in the Sea of the wrath of God, then we cry
out with the disciples, Lord Jesus save us we perish. Many protestants in
these days hold Christ to be their Savior, but it is only formably from the
teeth outward, and no further: for they were never touched with the sense of
their spiritual misery that they might say with Daniel, Shame and confusion
belongs unto us: and with the Publican, I am a sinner, Lord be merciful to
me. And therefore the conclusion is this, that if we will have Christ to be our
Savior, we must first believe that in our selves we are utterly lost: and so
must that place be understood where Christ says, he is not sent, but to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, that is, to those which in their own sense
and feeling are lost in themselves.

Secondly, if Christ be a Savior, then we must acknowledge him to be so. But
how shall we do this? I answer, Thus: A man is taken to be a skillfull
Physician by this, that many patients come unto him, and seek for help at his
hands. And so should it be with Christ. But alas, the case is otherwise. Every
man can talk of Christ, but few acknowledge him to be a Savior, by seeking to
him for their salvation, because they judge themselves righteous, and feel not
themselves to stand in need of the help of Christ. Nay which is more, if a man
be known that can cure strange diseases, men will seek to him by sea and
land, and sell both goods and lands to get help at his hands. Even so, if
men were persuaded that Christ were a perfect Savior, and that they were sick
and utterly unable to be saved without him, they vvoulde never rest nor be
quiet but seek unto him for his help, and cry with David, O Lord, say unto
my soul that thou art my salvation, Psalm. 35.3.
The woman that was diseased with an issue of blood, came behind our Savior
Christ, Mat. 9.20.
and when she had but touched him, she was healed. In the same manner, if we
shall seek to come to Christ, and do but touch his precious body and blood by
the hand of faith, the issues and the bleeding wounds of our souls shall be
dried up. When a man that had been sick 38. years was come to the poole of
Bethesda, he was feign to lie there uncured; because when the angel troubled
the water evermore some stepped before him: but if we will seek to Christ for
the salvation of our souls, no man shall prevent us or step before us. Ioh.
5.7.
And if we find our selves to be so laden with the burden of our sins that
we can not come to him, let us then do as the palsy man did: he got 4. men to
carry him on their shoulders to the place where Christ was: and when they
could not by reason of the prease of people enter into the house, they opened
the roof and let him down in his bed by cords to Christ that he might be
healed. Mark. 2.4.
And so let us use the help of such as be godly, that by their instructions
and consolations they may as it were put too their shoulders, and by their
prayers as with cords bring us to Christ, that we may receive eternal
salvation, being otherwise dead in sin and subject to damnation.

Lastly, whereas Joseph and Mary gave this name not at their own pleasure, but
at the appointment of God himself: this ministers a good instruction to all
parents touching the naming of their children when they are baptized, that they
are with care and deliberation to give convenient names unto them which may put
them in mind of duties either to God or men. This is worthy of our observation,
for many care not how they name their children, yea it is at this day and ever
has been, that some* give such names to them as that at the very rehearsing
thereof laughter ensues. But this ought not to be so; for the name is given
unto children at the time of their baptism in the presence of God, of his
Church, and angels, even then when they are to be entered into the Church of
God and that in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost:
therefore though we do not place religion in titles, or names, yet
nevertheless a wise and godly choice in this matter is to be had, that the
names imposed may be in stead of instructions and admonitions to the parties
named: and for this cause in the old testament names were given either by
prophetical instinct, or according to the event of things which came to pass
about the time of the birth of children, or they were borrowed from the holy
auncetours, Luke 1.59.
to put the posterity in mind to follow their steps.

And thus much of the duties: Now follow the consolations that Gods Church and
people reap from this that the son of God is our Savior. When as all
mankind was included under sin and condemnation, then the Lord had mercy upon
us and gave unto man the covenant of grace in which he promised that his own
son should be our redeemer. This is a great and unspeakable comfort, as may
appear in that the angels so greatly rejoiced herein when Christ was borne,
Behold, say they, I bring you tidings of great joy that shall be to all the
people, that is, that unto you is borne i^ the city of David a Savior which
is Christ the Lord. Luke ^.10, 12.
Now if they rejoice thus exceedingly at Christ's birth, who was not their
Savior, because they stand not in need to be redeemed: then much more ought
the Church of God to rejoice herein whom it does principally concern: and no
marvel; for if this savior had not been, it had been better to have been^ a
brute beast or any other creature then a man; for the death of a beast is the
end of his woe, but the death of a man without a Savior is the beginning of
endelesse misery. Satan and his angels are fallen and have no Savior, but
when man was fallen, God of his mercy dealt not so with him, but gave his
own son to restore him to better estate, whereas he might as justly have
damned all men for the fall of our first parents, as he did the wicked angels
for theirs; for God is not bound to any creature; behold then a matter of
unspeakeable joy: let us therefore receive and embrace Christ our Savior, fly
to him for the pardon of all sins.

Now we come to the second title of the Son of God, whereby he is termed
Christ: which title is as it were the surname of the second person as some
do think: yet according to the opinion of some others it is no name at all,
but only a mere appellation, Tertull. contra Praxea^.
as when in the like case a particular man is called a Duke or a King. It is
all one with Messiah in Hebrewe wherewith the redeemer was named in the old
Testament, Dan 9.24.
and both signify anointed.

Among the Jews before the coming of Christ three estates or orders of men
were anointed with oil; First of all kings, as Saul, David, and the rest of
the kings of Judah. Secondly the priests that served in the tabernacle and
temple before the Lord when they were ordained, and as it were, installed
into the priesthood, were anointed with oil, as first of all Aaron and his
sons, but afterward the high priests alone. Thirdly prophets were thus
anointed, as Elisha.

Now this legal anointing was a tipe and figure of the anointing of Christ:
which was not with bodily oil, but by the spirit, and it was more excellent
then all other annointings were. For David says, Psalm. 45.7.
he was anointed with the oil of gladness above all his fellows,
signifying, that neither king, priest, nor prophet, was ever anointed in the
same manner as he was.

Christ's anointing is according to both his natures; for in what nature he
is a Mediator, in the same he is anointed: but according to both his natures
jointly he is a mediator: the godheade is no mediator without the manhood,
nor the manhood without the godhead: and therefore his anointing extendes it
self both to his godhead and to his manhood.

Christ's anointing has two parts, both of them figured by the anointing of
the Jews. The first is his consecration whereby he was set apart to do the
office of a Mediator between God and man: and therefore to be a king, a
priest, a prophet: a king to gather and withal to govern his Church and
people: a priest, to make satisfaction and intercession for the sins of the
elect: a prophet, to reveal and teach his people the will of God his father.
And though it be true that Christ is set a part to the work of mediation as he
is mediator or as he is man: yet as he is God he does design and set himself
apart to the same work. For to design the mediator is a common action of the
3. persons, the father, the son and the holy ghost: and yet considering the
father is first in order, and therefore has the beginning of the action; for
this cause he is said especially to design, as when S. John says, Him has
God the father sealed.

Ioh. 6.27.
The second part of Christ's anointing is the pouring out of the fullness of
the spirit or grace into the manhood of Christ: Isa. 61.1.
and it was particularly figured by the holy oil. For first, that oil had no
man but God alone to be the author of it: so the most excellent and
unspeakeable graces of the manhood of Christ have their beginning from the
godhead of Christ. Exodus 30.
Again, though the same oil was most precious. yet was it compounded of
myrrh, calamus, and Casia, and such like earthie matters: to signify, that
the spiritual oil of grace whereof the manhood of Christ was as it were, a
vessel or storehouse, did not consist of the essential properties of the
godhead, as Eutiches and his followers in these days imagine, but in certain
created gifts and qualities placed in his humane nature: otherwise we should
not have any participation of them. Thirdly, the sweet savor of the holy oil
figured, that the riches of all grace with the effect thereof in the obedience
of Christ, does take away the noisome sent of our loathsome sins from the
nosthrilles of God, and withal does make our persons and all our actions
acceptable unto him as a svveete perfume, 2. Cor. 2.17.
as Paul says, We are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, etc. And Christ's
death is for this cause termed a sacrifice of sweet smelling savor.

And we must further understand that these gifts of Christ's manhood are not
conferred in a small scantling or measure; for John says, John. 3.34.
God gives him the spirit not by measure; because the graces which are in
Christ are far more both in number and degree, then all men or angels have or
shall have: though the good angels and the saints of God in heaven are very
excellent creatures stored with graces and gifts of God. For this cause Christ
is called the head of man, 1. Cor. 11.
because he is every way the most principal and glorious man that ever was.
Yet for all this are not the gifts of Christ's manhood infinite any way; because
it is finite, being a creature, and therefore not capable of that which is
infinite.

By Christ's anointing the people of God reap great benefit and comfort,
because they are partakers thereof. For this cause the oil where with he was
anointed is called the oil of gladness, because the sweet savor of it
gladdeth the hearts of all his members, Psalm. 45.7.
and brings the peace of God which passes all understanding. Psalm. 133.
The holy oil powered upon Aarons head came down to his beard, and to the
very skirtes of his garments: and it signified that the spiritual oil of
grace was first of all powered upon our head Christ Jesus, and from thence
consequently derived to all his members, that by that means he might be not
only anointed himself, but also our annointer.

Now the benefits which we receive by his anointing are two. The first is,
that all the elect when they are called to the profession of the gospel of
Christ, are in and by him set apart and made spiritual kings, priests, and
prophets, as S. John says, He has made us kings and priests unto God his
Father. And S. Peter out of Joel, Apoc. 1.6.
I will power (says the Lord) my spirit upon all flesh, Act. 2.24.
and your sons and daughters shall prophecy.

The second benefit is, that all the faithful receive the same oil, that is,
the same spirit of God in some measure which he received above measure, as S.
John says, The anointing which ye have received of him dwells in you and
teaches you all things. 1. Ioh. 2.27.
where by anointing is meant the holy Ghost. Psa. 105.15.
And hence it is, that men are called Christians of the name of Christ, that
is, anointed with the same oil wherewith Christ was anointed. And the holy
oil might not be given to a stranger, to signify, that to have the spirit of
Christ, and to be guided by it, is peculiar to them that are Christ's. Exo.
30.33.
Now then let us all lay these things to our hearts, and extol the
unspeakeable goodness of God that has advaunced us to the dignity of kings,
priests, prophets, before him, and has given his spirit unto us to enable us
to be so indeed.

Now follow the duties which are to be learned hence. And first, whereas all
Christians receive anointing from the holy one Christ Jesus, 1. Ioh. 2.20. Dan
9.24.
to become prophets in a sort, we must do our endeavors, that the word of
God may dwell plentifully in us, Ioh. 5.39. (...).
and for that cause we must search the scriptures, even as hunters seek for
the game, and as men seek for gold even in the mines of the earth. There is
nothing that is more unbeseeming a man, then gross ignorance a Christian.
Therefore the author of the epistle to the Hebrews reprooues them, Heb. 4.12.
that whereas for the time they ought to have been teachers, they had need
again to be taught the first principles of the word of God.

Again, that portion of knowledge which we have received of God is further to
be applied to the benefit and good of others: this is that most precious baulme
that on our parts should never be wanting to the heads of men. And here every
man that is set over others must remember within the compass of his calling
and charge to instruct those that be under him so far forth as possibly he
can. Psalm. 141.5.
Governors of families must teach their children and servants and their whole
household the doctrine of the true religion, that they may know the true God
and walk in all his ways in doing righteousness and judgment. If
householders would make conscience of this their duty, and in some sort and
measure prepare their families against they come to the public congregation,
the ministers of the Gospel with greater comfort and far more ease should
perform their duty; and see far more fruit of their ministry then now
they do. But whereas they neglect their duty, falsely persuading themselves
that it does not belong to them at all to instruct others; it is the cause of
ignorance both in towns and families, in masters themselves, in servants and
children and all. Lastly, by this we are admonished to take all occasions that
possibly can be offered, mutually to edify each other in knowledge, saying
among our selves (as it was foretold of these times) Come, let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord to the house of the God of Jacob, Isa. 2.3.
and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths: and withal,
we should confirm each others, as Christ says to Peter, when thou art
converted confirm thy brethren; and be ready at all times to render an
account of our faith and religion even before our enemies when we are justly
called so to do.

Secondly, because we are set apart in Christ, to become spiritual priests
unto God, 1. Pet. 2.5.
we must therefore offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable unto him: and they be
in number seven. The first is an affiance whereby we rest upon God, as David
says, Offer the sacrifice of righteousness and trust in the Lord. Psalm. 4.6.
The second is wholly to subject our selves to the ministry of the gospel,
that we may be changed and converted by it, as Paul says, Romans 15.16.
That he ministered the Gospel to the Gentiles, that the offering up of them
might be acceptable, being sanctified by the holy Ghost. The third is, all
manner of prayers and supplications made unto God. Let my prayer, says David,
be directed in thy sight as incense, Psalm. 141.2.
and the lifting up of mine hands as an evening sacrifice. The fourth is
praising and thankesgiving unto God. Let us by him offer the sacrifice of
praise alvvaies to God, that is the fruit of the lips which confess his
name. Heb. 13.15. Rev. 5.8.
And in the Revelation the golden vials full of odors are the prayers of the
saints. The fifth is the relief of our poor breethren according to our
ability, as Paul says, I was even filled after that I had received of
Epaphroditus that which came from you, Phil. 4.18. Psalm. 51.19.
an odor that smells sweet, a sacrifice ple^sant and acceptable to God. The
sixth is the denial of our selves with a contrite and broken heart. The seventh
is, to resign our selves bodies and souls wholly to the service of God: Set
your selves (says Paul) to God, as they that are alive from the dead: Romans
6.13.
and your members as weapons of righteousness unto God. In which words he
alludes to the manner of the old Testament: when a man offered any sacrifice
for himself, he brought the beast into the temple or tabernacle and set it
before the altar, in token that he did resign it unto God: and so we for our
parts must not give our bodies and souls to become the instruments of sin
and satan, but we must have them always in readiness, freely presenting them
unto him that he may have the whole disposition of them according to his good
pleasure, to the honor and glory of his name. Again, in the whole burnt
offering all was consumed and turned to smoke, no man having benefit of it, to
signify, that we must give our selves not in part but wholly to the service of
God, even to death if need be. If this be so, miserable is the practice of such
that give up their bodies and souls to live in licentious wantonness, in the
pleasures of their beastly sins, in idleness. For they offer themselves a
sacrifice, not to God but to the devil.

Thirdly, considering we are anointed to be spiritual kings even in this
life, we must walk worthy so great a calling. That this may be so, first of
all such as are governors set over others, must rule not according to their
wills and pleasures, but in the Lord: withal, doing homage to their head
and king Christ Jesus himself. Secondly, we must every one of us rule and
bear sway even as kings over our own thoughts, wills, affections,
over-mastering them as much as we can by Gods word and spirit: withal,
maintaining and proclaiming continual war against our corrupt natures, the
devil, and the world. And truly he which can bear rule over his own
heart, is a right king indeed: and having received some measure of grace to
reign over himself in this life, he shall reign for ever with Christ in the
life to come. As for such as are carried away with the svvinge of their
corruptions, having blindness and ignorance to reign in their minds,
rebellion in their wills and affections, looseness in their whole lives, they
may carry the form of Christians as long as they will, but indeed they are
no spiritual kings but bondemen: the strong man satan keeps as yet the hold
of their hearts, and as Lord and king holds up his scepter there.

Lastly, seeing Christ is anointed with the most precious baulme that ever
was, and that for our sakes, he must be sweet and savourie unto us, and all
other things must be as unsavory dross and dung in regard of him. We must
in this case endeavor to say as the spouse of Christ does: Because of the
savor of the good ointments, Cant. 1.2.
thy name is an ointment powered out: therefore the virgins love thee. O that we
could savor in the fear of God, Isai. 11.3.
that we might perceive how all his garments smell of myrrh, aloes, and
cassia, coming forth of his ivory palaces unto us. Psalm 45.8.
And because the holy ointment of Christ is powered forth upon all his members
to make them favourie and sweet in the presence of God, let us make conscience
of all manner of sin, lest by the poison and stincke thereof, we infect not
only our selves, but all the creatures of God which we use, yea heaven and
earth itself. It stands not with equity that after we have been embaulmed
and sweetened by the precious merits of Christ that we should make our selves
as two footed swine, to return to the mire of our old sins.

The coupling and combining of these two former titles together, contains the
principali question of the whole bible, which is, whether Jesus the son of
Mary be Christ or no; as S. John says. These things are written, Ioh. 2^.31.
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that in
believing ye might have life everlasting. This conclusion was denied by the
Jews, but avouched and confirmed both by Christ and by his Apostles; and their
principal argument was framed thus. Act. 18.5.
He which has the true notes of Christ is the Messiah or Christ indeed: but
Jesus the Son of Mary has the true notes of Christ: therefore Jesus is
Christ. The proposition is opened at large in the prophesies of the old
testament: the assumption is confirmed in the writings of the new testament:
and the principal reasons of the confirmation are couched in the articles
which co^cern the second person. The conclusion follows, and is set down as I
have said, in the knitting together of the titles, Jesus and Christ.

Thus much of the second title: now follows the third, his only Son: that
is, the only son of the first person the father. In this title we must
consider 2. things: the first, that he is the son of God: the second, that he
is the only Son of God. Touching the first, Christ is called the Son of
God, because he was begotten of the father. Now for the opening of this
eternal generation, we must consider three points: the thing begotten, the
manner of begetting, and the time. For the thing it self, it is Christ; who
must be considered 2. ways, as he is a son, and as he is God: As he is a
son, he is not of himself, but the son of the father begotten of him:
nevertheless as he is God, Non (...) tame^ (...).
he is of himself neither begotten nor proceeding; for the essence or godhead
of the father is of it self without all beginning: but the godhead of the
son is one and the same with the godhead of the father: for by what godhead
the father is God, by the same and no other the son is God: therefore the
son as he is God, he is God of himself without beginning as the Father.
Whereupon it follows, that the son is begotten of the father as he is a
son, but not as he is God.

The manner of this generation is this. The son is begotten of the substance
of the father not by any flux, as when water is derived from the head of the
spring to the channel: nor by decision as when a thing is cut in pieces: nor by
propagation, as when a grift is transplanted into a new stock: but by an
unspeakeable communication of the whole essence or Godhead from the father to
the son; in receiving whereof the son does no more diminish the majesty or
Godhead of the father, then the light of one candle does the light of the other
from which it is taken. Whereupon the Council of Nicene has said well, that
the son is of the Father as light of light not proceeding but begotten.

The time of this generation has neither beginning, middle, or end: and
therefore it is eternal before all worlds: and that is a thing to be wondered
at, that the father begetting and the son begotten are coeternall, and
therefore equal in time. Wisdom in the proverbs (which with one consent of all
divines is said to be Christ) affirms that she was before the world was
created, that is, from eternity: Prove. 8.24.
for before the world was made there was nothing but eternity. But it may be
alleged to the contrary, that the saying of the father, This day have I
begotten thee, is expounded by Paul of the time of Christ's resurrection. Answ.
Psalm. 2.7. Act. 13.30, 33.
We must distinguish between generation it self and the manifestation of it:
and of the second must the place be understood, which may be brought to pass
at the time of Christ's resurrection in which he was mightily declared to be the
son of God, though in the mean season the generation it self be eternal.
Romans 1.4.
If any man allege further that the person which begets must needs go
before the person begotten, the answer is, that there is a double priority; one
of order, the other of time: now in the generation of creatures there is
priority both of order and time: but in the generation of the second person in
trinity there is prioritie of order alone: the father being first, the son
second, without prioritie of time: because they both in that respect are
equal, and neither is before or after other: because the being or subsisting
of the persons is not measured by time.

Hence it follows necessarily, that Jesus Christ is true God: and the whole
tenor of the scriptures confirm it sufficiently. I. he is made equal to God
the father, who being in the form of God thought it no robbery to be equal
with God: and, Phil. 2.8. Ioh. 16.15. Number. 14.26, 27. 1. Cor. 10.9. Psalm.
102.26. cu^ Ioh. 1.3. 1. Ioh. 5.20. Ioh. 1.1. and 8.56.
All things that the father has are mine. The children of Israel are said to
have tempted Iehova: and Paul says, that he whom they tempted was Christ.
Iehoua founded the earth, and the same is said of Christ. II. Christ the son
of God is by name called God: Jesus Christ is very God and life eternal. III.
The properties of the godhead are ascribed unto him. He is eternal, because he
was then when there was no creature. In the beginning was the word: and, before
Abraham was I am. Mat. 18.20. and 26.
He is omnipresent, Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there
am I in the midst amongst them. Lastly he is omnipotent, Whatsoever things
the father does, Ioh. 5.19.
the same does the son also. IIII. The works of creation and preservation
are as well ascribed to the son as to the father. By him the father made the
world, and he bears up all things by his mighty power: and miracles, which
are works either above or against the order of nature peculiar to God, were
done by Christ. V. Divine worship is given to him: for he is adored, invoted,
and believed in, as God the father. To him is given a name, at which every knee
does bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, Phil, 2.10.
and things underneath the earth.

As for the reasons which be alleged to the contrary, they are of no moment.
I. The word of God can not be God; the son is the word of the father:
therefore he is not God. Answ. The word is taken two ways: first for a
sounding word standing of letters and syllables uttered either by God or by
the creatures: now on this manner Christ is not the word of God. Secondly
there is a substantial word, which is of the substance of him whose word it
is. And thus Christ is the word of God the father. And he is so termed, I. in
respect of the father, for as reason and speech has his beginning from the
mind without any passion in the mind, so has he beginning from the father. And
as the speech is in the mind and the mind in the speech, so the father is in
the son, and the son in the father. 2. In respect of all creatures. The
father does all things by the son* by whose powerful word the world was
made, Ioh. 1. v. 1. Heb. 1.3. Ioh. 5.25. 2. Cor. 13.3. Ioh. 17.
is now preserved and shall be abolished. 3. In respect of the Church. For the
father by him speaks unto us both in the outward ministry of the word, and
by the inward operation of the spirit: and again we by him speak to the
father.

II. It may be objected thus, God has no beginning from any other; Christ has
beginning from the father: therefore he is not God. Answer. Christ must be
considered both in regard of his godhead and in regard of his person: in
regard of his god head he came not of any but is of himself, as well as
the father is: yet in regard of his person he is from the father, who is a
beginning to the rest of the persons, Matthew. 28. Principium ordi^is and
^rigi^is.
both in respect of order (for the scripture says not; the holy Ghost, the
Son, the Father: but the Father, the Son, the holy Ghost) as also in
respect of the communication of the Godhead. And whereas it is said that God is
of himself, if the name God, be taken for the Godhead it self absolutely
considered, it is true: but if it be taken for any particular person in the
Godhead, it is false. III. None is greater then God: but the father is greater
then Christ, for so he says, the father is greater then I. Ioh. 14.
Ans. Christ there speaks of himself as he was a man abased in the form of a
servant: in which respect he is less then the father, who never was incarnate
and abased in our nature. And though Christ in respect of his nature assumed be
inferior to the father, yet does it not hinder but that he may be equal to
him, as he is the second person in trinity, or as he is God by one and the
same Godhead with the father. IV. He that is made of God, to be this, or that,
is not God: but Christ is made of God, as Paul says, 1. Cor. 1.30.
Christ is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, etc. Answer. Christ is said to
be made, not because there was any beginning of his Godhead, or any change or
alteration in his person: but because in the eternal counsel of the father,
he was set apart before all times to exequute the office of a Mediator, and
was withal in time called, and as it were consecrated and ordained thereunto
in his baptism: he is made therefore in respect of his office, but not in
respect of his person, or nature. V. God has no head, Christ has an head, as
Paul says, God is Christ's head. Answ. God, that is, the father, 1. Cor. 11.3.
is head of Christ, not as he is God simply, but as he is God incarnate, or
made manifest in the f^esh, and in respect of the office to which he willingly
abased himself. VI. He which gives up his kingdom is not God, Christ gives
up his kingdom. Then, says Paul, shall be the end, 1. (...).15.24.
when he has delivered up the kingdom to God even the father. Answer. Christ
is king two ways, as he is God, and as he is Mediator: as he is God, he
reigns eternally with the father and the holy Ghost: but as he is Mediator,
in the end of the world when all the company of the elect are gathered, his
kingdom shall cease not simply but in respect of the ^^tward manner of
administration: for the exequution of civil and ecclesiastical functions
shall cease. And whereas in the same place, verse. 28.
it is said that Christ shall be subject unto God eternally after the end, it
must be understood partly in regard of the assumed manhood, partly in respect
of his mystical body the Church most nearly joined unto him in heaven. VII.
The first borne of every creature, and of many brethren, is a creature and not
God: but Christ is the first borne of every creature, and of many brethren.
Ans. He is called the first borne by allusion to the first borne in the old
testament: Romans 8.29. Col. 1.15.
for as they were principal heirs having double portions allowed them; and
the chief or governors of the family* so Christ is made heir of the world,
Genesis 49.3. Deuteronomy. 21.17.
and the head of Gods family which is his Church elected and adopted in him.
And again he is called the first borne of every creature, because he was
begotten of the substance of his father before any creature was made, and
therefore it is not here said that he was first created, but first begotten.

By the reasons which have bin alleged, as also by the insufficiency of the
contrary arguments, it is more then manifest against all heretics that Christ
is very God. Yet to stop the mouths of all Atheists, and to satisfy all
wavering and doubtings minds, I will add one reason further. The gospel of S.
John was chiefly penned for this end, to prove the dietie of Christ: and among
other arguments alleged, this is one* that Christ gave a resolute and a
constant testimony of himself, that he was the son of God, and very God:
now if any man shall say, that sundry persons since the beginning of the world
have taken upon the^, and that falsely, to be gods: I answer, that never any
creature took this title and honor upon him to be called God, but the
fearful judgments of God were upon him for it. In the estate of man's
innocence the devil told our first parents that by eating the fruit of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil, they should be as gods knowing good and
evil: now they believed him, and affected divine honor, but what came of it?
surely Adam with all his posterity is shut up for it under eternal damnation.
Herod likewise araied in royal apparel, and sitting on the judgment seat,
made an oration to the men of Tire and Sidon, who gave a shout saying, the
voice of God, and not of man. Now because he took the glory of God to
himself, and did not return it to him to who^ it was due, immediately the
angel of the Lord smote him. And so, if Christ had bin but a mere man, and not
very God, as he avouched, undoubtedly the hand of God would have bin upon him
likewise for his confusion: but when he suffered for us, and bare the
punishment due for our sins, he most triumphed. And the judgments of God
were upon Herod, Pontius Pilate, Caiphas, and upon all those that were enemies
to him, and to his church afterward, and that partly in life and partly in
death. Wherefore seeing that God can not abide that his glory should be given
to any creature, and seeing for that cause he takes revenge on all those that
exalt themselves to be gods, it remains that the testimony which Christ gave of
himself that he was God, is infallibly true, and without all question to be
believed of us. And to conclude, I would have all the devils in hell with the
cursed order of Lucians, Porphyrians, and Atheists whatsoever to answer this
one point, how it could come to pass, that Christ by publishing the doctrine
of the Gospel that is as contrary to man's reason, will, and affections, as
water to fire, should win almost the whole world to become his disciples, and
to give their lives for him, unless he were God indeed, as he confessed
himself to be.

There be sundry special reasons wherefore it was necessary that Christ
should be God. I. There is none which can be a Savior of body and soul but
God. Isa. 43.11.
I even I am the Lord, and besides ^e there is no Savior. And, Ose. 13.4.
I am the Lord the God from the land of Egypt, and thou shall know no God but
me: for there is no Savior beside me. II. There must be a proportion between
the sin of man and the punishment of sin: now the sin of man in respect
of the offense of the majesty of God is infinite, in that he is infinitely
displeased with man at the breach of his law: therefore the punishment of
sin must be infinite: and hence it follows that he which suffers the
punishment being man, must withal be God, that the manhood by the power of
the Godhead may be supported, that in suffering it may vanquish death, and make
a satisfaction. III. He that must be a Savior, must be able 1. to deliver men
from the bondage of their spiritual enemies, namely sin and Satan: 2. to
restore the image of God lost by the fall of Adam, and to confer righteousness
and life everlasting: 3. to defend them from hell, death, damnation, the flesh,
the devil, the world: 4. to give them full redemption from all their miseries
both in body and soul, and to place them in eternal happiness: all which none
can do, but he which is very God. IV. It was the pleasure of God, to show his
incomprehensible goodness in this, that his grace should not only be equal to
our sin, but also by many degrees go beyond it. And therefore the first Adam
being but a mere man, the second Adam must be both God and man: that as the
second was more excellent then the first, so our comfort might be greater in
our redemption by the second, then our misery and discomfort was by the fall
of the first.

Hitherto we have showed how Christ is the son of God: Now let us come to
the second point, namely that he is the only son of God. And he is so
termed because he is the son of the father, in that manner as nothing else
can be but he. Angels indeed are termed the sons of God, Job. 1.
but that is only in respect of their creation: and all that believe in Christ
are the sons of God by adoption, being received into the family of God which
is his Church by the merit of Christ, whereas by nature they were the children
of wrath. Christ also as he is man (I say not his manhood which is a nature and
no person) is the son of God by the grace of personal union, and not by
nature or by adoption. Lastly Christ as he is the second person in trinity,
the eternal word of the father, coeternall and consubstanciall with him, is
also the son of God. But how? neither by creation, nor adoption, nor by the
virtue of personal union, but by nature; as he was begotten of the very
substance of the father before all worlds: and therefore he is called the
proper and only begotten son of God. It may be objected on this manner. If
the father beget the son, Ioh. 1 18. Romans 8.32.
he does it either willingly, or against his will: if willingly, then the son
is begotten by the freewill of the father, and no son by nature. Answer. The
father did communicate to the son his whole Godhead willingly without
constraint, yet not by his will: and therefore he is the son of the father by
nature, not by will. It may be further said, that if Christ be the son of God
by nature, as he is the essential word of the father, and by personal union
as he is man, then is he not one but two sons. Answ. As he is but one person,
so is he but one son: yet not in one but in two respects: two respects make
not two things, whereas one and the same thing and so remaining may admit
sundry respects.

Thus much of the meaning of the third title: Now follow the comforts which may
be gathered hence. Whereas Christ Jesus is the son of God, it serves as a
means to make miserable and wretched sinners that are by nature the children
of wrath and damnation, to be the sons of God by adoption* as Saint John
testifies. Ioh. 1.12.
Now what a benefit is this to be the child of God, no tongue can express.
Christ says, Blessed are the peacemakers: Matthew. 5.9.
but why are they blessed? for, says he, they shall be called the sons of God.
Whereby he testifies that the right of adoption is a most excellent
privilege; and not without cause. For he which is the child of God, is
spiritually allied to Christ, and to all the saints and servants of God both in
heaven and earth, having him for his elder brother, and all his members as his
brethren and sisters: yea if we be Gods adopted children, we are also heirs,
even heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ. Well, Romans 8.17.
how great soever this prerogative is, yet few there be that rightly weigh it
and consider of it. Children of noble men and princes heirs are had in account
and reputation of all men, they are the very speech and wonder of the world.
But it is a matter of no account to be the son of God and fellow-heire with
Christ. The dearest servants of God have been esteemed but as the offscouring
of the world. And no marvel, for they which are after the flesh, savor the
things of the flesh. Few men have their understandings enlightened to discern
of such spiritual things as these are, and therefore are they little or
nothing regarded. A blind man never seeing the son, is not brought to wonder
at it: and earthly minded men neither seeing nor feeling what an excellent
thing it is to be the child of God, cannot be brought to seek after it. But
let all such as fear God enter into a serious consideration of the
unspeakable goodness of God, comforting themselves in this, that God the father
has vouchsafed by his own son to make the^ of the vassals of Satan, to be
his own dear children.

Now follow the duties which are two. First, we believe that Jesus Christ who
was to be the Savior of mankind, must needs be God: what is the reason hereof?
surely because no creature, no not all creatures in heaven and earth were able
to save one man, so vile, wretched, and miserable is our estate by Adams fall.
And therefore the son of God himself pitied our estate, and being king of
heaven and earth, was feign to come from heaven, and lay down his crown and
become a servant, and taking upon him our nature, was also feign to take upon
him our case and condition, and suffer death for our sins, which otherways
every one of us should have suffered both in body and soul world without end.
To make this more plain, let us suppose that some one has committed an
offense against a prince; now the trespass is so grievous, that no man can
appease the kings wrath, save only the kings only son, and which is more,
the kings son cannot release him, unless he suffer the punishment for him in
his own person, which is due unto the malefactor. Now what is to be thought
of this man's estate? surely all men will say that he is in a most miserable
taking, and that his trespass is notorious: and so it is with every one of us
by nature, whatsoever we are. No man could save our souls, no not all the
angels in heaven, unless the king of heaven and earth the only son of God
had come down from heaven and suffered for us, bearing our punishment. Now the
consideration of this must humble us and make us to cast down our selves under
the hand of God for our sins, and pray continually that the Lord would send
some Moses or other which might smite the rocks of our hearts, that some tears
of sorrow and repentance might gush out for our woeful misery.

Secondly, whereas God the father of Christ gave his only son to be our
savior, as we must be thankful to God for all things, so especially for this
great and unspeakable benefit. Common blessings of God, as meat, drink,
health, wealth, and liberty, must at all times move us to be thankful, but
this, that Christ Jesus the only son of God, redeemed us being utterly
lost, this I say, must be the main point of al our thankfulness: but men's
hearts are so frozen in the dregs of their sins, that this duty comes
little in practice now adays. Our Savior Christ cleansed ten leapers, but there
was but one of the^ that returned to give him thanks, and this is as true in
the leprosy of the soul, for though salvation by Christ be offered unto us
daily by Gods ministers, yet not one of ten, nay scarce one of a thousand gives
praise and thanks to God for it, because men take no delight in things which
concern the kingdom of heaven, they think not that they have need of
salvation, neither do they feel any want of a Savior. But we for our parts
must learn to say with David, What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits: Psalm. 116.12.
yea we are to practice that which Solomon says, My son give me thy heart:
Prove. 23.26.
for we should give unto God both body and soul in token of our thankfulness
for this wonderful blessing that he has given his only son to be our savior;
and let us know this for truth, that they which are not tha^kfull for it, let
them say what they will, they have no soundnes of grace at the heart.

And thus much of the third title. The fourth and last title is in these words
our Lord. Christ Jesus the only son of God is our Lord three ways: 1. by
creation, in that he made us of nothing, when we were not: 2. he is our Lord in
the ^ight of redemption. In former times the custom has bin that when one is
taken prisoner in the fields, he that paies his ransom shall become always
after his lord: so Christ when we were bondslaues under hell, death, and
condemnation, paid the ra^some of our redemption, and freed us from the bondage
of sin and satan, and therefore in that respect he is our Lord. 3. He is the
head of the Church (as the husband is the wives head,) to rule and govern
the same by his word and spirit. And therefore in that respect also Christ is
our Lord.

And thus much for the meaning. Now follow the duties. 1. If Christ be our
sovereign Lord, we must perform absolute obedience unto him, that is,
whatsoever he commands us, that we must do. And I say absolute obedience,
because Magistrates, Masters, Rulers, and fathers may command, and must be
obeyed, yet no^ simply, but so farfoorth as that which they command does agree
with the word and commandment of God: but Christ's will and word is
righteousness it self, and therefore the rule and direction of all our actions
whatsoever, and for this cause he must be absolutely obeyed. Thus he requires
the obedience of the moral law: but why? because he is the Lord our God. And
in Malach. he says, Exodus 20. Mal. 1.6.
If I be your Lord, where is my fear? And again, we must resign both body
and soul, heart, mind, will, affections, and the course of our whole lives to
be ruled by the will of Christ. He is Lord not only of the body, but of the
spirit and soul of man: he must therefore have homage of both, as we adore
him by the knee of the body, so must the thoughts and the affections of our
hearts have their knees also to worship him, and to show their subjection to
his commandments. As for such as do hold him for their Lord in word, but will
not endeavor to show their loyalty in all manner of obedience, they are
indeed no better then stark rebels. Secondly, when by the hand of Christ
strange judgments shall come to pass, as it is usual in all places
continually; we must stay our selves without murmuring or finding fault,
because he is an absolute Lord over all his creatures: all things are in his
hands, and he may do with his own whatsoever he will; and therefore we must
rather fear and tremble whenever we see or hear of them: so David says, I
was dumb and opened not my mouth because thou did it. Psalm. 119.120.
And again, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments. Thirdly, before we use any of Gods creatures or ordinances, we must
sanctify them by the direction of his word and by prayer: 1. Cor. 10.26.
the reason is this, because he is Lord over all, and therefore from his word
we must fetch direction to teach us whether we may use them or not, and when
and how we must use them: and secondly we must pray to him, that he would give
us liberty and grace to use them aright in holy manner. Also we are so to use
the creatures and ordinances of God, as being always ready to give an
account for them at the day of judgment, for we use that which is the Lords,
not our own; we are but stewards over them, and we must come to a reckoning
for the stewardship. Have thou learning? then employ it to the glory of God,
and the good of the Church: boast not of it as though it were thine own. Have
thou any other gift or blessing of God, be it wisdom, strength, riches,
honor, favor, or whatsoever; then look thou use it so, as thou may be
always ready to make a good account thereof unto Christ. Lastly, every one
must so lead his life in this world, as that at the day of death he may
surrender and give up his soul into the hands of his Lord, and say with
Steven, Lord Jesus receive my soul: for thy soul is none of thine, but his
who has bought it with a price, Act. 7.
and therefore thou must so order and keep it as that thou may in good manner
restore it into the hands of God at the end of thy life. If a man should borrow
a thing of his neighbor, and use it so as he does quite spoil it, he would be
ashamed to bring it again to the owner in that manner, and if he do, the
owner will not receive it. Ungodly men in this life do so stain their souls
with sin, as that they can never be able to give them up into the hands of God
at the day of death: and if they would, yet God accepts them not, but casts
the^ quite away. We must therefore labor so to live in the world, that with a
joyful heart at the day of death we may commend our souls into the hands of
our Lord Christ Jesus, who gave them unto us. This is a hard thing to be done,
and he that will do it truly, must first be assured of the pardon of his own
sins, which a man can never have without true and unfeigned faith and
repentance: wherefore while we have time, let us purge and cleanse our souls and
bodies, that they may come home again to God in good plight.

And here all governors must be put in mind that they an higher Lord, that
they may not oppress or deal hardly with their inferiors. Ephesians. 6.9.
And this is Paul's reason, ye masters (says he) do the same things unto your
servants, putting away threatening: and know that even your master is also in
heaven, neither is their respect of persons with him. Inferiors again must
remember to submit themselves to the authority of their governors, especially
of magistrates. For they are set over us by our sovereign Lord and king Christ
Jesus: as Paul says, Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. For there is no power but of
God, and the powers that be ordained are of God. Ephesians. 6.5.
And again, Servants be obedient to your masters according to the flesh, with
fear and trembling, in singlenes of your hearts, as unto Christ.

The comfort which Gods Church may reap hence, is very great: for if Christ be
the Lord of lords, and our Lord especially, we need not to fear what the
devil or wicked men can do unto us. If Christ be on our side, who can be
against us? we need not fear them that can destroy the body and do no more,
but we must cast our fear on him that is Lord of body and soul, Mat. 10.28.
and can cast both to hell.

Thus much of the fourth title. Now follows Christ's incarnation, in these
words, Conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Marie. And they
contain in them one of the most principal points of the doctrine of godliness,
as Paul says, without controversy great is the mystery of godliness, which
is, 1. Tim. 3.16.
God is made manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, etc. And that we
may proceed in order, in handling them, I will first speak of the incarnation
generally, and then after come to the parts thereof. In general we are to
propound five questions, the answearing whereof will be very needful to the
better understanding of the doctrine following.

The first question is, who was incarnate or made man? Answer. The second
person in Trinity, the son of God alone, and it is set down in this article
according to the Scriptures. Ioh. 1.14. Luke 1.35.
Saint John says, The Word was made flesh: and the angel says, The holy one
which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the son of the most highest. Romans
1.13.
And Paul says, that Christ Jesus our Lord was made of the seed of Abraham
according to the flesh. And there be sundry reasons, why the second person
should rather be incarnate then any other. 1. By whom the father created all
things, and man especially, by him man being fallen is to be redeemed, and as
I may say, recreated: now man was at the first created of the father by the
son: and therefore to be redeemed by him. 2. It was most convenient, that he
which is the essential image of the father, should take man's nature that he
might restore the image of God lost and defaced in man: Hebr. 1.3. Coloss. 1.
but the second person is the essential image of the father, and therefore he
alone must take man's nature. 3. It was requisite that that person which was by
nature the son of God, should be made the son of man, that we which are the
sons of men, yea the sons of wrath, should by grace be made the sons of
God: now the second person alone is the son of God by nature, not the
father, nor the holy Ghost.

As for the father, he could not be incarnate. For to take flesh is to be sent
of an other, but the father cannot be sent of any person, because he is from
none. Again, if the father were incarnate, he should be father to him which
is by nature God, and the son of a creature, namely the Virgin Marie, which
things can not well stand.

And the holy Ghost could not be incarnate: for then there should be more
sons then one in the Trinity, namely the second person the son of the
father, and the third person the holy Ghost, the son of the Virgin Marie.

It may be objected to the contrary on this manner, The whole divine essence
is incarnate, every person in Trinity is the whole divine essence, therefore
every person is incarnate. Answer. The whole Godhead indeed is incarnate, yet
not as it is absolutely considered, but so farfoorth as it is restrained and
limited to the person of the son; and to speak properly, the Godheade it
self is not incarnate, but the very person of the son subsisting in the
Godhead. And though all the persons be one and the same essence, yet do they
really differ each from other in regard of the peculiar manner of subsisting:
and therefore man's nature may be assumed of the second person, and be not
assumed either of the father or of the holy Ghost; as in the like case the
soul of man is wholly in the head and wholly in the feet, yea wholly in every
part: and yet the soul can not be said to use reason in the feet or in any
other part, but only in the head.

Again it may be alleged, that the incarnation being an outward action of
God to the creature, is not proper to the son. For the rule is, that all
outward actions of God are common to all the persons in Trinity equally. Ans.
The incarnation stands of two actions, the first is the framing and creating of
that manhood which was to be assumed by Christ: Inchoative communis,
termi^alive non: sic scholastici.
and this is common to all the three persons equally: the second is the
limiting or the receiving of it into the unity of any person, and in respect
of this action, the work of incarnation is peculiar to the Son. To this
purpose Augustine speaks, August. in Euch. ad Laur. c. 38.
that creature which the Virgin conceived and br^ught* forth, though it
appertain to the person of the son alone, yet was it made by the whole
Trinity: as when three me^ weaue one and the same garment, and the second
only wears it.

The second question is, what manner of man the son of God was made? Ans. He
was made a proper or particular man, and a perfect or a very man. I say that he
was a particular man, to show that he took not unto him the general form or
idea of man's nature conceived only in mind, nor the common nature of man as it
is existing in every man: but the whole nature of man* that is, both a body
and a reasonable soul, existing in In vno individ^o.
one particular subject. I say further that he was and is a true and perfect
man, being in every thing that concerns man's nature like to Adam, Abraham,
David, and all other men, saving only in sin. For first of all he had the
substance of a true body and of a reasonable soul: secondly, the properties
of body and soul: in the body, length, breadth, thicknes, circumscription,
etc. ^n the soul, the faculties of understanding both simply and compounde:
will, affections; as love, hatred, desire, joy, fear, etc. the powers also of
hearing, feeling, seeing, smelling, tasting, moving, growing, eating,
digesting, sleeping, etc. Thirdly, he took unto him the infirmities of man's
nature, which are certain natural defects or passions in body or mind, as
to be hungry, thirsty, weary, sad and sorrowful, ignorant of some things,
angry, to increase in stature, and wisdom, and knowledge, etc. yet this which
I say must be understood with two caveats. The first is, that infirmities be
either certain unblameable passions, or else such defects as are sins in
themselves; now Christ takes the first only, and not the second. Secondly,
infirmities be either general, or personal; general, which appertain to the
whole nature of man, and are to be found in every man that comes of Adam: as to
be borne unlearned, and subject to natural affections, as sorrow, anger, etc.
Personal, are such as appertain to some particular men, and not to all, and
arise of some private causes and particular judgments of God, as to be borne a
fool, to be sick of an ague, consumption, dropsy, pleuresie, and such like
diseases. Now the first sort be in Christ, and not the second: for as he took
not the person of any man, but only man's nature, so was it sufficient for him
to take unto him the infirmities of man's nature, though he took not the
private infirmities of any man's person. And the reason why Christ would put on
not only the substance and faculties of a true man, but also his infirmities,
was; that he might show him self to be very man indeed, also that he might
suffer for us both in body and soul, and that he might give us an example of
patience in bearing all manner of evil for Gods glory and the good of our
neighbor.

Now the things which may be alleged to the contrary for the infringing of
the truth of Christ's manhood, are of no moment. As first, because Christ
appeared in the form of a man in the old testament; being no man: therefore
he did so at his coming in the new testament: but the reason is not like. For
Christ in the old testament as the angel of his father in some special
affairs, took unto him the body of a man for some space of time; Genesis 18.9,
13.
but he did not receive it into the unity of his person; but laid it down
when the business which he enterprised with men was ended. Now in the fulness of
time he came from heaven, as the angel of the covenant, and for that cause he
was to unite into his own person the nature of man. And when as Paul says
that Christ came in the similitude of sinful flesh, his meaning is not to
signify, Romans 8.3.
that he was a man only in resemblance and show, but to testify that being
a true man indeed void of sin, was content to abase himself to that
condition in which he became like to a miserable sinner in bearing the
punishment for our sin. For Paul does not say that he took upon him the
similitude of flesh simply as it is flesh, but of the flesh of sin or
sinful flesh.

The third question is, why the son of God must become man? Answer. There be
sundry reasons of this point, and the most principal are these. First of all
it is a thing that greatly stands with the justice of God, that in that nature
in which God was offended, in the same should be a made satisfaction to God for
sin: now sin was committed in man's nature, Adam sinned first and in him
all his posterity: therefore it is very necessary that in man's nature there
should be a satisfaction made to Gods justice, and therefore the son of God
must needs abase himself and become man for our sakes. Secondly, by the right
of creation every man is bound in conscience to fulfull even the very rigor
and extremity of the moral law. But considering man is now fallen from his
first estate and condition, therefore it was requisite that the son of God
should become man, that in man's nature he might fulfill all righteousness which
the law does exact at our hands. Thirdly, he that is our redeemer must die
for our sins; for their is no remission of sins without shedding of blood:
but Christ as he is God can not die. For no passion can befall the Godhead.
Therefore it was needful that he should become man, that in man's nature he
might die and fully satisfy Gods justice for man's offense. Lastly he that
must make reconciliation between God and man, must be such an one as may make
request or speak both to God and man. For a Mediator is as it were a middle
person making intercession between two other persons, the one offended the
other offending. Therefore it is necessary that Christ should not only be
God, to speak unto the father for us and to present our prayers unto him; but
also man, that God might speak to us, and we to God by Christ. For howsoever
before the fall, man could speak to God even face to face, yet since the fall,
such fear possesses man's corrupt nature that he cannot abide the presence of
God, but flies from it.

Now whereas I say that it was necessary that the son of God for the causes
before alleged must become man; the necessity must be understood in respect
of Gods will, and not in respect of his power. For if it had so pleased God he
was able to have laid down an other kind of way of man's redemption, then by
the incarnation of the son of God: August. de Agone Christ.
and he appointed no other way, because he would not.

Thus much of the Incarnation in general. Now follow the duties which arise
of it. And first we are taught hereby to come to Christ by faith, and with
all our hearts to cleave unto him. Great is the deadness and sluggishnesse of
man's nature: for scarce one of a thousand cares for him or seeks unto him for
righteousness and life everlasting. But we should excite our selves every
way to dravve near to him as much as possibly we may: for when he was
incarnate, he came near unto us by taking our nature upon him, that we
again whatsoever we are, might come near unto him by taking unto us his
divine nature. Again, 2. Pet. 1.4.
when Christ was incarnate, he was made bone of our bone, and flesh of our
flesh; and therefore proportionally we must labor to become bone of his bone,
and flesh of his flesh: which we shall be, when we are mistically united unto
him by faith, and born anew by his spirit. Moreover Christ by his incarnation
came down from heaven to us, that we being partakers of his grace might ascend
up to heaven by him. And thus we see how the meditation of Christ's incarnation
should be a spur to prick us forward still more and more to come to Christ.

Secondly, Christ's incarnation must be a pattern unto us of a most wonderful
and strange humility. For as Paul says, Being in the form of God and
thinking it no robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6, 7.
made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant: and
humbled himself and became obedient to death, even to the death of the cross.
Yea so farrefoorth abased he himself, that (as David says) he was a worm
and no man. Psalm. 22.
And this teaches us to lay aside all self-love and pride of heart, and to
practice the duties of humility, as the Apostle exhorts the Philippians in
the same place: and that shall we do when we begin to cast off that high
opinion which every man by nature conceiueth of himself, and become vile and
base in our own eyes. Secure and drowsy protestants think themselves blessed,
and say in their hearts as the Angel of the Church of Laodicea said, I am rich
and increased with gold, and have need of nothing; Rev. 3*17.
whereas indeed they are most miserable and wretched, and poor, and naked,
and blind. And the same fond opinion possesses the minds of our ignorant
people, who chaunt it in the very same tune, saying, that God loves them, and
that they love God with all their hearts, and their neighbors as them selves:
that they have perfect faith in Christ, and ever had, not once so much as
doubting of their salvation: that all is well with them, and that they are past
all danger whatsoever, in the matter of their salvation, and therefore need
not take so much* care for it. Thus ye may see how men are commonly carried
away with vain and fond conceits of their own excellency. And truly so long
as this ouerweening of our own righteousness reigns in our hearts, let
Preachers speak and say what they will, we will never become followers of
Christ in the practice of humility. Some will say peradventure, that they
never had any such opinion of their own righteousness; but I answer again,
that there was never yet any man descending of Adam, save Christ; but he had
this proud fantasy ruling and reigning in him, till such time as God give
grace to change and altar his heart: and this inward pride the less we
discern it, the more it is: and the more we discern it the less it is.
Therefore though as yet thou see it not in thy self, yet labor both to see it
and to feel it, and to strive against it, casting down thy self for thine
own misery after Christ's own example, who being God abased him self to
the condition of a miserable man. For thou shall never be filled with the good
things of God, till thou be emptied of self-love and selfe-liking. For this
cause let us purge and empty our selves of all conceit of our own
righteousness that God may fill our hearts with his grace.

Furthermore, the Incarnation of Christ is the ground and foundation of all our
comfort, as the names of Christ serving to express the same do testify.
Iaakob in his last testament says, Genesis 49.10.
that the scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shilo, that is, the Messiah
come. Now the name Shilo signifies the tunicle or skin that lappeth the
infant in the mothers womb, P. Galatin. de occultis cathol. verit. lib. 4.
cap. 4.
called by the Physicians the Secundine: and by a kind of figure it is put for
the Son of God in the womb of the virgin made man. And Job to comfort
himself in his affliction says, I know that my redeemer lives. Now the
word which he uses to signify his redeemer by, Goel.
is very emphaticall, for it signifies a kinsman near allied unto him of his
own flesh that will restore him to life. And the Lord by the prophet Esai
calls Christ Immanuel, that is, God with us: which name imports very much,
namely, that whereas by nature we have lost our fellowshippe with God, because
our sins are a wall of partition severing us from him: Isai. 59.2. Coloss.
1.21.
yet nevertheless the same is restored to all that believe by the Mediator
Christ Jesus: because his divine nature is coupled to man's nature, and so the
word is made flesh. And this strait conjunction of two natures into one person,
ioynes God to men and men to God: yea by Christ we are brought to God and have
free access unto him, and again in him we apprehend God and are made one
with him.

And further whereas Christ beside our nature took our infirmities also, it is
a wonderful comfort unto Gods Church: for it shows, that he is not only a
Savior, but also a very compassionate and pitiful Savior. As the holy ghost
says, In all things it became Christ to be like unto his breethren that he
might be merciful and a faithful high priest in things concerning God. Hebr^
21.7.
Let a man be sick of a grievous disease, and if a friend come that has hene
troubled with the same disease, he will show more compassion then twenty
others: and so Christ having felt in his own soul and body the anguish and
the manifold perplexities that we feel in our temptations and afflictions,
has his bowels as it were earning toward us, evermore being pressed and ready
to relieve us in all our miseries. In the days of his flesh he wept over
Jerusalem when he saw it a far off, because she continued in her old sins,
and did not know the time of her visitation: and no doubt, though now he be
exalted in glory in heaven, yet his compassion to his poor members upon earth
is no whit diminished.

Now we come to speak of the incarnation more particularly: and the Creed
yet further expresses it by two parts; the first is the conception of Christ
in these words, Conceived by the holy Ghost: the second is his birth, in the
words following, Borne of the virgin Mary.

The conception of Christ is set down with his efficient cause, the holy
ghost, as the Angel said to Joseph, Fear not to take Marie for thy wife, for
that which is conceived in her is of the holy ghost. Here it may be demanded
why the conception of Christ should be ascribed to the holy ghost alone, Matt.
1.21.
which is common to all the persons in Trinity, as all other such actions are.
Answer. It is not done to exclude the Father or the Son himself from this
work: but to signify that it comes of the free gift and grace of God (which
commonly is termed by the name of the Holy Ghost: that the manhood of Christ
being but a creature, should be advaunced to this dignity, Aug. ench. cap.
37.39.
that it should become a part of the son of God. And again, the Holy Ghost
is the author of this conception in a special manner: for the father and the
son did cause it by the holy Ghost: but the holy ghost did cause it from them
both immediately.

In the conception of Christ we must observe and consider three things. The
framing of the manhood, the sanctifying of it, and the personal union of the
manhood with the godheade. And howsoever I distinguish these three for orders
sake, yet must we know and remember, that they are all wrought at one and the
same instant of time. For when the Holy Ghost frames and sanctifies the manhood
in the womb of the virgin: at the very same moment it is received into the
unity of the second person.

In the forming of Christ's manhood two things must be considered, the matter
and the manner: the matter of his body was the very flesh and blood of the
virgin Marie; otherwise he could not have been the son of David, of
Abraham, and Adam according to the flesh. As for his soul, it was not derived
from the soul of the virgin Mary as a part thereof, but it was made as the
souls of all other men be, of nothing by the power of God, and placed in the
body; both of them from the first moment of their being, having their
subsistence in the person of the son. And here we must take heed of two
opinions: the first is of the Anabaptists, which hold, that the flesh of Christ
came down from heaven, and passed through the virgin Marie as through a pipe,
without taking any substance from her: the places which they allege for their
purpose are manifestly abused. For whereas Christ says of himself that he
descended from heaven, his speech must be understood in respect of his
godheade, Ioh. 3.13.
which may be said in some sort to descend, in that it was made manifest in
the manhood here upon earth. And whereas Paul calls him heavenly and the
Lord from heaven, it is not in respect of the substance of his body, 1. Cor.
15.
but in respect of the glorious qualities which he received after this
resurrection. The other opinion is of the Papists that hold the bread in the
sacrament to be turned substantially into the body of Christ: which thing if
it be true, then the body of Christ is made of bread kneaded and tempered by
the hand of the baker, and not of the substance of the virgin Mary.

As for the manner of the making and framing of the humane nature of Christ, it
was miraculous* not by generation according to the ordinary course of nature,
but by an extraordinary operation of the holy Ghost above nature: and for this
cause it is not within the compass of man's reason either to conceive or to
express the manner and order of this conception. Luke 1.35,
The Angel ascribes two actions to the holy Ghost in this matter; the one to
come upon the virgin Marie; Iud. 14.6.
the other, to overshadovv her: by the first is signified the extraordinary
work of the holy ghost in fashioning the humane nature of Christ, for so much
the phrase elsewhere imports. The second signifies, Act. 1.8. Luke 24.49.
that the holy ghost did as it were cast a cloud over her, to teach us, that we
should not search over much into the mystery of the Incarnation.

It may be objected against this which has been said, that if Christ be in
this manner conceived by the holy Ghost, then the holy ghost shall be father to
Christ, and Christ his son. Answer. The reason is not good. For he that is a
father is not a bare efficient cause, but one which in the effecting of any
thing conferres the matter unto it from him self whereof it shall be made. Now
the holy ghost did not minister any matter unto Christ from his own substance;
but did only as it were, take the mass and lump of man's nature from the
body of the virgin Mary, and without ordinary generation made it the body
of Christ: as Basil says, Christ was conceived not of the substance, Sermon.
de S. na^ivit*
but of the power, not by any generation, but by the appointment and
benediction of the holy ghost.

The second point in the conception is the sanctifying of that mass or lump
which was to be the manhood of Christ. And that was done upon special cause:
first, tha^ that it might be ioned to the person of the Son which could not
have been if it had been defiled with sin. Secondly, Christ was a Savior
as he is both God and man: now then being man, if he had been sinful
himself, he could not have saved others, but should have stood in need of a
Savior for himself.

This sanctification has two parts: the first is, the stay and stoppage of
the propagation of original sin, and of the guilt of Adams sin; which was
on this manner. God in the beginning set down this order touching man, that
what evil or defect soever he brought upon himself, he should derive the
same to every one of his posterity begotten of him: and hereupon when any
father begets his child, he is in the room of Adam, and conveyes unto it
besides the nature of man the very guilt and corruption of nature. Now for the
preventing of this evil in Christ, God in great wisdom appointed that he
should be conceived by the holy ghost without any manner of generation by man.
And by this means he takes substance from the virgin without the guilte and
corruption of the substance. But it may further be objected thus. All that be
in Adam have sinned in him: but Christ was in Adam as he is man: therefore he
sinned in him. Answer. The proposition is false, unless it be expounded in
this manner: All that were in Adam have sinned in him so be it they come of him
by generation. Paul says not, that, out of one man, but, by one man sin
entered into the world, to show, Romans 5.12.
that he propagates his corruption to no more then he begets. Again, Christ
is in Adam not simply as other men are, but in part: namely in respect of
substance which he took from him, and not in respect of the propagation of
the substance by ordinary generation: other men are both from Adam and by
Adam, but Christ is from him alone and not by him as a begetter or procreant
cause. The second part of sanctification is the infusion of all pureness and
holiness into the manhood of Christ, so far forth as was meet for the
nature of a redeemer.

The duties to be learned hence are these: First, whereas Christ was sanctified
in the womb of the virgin Mary, we likewise must labor to be sanctified in
our selves, following the commandment of God, Be ye holy as I am holy. 1. Ioh.
3.3.
S. John says, that he which has hope to be with Christ in glory in heaven,
purifieth himself even as he is pure: no doubt setting before himself the
example of Christ as a pattern to follow in all his ways. And because our
hearts are as it were seas of corruptions, we must daily cleanse our selves of
them by little and little, following the practice of the poor beggar that is
always peecing and mending, and day by day pulles away some rags and puts
better cloth in the room. And if we shall continually endeavor our selves to
cast off the remnants of corruption that hang so fast on, and make a supply
thereof by some new portions of Gods heavenly grace; we shall be vessels of
honor sanctified and meet for the Lord, and prepared unto every good work.
Christ could not have bin a fit savior for us unless he had first of all bin
sanctified: neither can we be fit members unto him, unless we be purged of our
sins and in some measure truly sanctified.

The comfort which Gods people may reap of the sanctification of Christ's
manhood is great. For why was he sanctified? Surely if we mark it well, we
shall find it was for the good and benefit of his elect. For Ada^ and Christ be
two roots as has bin showed. Adam by creation, first received Gods image, and
after lost the same for himself and his posterity. Now Christ to remove the
sin of man is made the second Adam, and the root and very head of all the
elect. His manhood was filled with holiness above measure: that from thence
as from a storehouse it might be derived to all his members. And therefore by
his most holy conception, our sinful birth and conception is sanctified, and
his holiness serves as a cover to hide our manifold corruptions from the eyes
of God. Yea it serves as a buckler to awarde the temptations of the devil: for
when he shall say to our hearts on this manner? no unclean thing can enter into
the kingdom of heaven; but thou by reason of the remnants of original sin
art unclean: therefore thou can not enter into the kingdom of heaven: we
return our answer, saying, that Christ's righteousness is our righteousness
serving to make us stand without blame or spot before God. And as Jacob put on
Esaus garments that he might get his fathers blessing^ so if by faith we do
put on the white garment of righteousness of our elder brother Christ Jesus and
present our selves in it unto our heavenly father, we shall obtain his
blessing, which is eternal happiness.

Now remains the third and last part of the conception, which is the unio^ of
the godhead and the manhood: concerning which, many points are particularly to
be handled. The first is, what kind of union this is? Ans. In the Trinity
there be two sorts of unions: union in nature, and union in person. Union in
nature is, when two or more things are joined and united into one nature, as the
Father, the Son, the holy ghost being and remaining three distinct persons,
are one and the same in nature or godhead. Union in person is, when 2. things
are in that manner united, that they make but one person or subsistence: As a
body created by God and a reasonable soul joined both together make one
particular man as Peter, Paul, John, etc. And this second, is the union whereof
we entreat in this place: by which the second person in Trinity the son of
God did unite unto himself the humane nature that is the body and soul of
man: so as the godhead of the son and the manhood concurring together make
but one person.

The second point is, in what thing this union does consist. Ans. It consists
in this, that the second person the son of God does assume unto it a manhod
in such order, that it being void of all personal being in it self, does
wholly and only subsist in the same person. As the plant called Mi^tell
having no root of his own both grows and lives in the stock or body of the
Oak or some other tree: Viscum Matthiol*
so the humane nature having no proper subsistence, is as it were ingrafted
into the person of the son, and is wholly supported and sustained by it so as
it should not be at all if it were not sustained in that manner. And for the
better understanding of this point, we must consider, that there be four
degrees of the presence of God in his creatures. The first is his general
presence, and it may be called the presence of his providence, Act. 17.28.
whereby he preserves the substances of all creatures, and gives unto them to
live, moove, and have being: and this extends it self to all creatures good
and bad. The second degree is the presence of grace, whereby he does not only
preserve the substance of his creature, but also gives grace unto it: and this
agrees to the Church and people of God upon earth. The third degree is the
presence of glory peculiar to the saints and Angels in heaven: and this
stands in three things, for God not only preserues their substances, and
gives them plenty of his grace, but also admittes them into his glorious
presence, so as they may behold his majesty face to face. The fourth and last
is that, whereby the godhead of the son is present and dwelles with and in
the manhood giving unto it his own subsistence. Whereby it comes to pass that
this manhood assumed is proper to the son, and cannot be the manhood of the
father, or of the Holy Ghost, or of any creature whatsoever. And this is a
thing so admirable and so unspeakeable, that among all the works of God there
can not be found another example hereof in all the world.

Hence it follows necessarily that the manhood of Christ consisting of body
and reasonable soul, is a nature only and not a person: because it does not
subsist alone as other men, Peter, Paul, John do; but wholly dependes on the
person of the word, into the unity whereof it is received.

The third point is, in what order the divine and humane nature of Christ are
united together. Damasc. lib. 3. cap. 6. Cyprian. in symb.
Answer. The common consent of divines is, that, albeit all the parts of the
manhood and the godhead of Christ be united at one instant: yet in respect of
order he unites unto himself first and immediately the soul, and by the soul
the body. For it seems not to be meet that God being a most simple essence
should immediately be joined to a compound body: and therefore he is united
unto it by the more simple part of man, which is the soul. Again the manhood
of Christ is first and immediately joined to the person of the son himself,
and by the person to the godhead of the son.

The fourth point is, whether there remain any difference or diversity of the
two natures after that the union is made. Answer. The two natures concurring
make not the person of the son to be compounded properly, but only by
analogy: for as body and soul make one man, so god and man make one Christ:
neither are they turned one into another, the godhead into the manhood or the
manhood into the godhead, as water was turned into wine at Cana in Galile:
nether are they confused and mingled together as meats in the stomach: but
they are and so remain without composition, conversion, or confusion really
distinct and that in three respects. First in regard of essence. For the
godhead of Christ is the godhead and can not be the manhood: and again, the
manhood of Christ is the manhood and not the godhead. Secondly they are
distinguished in proprieties: the godhead is most wise, just, merciful,
omnipotent: yea wisdom, justice, mercy, and power it self: and so is not the
manhood, neither can it be. Again, Christ as he is God has his will eternal
and uncreated, which is all one with the will of the father and the holy ghost.
And as he is man he has another will created in time, and placed in his
reasonable soul: and this Christ signifies when he says, Not my will but thy
will be done. Thirdly, they are distinct in their actions or operations; which
though they go together inseparably in the work of redemption: yet they must
in no wise be confounded but distinguished as the natures themselves are.
Christ says of himself, I have power to lay down my life, Ioh. 10.^8.
and I have power to take it up again: and hereby he shows the distinction of
operations in his two natures. For to lay down his life is an action of the
manhood, because the godhead can not die: and to take it up again is the
work of the godhead alone, which reunites the soul to the body after death.

The first and last point is, what arises of this union? Ans. By reason of
this hypostaticall union, though the godheade receive nothing from the
manhood, yet the manhood it self, which is assumed, is thereby perfected and
enriched with unspeakeable dignity. For first of all it is exalted above all
creatures whatsoever, even angels themselves, in that it has subsistence in
the second person in Trinity. Secondly, together with the godhead of the
son, it is adored and worshipped with divine honor, as in like case the
honor done to the king himself, redounds to the crown on his head. Thirdly
by reason of this union, the godheade of Christ works all things in the matter
of our redemption, in and by the manhood. And hereupon the flesh of Christ
though it profit nothing of it self, yet by the virtue which it receives from
that person to which it is joined, it is quickening flesh and the bread of life.

Again from this union of two natures into one person arises a kind of speech
or phrase peculiar to the scriptures, called the communication of proprieties
when the property of one nature is attributed to the whole person or to the
other nature, as when Paul says, that God shed his blood, that the Lord of
glory was crucified. Act. ^0.28. 1. Cor. 2.8. Ioh. 3.13.
And when Christ says that he talking with Nichodemus was then in heaven.

The use of the personal union is threefold. First it serves to show the
heinousness of our sins, and the greatness of our misery. For it had not
been possible to make a satisfaction to Gods justice in man's nature for the
least offense, unless the same nature had first of all been nearly joined to
the godhead of the son; that thereby it might be so far forth supported and
sustained that it might overcome the wrath of God. Secondly it sets forth unto
us the endless love of God to man. For whereas by reason of Adams fall we are
become the vilest of all creatures, except the devil and his angels: yet by
his mystical conjunction, our nature is is exalted to such an estate and
condition as is far above all creatures even the angels themselves. Thirdly
it is as it were the keye of all our comfort: for all sound comfort stands in
happiness, all happiness is in fellowship with God, all fellowshippe with God
is by Christ, who for this cause being very God, became very man, that he
might reconcile man to God and God to man.

Thus much of the conception of Christ: now follows his birth: whereby in the
ordinary time of travel according to the course of nature he was brought
forth into the world by the virgin Mary. And it was the will of God, Luke 2.6.
that Christ should not only be conceived, but also borne, and that after the
manner of men, that he might be known to be very man indeed. In the birth we
may consider four things; the time, the place, the manner, the manifestation
of it.

The time was in the last days, toward the end of the 70. weeks of Daniel,
Isai. 2.2. Dan. 9.2^.
which are to be accounted from the end of the captivity of Babylon, and make
in all 490 years: or more plainly 3900. years and more from the beginning of
the world, and as Paul says in the fullness of time. And the Evangelists have
noted of purpose the time to have been when Augustus Caesar taxed the Jews and
all nations under his dominions; Gal. 4.4.
Luke 2*1.
to signify that Christ was borne at the very time foretold by Jacob, when
the crown and scepter was taken from Judah: and withal, to shevve that his
kingdom was not of this world. And it was the good pleasure of god that
Christ should not be borne either later or sooner, but so many ages from the
beginning of the world. And this consideration of the very time it self
serves greatly for the confirmation of our faith. For thus may we reason with
our selves. If God who in the beginning made a promise to our first parents
concerning the seed of the woman, deferred it almost 4000. years, and yet at
length accomplished the same to the very full: then no doubt God having
promised the resurrection of the dead and life everlasting, will in his good
time bring them to pass, though as yet we see them not. And thus by the
acco^plishment of al things past, should we confirm our hope concerning things
to come.

The place was not Jerusalem nor Nazareth, nor any other city, but only a
village of Judah called Bethleem, that the prophecy of Micheas might be
fulfilled, Thou Bethleem Ephrata art little to be among the thousands of Judah,
yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that shall be the ruler in
Israel. And here we may observe a memorable example of Gods providence which
ouer-ruleth the procedings of cruel tirants, to the accomplishing of his own
will, they themselves for their parts intending nothing less. Augustus not so
much as dreaming of the birth of the Messiah, gave commandment that every man
should go to his own city to be taxed: and hereupon Joseph and Mary take
their iourny from Nazareth to Bethleem: which journey God himself appointed
and disposed to this end, that the Messiah might be borne in the place which he
preordained and foretold by his prophet.

The manner of Christ's birth was very base and poor: for the place where he
was borne was a stable, and the cradle where he lay was a cratch. And he
willingly took upon him this poverty for sundry causes. I. That the scripture
might be fulfilled, which says, that he should be the shame and contempt of
the people: Psalm. 22.6.
and that ye shall grow up as a root out of a dry ground and have neither
form nor beauty. Isa. 53.2.
II. That he might afterward from this base condition be exalted even in his
manhood to that rich and glorious estate in which he should manifest himself
to be Lord of heaven and earth. III. He was borne in exceeding poverty that he
might shame the wise men of this world, who exceedingly esteem of their
riches, power, and glory, persuading themselves that without such means no
good thing can be done. And yet for all this they can not so much as reconcile
one man to God by all their might and wealth: whereas Christ himself has done
the same both in poverty and weakness; and can enlarge and preserve his
kingdom without earthly helps. When he hung upon the cross the soldiers
stripped him of his garments: and being naked he brought that to pass which all
the monarchs of the earth in all their roialties could never have performed.
And whether Christ lie in the manger between the Ox and the Ass, or in the
palace of the king, it matters not in regard of our salvation. IIII. He came
in this manner that there might be a difference between his first coming in
the flesh and his last coming to judgment. In the first he came only for
this end, not to make any outward alterations in the world, but to change the
conscience and to put in execution the work of our spiritual redemption: and
therefore he has reserved the ouerturning of all earthly estates with the
manifestation of his own glory to the latter. V. Lastly he was borne in a
poor estate that he might procure true riches for us in heaven: and withal,
sanctify unto us our poverty upon earth. As Paul says, Ye know the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 8.^.
that he being rich for your sakes became poor, that ye through his poverty
might be made rich. He was content to lie in the manger that we might rest in
heaven.

This serves to teach us to be content to bear any mean condition that the
Lord shall send upon us: for this is the very estate of the son of God
himself. And if for our cause he did not refuse the basest condition that
ever was, why should we murmr at the same: for what is the best of us but
miserable sinners, and therefore utterly unworthy either to go or lie upon the
bare earth? and though we fare and lie better then our Lord himself; yet
such is our daintiness, we are not pleased therewith: whereas he for his part
disdained not the manger of the Ox. And if the Lord of heaven and earth
coming into the world find so little entertainment or favor, we for our
parts being his members, should willingly prepare our selves to take as hard
measure at the hands of men.

The last point is the manifestation of Christ's birth that it might be known
to the world. Luke ^.
Where consider two circumstances, the first, to whom? namely to poor
shepherds tending their flocks by night, and not to great or mighty men,
lovers of this world, nor to the priests of Jerusalem contemners of Gods
grace; and that for two causes: one, because the shepherds were the fittest
persons to publish the same at Bethleem: the other, it was Gods pleasure to
manifest that in the birth of Christ which Paul says, Not many wise men after
the flesh, not many mighty, 1. Cor. 1.27.
not many noble are called: but God has chosen the foolish things of the world
to confound the wise. The second is, by whom? by the angel of the Lord
appearing in great glory unto the shepheardes. For the priests of Jerusalem
and the rulers of the synagogues, to whom this office did belong, held their
peace, being blinded in their manifold errors and wicked ways.

The duties to be learned of the birth of Christ are these. First we are
admonished hereby to magnify and praise the name of God, saying with Mary, My
soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my savior. And
with Zachary, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for he has visited and
redeemed his people. And with the angel of the Lord, Glory to God in the
highest heavens. For in this birth is made manifest the wisdom, the truth,
the justice and mercy, and goodness of God toward us, more then ever it was
before: yea as Christ God and man, is more excellent then the first Adam
created according to Gods own image, and as the spiritual life is better then
the natural life, and as the eternal and most holy marriage of Christ the
husband and his spouse the Church rising as it were out of the blood that
trickled out of his side, is more wonderful then the creation of Eve of the
rib of Adam. Lastly, as it is a far greater matter by death to overcome death,
and to turn it into eternal life, then to command that to exist and be which
was not before: so is the work of redemption begun in the birth of Christ more
unspeakeable and admirable then the first creation of man. Hereupon not 6.
cherubims as in the vision of Isaiah, not 24. elders as in the Apocalypse, but a
great multitude of Angels like armies were heard to praise God at the birth of
Christ: Luke 2.13.
and no doubt the like sight was not seen since the beginning of the world.
And the angels by their example put us in mind to consider aright of this
benefit, and to praise God for it. But alas, this practice is very rare in
this fruitless and barren age of the world, where sin and iniquity
abounds, as may be seen by experience for by an old custom we retain still in
the Church the feast of the nativity of Christ, so commonly called: which
nevertheless is not spent in praising the name of God that he has sent his
son from his own bosom to be our redeemer, but contrariwise in rifling,
dicing, carding, masking, mumming, and in all licentious liberty for the most
part, as though it were some heathen feast of Ceres or Bacchus.

Secondly Christ was conceived and borne in bodily manner, that there might be a
spiritual conception and birth of him in our hearts, as Paul says, Gal. 4.19.
My little children of whom I travel till Christ be formed in you: and that
is, when we are made new creatures by Christ and perform obedience to our
creator. When the people said to Christ that his mother and his brethren
sought him, he answered, He that does the will of God is my brother, my sister
and mother. Mar. 13.3^.
Therefore let us go with the shepherds to Bethleem, and finding our blessed
savior swadled and lying in the cratch, let us bring him thence and make our
own hearts to be his cradle: that we may he able to say that we live not, but
Christ lives in us: and let us present unto him ourselves, our bodies and
souls as the best gold, myrrh and frankincense that may be: and thus
conceiving him by faith, he remaining without change, we shall be changed into
him and made bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. The world, I know, never
so much as dreameth of this kind of conception and birth, for as David says,
Men travel with wickedness, conceive mischief, and bring forth a lie. And S.
James says, Psalm. 7.14. Iam. 1.1^.
Men are drawn away by their own concupiscense, which when it has conceived
brings forth sin. And these are the ougly and monstrous birthes of these
days. But let us, I pray you, contrariwise wail and mourn for the
barrenness of our hearts that do so little conceive the grace of Christ in
heart, and bring it forth in action. The mother of Christ undoubtedly was a
blessed woman: but if she had not as well conceived Christ in her heart as
she did in her womb, she had not been saved: and no more can we, unless we
do the same.

The birth of Christ to them that have touched hearts, is the comfort of
comforts, and the sweetest balm or confection that ever was. Behold say the
angel to the shepherds we bring tidirgs of great joy that shall be to all
people: but wherein stands the joy? they add further, Romans 5.1.
unto you this day is borne in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ
the Lord. And no marvel: for in that birth is manifested the good will of God
to man, and by it we have peace, first with God, secondly with our selves in
conscience, thirdly with the good angels of God, fourthly with our enemies:
lastly, with all the creatures. For this cause the angels sang, Peace on earth,
good will toward men.

In the last place the Creed notes unto us the parent or mother of Christ, the
virgin Mary. And here at the very first it may be demanded, how he could have
either father or mother; because he was figured by Melchisedech who had neither
father nor mother. Ans. Melchisedech is said to be without father and mother,
Heb. 7.3.
not because he had none at all. For according to the ancient and received
opinion, it is very likely that he was Sem the son of Noe: Hier. epist. ad
Euagr.
but because where he is mentioned under this name of Melchisedech in the 14.
chapter of Genes. there is no mention made either of father or mother: and so
Christ in some sort is without father or mother: as he is man he has no
father, as he is God he has no mother. And whereas Christ is called the son of
Joseph, Mat. 13.55. Ioh. 1.45. and 6.52. Luke 4.22.
it was not because he was begotten of him, but because Joseph was his reputed
father: or, which is more; because he was a legal father, namely according to
the Jews laws: in that (as sundry divines think) he was the next of his kin,
and therefore to succeed him as his lawful heir.

Mary became the mother of Christ by a kind of calling thereto which was by an
extraordinary message of an angel concerning the conception and birth of
Christ in and by her: to which calling and message she condiscended, saying,
Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word. And
hereupon she conceived by the Holy Ghost. This being so, it is more then
sensles folly to turn the salutatio^ of the angel, Hail freely beloved, etc.
into a prayer.

And she must be held to be the mother of whole Christ God and man: (...).
and therefore the ancient Church has called the mother of God: yet not the
mother of the godhead.

Furthermore the mother of Christ is described by her quality, a virgin, and
by her name Mary. She was a virgin, first that Christ might be conceived
without sin and be a perfect Savior: secondly, that the saying of the
prophet Esai might be fulfilled, Isa. 7.24.
Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son: according as it was foretold
by god in the first giving of the promise, the seed of the woman, not the seed
of the man, shall bruise the serpents head. Now the Jews, to elude the most
pregnant testimony of the Prophet say, that Alma signifies not a virgin, but
a young woman which has known a man. But this is indeed a forgerie. For Esaias
there speaks of an extraordinary work of God above nature, whereas for a
woman having known man to conceive, is no wonder. And the word Alma, through
the whole bible is taken for a virgin, Genesis 24. Exodus 2.
as by a particular search will appear.

As Marie conceived a virgin, so it may be well thought that she continued a
virgin to the end, though we make it no article of our faith. When Christ was
upon the cross, he commended his mother to the custody of John; Ioh. 19.2^.
which probably argues, that she had no child to whose care and keeping she
might be commended. And though Christ be called hi^ first borne, yet does it
not follow that she had any child after him: for as that is called last after
which there is none, so that is called the first before which there was none.
And as for Joseph, Epiph. lib. 2. tom. 1.
when he was espoused to Marie, he was a man of eighty years old.

And here we have occasion to praise the wisdom of God, in the forming of man.
The first man Adam was borne of no man; but immediately created of God: the
second, that is Eve, is formed not of a woman, but of a man alone: the third
and all after, begotten both of woman and man: the fourth, that is Christ, God
and man, not of no man as Adam, not of no woman, as Eve; not of man and woman
as we: but after a new manner, of a woman without a man he is conceived and
borne.

And hereupon our duty is not to despise, but highly to reverence the virgin
Marie, as being the mother of the son of God, a prophetisse upon earth, a
Saint in heaven. And we do willingly condescend to give her honor three
ways, 1. by thanksgiving to God for her, Luk 1.4^.
2. by a reverent estimation of her, 3. by imitation of her excellent virtues:
yet far be it from us to adore her with divine honor, by prayer to call upon
her, as though she knew our hearts, and heard our requests, and to place her in
heaven as a queen above the son of God.

The name of the mother of Christ is added, to show that he came of the lineage
of David, and that therefore he was the true Messiah before spoken of. It may
be objected, that both Matthew and Luke set down the genealogy of Joseph, of
whom Christ was not. Answer. Matthew sets down indeed in Christ's genealogy,
the natural descent of Joseph, the husband of Marie, having Jacob for his
natural father: but Luke taking an other course, propounds the natural
descent of Marie the mother of Christ: and when he says that Joseph was the
son of Eli, he means of a Legal son. Aphrican. apud Eusebius. Damasc. l. 4.
c. 1^.
For sons and daughters in law are called sons and daughters to their
fathers and mothers in law: Marie her self and not Joseph, being the natural
daughter of Eli. And whereas Luke does not plainly say, that Marie was the
daughter of Eli, but puts Joseph the son in law in her room, the reason
hereof may be, because it was the manner of the Jews to account and continue
their genealogies in the male and not in the female sex, the man being the
head of the family, and not the woman. And though Ruth, and Rahab, and other
women be mentioned by Matthew, yet that is only by the way: for they make no
degrees herein. Again it may further be demanded, how Christ could comes of
David by Solomon, as Matthew says, and by Nathan as Luks says; they twain
being two distinct sons of David. Answer. By virtue of the law, whereby the
brother was bound to raise up seed to his brother: Deuteronomy. 25.
there was a double descent in use among the Jews, the one was natural, the
other legal. Natural, when one man descended of an other by generation, as the
child from the natural father. Legal, when a man not begotten of an other,
Matthew. 1.12. and Luke 3.27.
yet did succeed him in his inheritance; and thus Salathiel is the natural
son of Neri, and the legal son of Iechonias. Now Saint Luke sets down the
natural descent of Christ from David by Nathan: and Saint Matthew the other
descent, which is legal, by Solomon; whom Christ succeeded in the right of
the kingdom, being borne the king of the Jews: none that could possibly be
named, having more right to it then he.

By this descent of Christ we have occasion to consider, that Christ was even
in his birth the most excellent and noble man that ever was, descending of the
eternal father as he is the son of God, and as he man, descending of the
Patriarks, and of the renowned kings of Judah. And this his nobility he
conuaies in part to his members, in that he makes them the sons of God, a
royal priesthood, and a peculiar people to himself: enriching them also with
the revenues of the whole world, and with the title and right to the kingdom
of glory in heaven, as their inheritance.

And withal, Christ being the lively pattern of true nobility, by his
example men of blood are taught not to stand so much on their pedigree, and
their ancetours, as though nobility stood in this, that man descends of man:
but to labor with all that they may to be the sons and daughters of God by
regeneration in Christ. This in deed is the ornament of the blood, the best
part in the noble man's skutchin, and the finest flower in his garland. And
though a man be never so noble or great an estate, yet if he be not a repentant
sinner, he is base and vile, and his nobility stinks in the nostrils of God.
Christ in his genealogy does not so much as vouchsafe to name those his
ancetours that ruled wickedly; and hereupon Saint Matthew omitteth three kings
of Judah* Achaziah, Ioas, and Amaziah: whereas nevertheless heinous offenders
that repented are mentioned, as Ruth, and Thamat, and Bathshabe.

Thus much of the incarnation of Christ: Now follows the third and last point
which is to be considered in the description of Christ, namely the estate of
Christ after his birth, which is twofold, the estate of humiliation, and the
estate of exaltation.

The estate of humiliation, is the condition of Christ the Mediator, in which
he abased himself even to the death of the cross, that by that means he
might perform the office of a priest in making satisfaction to the justice of
his father.

This estate agrees to the whole person of Christ according to both natures.
For first of all his manhood was abased and humbled, in that it was made
subject to the infirmities of man's nature, as also to the miseries and
punishments which were due unto man for sin. Secondly, his Godhead was
abased; not as it is considered in it self. For so it admits no alteration or
change. But in respect of the flesh or manhood assumed; under the which as
under a veil, the Godhead lay hid from the first moment of the incarnation to
the time of his resurrection, without any great manifestation of his power and
majesty therein.

The order of these two estates must be marked. First is the estate of
humiliation, and then in the second place follows the estate of exaltation. As
Christ says of him self, O fools, and slow of heart to believe, etc. ought
not Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his glory. Luke
^4.26.
And here we for our part must learn a lesson. The same which was true in
Christ the head, must be verifyed in all his members; they must also have their
twofold estate. First in this life the estate of humiliation: secondly, after
this life the estate of glory. And as Christ first entered into the state of
his humiliation, and then into glory: so it is with his members, first they
must be abased in this life, and secondly exalted in the world to come. He
that will reign with Christ and be exalted, must first suffer with him, and be
humbled: he that will wear the crown of glory, must wear first a crown of
thorns: they that will have all tears wyped from their eyes, must here first
in this life shed them. And the children of God before they can sing the song
of Moses, Rev. 15.2.
and of the servants of God, and of the lamb, must first swim through the
sea of burning glass: whereby it is signified, that those which after this life
would sing songs of praises to Christ, must in this life be cast into a sea of
misery. And if this be true, then we may hear learn, that it is a wretched
case for a man in this life to have perpetual ease, rest, and quietness both in
body and soul, goods, and good name: for we see by Christ's example, that
through adversity we must come to happiness: and if a man would have rest and
peace in the life to come, then in this life he must suffer trouble,
persecution, and sorrow. Indeed in the judgment of the world, they are
blessed that always live at rest; but before God they are most miserable: and
(as oxen which are made fat in the best pasture) ready for the slaughterhouse
every day. Secondly, here is an excellent consolation for those which profess
the Gospel of Christ* in the time of trouble and persecution they must
rejoice, because the state of humiliation in this life is a sign that they are
in the plain and right way to salvation and glory. A man is to take his
journey into a far country, and inquiring for the way, it is told him that
there are many plain ways; but the straight and right way is full of woods,
and hills, and mountains, and great dangers: now when he is traueiling, and
comes into those places, he gathers certainly that he is in the right way: so
the child of God that is going to the kingdom of heaven, though there be many
ways to walk in, yet he knows that there is but one right way, which is very
straight and narrow, full of trouble, sorrow, and persecution: full of all
manner of crosses and afflictions: and when in this life he is persecuted and
afflicted for good causes, whether in body or in mind, if he be content to
bear his cross, it agrees plainly that he is in the right way unto
salvation: Act. 14.22.
for thorough many afflictions we must enter into the kin^dome of heaven.

The humiliation of Christ is first of all set down in the Creed generally,
and secondly by his parts or degrees. Generally, in these words, suffered under
Pontius Pilate. Where we must consider two things; the passion it self, and
under whom it was. For the first, that we may the better conceive the passion
in his own nature, seven special points must be opened. I. The cause
efficient. The principal cause of the passion, as it is the price of our
redemption, was the decree and providence of God; Act. 2.23.
as Peter says expressly that Christ was delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God. The impulsive cause that moved God to work
salvation by this means, was nothing in man (for all mankind was shut up
under unbelief, and therefore unable to procure the least favor at Gods hand)
but the will and good pleasure of God within himself. The instruments which
the Lord used in this business, were the wicked Jews and Gentiles, and the
devil himself; by who^ he brought to pass the most admirable work of
redemption; even then when they according to their kind did nothing else but
practice wickedness and malice against Christ. II. The matter of the passion, is
the whole malediction or curse of the Law, containing in it all manner of
adversities and miseries both of body and mind. All which may be reduced to
three heads, the temptations of Christ, his ignominies and slanders, his
manifold sorrows and griefs, especially those which stand in the apprehension
of the unsupportable wrath of God. III. The form of the passion* is that
excellent and meritorious satisfaction which in suffering Christ made unto his
father for man's sin. We do not rightly consider of the passion, if we
conceive it to be a bare and naked suffering of punishment, but withal we
must conceive it as a propitiation or a means satisfactorie to Gods justice.
The passion considered as a passion, ministers no comfort: but all our joy and
rejoicing stands in this, that by faith we apprehend it as it is a satisfaction
or a means of reconciliation for our offenses. In this very point stands the
dignity of the passion, whereby it differs from all other sufferings of men
whatsoever. Therefore most damnable and wicked is the opinion of the Papists,
who besides the alone passion of Christ, maintain works of satisfaction,
partly of their own, and partly of the Saints departed: which they add to the
passion as an appendance thereof. IV. The end of the passion is, that God
might bring to pass a work in which he might more fully manifest his justice
and mercy, then he did in the creation, and that is the reconciliation
between God and man. And here remember with the passion to join the obedience
of Christ in fulfilling the law: for Christ in suffering obeyed, and in
obeying suffered. And they must be jointly conceived together for this cause.
In reconciliation with God, two things are required, the remoouing of sin in
regard of the guilt, of the fault, and the punishment, and the conferring or
giving of righteousness. Now the passion of Christ considered apart from his
legal obedience, only takes away the guilt and punishment, frees man from
death, 1. Non peccator.
and makes him of a sinner to be no sinner, and that he may be fully reconciled
to God, and accepted as righteous to life everlasting, 2. Iustus.
the legal obedience of Christ must be imputed. And therefore in the
Scriptures, where all obedience is ascribed to the death and passion of Christ,
this very obedience which stands in the perfect love of God and man must be
included and not excluded. V. The time of the passion was from the very birth
of Christ to his resurrection: yet so, as the beginnings only of his
sufferings were in the course of his life, and the accomplishment thereof to
the very full, upon the cross. VI. The person that suffered was the son of
God himself: concerning whom in this case two questions must be resolved. The
first, how it can stand with Gods justice, to lay punishment upon the most
righteous man that ever was, and that for grievous sinners: considering that
tyrants themselves will not do so. Answer. In the passion, Christ must not be
considered as a private person: for then it could not stand with equity that
he should be plagued and punished for our offenses; Heb. 7.22.
but as one in the eternal counsel of God set apart to be a public surety
or pledge for us, to suffer and perform those things which we in our own
persons should have suffered and performed. For this cause God the father is
said to give his son unto us, Ioh. 3.16. and 30.5.
and the son again to give his life for his friends. The second question is,
how by the short and temporary death of the son of God, any man can possibly
be freed from eternal death and damnation, which is due unto him for the least
sin. Answer. When we say that the son of God suffered, it must be
understood with distinction of the natures of Christ, not in respect of the
Godhead, but in respect of the assumed manhood: yet nevertheless the passion
is to be ascribed to the whole person of Christ God and man: and from the
dignity of the person which suffered, arises the dignity and excellency of
the passion, whereby it is made in value and price, to cou^teruaile everlasting
damnation. For when as the son of God suffered the curse for a short time, it
is more then if all men and angels had suffered the same for ever. VII. The
difference of the passion of Christ, and the sufferings of Martyrs: and that
stands in two things. First Christ's passion was a curse or punishment; the
sufferings of the Martyrs are no curses, but either chastisments or trials.
Secondly, the passion of Christ is meritorious for us even before God, because
he became our Mediator and surety in the covenant of grace, but the
sufferings of martyrs or not of value to merit for us at Gods hand, because in
suffering they were but private men, and therefore they nothing appertain to
us. By this it appears, that the Treasury of the Church of Rome which is as
it were a common chest, containing the overplus of the merits of Saints,
mingled with the merits of Christ, kept and disposed by the Pope himself, is
nothing else but a sensles dotage of man's brain. And whereas they say that
Christ by his death did merit that Saints might merit both for themselves and
others, it is as much as if they should say, the son of God became Jesus, to
make every one of us Jesus. And it is a manifest untruth which they say. For
the very manhood of Christ considered apart from the Godhead, cannot merit
properly: considering whatsoever it is, has, or does; it is, has, and does
the same, wholly and only by grace: whereas therefore Christ meriteth for us,
it is by reason he is both God and man in one person. For this cause it is not
possible that one mere man should merit for an other.

Lud. Gran.
The use of the passion follows. It is the manner of Friars and Jesuits in the
Church of Rome to use the consideration of the passion of Christ, as a means
to stir up compassion in themselves, partly toward Christ, who suffered
grievous torments, and partly toward the virgin Marie, who for the torments of
her dear son was exceedingly troubled: and withal to kindle in their hearts
an indignation toward the Jews, that put Christ to death. But indeed this
kind of use is mere humane, and may in like manner be made by reading of any
humane history. But the proper and the special use of the passion in deed is
this: First of all we must set it before our eyes as a looking glass, in which
we may clearly behold the horriblenes of our sins, that could not be
pardoned without the passion of the son of God: and the unspeakable love of
Christ, that dyed for us, and therefore loved his own enemies more then his
own self: and lastly our endless peace with God and happiness; in that,
considering the person of our redeemer, who suffered the pangs of hell, we may
after a sort find our paradise even in the midst of hell.

Secondly, the meditation of Christ's passion serves as a most worthy means to
begin and to confirm grace, specially when it is mingled with faith; and
that t^o ways: For first, it serves to breed in our hearts a godly sorrow
for our sins past, when we do seriously with our selves consider, that our
own sins were the cause of all the pains and sorrows and calamities which
he suffered in life and death. When any man had sinned under the Law, he
brought unto the temple or tabernacle some kind of beast for an offering,
according as he was prescribed, Lev. 4.4, 29.
laying his hand upon the head of it, and afterward slaying it before the
Lord. Now by the ceremony of laying on the hand, he testified that he for his
part had deserved death, and not the beast; and that it being slain and
sacrificed, was a sign unto him of the sacrifice of Christ offered upon the
cross for his sins. And hereby we are taught, that so often as we remember the
passion of Christ, we should lay our hands as it were upon our own heads,
utterly accusing and condemning ourselves, evermore keeping this in heart, that
Christ suffered not for himself, but for our offenses, which were the proper
cause of all his woe and misery. And as Christ's passion was grievous and
bitter unto him, so should our sins likewise be grievous and bitter unto us:
let us always remember this; otherwise we shall never reap any sound benefit
by the passion of Christ.

Again, the passion of Christ is a notable means to stir up in our hearts a
purpose and a care to reform our selves, and live in holiness and newnes of
life; on this manner: Has the Son of God so mercifully dealt with me, as to
suffer the curse of the whole law for my manifold iniquities, and to deliver me
from just and deserved damnation? yea, no doubt, he has, I am resolved of it:
if I should go on in mine old course, I should be the most ungrateful of all
creatures to this my loving Savior: I will therefore by his grace return, and
reform my life. And in this very point of reformation, the passion of Christ
is set before us as a most lively pattern and example to follow. For as much
(says Saint Peter) as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, 1. Pet. 4.1.
arm your selves likewise with the same mind, which is, that he which has
suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin. Where he teaches, that there
must be in us a spiritual passion answearable to the passion of Christ. For as
his enemies did lade him with miseries even to the death of the cross; so
should we lade our own flesh, that is, the corruption of our natures, with all
such means as may subdue and weaken, crucify and kill it. To the doing of
this, three things especially are required. First, we must consider that the
corruption of our rebellious natures is like the great and mighty Goliath, and
the grace of God which we have received like young and little David: and
therefore if we desire that grace should prevail against corruption, we must
disarme the strong man, and strippe him of all his weapons: which is done, by
giving all the members of our bodies to be instruments of the service of God in
righteousness and holiness. Secondly, we must endeavor to keep in the
corruption of nature as it were choking and smothering at the heart; that by it
neither the world nor the devil prevail against us. And this must be done by
having a narrow regard unto all the powers and faculties of body and soul,
setting a watch before our eyes, ears, lips, and all other parts of the
body, that are in any action the instruments of the soul; Psalm. 119.37. Job
31.1. Prove. 4.23.
and above all, as Solomon says, by countergarding the heart with all
diligence. By the outward senses of the body, as through open windows the
devil creepes into the heart; and therefore our duty is, to stop all such
ways of entrance. Thirdly, when original corruption begins to rebel either
in the mind, will, or any of the affections, then must we draw out the sword
of the spirit which is the word of God, and encounter with that hidious giant,
laying load upon him by the judgments and threatenings of the law, and as it
were beating him down with clubbes, as Paul speaks. 1. Cor. 9.17. (...).
And if it fall out that concupiscence begin to conceive and bring forth any
sin, we must cruise it in the head, and dash it against the ground, as a bird
in the shell, least it grow up to our utter confusion. These are the duties
which we should learn by the passion of Christ. But lamentable are our days,
in which all for the most part goes contrary: for commonly men are so far
from killing and subduing the rebellion of the natural concupiscence, that all
their study and care is, how they may feeede and cherish it, and make it
stronger then the mighty Goliath. But let us for our parts be conformable to
Christ in his passion, suffering in our flesh as he suffered in body and soul
for us. And let us daily more and more by the hand of faith apprehend and
apply to our hearts and consciences the passion of Christ, that it may as a
fretting corasive eat out the poison of our sinful natures and to consume
it.

Now follows the second point concerning the passion of Christ, which is
under whom he suffered, namely under Pontius Pilate. And Christ may be said to
suffer under him in two respects. First, because he was then the President of
Jury. Luke 3.1.
For a little before the birth of Christ the kingdom of the Jews was taken
away by the Roman Emperor, and reduced into a Province, and Pontius Pilate
was placed over the Jews, not as king, but as the Roman Emperors deputy.
And this circumstance is noted in the history of the Gospel, and here
specified in the Creed, to show that the Messiah was exhibited in the time
foretold by the Prophets. Genesis 49.10.
Jacob foretold that Shilo must be borne after the scepter is removed from
Judah. Isaiah says, Isa. 11.1.
that the family of Ishai shall be worn as it were to the root before Christ
as a branch shall spring out of it. Again, Christ suffered under Pontius
Pilate as he was a judge: whereby we are given to understand of a wonder,
namely that Christ the son of God, King of heaven and earth, was arraigned at
the bar of an earthly judge, and there condemned. For thus much the words in
meaning import, that Pontius Pilate sat as judge on Christ, to examine him, to
arraigne him, and give sentence against him. Wherefore before we come to speak
of the degrees of the passion of Christ, we must needs entreat of his
arraignement upon earth. In handling whereof we must generally consider these
points. First, that when he was arraigned before Pilate he was not as a
private man, but as a pledge and surety, Hebr. 7.22.
that stood in the place and stead of us miserable sinners, as the Prophet
Jsaiah says, He bare our infirmities, Isa. 52.4.
and carried our sorrows: and withal in him was mankind arraigned before
God. Secondly, this arraignment was made not privately in a corner, but openly
in the public court, and that in a great feast of the Jews, as it were in
the hearing of the whole world. Thirdly, though Pilate in citing, examinig,
and condemning Christ, intended not to work any part of man's redemption, yet
was this wholly set down in the counsel and good pleasure of God, in whose
room Pilate sat, and whose judgment he exercised. 2. Chr. 19.6.


The general use of Christ's arraignement, is twofold. First, it is a terror
to all impenitent sinners: for there is no freedom or protection from the
judgment of God, but by the arraignment of Christ: and therefore such as in
this life receive him not by faith, must at the end of this world be brought
out to the most terrible bar of ^he last judgment, there to be arraigned
before the King of heaven and earth. And mark the equity hereof. Christ
himself could not have been our Savior and redeemer, unless he had been
brought out to the bar of an earthly judge, and arraigned as a guilty
malefactor: and therefore there is no man upon earth that lives and dies out
of Christ, but he must whether he will or no, hold up his hand at the bar
of the great judge of all mankind, where he shall see hell underneath him
burning red hot, and opening it self wide to swallow him up: and on the
right hand of God standing all the Prophets, Apostles, and Saints of God giving
judgment against him: on the left hand, the devil and all his angels accusing
him; and within him a guilty conscience condemning him. And thus shall be one
day the arraignment of all those persons, that with full purpose of heart
cleave not to Christ: and yet, alas, huge and infinite is the number of those
which make more account of transitory and earthly matters, even of their
pigges with the Gaderens, then of him and his benefits: but such should rather
be pitied then despised of us, considering their estate is such, that every day
they are going as traitors pinnioned to their own judgment, that they may
go thence to eternal exequution.

Secondly, Christ's arraignment is a comfort to the godly. For he was arraigned
before Pilate, that all such as truly believe in him, might not be arraigned
before God at the day of the last judgment: he was accused before an earthly
judge, that they might be cleared and excused before the heavenly judge: lastly
he was here condemned on earth, that we might receive the sentence of
absolution and be eternally saved in heaven.

The arraignment of Christ has three parts: his apprehension, his accusation,
his condemnation. In the apprehension, we must consider two things: the
dealing of Christ, and the dealing of Judas and the Jews. The dealing and
proceeding of Christ was this, when he saw that the time of his apprehension
and death was near, he solemnly prepared himself thereto. And his example
must teach every one of us, who know not the shortness of our days, every
hour to prepare our selves against the day of death, that the^ we may be found
ready of the Lord. What? shall the Son of God himself make preparation to
his own death, and shall not we most miserable sinners do the same, who
stand in need of a thousand preparations more then he? wherefore let us
continually think with our selves that every present day is the last day of
our life, that so we may address our selves to death again the next day.

The first thing which Christ does in this preparation, is to make choice of
the place, in which he was to be apprehended, as will appear by conferring the
Evangelists together. S. Matthew says, he went to the place called Gethsemane:
Mat. 26.36. Luc. 22.39.
S. Luke says, he went to the mount of Olives as he was accustomed. And that
we might not imagine that Christ did this that he might escape and hide
himself from the Jews, Ioh. 18.2.
S. John says, that Judas which betrayed him knew the place, because
oftentimes he resorted thither with his disciples: whereas if he had feared
apprehension he would have rather gone aside to some other secret and unwonted
place. This the^ is the first point to be considered, that Christ knowing the
time of his own death to be at hand, does willingly of his own accord resort
to such a place in which his enemies in all likelihood might easily find him,
and have fit opportunity to attach him. For if he should have still remained
in Jerusalem, the Scribes and Pharisees durst not have enterprized his
apprehension, because of the people whom they feared: but out of the city in
the garden all occasion of fear is cut off. By this it is manifest, that
Christ yielded himself to death willingly, and not of constraint: and unless
his sufferings had bin voluntary on his part, they could never have bin a
satisfaction to Gods justice for our sins. Here a question offers it self
to be considered, whether a man may lawfully fly in danger and persequution,
seeing Christ him self does not. Answ. When good means of flying and just
occasion is offered, it is lawful to fly. When the Jews sought to kill Paul
at Damascus, the disciples took him by night, and put him through the wall and
let him down in a basket to escape their hands. When Moses was called by God
to deliver the Israelites, after he had slain the Egyptian, and the fact was
known, and Pharao sought to kill him for it, he fled to the land of Madian.
And our Savior Christ sundry times when he was to be stoned, and otherways
hurt by the Jews, withdrewe himself from among them. It is lawful then to
fly in persequution, these caueats observed. First, if a man find not
himself sufficiently strengthened to bear the cross. Secondly, his departure
must be agreeable to the general calling of a Christian, serving to the glory
of God and the good of his brethren, and the hurt of none. Thirdly, there must
be freedom at the least for a time from the bond of a man's particular calling.
If he be a magistrate, he must be freed from ruling, if a minister, from
preaching and teaching, otherways he may not fly. And in this respect Christ,
who did withdraw himself at other times, would not fly at this time; because
the hour of his suffering was come, Ioh. 18.4.
wherein he intended most willingly to submit himself to the good pleasure
and will of his father.

The second part of the preparation, is the prayer which Christ made unto his
father in the garden. And herein his example does teach us earnestly to pray
unto God against the danger of imminent death, and the temptations which are
to come. And if Christ, who was without sin, and had the spirit above
measure had need to pray, then much more have we need to be watchful in all
kind of prayers, who are laden with the burden of sin, and compassed about
with manifold impediments and dangerous enemies.

In this prayer sundry points worthy our marking are to be considered. The
first, who prayed? Ans. Christ the Son of God: but still we must remember the
distinction of natures and of their operations in one and the same Christ; he
prays not in his Godhead, but according to his manhood. The second is, for
whom he prays? Ans. Some have thought that this and all other his prayers
were made for his mystical body the Church; but the truth is, he now prays for
himself, yet not as he was God, for the Godheade feels no want, but as he was
a man abased to the form of a servant: and that for two causes. First, in that
he was a man, he was a creature, and in that respect was to perform homage to
God the Creator. Secondly, as he was man, he put on the infirmities of our
nature, and thereupon prayed that he might have strength and power in his
manhood to support him in bearing the whole brunt of the passion to come.

The third point is, to whom he prayed? Answer. To the father: neither must
this trouble us, as though Christ in praying to the father, should pray to
himself, because he is one and the same God with him. For though in essence
they admit no distinction, yet in person o^ in the proper manner of subsisting
they do. The father is one person, the Son an other: therefore as the father
saying from heaven, This is my well-beloved Son, Jn personis non est aliud and
aliud: est tamen alius and alius.
spoke not to himself, but to the Son: so again the Son when he prays,
he prays not to himself, but to the father.

The fourth point, what was the particular cause of his prayer. Answ. His
agony in which his soul was heavy unto death; not because he feared bodily
death, but because the malediction of the Law, even the very heat of the fury
and indignation of God was powered forth upon him, wherewith he was affected and
troubled, as if he had bin defiled with the sins of the whole world. And this
appears, 1. by the words whereby the Evangelists express the agony of
Christ, which signify exceeding great sorrow and grief: 2. by his doleful
complaint to his disciples in the garden, Mat. 26.37. (...).
My soul is heavy unto the death: 3. by his fervent prayer thrice repeated,
full of doleful passions: 4. by the coming of an Angel to comfort him: 5. by
his bloody sweat, the like whereof was never heard. And herein lies the
difference between Christ's agony, and the death of martyrs: he put on the
guilt of al our sins, they in death are freed from the same: he was left to
himself void of comfort, they in the midst of their afflictions feel the
unspeakable comfort of the holy Ghost: and therefore we need not marvel why
Christ should pray against death, which nevertheless his members have received
and borne most joyfully. Again, this most bitter agony of Christ is the
ground of all our rejoicing, and the cause why Paul biddes all the faithful in
the person of the Philippians, to rejoice always in the Lord, and again to
rejoice. And here we are further taught, that when we are plu^ged into a sea of
most grievous afflictions, and overwhelmed with the gulfes of most dreadful
temptations, even then, then I say, we should not be discouraged, but lift up
our hearts by fervent prayer to God. Thus did Christ when in the garden he was
drinking the cup of the wrath of God and sucking up the very dregs of it:
and David says, that out of the deepes he called of the name of the Lord and
was heard. Psalm. 503.1.


The fifth point, what is the matter and form of this prayer. Answer. Christ
prays to be delivered from the death and passion which was to come, saying on
this manner, Father, let this cup pass from me: yet with two clauses added
thereto, If it be possible, and, Not my will, but thy will be done. But it may
be demanded, how it could be that Christ knowing that it was his Fathers will
and counsel that he should suffer death for man, and also coming into the
world for that end, should make such a request to his Father without sin.
Answer. The request proceeds only of a weakness or infirmity in Christ's
manhood without sin, which appears thus. We must still consider that when
he made this prayer to his father, the whole wrath of God and the very
dolours and pangs of hell seized upon him: whereby the senses and powers of his
mind were astonished, and wholly bent to relieve nature in this agony. For as
when the heart is smitten with grief, all the blood in the body flows unto
it to comfort it: so when Christ was in this astonishment, the understanding
and memory, and all the parts of his humane nature (as it were for a time
suspending their own proper actions) concurred to sustain and support the
spirit and life of Christ, as much as possibly might be. Now Christ being in
the midst of this perplexed estate, prays on this manner, Father if it be
possible let this cup pass. And these words proceed not from any sin or
disobedience to his Fathers will, but only from a mere perturbation of mind,
caused only by an outward means, namely the apprehension of Gods anger; which
neither blinded his understanding nor took away his memory so as he forgot
his fathers will, but only stopped and stayed the act of reasoning and
remembering for a little time: even as in the most perfect clock that is the
motion may be stayed by the air, or by a man's hand, or by some outward cause
without any defect or breach made in any part of it. It may be objected that
Christ's will is flat contrary to the will of his father. Answer. Christ's
will as he is man and the will of the father in this agony, were not
contrary, but only diverse, and that without any contradiction or
contrariety. Now a man may will a diverse thing from that which God wills,
and that without sin. Paul desired to preach the word of God in Asia and
Bithynia, Act. 16.6, 7.
but he was hindered by the spirit. For all this, there is no contrariety
between Paul and the spirit of God; but in the show of discord great
consent. For that which Paul wills well, the spirit of God wills not, by a
better will: though the reason hereof be secret, and the reason of Paul's will
manifest. Again the minister in charity reputing the whole congregation to be
elect, in holy manner seeks and wills the salvation of every one, which
nevertheless the Lord in his eternal counsel wills not. Now between
both these wills there may be and is a difference without contrariety. For
one good thing as it is good may differ from another; but it can not be
contrary to it. It may further be alleged, that in this prayer there seems
to be a combat and fight in the mind, will, and affections of Christ, and
therefore sin. Answer. There are three kind of combats: the one between
reason and appetite, and this fight is always sinful, and was not in
Christ: the second is between the flesh and the spirit, and this may be in
Gods child who is but in part regenerate; but it did not befall Christ who was
perfectly holy. The third is a combat of diverse desires, upon sundry
respects drawing a man too and fro. This may be in man's nature without fault:
and was in Christ, in whom the desire of doing his Fathers will striving and
struggling with another desire, whereby nature seeks to preserve it self,
caused him to pray in this manner.

The sixth point is, in what manner Christ prayed. Answer. He prayed to his
Father partly kneeling, partly lying on his face, and that with strong cries
and tears, sweating water and blood: and all this he did for our sins.
Here then behold the agony of Christ as a clear crystal, in which we may
fully see the exceeding greatness of our sins, as also the hardness of our
hearts. We go vaunting with our heads to heaven as though it were nothing to
sin against God, whereas the horror of the wrath of God for our rebellions,
brought down even the son of God himself and laid him groueling upon the
earth. And we can not so much almost as shed one tear for our iniquities,
whereas he sweates blood for us. Oh let us therefore learn to abase our
selves and to carry about us contrite and bleeding hearts, and be confounded
in our selves for our sins past.

The last point is the event of the prayer, in that it was heard, as the
author of the Hebrews says, Christ Jesus in the days of his flesh, did
offer up unto his father prayers, Heb. 5.7.
and supplications, with strong cries and tears, unto him that was able to
save him: and was also heard in that thing which he feared. But some will
say, how was Christ heard, seeing he suffered death and bare the pangs of
hell, and the full wrath of God; if he had been heard he should have been
delivered from all this? Ans. We must know that God hears our prayers two
ways. I. when he directly graunts our request. II. when knovving what is
good for us, he gives not us our requests directly, but a thing answerable
thereunto. And thus was Christ heard: for he was not delivered from suffering:
but yet he had strength and power given him, whereby his manhood was made
able to bear the brunt of Gods wrath. And in the same manner God hears the
prayers of his servants upon earth. Paul prayed to be delivered from the Angel
Satan that buffe^ed him: but the Lord answered that it must not so be, because
his grace vvherby he was enabled to resist his te^pta^ion was sufficient: and
Paul finding the fruit of his prayers on this manner, 2. Cor. 12, 9.
protestes hereupo^ that he will rejoice in his infirmities. Others pray for
te^porall blessings, as health, life, liberty, etc. which notwithstanding God
holds back, and gives in stead thereof spiritual graces, patience, faith,
contentation of mind. Augustine says, God hears not our prayers always
according to our wills and desires, Audit ad salutem. non audit ad voluntatem.
but according as the things asked shall be for our salvation. He is like the
Physician, who goes on to launch the wound and hears not the patient though he
cry never so, till the cure be ended.

Now follows the second thing to be considered in Christ's apprehension,
namely the dealing of the Jews: wherein we must consider four things. I. how
they consult together concerning Christ's apprehension. II. how they came to
the place and met him. III. how they laid hands on him. IIII. how they bound
him and took him away. For the first: before they enterprised this matter,
they did wisely and warily lay their heads together, to consult of the time and
place: and also of the manner of apprehending him. So S. Matthew says, There
assembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders of the
people into the hall of the chief priest called Caiphas: Mat. 26.3, 4, 5.
and consulted how they might take Jesus by subtlety. Whence we learn two
good instructions. First, the Jews having a quarrel against Christ, could
never be at rest till they had his blood: and therefore they consult how they
might take him: but God did so order the matter, and dispose of their purposes
and consultations, that hereby he did both confound them and their nation. For
by reason of this heinous sin against Christ, came the just wrath of God
upon them, and so remains unto this day. Whereby we see, that those which
will be wise without the direction of Gods word, and against Christ, the
Lord will overthrow them in their own vvisdome. And thus it was with
Achitophel, who for wisdom was as the oracle of God: yet because he
rebelled against the Lords anointed, God confounded him in his own vvisdome.
For when his counseil which he gave against David was not followed, 2. Sam.
17.23.
he thought himself despised as the text says, and sadled his Ass, and arose
and went home into his city, and put his household in order, and hanged
himself, wherein he showed himself more senseless then a brute beast. And
in our days the Leagers that have bound themselves by oath to root out the
Church of God; by his most wonderful providence turn their swords against
themselves and destroy each other. Therefore if we will be wise, we must learn
to be wise in Christ; for else our counsel will be our own confusion.
Secondly, hence we learn, that if men will live in their stubbernnesse and
rebellion against Christ, the Lord will so carry and order those men, or that
people, that they shall be the causes of their own perdition. This we may
plainly see in the example of these Jews: for they evermore envied Christ,
and now they go on to take counsel against him: but God so disposed of it,
that thereby they brought destruction upon themselves and theit cuntry. This
must teach thee to take heed how thou live in thy sins: for if thou do so,
the Lord has many ways to work thy confusion: as, thy conscience to condemn
thee; thy friends to forsake thee; the devil and his angels to torment and
molest thee; and his creatures to annoy thee. Yea, the Lord can leave all
these, and make thine own self to be the direct means of working thine own
confusion, both in body and soul eternally: and that even then, when thou art
most wary and wise in thine own behalf: and this is the reward of all those
that walk on in their evil ways.

Having consulted, in the next place they come to the garden, where Christ was
to be apprehended. And here we are to consider who they were that came, namely
the Scribes, and Pharisees, the high priests, and their servants; Mat. 26.47.
Ioh. 18.3.
a band of soldiers, and the servants of Pontius Pilate, and the Elders of the
Jews: all which came with one consent to the place where Christ was, that they
might attach him. Where we may learn a good lesson that all sorts of wicked
men disagreeing among themselves, ca^ agree against Christ. The Scribes and
Pharisees were two contrary sects, and at discord one with another in matters
of religion: and Judas was one of Christ's disciples: the Elders differed from
them all: the soldiers were Gentiles: all these were at variance among
themselves, and could not one brook another. So also we read that Herod and
Pontius Pilate were not friends: but at the same time when Christ was
apprehended, Pilate sent him to Herod, and they were made friends. Luke 25.12*
Now as these wicked men did all conspire against Christ: so do the wicked
ones of this world in all cuntries and kingdoms band themselves against the
Church of Christ at this day. And howsoever such be at discord among
themselves, yet they do all join hand in hand to persecute Christ in his
members. And the reason is plain; because Christ and his religion is as flat
opposite to the corrupt disposition of all men, as light is to darkness.

Again, whereas we see so many sorts of men so amiably consenting to take
Christ: we may note how all men naturally do hate and abhor him, and his
religion. And look as then it was with Christ, so has it been with all his
members, and will be to the end of the world. They are accounted as the
offscouring of the world, men not worthy to live on the face of the earth: as
Christ told his disciples, Mat. 24.9.
saying, Ye shall be hated of all nations for my names sake.

Let us also mark how all these came furnished to apprehend Christ: the text
says, they came with clubs and staves as unto a thief. Luke 22.52.
All the whole nation of the Jews knevve right well that Christ was no man of
violence, but meek and humble: and yet they came armed to apprehend him; as
though he had been some mighty potentate that would not have been apprehended,
but have resisted them. Where we do see the property of an evil conscience,
which is to fear where there is no cause at all. This causes some to be
afraid of their own shadows: and if they see but a worm peep out of the
ground, they are at their wits end: Prove. 28.1.
and as Solomon says, The wicked flee when none pursues them.

After that they are now come to Christ, we are to consider two things in their
meeting. I. Christ's communication with them. II. The treason of Judas.
Concerning their conference, John. 18.4, 5, 6.
it is said, Jesus knowing all things that should come unto him, went forth,
and said unto them, Whom seek ye? they answered him, Jesus of Nazareth:
Jesus answered, I am he. Now so soon as he had said, I am he, the stoutest of
them fell to the ground, as being astonished at the majesty of his word. Where
note, that the word of God is a word of power. The same power was in his
word, when he raised up Lazarus: for when he had ^yen in the grave, and had
entered into some degrees of corruption, he did no more but said, Lazarus, come
forth: and he that was dead came forth. And hence we may also mark what a
wonderful might and power is in the word preached: for it is the very word
of Christ, and therefore being preached by his ministers lawfully called by him
thereunto; has the same power and force in it which Christ himself showed
when he spoke on earth. It is the savor of life unto life to save those that
hear it: or the savor of death unto death. It is like to a vapor or perfume
in the air, 2. Cor. 2.16.
which in some men's nosthrilles is savourie and pleasant, and does reviue
them: and others it strikes stark dead. And therefore every one that either
now, or heretofore has heard this word preached, shall find it to be unto
them either a word of power to save their souls, or through their corruption
the ministry of death and condemnation. Again, if a word spoken by him,
being in a base and low estate, be able to overthow his enemies, then at the
last day when he shall come in his glory, and power, and majesty to judge
both the quick and the dead; what power shall his words have* Go you
cursed of my father into everlasting fire which was prepared for the devil and
his angels? The consideration of this, that the word of Christ shall even be as
powerful at that day, must be a motive to every one of us to cause us to
come unto Christ: and while we have time in these days of grace and mercy,
to seek to be reconciled unto him for all our sins, least at the last day
we hear that dreadful voice of Christ sounding against us, Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire, etc.

And thus much for the communication. Now follows Judas his treason: wherein
we are to observe these things. I. the qualities and conditions of the man
that did the treason. He was by calling a disciple chosen to be an Apostle
which is the chiefest in Ecclesiastical callings: and among the Disciples he
was in some account; because he was as it were a steward in Christ's family,
and bare the bag: but yet he was a traitor, and did more against Christ
then all the Jews did. For he brought them to the place where they might
apprehend him: and when they were come, did point him out unto them, and
delivered him into their hands: nay he gave them a sign and token saying, Mar.
14.44.
Whom I kiss, he it is: take him and lead him away warily. Here we see the
cause why Christ called Judas a Devil: for he said, Have I not chosen you
twelve, and one of you is a devil. Ioh. 6* 70.
He became to be a devil and a traitor by nourishing a wicked and a covetous
heart. And here we are taught that the ministers of Christ, if they make no
conscience of sin, by the just judgment of God do prove devils incarnate:
this example of Judas does manifest the same: and the reason is plain, for the
more knowledge a man has, the more wicked he is if he want grace. They are
like in this case unto a man that has meat and drink enough, but no stomach
to digest it: and so the more he eats, the more it turns to his hurt. This
I speak not to deface the callings of ministers; but that those which preach
Gods word, should not do it with impenitent hearts, living in their own
sins. For it is a fearful thing for a man to speak unto the people of the
pardon of their sins, and yet himself not to apprehend the same by faith. A
lump of wax if you keep it from heat, or from the fire, it keeps his own
form still, but if it be held to the fire, it melts and runs abroad: Ier.
15.19*
so ministers who by reason of their callings come near God, if they be lumps
of iniquity and live in their sins, they shall find that the corruptions of
their hearts will melt abroad as wax at the fire. And therefore every one that is
designed to this calling, Isai. 6.5. Act* 20.28.
must first purge him self of his own sins, or else Gods judgments will
fall on him, as they did on Judas that betrayed Christ.

Secondly let us consider what moved Judas to betray his master; namely, the
desire of wealth and gain: and this covetousness, which is an insatiable
desire of money, 1. Tim. 6.1^*
is the root of all sin: not that all sins came of it, but because where
it is, there all other sins are preserved, and do get strength. The desire
of thirty pieces of silver caused Judas to make an agreement with the Jews,
and to betray his master. But some will say this practice of Judas is strange,
and no man that lives now would do the like for any money. Answer, Judas is
dead indeed, but his practice is yet alive: for in the high and weighty
calling of the ministry, he that has charge of souls, and either cannot
teach and feed his flock, or else will not, though he betray not Christ, yet he
betrays the members of Christ unto the devil. If a nource should take a man's
child to bring up, and yet never give it milk, insomuch that the child dies
for hunger: is not she the murderer of it? yes verily. And so it is with him
that takes upon him the charge of Gods people, and never feeds them with the
milk of Gods word, or else so seldom that their souls do famish: he is the
murderer of them, and has betrayed them into the hands of their enemy: and
shall be condemned for them as a traitor unto God unless he repent. Besides,
those that live by traffic in buying and selling, make gain by lying,
swearing, and breaking the Lords Sabbath: they are also Iudasses: for they
choppe away their souls with the devil for a little gain. And more
lamentable is their case, because it is hard to find one of an hundred in the
world that makes conscience of a lie, or of any bad dealing; if any gain at
all may come thereby. Men use to cry out on Judas for betraying Christ: and
well, yet they themselves for a little worldely pelf betray their own souls.
And if such would not be counted Iudasses, they must leave off to sin and
keep a good conscience in Gods worship, and the works of their callings.

Thirdly, let us note what course Judas took in betraying Christ: he was
very submisse, saying, Hail, Master, and kissed him. Why did he so? Herein
he played the most palpable hypocrite: for having gotten a piece of money, he
thought that neither Christ, nor any of his fellow disciples should have
known of it (though Christ knew it well enough) and therefore he comes in this
manner to him thinking that he would have conveyed himself from amongst
them at the very pinch, as he had done often times before. And this practice
also of Judas is common in the world: Judas an enymie unto Christ speaks him
fair, and salutes him, and so do most of our secure and drowsy protestants in
England: they will salute Christ, both by hearing his word and receiving his
sacraments: and as the prophet says, they honor god with their lips but
their hearts are far from him. We may see daily experience of this: every
man will say, Lord, Lord, but in there lives and conversations, few there be
that deny him not; both in the duties which they owe unto god: and also
toward there brethren. Many will come to hear gods word because they are
compelled by the magistrates laws: but when they are come they worship not god
in therehearts: which is plainly seen by the breach of gods holy saboth in
every place: and that they make more account of a mess of pottage with Esau,
then of their birth right: and of 30 pieces of silver than of Christ*

The 3 point to be handled in Christ's apprehension is that they lay hand on
him: wherein we must consider 2 things. I. the resistance made by Christ's
disciples. II. their flight. For the first, Christ's disciples resisted, and
principally Peter drawing his sword, stroke one of the hye priests servants,
and cut off his ear. This fact our savior Christ reproues: and that for these
causes. Mat. 20.50.
I. because his disciples were private men: and they that came to apprehend him
were magistrates Secondly, he was to work the work of man's redemption: now
Peter by this did what he could to hinder him. And from this practice of Peter
we may learn, that nothing in the world is so hard unto a man, as to take up
his cross and follow Christ. One would think it should be a hard matter for
him to encounter with enemies, especially they being stronger then he: but
Peter stoutly resisting makes nothing of yt: whereas a little before when
Christ told him and the rest concerning his passion they were so heavy with
grief that they could not hold up there heads: so hard a thing it is to bear
the cross: and for this cause afterward when Christ reproved him for
striking, both he and all the rest of the disciples fled away. Secondly Peter
in all men's reason was to be commended, because he struck in the defense of his
master: but Christ reproves him for it. Whence we learn, that if a man be
zealous for Christ: he must be zealous within the compass of his calling: and
not be zealous first, and then look for a calling, but first look for a
calling and then be zealous. which thing if Peter had marked he had not dealt
so rashly: for being without the compass of his calling he could not but do
amiss. Here it may be demanded, whether Christ and his religion may not be
maintained by the sword? I Answer, that the magistrate, which is the
vicegerent of the lord, is the keeper of both tables: and therefore is to
maintain religion with the sword: and so may put to death both Atheistes,
which hold there is no god, of which sort there is many in these days: and
hertiques, which maliciously maintain, and hold any thing that overthrows
religion in the Churches whereof they were members. But some object, that in
the parable of the field, the servants are commanded not to pluck up the tares
from the wheat, Mat. 13.30.
but to suffer both to grow till harvest: and that therefore there must be no
separation of heritiques, and true christians before the last day of
judgment. Answer. The scope of that place is not to forbid the execution of
heritiques: but it speaks only of the final separation which must be in the
end of the world. For there the Master of the family does signify God
himself, and the field, the Church militant spread over the face of the whole
earth: and by tares is meant not only heritiques; but also all those that are
forth of the church: the servants are gods holy Angels, and the harvest is
the last judgment. Here further it may be demanded who may use the sword?
Answer. That man may use the sword to strike and to kill, into whose hands
God puts the sword. Now God puts it into the hand first and principally
of the public magistrate who when just occasion serves may draw it out. And
again into a private man's hand sometime. A private man when he is assailed of
his enemy, may take the sword in way of his own defense, and may kill his
enemy therewith (if there be no other help) not doing it upon malice, but
because he can not otherwise escape, and save his own life: and so for want of
a magistrate, he is a magistrate unto himself.

In the flight of the disciples we may consider 2. things, the time, and the
quality of the persons. The time was at the apprehension of our Lord and
Savior. And this came to pass not without the special providence of God:
that it might be known, that Christ had no helper or fellow in the
accomplishment of the work of our redemption: and that, whereas we for our
sins deserved to be forsaken of all creatures, he being our pledge and
surety, might be forsaken for us. As for the quality of the persons that
fly, they were the chosen disciples of Christ such as had believed in him,
confessed him, and preached in his name. And this serves to teach us that God
will otherwiles forsake his own children and servants and leave them to
themselves in some part, that they may feel their wants and miseries, and
their weakness in themselves, and by that means be humbled thoroughly, and be
touched with an hungering desire after Christ. As a mother sets down her young
child and hides her self, suffering it to cry and break the face, not
because she hates it, but that she may teach it to depend upon her, and love
her: so God gives grace to his children, and yet again sometime he does in
part withdraw it from them, and then they fail in their duties sundry ways:
and this he does to make them ashamed of themselves, and to cause them to put
all their co^fide^ce out of themselves in the merits of Christ.

The fourth thing to be considered in Christ's apprehension, is their binding
of him. In which action of theirs we are to observe first of all the
circumstance of time, ^oh. 18.12.
when this binding was. When our Savior Christ had said unto them, I am
he, they being astonished fell to the ground: and vvithall, when Peter had
smitten off Malchus ear with his sword, Christ healed the same miraculously.
Yet after all this, though they saw his wonderful power both in word and
deed, they proceed in malice against him, and lay hands on him, and bind him
as a malefactor. In this we note what a fearful sin hardness of heart
is: the danger whereof appears in this, that if a man be taken with it,
there is nothing that can stay or daunt him in his wicked proceedings: no not
the powerful words and deeds of Christ himself. And indeed among Gods
judgments there is none more fearful then this: and (how fearful soever
it be) it is to be found amongst us in these days. For it is very evident by
common experience, that the more men are taught the doctrine of the law, and
of the Gospel, the more hard and senseless are their hearts: like unto the
stithie: which the more it is beaten upon with the iron hammer, the harder it
is. And again, it is hard to find men that sorrow for their sins, and feel
the want of Christ: which argues the exceeding deadness of spirit. And let
us be resolved that it is a most terrible judgment of God, the rather to be
feared, because it is like a pleasant sleep, into which when a man is fallen,
he feels neither pain nor grief. And therefore we for our parts must look
unto it with fear and trembling, lest it take such hold of us, that we be past
all hope of recoverie.

Furthermore, this binding of Christ was prefigured unto us in the sacrifices
of the old testament: for the beast that was to be sacrificed, was tied with
cords and bound, and so brought to the altar. And whereas Christ is bound, we
must not consider him in his own person; but as he standing in our room and
stead bears the person of all sinners: and therefore whereas he is thus
taken captive by his enemies, to be brought before a mortal judge, there to be
arraigned for us: hence we learn two good instructions. First here is a
comfort to all the people of god: Christ was bound by his enemies, that they
might be unloosed from the bondage of Satan, sin, and their own corruptions
(under which they lie bound by nature) and might have free liberty in and by
him. Secondly all impenitent sinners are taught hereby to reform and amend
their hearts and lives. For what exceeding madness is this, that they by
Christ's bonds being set at liberty, will yet live and die in their sins, and
take pleasure to lie bound hand and foot under the power of sin and satan?
And indeed this shows unto us the fearful and dangerous estate of all those
that go on still in their sins. For what can they say for themselves at the
day of judgment, when as now they have freedom offered and will not accept of
it?

Thus much of Christ's apprehension: Now follows the indictment. For they
proceed against him iudicially, after the custom of the Jews. Mat. 26.57.
Mar. 14.53. Luke 22.66. Ioh. 18.19.
Christ's indictment was twofold. One before Caiphas the high priest in the
great council at Jerusalem; the second before the civil Judge Pontius Pilate,
as is plainly set forth by all the Evangelists. And Christ's arraignement
before Caiphas was a preparation to the second before Pontius Pilate, that the
Jews might thoroughly proceed against him. In the first we are to consider
these points. I. The time in which Christ was indicted. II. the end of his
indictment. III. the whole tenor and proceeding thereof. For the first: Christ
was indicted early in the morning at the break of the day: for he was
apprehended in the night, and with all have brought into Caiphas his hall, and
there they kept him all night: and at the break of the day Caiphas the high
priest, and the Elders with the Scribes and Pharisees, held a solemn council
against him: and there they had accused him and condemned him before morning,
and sent him then to the common hall, as S. Matthew says, Mat. 27.1, 2.
When the morning was come all the chief Priests, and elders of the people
took counsel against Jesus to put him to death: and lead him away bound, and
delivered him to Pontius Pilate. In which action of theirs we are to mark two
points. First the diligence of ungodly men and the quicknes of their nature to
practice sin and wickedness: as it was said of the old Jews, their feet run
to evil, and they make have to shed blood. Isai. 59.7.
When the Israelites would sacrifice to the golden calfe which they had made;
Exodus 32.6.
it is said, they rose up early in the morning. Hence it appears, that if God
leave us to our selves, we are as ready to practice any mischief as the fire
is to burn without delay and with violence. Now the consideration of this must
move every one of us to take heed of all occasions and provocations to sin
whatsoever they be, that it break not forth any way. Secondly in the
circumstance of time of this council, we may mark the rashness of this solemn
assembly in judicial proceedings: whereas they examine him both of his
doctrine, and also of his disciples, omitting such circumstances as should have
bin used; as the serious examining of witnesses, and the waynig of his
contrary answers: for he is taken and brought before the judge and condemned
on a sudde^* now as this was the practice of this council, so on the contrary
the common complaint of these times is of the slow dispatch of matters in law,
and of the long delay: insomuch that some be almost undone before their suits
be ended: whereas judicial proceedings were ordained by God, not for men's
undoing, but for the maintaining of the common peace, and liberty, and wealth.
And therefore justice ought to be dispatched with such speed, as men thereby
might be furthered, and not hindered.

The end of Christ's indictment was directly to kill him, Mat. 26.59. Mat. 14.55.
and to put him to death. Here is no indifferent proceeding to be looked for,
but plotting on every hand for the very blood of Christ. Where note, that in
the hearts of all wicked men, there is an ingrafted hatred of Christ, and as it
were bred in the bone: and the same affection they carry to the members of
Christ. This hatred is manifested in the first giving of the promise, I will
put enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and her seed. It
appears in the hatred that Cain bare to his brother Abel, Ismael toward
Isaac, Esau toward Jacob: and the Gentile^s that were without the covenant,
toward the Church of god at all times. And to come nere to our selves, this
ingrafted hatred that is in the heart of the wicked against Christ and his
members, is as plentiful and evident as ever it was, even in these our days.
For among all men, none are more maligned and hated then those that profess
Christ: and for none other cause, but because they profess Christ. And
hereupon the very profession of religion is laden with nicknames and
reproachful terms by all sorts of men.

And thus much of the end and intent of their counsel. The proceeding in
judgment stands in these points. I. they examine Christ. II. they bring
witnesses against him. III. they adjure him to tell them who he is: of these in
order. First, they examine our Savior Christ of his doctrine suspecting him to
be a false prophet: secondly of his disciples, as suspecting him seditiously to
raise up a new sect unto himself, to make a faction amongst the Jews. Now to
this examination let us mark Christ's answer; in which he says nothing at
all concerning his disciples: whereas notwithstanding he might have said, Ioh.
18.19.
that one of them betrayed him, another denied him, and the rest fled away:
whereby we note, that it is not our duty at all times, and in all places, to
speak of the faults and wantes that we know by others. Secondly, the answer
which he makes is only concerning his doctrine: whereby the ministers of God
and all men else are taught, that being called before their enemies, to give
reason of their doctrine: they are (as S. Peter says) to be always ready to
give an account of the hope that is in them. 1. Pet. 3.15.
And further we are to consider the wisdom that Christ uses in answering;
for he says nothing of his doctrine in particular, but said, I speak openly
to the world, I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple whether the
Jews resorted: Ioh. 18.19, 20.
in secret have I taught nothing: ask them therefore what I said which heard
me: Behold, they can tell you what I said. Now the reason why he answers
thus sparingly in general terms is; because their examination served only to
entangle him: and out of his words to gather matter of accusation. After whose
example we may learn, that being called to make answer of our faith and
doctrine before our enemies, we are to do it so, as thereby we do not entangle
our selves; nor give any advantage unto our enemies: and hereof we have a
notable example in the Apostle Paul, Act. 23.6. In the words of Christ's
answer we must observe 2. things. First that the place where Christ taught
was publi^e. Now hence it may be demanded, whether ministers may handle the
word of god privately or no? Ans. The state of Gods Church is twofold:
peaceable, or troblesome. In the time of peace ministers must preach the word
publicly: but in time of persecution, for the safety and preservation of the
Church of God, they may with good warrant preach privately: and indeed at such
times the assemblies of the Church make private places public. Act. 12.12,
And hence we learn, that in time of peace, all those that are called to the
office of the ministry, must (if it be possible) spend their labor
publicly, so as they may do most good. Secondly, whereas Christ says, he
preached in their Synagogues and temple, which at that time were places full of
disorder; Math. 21.15.
in so much as he called the Temple a den of thieves: and the Scribes and
Pharisees had corrupted the doctrine of the Law, Matthew. 15.3.
transgressing the commandments of God by their own traditions: and they
taught justification by the works of the Law, as Paul says, they being
ignorant of the righteousness of God, Romans 10.3.
and going about to stablish their own righteousness which is by works, have
not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. Besides all this, they
were loose and wicked men in their lives and conuersations: and therefore
Christ commanded the people that they should observe, Matt. 23.2, 3.
and do whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees bid them, sitting in Moses
chair: but after their works they must not do, because they say and do not.
Now although these corruptions and deformities were in the Jewish Church, yet
our Savior Christ severed not from it, but came and preached both in their
temple and Synagogues, where these seducers and false teachers were. And hence
we gather, that the practice of all those men in our Church, which separate
themselves from all assemblies for the wants thereof, holding that our Church
is no Church, that the grace which is wrought by the preaching of the word
among us is nothing else but a sathanicall illusion; that our Sacraments are no
Sacraments, I say, this their practice is condemned by our Savior Christ's
conversing among the Jews. For if Christ should have followed their opinion,
he ought to have fled from amongst the Jews, and not so much as once to have
come into the temple, or taught in their Synagogues; but contrariwise he joined
himself with them: and therefore we can not in good conscience disjoyne our
selves from the Church of England. The second thing to be observed in Christ's
answer is, that he referres Caiphas to the judgment of his hearers, being
resolved of the truth of his own doctrine, though sundry of them were his
utter enemies. Behold then a good example for all the ministers of Gods word to
follow; teaching them to deliver Gods word so purely and syncerely, that if
they be called into question about the same, they may be bold to appeal to
the consciences of their hearers, although they be wicked men.

Now after this answer, one of the servants of Caiphas smites Christ with a
rod: in whom the saying is verified, Ioh. 18.22.
Like master, like servant, that is, if the master be wicked, servants commonly
will be wicked also: if the master be an enemy to Christ, his servant will be
Christ's enemy also. And this is the cause why there are so many lewd prentises
and servants, because there are so many lewd masters. Many masters complain of
servants now adays; but there is more cause why they should complain of
themselves: for usually servants will not become obedient to their masters,
till their masters first become obedient unto Christ: therefore let masters
learn to obey God, and then their servants will obey them also.

Further, Christ being smitten, makes this answer: If I have evil spoken,
bear witness of the evil: but if I have well spoken, why smitest thou me?
making complaint of an injury done unto him. Now hereupon scoffing Julian the
apostata says, Christ keeps not his own laws, but goes against his own
precept; when as he said, If one strike thee on the one cheek, Math. 5.^9.
turn to him the other also. But we must know, that in these words Christ's
meaning is, that a man must rather suffer a double wrong, then seek a private
revenge. And before Christ spoke in his own defense, which a man may lawfully
do, and not seek any revenge: for it is one thing to defend his own cause,
and an other to seek revenge.

Now follows the second point in their proceeding, which is, the producing of
false witnesses against him; as S. Matthew says, Mat* 26.60.
The whole Council sought false witness against him, and though many came,
yet found they none: for they could not agree together, because they alleged
false things against him, which they could not prove. And thus the members of
Christ have often such enemies as make no bones shamefully to avouch that
against them, which they ca^ not be able to justify. The ten persecutions
which were in the first 300. years after Christ, Tertul. Apol. contra gent.
arose oftentimes of shameless reports that men gave out, which said that
Christians lived of man's flesh: and therefore slew their own children: 2. that
they lived on rawe-flesh, 3. that they committed incest one with another in
their assemblies: 4. that they worshipped the head of an ass: 5. that they
worshipped the su^ne and moon: 6. that they were traitors, and sought to
undermine the Roman Empire: and lastly, wheresoever was thunder or
earthquakes, seditio^s or tumults, or any disquietnes or trouble, Christians
were accused as the authors thereof. Such enemies have they had in all ages:
and in these our days the same is practiced, and will be to the worlds end.
Now when the first witnesses could not agree among themselves, then two other
false witnesses came forth, which avouched that Christ said, I will destroy
this temple made with hands, and within three days will build another made
without hands. Mark. 14.38.
Indeed Christ said some such words: for says he, Destroy this temple, and
within three days I will build it up again. Ioh. 2.16. verse. 21.
But he spoke this of the temple of his body: whereas they maliciously did
interpret him to have spoken of the temple in Jerusalem. And again they
change the words, for Christ said, Destroy this temple, etc. but these
witnesses say he said, I will destroy this temple made with hands, etc. And
thus they change both words and meaning: and therefore the holy Ghost calls
them false witnesses. By this we must be advertised to take heed how we report
men's words: for if we change the meaning, though in part we retain the words,
we may soon become slaunderers and false witnesses: and as this duty must be
performed toward all men, so especially toward the ministers of the Gospel:
and the neglect of this duty procures many slaunderers to the^ in this our
Church: whereof indeed the reporters are the cause, and not the ministers
themselves.

Now at this false accusation Christ was silent, so as Caiphas asked him why he
answered nothing. Herein we are to consider many things: I. why Christ was
silent. The causes be two: first he was to show himself a pattern of true
humility and patience, therefore even then would he be silent when he was most
falsely accused of his adversaries. Secondly he is silent; that standing before
the judge to be condemned, the sentence might proceed against him, and he
might suffer the death appointed, which was due unto us, and so become our
redeemer. And in Christ's example we must note, that it is a special duty to
know when to speak, and when to be silent. The ordering of the tongue is a
rare gift, and few attain unto it. Some will peradventure ask what rule we
have to direct us herein? Answer. The general rule for the ordering of the
tongue, is the law of God* We are commanded to seek the glory of God in the
first table; and in the second the good of our neighbor: when thy speech
therefore will serve either for Gods glory, or the good of thy neighbor, then
thou must speak: if it serve for neither, then be silent. Again, if thy
silence be either for Gods glory, or the good of thy neighbor, then be
silent; if it will not, then speak. And because it is hard for a man to know
when his speech or silence will serve for these two ends: therefore we must
pray unto God that he would teach and direct us herein: as David does, Set a
watch (says he) O Lord, Psalm. 141.3.
before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips: and again; open thou my
lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. Psalm. 51.15.


Thus much for the false witnesses produced. Now follows the third point,
which is, the adjuring of Christ: for Caiphas the high Priest charged him to
tell him whether he were the Christ the Son of God, or no. To adjure a man,
is to charge and command him in the name of God, to declare a truth, not only
because God is witness thereof, but also because he is judge to revenge, if he
speak not the truth. 1. Th. 5.27.
Thus Paul adjured the Thessalonians, charging them in the Lord, that his
epistle should be read unto all the brethren the Saints. And the like does
Caiphas to Christ. And here is a thing to be wondered at; Caiphas the high
Priest adjureth him in the name of God, who is very God, even the Son of God,
which shows what a small account he makes of the name of God: for he did it
only to get advantage on Christ's words: and so do many now adays, who for a
little profit or gain make a matter of nothing to abuse the name of God a
thousand ways.

Now Christ being thus adjured, though silent before, yet now in reverence to
Gods majesty, answered and said: first, Thou have said it: and in Saint
Mark, I am he. Math. 26.24. Mar. 14.62. Ioh. 19.7.
In this answer, appears the wonderful providence of God. For though
Caiphas take hence the occasion of condemning Christ, yet has he withal
drawn from him a most excellent confession, that he is the Son of God, and
our alone Savior. And by this means he proceeds to shut heaven against
himself, and to open the same for us.

Thus we have ended the first indictment of Christ before Caiphas. Now
follows the second, which was before Pontius Pilate, in the common hall at
Jerusalem. Ioh. 18.19. Luke 23. Math. 27.2. Mark. 15.1.
The history of it is set down at large in all the Evangelists. In this
second indictment of Christ (that we may refer every matter to his place) we
are to observe four things: I. the accusation of Christ before Pilate. II. his
examination. III. Pilats policy to save Christ. IV. Pilats absolving of him;
and then the condemnation of Christ in both courts, Ecclesiastical and civil:
of these in order. In Christ's accusation, we must consider many points. The
first is, who were his accusers, namely the high Priest, the Scribes, and
Pharisees, and Elders of the people, and the common people: all these conspired
together to accuse him. The cause that moved the Pharisees and Elders of the
people hereunto, is noted by Saint Matthew, who says of envy they delivered
him. Envy is nothing but a sadness in a man's heart, Math. 27.18.
at the prosperity of his better. And it reigned in the Scribes and Pharisees,
and the occasion was this. Christ had taught most heavenly doctrine, and
confirmed the same by most wonderful miracles, and did greatly exceed them
all, and was in more account among the people: and for this cause the Scribes
and Pharisees and high Priests, repined and grudged at him. Now their example
serves to admonish us to take heed of this sin, as being the mother of many
mischiefs. And we must rather follow the example of Moses, who when Joshua
desired him to forbid Eldad and Medad to prophecy, Number. 11.26, 27, 28.
answered, Enviest thou for my sake? yea I would to God that all the Lords
people were prophets. And we must be of the same mind with John Baptist, who
hearing by his disciples that the people left him, and followed Christ, said,
his joy was fulfilled, for Christ must increase, and he must decrease. Ioh.
3.29.
And so we must be glad and content when we see the prosperity of our
neighbors any way. Now the cause why the common people join with them was,
because the chief priests and the Scribes and elders had persuaded them to a
bad conceit of Christ. Mat. 27, 20.
Hence it appears that it is most requisite for any people, be they never so
good, to have good magistrates, and godly rulers to govern them by wise and
godly counsel. The necessity hereof was well known to Iethro Moses father in
law, though he were a heathen man: for he bids Moses to provide among all
the people men of courage fearing God, men dealing truly, Exo. 18.21.
hating covetousness, and appoint them to be rulers over the people. Teaching
us, that if covetous, malicious, and ungodly men, not fearing God, go before
the people, they shall in all likelihood be carried into the like sins by
their example.

The next point concerns the place where they accuse him, which was at the
door of the common hall: for having brought him before the council at
Jerusalem, Ioh. 18.28.
and there condemned him of blasphemy, afterward they bring him unto the
common hall where Pilate sat judge. Yet did they not enter in, but stayed
without at the door, least they should be defiled, and be made unfit to eat
the passover. In which practice of theirs, we are to mark an example of most
notable both superstition, and most gross hypocrisy. For they make no bones
to accuse and arraigne a man most just and innocent, and yet are very strickt
and curious in an outward ceremony. And in like manner they made no conscience
to give thirty pieces of silver to betray Christ: but to cast the same into
the treasury, Matt. 27.6.
they make it a great and heinous offense. And for this cause Christ
pronounces a woe unto the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 23.23*
calling them hypocrites: for, says he, you tithe mynt, anyse, and commin, and
leave the weighty matters of the law, as judgment, and mercy. And the very
same thing we see practiced of the Church of Rome at this day, and of sundry
Papists that live amongst us: they will not eat flesh in Lent, or upon any of
the Popes fasting days for any thing; and yet the same men make no conscience
of seeking the blood of the Lords anointed, and their dread sovereign. And in
this we see the most palpable, and most gross hypocrisy of those that be of
that Church. But shall we think that our own Church is free from such men? no
assuredly: for take a view of the profession that is used among the people of
England, and it will appear that they place their whole religion for the most
part in the observation of certain ceremonies. The manner of most men is to
come to the place of assemblies, where God is worshipped, and there mumble up
the Lords prayer, the commandments, and the belief in stead of prayers,
which being done, God is well served think they: whereas in the mean season
they neglect to learn and practice such things as are taught them for their
salvation by the ministers of Gods word. At the feast of Easter, every man will
be full of devotion and charity, and come to receive the Sacraments, as though
he were the holiest man in the world; but when the time is past, all generally
turn to their old biace again: and all the year after live as they list,
making no conscience of lying, slaundering, fraud, and deceit in their
affairs among men. But we must know that there is no soundnes of religion,
but gross hypocrisy in all such men: they worship God with their lips,
but there is no power of godliness in their hearts.

The 3. point is, concerning the party to whom they make this accusation
against him; namely, not to a Jew, but to a Gentile: for having condemned him
in their Ecclesiastical court before Caiphas the high Priest, they bring him
to Pontius Pilate the deputy of Tiberius Caesar in Judea. Where we must
observe the wonderful providence of God, in that not only the Jews, but the
Gentiles also had a stroke in the arraignement of Christ, that that might be
true which the Apostle says, God shut up all under sin, that he might have
mercy upon all. Romans 11, 32.


The fourth point is, the matter of their accusation: they accuse our Savior
Christ of 3. things. I. that he seduced the people. Luke 23.2.
II. that he forbad to pay tribute to Caesar. III. that he said he was a King.
Let us well consider these accusations, especially the two last, because they
are flat contrary both to Christ's preaching, and to his practice. For when the
people would have made him a King, after he had wrought the miracle of the
five loaves and two fishes, the text says, Ioh. 6.15 Mat. 17.27.
he departed from among them unto a mountain himself alone. Secondly, when
tribute was demanded of him for Caesar, though he were the kings son, and
therefore was freed; yet says he to Peter, least we should offend the^, go
to the sea, and cast in an angle and take the first fish that comes up, and
when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece of twenty pence,
that take and give unto them for thee and me. And when he was called to be a
judge to divide the inheritance between two brethren, he refused to do it,
saying, Who made me a judge between you? Therefore in these two things, they
did most falsely accuse him. Whereby we learn, that nothing is so false and
untrue, but the slaunderer dare lay it to the charge of the innocent: the
tongues of the slaunderers are sharp swords, and venomous arrows, Psalm. 120.4.
and 5.9.
to wound their enemies: their throats are open sepulchers, the poison of aspes
is under their lips. If a man speak gracious words, his tongue is touched
with the fire of Gods spirit: but as Saint James says, the tongue of the
wicked is fire, Iam. 3.6.
yea a world of wickedness, and it is set on fire with the fire of hell:
therefore let this example be a caveat for us all, to teach us to take heed of
slandering, for the devil then speaks by us, and kindles our tongues with the
fire of hell.

The fifth point is, the manner of their accusation, which is diligently to be
marked: for they do not only charge him with a wonderful untruth, but they
beseech Pilate to put him to death, crying, Unjustly. For a blasphemer by their
law should be stoned and not crucified.
Crucify him, Crucify him: Matthew. 27.22, 23.
in so much that Pontius Pilate was afraid of them: where we may see how these
shameless Jews go beyond their compass, and the bounds of all accusers, whose
duty is to testify only what they know. Now in the matter of this their
accusation, appears their wonderful inconstancy. For a little before when
Christ came to Jerusalem riding upon an ass, showing some signs of his kingly
authority, they cut down branches from the trees, and strawed them in the
way, crying, Hosanna, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord: but
now they sing an other song, and in stead of Hosanna, they cry, Crucify him,
Crucify him. And the like inconstancy is to be found in the people of these
our times. They use to receive any religion that is offered unto them: for in
the days of King Edward the sixth, the people of England received the Gospel
of Christ: but shortly after in Queen Mary's time, the same people received
the wretched and abominable doctrine of the Church of Rome. And not many
years after when it pleased God to bring again the light of his glorious
Gospel by our gracious Prince, the same people turned from popery, and
embraced the true religion again. And thus with the Jews one while they cry
Hosanna to Christ, and receive his Gospel; and shortly after they cry,
Crucify him, Crucify him, by embracing idolatrous popery. Let us therefore
learn in the fear of God, by the ficklenes of the Jews, that sing two
contrary songs in so short a space, to acknowledge our inconstancy and
weakness in the matter of religion: whereby if God leave us but a little to
our selves, we shall straight way forsake Christ, his Gospel, and all.

Thus much of the accusation. Now follows Christ's examination before Pontius
Pilate: for when the Jews had thus falsely accused him, then Pontius Pilate
took him, and brought him into the common hall, and asked him this question;
Art thou a King? Now Christ being thus examined, made as Paul also
testifies, a good confession. The sum thereof stands in four heads. 1. Tim.
6.12,
The first is, that he confesses himself to be a King; Ioh. 18.36, 37.
not such an one as they accused him to be, yet a true King. Whence we may
learn diverse instructions. First, that every Christian man in the midst of his
misery and affliction, has one that is most sufficient every way to defend him
against all his enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil. For this king
can do whatsoever he will: and therefore when the legion of devils would enter
into a herd of swine, they could not without his leave. And when the Centurions
daughter was dead, Math. 8.31. Mark. 6.41. Ioh. 11.43.
he but spoke the word and she arose. And when Lazarus was dead, and had li^n
in the grave four days, he but said, Lazarus come forth, and he came forth
bound hand and foot. Yea even hell and death give place to his word, and
nothing can resist his power. And therefore he that is a true member of Christ,
needs not to fear any enemies be they never so great, or so many. And again,
as Christ is able, so is he ready and willing to save and defend all that
believe in him. For he it is that gave his life for his subjects, which no king
will do, and shed his blood for their redemption: which he would never have
done, if he had not desired their salvation. Secondly, when as Christ is a
mighty king, which can do whatsoever he will, let al such among us that have
hitherto lived in ignorance, and by reason of ignorance live in their sins,
at length begin to come unto him, and do him homage, and with penitent hearts
fall down before him: otherwise if they continue in their old rebellions, let
them know whosoever they be, high or low, that he has a rod of iron in his
hand to bruise them in pieces; Psalm. 2.9. and 110.2.
their souls shall smart for it: as both Pilate, Caiphas, and the rest of the
Jews were with a full cup rewarded, for crucifying the Lord of life. And if
Christ cannot draw thee in this life from thy crooked ways, be sure at the
hour of death he will break thee in pieces like a potters vessel. This must
we learn in regard of the first point, that he said plainly, He was a King.

Now follows the second part of his confession, namely that his kingdom was
not of this world. Where he sets down what kind of king he is; he is no
earthly king, his kingdom stands not in the power of men, nor in earthly and
outward government; but his kingdom is spiritual, and his government is in
the very hearts and consciences of men. His kingdom is not outward to be
seen of men, but inward in the heart and soul* and therefore it is only
begun in this life, and is continued and accomplished in the world to come
in the kingdom of glory: where Christ shall be all in all in the hearts and
consciences of all the elect. Now then, if this be so, howsoever Satan have
heretofore reigned in us, and made our hearts as it were his palaces: yet
now let us prepare a room for Christ that he may come and dwell in us: let
him rule our hearts, wills, and affections that they may become conformable to
his will: let us resign our selves wholly to be ruled by him, that his
spiritual kingdom may be in us. This kingdom in the heart and conscience is the
pearl and hid treasure, Math. 13.46.
which when a man finds, he sels all that he has and buyeth it. Let us
therefore in the fear of God, esteem it as the most precious thing that may be,
and so live in this world, as that Christ may rule inwardly in us, by his word
and spirit. And again seeing this regiment of Christ is heavenly, and the full
manifestation of it is in the life to come: we must therefore use this world and
all things in it, as honor, wealth, ease, and liberty, 1. Cor. 7.31.
as though we used them not. As a trauailer uses his staff in his journey; as
long as it does further him, so long he will carry it with him: but when it
hinders him, then he casts it away: so must we use the things of this life,
namely as long as they are helps to further and make us fit for the kingdom
of heaven, but if they be any hinderance to this spiritual regiment of Christ,
we must renounce them and cast them away, be they never so precious to us.

The third point of Christ's confession is, concerning the means whereby he
gouernes his kingdom: I came (says he) into this world to bear witness of the
truth, that is, to preach the gospel and doctrine of salvation: and herby he
teaches that the outward administration of his kingdom, stands specially in
the preaching of the word, which is a principal ordinance of his, serving to
gather his Church from the beginning of the world to the end thereof. And for
this cause he has in all age^ set apart chosen ministers for the publishing of
the doctrine of the Gospel. And by this it is manifest that the gift of
prophecy, is the greatest gift that God bestows on his Church for the building
thereof. And therefore it ought to be most highly esteemed of, as a most
precious jewel. And for this cause also the schools of learning are to be
reverenced and maintained, and all other means used for the furthering of
them; because they are under God the fountains and welsprings of this gift of
prophecy.

The last point is, concerning the subjects of Christ's kingdom, expressed in
these words, They which are of the truth, hear my voice. In which he sets
down the true mark of his servants and subjects, that they are hearers of
that heavenly and saving word which he revealed from the bosom of his father.
It may be alleged the most wicked men upon earth, yea the devils themselves
may be hearers of the truth of Christ. Answer. There be two kind of hearers:
one which hears only the outward sound of the word with his bodily ears,
Matt. 13.9.
and he having ears to hear does not hear: the second, is he that does not
only receive the doctrine that is taught with his ears, but also has his
heart opened to feel the power of it, and to obey the same in the course of his
life. This distinction is notably set forth by David, saying, Sacrifice and
burnt offerings thou would not have: Psalm. 40.6.
but my ears have thou pierced: whereby he insinuates as it were two kinds of
ears: one that is deaf and cannot hear: and thus are the ears of al men by
nature in hearing the doctrine of salvation: the other is a new ear pierced
and bored by the hand of God, which causes a man's heart to hear the sound and
operation of the word, and the life to express the truth of it. Now the
subjects of Christ's kingdom are such, as with the outward hearing of the word,
have an inward hearing of the soul, and grace also to obey: and therefore al
those that make no conscience of obedience to the word of god preached unto
them, are no less then rebels to Christ. We may persuade our selves that we
are good subjects, because we hear the word and receive the sacraments, but if
our lives abound with sin, and if our hearts be not pierced through by the
sword of Gods spirit, whether we be high or low, rich or poor, let us be what
we will be, we are no right subjects indeed, but rebels and traitors unto
the everliving God. It may be hereafter God will give further grace; but as yet
all impenitent persons, though living in the midst of Gods Church, are not
obedient and faithful subjects: and therefore while we have time, let us labor
to perform in deed that which we do in word profess.

Thus much of the examination and confession of Christ. Now follows the
third point concerning the policies which Pilate used to save Christ: and they
are three. First, when he heard that Christ was of Galilee, he took occasion
to send him to Herod, Luke 25.7.
thinking thereby to shift his hand of him, and not to shed his blood. In
which policy, though he seem unwilling to put Christ to death, yet herein
he is a most unjust judge: for having given testimony of Christ, that he is
innocent, he ought to have acquitted him, and not have sent him to Herod for
further judgment. In Herod's dealing with Christ, we may observe these
points. The first, that he is wonderfully glad of his coming. Why so? the
text says, Luke 23.8.
because he was desirous to see him of a long season, because he had heard many
things of him, and trusted to have seen some sign done by him. Here mark
how he rejoiced, not in Christ because he was Christ, that is, his Messiah
and redeemer, but because he wrought miracles, signs, and wonders. And so it
is among us at this day: it is a rare thing to find a man that loves Christ,
because he is Christ: some love Christ for honor, some for wealth, and others
for praise: in that they get honor, wealth, and praise by confessing his
name. Again, many profess Christ, only because it is the law and custom of
their nation. But we must learn to be of this mind, to love Christ, because
he is Christ, even for himself, and not for any other sinister respect: and
we must rejoice in Christ for himself, though we never have profit nor
pleasure, neither honor or wealth by him. And if we love him for wealth or
pleasure, or for any other end but for himself alone, when these things are
taken away, then we shall utterly forsake Christ in like manner. The second
point is, that Herod desires Christ to work a miracle. He can be content to
see the works of Christ, but he can not abide to hear his word, and to bear
his yoke. Like to him are many in these days, which gladly desire to hear the
Gospel of Christ preached, only because they would hear speech of some
strange things, laying aside all care and conscience to obey that which they
hear. Yea many in England delight to read the strange histories of the bible;
and therefore can rehearse the most part of it, (and it were to be wished that
all could do it:) yet come to the practice of it, the same persons are
commonly found as bad in life and conversation, yea rather worse then others.
Let us therefore labor that with our knowledge we may join obedience, and
practice with our learning; and as well to be affected with the word of Christ,
as with his works. The third point is, that Herod derides Christ, and sends him
away, clothed in a white garment. Luke 13.32.
This is that Herod whom Christ called a fox; who also when he heard John
Baptist preach, did many things, and heard him gladly. How then comes Herod to
this outrage of wickedness, thus to abuse Christ? Answer. We must know, that
although Herod at the first heard John preach, yet withal he followed his
own affections, and sought how to fulfill the lusts of his flesh. For when
John told him that it was not lawful for him to have his brother Philips wife,
he cast him in prison, and after cut off his head for it: after which offense,
he is grown to this height of impiety, that he now despises Christ, and
cannot abide to hear him. Where we learn, that as we are willing to hear
Gods word preached, so withal we must take heed that we practice no manner of
sin; but make conscience of every thing that may displease God. Thou may, I
grant, be one that fears and favors John Baptist for a time, wallowing in
thy old sins* but after a while, yiedling to the swinge of thy corrupt heart,
thou will never hear John, nor Christ himself, but hate and despise them
both. This is the cause why some which have been professors of religion
heretofore, and have had great measure of knowledge, are now become very loose
persons, and can not abide to hear the word preached unto them; the reason
is, because they could not abide to leave their sins. Therefore that we may
begin in the spirit and not end in the flesh, let every one that calls on the
name of the Lord depart from iniquity.

Now follows the second policy of Pilate. For when he saw the first would not
prevail, then he took a new course: for he took Jesus into the common hall
and scourged him, and the soldiers platted a crown of thorns and pur it on
his head, and they put on him a purple garment, Ioh. 19.1.
and said, Hail King of the Jews, and smote him with their rods. And thus
he brought him forth before the Jews, persuading himself, that when they
saw him so abased, and so ignominiously abused, they would be content
therevvith, and exact no greater punishment at his hands: thinking thus to
have pacified the rage of the Jews, and so to have delivered Christ from
death, by inflicting upon him some lesser punishment. This policy is as it
were a looking glass, in which we may behold of what nature and condition
all plotts and policies of me^ are, which are devised and practiced without
the direction of Gods word. In it we may observe 2. things: the first is, the
ground thereof; which is a most silly, simple, or rather sensles argument. For
he reasons thus: I find no fault in this man, Luke 23.14, 15, 16.
therefore I will chastise him and let him go. A man would hardly have
thought, that one having but his common sense, would not have made such a
reason, much less a great judge sitting in the room of God. But in him we
may behold and see the ground of all humane policy which is beside the word
of God, namely the foolish and blind reason of men. The 2. thing to be
considered is, the proceeding and issue of this policy. Pilat must either
whip Christ being innocent; or put him to death: which are both sins and
great offenses. Now he makes choice of the lesser, which is to whippe him,
and is persuaded that he ought to do so: whereas of two sins or evils, a man
ought to do neither. And in doing this, Pilate begins to make a breach in his
conscience; and that is the fruit that all politics reap of their devises,
which proceed by the light of their own reason, without the word of God. By
this example, we are admonished of two things: first, that before we enterprise
any business, we must rectify our judgments by Gods word. David was a most
wise King, and no doubt, had withal a grave and wise council, but yet he
preferred the word of God before all, saying, Thy testimonies are my
counselors. Psalm. 119.24.
Secondly, in our proceedings we must keep an upright, pure, and unblameable
conscience, as Paul exhorts Timothy to have the mystery of faith in a pure
conscience; giving us thereby to understand, ^. Tim. 3.9.
that a good conscience is as it were a chest or cupboard, in which we are to
keep and lock up our religion, and all other graces of God, as the most
precious jewels that can be: and that if we suffer this chest to be broken up,
all our riches and jewels are gone.

But let us yet view the dealing of Pilate more particularly: he whippes
Christ, puts on him a purple garment, puts a reed in his hand, sets a crown
of thorns upon his head, and causes the soldiers to mock him, and spit in
his face. Now in this that Christ standing in our room, was thus shamefully
abused, we must consider what was due unto every one of us for our sins,
namely shame and reproach in this life, and in the life to come endless
confusion. And we see the confession of Christ to be true which he made to
Pilate, that his kingdom was not of this world; for if it had been so, they
would have put a crown of gold upon his head, and not a crown of thorns,
nothing at all beseeming an earthly king: and in stead of a reed they would
have put a scepter into his hand: and in stead of buffetting and spitting on
him, they would have adored him, and fallen down before him. Again, whereas
Christ our head in this world, ware no other crown but one made of thorns,
it serves to teach all those that are the members of Christ, that they must
not look for a crown of glory in this life; because that is reserved for the
life to come. And if we would then wear the crown of glory with Christ* we
must here in this life wear a crown of thorns, as he did: for as Paul says,
If we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him: 1. Tim. 2.12.
and that which was fully verified in Christ the head, must in some part be
verified in every true member of Christ.

Pilats third policy was this: when he saw that neither of the two former
would prevail, he comes forth unto the Jews, and makes an oration to this
effect; that now was the feast of the Passover, and that they had a custom
that the Governor should then deliver unto the people a prisoner whom they
would: therefore he asked them whether he should let loose to them Barrabas, or
Jesus which is called Christ: this Barrabas was a notable malefactor, that
with insurrection had committed murder. And thus Pilate cunningly matcheth
Christ with Barrabas, thinking that the Jews would rather choose him then
Barrabas, being a notorious malefactor, not worthy to live on the face of
the earth: and by this means he thought to have delivered Christ from death,
though otherwise he accounted him also as a malefactor. The ground of this
policy (as we see) is an old custom of the Jews, that a prisoner should be
let loose at Easter. And it may be the end of this custom was, to increase
the solemnity of the feast. But whatsoever in truth the end was, the fact it
self was but a profanation of the time, and an abomination before the Lord:
for Solomon says, He that justifies the wicked, Prove. 17.15.
and condemns the just, even they both are abomination before the Lord. The
like practice takes place with many in these days, who think the Lo^ds day
never well spent, unless they may add solemnity thereunto, by revel and
riot, by frequenting of taverns and alehouses. And furthermore, where Pilate
matcheth Christ being innocent with Barrabas, and the people prefer him
before Christ, having liberty to choose either; it shows that God in his
providence had appointed that Christ should not stand in his own room before
Pilate, but in our room and stead, as a Mediator between God and us. And in
this fact of the people we see how sin by degrees takes hold of men and that
speedily. Who would have thought that these Jews, which a little before cried
Hosanna, and spread their garments before Christ in the way, would ever have
preferred a murderer before him? But it was the doing of the high priests, the
Scribes, and Phases, who did animate and stir them up to this wickedness: and
hereupon when they had yielded, first to attach him, and then to accuse him,
they are carried to an higher degree of impiety, namely to seek his blood: and
least he should escape their hands, they plunge themselves deeper yet
preferring a wretched murderer, even seditious Barabbas before him. This must
teach every one of us to take heed of the beginnings even of the least sins;
for the devil is cunning, he will not plunge a man into the greatest sins at
the first: but his manner is, by little and little to creep into the heart:
and having once possession thereof, by steps to bring men to the height of
sin, and that with speed. We must therefore in the fear of God prevent sin
betimes, and at the first motion cut off all occasions hereof: that which Paul
says of heresy, comparing it to a canker or gangreene, 2. Tim. 2.17.
may be said of all sin. The nature of the gangren is to run from one
joint to another, from the toe to the foot, from the foot to the leg, from
the leg to the thigh, till it have wasted and destroyed the life of the
body. So give any sin but an entrance, and it will soon ouerspread the
whole man: and if the devil may be suffered but to put one talent into thy
heart, he will presently wind himself into thee, his head, his body and all.
The Psalmist says that he is blessed that takes the children of the
Babylonians and dasheth them against the stones, Psalm. 137.9.
and as truly may it be said, blessed is the man that dasheth the head of his
sins against the ground while they are young, before they get strength to over
master him.

Mat. 27.23, 24. Luke 23.14, 22. Mar. 15.14.
Thus have we seen the policies of Pilate: Now follows the absolution of
Christ: for when Pilate had used many means to deliver him, and none would
prevail, then he absolues him, by giving diverse testimonies of his
innocence: for he came forth three times, and bare witness thereof: Ioh.
18.38. and 19.4.
and last of all he testified the same by washing of his hands, which rite
signifies properly the defiling of the hands before, but as yet Pilate had
not defiled his hands, and therefore he used it as a token, to show, that
Christ was innocent, and that he would not defile his own hands with
innocent blood. There were three causes that moved Pilate to absolve Christ.
Mat. 27.24.
First he saw that he was a just man, as Saint Matthew notes, and that the
high priests and people had delivered him up of envy, as S. Mark says. By
this it is plain, Mar. 15.10.
that a very Pagan or infidel may in some things go beyond such as be in Gods
Church, having better conscience, and dealing more justly then they. Pontius
Pilate was a heathen man and a Gentile, the Jews were the Church and people
of the living God: yet he sees plainly that Christ was a just man, and
thereupon absolues him: whereas the Jews which should be men of conscience and
religion, seek his death. And thus a very Pagan may otherwhiles see more into
a matter the^ those that be reputed of the church. And this must admonish all
such as profess the gospel to look unto their proceedings, that they do all
things with upright conscience: for if we deal uniustly in our proceedings,
we may have neighbors, men of no religion, that will look through us, and
see the gross hypocrisy of our profession, that would be loath to do those
things which we do. The second cause that moved Pilate to absolve Christ,
was his wives dream: for when he was set down upon the judgment seat, she
sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man: Mat. 27.16.
for I have suffered many things in a dream by reason of him. Dreams are of
three sorts: natural, rising from the constitution of the body: diabolical,
such as come by the suggestion of the devil: divine, which are from God. Some
have thought that this dream was of the devil* as though he had labored
thereby to hinder the death of Christ, and consequently our salvation: but I
rather think that it was occasioned by the things which she had heard
before of Christ, or that it was immediately from God, as the dreams of Pharao
and Nabuchodonoser, and served for a further manifestation of Christ's
innocence. Here it may be asked, whether we may regard our dreams now, as
Pilates wife did or no? Answer, We have the books of the old and new
Testament to be our direction, Isai. 8.20.
as Esai says: to the law, and to the testimony, they must be our rule and
guide. In these days we must not look to be taught by visions and dreams:
yet shall it not be amiss to observe this caveat concerning dreams, that by
them we may guess at the constitution of our bodies, and often times at the
sins whereunto we are inclined. The last motive which caused Pilate to
absolve Christ was a speech of the Jews: for they said, that Christ ought to
die by their law, because he said he was the son of God. And the text says,
Ioh. 19.7, 8.
when Pilate heard that, he was afraid. Mark how a poor Painym that knew
not Gods word, at the hearing of the name of the son of God is stricken with
fear. No doubt he shall rise in judgment against many among us that without
all fear rend the name of God in pieces by swearing, blaspheming, cursed
speaking. But let all those that fear the Lord learn to tremble and be
afraid at his blessed name.

Thus much for the causes that moved Pilate to absolve Christ: as also for the
second part of Christ's arraignement, namely, his accusation. Now follows the
third part, which is his condemnation: and that is twofolde. The first by the
Ecclesiastical assembly and council of the Jews at Jerusalem, in the high
priests hall before Caiphas. The tenor of his condemnation was this. Mat.
26.66.
He has blasphemed, what have we any more need of witnesses, he is worthy to
die? The cause why they say not he shall die, but, he is worthy to die, is
this. The Jews had two jurisdictions, the one Ecclesiastical, Deuteronomy. 17.7, 8,
9.
the other civil, both prescribed and distinctly executed by the commandment
of God, till the time of the Machabees, in which both jointly together came
into the hands of the priests: but afterward about the days of Herod the
great, the Roman Emperor took away both jurisdictions from the Jews and
made their kingdom a province, so as they could do no more but apprehend,
accuse, and imprison: as does appear by the example of Saul, who gate letters
from the high priest to Damascus, Act. 9.2.
that if he found any either man or woman that believed in Christ, he might
bring them bound to Jerusalem, and imprison them: but kill or condemn they
could not.

By the fact of this counsel we learn sundry points: first, that general
counsels and the Pope himself sitting iudicially in his consistory may err.
If there were any visible Church of God at that day upon the face of the whole
world, it was no doubt the Church of the Jews. For Caiphas the high priest was
a figure of Christ, the Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses chair, and
Jerusalem is called by Christ the holy city, Mat. 4.5. and 27.53. Yet for all
this that which was foretold is now verified, namely, that the chief corner
stone should be rejected of master builders. For by the general consent of the
council at Jerusalem, Christ the head of the Catholic Church and the redeemer
of mankind is accused of blasphemy, and condemned as worthy of death. Wherefore
it is a mere dotage of man's brain to avouch that the Pope cannot possibly
err in giving a definitive sentence in matters either of faith or manners.
Neither can the Church of Rome plead privilege, for Jerusalem had as many
prerogatives as any people in the world could have. Romans 9.3.


Again, by this we see there is no reason why we should ascribe to any man
or to oecumenicall counsels themselves absolute and sovereign power to
determine and give judgment in matters of religion, considering they are in
danger to be overtaken with notable slippes and errors. And therefore the
sovereignty of judgment is peculiar to the son of God who is the only
doctor and lawgiver of the Church: Mat. 23.10.
and he puts the same in execution in and by the written word. As for the
speech of the Papists calling the scriptures a dumb Judge, it is little to be
regarded: For they are, as it were, the letter of the living sent from heaven
to his Church upon earth: and therefore the scriptures speak as plainly and as
sufficiently unto us of all matters of faith, as a man can speak unto his
friend by letter, so be it, we have the gift of discerning. Yet do we^ not
bar the Church of God from all judgment. For the ministerial power of
giving judgment both publicly and privately is granted (...) of God: and
that is to determine and give sentence of matters in question according to the
word as the lawyer gives judgment, not according as he will, but according to
the tenor of the law.

Thirdly we learn, that personal succession is no unfallible mark of the
true faith, and of true pastors, unless withal be joined succession in the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. For Caiphas held his office by
succession from Aaron: and yet in public assembly condemned the Messiah spoken
of by Moses and the Prophets. Therefore the succession of the bishops of Rome
from Peter is of no moment unless they can prove that their religion is the
religion of Peter which they can never do.

And thus much for Christ's first condemnation. The second was by Pontius
Pilate, who sat in an other court as a civil judge, and the t^no^^ of his
sentence was, that the Jews should take him and crucify him. Luke 23.24.
Here we must consider the reasons that moved Pilate to determine thus: the
first was, the impatience of the Jews: he for his part was loath to defile his
hands with innocent blood, but the Jews cried, Mat. 27.25.
his blood be upon us, and on our children: which according to their wish came
upon them within few years after, and so remains still unto this day. By
which we are taught to take heed of imprecations against our selves, our
children, or servants, or any other creatures: for God hears men's prayers two
ways: either in his mercy, or in his wrath and anger. If thou curse thy self,
or any other, except thou turn unto the Lord by speedy repentance, he may
hear thy prayer in his wrath, and verify thy curse upon thee to thy utter
confusion. The second reason that moved Pilate to condemn Christ was, because
he feared men more then God: for being deputy under Tyberius Caesar over the
province of Judea, Ioh. 19.12, 13.
for fear of loosing his office, and of displeasing the Jews, he condemned
Christ after he had absolved him: whereby we see, that it is a grievous sin
to fear dust and ashes more then the living God. And therefore S. John says,
that the fearful shall have their portion in the burning lake: that is,
Revel. 21.8.
such as are more afraid of man then of God. And this sin in Pilate wanted
not his just toward for not long after he lost his deputy-ship, and Cesars
favor, Eusebius. hist. l. 2. c. 7.
and fled to Vienna; where living in banishment, he killed himself. And
thus God meets with them that fear the creature more then the Creator. That
we may therefore avoid the heavy hand of God, let us learn to fear God above
all: else we shall dishonor God, and shame the religion which we profess.

The proper end of Christ's condemnation set down though not in Pilats will,
yet in Gods eternal counsel was, that he might be the cause of absolutio^ at
the bar of Gods justice unto all those whosoever they are which shall come to
life eternal for we must still remember, that when Christ was condemned by
mortal Judges, he stood in our place, and in him were all our sins condemned
before God. Therefore to conclude this point; if this were the end in the
counsel of God, to have his own son condemned by Pontius Pilate a mortal
judge, that we might not be condemned but absolved before Gods judgment seat:
let us all labor to have this absolution sealed up in our hearts by the
testimony of Gods spirit. For one day we must come to the bar of Gods
judgment: and if we have not an absolution by Christ's condemnation at Pilates
earthly bar, let us look for nothing else but the fearful sentence of
condemnation at the celestial bar of Gods justice, to be uttered at the day of
the last judgment. If a man should commit such an heinous offense, as that he
could no other way escape death but by the princes pardon, he neither would nor
could be at rest, till by one means or other he had obtained the same, and
had gotten it written and sealed: which done, he would carry it home, lock
it up safe and sound, and many times look upon it with great joy and gladness.
Well, this is the case of every one of us: by nature we are rebels and
traitors against God, and have by our sins deserved ten thousand deaths. Now
our only stay and refuge is, that Christ the son of God was condemned for
us: and therefore in Christ we must sue for pardon at Gods hands, and never rest
till we have the assurance thereof sealed up in our hearts and consciences:
always remembering, that ever after we lead a new life* and never commit the
like sins against God any more. It were a blessed thing if this would enter
into our hearts: but alas, we are as dead in our sins as a dead carcass is
in the grave. The ministers of God may teach this often unto us, and we may
also hear the same: but Satan does so possess men's hearts, that they seldom
or never begin to believe or receive it till it be too late. Every one can
say, God is merciful, but that is not enough: for Christ being most righteous
was condemned, that thou being a wretched sinner might be saved: and
therefore thou must labor for thy self, to have some testimony of thine
absolution by Christ's condemnation, sealed up in thine own conscience, that
thou may more assuredly say, God is and will be merciful unto thee.

Having spoken of the whole arraignement of Christ, and of his passion in
general. Now let us proceed to the parts of the passion, which are three:
Christ's Execution, his Burial, and his Descending into hell: This being
withal remembered, that these three parts, are likewise three degrees of
Christ's humiliation.

Christ's execution is that part of his passion, which he bare upon the
cross, expressed in the words of the Creed, he was crucified, and died. In
handling of it we must observe five things. I. the person that suffered. II.
the place where he suffered. III. the time when he suffered. IIII. the manner
how he suffered. V. the excellency of his passion. For the first, the person
that suffered was Christ the just, as Peter says, Christ also has once
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust: and again, Christ Jesus the just
(says S. John) is the reconciliation for our sins. 1. Pet. 3.18. 1. Ioh. 2.1.
And in his execution, we shall have manifest declarations of his
righteousness and justice, consisting in two most worthy points. First, when
he was upon the cross, and the soldiers were nailing his hands and feet
thereunto, and racking his body most cruelly, he prayed, Father forgive them
they know not what they do. Luke 23.34.
These soldiers were by all likelihood the very same that apprehended him,
and brought him before Caiphas, and from thence to Pontius Pilate, and there
platted a crown of thorns and set it on his head, and buffetted him, and
spitefully entreated him as we have heard: and yet Christ speaks no word of
revenge unto them, but with all patience in the extremity of their malice and
injury, he prays his father to forgive them. Hence we are taught that when
injuries are done unto us, we ought to abstain from all affection of revenge,
and not so much as manifest the same either in word or deed. It is indeed a
hard lesson to learn and practice: but we must endeavor to do it: and not
only so, but to be ready for evil to do good: yea, even at that instant
when other men are doing us wrong: even then (I say) we must be ready, if it
be possible to do them good. When as Christ's enemies were doing unto him all the treachery they would, even then he performs the work of a Mediator, and
prays for them unto his father, and seeks their salvation. Again, whereas
Christ prays thus, Father forgive them, we gather, that the most principal
thing of all that man ought to seek after in this life, is the forgiveness of
sins. Some think that happiness consists in honor, some in wealth, some
in pleasure, some in this, some in that: but indeed the thing which we should
most labor for, is reconciliation with God in Christ, that we may have the
free remission of all our sins. Yea this is blessedness it self as David
says, Blessed is he whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.
Psalm. 32.1.
Here then behold the madness of most men in this world, that either seek for
this blessing in the last place or not at all.

The second testimony of Christ's righteousness given in the midst of his
passion was, that he beheld his mother standing by, John. 19.
and commended her to the custody of John his disciple: whereby he gave an
example of most holy obedience unto the fifth commandment, which prescribes
honor to father and mother. And this his fact shows, that the observing of
this commandment stands not in outward show and reverence only; but in a
godly recompense, in procuring unto parents all the good we can, both
concerning this and a better life. It often falls out that children be as it
were Cains to father and mother: some rail on them, some fight with them;
others see them pine away and sterue, and not relieve them. But all dutiful
children must here learn, that as their parents have done many duties unto
them; and have brought them up: so they again must in all reverence perform
obedience unto them both in word and deed: and when occasion is offered
relieve them, yea in all that they can, do good unto them. Again in this we
may see what a wretched state is that which the Church of Rome calls the
state of perfection; namely to live a part from the company of men, in fasting
and praying all the days of a man's life: for hereby the bond of nature is
broken, and a man can not do the duty unto his parents which Gods law
requires, and Christ here himself practices, nor the duties of a member of
Christ which are to be done to the whole Church, and to the rest of the members
thereof.

The place where Christ suffered is called Calvary or Golgotha, that is, the
place of dead men's skulls, without the walls of Jerusalem. Concerning the
reason of this name, men be of diverse opinions. Some say it was so called,
because Adam was buried there, and that his skull being there found, gave the
name to the place. Jewish Rabbines. Cypr. lib. de resurrect. Aug. Sermon. 71. de
temp. Hieron. epist. Paulae ad Marcellam.
And this is the very opinion of some ancient divines, that Christ was there
crucified where Ada^ was buried: but because it has no certain ground, I leave
it as uncerten. Others think it was called Calvary, because the Jews were
wont to carry out the bones of dead men, and there to heap them together, as in
times past the manner was in the vauts of sundry Churches in this land. And
some others think it was called Golgotha or Calvary, because thieves and
murderers, and malefactors were there executed, stoned, burned: whereby it
came to pass that many skulles and bones of dead men were found there.

The time when Christ was executed, was at the Jews passover, when not only
the Jews, but also many Proselytes of many countries and nations were
assembled: and therefore this execution was not in a private corner, but openly
in the view of the world. For as he was a Savior not to the Jews only but
also to the Gentiles: so it was very requisite that his death should be
public before all men both Jews and Gentiles. As for the hour of the day in
which he suffered, there is some difficulty in the Evangelists: for S. John
says, that he was condemned about the sixth hour of the day: and S. Mark
says, Ioh. 19.14. Mar. 15.23.
he was crucified the third hour. Hence it may be demanded, how both these
can stand together. Answer. Howsoever the Jews natural day began at evening,
yet the artificial day began at sunne-rising and ended at sunne-setting: and
it was divided two ways. First, into twelve parts called twelve hours,
whether the days were longer or shorter. Secondly into four parts or
quarters, and every part contained three hours: as from the first hour to the
third was one part called morning; from the third hour to the sixth, an other
part called the sixth hour; from the sixth hour to the ninth, the third part
called the ninth hour; and from the ninth hour to the twelfth, the fourth
part called evening. Now when S. John says, Christ was condemned about the
sixth hour, it must be understood of the second quarter of the day, called the
sixth hour: and whereas S. Mark says he was crucified the third hour of the
day, he speaks of the lesser hours, twelve whereof made the whole day: and
thus they both agree, for the third hour of the day and the beginning of the
2. quarter follow each other immediately. Again it may be answered, that Christ
was condemned at six of the clock after the Roman account, A. Gell. noct. alt.
lib. 3. c. 2.
which begins the day at midnight; and crucified at 3. (which is 9. of the
clock in the morning with us) aftet the Jews account who begin their
artificial day, as I said, at the sunne-rising.

The fourth and last point is the order and whole proceeding of Christ's
execution: which may be reduced to 4. heads: the first, his going to
execution, the 2. his crucifying, the 3. his death, the 4. the consequents of
his death. Again in his going to execution we may consider many points.

The first that he is brought out of Jerusalem as a malefactor. For the old
and ancient custom of the Jews was to put those whom they judged to be
notorious offenders to death without their tents when they wandered in the
wilderness, Iosu. 7.24. Levi. 24.12. Acts. 7.58.
and without the walls of Jerusalem, lest they should any way be defiled with
their blood. And this fell out by the special providence of God, that that
might be fulfilled in Christ which was prefigured in the sacrifices of the old
testament, when the bodies of beasts were not eaten of the priests, Lev. 6.36.
but burnt without the camp: therefore (says the H. ghost) even Jesus that he
might sanctify the people with his own blood, Heb. 13.12.
suffered without the gates.

Hence may all Christians learn to know their own estate and condition:
first, in this world they must look to be accounted the offscouring of the
earth, and the filth of the world, 1. Cor. 4.13.
as the Apostle says, and we must all prepare our selves to bear this
estate. They that will be Gods children must not look to be better accepted
of in the world then Christ was. Secondly by this every one of us must learn
to be content to use this world, as strangers and pilgrims; being every day
and hour ready to leave the same: for if Christ the son of God himself
was brought out of Jerusalem, as not being worthy to have his abode there,
then must every Christian man look much more for the like extremity. And
therefore it is not good for us to have our hearts tied to the world, and to
seek alvvaies to be approved of the same, for that argues that we are not
like to Christ, but we must rather do as poor pilgrims in strange cuntries,
and that is only to look for safe conduct through the miseries in this world,
having in the mean season our hearts, wills, and affections set on the
kingdom which is in heaven. The second thing is, that Christ was made to
bear his own cross: for so it seems the manner of the Romans was to deal
with malefactors. And this must put us in mind of that notable lesson which
Chtist himself taught his disciples: namely, that if any man will be his
disciple, he must deny himself, take up his own cross daily and follow
him: where, by the cross we must understand, that portion of affliction, Luke
9.23.
which God has allotted to every one of his children: for there is no child of
God to whom he has not measured out as it were some bitter cup of misery in
this life. And therefore Paul says, Now rejoice I in my suffering for you,
Colos. 1.24.
and fulfill the rest of the sufferings of Christ in my flesh. By Christ's
sufferings he means not the passion of Christ, but the sufferings of the
body of Christ, that is, the Church whereof Christ is the head. Moreover we
must suffer as he did, and that daily: because as one day follows another, so
one cross comes in the neck of another. And whereas Christ bears the cross
that was laid on him by the hands of the soldiers, it must teach us not to
pull crosses upon ou^ selves, but wait till God lay them on us, and then we
must willingly bend our shoulders, stoop down, and take them up; whether they
be in body or in soul, and that every day if it be Gods will so long as we
live: and by this shall we most notably resemble our Savior Christ.

Thirdly, when Christ had carried his cross so long till he could carry it
no longer, by reason of the faintness of his body, which came by buffets,
whippings, and manifold other injuries, then the soldiers meeting with one
Simon of Cyrene a stranger, made him to bear the cross: Luke 23.26.
where we are put in mind, that if we faint in the way and be wearied with the
burden of our afflictions, God will give good issue, and send as it were some
Simon of Cyrene to help us, and to be our comforter. Mat. 11.28.


The fourth points is, that when Christ was carrying his own cross, and was
now passing on toward Golgotha, certain women met him, and pitying his
case wept for him: but Christ answered them and said, Daughters of Jerusalem,
weep not for me, but for your selves, and your children, etc. Luke 23.27.
By this we are first of all taught to pity the state of those that be in
affliction and misery, especially those that be the children of God: as the
Apostle exhorts us, saying, Remember them that are in bonds, Hebr. 13.3.
as though you were bound with them: and them that are in affliction, as
though you were afflicted with them. In this land by Gods especial blessing
we have enjoyed the gospel of Christ with peace a long time, whereas other
cuntries and Churches are in great distress: some wallow in palpable ignorance
and superstition: others have liberty to enjoy the gospel and want teachers:
and some have both the word and teachers and yet want peace, and are in
continual persecution. Now when we that have the Gospel with peace do hear
of these miseries in our neighbor Churches, we ought to be moved with
compassion toward them, as though we our selves were in the same afflictions.
Secondly, whereas Christ says, Weep not for me, but for your selves, he does
teach us to take occasion by other men's miseries to bewail our own estate: to
turn our worldly griefs into godly sorrow for our sins: whereby we do
rather weep for our offenses, then for our friends, although even that may
also be done in a godly manner. When a man by bleeding at the nose is brought
into danger of his life, the Physician lets him blood in an other place, as in
the arm, and turns the course of the blood an other way to save his life: and
so must we turn our worldly sorows, for loss of goods or friends, to a godly
sorrow for our offenses against God: for as S. Paul says, Godly sorrow causes
repentance unto salvation, 2. Cor. 7.10.
not to be repented of: but worldly sorrow causes death.

The fifth point is, that when Christ was brought to the place of execution,
they gave him vinegar to drink mingled with mirrhe and gall: Mar. 15.23.
some say it was to intoxicate his brain, and to take away his senses and
memory: which if it were true, we may here behold in these Jews a most wicked
part, that at the point of death when they were to take away his life, they had
no care of his soul. For this is a duty to be observed of all magistrates,
that when they are to execute malefactors, they must have an especial care of
the salvation of their souls. But some think rather that it was to shorten
and end his torments quickly. Some of us may peradventure think hardly of the
Jews, for giving this bitter potio^ to Christ at the time of his death: but
the same thing does every sinner that repe^teth not. For whenever we sin, we
do as much as te^per a cup of gal, or the poiso^ of aspes, and as it were give
it to god to drink: for so God him self co^pareth the sin of the wicked Jews
to poison, saying, Their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the vines of
Gomorra, their grapes are grapes of gal, their clusters be bitter, Deu. 32.22,
23.
their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel gall of aspes. And for
this cause we ought to think as hardly of our selves as of the Jews, because
so often as we commit any offense against God we do as much as mingle rank
poison, and bring it to Christ to drink. Now when this cup was given him he
tasted of it, but drank not, because he was willing to suffer all things that
his father had appointed him to suffer on the cross, without any shortening or
lessening of his pain.

Thus we see in what manner Christ was brought forth to the place of
execution: Now follows his crucifying. Christ in the providence of god was to
be crucified for two causes: one, that the figures of the old testament might
be accomplished and verified. For the heave offering lifted up and shaked from
the right hand to the left, and the brazen serpent erected upon a pole in the
wilderness, prefigured the exalting of Christ upon the cross. The second, that
we might in conscience be resolved, Gal. 3.13
that Christ became under the law and suffered the curse thereof for us, and
bare in his own body and soul the extremity of the wrath of God for our
offenses. And though other kinds of punishments were notes of the curse of God,
as stoning and such like; yet was the death of the cross in special manner
above the rest accursed, not by the nature of the punishment, not by the
opinions of men, not by the civil laws of cuntries and kingdoms, Deu. 21.23.
but by the virtue of a particular commandment of God, foreseeing what manner
of death Christ our redeemer should die. And hereupon among the Jews in all
ages this kind of punishment has been branded with special ignominy, as Paul
signifies when he says, He abased him self to the death, Philip. 2.8.
even to the death of the cross: and it has been allotted as a most grievous
punishment to most notorious malefactors. Number. 25 4. 2. Sam. 2^.6.
If it be said that the repentant thief upon the cross died the same death
with Christ and yet was not accursed, the answer is, that in regard of his
offenses he deserved the curse and was actually accursed, and the sign of this
was the death which he suffered, and that in his own confession: but because
he repented, his sins were pardoned, and the curse removed. It may further
be said, that crucifying was not known in Moses days, and therefore not
accursed by any special commandment of God in Deuteronomy. Ans. Moses indeed
speaks nothing in particular of crucifying* yet nevertheless he does include
the same under the general. For if every one which hangs upon a tree be
accursed, then he also which is crucified; for crucifying is a particular
kind of hanging on the tree. Lastly it may be alleged, that Christ in his
death could not be accursed by the law of Moses, because he was no
malefactor. Ans. Though in regard of himself he was no sinner, yet as he was
our surety he became sin for us, and consequently the curse of the law for
us, in that the curse every way due unto us by imputation and application was
made his.

Furthermore Christ was crucified not after the manner of the Jews, who used to
hang malefactors upon a tree binding them thereto with cords, and that when
they were dead; but after the usual manner of the Romans: his body being
partly nailed to the cross, Psalm. 22.17.
and partly in the nailing extremely racked; otherwise I see not but that a man
might remain many days together alive upon the cross. And here we have
occasion to remember that the Papists who are so devout and zealous toward
crucifixes are far deceived in the making of the^. Iren. lib. 2. cap. 42. Aug.
lib. 50. Hom. 3.
For first of all the cross was made of 3. pieces of wood, one fastened upright
in the ground to which the body and back leaned, the second fastened toward
the top of the first, overthwart to which the hands were nailed: the third
fastened toward the bottom of the first, on which the feet were set and
nailed: whereas contrariwise popish caruers and painters fasten both the feet
of Christ to the first: secondly the feet of Christ were nailed asunder with
two distinct nails, Author libri de passione inter opera Cypriani.
and not nailed one upon another with one nail alone as Papists imagine, and
that to the very body of the cross, for then the soldiers could not have
broken both the legs of the thieves, but only the outmost.

Let us now come to the use which may be made of the crucifying of Christ.
First of all here we learn with bitterness to bewail our sins: for Christ
was thus cruelly nailed on the cross, and there suffered the whole wrath of
God, not for any offense that ever he committed, but being our pledge and
surety unto God, he suffered all for us: and therefore just cause have we to
mourn for all our offenses, which brought our Savior Christ to this low
estate. If a man should be so far in debt that he could not be freed, unless
the surety should be cast into prison for his sake; nay, which is more, be
cruelly put to death for his debt, it would make him at his wits end, and his
very heart to bleed. And so is the case with us by reason of our sins; we are
Gods debtors, ye bankrupts before him, yet have we gotten a good surety, even
the son of God himself, Math. ^.12.
who to recover us to our former liberty was crucified for the discharge of
our debt. And therefore good cause have we to bewail our estate every day, as
by the Prophet it is said, They shall look on him whom they have pierced,
they shall lament for him as one mourns for his own son: Zach. 12.10.
they shall be sorry for him as one is sorry for his first borne. Look as
the blood followed the nails that were stricken through the blessed hands and
feet of Christ, so should the meditation of the cross and passion of our
Redeemer be as it were nails and spears to pierce us, that our hearts might
bleed for our sins: and we are not to think more hardly of the Jews for
crucifying him then of our selves, because our sins they also crucified him.
These are the very nails which pierce his hands and feet, and these are the
spears which pierce through his side. For the loss of a little worldly pelf,
oh how are we grieved! but seeing our transgressions are the weapons whereby
the son of God was crucified, let us (I say it again and again) learn to
be grieved for them above al things, and with bleeding and melting hearts bow
and buckle under them, as under the cross.

Secondly, Christ says of himself, as Moses lift up the serpent in the
wilderness, so must the son of man be lifted up: Ioh. 3.14.
the comparison is excellent, and worthy the marking. In the wilderness of
Arabia the people of Israel rebelled against God, and thereupon he sent fiery
serpents among them, which stong many of them to death: now when they repented,
Moses was commanded to make a brazen serpent, and to set it upon a pole, that
as many as were stong might look unto it and recover: and if they could but
cast a glaunce of the eye on the brazen serpent, when they were stong eue^ to
death, they were restored to health and life. Now every man that lives is in
the same case with the Israelits; Satan has stong us at the heart, and given
us many a deadly wound, if we could feel it, and Christ who was figured by the
brazen serpent was likewise exalted on the cross, to co^ferre righteousness and
life eternal to every one of us: therefore if we will escape eternal death, we
must renounce our selves, and lift up the eyes of our faith to Christ
crucified, and pray for the pardon of our sins: and then shall our hearts and
consciences be healed of the wounds and gripes of the devil: and until such
time as we have grace to do this, we shall never be cured, but still lie wounded
with the stings of satan, and bleeding to death even at the very heart,
although we feel no pain or grief at all. But some may ask how any man can
see him crucified now after his death? Answer. Wheresoever the word of God is
preached, there Christ is crucified, as Paul says, Oh foolish Galatians, who
has bewitched you that ye should not obey the truth, Gal. 3.1.
to whom before Jesus Christ was described in your sight, and among you
crucified? meaning that he was lively preached among them. We need not to go
to wooden crosses, or to golden crucifixes to seek for him; but where the
Gospel is preached, thither must we go, and there lift up our eyes of faith
to Christ, as he is revealed unto us in the word; resting on him and his merits
with all our hearts, and with a godly sorrow confess and bewail our sins,
craving at his hands mercy and pardon for the same. For till such time as we
do this, we are grievously stong by Satan, and are every moment even at deaths
door. And if we can thus behold Christ by faith, the benefits which comes
hereby shall be great: for as Paul says, the old man, that is, the corruption
of our nature, and the body of sin that reigns in us, shall be crucified
with him: for when Christ was nailed on the cross, all our sins were laid
upon him; therefore if thou do unfeignedly believe, all thy sins are
crucified with him, and the corruption of thy nature languisheth and dies as
he languished and died upon the cross.

Thirdly, we must learn to imitate Christ: as he suffered himself to be
nailed to the cross for our sins, so answearably must every one of us learn
to crucify our flesh, and the corruption of our nature, and the wickedness of
our own heart, as Paul says, They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh
with the lusts and affections thereof. Gal. 3.24.
And this we shall do, if for our sins past we do wail and mourn with
bitterness, and prevent the sins to come into which we may fall by reason of
the corruption of our natures, by using all good means, as prayer and fasting,
and the word of God preached, and by flying all occasions of offense. We are
not to destroy our bodies or to kill our selves, but to kill and crucify sin
that lives in us, and to mortify the corruption of our nature that rebels
against the spirit. Christianity stands not in this, to hear the word of God,
and outwardly to profess the same, and in the mean season still to live in our
sins, and to pamper our own rebellious flesh; but it teaches us always to
have in readiness some spear or other to wound sin, and the sword of the
spirit to cut down corruption in us, that thereby we may show our selves to be
lively followers of Christ indeed.

Fourthly, by this we may learn that the wrath of God against sin is
wonderful great, because his own Son bearing our person, and being in our
place, was not only crucified, and racked most cruelly, but also bare the
whole wrath of God in his soul: and therefore we must leave off to make so
little account of sin as commonly we do.

Fifthly, whereas the person crucified was the son of God, it shows that the
love of God which he bare unto us in our redemption is endless; like a sea
without bank or bottom, it can not be searched into: and if we shall not
acknowledge it to be so, our condemnation will be the greater.

Sixthly, in this that Christ bare the curse of the law upon the cross; we
learn that those that be the children of God, when they suffer any judgment,
cross, or calamity, either in body or in mind or both, do not bear them
as the curses of God, but as the chastisements of a loving father. For it does
not stand with the justice of God to punish one fault twice: and therefore
when any man that puts his whole confidence in God, shall either in his own
person, in his good name, or in his goods feel the heavy hand of God, God
does not as a judge curse him, but as a father correct him. Here then is
condemned the opinion of the Church of Rome, which hold, that we by our
sufferings do in some part satisfy the justice of God: but this can not stand,
because Christ did make a perfect satisfaction to the justice of his father for
all punishment. And therefore satisfaction to God made by man for temporal
punishment is needelesse, and much derogates from Christ's passion.

In the crucifying of Christ, two things specially must be considered. The
manner of the doing of it, and his continuance alive upon the cross. Touching
the manner, the spirit of God has noted two things. The first, that Christ
was crucified between two thieves, the one upon his left hand, the other upon
his right; in which action is verified the saying of the Prophet Esaias, He was
numbered among the wicked: Esa. 53.6.
and the Jews for their parts do hereby testify that they esteemed him to be
not some common wicked man, but even the captain and ringleader of all thieves
and malefactors whatsoever. Now whereas Christ standing upon the cross in
our room and stead, is reputed the head and prince of all sinners, it serves
to teach every one of us that believe in him, to judge our selves most vile and
miserable sinners, 2. Tim. 1.1^.
and to say of our selves with Paul, that we are the chief of all sinners. The
second thing is, that Christ was crucified naked: because he was stripped of
his garments by the soldiers when he was to be crucified. The causes why he
suffered naked, are these. First Adam by his fall brought upon all mankind
death both of body and soul, and also the curses of God which befall man in
this life: among which this was one, that the nakedness of the body should be
ignominious; and hereupon when Adam had sinned, and saw himself naked, he fled
from the presence of God, and hid himself eue^ for very shame. Genesis 3.7, 8.
Christ therefore was stripped of his garments, and suffered naked, that he
might bear all the punishment and ignominy that was due unto man for sin.
Secondly, this came to pass by the goodness of God, that we might have a
remedy for our spiritual nakedness, which is, when a man has his sins lying
open before Gods eyes; and by reason thereof he himself lies open to all
Gods judgments. Hereof the Angel speaks to the Church of Laodicea, saying,
Thou say J am rich, and increased with goods, Rev. 3.17.
and have need of nothing, and know not how thou art wretched, miserable,
blind, and naked. So when the Israelites had committed idolatry by the golden
calfe, Moses tells them that they were naked, Exodus 32.25.
not only because they had spoiled themselves of their earings, but especially
because they were destitute of Gods favor, and lay open and naked unto all his
judgments for that sin. And Solomon says, Where there is no vision, there
the people are made naked, that is, Prove. 29.18.
their sins lie open before God; and by reason thereof they themselves are
subject to his wrath and indignation. Now Christ was crucified naked, that he
might take away from us this spiritual nakedness; and also give unto us meet
garments to cloth us withal in the presence of God, called white raiment,
Rev. 3.18.
as Christ says, I counsel thee to buie of me white raiment, that thou may
be clothed, and that thy filthy nakedness do not appear: and, Long white
robes dipped in the blood of the lamb, which serve to hide the nakedness of our
souls. Rev. 7.14.
What these garments are, the Apostle shows when he says, All that are
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. And, Gal. 3.27. Ephesians. 4.24.
Put on the new man which after God is created in righteoosnes and true
holiness. Our nakedness makes us more vile in the sight of God, then the most
loathsome creature that is can be unto us, until we have put on the
righteousness of Christ to cover the deformity of our souls, that we may
appear holy, and without spot before God. Thirdly, Paul says, We know if our
earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given of God,
2. Cor. 5.1, 2, 3.
etc. For therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with our house which is
from heaven, because if we be clothed we shall not be found naked. Where it is
like that the Apostle alludeth to the nakedness of Adam after his fall; and
therefore gives us another reason why Christ was crucified naked, namely that
after this life he might cloth all his members with eternal glory.

If this be so, that a part of our rejoicing stands in the glorious nakedness of
Christ crucified, there is no reason why we should be puffed up with the
vanity of our apparel. It should rather be an occasion to make us ashamed,
then to make us proud. The thief may as well brag of the brand in his hand,
or of the fetters on his heels, as we may of our attire; because it is but the
covering of our shame: and therefore should put us in mind of our sin and
shamful nakedness.

The abode of Christ upon the cross, was about the space of six hours.
August. ser. 119. de tempore.
For the death of the cross was no sudden but a Producta mors. Mar. 15.25.
lingering death. And in this space of time there fell out five notable events.
The first, that the soldiers having stripped Christ of his garments, divided
them into four parts, and cast lotts for his coat, because it was woven
without seame. And by this appears the great love of Christ to man, who was
not only content to suffer, but also to loose all that ever he had, even to
the garments on his back to redeem us; teaching us answeerably that if it
please God to call us to any trial hereafter, we must be content to part with
all for his sake, that we may win him. Again, in these soldiers we may
behold a picture of this world: when they had nailed Christ to the cross, they
will not loose so much as his garments; but they come and divide them and cast
lotts for them: as for Christ himself, the Savior and redeemer of mankind,
they regard him not. And thus fares the world; it is a hard thing to find a
man to accept of Christ, because he is Christ his redeemer: but, when gains
comes by Christ, then he is welcome. Esau that esteemed nothing of his fathers
blessing, made great account of his brothers pottage. The Gaderenes made more
account of their swine, then of Christ: for when they heard that they were
drowned, they beseech him to depart out of their coasts. Nay so bad is this
age, that such as will be taken to be the special members of Christ, do not
only with the soldiers strippe Christ of his garments, but more then this,
they bereave him of his natures and offices. The Church of Rome by their
transsubstantiation strippe him of his manhood: and by making other priests
after the same order with him, which do properly forgive sins, strippe him
of his priesthood: and of his kingly office, by joining with him a Vicar on
earth, and head of the Catholic Church, and that in his presence, whereas all
debitishippes and commissions cease in the presence of the principal. And when
they have done all this, then they further load him with a number of a
beggarly ceremonies; and so do nothing else but make a Fictitium Christum.
feighned Christ, in stead of the true and alone Messiah.

The second event was, that Christ was mocked of all sorts of men. First, they
set up the cause written why he was crucified, namely, This is the King of the
Jews: then the people that passed by reviled him, Math. 27.37, 38, 39.
wagging their heads at him, and said, Thou that destroiest the temple and
buildest it in three days, save thy self, etc. Likewise the high priests
mocking him, with the Scribes and Pharisees and the Elders, said, He saved
others, let him safe himself. The same also did one of the thieves that was
crucified with him, cast in his teeth. Behold here the wonderful strange
dealing of the Jews: they see an innocent man thus pitifully and grievously
racked, and nailed on the cross, and his blood distilling down from hands
and feet; and yet are they without all pity and compassion, and do make but
a mock and a skoffe at him. And in this we may plainly see how dangerous and
fearful their case is, who are wholly given up to the hardness of their own
hearts: and we are further admonished to take heed how we give our selves to
jesting or mocking of others. And if any think it to be a light sin, let
them consider what befell the Jews for mocking Christ. The hand of God was
upon them within a while after, and so remains to this day. Little children
wickedly brought up, when they saw Elisha the man of God coming, they mocked
him, and said, Come up thou bald pate, come up thou bald pate: 2. King. 2.23,
24.
but Elisha looked back on them, and cursed them in the name of the Lord, and
two wild bears came out of the forest and tare in pieces two and forty of
the^. Julian once a Christian Emperor, but after an Apostata, did nothing else
but mock Christ and his Gospel, and made jests of sundry places of
Scripture: but being in fight against the Persians, was wounded with a dart no
man knows how, and died scoffing and blaspheming, And such like are the
judgments of God, which befall mockers and skorners. Let us therefore in the
fear of God learn to eschew and avoid this sin.

Furthermore, if we shall indifferently consider all the mockes and skornings
of the Jews, we shall find that they cannot truly convince him of the least
sin; which serves to clear Christ, and to prove that he was a most
innocent man, in whose ways was no wickedness, and in whose mouth was found no
guile: and therefore he was most fit to stand in our room, and suffer for us
which were most vile and sinful. And here by the way a question offers it
self to be skanned. Saint Matthew says, The thieves which were crucified with
him, Mat. 27.44.
cast the same in his teeth which the Scribes and Pharisees did: Saint Luke
says, that one of the thieves mocked him. Luke 23.39.
Now it may be demanded, how both these can be true? Answer. Some reconcile
the places thus; that the Scripture speaking generally of any thing,
Synechdoche.
by a figure does attribute that to the whole, which is proper to some part
only: and so here does ascribe that to both the thieves which agrees but to
one. Others answer it thus: that at the first both of the evil doers did mock
Christ, and of that time speaks Matthew: but afterward one of them was
miraculously converted, then the other alone mocked him, and of that time spoke
S. Luke. And this I rather take to be the truth. But what was the behavior of
Christ, when he is thus laden with reproach? In wonderful patience he replies
not, but puts up all in silence. Where we may note, that when a man shall ^aile
on us wrongfully, we must not return rebuke for rebuke, nor taunt for taunt:
but we must either be silent, or else speak no more then shall serve for our
just defense. This was the practice of the Israelites, by the appointment of
Hezekias, when Rab^^akah reviled the Jews, and blasphemed the name of God; the
people held their peace, and answered him not a word: for the kings
commandment was, answer him not. So Hannah being troulbed in mind, prayed
unto the Lord, 2. King. 18.36.
and Hely marked her mouth, for she spoke in her heart, and her lips did
move only, but her voice was not heard, therefore Hely thought she had been
drunken, and said, How long will thou be drunken? put away thy dru^kennesse
from thee. 1. Sam. 1.14.
Such a speech would have moved many one to very hard words: but she said,
Nay, my lord, but I am a woman troubled in spirit, I have drunk neither wine
nor strong drink: but have powered out my soul before the Lord. This is a hard
lesson for men to learn; but we must endeavor our selves to practice it, if
we will be followers of Christ, and overcome evil with good.

The third thing that fell out in the time of Christ's crucifying, was the
pitiful complaint, in which he cried with a loud voice, Eli, Eli, lamasabact
hani, that is, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.46.
In the opening of this complaint many points must be skanned. The first is,
what was the cause that moved Christ to complain? Answer. It was not any
impatience or discontentation of mind, or any despair, or any dissembling, as
some would have it: but it was an apprehension and a feeling of the whole wrath
of God, which seized upon him both in body and soul. The second, what was the
thing whereof he does complain. Answer. That he is forsaken of God the father.
And from this point arises an other question. How Christ being God can be
forsaken of God? for the father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are all three
but one and the same God. Answer. By God we must understand God the Father the
first person. According to the common rule, when God is compared with the Son
or holy Ghost, then the father is meant by the this title God, as in this place:
not that the father is more God then the Son, for in dignity all the three
persons are equal: but they are distinguished in order only, and the father is
first. And again whereas Christ complains that he was forsaken, it must be
understood in regard of his humane nature, not of his Godhead. And Christ's
manhood was forsaken, not that his Godhead and manhood were severed, for they
were ever joined together from the first moment of the incarnation: but the
Godhead of Christ, and so the Godhead of the father did not show forth his
power in the manhood, but did as it were lie asleep for a time, that the
manhood might suffer: when a man sleeps the soul is not severed from the
body, but lies as it were dead, and exercises not it self: even so the
Godhead lay still, and did not manifest his power in the manhood, and thus the
manhood seemed to be forsaken. The third point is, the manner of this
complaint; My God, my God, says he: these words are words of faith, I say not
of justifying faith, whereof Christ stood not in need: but he had such a faith
or hope, whereby he did put his co^fide^ce in God. The last words, why have thou
forsaken me? seem at the first to be words of distrust. How then (will some
say) can these words stand with the former: for faith and distrust are flat
contraries? Answ. Christ did not utter any speech of distrust, but only make
his moan and complaint, by reason of the greatness of his punishment: and yet
still relied himself on the assistance of his father. Hence we learn, first
that religion does not stand in feeling, but in faith: which faith we must have
in Christ, though we have no feeling at all: for God oftentimes does withdraw
his grace and favor from his children, that he may teach the^ to believe in
his mercy in Christ then, when they feel nothing less then his mercy. And
faith and feeling can not always stand together; because faith is a subsisting
of things which are not seen, and the ground of things hoped for: and we must
live by faith, and not by feeling. Though feeling of Gods mercy be a good
thing, yet God does not always vouchsafe to give it unto his children: and
therefore in the extremity of afflictions and temptations, we must always
trust and rely on God by faith in Christ; as Christ himself does when he is
as it were plunged into the sea of the wrath of God. Secondly, here we may see
how God deals with his children: for Christ in the sense and feeling of his
humane nature was forsaken, yet had he sure trust and confidence in God, that
caused him to say, My God, my God. God will oftentimes cast his dear children
into huge gulfs of woe and misery, where they shall see neither bank nor
bottom, nor any way to get out: yet men in this case must not despair, but
remember still that that which befell Christ the head, does also befall his
members. Christ himself at his death did bear the wrath of God in such
measure, as that in the sense and feeling of his humane nature he was forsaken:
yet in all this he was the Son of God, and had the spirit of his father,
crying, My God, my God. And therefore though we be wonderfully afflicted either
in body or in mind, so as we have no sense or feeling of Gods mercy at all,
yet we must not despair and think that we are cast-awaies, but still labor
to trust and rely on God in Christ, and build upon this that we are his
children, though we feel nothing but his wrath upon us, against mercy
cleaving to his mercy. This was David's practice: In the day of trouble (says
he) I sought the Lord: my sore ran and ceased not in the night: my soul
refused comfort. Psalm. 77.2, 3.
I did think upon God and was troubled: my soul was full of anguish: and so
continues, saying, Will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he show no
more favor? has God forgotten to be merciful? verse. 10, 11, 12, etc.
but in the end he recouereth himself out of this gulf of temptation,
saying, Yet I remember the years of the right hand of the most high: I
remember the works of the Lord, certainly I remember the wonders of old.
Wherefore this practice of Christ in his passion, must then be remembered of us
all, when God shall humble us either in body or soul or both.

The fourth thing which fell out when Christ was on the cross was this: after
Christ knew that all things were performed, and that the Scriptures were
fulfilled, he said, I thirst; and then there standing a vessel full of
vinegar, Ioh. 19.28.
one ran and filled a sponge therewith, and put it about an hyssope stalk,
and put it to his mouth: which when he had received, he said, It is finished.
The points here to be considered, are four. The first, that Christ thirsts.
And we must know that this thirst was a part of his passion; and indeed it was
no small pain, as we may see by this: when Sisera was overcome by Israel, Iud.
4.19.
and had fled from his enemies to Iaels tent, he called for a little water to
drink, being more troubled with thirst, then with the fear of death at the
hand of his enemies. And indeed thirst was as grievous to men in the East
country, as any torment else. And hereupon Sampson was more grieved with
thirst, then with fear of many thousand Philistims. Iud. 15.18.


Again, whereas Christ complains that he thirsts* it was not for his own
sake, but for our of^ences: and therefore answearably we must thirst after
Christ and his benefits, as the dry and thirsty land where no water is, does
after rain: Psalm. 143.6. and 42.1.
and as the heart brayeth after the rivers of water, so must we say with David,
My soul pants after thee, O Lord, and the benefits of thy death.

The second, that a sponge full of vinegar tied upon an hyssope stalk, was
reached to Christ upon the cross. Now it may be demanded, how this could be,
considering the stalk of the hyssope is not past a foot long. Answer. As the
tree of mustard seed with the Jews is far greater and taller then with us,
in so much that the birds of heaven build their nests in it: so it may be that
hyssope grows much longer in those countries then with us. Or, as I take it
rather, Mat. 15.36.
the hyssope stalk was put upon a reed, and by that means the sponge was put
up to the mouth of Christ.

The third point is, that Christ drinks the vinegar offered: but when? Not
before all things were finished that were to be done on the cross. And by this
he shows his exceeding care for our salvation. He laid aside all things that
would turn to his own ease, that he might fully work our redemption, and
fulfill the will of his father who sent him into the world for that end. The
like care must every one of us have to walk dutifully, and as it were, to go
with thorough-stitch in our particular callings* that God may be glorified by
us. When Abraham's servant came to Bethuel to get a wife for Isaac, me^t was set
before him, but he said, I will not eat before I have said my message: so
likewise we must first see Gods glory procured in our affairs, and then in
the second place, Genesis 24.3^*
if commodity or praise redound to us, we must afterward take it.

The last point is, that when Christ had drunk the vinegar he said, It is
finished. Which words may have a double sense: one, that such things as were
figured by the sacrifices of the old testament are accomplished: the other,
that now upon the cross he had finished his satisfaction to the justice of his
father for man's sin. And this of the twain I rather think to be his
meaning. If it be said, that the burial and resurrection and ascension of
Christ, etc. which are very necessary to man's redemption, were not yet
begun, the answer is, that the works of Christ's priesthood which follow his
death serve not to make any satisfaction to Gods justice for sin, but only
to confirm or apply it, after it is made and accomplished on the cross. And
if this be so, that Christ in his own person accomplished the work of
redemption, and made a full and perfect satisfaction for us, as these words
import, It is finished, then humane satisfactions to Gods justice for sin are
altogether superfluous.

The fifth event that fell out when Christ was upon the cross was, that he
cried with a loud voice, and said, Father, into thy hands I lay down my
spirit, that is, I commend my soul as being the most precious thing which I
have in this world into thy custody, who art a most faithful keeper thereof.
These words are taken by Christ out of the Psalms: for when David was in
danger of his life by reason of Saul, and had no friend to trust, he makes
choice of God to be his keeper, and said, Into thy hands, O Lord, do J commend
my spirit. Psalm. 31.5.
Now our Savior Christ being in the like distress, both by reason of the
Jews, who every way sought his final destruction and confusion, and
especially because he felt the full wrath of God seazing upon him, does make
choice of David's words, and apply them to himself in his distress. And by
his example we are taught not only to read the general history of the Bible,
but also to observe the things commanded and forbidden, and to apply the same
unto our selves, and to our particular estates and dealings whatsoever: thus
the Prophet David says, In the roll of the book it is written of me, that I
should do thy will, Psalm. 40.7.
O my God! How can this be? for no part of Scripture penned before the days
of David says thus of him. True indeed: but as I take it, David's meaning is,
that he read the book of the Law, and found general precepts and
commandments given to Kings and Princes, that they should keep all the
ordinances and commandments of God, which he being a King applies
particularly to his own person, and thereupon says, In the volume of the
book it is written of me, etc. And this duty is well practiced by the people
of God at this day: for the Psalms of David were penned according to the
estate of the Church in his time: and in these days the Church of God does
sing the same with the same spirit that David did, and does apply them to
their several estates and conditions.

Now in that Christ commends his soul into the hands of his father, he does it
to testify that he died not by constraint, but willingly: and by his own
practice he does teach us to do the like, namely to give up our own souls
into the hands of God. And because this duty is of some difficulty, we must
observe three motives or preparatiues which may induce us to the better doing
of it. The first is, to consider that God the Father of Christ, is the creator
of our souls, and therefore he is called the father of spirits. And if he be a
creator of them, then is he also a faithful preserver of them. For sure it is,
that God will preserve his own workmanship. Who is or ca^ be so careful for the
ornament and preservation of any work, as the crafts-master? and shall not God
be more careful then man? wherefore Saint Peter exhorts us to commit our
souls unto God, as unto a faithful creator. The second motive is this, we
must look to be resolved in our consciences, that God the Father of Christ is
our Father: every man for himself must labor to have the assurance of the
pardon of his own sins, and that the corruption of his soul be washed away
in the blood of Christ, that he may say, I am justified, sanctified, and
adopted by Christ. And when any man can say thus, he shall be most desirous and
willing to commit his soul into the hands of God. This was the reason which
moved Christ to lay down his soul into the hands of God, because he is his
Father. The third motive or preparatiue is, a continual experience and
observation of Gods love and favor toward us, in keeping and preserving him;
as appears by David's example, Into thy hands (says he) I commit my soul:
Psalm. 31.5.
for thou have redeemed me, O thou God of truth.

The time when we are specially to commend our souls into the hand of God,
is first of all the time of any affliction or danger. This was the time when
David commended his soul into the hands of God in the Psalm before named.
We know that in any common danger or peril, as the sacking of a city, or
burning of an house, if a man have any precious jewel therein, he will first
fetch that out, and make choice of a faithful friend, to whose custody he
will commit the same: even so, in common perils and dangers, we must always
remember to commit our souls as a most precious jewel into the hands of God,
who is a faithful creator. An other more special and necessary time of
practicing this duty, is the hour of death, as here Christ does, and Steven,
who when the Jews stoned him to death, called on God, and said, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit. And as this duty is very requisite and necessary at all
times, so most especially in the hour of death; because the danger is great
by reason that Satan will then chiefly assault us, and the guilt of sin will
especially then wound the conscience. Lastly, at all times we must commit our
souls into Gods hands: for though we be not always in affliction, yet we are
always in great danger: and when a man lies down to rest, he knows not
whether he shall rise again or no; and when he rises, he knows not whether
he shall lie down again. Yea, at this very hour we know not what will befall
the next.

And great are the comforts which arise by the practice of this duty. When
David was in great danger of his life, and his own people would have stoned
him, because their hearts were vexed for their sons and daughters which the
Amalekites had taken; it is said he comforted himself in the Lord his God. 1.
Sam. 30.6.
And the practice of Paul in this case is most excellent: For the which cause
(says he) J suffer those things, ^. Tim. 1.12.
but I am not ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded
that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day.
This worthy servant of God had committed his life and soul into Gods hand:
and therefore he says, In all my sufferings I am not ashamed: where we may
see, that if a man have grace in his lifetime to commit his soul into Gods
hand, it will make him bold even at the point of death. And this must be a
motive to cause every man every day and hour to lay down his soul into the
hands of God, although by the course of nature he may live twenty years
longer. But howsoever this duty be both necessary and comfortable, yet few
there be that practice the same. Men that have children are very careful and
diligent to bring them up under some man's tuition; and if they have cattle,
sheep, or oxen, they provide keepers to tend them: but in the mean season for
their own souls they have no care, they may sink or swim or do what they
will. This shows the wonderful blindness or rather madness of men in the
world, that have more care for their cattle, then for their own souls: but
as Christ has taught us by his example, so let every one of us in the fear of
God learn to commit our souls into the hand of God.

Again, in that Christ lays down his own soul, and withal the souls of
all the faithful into the hands of the father, we further learn three
things. The first, that the soul of man does not vanish away as the souls of
beasts and other creatures: there is great difference betvveene them: for
when the beast dies, his soul dies also: but the soul of man is immortal.
The consideration whereof must move every man above al things in this world to
be careful for his soul: if it were to vanish away at the day of death, as
the soul of beasts do, the neglect thereof were no great matter: but seeing
it must live for ever, either in eternal joy, or else in endless pains and
torments, it stands us upon, every man for himself, so to provide for his
soul in this life, that at the day of death when it shall depart from his
body, it may live in eternal joy and happiness. The second, that there is an
especial and particular providence of God, because the particular soul of
Christ is committed into the hands of his father, and so answerably the souls
of every one of the faithful are. The third, that every one which believes
him self to be a member of Christ, must be willing to die when God shall call
him thereunto. For when we die in Christ, the body is but laid asleep,
and the soul is received into the hands of a most loving God and merciful
Father, as the soul of Christ was. Lastly, whereas Christ surrendering his
soul into his fathers hands, calls it a spirit, we note, that the soul of
man is a spirit, that is, a spiritual, invisible, simple essence without
composition created, as the angels of God are. The question whether the soul
of a child come from the soul of the parents as the body does come from their
bodies, may easily be resolved. For the soul of man being a spirit, can not
beget another spirit, as the Angels being spiritual do not beget Angels: for
one spirit begets not another. Nay which is more* one simple element
begets not another, as the water begets not water, nor air begets
air: and therefore much less can one soul beget an other. Again, if the
soul of the child come from the soul of the parents, then there is a
propagation of the whole soul of the parent or of some part thereof. If it be
said, that the whole soul of the parents be propagated, then the parents
should want their own souls and could not live. If it be said that a part of
the parents soul is propagated: I answer, that the soul being a spirit or a
simple substance can not be parted: and therefore it is the safest to conclude,
that the body indeed is of the body of the parents, and that the soul of man
while the body is in making, is created of nothing: Heb. 12.9.
and for this very cause God is called the Father of spirits.

Thus much of the crucifying of Christ: Now follows his death. For having
laid down his soul into the hands of his Father, Luke 23.46.
the holy Ghost says, he gave up the ghost: to give us to understand, that his
death was no fantastical but a real death, in that his body and soul were
severed as truly as when any of us die. In treating of Christ's death we must
consider many points. The first, that it was needful that he should die, and
that for two causes. First, to satisfy Gods justice: for sin is so odious a
thing in Gods ^ight, that he will punish it with an extreme punishment:
therefore Christ standing in our room must not only suffer the miseries of
this life, but also die on the cross, that the very extremity of punishment
which we should have borne, might be laid on him: and so we in Christ, might
fully satisfy Gods justice: for the wages of sin is death. Secondly Christ
died that he might fulfill the truth of Gods word which had said, that man
for eating the forbidden fruit should die the death. The properties of Christ's
death are two: Genesis 2.17.
The first, that it was a voluntary and willing death: The second, that it was
a cursed death. For the first, whereas I say Christ's death was voluntary, I
mean that Christ died willingly, and of his own free accord gave up him self
to suffer upon the cross. Howsoever the Jews did arraigne, and condemn, and
crucify him, yet if he had not willed his own death, and of his free accord
given him self to die* not the Jews nor all the whole world could ever have
taken away his life from him. He dyed not by constraint or compulsion, but
most willingly: and therefore he says, No man takes my life from me, but I
(says he) lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down* and have
power to take it again. Ioh. 10.18. Mat. 27.46. Luke 23.46.
And our Savior Christ gave evident tokens hereof in his death, for then Jesus
cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost. Ordinarily men that die on the
cross, languish away by little and little, and before they come to yield up
their lives they loose their speech, and only ratle or make a noise in the
throat: Isai. 38.14.
but Christ at that very instant when he was to give up the ghost, cried with
a loud voice: which shows plainly, that he in his death was more then a
conqueror over death. And therefore to give all men a token of his power, and
to show that he died voluntarily, it pleased him to cry with a loud voice. And
this made the Centurion to say that he was the son of God. Again, Christ
dyed not as other men do; Mar. 15.39.
because they first give up the ghost, and then lay their heads aside: but he
in token that his death was voluntary, first lays his head aside after the
manner of a dead man, Ioh. 19.30.
and then afterward gives up the ghost. Lastly, Christ died sooner then men are
wont to do upon the cross, and this was the cause that made Pilate wonder
thar he was so soon dead. Mar. 15.44.
Now this came to pass not because he was loath to suffer the extremity of
death: but hecause he would make it manifest to all men that he had power to
die or not to die. And indeed this is our comfort that Christ died not for us
by constraint, but willingly of his own accord.

And as Christ's death was voluntary, so was it also an accursed death, and
therefore it is called the death of the cross. And it contained the first and
the second death: To signify this point the Creed says that he was crucified
and also died.
the first is the separation of the body from the soul: the second is the
separation of body and soul from God: And both were in Christ: for beside the
bodily death, he did in soul apprehend the wrath of God due to man for sin:
and that made him cry, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

And here we must not omit a necessary point, namely, how far forth Christ
suffered death. Answ. Some think that he suffered only a bodily death and
such pains as follow the dissolution of nature: but they no doubt come to
short, for why should Christ have feared death so greatly if it had been
nothing but the dissolution of nature. Some again think that he died, not
only the first, but also the second death: but it may be that is to go to
far: for if to die the first death be to suffer a total separation of body
and soul, then also to die the second death is wholly and every way to be
severed from all favor of God, and at the least for a time to be oppressed of
the same death as the damned are. Now this never befell Christ, no not in the
midst of his sufferings, considering that even then he was able to call God
his God. Therefore the safest is to follow the mean; namely that Christ died
the first death* in that his body and soul were really and wholly severed,
yet without suffering any corruption in his body, which is the effect and
fruit of the same: and that withal he further suffered the extreme horrors
and pangs of the second death, not dying the same death nor being forsaken of
god, more then in his own apprehension or feeling. For in the very midst of
his sufferings the father was well pleased with him. And this which I say does
not any whit lessen the sufficiency of the merit of Christ: for whereas he
suffered truly the very wrath of God, and the very torments of the damned in
his soul, it is as much as if all the men in the world had died the second
death, and had bin wholly cut off from God for ever and ever. And no doubt
Christ died the first death, only suffering the pangs of the second, that the
first death might be an entrance not to the second death which is eternal
damnation, but a passage to life eternal.

The benefits and comfortes which arise by the death of Christ are specially
four. The first is the change of our natural death, I say not, the taking of
it away, for we must all die; but whereas by nature death is a curse of God
upon man for eating the forbidden fruit, by the death of Christ it is changed
from a curse into a blessing: and is made as it were a middle way and entrance
to conveigh men out of this world into the kingdom of glory in heaven: and
therefore it is said, Heb. 2.15.
Christ by his death has delivered them from the fear of death, which all the
days of their lives were subject to bondage. A man that is to encounter with
a Scorpion* if he know that it has a sting, he may be dismayed: but being
assured that the sting is taken away, he need not fear to encounter therewith.
Now death in his own nature considered, is this scorpion armed with a sting:
but Christ our Savior by his death has pulled out the sting of our death, and
on the cross triumphantly says, O death where is thy sting? O grave where is
thy victory? 1. Cor. 15.55.
and therefore even the^ when we feel the pa^gs of death approach, we should
not fear but conceive hope, considering that our death is altered and changed
by the virtue of the death of Christ. Secondly, the death of Christ has quite
taken away the second death from those that are in Christ: as Paul says, There
is no comdemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.
which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Thirdly the death of
Christ is a means to ratify his last will and testament: For this cause was
Christ the Mediator of the new testament, that through death (which was for
the redemption of the transgressions which were in the former t^stament) they
which were called might receive the promise of the eternal inheritance. Heb.
9.15.16.
For where a testament is, there must be the death of him that made the
Testament: for the Testament is confirmed when men are dead: for it is yet of
no force, as long as he is alive that made it. And therefore the death of
Christ does make his last will and testament which is his covenant of grace,
authentical unto us. Fourthly, the death of Christ does serve to abolish the
original corruption of our sinful hearts. As a strong corasive laid to a
sore eats out all the rotten and dead flesh, even so Christ's death being
applied to the heart of a penitent sinner by faith, weakens and consumes the
sin that cleaues so fast unto our natures and dwelles within us. Some will
say, how can Christ's death which now is not, because it is long ago past and
ended, kill sin in us now? Answer, Indeed if we regard the act of Christ's
death, it is past, but the virtue and power thereof endures for ever. And the
power of Christ's death is nothing else but the power of his godhead, which
enabled him in his death to overcome hell, the grave, death, and condemnation,
and to disburden him self of our sins. Now when we have grace to deny our
selves, and to put our trust in Christ, and by faith are joined to him, then as
Christ himself by the power of his godhead overcame death, hell, and damnation
in himself: so shall we by the same power of his godhead kill and crucify
sin and corruption in our selves. Therefore seeing we reap such benefit by the
death of Christ, if we will show our selves to be Christians, let us rejoice
in the death of Christ: and if the question be, what is the chiefest thing
wherein we rejoice in this world? we may answer, the very cross of Christ,
and the least drop of his blood.

The duties to be learned by the death of Christ are two: the first concerns
all ignorant and impenitent sinners. Such men whatsoever they be, by the death
of Christ upon the cross, must be moved to turn from their sins: and if
the consideration hereof will not move them, nothing in the world will. By
nature every man is a vassal of sin, and a bondslaue of Satan: the devil
reigns and rules in all men by nature, and we our selves can do nothing but
serve and obey him. Nay (which is more) we lie under the fearful curse of God
for the least sin. Well now, see the love of the son of God, that gave
himself willingly to death upon the cross for thee, that he might free thee
from this most fearful bondage. Wherefore let all those that live in sin
and ignorance reason thus with themselves: Has Christ the Son of God done
this for us, and shall we yet live still in our sins? has he set open as it
were the very gates of hell, and shall we yet lie weitring in out damnable
ways and in the shadow of death? In the fear of God let the death of Christ
be a means to turn us to Christ: if it can not move us, let us be resolved
that our case is dangerous. To go yet further in this point, every one of us is
by nature a sick man, wounded at the very heart by satan: though we feel it
not, yet we are deadly sick: and behold, Christ is the good Physician of the
soul, and none in heaven or earth, neither Saint, angel, nor man can heal
this our spiritual wound, but he alone: who, though he were equal with the
father, yet he came down from his bosom and became man, and lived here many
years in misery and contempt: and when no herb nor plaster could cure this
our deadly wound or desperate sickness, he was content to make a plaster with
his own blood: the pain he took in making it caused him to sweat water and
blood: nay the making of it for us cost him his life, in that he was content by
his own death to free us from death: which if it be true, as it is most true,
the^ woeful and wretched is our case if we will still live in sin, and will
not use means to lay this plaster unto our hearts. And after the plaster is
applied to the soul, we should do as a man that has been grievously sick,
who when he is on the mending hand gets strength by little and little. And so
should we become new creatures going on from grace to grace, and show the same
by living godlily, righteously, and soberly, that the world may see that we
are cured of our spiritual disease. O happy, yea thrice happy are they that
have grace from God to do this. The second duty concerns the^ which are
repentant sinners. Has Christ given himself for thee, and is thy conscience
settled in this? then thou must answerably bear this mind, that if thy life
would serve for the glory of God and the good of his Church, thou would then
give it most willingly if thou be called thereto. Secondly, if Christ for thy
good has given his life, then thou must in like manner be content to die for
thy brethren in Christ if need be: He (says S. John) laid down his life for
us, 1. Ioh. 3.16.
therefore we ought to lay down our lives for our brethren. Thirdly, if Christ
was co^te^^ to shed his own hearts blood not for himself, but for the sins of
every one of us, the^ we must be thus affected, that rather then by sinning we
would willingly offend god, we should be content to have our own blood shed:
yea if these two things were put to our choice, either to do that which might
displease God, or else to suffer death, we must rather die then do the same. Of
this mind have been all the martyrs of God, who rather then they would yield to
Idolatry, were content to suffer most bitter torments and cruel death. Yea,
every good christian is so affected, that he had rather choose to die then to
live, not moved by impatience in respect of the miseries of this life: but
because he would cease to offend so loving a father. To sin is meat and drink
to the world, but to a touched and repe^ta^t heart there is no torment so
grievous as this is, to sin against God, if once he be persuaded that Christ
died for him.

Thus much for Christ's death: now follovv those things which befell Christ
when he was newly dead; and they are two especially. The first, that his
legs were not broken as the legs of the two thieves were. Of the first,
S. John renders a reason, namely that the scripture might be fulfilled, Ioh.
19.36.
which says, not a bone of him shall be broken: which words were spoken by
Moses of the paschall lamb, and are here applied to Christ, Exo. 12.46.
as being typically figured thereby. And hence we observe these two things.
First, that Christ crucified is the true paschall lamb as S. Paul says,
Christ our passover is sacrificed: 1. Cor. 5.7. Ioh. 1.29.
and S. John says, Behold the lamb of God, distinguishing him thereby from the
typical lamb. In this that Christ crucified is the true paschall lamb, the
child of God has vvonderfull matter of comfort. The Israelites did eat the
passover in Egypt, Exo. 12.23.
and sprinkled the blood of the lamb on the posts of their doors, that when
the Angel of God came to destroy the first borne both of man and beast, and
saw the blood upon their houses might pass over them, that the plague should
not be upon them to destruction. So likewise if thou do feed on the lamb
of God, and by a lively faith sprinkle the door of thine heart with his blood,
the judgments of god in this life, and the terrible curse of death, with the
fearful sentence of condemnation at the day of judgment, and all punishments
due unto thy sins shall pass over thee, and not so much as touch thee. And
whereas the legs of our Savior Christ were not broken by the soldiers, who
sought by all means possible to work against him all the mischief they
could: we may note, that the enemies of Christ and his Church, let them
intend to show never so much malice against him, they can not go beyond
that liberty which God gives them: then Gods will is they can do no more for
their lives. The Medes and Persians are called the Lords sanctified ones: Isai.
13.3. Isai. 46.11.
Cyrus is called the man of Gods counsel, because whatsoever they intended
against the people of God, yet in all their proceedings they did nothing, but
that which God had determined before to be done. And when Senacherib came
against the Jews as a wild beast out of his den, the Lord tells Hezekiah
concerning Ashur that he will put his hook in his nostrills, Isai. 37.29.
and his bridle in his lips, and bring him back again the same way he came,
that is, he will so rule him that he shall not do the lest hurt unto the Jews,
more the^ god will. This is a matter of great comfort to Gods Church oppressed
with manifold enemies, Papists, Jews, Turks, and all infidels, maliciously
bent against it for Christ's sake. Now they may intend and practice mischief,
but more then Gods will and counsel is they ca^ not do: for he has his ring
in their nostrills, and his bridle in their lips to rule them as he lists.

The second thing which fell out immediately upon the death of Christ is, that
the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and thence issued water and blood.
The use which arises of this point is twofolde: First, it serves to prove
that Christ died truly, and not in show, or a fained death: for there is about
the heart a filme or skin like unto a purse wherein is contained clear water
to cool the heat of the heart, Columb. de re Anat. l. 7.
and therefore when water and blood issued out after the pearcing of the side,
it is very likely that that very skin was pierced: for else in reason we can not
conjecture whence this water should come. S. John an eyewitness of this
thing, being about to prove that Jesus the son of Mary was the true Messiah,
brings in six witnesses: three in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost: and three in earth, the Water, the Spirit, and the blood: 1. Ioh.
5.8.
where no doubt he alludeth to the water and blood that issued out of the side
of Christ* by spirit we may understand the efficacy and operation of Gods
spirit making men to bring forth the fruits of the same, as love, peace, joy,
etc. And the second witness namely water, has relation to the water that came
forth of Christ's side, which signifies the inward washing away of sin, and
the purging of the heart by Christ's blood: which also is and was signified by
the outward washing of the body with water in baptism. The third witness
he calls blood, alluding to the blood that issued out of Christ's side:
whereby is signified the expiation or satisfaction made to Gods justice for
man's sin. The same use had the ceremonial sprinkling with blood in the old
testament, typically signifying the sprinkling of Christ's blood. Now these
three witnesses are not to be sought for in heaven, but every Christian man
must search for them in his own heart and conscience, and there shall he
find them in some measure. And this water and blood flowing out of the side of
Christ being now dead, signifies that he is our justification and
sanctification even after his death: and that out of his death springs our
life: and therefore as Eve was made of a ribbe taken out of the side of the
first Adam: so springs the Church of the blood that flows out of the side of
the second Adam.

Having thus entreated of Christ's execution, let us now come to the last
point, namely, the excellency of Christ's passion, consisting in these two
points. I. a sacrifice. II. a triumph. For the first, when Christ died he
offered a propitiatory and real sacrifice to his father: and herein his death
and passion differs from the sufferings and deaths of all men whatsoever. In
this sacrifice, we must consider 4. things. I. who was the priest. II. what was
the sacrifice. III. what was the altar. IV. the time wherein this sacrifice
was offered. The priest was Christ himself, as the author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews proves at large from the third chap. to the 9. and of him we are
to consider these 4. points. The first, what is the office of Christ's
priesthood. Answer. The office of Christ's priesthood stands in 3. things. I.
to teach doctrine, and therefore he is called the high priest of our
profession, that is, of the Gospel which we profess, Heb. 3.1.
because he is the author and doctor of the same. II. to offer up himself
unto his father in the behalf of man, for the appeasing of his wrath for
sin. III. to make request or intercession to God the father, that he would
accept the sacrifice which he offered on the cross for us. The second is
according to which nature he was a priest: whether in his manhood, or in his
godhead, or both together? Ans. The office of his priesthood is performed by
him according to both his natures: and therefore he is a priest not as the
papists would have him, according to his manhood only, but as he is both God
and man: for as he is a mediator, so is he a priest: but Christ is a mediator
according to both natures: each nature doing that which is peculiar to it, and
conferring something to the work of redemption: and therefore he is a priest as
he is both God and man. The third point, after what order is he a priest? Ans.
The scripture me^tioneth 2. orders of priests: the order of Levi, and the order
of Melchisedeck. Christ was not a priest after the order of Aaron: and yet
notwithstanding in that priesthood were many notable rites whereby the
priesthood of our Savior Christ was resembled, and we may note 5. especially.
First in the anointing of the high priests, as of Aaron and his sons after
him, oil was powered on his head, Exop. 29.7. Psalm. 113.2.
and it ran down to the very edge of his garments, whereby was signified that
Christ the true high priest was anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows, Psalm. 45.7.
that his manhood was filled with the gifts and graces of God, both in
measure, number, and degree above all me^ and angels. Secondly the sumptuous
and gorgious apparel which the high priest put on when he came into the
sanctuary, Exodus 28.2.
was a sign of the rich and glorious robe of Christ's righteousness, which is
the purity and integrity of his humane nature and of his life. Thirdly, the
special parts of the high priests attire were, first the Ephod, the 2.
shoulders whereof had 2 onyx stones, Exo. 28.12, 21.
whereon were engraue^ the names of the 12. tribes of Israel: 6. names on the
one stone, and 6. on the other, as stones of remembrance of the children of
Israel to god ward: secondly, the brestplate of judgment like the work of the
Ephod, vvherin were set 12. stones according to the names of the children of
Israel, graue^ as signets every one after his name. Now by these 2. ornaments
were figured two things in Christ: by the first, that he carries all the elect
on his shoulders, and supports the^ by his spirit so long as they are in this
world, against the world, the flesh, and the devil. By the second, that Christ
our high priest being now in his sanctuary in heaven, has in memory all the
elect, and their very names are written as it were in tables of gold before
his face, and he has an especial love and care over them. Upon this ground
the church in the Canticles prays on this manner, Cant. 8.6.
Set me as a seal on thy heart, and as a signet upon thy arm. And indeed this
a matter of comfort to us all, that Christ has our several names written in
precious stones before his face, though he be now in heaven and we on earth:
and the particular estate of every one of us is both known and regarded of
him. Again, God gave to Moses the Vrim and Thummim, which was put on the
brestplate of the high priest, when he was to ask counsel from God of things
unknowe^, before the mercy seat, whence God gave answer. What the Vrim and
Thummim was it is not known: and it is like it was not made by any art of man,
but given by God; and how it was used we can not tell: but yet the
signification of the words affords matter of meditation. Vrim signifies
lights, and Thummim signifies perfections. And by this a further matter was
prefigured in Christ, who has the perfect Vrim and Thummim in his breast:
first, because in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge:
Coloss. 2.3.
secondly, because he reveiles to his Church out of his word such things as
none ca^ know but the children of God: as David says, The secret of the Lord
is reveiled to the^ that fear him. Psalm. 25.14. Ephe. 1.17. 1. Cor. 2.12.
And for this cause the spirit of Christ is called the spirit of wisdom and
revelatio^; and the spirit of God, whereby we know the things that are given
unto us of God: as namely, our election, vocation, justification, and
sanctification in this life, and our eternal glorificatio^ after this life:
yea to every member of Christ within his Church he gives a special spirit of
revelatio^, vvherby he may know that God the father is his father; the son
the redeemer, his redeemer; and the H. ghost his sanctifier and co^forter.
Lastly the high priest had a plate on his forehead, and therein was in graue^
the holiness of Jehovah: this signified the holiness of Christ: Exo. 28.36.
for as he is God, he is holiness it self: and as he is man, he is most holy,
being sanctified by the H. ghost for this end, that he might cover our sins and
unrighteousnes, with his righteousness and holy obedience.

The second order of priesthood is the order of Melchisedec: of which Christ
was, as David says, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedeck: Heb. 7.
and that in 2. special respects. I. Melchisedeck was both a priest and a
king: so was Christ. II. Melchisedeck had neither father nor mother, because
his history is set down with mention of neither. So likewise Christ as he
is God, had no mother, and as he is man, he had no father. The Papists avouch
Christ to be a Priest of this order in a new respect, in that as Melchisedeck
offered bread and wine, when Abraham came from the slaughter of the Kings: Genesis
14.18.
so (say they) Christ in the last supper did offer his own body and blood
under the forms of bread and wine. But this is a frivolous devise of theirs:
for if we read Hebr. 7. where this point is handled, there is no comparison at
all made of their two sacrifices; but the resemblances before named are only
set down. Again, it is not said in Genesis that Melchisedeck offered
sacrifice; but that he brought forth bread and wine, Protulit non obtulit.
and made a feast to Abraham and his company. And if Christ should be of the
order of Melchisedeck, in regard of the offering of bread and wine, yet would
this make much against the papists. For Melchisedeck brought forth true bread
and true wine; but in the sacrifice of the mass there is no true bread nor
true wine: but (as they say) the real body and blood of Christ under the
form of bread and wine.

The 4. point is, whether there be any more real priests of the new Testament
beside Christ or no? Ans. In the old testament there were many priests one
following an other in continual succession, but of the new testament there is
one only real priest, Christ Jesus God and man, and no more: as the author of
the Hebr. says, because he endures for ever, Heb. 7.24. (...).
he has an everlasting priesthood: and the word translated ( everlasting)
signifies such a priesthood, which cannot pass from him to any other, as the
priesthood of Aaron did. And therefore the priesthood of Christ is so tied to
his own person, that none can have the same but he; neither man nor angel, nor
any other creature, no not the father nor the H. Ghost. But the factours of the
Church of Rome will say, that Christ may have men to be his deputies in his
stead to offer sacrifice. Answ. We must consider Christ 2. ways: I. as he is
God: II. as he is mediator. As he is God with the father and with the holy
Ghost, he has kings and magistrates to be his deputies on earth: and therefore
they are called Elohim, that is, Psalm. 82.
gods. But as he is Mediator, and so consequently a priest and a King, he
has neither deputy nor vicegerent; neither king to rule in his stead over his
Church, nor priests to offer sacrifice for him: nay he has no prophet to be
his deputy, as he is the doctor of the Church. And therefore he says to his
disciples: Mat. 23.10.
be not called doctors, for one is your doctor. Indeed he has his ministers
to teach men his will: but a deputy to offer sacrifice in his stead he has
not. And therefore we may with good conscience abhor the massing priesthood of
the Church of Rome, as a thing fetched from the bottom of Hell: and their
massing priests as instruments of Satan; holding this for a very truth, that
we have but one only priest eue^ Christ himself god and man. Indeed all
Christians are Priests to offer up spiritual sacrifice: but it is the
property of Christ alone to offer an outward and real sacrifice unto God now
in the new testament.

Thus much of the first point who is the priest. The second follows: what is
the sacrifice. Answer, The sacrifice is Christ, as he is man, or the manhood of
Christ crucified. As the priest is both God and man: so the sacrifice is man,
not or the godhead.
God. So it is said, we are sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ. Heb. 10.10.
Touching this sacrifice, sundry questions are to be skanned. The first, what
kind of sacrifice it was? Answer, In the old Testament there were two kind of
sacrifices: one, propitiatory which served to satisfy for sin: the other,
eucharisticall for praise and thanksgiving. Now the sacrifice of Christ was a
sacrifice propitiatory specially prefigured by the typical sacrifice, called
the whole burnt offering; Genesis 8.20. Job. 1.8.
the use whereof was from the beginning; for as it was all consumed to ashes
upon the altar, and turned into smoke, so the fire of Gods wrath did seize upon
Christ on the cross, and did consume him as it were to nothing to make us
something. Secondly, when Noe offered an whole burnt offering after the flood,
it is said, God smelled a savor of rest: Genesis 8.21.
not because he was delighted with the smell of the sacrifice, but because he
approved his faith in Christ. And hereby was figured, that Christ upon the
cross was an offering, and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God:
Ephe. 5.2.
because God was well pleased therewith. Now whereas Christ was content wholly
to offer up himself to appease the wrath of his father for us: it must teach
us to give our bodies and souls, as holy, living, and acceptable sacrifices,
wholly dedicating them to the service of God.

The second question is, how often Christ offered himself? Ans. Once only and no
more. This must be held as a principle of divinity: With once offering has he
consecrated for ever, them that are sanctified: and again, Hebr. 10.14. Heb.
9.28.
Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many. And it serves to
overthrow the abominable sacrifice of the mass, in which the true body and
blood of Christ is offered under the forms of bread and wine, really and
substa^tially (as they say) for the remission of the sins of the quick and
the dead, and that continually: but if this unbloody sacrifice of Christ be
good, then it is either the continuing of that which was begun on the cross by
Christ himself, or the iteratio^ of it by the mass priest. Now let papists
choose whether of these 2. they will: if they say it is the continuing of the
sacrifice of Christ, then they speak outrageous blasphemy: for it is in effect
to say, that Christ's sacrifice was not perfect, but only begun on the cross,
and must be accomplished by the mass priest to the end of the world. If they
affirm the second, that it is an iteration of Christ's sacrifice, the^ also
they speak blasphemy: for hereby they make it also an imperfite sacrifice,
because it is repeated and iterated: for upon this ground does the author to
the Hebrews prove, that the sacrifices of the old testament were imperfit,
because they were daily offered. And whereas they say, that there be 2. kinds of
sacrifices, one bloody once only offered upon the cross: the other unbloody,
which is daily offered. I answer, that this distinction has no ground out of
Gods word: neither was it known to the H. ghost who says, that without blood
there is no remission of sinnss.

The 3. question is, what is the fruit of this sacrifice. Answ. Heb. 9*22.
The whole effect thereof is contained in these 4. things. I. the oblation of
Christ purges the believer from all his sins whether they be original or
actual: so it is said, If we walk in the light, we have fellowship one with
another: 1. Ioh. 1*7.
and the blood of Jesus Christ his son purges us from all sin: whether
they be of omission in regard of our duties: or of commission in doing evil.
II. the oblatio^ serves for the justifying of a sinner before God, Rom* 5.10.
as Paul says, We are justified by his blood, and are reconciled to god by his
death. This being here remembered, that in the passion of Christ we include his
legal obedience, whereby he fulfilled the law for us. III. the oblatio^ of
Christ serves to purge men's consciences from dead works; How much more then
shall the blood of Christ, Heb. 9*14.
which through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge
your consciences from dead works to serve the living God. IV. the oblation of
Christ procures us liberty to enter to heaven, By the blood of Christ Jesus we
may be bold to enter into the holy place, Heb. 10.20.
by the new and living way which he has prepared for us through the vail, that
is, his flesh. By our sins there is a partition wall made between God and us:
but Christ by offering himself upon the cross, has beaten down this wall,
opened heaven, and as it were, trained the way with his own blood, whereby we
may enter into the kingdom of God, and without the which we can not enter in
at all.

The last question is, how this sacrifice may be applied to us. Ans. The means
of applying the sacrifice be two. I. the hand of God which offreth. II. the
hand of the believer that receives the sacrifice offered. The hand of God
whereby he offers unto us his benefit, is the preaching of the word, and the
administration of the sacraments, baptism, and the Lords supper: and
whersoeuer these his holy ordinances are rightly administered and put in
practice, there the Lord puts forth his hand unto us, and offers most freely
the virtue and benefit of the death of Christ. And then in the next place
comes the hand of the believer which is faith in the heart, which, when God
offers, does apprehend and receive the thing offered, and make it ours.

The third thing to be spoken of is the altar whereon Christ offered himself.
The altar was not the cross, but rather the godhead of Christ. He was both the
priest, the sacrifice, and the altar: the sacrifice, as he is man; the priest,
as he is both God and man; the altar, as he is God. The property of an altar
is to sanctify the sacrifice, as Christ says, Ye fools and blind, whether
is greater the offering, Mat. 23.9.
or the altar that senctifieth the offering? Now Christ as he is God,
sanctifies himself as he was man: and therefore (says he) for their sakes
sanctify I my self, by doing 2. things: Ioh. 17.19.
I. by setting a part the manhood to be a sa^rifice unto his father for our
sins. II. by giving to this sacrifice merit or efficacy to deserve at Gods
hands remission of our sins: the ma^hood of Christ without the godhead has no
virtue nor efficacy in it self to be a meritorious sacrifice: and therefore the
dignity and excellency which it has is derived thence. As for the chalkie and
stony altars of the Church of Rome, they are nothing else but the toys of man's
brain. Christ himself is the only real altar of the new testament. And
instead of altars which were under the law, we have now the Lords table
whereon we celebrate the sacraments of his body and blood, to show forth his
death till he come.

The 4. point is concerning the time of Christ's oblation, which he himself
calls the acceptable year of the Lord: Luke 4.19. Lev. 25.10.
alluding unto another year under the law called the year Iubile, which was
every 50. year among the Jews, in which at the sound of a trumpet all that had
set or sold their possessions received them again: all that were bondmen were
then set at liberty. This Iubile was but a figure of that perfect delivera^ce
which was to be attained by Christ's passion, which was no temporary
deliverance for every 50. year, but an eternal freedom from the bondage of
sin, hell, death, and condemnation. And the preaching of the word is the
trumpet sounded which proclaims unto us freedom from the kingdom of
darkness, and invites us to come and dvvell in perfect peace with Christ
himself. Well, if the year of perpetual Iubile be now come, in what a
vvre^ched estate are all our loose and blind people that esteem nothing of that
liberty which is offered to them, but choose rather to live in their sins,
and so in bondage under Satan and condemnation, then to be at freedom in
Christ.

Now follovv the uses which are to be made of the sacrifice of Christ. The
prophet Aggai says, Aggai. 2.4.
that the second temple built by Zorubbabell was nothing in beauty unto the
first which was built by Solomon: and the reason is plain, for it vvanted
five things which the first temple had. I. the appearing of the presence of
God at the mercy seat between the two Cherubims. II. The Vrim and Thummim on
the breast plate of the high Priest. III. The inspiration of the holy Ghost
upon extraordinary Prophets. IV. The Arc of the Covenant: for that was lost
in the captivity. V. Fire from heaven to burn the sacrifices. Yet for all
this, the Prophet afterward says, The glory of the last House, Agg. 2.10.
shall be greater then the first. Now it may be demanded, how both these
sayings can stand together? Answer. We are to know, that the second Temple was
standing in the time when Christ was crucified for our sins; and it was the
sacrifice of Christ which gave glory and dignity to the second temple, though
otherwise for building and outward ornaments it was far inferior to the
first. And by this we are taught, that if we would bring glory unto our own
selves, unto our houses and kindred, either before God or before men, we must
labor to be partakers of the sacrifice of Christ, and the sprinkling of his
blood to purge our hearts. This is the thing that brings renown both to place
and person, how base soever we be in the eyes of the world. Secondly, all
oblations and meat offerings were sprinkled with salt, Lev. 2.13. Eze. 43.24.
and every sacrifice of propitiation which was to be burned to ashes, was first
salted: and hereby two things were signified. The first, that every one of us
in our selves are loathsome or vile in the sight of God; Ezec. 16.4.
like unto stinking carrion or raw-flesh kept long vnpoudered. A dead and
rotten carkeise is loathsome unto us; but we in our selves are a thousand times
more loathsome unto God. The second, that we are as it were salted and made
sauorie and acceptable to God by the virtue of the sacrifice of Christ upon the
cross. Our duty the^ is to labor that we may feel in our selves the biting
and sharpnes of the oblation of Christ, to wast and consume the superfluities
of sin and the corruptions of our natures. And we must withal endeavor,
that the whole course of our lives, and our speech it self be gracious and
poudred with this salt, least God at length spue us out of his mouth. To this
end has God appointed his ministers to be the salt of the earth, Colos. 4 6.
Math. 5.13.
that by their ministry they might apply the death of Christ, and season the
people. And it has pleased God to besprinkle this land with more plenty of
this salt, then has been heretofore. But, alas, small is the number of them
that give any relish of their good seasoning. The more lamentable is their
case. For as flesh that can not be seasoned with salt, putrifies: so men, that
cannot be sweetened and changed by the sacrifice of Christ, do rotte and perish
in their sins. The waters that issued from under the threshold of the
Sanctuary, Eze. 47.8, 11.
when they came into Mare mortuum.
the dead sea, the waters thereof were wholesome: but myrie places and marshes
which could not be seasoned, were made saltpits. Now these waters are the
preaching of the Gospel of Christ, which flowing through all the parts of this
I Will, if it do not season and change our nation, it shall make it as places of
nettles and salt pits, and at length be an occasion of the eternal curse of
God. Thirdly, Christ's priesthood serves to make every one of us also to be
priests. And being priests, we must likewise have our sacrifice and our altar.
Mal. 1.11. 1. Tim. 2.8.
Our sacrifice is the clean offering, which is the lifting up of pure hands to
God without wrath or doubting in our prayers: also our bodies and souls, our
hearts and affections, the works of our lives, and the works of our callings:
all which must be dedicated to the service of God for his glory, and the good
of his Church. The altar whereon we must offer our sacrifice, is Christ our
redeemer, Rev. 8.3. Heb. 13.10.
both God and man, because by the virtue of his death as with sweet odours he
perfumes all our obedience, and makes it acceptable to God. The ministers of
the Gospel are also in this manner priests, as Paul insinuates when he
calls the Gentiles his offering unto God. Romans 15.16.
And the preaching of the word is as it were a sacrificing knife, whereby the
old Adam must be killed in us; and we made an holy and acceptable sweet
smelling oblation unto God, sanctified by the holy Ghost. Therefore every one
that hears Gods word preached and taught, must endeavor that by the
profitable hearing thereof, his sins and whole nature may be subdued and
killed; as the beast was slain and sacrificed upon the altar by the hand of
the Leuite. Lastly, the exhortation of the holy Ghost must here be considered,
Seeing (says he) we have an high Priest, which is over the house of God, Heb.
10.21.
let us draw near with a true heart in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our
hearts from an evil conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water: the
meaning of the words is this, that if Christ have offered such a sacrifice of
such value and price, which procures pardon of sin, justification,
sanctification, and redemption, then we must labor to be partakers of it; to
have our bodies and souls purified and cleansed by his blood, and sanctified
throughout by the holy Ghost, that thereby we may be made fit to do sacrifice
acceptable to God in Christ. This is the use which the Apostle makes of the
doctrine of Christ's priesthood in that place, which also every man should
apply unto himself: for why should we live in our sins and wicked ways,
every hour incurring the danger of Gods judgments, seeing Christ has
offered such a sacrifice whereby we may be purged and cleansed, and at length
freed from all woe and misery.

Thus much of Christ's sacrifice: now follows his triumph upon the cross. That
Christ did triumph when he was upon the cross, it is plainly set down by the
Apostle Paul, where he says, that putting out the hand writing of ordinances
that was against us, which was contrary to us, he even took it out of the
way, and fastened it upon the cross, and has spoiled the principalities and
powers, Coloss. 2.14, 15.
and has made show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same
cross. This triumph is set forth by signs and testimonies of two sorts. I. By
signs of his glory and majesty. II. by signs of his victory on the cross.
The signs of his glory and majesty are principally seven. The first is the
title set over his head upon the cross, Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews.
The end why titles were set over the heads of malefactors was, that the
beholders might know the cause of the punishment, and be admonished to take
heed of like offenses, and be stirred up to a dislike of the parties executed
for their offenses. And therefore, no doubt, Pilate wrote the title of Christ
for the aggravating of his cause, and that with his own hand. Yet mark the
strange event that followed: for when Pilate was about to write the
superscription, God did so govern and ouerrule both his heart and hand, that
instead of noting some crime, he sets down a most glorious and worthy title,
calling him Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews: which words contain the very
sum and pith of the whole Gospel of Christ, delivered by the Patriarchs and
Prophets from age to age. We must not think that Pilate did this of any good
mind, or upon any love or favor that he bare to Christ: but only as he was
guided and ouerruled by the power of God for the advancement of the honor and
glory of Christ. The like did Caiphas, who though a sworn enemy to Christ,
yet he uttered a prophecy of him, saying, that it was necessary that one
should die for the people: nor that he had any intent to prophecy; but because
the Lord used him as an instrument to publish his truth. And when Baalam for
the wages of unrighteousness would have cursed the Lords people, for his life
he could not; nay all his cursings were turned into blessings. By this then it
appears, that it is not possible for any man, do what he can, to stop the
course of the Gospel of Christ: nay (as we see) God can raise up the wicked
sometime to spread abroad and to publish the truth, though they themselves
intend the contrary. Furthermore let us mark that when the Jews did most of
all intend to bring disgrace and ignominy upon our Savior Christ, then did
they most of all extol and magnify his name: they could not for their lives
have given him a more renowned title then this, that he was king of the Jews.
And the same is the case of all the members of Christ: for let a man walk in
good conscience before God and man, he shall find this to be true, that when
he is most disgraced in the world, then commonly he is most honored with God
and men.

Further, Pilate wrote this superscription in three languages, Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin. And no doubt the end thereof in the providence of God was, that
the passion of Christ, as also the publishing of his kingdom and Gospel might
be spread over the whole world. This shows the malice of the Church of Rome,
which will not suffer the word of God to be published but in the latin tongue,
least the people should be entangled in errors.

Again, when Pilate had thus written the superscription, the high priests and
Pharisees offended thereat, came to Pilate willing him to change the title,
saying, Write not the king of the Jews, but that he said, I am the king of the
Jews: but Pilat answered them again, That which J have written, Ioh. 19.21.
I have written. Though Pilate had bin ouerruled before to condemn Christ to
death, against his own conscience, yet will he not in any-wise condescend to
change the superscription. How comes this to pass? Surely as he was ruled by
the hand of God in penning it, so by the same hand of God was he confirmed in
not changing it. Hence we learn sundry instructions. First, that no man in
the world, let him endeavor himself to the uttermost of his power, is able to
stop the course of the kingdom of God: it stands firm and sure, and all the
world is not able to prevail against it. Secondly, whereas Pilate being but an
heathen man was thus constant, that he will not have his writing changed; we
may note, how permanent and unchangeable the writings of the holy word of God
are. They are not the words of heathen men, but were spoken by the mouth of
the Prophets and Apostles, as God gave them utterance. The book of Scripture
therefore is much more immutable, so as no creature shall be able to change
the least part of it till it be fulfilled. Thirdly, by Pilates constancy, we
learn to be constant in the practice and profession of the religion of Christ:
this is a necessary lesson for these days, wherein men's professions do
fleet like water, and go and come with the tide. Many zealous professors to
day, but to morrow as cold as water. And the complaint of the Lord touching
times past, agrees to our days: O Ephraim, what shall I say to thee? thy
righteousness is like the morning dew. Os^. 6.


The second is, the conversion of the thief: a most worthy argument of the
Godhead of Christ. For by it when he was upon the cross, and in the very
midst of his passion, he gives unto all the world a lively and notable
experience of the virtue and power of his death, so as his very enemies might
not only behold the passion it self, but also at the same time acknowledge
the admirable efficacy thereof. And therefore with the passion of Christ, we
must join the conversion of the thief: which is as it were a crystal glass
wherein we may sensibly behold the endless merit and virtue of the obedience of
Christ to his father, even to the death of the cross. And therefore I will
briefly touch the special instructions which are to be learned by it. First
let us mark that both the thieues in every respect were equal, both wicked and
lewd livers: and for their notorious faults both attached, condemned, and
executed both on the cross at the same time with Christ: yet for all this, the
one repenting was saved, the other was not. And in their two examples we see
the state of the whole world, whereof one part is chosen to life eternal, and
thereupon attaines to faith and repentance in this life: the rest are rejected
in the eternal counsel of God, for just causes known to himself, and such
being left to themselves never repent at all. Secondly we are taught hereby,
that the whole work of our conversion and salvation must be ascribed wholly to
the mere mercy of God: of these two thieues the one was as deeply plunged in
wickedness as the other, and yet the one is saved, the other condemned. The like
was in Jacob and Esau; both borne at one time, and of the same parents, Romans
9.13.
and neither of them had done good nor evil when they were borne: yet one was
then loved the other was hated: yea if we regard outward prerogatives, Esau was
the first borne, Genesis 25.23.
and yet was refused.

Furthermore, the thief on the cross declares his conversion, by manifest
signs and fruits of repentance, as appears by the words which he spoke to
his fellow, Fear not thou God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation.
Though hands and feet were fast nailed to the cross* Luke 23.40.
yet heart and tongue is at liberty to give some tokens of his true
repentance. The people of this our land hear the word, but for the most part
are without either profit in knowledge or amendment of life: yet for all this
they persuade themselves that they have good hearts and good meanings, though
they cannot bear it a way, and utter it so well as others. But, alas, poor
souls, they are deluded by satan: for a man that is converted, can not but
express his conversion, and bring forth the fruits thereof. And therefore our
Savior Christ says, If a man believe in me, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of water of life. Ioh. 7*38.
The grace (as Elihu says) of God is like new wine in a vessel which must
have a vent; Job 32.19.
and therefore he that shows no tokens of Gods grace in this life, is not as
yet converted; let him think and say of himself what he will. Can a man have
life, and never move nor take breath? and can he that brings forth no fruit
of his conversion live unto God? Well, let us now see what were the fruits of
the thiefes repentance. They may be reduced to four heads. First, he rebukes
his fellow for mocking Christ, indeauouring thereby to bring him to the same
condition with himself, if it were possible: whereby he discouers unto us the
property of a true repentant sinner, which is, to labor and strive, so much
as in him lies, to bring all men to the same state that he is in. Thus David
having tried the great love and favor of God toward himself, breaks forth,
and says, Come children, hearken unto me, Psalm. 34.11.
and I will teach you the fear of the Lord: showing his desire, that the same
benefits which it pleased God to bestow on him, might also in like manner be
conveyed to others. Therefore it is a great shame to see men professing
religion, carried away with every company, and with the vanities and fashions
of the world, whereas they should rather draw even the worst men that be to the
fellowship of those graces of God which they have received. That which the Lord
spoke to the Prophet Jeremy, must be applied to all men: Let them return unto
thee, but return not thou unto them. Ierem. 15.19.
In instruments of music the string out of tune must be set up to the rest
that be in tune, and not the rest to it.

Again, in that he checkes his fellow, it shows that those which be touched
for their own sins, are also grieved when they see other men sin and
offend God. But to go further in this point, let us diligently and carefully
mark the manner of his reproof, Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the
same condemnation. In which words he rippes up his lewdness even to the
quick, and gives him a worthy item, telling him that the cause of all their
former wickedness, had been the want of the fear of God. And this point must
every one of us mark with great diligence. For if we enter into our hearts and
make a thorough search, we shall find that this is the root and fountain of
all our offenses. We miserable men for the most part have not grace to consider
that we are always before God; and to quake and tremble at the consideration
of his presence: and this makes us so often to offend God in our lives as we
do. Abraham coming before Abimelech, shifting for himself said, that Sara
was his sister, and being demanded why he did so, answered, because he
thought the fear of God was not in that place: Genesis 20.11.
insinuating that he which wants the fear of God, will not make conscience of
any sin whatsoever. Would we then even from the bottom of our hearts turn
to God, and become new creatures, then let us learn to fear God: which is
nothing else but this, when a man is persuaded in his own heart and
conscience that wheresoever he be, he is in the presence and sight of God, and
by reason thereof is afraid to sin. This we must have fully settled in our
hearts, if we desire to learn but the first lesson of true wisdom. But what
reason uses the thief to draw his fellow to the fear of God? Thou art
(says he) in the same condemnation, that is, by thy sins and manifold
transgressions thou have deserved death, and it is now most justly inflicted
upon thee, will thou not yet fear God? Where we are taught, that temporal
punishments and crosses, ought to be means to work in us the fear of God;
for that is one end why they are sent of God. It is good for me (says David)
that I have been chastised, Psalm. 119.7^.
that I may learn thy statutes. 1. Cor. 11.32. Mich. 7.9.
And Paul says, when we are chastised, we are nurtured of the Lord. And the
Jews are taught by the Prophet Micah to say, I will bear the wrath of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him.

The second fruit of his conversion is, that he condemns himself and his
fellow for their sins, saying, Indeed we are righteously here, for we
receive things worthy for that we have done, that is, we have wonderfully
sinned against Gods majesty, and against our brethren: and therefore this
grievous punishment which we bear, is most just and due unto us. This fruit of
repentance springs and grows very thin among us, for few there be which do
seriously condemn themselves for their own sins: the manner of men is to
condemn others, and to cry out that the world was never so badde, but bring
them home to themselves, and you shall find that they have many excuses and
defenses as plaisterworke to cast over their foul and filthy sins: and if
they be urged to speak against themselves, the worst will be thus, God help
us, we are all sinners, even the best of us. But certain it is, that he which is
thoroughly touched in conscience for his sins, both can and will speak more
against himself for his manifold offenses, then all the world besides. Thus
Paul when he was converted, 1. Tim* 1.15.
calls himself the chief of all sinners. And the prodigal child confesses
that he had sinned against heaven and against his father, and was not worthy
to be called his child.

The third fruit of his conversion is, that he excuses our Savior Christ, and
gives testimony of his innocence, saying, But this man has done nothing
amiss. Mark here: Pilate condemned Christ, Herod mocked him, all the learned
Scribes and Pharisees condemned him, and the people cry, away with him, let him
be crucified: and among his own disciples Peter denied him, and the rest ran
away: there remains only this poor silly wretch upon the cross to give
testimony of Christ's innocence: whereby we learn, that God chooses the
simple ones of this world, to overthrow the wisdom of the wise: and therefore
we must take heed that we be not offended at the gospel of Christ, by reason
that for the most part simple and mean men in the world embrace it. Nay mark
further, this one thief being converted, had a better judgment in matters
concerning Gods kingdom, then the whole body of the Jews. And by this all
students may learn, that if they desire to have in themselves upright
judgment in matters of religion, first of all they must become repentant
sinners: and though a man have never so much learning, yet if he be carried
away with his own blind affections and lusts, they will corrupt and darken
his judgment. Men which work in mines and coale-pits under the earth, are
troubled with nothing so much as with dampes, which make their candle burn
dark, and sometimes put it quite out. Now every man's sins are the damps of
his heart, which when they take place, do dim the light of his judgment, and
cast a mist over the mind, and darken the understanding and reason: and
therefore a needful thing it is, that men in the first place should provide
for their own conversion.

The fourth fruit of his repentance is, that he prays for mercy at Christ's
hands, Lord (says he) remember me when thou come into thy kingdom: in
which prayer we may see what is the property of faith. This thief at this
instant heard nothing of Christ but the skornings and mockings of the people,
and he saw nothing but a base estate full of ignominy and shame, and the
cursed death of the cross, yet nevertheless he now believes in Christ, and
therefore entreats for salvation at his hand. Hence we learn, that it is one
thing to believe in Christ, and an other to have feeling and experience: and
that even then when we have no sense or experience, we must believe: Heb. 11.1.
for faith is the subsisting of things which are not seen: and Abraham above
hope did believe under hope: and Job says, though thou kill me, Romans 4.18.
yet will I believe in thee. In Philosophy a man begins by experience, after
which commes knowledge and belief; as when a man has put his hand to the
fire, and feels it to be hot, he comes to know thereby that fire burns: but
in Divinity we must believe though we have no feeling: first comes faith, and
after comes sense and feeling. And seeing the ground of our religion stands in
this, to believe things neither seen nor felt, to hope above all hope, and
without hope: in extremity of affliction to believe that God loves us, when
he seems to be our enemy, and to persevere in the same to the end.

The answer which Christ made to his prayer was, This night shall thou be with
in Paradise. Whereby he testifies in the midst of his sufferings the power
which he had over the souls of men: and verifies that gracious promise, Ask
and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened
to you: and withal confutes the popish purgatory. For if any man should have
gone to that forged place of torment, then the thief upon the cross, who
repenting at the last gasp wanted time to make satisfaction for the temporal
punishment of his sins. And by this conversion of the thief we may learn,
that if any of us would turn to God and repent, we must have three things. I.
The knowledge of our own sins. II. From the bottom of our hearts we must
confess and condemn our selves for them, and speak the worst that can be of
our selves, in regard of our sins. III. We must earnestly crave pardon for
them, and call for mercy at Gods hands in Christ, withal reforming our lives
for the time to come: if we do, we give tokens of repentance; if not, we may
think what we will, but we deceive our selves, and are not truly converted.
And here we must be warned to take heed least we abuse, as many do, the
example of the thief, to conclude thereby that we may repent when we will;
because the thief on the cross was converted at the last gasp. For there is
not a second example like to this in all the whole Bible: it was also
extraordinary. In deed sundry men are called at the eleventh hour, but it
is a most rare thing to find the conversion of a sinner after the second
hour, and at the point of the twelfth. This mercy God vouchsafed this one
thief, that he might be a glass in which we might behold the efficacy of the
death of Christ, but the like is not done to many me^, no not to one of a
thousand. Let us rather consider the estate of the other thief, who neither by
the dealing of his fellow, Luke 23*44. (...).
nor by any speech of Christ could be brought to repentance. Let us not
therefore defer our repentance to the hour of death: for then we shall have
sore enemies against us: the world, the flesh, the devil, and a guilty
conscience: and the best way is beforehand to prevent them. And experience
shows that if a man defer repentance to the last gasp, often when he would
repent he cannot. Let us take Salomons counsel: Remember thy creator in the
days of thy youth, before the evil days come. If we will not hear the Lord
when he calls us, he will not hear us when we call on him.

The third sign was, the ecclipsing or darkning of the sun from the sixth
hour to the ninth. And this eclipse was miraculous. For by the course of
nature the sun is never ecclipsed, but in the new moon: whereas contrariwise
this eclipse was about the time of the Passover which was always kept at the
full moon. Luke 23.44. (...).
Question is made touching the largenes of it: some moved by the words of
Luke, who says that darkness was upon the whole earth, has thought that the
eclipse was universal over the whole word: but I rather think, that Saint
Lukes meaning is, that it was over the whole region or country of Jury. For
if such a wonder had happened over the whole world, all historiographers Greek
and Latin and Astronomers, diligent obseruers of all ecclipses, would have
made special mention thereof. And though some Eusebius. Chron. Tertull. Apolog. c
21. Ores. l. 7. c* 4.
writers say that it was over the whole earth, and that it was set down in
record both by the Romans and Grecians, yet all their writings prove no more
but this, that it was over Jury and Galelie and the countries bordering near
unto. The uses of this miracle are manifold. I. This darkening of the sun
gives a check to the Jews for their crucifying of Christ: they were not
ashamed to apprehend, accuse, and condemn him: yet this glorious creature the
sun pulls in his beams, being as it were ashamed to behold that, which
they were not ashamed to do. II. It serves to signify the great judgment of
God to come upon the Jews. For as when Christ suffered, darkness was over all
the land of Jury, and all the world besides had the light of the sun, 2.
Cor. 3.5.
so shortly after blindness of mind was over the whole nation of the Jews, and
all the world besides saw the son of righteousness shining unto them in the
preaching of the Gospel. Mal. 4.2.
III. It serves to advertise us that such as carry themselves toward Christ
as the Jews did, have nothing else in them but darkness, and that they sit in
darkness and shadow of death: Isa. 8.20. Luke 1.79.
and therefore not able any whit better to see the way that leads unto life,
then he which is cast into a dark dungeon can; who if they thus remain, shall
at length be cast into utter darkness. This being the estate of all them
that be forth of Christ: we must labor to be freed from this darkness, that
the day star may rise in our hearts, 2. Pet. 1.1.
and shine upon us, and put life into us. IIII. This miraculous and wonderful
darkening of the sun does convince the Jews, that Christ whom they
crucified was the Lord of glory, and the Savior of the world: and it is very
likely that this was the principal end of this miracle. For whereas neither
his doctrine, nor his former miracles could move them to acknowledge him for
the Messiah, yet this one work of God does as it were strike the nail to the
head, and stop all their mouths. V. Besides this, whereas at that very
instant when Christ was about to make a satisfaction to the justice of his
father for our sins; the sun was thus darkened: it teaches us first to
think of the passion of Christ, not as of a light matter, but as of one of the
greatest wonders of the world, at the sight whereof the very frame of nature
was changed: secondly, to think of our own sins, as the vilest things in
the world, and that they deserve the intolerable wrath of God: considering
that at the time when they were to be abolished, the course of nature even in
the very heavens is turned vpside down.

The fourth sign is, the rending of the veil of the Temple from the top to
the bottom. Mat. 27.11.
The temple was divided into two parts: the one more inward into which no man
might come but the high priest, and that once a year; and it was called the
holy of holies: the other was that where the people came and offered sacrifices
unto the Lord. Now that which parted the temple into these two parts was
called the veil, and at the time of Christ's passion it was re^t from the top
to the very bottom. This has diverse uses: I. The holy of holies signified the
third heaven, Hebr. 9.8.
where God shows himself in glory and majesty unto his Saints: now the
rending of the veil figureth unto us, that by the death of Christ heaven which
was otherwise shut by our sins is now set open, and a way made to enter
thereto. II. It signifies, Ioh. ^.51.
that by the death of Christ we have all without impediment, free access to
come unto God the father by earnest prayer in the name of Christ; which is a
most unspeakable benefit. III. It signifies, that by Christ's death an end is
put to all ceremonies, to ceremonial worship, and the sacrifices of the old
testament: and that therefore in the new testament there remains one only
real and outward sacrifice, that is, Christ crucified on the cross: and the
whole service and worship of God for outward ceremonies most simple and
plain. IIII. The Temple was the chief and one of the most principal
prerogatives that the Jews had; it was their glory that they had such a place
wherein they might worship and do service to the true God: and for the Temples
sake God often spared them, and therefore Daniel prays: O Lord, Dan. 9.17.
hear the prayer of thy servant, and his supplication, and cause thy face to
shine upon thy Sanctuary that lies wast for the Lords sake. Yet for all this,
when they began to crucify the Lord of life, their prerogatives helps the^
not, nay they are deprived thereof, and God even with his own hand rends the
veil of the temple in sunder, signifying unto them, that if they forsake him,
he will also forsake them. And so may we say of the Church of England: No doubt
for the Gospels sake we have outward peace and safety, and many other
blessings, and are in account with other nations: yet if we make no conscience
to obey the word of God, and if we have no love of Christ and his members, God
will at length remove his candlestick from us, and utterly deprive us of this
ornament of the Gospel, and make our land as odious unto all the world, as the
land of the Jews is at this day. Let us therefore with all care and diligence
show forth our love both to Christ himself and to his members, and adorn the
Gospel which we profess by bringing forth fruits worthy of it.

The fifth sign is the earthquake, whereby hard rocks were cloven asunder.
And it serves very fitly to signify further unto us, Matt. 27.51.
that the sin of the Jews in putting Christ to death was so heavy a burden,
that the earth could not bear it, but trembled thereat, though the Jews
themselves made no bones of it. And it is a thing to be wondered at, that the
earth do not often in these days, tremble and quake at the monstrous
blasphemies and fearful oaths by the wounds and blood and heart of Christ,
whereby his members are rent asunder, and he traitorously crucified again.
Secondly, the earthquake shows unto us the exceeding and wonderful hardness of
the hearts of the Jews, and ours also: they crucified Christ and were not
touched with any remorse; and we can talk and hear of his death, yea we can
say he was crucified for our sins: and yet are we nothing affected therewith,
our hearts will not rend when as hard rocks cleave asunder. Thirdly, the
mooving of the earth, and the rending of the rocks asunder, may be a sign unto
us of the virtue of the doctrine of the Gospel of Christ: which is nothing else
but the publishing of the passion of his death: which being preached, shall
shake heaven and earth, sea and land. It shall move the earthen, hard, and
rockie hearts of men; Agg. 2.7.
and raise up of mere stones and rocks children unto Abraham. But the maine
use and end of this point is, to prove that he that was crucified, was the
true Messiah the son of God: and therefore had the power of heaven and earth,
and could move all things at his pleasure.

The sixth sign of the power of Christ is, that graves did open, and many
bodies of the saints which slept arose, Mat. 27.52.53.
and came out of their graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy
city, and appeared unto many. The use of this sign is this: it signifies unto
us, that Christ by his death upon the cross did vanquish death in the grave,
and opened it, and thereby testified that he was the resurrection, and the
life: so that it shall not have everlasting dominion over us: but that he will
raise us up from death to life, and to everlasting glory.

The seventh sign is the testimony of the Centurion with his soldiers which
stood by to see Christ executed: S. Mark says, when he saw that Christ thus
crying gave up the ghost, he said, truly this was the son of God. Mar. 15.39.
Thus we see it is an easy matter for Christ to defend his own cause: let
Judas betray him, Peter deny him, and all the rest forsake him, yet he can if
it so please him make the Centurion that stands by to see him executed to
testify of his innocence. But what was the occasion that moved him to give
so worthy a testimony? S. Matthew says, it was fear, Mat. 27.54.
and that fear was caused, by hearing the loud cry of Christ, and by seeing
the earthquake and things which were done. And this must put us in mind not
to pass by Gods judgments which daily fall out in the world, but take
knowledge of them, and as it were, to fix both our eyes on them. For they are
notable means to strike and astonish the rebellious heart of man, and to bring
it in awe and subjection to God. After that the two first captains with their
fifties commanding the prophet Elias to come down to king* Achaziah were
consumed with fire from heaven: the king sent his third captain over fifty
with his fifty to fetch him down: but what does he? it is said, he fell on
his knee before Eliah and besought him saying, O man of God, 2. King. 1.13.
I pray thee, let my life and the lives of these fifty servants be precious in
thine eyes. But what was the cause why he prayed thus? Surely he observed what
judgments of God fell upon his two former fellow captains, Behold, says
he, there came down fire from heaven, and devoured the two former captains
with their fifties: therefore let my life be precious now in thy sight. Thus
laying to his own heart and making use of Gods judgments, he humbled
himself and was spared with his fifty. And Habbaccuk says, When I heard the
voice, Habac. 3.16.
namely of Gods judgments, rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in
my self that I might be safe in the day of the Lord. Now what this fear of
the Centurion was, there is a further question, and it is very like that it
was but a sudden motion or a certain preparatiue to better things. For he was
but an heathen man, and had as yet no knowledge of Christ, and whether he
repented or not it is uncerten: and we must not marvel at this, for there are
many sudden motions in show very good, that upon like occasions rise in the
hearts of natural men. When God plagued the land of Egypt, then Pharaoh sent
for Moses and confessed that the Lord was righteous, but he and his people
were wicked; and desired Moses to pray to God to take away the plague, who did
so: but so soon as the hand of God was stayed, Exodus 9.27. and 34.
he returned to his old rebellion again. And as a dog that comes out of
the water shakes his ears, and yet returns into it again: so is the manner
of the world: when crosses and calamities befall men, as sickness, loss of
friends or goods, then with Ahab they outwardly humble themselves and go
softly: they use to frequent the place where the word is preached and Gods name
called upon: but alas, common experience shows that these things are but
fittes arising of uncerten and flittering motions in the heart. For so soon as
the cross is removed, they return to their old byas again, and become as
bad and as backwarde as ever they were: being like to the tree that lies in
the water, which for a while is green, but afterward withers. And therefore
we for our parts, when we have any good motions come into our hearts as the
beginnings of further grace, we must not quench them but cherish and preserve
them, remembering that the kingdom of heaven, is like a grain of mustard seed,
which when it is sown is the least of all seeds: but afterward it grows up
into a tree, that the fowls of the heaven may build their neasts in it: and
like to this are the first motions of Gods spirit, and therefore they must be
cherished and maintained.

And thus much for the 7. signs of the power of Christ's godhead. Now follows
the second part of the triumph of Christ, which contains signs of his
victory upon the cross, notably expressed by Paul when he says, And putting
out the handwriting of ordinances which was against us, which was contrary to
us, he even took it out of the way and fastened it upon the cross, and has
spoiled the principalities and powers, Col. 2.14, 15.
and has made a show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same.
In which words he alludeth to the manner of heathen triumphs: for it was the
custom of heathen princes when they had gotten the victory over their
enemies, first to cause a pillar of stone, or some great oak to be cut down,
and set up in the place of victory, upon which either the names of the chief
enemies were set, or their heads were hanged, or words were written in the
pillar to testify the victory. This being done, there follovved an open
show, in which first the conqueror prepares for himself a chariot of
victory wherein he was himself to ride, and then the chief of his enemies
bound and pinioned, were led openly after him. Now on the same manner upon
the cross there was a pitched field; the Emperor on the one side was Christ;
his enemies on the other side were the world, the flesh, hell, death,
damnation, the devil, and all his angels: all which, banding themselves
against him were all subdued by him upon the same cross: and he himself gave
two signs of his triu^ph, one was a monument of the victory, the other an
open show of his conquest. Now the monument of Christ's victory was the
cross it self, whereon he nailed the obligation or bill which was against
us: vvherby satan might have accused and condemned us before god. For we must
consider that god the father is as a creditour, and we all debtors unto him:
he has a bill of our hands which is the law, in that it gives testimony
against us; first by the legal washings, which did show and signify that we
were altogether defiled and unclean; secondly by the sacrifices that were
daily offered for propitiation for our sins. Now Christ was our surety, and
paid every iotte of the debt which we should have paid, and requiring the
acquittance, takes the ceremonial law, and the curse of the moral law, and
nails them to the cross.

Furthermore in the show of conquest, the chariot is the cross likewise: for
it was not only a monument of victory, but also a chariot of triumph. And the
captives bound and pinioned which follow Christ, are principalities and powers,
that is, the devil, and his angels, hell, death, and condemnation: all which
are as it were taken prisoners, their armor and weapons are taken from them,
and they chained and bound each to other.

The meditation of this point serves to admonish us to abandon all manner of
sin, and to make conscience of every good duty if we will aright profess
the gospel of Christ: for when we sin, we do as it were pull Christ out
of his chariot of triumph, and untie satan's bonds, and give him weapons, and
(as much as we can) make him valiant and strong again. Now for any man to make
satan and sin valiant and strong against himself, whereas Christ has
weakened him, and even bruised his head, is no better then to become an enemy
of the cross of Christ. Philip. 3.18.
Again, hereby we are taught to pray unto God that our blind eyes may be
opened, that we may discern aright of the passion of Christ. It is a wonder
to see how men are carried away with a liking of vain shows, games and
enterludes: how they spend even whole days in beholding the^, and their money
also that they may come to the places where they are: oh then how exceedingly
ought our hearts to be ravished with this mast admirable shevve, in which the
son of God himself rides most gloriously in his chariot of triumph, and
leads his and our most cursed enemies captive, yea treades them under his
foot. This triumph is set forth unto us in the preaching of the Gospel, and
may be seen of us all freely without money or money-worth. What wretches then
shall we be, if we suffer our hearts to be filled with earthly delights, and
in the mean season have little or no desire to behold with the eyes of our
mind this goodly spectacle that is to be seen in the passion of Christ, that
serves to revive and refresh our souls to life eternal.

Thirdly if Christ when he was most weak and base in the eyes of men, did most
of all triumph upon the cross; then every one of us must learn to say with
the Apostle Paul, God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing but in the
cross of Christ Jesus our Lord. That we may say this truly, Galat. 6.14.
first of all we must labor to have the benefit of the cross of Christ not
only in the remission but also in the mortification of our sins: secondly,
we must not be discomforted, but rather rejoice and triumph therein. A
Christian man can never have greater honor then to suffer for the Gospel of
Christ when God calls him thereunto: and therefore S. Paul sets forth
another most glorious show which all those must make that suffer any thing for
Gods cause. They must encounter with the world, the flesh, 1. Cor. 4.9.
and the devil, and are placed as it were on a theater: and in this conflict
the beholders are men and Angels; yea, the whole host of heaven and earth: the
umpire or judge is God himself, it will give sentence of victory on their
side, and so they shall overcome. We must not hereupon thrust our selves into
danger: but when it shall please God to call us thereunto, we must think our
selves highly honored of him. As when God sends loss of friends, of
substance, or good name, or any other calamity, we must not despair, or be
over grieved: but rather rejoice and address our selves then with our savior
Christ to make a triumph.

Thus much of Christ's triumph, and the passion of his cross. Now follows
the second degree of his humiliation in these words, And buried. Where we must
consider these points: I. why it was needful that Christ should be buried.
II. who was the author of this burial. III. the manner or preparation to his
burial. IIII. the place and time where and when he was buried. Of these in
order. For the first; the causes are many, but especially four why Christ was
to be buried. I. that the truth and certentie of his death might be confirmed
unto us, and that no man might so much as imagine that his death was a
fantastical death, or his body a fantastical body: for men use not to bury a
living but a dead man, or a man in show, but a true man. II. that his burial
might be unto him a passage from the estate of humiliation to the estate of
exaltation, which began in his resurrection: and he could not have risen
again, if he had not been first buried. III. that the outward humiliation in
the form of a servant, which he took upon him, might be continued upon him to
the lowest degree of all: and therefore it was not sufficient that he should
be crucified even to death, but being dead, he must be also buried. IIII.
Christ was buried, that he might not only vanquish death on the cross, but
even after the manner of conquerours subdue him at his own home, and as it
were, pluck him out of his own cabin.

The authors of Christ's burial were Joseph of Arimathea, and Nichodemus, Mat.
27. Mar. 15.43. Ioh. 19.38.
who came to Jesus by night. Now concerning them and this their fact, there are
many things worthy to be considered in this place. First of all they were
disciples of Christ, and the difference between them and the rest is to be
considered. The other disciples though in number they were but few, yet in the
feast before his passion they openly followed him: but when Christ was to be
arraigned, and the persecution of the Church of the new Testament began in him,
then Judas betrayed him, Peter denied him, and the rest fled away: yet even at
the same instant these two secret disciples of our Savior Christ, Joseph of
Arimathea and Nicodemus take courage to themselves, and in time of danger
openly profess themselves to be Christ's disciples by an honorable and
solemn burial; God no doubt opening their hearts and inabling them to do
so. The like is to be seen in all ages since the passion of Christ in the
Church of God, in which men zealous for the gospel in peace have been
timorous in persecution, whereas weak ones have stood out against their
enemies even unto death it self. The reason is, because God will humble those
his servants which are often times endued with great measure of graces, and
contrariwise exalt and strengthen the weak and feeble: and the same no doubt
will be found true among us, if it should please god to send any new trial
into the Church of England. This serves to teach us to think charitably of
those which are as yet but weak among us: and with all in our profession to
carry a low sail and to think basely of our selves, and in the whole course of
our lives creep allow by the ground, running on in fear and tre^bling, because
the Lord oftentimes humbles those that be strong, and give courage and strength
to weak ones boldly to confess his name. Secondly, whereas these two
disciples have such care of the burial of Christ, we learn, that it is our
duty to be careful also for the honest and solemn burial of our brethren.
The Lord him self has commanded it, Thou art dust, and to dust thou shall
return. Genesis 3.19.
Also the bodies of men are the good creatures of God, yea the bodies of Gods
children are the temples of the Holy ghost, and therefore there is good cause
why they should be honestly laid in the earth. And it was a curse and
judgment of God upon Iehoiakim that he must not be buried, Ier. 22.19.
but like a dead ass be drawn and cast out of the gates of Jerusalem. Amos.
2.1.
And so the Lord threatens a curse upon the Moabites because they did not
bury the king of Edom, but burnt his bones into lime. And therefore it is a
necessary duty one neighbor and friend to look to the honest burial of
another. Hence it follows, that the practice of Spain and Italy and all
popish countries, which is to keep the parts of men's bodies and such like
relikes of saints unburied, that they may be seen of me^ and worshipped, has
no warrant: dust they are and to dust they ought to be returned.

Furthermore the properties and virtues of both these men are severally to be
considered. And first to begin with Joseph, he was a senator, a man of
great account, authority, and reputation among the Jews. Luke 23.50.
It may seem a strange thing that a man of such account would abase him self
so much as to take down the body of Christ from the cross. It might have been
an hinderance to him and a disgrace to his estate and calling: as we see in
these days, it would be thought a base thing for a knight to come to the place
of execution and take down a thief from the hand of the hangman to bury
him: but this noble Senator Joseph for the love he bare to Christ, made no
account of his state and calling, neither did he scorn to take upon him so
base an office, considering it was for the honor of Christ: where we learn,
that if we truly love Christ, and our hearts be set to believe in him, we will
never refuse to perform the basest service that may be for his honor, nothing
shall hinder us. It is further said, that he was a good man and a just: Luke
23.50, 51.
and also a rich man. And the first appears in this, that he would neither
consent to the counsel nor fact of the Jews in crucifying Christ. It is rare
to find the like man in these days. From his example we learn these
lessons. I. that a rich man remaining a rich man may be a servant of God, and
also be saved: for riches are the good blessings of God, and in them selves do
no whit hinder a man in coming to Christ. But some will say, Christ himself
says, It is easier for a Mat. 19.24.
cable to go through the eye of a needle, as a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Ans. It is to be understood of a rich man, so long as he
swells with a confidence in his wealth: but we know, that if a cable be
untwisted and drawn into small threeds, it may be drawn through the eye of a
needle: so he that is rich let him deny himself, abase himself, and lay
aside all confidence in himself, in his riches and honor, and be as it were,
made small as a tvvine threede, and with this good Senator Joseph become the
disciple of Christ, he may enter into the kingdom of heaven. But Christ says
in the parable that riches are thorns, which choke the grace of God. Answer:
It is true, they are thorns in that subject or in that man that puts his
trust in them; not in their own nature, but by reason of the corruption of
man's heart, who makes of them his God. S. John says further, that Joseph was
a disciple of Christ, Ioh. 19.38.
but yet a close disciple for fear of the Jews. And this shows, that
Christ is most ready to receive them that come unto him, though they come
laden with manifold wants. I say not this, that any hereby should take boldness
to live in their sins, but my meaning is, that though men be weak in the
faith, yet are they not to be dismayed, but to come to Christ, who refuses
none that come to him. Draw nere to God (says S. James) and he will draw nere
to you. Christ does not forsake any, Iam. 4.8.
till they forsake him first. Lastly the H. ghost says of him, that he waited
for the kingdom of God, that is, he did believe in the Messiah to come, and
therefore did wait daily till the time was come, when the Messiah by his death
and passion should abolish the kingdom of sin and satan, and establish his
own kingdom throughout the whole world. The same is said of Simeon that he was
a good man and feared God, and waited for the consolation of Israel. This was
the most principal virtue of all that Joseph had, and the very root of all
his goodness and righteousness, that he waited for the kingdom of God. For it is
the property of faith whereby we have confidence in the Messiah to change our
nature, and to purify the heart, and to make it bring forth works of
righteousness. There be many among us, that can talk of Christ's kingdom,
and of redemption by him, and yet make no conscience of sin, and have little
care to live according to the gospel which they profess: and all is, because
they do not soundly believe in the Messiah, and they wait not for the
kingdom of heaven, and therefore there is no change in them: but we must
labor to have this affiance in the Messiah with Joseph, and to wait for his
second appearance, that thereby we may be made new creatures, having the
kingdom of Satan battered and beaten down in us, and the kingdom of God
erected in our hearts.

Touching Nichodemus S. John says, that he came to Jesus by night. Many men
build upon this example, that it is lawful to be present at the Mass, so be
it in the mean season we keep our hearts to God: and indeed such men are
like Nichodemus in that they labor to bury Christ as much as they ca^, though
now after his resurrection he should not be buried again. But though
Nichodemus durst not openly at the first profess the name of Christ, yet after
his death when there is most danger he does: and by this means reformeth
his former doing.

Thus much of the persons that buried Christ: The third thing to be observed is
the manner of Christ's burial, which stands in these 4. points. First they
take down his body from the cross: secondly, they wind it: thirdly, they lay
it in a tomb: fourthly, the tomb is made sure. Of these in order. First,
Joseph takes down the body of Christ from the cross whereon he was
executed, but mark in what manner: he does it not on his own head without
leave, but he goes to Pilate and beggeth the body of Christ, and asks leave
to take it down, because the disposing of dead bodies was in Pilates hand, he
being deputy at that time: whereby we learn, that in all our dealings and
actions (though they have never so good an end) our duty is to proceed as
peaceably with all men as may be: as S. James says: The wisdom that is from
above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, Iam. 3.17.
etc. Again, this ^eacheth us, that in all things which concern the
authority of the Magistrate, and belong unto him by the rule of Gods word,
we must attempt or do whatsoever we do by leave. And here we may see of what
courses they take, that being private men in this our Church, will
notwithstanding take upon them to plant Churches without the leave of the
Magistrate being a christian prince. Having thus taken the body of Christ
down, they go on to wind it. And Joseph for his part brought linen clothes,
Ioh. 19 40. Luke 24.1.
and Nichodemus a mixture of myr^he and aloes to the quantity of an hundred
pounds for the honorable burial of Christ. His winding was on this manner:
they wrapped his body hastily in linen clothes, sweet odours put thereto.
Besides all this, in the Jews burials there was embalming and washing of the
body, but Christ's body was not P. Ram. theol. l. 1. c. 14. Seems to be deceived
in that he puts Christ's burial for his embalming, and his descending into bell
for his burial or his lying in the grave.
embalmed or washed, because they had no time to do it, for the preparation to
the passover drew nere. And whereas these 2. me^ bury Christ at their own cost
and charges, we are taught to be like affected to the living members of Christ:
when they want we must relieve and comfort them liberally and freely. It may
here be demanded, whether men may not be at cost in making funerals,
considering even Christ himself is with much cost buried. Ans. The bodies of
all dead men are to be buried in seemly and honest manner, and if they be
honorable, they may be buried honorably: yet now there is no cause why men's
bodies should be washed, anointed, and embalmed as the use was among the
Jews: for they used embalming as a pledge and sign of the resurrection: 1.
Cor. 15.29.
but now since Christ's coming we have a more certain pledge thereof, even the
resurrection of Christ himself, and therefore there is no cause, why we should
use embaulming and washing as the Jews did. And the clause which is specified
in Saint Matthew is not to be omitted, that Joseph wrapped Christ's body in a
clean linen cloth: whereby we learn, Mat. 27.59.
that howsoever the strange fashions fetched from Spain and Italy are
monstrous and to be abho^red: yet, seeing the body of a man is the creature of
God, therefore it must be arrayed in cleanly manner, and in holy comelines. Tit.
2.3. 1. Tim. 3.2. (...). Ioh. 19.42. Mat. 27.60.66.
Paul requires that the minister of the Gospel in all things be seemly or
comely: and herein he ought to be a pattern of sobriety unto all men. Thirdly,
after they have wou^d the body of Christ, they lay it in a to^b, and lastly
they make it sure, closing it up with a stone rolled over the mouth of it. Also
the Jews request Pilat to seal it that none might presume to open it:
besides, they set a band of soldiers to watch the tomb, and to keep it that
his body be not stolle^ away. Many reasons might be alleged of this their
dealing, but principally it came to pass by the providence of God, that hereby
he might confirm the resurrection of Christ. For whereas the Jews would
neither be moved by his doctrine nor by his works and miracles to believe, he
causes this to be done, that by the certenty of his resurrection he might
convince them of hardness of heart, and prove that he was the son of God.

Thus much of the manner of his burial. Now follows the place where Christ was
buried. In the place we are to mark 3. things: I. that Christ was laid in
Joseph's tomb, whereby we may gather the greatness of Christ's poverty, in that he
had not so much ground as to make himself a grave in: and this must be a
comfort to the members of Christ that are in poverty. And it teaches them, if
they have no more but food and raiment, to be there with content, knowing that
Christ their head and king has consecrated this very estate unto them.
Secondly the tomb wherein Christ was laid was a new tomb wherein never any
man lay before. And it was the special appointment of Gods providence that it
should be so, because if any man had been buried there aforetime, the malicious
Jews would have pleaded, that it was not Christ that rose again but some
other. Thirdly we must observe, that this tomb was in a garden, as the fall of
man was in a garden, Ioh. 19.41. Genesis 3.8. Ioh. 18.1.
and as the apprehension of Christ in a garden beyond the brook Cedron. And
here we must note the practice of a good man. This garden was the place of
Joseph's delight and holy recreation wherein he used to solace himself in
beholding the good creatures of God, yet in the same place does he make his
own grave long before he dyed: whereby it appears, that his recreation was
joined with a meditation of his end: and his example must be followed of us.
True it is, God has given us his creatures not only for necessity, but also
for our lawful delight, but yet our duty is, to mingle therewith serious
meditation and consideration of our last end. It is a brutish part to use the
blessings and creatures of God, and not at all to be bettered in regard of our
last end by a further use thereof.

The time when Christ was buried was the evening, wherein the Sabbath was to
begin according to the manner of the Jews, which began their days at
sunne-setting from evening to evening according to that in Genesis: the evening
and the morning was the first day. Luke 23.54. Mat. 27.57.
Now Joseph comes a little before evening and beggeth the body of Christ and
burieth it: where note, that howsoever we are not bound to keep the sabbath
so strictly as the Jews were, yet when we have any business or work to be
done of our ordinary calling, we must not take a part of the Lords sabbath
day to do it in, but prevent the time, and do it either before as Joseph did,
or after the sabbath. This is little practiced in the world. Me^ think if they
go to church before and after noone to hear Gods word, then all the day after
they may do what they list, and spend the rest of the time at their own
pleasure: but the whole day is the Lords, and therefore must be spent wholly
in his service both by public hearing of the word, and also by private
reading and meditation on the same.

To conclude the doctrine of Christ's burial: Here it may be demanded, how he
was always after his incarnation both god and man, considering he was dead and
buried, and therefore body and soul were sundred, and a dead man seems to be
no man. Ansvv. A dead man in his kind is as true a man as a living man: for
though body and soul be not united by the bond of life, yet are they united
by a relation which the one has to the other in the counsel and good pleasure
of God, and that as truly as man and woman remain coupled into one flesh by a
covenant of marriage, though afterward they be distant a thousand miles
asunder: and by virtue of this relation every soul in the day of judgment
shall be reunited to his own body, and every body to his own soul. But
there is yet a more straighter bond between the body and soul of Christ in
his death and burial. Damasc.
For as when he was living his soul was a mean or bond to unite his godhead
and his body together: so when he was dead his very godhead was a mean or
middle bond to unite the body and soul: and to say otherwise is to dissolve
the hypostaticall union, by virtue whereof Christ's body and soul though
severed each from other, yet both were still joined to the godhead of the son.

The use and profit which may be made of Christ's burial is two-folde. I. It
serves to work in us the burial of all our sins. Know ye not (says
Paul) that all who have been baptized into Christ, Romans 6.3.
have been baptized into his death, and are buried with him by baptism into
his death? If any shall demand how any man is buried into the death of Christ,
the answer is this: Every Christian man and woman are by faith mystically
united unto Christ and made all members of one body, whereof Christ is the
head. Now therefore as Christ by the power of his godhead when he was dead and
buried, did overcome the grave and the power of death in his own person. So by
the very same power by means of this spiritual coniunctio^ does he work in
all his members a spiritual death and burial of sin and natural
corruption. 2. Kin. 13.21.
When the Israelites were burying of a man for fear of the soldiers of the
Moabites, they cast him for have into the sepulcher of Elisha. Now the dead
man, so soon as he was down, and had touched the body of Elisha, he revived
and stood upon his feet. So let a man that is dead in sin be cast into the
grave of Christ, that is, let him by faith but touch Christ dead and buried, it
will come to pass by the virtue of Christ's death and burial, that he shall be
raised from the death and bondage of sin to become a new man.

Secondly the burial of Christ serves to be a sweet perfume of all our graves
and burials: for the grave in it self is the house of perdition; but Christ by
his burial has as it were consecrated and perfumed all our graves: and in
stead of houses of perdition, Isai. 57.2.
has made them chambers of rest and sleep, yea beds of down, and therefore
howsoever to the eye of man the beholding of a funeral is terrible, yet if we
could then remember the burial of Christ, and consider how he thereby has
changed the nature of the grave, even then it would make us to rejoice. Lastly
we must imitate Christ's burial in being continually occupied in the spiritual
burial of our sins.

Thus much of the burial. Now follows the third and last degree of Christ's
humiliation: He descended into hell. It seems very likely that these words
were not placed in the creed at the first, P. Vire^. in symb. Erasm. in Colloq.
or (as some think) that they crept in by negligence because above threescore
creeds of the most ancient councels and fathers want this clause: and among the
rest the Nicene Creed. But if the ancient and learned fathers assembled in that
council had bin persuaded or at the least had imagined that these words had bin
set down at the first by the Apostles, no doubt they would not in any wise have
left them out. Ru^^. in expo^sit. symb.
And an ancient writer says directly, that these words, he descended into
hell, are not found in the Creed of the Roman Church, nor used in the
Churches of the East: and if they be, that then they signify the burial of
Christ. And it must not seem strange to any that a word or twain in process
of time should creep into the Creed, considering that the original copies of
the books of the old and new Testament have in them sundry V^rias lectiones.
varieties of readings and Man. 27.9. Jeremie for Zachary.
words otherwhiles which from the margin have crept into the text.
Nevertheless considering that this clause has long continued in the creed,
and that by common consent of the Catholic Church of God, and it may carry a
fit sense and exposition, it is not as some would have it, to be put forth.

Therefore that we may come to speak of the meaning of it, we must know that it
has 4. usual expositio^s, which we will rehearse in order, and then make choice
of that which shall be thought to be the fittest. The first is, that Christ's
soul after his passion upon the cross, did really and locally descend into
the place of the damned. But this seems not to be true. The reasons are these.
I. All the Evangelists and among the rest S. Luke intending to make an exact
narration of the life and death of Christ have set down at large his passion,
death, Luke 1.3. Omnia assequut^ (...).
burial, resurrection, and ascension, and withal they make rehearsal of
small circumstances, therefore no doubt they would not have omitted Christ's
local descent into the place of the damned, if there had been any such thing.
And the end why they penned this history was, that we might believe that Jesus
is Christ the son of God, and believing, Ioh. 20.31.
we might have life everlasting. Now there could not have been a greater matter
for the confirmation of our faith the^ this, that Jesus the son of Mary who
went down to the place of the damned, returned thence to live in happiness
for ever. II. If Christ did go into the place of the damned, then either in
soul or in body or in his godheade. But his godhead could not descend, because
it is every where, and his body was in the grave. And as for his soul it went
not to hell, but presently after his death it went to paradise, that is, the
third heaven, a place of joy and happiness. Luke. 23.43. This day shall thou be
with me in paradise: which words of Christ must be understood of his manhood
or soul, and not of his godhead. For they are an answer to a dema^d: and
therefore unto it* they must be suitable. Now the thief seeing, that Christ was
first of all crucified* and therefore in all likelihood* first of all die, makes
his request to this effect. Lord, thou shall shortly enter into thy kingdom,
remember me then, to which Christ's answer (as the very words import) is thus
much. I shall enter into paradise this day, and there shall thou be with me.
Now there is no entrance, but in regard of his soul or manhood. For the
godhead which is at all times in all places, ca^ not be said properly to enter
into a place. Again when Christ says, thou shall be with me in paradise, he
does intimate a resembla^ce* which is between the first and second Adam. The
first Ada^ sinned against God, and was presently cast forth out of paradise.
Christ the second Adam having made a satisfaction for sin must immediately
enter into paradise. Now to say that Christ in soul descended locally into
hell, is to abolish this analogy between the first and second Adam. III.
Ancient councels in their confessions and creeds omitting this clauseshew, that
they did not acknowledge any real descent, and that the true meaning of these
words, he descended, was sufficiently included in some of the former articles,
and that may appear, because when they set down it, they omit some of the
former: as Athanasius in his creed setting down these words he descended, etc.
omits the burial, putting them both for one as he expounds himself Li. de
incar. Chrysostom* hom. 1. and 2. in symb.
else where. Now let us see the reasons which may be alleged to the contrary.

Ob. I. Mat. 12.40. The son of man shall be 3. days and 3. nights in the
heart of the earth, that is, in hell. Ans. I. This exposition is directly
against the scope of the place: for the Pharisees desired to see a sign, that
is, some sensible and manifest miracle: and hereunto Christ answers that he
will give them the sign of Jonas, which ca^ not be the descent of his soul
into the place of the damned which is impossible; but rathet his burial, and
after it his manifest and glorious resurrection. II. The heart of the earth may
as well signify the grave as the center of the earth. For thus Tyrus bordering
upon the sea is said to be in the heart of the sea. Ezec. 27.4. In cord marium.
III. This exposition takes it far granted that hell is seated in the midst
of the earth* whereas the scriptures reveal unto us no more but this, that hell
is in the lower parts: but where these lower parts should be, no man is able to
define.

Object. II. Act. 2.37. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou
suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Answer. These words can not prove any
local descent of Christ's soul. For Peter's drift in alleging of them is, to
prove the resurrection, and he says expressly, that the words must be
understood of the resurrection of Christ, verse. 31. He seeing this before,
spoke of the resurrection of Christ. What? namely these words, his soul was
not left in hell, etc. Now there is no resurrection of the soul, but of the
body only, as the soul cannot be said to fall, but the body. It will be
replied, that the word (...) cannot signify the body, and the word (...) the
grave. Answer. The first word signifies not only the spiritual part of man,
the soul* but also the whole person, or the man himself, Romans 13.1. 1. Cor.
15.45. And the second is as well taken for the grave, as for hell. Apoc. 20.14.
Death and (...) are cast into the lake of fire. Now we can not say, that hell
is cast into hell, but the grave into hell. And the word in this text, must
needs have this sense. For Peter makes an opposition betw^eene the grave into
which David is shut up, and the hell out of which Christ was delivered, verse.
2^. and 31. Again it will be said, that in this text there be two distinct
parts: the first of the souls coming forth of hell, Bellar. quaest. de descen.
in these words, Thou will not leave my soul in hell. The second, of the
bodies rising out of the grave in the next words: neither will thou suffer my
flesh to see corruption. Answer. It is not so. For flesh in this place
signifies not the body alone, but the humane nature of Christ, as appears
verse. 30. unless we shall say that one and the same word in the same sentence
is taken two ways. And the words rather carry this sense: Thou will not
suffer me to continue long in the grave; nay which is more, in the time of my
continuance there, thou will not suffer me so much as to feel any corruption;
because I am thy holy one.

Object. III. 1. Pet. 3.19. Christ was quickened in spirit, by the which spirit
he went and preached to the spirits which are in prison. Answer. The place is
not for this purpose. For by spirit is meant not the soul of Christ, but his
Godhead, which in the ministry of Noe preached repentance to the old world.
And I think that Peter in this place alludes to another place in Genesis 6.3.
where the Lord says, My spirit shall not always strive with man, because he
is but flesh. And if the spirit do signify the soul, then Christ was
quickened either by his soul or in his soul. But neither is true. For the
first, it can not be said, that Christ was quickened by his soul, because it
did not join it self to the body: but the Godhead joined them both. Neither
was he quickened in soul: for his soul died not. It could not die the first
death, which belongs to the body: and it did not die the second death, which
is a total separation from God: only it suffered the sorrows of the second
death, which is the apprehension of the wrath of God; as a man may feel the
pangs of the first death, and yet not die the first death, but live. Again, it
is to no end that Christ's soul should go to hell to preach, considering that
it was never heard of that one soul should preach to another, especially in
hell, where all are condemned, and in conscience convicted of their just
damnation, and where there is no hope of repentance or redemption. It will be
answered, that this preaching is only real or experimental, because Christ
shows himself there to convince the unbelief of his enemies. Answer. This
which is said is flat against reason. For when a man is justly condemned by
God, After just execution conviction is needelesse.
and therefore sufficiently convicted: what need the judge himself come to the
place of execution to convict him. And it is flat against the text. For the
preaching that is spoken of here, is that which is performed by men in the
ministry of the word, as Peter expounds himself, 1. Pet. 4.6. To this
purpose was the Gospel also preached unto the dead, that they might be
condemned according to men in the flesh, that they might live according to God
in the spirit. Lastly, there is no reason why Christ should rather preach and
show himself in hell, to them that were disobedient in the days of Noe, then
to the rest of the damned.

And this is the first exposition, the second follows. He descended into hell,
that is, Christ descended into the grave, or was buried. This exposition is
agreeable to the truth, yet is it not mee^ or convenient. For the clause next
before, he was buried, contained this point: and therefore if the next words
following yield the same sense, there must be a vain and needelesse
repetition of one and the same thing twice, which is not in any-wise to be
allowed in so short a Creed as this. If it be said that these words are an
exposition of the former, the answer is, that then they should be more plain
then the former. For when one sentence expounds an other, the latter must
always be the plainer: but of these two sentences, He was buried, he descended
into hell, the first is very plain and easy, but the latter very obscure and
hard, and therefore it can be no exposition thereof: and therefore this
exposition also is not to be received.

Thirdly, others there be which expound it thus, He descended into hell, that
is, Christ Jesus when he was dying upon the cross, felt and suffered the pangs
of hell and the full wrath of God seazing upon his soul. This exposition has
his warrant in Gods word, where hell often signifies the sorrows and pains
of hell, as Hanna in her song unto the Lord says, 1. Sam. 2.6.
The Lord kills and makes alive, he brings down to hell and raises up,
that is, he makes men feel woe and misery in their souls, even the pangs of
hell, and after restores them. And David says, The sorrows of death
compassed me, and the terrors of hell laid hold on me. Psalm. 18.5.
This is an usual exposition received of the Church, and they which expound
this article thus, gives this reason thereof: The former words, was crucified,
dead and buried, do contain (say they) the outward sufferings of Christ:
now because he suffered not only outwardly in body, but also inwardly in
soul, therefore these words, he descended into hell, do set forth unto us his
inward sufferings in soul, when he felt upon the cross the full wrath of God
upon him. This exposition is good and true, and whosoever will may receive it.
But yet nevertheless it seems not so fitly to agree with the order of the
former articles. For these words, was crucified, dead and buried, must not be
understood of any ordinary death, but of a cursed death in which Christ
suffered the full wrath of God, even the pangs of hell both in soul and body:
seeing then this exposition is contained in the former words, it cannot fitly
stand with the order of this short Creed, unless there should be a distinct
article of things repeated before.

But let us come to the fourth exposition; He descended into hell, that is,
when he was dead and buried, he was held captive in the grave, and lay in
bondage under death for the space of three days. This exposition also may be
gathered forth of the Scriptures. Saint Peter says, God has raised him up,
Act. 2.24.
(speaking of Christ) and loosed the sorows of death, because it was impossible
that he should be holden of it. Where we may see, that between the death and
resurrection of Christ, there is placed a third matter, which is not mentioned
in any clause of the Apostles Creed save in this, and that is his bondage
under death, which comes in between his death and rising again. And the
words themselves do most fitly bear this sense, as the speech of Jacob
shows, I will go down into o^, the grave. Genesis 37.35.
hell unto my son mourning. And this exposition does also best agree with the
order of the Creed; first he was crucified and died, secondly he was buried,
thirdly laid in the grave, and was therein held in captivity and bondage under
death. And these three degrees of Christ's humiliation, are most fitly
correspondent to the three degrees of his exaltation. The first degree of his
exhaltation, he rose again the third day, answearing to the first degree of
his humiliatio^, he died: the second degree of his exhaltatio^, he ascended
into heaven, answering to his going down into the grave, was buried: and
thirdly his sitting at the right hand of God (which is the highest degree of
his exhaltation) answearing to the lowest degree of his humiliation, he
descended into hell. These two last expositions are commonly received, and we
may indifferently make choice of either: but the last (as I take it) is most
agreeable to the order and words of the Creed.

Thus much for the meaning of the words. Now follow the uses. And first of all
Christ's descending into hell, teaches every one of us that profess the name
of Christ, that if it shall please God to afflict us, either in body, or in
mind, or in both, though it be in most grievous and tedious manner, yet must
we not think it strange. For Christ upon the cross not only suffered the
pangs of hell, but after he was dead, death takes him and as it were carries
him into his den, or cabin, and there triumphs over him, holding him in
captivity and bondage, and yet for all this was he the son of God: and
therefore when Gods hand is heavy upon us any way, we are not to despair,
but rather think it is the good pleasure of God to frame and fashion us, that
we may become like unto Christ Jesus as good children of God. David a man after
Gods own heart was by Samuel anointed king over Israel, but withal God
raised up Saul to persecute him, as the fowler hunteth the partridge in the
mountain, in so much that David said, there was but one step between him and
death. Job. 2.8, 9.
So likewise Job a just man and one that feared God with all his heart, yet how
heavily did God lay his hand upon him; his goods and cattle were all taken
away, and his own children slain, and his own body stricken by satan with
loathsome biles from the sole of his foot unto the crown of his head, so as
he was feign to take a potsheard and scrape himself sitting among the ashes.
And Jonah the servant and Prophet of the most high God, when he was called to
preach to Ninivie, because he refused for fear of that great city, God met
with him, and he must be cast into the sea, and there be swallowed up of a
whale, that so he might chastise him: and thus does he deal with his own
servants, to make them conformable to Christ. And further, when it pleases God
to lay his hand upon our souls, and make us have a troubled and distressed
conscience, so as we do as it were struggle with Gods wrath as for life and
death, and can find nothing but his indignation seazing upon our souls, which
is the most grievous and perplexed estate that any man can be in: in this case
howsoever we cannot discern or see any hope or comfort in our selves, yet we
must not think it strange, nor quite despair of his mercy. For the son of
God himself descended into hell, and death carried him captive, and triumphed
over him in the grave, and therefore though God seem to be our utter enemy,
yet we must not despair of his help. In diverse Psalms we read how David
was not only persecuted outwardly of his enemies, but even his sou^e and
conscience were perplexed for his sins, so as his bones were consumed within
him, Psalm. 32.3.
and his moisture was turned into the drought in summer. This caused Job to cry
out that the arrows of God were within him, Job 6.4.
and the venyme thereof did drink up his spirit, the terrors of God did fight
against him, and the grief of his soul was as weighty as the sand of the
sea, by reason whereof he says, that the Lord did make him a mark and a butte
to shoot at: and 16.9, 12.
and therefore when God shall thus afflict us, either in body or in soul, or
in both, we must not always think that it is the wrathful hand of the Lord
that begins to bring us to utter condemnation for our sins, but rather his
fatherly work to kill sin in us, and to make us grow in humility, that so
we may become like unto Christ Jesus. Secondly, whereas Christ for our sakes
was thus abased even unto the lowest degree of humiliation that can be, it is
an example for us to imitate, as Christ himself prescribes: Learn of me that
I am meek and lowly. Mat. 11.29.
And that we may the better do this, we must learn to become nothing in our
selves, that we may be all in all forth of our selves in Christ: we must loath
and think as basely of our selves as may be in regard of our sins. Christ
Jesus upon the cross was content for our sakes, to become a worm and no man,
Psalm. 22.6.
as David says, which did chiefly appear in this lowest degree of his
humiliation, when as death did as it were tread on him in his den; and the
same mind must likewise be in us which was in him. The liking that we have of
our selves must be mere nothing, but all our love and liking must be forth of
our selves in the death and blood of Christ.

And thus much of this clause, as also of the state of Christ's humiliation.
Now follows his second estate, which is his exaltation into glory, set down
in these words, The third day he rose again from the dead, etc. And of it we
are first to speak in general, then in particular according to the several
degrees thereof. In general, the exaltation of Christ is, that glorious or
happy estate, into which Christ entered after he had wrought the work of our
redemption upon the cross. And he was exalted according to both natures, in
regard of his Godhead, and also of his manhood. The exaltation of the Godhead
of Christ, was the manifestation of the glory of his Godhead in the manhood.
Some will peradventure demand, how Christ's Godhead can be exalted, seeing it
admits no alteration at all. Answer. In it self it cannot be exalted, yet
being considered as it is joined with the manhood into one person, in this
respect it may be said to be exalted: and therefore, I say, the exaltation of
Christ's Godhead is the manifestation of the glory thereof in the manhood. For
though Christ from his incarnation was both God and man, and his Godhead dwelt
in his manhood; yet from his birth unto his death, the same Godhead did little
show it self, and in the time of his suffering did as it were lie hid under
the veil of his flesh, as the soul does in the body, when a man is sleeping,
that thereby in his humane nature he might suffer the curse of the law, and
accomplish the work of redemption for us, in the low and base estate of a
servant. But after this work was finished, he began by degrees to make
manifest the power of his Godhead in his manhood. And in this respect his
Godhead may be said to be exalted. The exaltation of Christ's humanity stood
in two things. The first that he laid down all the infirmities of man's
nature, which he carried about him so long as he was in the state of a servant,
in that he ceased to be weary, hungry, thirsty, etc. Here it may be
demanded, whether the skarres and wounds remain in the body of Christ now
after it is glorified. Ans. Some think that they do remain as testimonies of
that victory which Christ obtained of his and our enemies, Olev. lib. de
subst. faed. Th. Bez.
and that they are no deformity to the glorious body of our Lord, but are
themselves also in him in some unspeakable manner glorified. But indeed it
rather seems to be a truth, to say that they are quite abolished; because they
were a part of that ignominious and base estate in which our Savior was upon
the cross: which after his entrance into glory he laid aside. And if it may
be thought that the wounds in the hands and feet of Christ remain to be
seen, even to the last judgment, why may we not in the same manner think
that the veins of his body remain emptied of their blood, because it was
shed upon the cross.

The second thing required in the exaltation of Christ's manhood is, that both
his body and soul were beautified and adorned with all qualities of glory.
His mind was enriched with as much knowledge and understanding as can possibly
befall any creature, and more in measure then all men and angels have: and the
same is to be said of the graces of the spirit in his will and affections: his
body also was incorruptible, and it was made a shining body, a resemblance
whereof some of his disciples saw in the mount: and it was endued with
agilitie, to move as well upward as downward, as may appear by the ascension
of his body into heaven, which was not caused by constraint or by any violent
motion, but by a property agreeing to all bodies glorified. Yet in the
exaltation of Christ's manhood we must remember two caveats: first, that he did
never lay aside the essential properties of a true body, as length, breadth,
thicknes, visibilitie, locallitie which is to be in one place at once and no
more, but keeps all these still, because they serve for the being of his
body. Secondly we must remember that the gifts of glory in Christ's body are
not infinite but finite: for his humane nature being but a creature, and
therefore finite, could not receive infinite graces and gifts of glory. And
hence it is more then manifest that the opinion of those men is false, which
hold that Christ's body glorified, is omnipotent and infinite, every way able
to do whatsoever he will: for this is to make a creature to be the creator.

Thus much of Christ's exaltation in general. Now let us come to the degrees
thereof, as they are noted in the Creed, which are in number three: I. He rose
again the third day: II. He ascended unto heaven: III. He sits at the right
hand of God the father almighty. In the handling of Christ's resurrection, we
must consider these points: I. why Christ ought to rise again: II. the manner
of his rising. III. the time when he rose: IV. the place where: V. the uses
thereof. For the first, it was necessary that Christ should rise again, and
that for three especial causes. First, that hereby he might show to all the
people of God that he had fully overcome death. For else, if Christ had not
risen, how should we have bin persuaded in our consciences, that he had made a
full and perfect satisfaction for us: nay rather we should have reasoned thus:
Christ is not risen, and therefore he has not overcome death, but death has
overcome him. Secondly, Christ Jesus which died was the son of God, therefore
the author of life it self, and for this cause it was neither meet nor
possible for him to be holde^ of death, but he must needs rise from death to
life. Thirdly, Christ's priesthood has 2. parts: one, to make satisfaction for
sin by his one only sacrifice upon the cross: the other, to apply the
virtue of this sacrifice unto every believer. Now he offered the sacrifice for
sin upon the cross, before his death, and therefore being dead must needs
rise again to perform the second part of his priesthood, namely to apply the
virtue thereof unto all that shall believe in him, and to make intercession in
heaven unto his father for us here on earth. And thus much of the first point.

Now to come to the manner of Christ's resurrection: five things are to be
considered in it. The first, that Christ rose again not as every private man
does, but as a public person representing all men that are to come to life
eternal. For as in his passion, so also in his resurrection, he stood in our
room and place: and therefore when he rose from death, we all, yea the whole
Church rose in him, Ephesians. 2.6.
and together with him. And this point not considered, we do not conceive
aright of Christ's resurrection, neither can we reap sound comfort by it.

The second is, that Christ himself and no other for him, did by his own
power raise himself to life. This was the thing which he meant, when he said,
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will build it up again: Ioh. 10.18.
and more plainly, I have (says he) power to lay down my life, and I have
power to take it again. From whence we learn diverse instructions. First whereas
Christ raises himself from death to life, it serves to prove that he was not
only man, but also true god. For the body being dead, could not bring again the
soul and ioyn it self unto the same, and make it self alive again; neither
yet the soul that is departed from the body, can return again and quicken
the body: and therefore there was some other nature in Christ, namely his
Godhead, which did reunite soul and body together, and thereby quickened the
manhood. Secondly, if Christ give life to himself being dead in the grave,
then much more now being alive and in heaven glorified, is he able to raise up
his members from death to life. We are all by nature stark dead in sin, as
the dead body rotten in the grave; and therefore our duty is, to come to
Christ our Lord by prayer, entreating him that he would raise us up every day
more and more from the grave of our sins to newnes of life. He can of men
dead in their sins make us alive unto himself to live in righteousness and
true holiness all the days of our life.

The third thing is, that Christ rose again with an earthquake. And this
serves to prove that he lost nothing of his power by death, but still
remained the absolute Lord of heaven and earth, to whom therefore the earth
under his feet trembling does him homage. This also proves unto us that
Christ which lay dead in the grave, did raise himself again by his own
almighty power. Lastly it serves to convince the keepers of the grave, the
women which came to embaulme him, and the disciples which came to the
sepulcher, and would not yet believe that he was risen again. But how came this
earthquake? Answer. Saint Matthew says, there was a great earthquake. For the
angel of the Lord descended from heaven, Math. 28.2.
etc. This shows that the power of angels is great, in that they can move and
stir the earth. Three angels destroyed Sodom and Gomorha. Genesis 19.1, 13.
Ezec. 12.29. 2. King. 19.35*
An angel destroyed the first borne of Egypt in one ^ight. In the host of
Senacherib one angel slew in one night 14500 me^. Of like power is the devil
himself to shake the earth, and to destroy us all, but that God of his goodness
limits and restrains him of his liberty. Well, if one angel be able to shake
the earth, what then will Christ himself do when he shall come to judgment the
second time, with many thousand thousa^ds of angels? oh how terrible will his
coming be? Not without cause says the holy Ghost that the wicked at that day
shall cry out, wishing the hills to fall upon them, and the mountains to cover
them for fear of that great and terrible day of the Lord*

The 4. thing is, that an angel ministered to Christ, being to rise again, in
that he came to the grave and rolled away the stone, and sat upon it. Where
observe, first how the angels of God minister unto Christ; though dead and
buried; whereby they acknowledge that his power, majesty, and authority is
not included within the bonds of the earth, but extends it self even to the
heavens themselves and the hosts thereof, and that according to his humanity.
Wicked men for their parts labored to close him up in the earth, as the bases^
of all creatures: but the angels of heaven most readily accept him as their
sovereign Lord and king: Math. 4.11.
as in like manner they did in his temptation in the wilderness* and in his
agony in the garden. Secondly, that the opinion of the papists and others,
which think that the body of Christ went through the graue-stone when he rose
again, is without warrant. For the end, no doubt, why the angel rolled away
the stone was, that Christ might come forth. And indeed it is against the
order of nature that one body should pass through another* without corruption
or alteration of either; considering that every body occupies a place, and two
bodies at the same instant cannot be in one proper place.

Furthermore it is said, that when the angel sat on the stone, his countenance
was like lightening, and his raiment as white as snow: and this served to show
what was the glory of Christ himself. For if the servant and minister be so
glorious, then endless is the glory of the lord and master himself. Lastly
it is said, that for fear of the angel, the watchmen were astonished, and became
as dead men: which teaches us, that what God would have come to pass, all the
world can never hinder. For though the Jews had closed up the grave with a
stone, and set a band of soldiers to watch, least Christ should by any means
be taken away* yet all this avails nothing: by an angel from heaven the seal
is broken, the stone is removed, and the watchmen at their wits ends. And
this came to pass by the providence of God, that after the watchmen had
testified these things to the Jews, they might at length be convicted that
Christ whom they crucified was the Messiah.

The fifth and last point is, that Christ rose not alone, but accompanied with
others: as S. Matthew says, that the graves opened, and many bodies of the
Saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves, Mat. 27.52.
and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many after Christ's
resurrection. And this came to pass that the Church of God might know and
consider that there is a reviving and quickening virtue in the resurrection of
Christ, whereby he is able not only to raise our dead bodies unto life, but also
when we are dead in sin, to raise us up to newnes of life. And in this very
point stands a maine difference between the resurrection of Christ, and the
resurrection of any other man. For the resurrection of Peter nothing auailes to
the raising of David or Paul: but Christ's resurrection auailes for all that
have believed in him: by the very same power whereby he raised himself, he
raises all his members: and therefore he is called a quickening spirit. And
let us mark the order observed in rising. First Christ rises, and then the
saints after him. And this came to pass to verify the Scripture, which says
that Christ is the first borne of the dead. Col. 1.18.
Now he is the first borne of the dead, in that he has this dignity and
privilege to rise to eternal life the first of all men. It is true indeed
that Lazarus and sundry others in time rose before Christ: but yet they rose
to live a mortal life, and to die again: Christ he is the first of all that
rose to life everlasting and to glory: never any rose before Christ in this
manner. And the persons that rose before with Christ are to be noted, they were
the Saints of God, not wicked men: whereby we are put in mind that the elect
children of God only are partakers of Christ's resurrection. Indeed both good
and bad rise again, but there is a great difference in their rising: for the
godly rise by the virtue of Christ's resurrection, and that to eternal glory:
but the ungodly rise by the virtue of Christ, not as he is a redeemer, but as
he is a terrible judge, and is to execute justice on them. And they rise again
for this end, that besides the first death of the body, they might suffer the
second death, which is the pouring forth of the wrath of God upon body and
soul eternally. This difference is proved unto us by that which Paul says,
1. Cor. 15.20.
Christ is the first fruits of them that sleep. Among the Jews such as had
corn fields gathered some little quantity thereof, before they reaped the
rest, and offered the same unto God, signifying thereby that they acknowledged
him to be the author and giver of all increase: and this offering was also an
assurance unto the owner, of the blessing of God upon the rest, and this being
but one handful did sa^ctify the whole crop. Now Christ to the dead is as the
first fruits to the rest of the corn, because his resurrection is a pledge and
an assurance of the resurrection of all the faithfulll. When a man is cast into
the sea, and all his body is under the water, there is nothing to be looked
for but present death, but if he carry his head above the water, there is
good hope of a recovery. Christ himself is risen as a pledge that all the just
shall rise again: he is the head unto his Church, and therefore all his
members must needs follow in there time. It may be demanded what became of
the Saints that rose again after Christ's resurrection. Ans. Some think they
died again, but seeing they rose for this end to manifest the quickening
virtue of Christ's resurrection, it is as like that they were also glorified
with Christ, and ascended with him to heaven.

Thus much of the manner of Christ's resurrection. Now follows the time when he
rose again, and that is specified in the Creed, The third day he rose again:
Thus says our Savior Christ unto the Pharisees, As Jonas was three days and
three nights in the whales bell^e: so shall the son of man be three days and
three nights in the heart of the earth. Mat. 12.39.
And though Christ was but one day and two pieces of two days in the grave:
(for he was buried in the evening before the sabbath, His abode in the grave
was about 38. hours.
and rose in the morning the next day after the sabbath) yet is this sufficient
to verify this saying of Christ. For if the analogy had stood in three whole
days* then Christ should have risen the fourth day. And it was the pleasure of
God that he should lie thus long in the grave* that it might be known that he
was thoroughly dead: and he continued no longer, that he might not in his body
see corruption. Matt. 28.1.
Again, it is said, Christ rose again in the end of the sabbath, when the
first day of the week began to dawne. And this very time must be considered,
as the real beginning of the new spiritual world, in which we are made the
sons of God. And as in the first day of the first world, light was commanded
to shin^ out of darkness upon the deepes: so in the first day of this new world,
the son of righteousness rises and gives light to them that sit in darkness,
and dispells the darkness that was under the old testament. And here let us mark
the reason why the sabbath day was changed. For the first day of the week,
which was the day following the Jews sabbath, is our sabbath day, which day we
keep holy in memory of the glorious resurrection of Christ: and therefore it
is called the Lords day. And it may not unfitly be termed Hierome.
Sunday, Apoc. 1.10.
though the name came first from the heathen, because on this day the blessed
son of righteousn^s rose from death to life.

Let us now in the next place proceed to the proofs of Christ's resurrection,
which are diligently to be observed, because it is one of the most principal
points of our religion. For as the Apostle says, He died for our sins, and
rose again for our justification* Romans 4.25.
and again, If Christ be not risen, then is our prea^hing vain, 1. Cor. 15.14.
and our faith is also vain* The proofs are of two sorts: first, Christ's
appearances unto men: secondly, the testimonies of men* Christ's appearances
were either on the first day* or ^n the days following. The appearances of
Christ the same day he rose again are five. And first of all ^arely in the
morning he appeared to Marie Magdalen. Mark. 16.9.
In this appearance diverse things are to be considered. The first, of what
note and quality the party was, to whom Christ appeared. Answer. Mary
Magdalen was one that had been possessed with seven devils, but was delivered
and became a repentant sinner, and stood by when Christ suffered, and came
with sweet odours when he was dead to embaulme him. And therefore to her is
granted this prerogative, that she should be the first that should testify
his resurrection unto men. And hence we learn, that Christ is ready and
willing to receive most miserable wretched sinners, even such as have been
vassa^ls and bondslaues of the devil, if they will come to him. Any man would
think it a fearful case, to be thus possessed with devils as Marie was: but
let all those that live in ignorance, and by reason thereof live in sin
without repentance, know this, that their case is a thousand times worse then
Marie Magdalen^ was. For what is an impenitent sinner? Surely nothing else but
the castle and hold of the devil, both in body and soul. For look as a
captain that has taken some hold or skonse, does rule and govern all
therein, and disposes of it at his will and pleasure: even so it is with all
blind and impenitent sinne^s; not one devil alone, but even legions of
devils possess them, and rule their hearts* and therefore howsoever they may
sooth themselves and say, all is well, for God is merciful; yet their case is
far worse then Mari^s was. Now then* would any be freed from this fearful
bondage? let them learn of Marie Magdalen to follow Christ, and to seek unto
him, and then albeit the devil and all his angels possess their hea^ts, yet
Christ being the strong man, will come and cast them all out, and dwell there
himself.

The second is, what Christ in his appearance said to Marie. Answ. He said,
Touch me not: for I am not yet ascended to my father. Mary no doubt was glad to
see Christ, and therefore looked to have co^versed as familiarly with him as
she was wont before his death, but he forbids her to touch him, that is, not
to look to enjoy his corporal presence as before, but rather to seek for his
spiritual presence by faith, considering he was shortly to ascend to his
father. For this cause when he appeared to his disciples, he stayed not long
with them at any time, but only to manifest himself unto the^, thereby to
prove the certentie of his resurrection. This prohibition shows first of all
that it is but a fond thing to delight in the outward picture and portraiture
of Christ, as the Jesuits do, who stand much upon his outward form and
lineaments. Secondly, it overthrows the popish crucifixes, and all the carved
and molten images of Christ, wherein the Papists worship him, for corporal
presence is not now required: therefore spiritual worship only must be given
unto him. Thirdly it overthrows the real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament. Many are of mind that they cannot receive Christ, except they eat
and drink his body and blood corporally: but it is not much material whether
we touch him with the bodily hand or no; so be it we apprehend him spiritually
by faith. Lastly, as we must not have earthly considerations of Christ: so must
we on the contrary labor for the spiritual hand of faith, which may reach up
it self to heaven, and there lay hold on him. This is the very thing which
Christ insinuates unto Mary in saying, Touch me not. And S. Paul says,
Henceforth know we no man after the flesh, yea though we had known Christ
after the flesh, yet now know we him no more, ^. Cor. 5.19.
that is, we know him no more as a man living among us, and therefore he adds,
If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: and this new creation is not by
the bodily presence of Christ* but by the apprehe^sio^ of faith.

The second appearance was to Marie Magdalen and to the other Marie, as they
were going from the grave to tell his disciples: at which time Christ meets
them, and bids them go tell his brethren that he is risen again. Mat. 28.9.
And whereas Christ sends women to his disciples, he purposed hereby to check
the^ for their unbelief. For these women forsook him not at his death, but
stood by and saw him suffer, and when he was buried they came to embalme him:
but all this while what became of Christ's disciples? Surely Peter denied him,
and all the rest fled away, eue^ James and John the sons of thu^der, save that
John stood a loofe to behold his death. Herupon Christ to make the^ ashamed of
their fault, sends these women unto them to publish that to them which they
by their calling ought above all other to have published. Secondly this
teaches, that whereas Christ builds his kingdom and publishes his Gospel
by Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, teachers, he can if it so please him,
perform the same by other means. In this his second appearance, he used weak
and silly women to publish his resurrection, and thereby shows that he is not
bound to the ordinary means, which now he uses. Thirdly, he sent them to
his disciples, to show, that howsoever they had dealt unfaithfully with him by
forsaking him and denying him, yet he had not quite forsaken them, but if they
would repent and believe, he would receive them into his love and favor
again, and therefore calls them his brethren, saying, Go and tell my
brethren. This teaches us a good lesson, that howsoever our sins past are to
humble us in regard of our selves, yet must they not cut us off or dismay us
from seeking to Christ, yea even then when we are laden with the burden of
them, we must come unto him, and he will ease us. Fourthly whereas silly women
are sent to teach Christ's disciples, Mar. 16.7.
which were scholars brought up in his own school, we are admonished, that
superiority in place and calling, must not hinder us* sometime to hear and to
be taught of our inferiors. Job says, he never refused the counsel of his
servant: 2. Kin. 5.13.
And Naaman the Syrian obeyed the counsel of a silly maid which advised him
to go to the Prophet of the Lord in Samaria to be cured of his ^eprosie: and
when he had been with the Prophet, he obeyed the counsel of his servant,
that persuaded him to do all the Prophet had said: Wash and be clean.

Now after that the women are come to the disciples and make relation of
Christ's resurrection, the text says, Their words seemed as fained things
unto them, Luke 24.11.
neither believed they them. Hence we learn two things: the first, that men
of themselves can not believe the doctrine of Christian religion: it is a hard
matter for a man to believe sundry things in the work of creation. The
temporal deliverance of the children of Israel seemed to them as a dream:
Psalm. 126.1.
and the resurrection of Christ: even to Christ's own disciples seemed a
fained thing. The second, that it is an hard thing truly and unfeignedly to
believe the points of religion: disciples brought up in the school of Christ,
and often catechized in this very point of Christ's resurrection, yet dull are
they to believe it. This confu^eth and condemns our carnal gospellers that
make it the lightest and easiest thing that can be to believe in Christ: and
therefore they say their faith is so strong, that they would not for all the
world doubt of Gods mercy: whereas indeed they are deceived and have no faith
at all, but blind presumption.

The third appearance was on this manner. As two of Christ's disciples were
going from Jerusalem to Emmaus about threescore furlongs, Luke 23.13.
and talked together of all the things that were done, Jesus drew nere and
talked with them, but their eyes were holden that they could not know him: and
as they went he communed with them, and proved out of the scripture his
resurrection, expounding unto them all things that were written of him: then
they made him stay with them, and their eyes were opened; and they knew him by
breaking of bread, but he was taken out of their sight. In this notable
appearance we may observe these four points. The first, that Christ held
their eyes that they could not know him: they saw a man indeed, but who he was,
they could not tell. By this it is more then manifest, that the use of our
outward senses, as seeing, feeling, smelling, etc. is supplied unto us
continually by the power of Christ, and therefore even in these things we must
acknowledge the continual goodness of God. Now if one man can not so much as
discern another but by the blessing of Christ, then shall we never be able to
discern the way of life from the way of death without him: and therefore we
must pray unto God that he would give us his holy spirit to enlighten the eyes
of our understanding, whereby we may be able to see and know the way that
leads unto life, and also to walk in the same. The second, that as Christ
was in expounding the scriptures unto them their hearts burned within them.
By this we learn, that howsoever the ministers of God publish the gospel to
the outward ears of men: Luke 3.15.
yet is it the proper work of Christ alone to touch and inflame the heart by
the fire of his holy spirit, and to quicke^ and raise men up to the life of
righteousness and true holiness: it is he only that baptiseth with the holy
ghost* and with fire* and it further admonishes us, Mat. 3.15.
that we should hear the word preached from the mouth of Gods ministers with
burning and melting hearts: but alas, the ordinary practice is flat contrary;
men's eyes are drowsy and heavy, and their hearts dead and frozen within them:
and that is the cause why after much teaching there follows but little profit.

The third thing is, that Christ did eat with the two disciples and was
known of them in breaking of bread. It is very like that our Savior Christ
did in some special manner bless the bread which he brake, whereby his
disciples discerned him from others. And in like manner we must by blessing our
meats and drinks distinguish our selves, though not from such as are the
servants of God, yet from all ungodly and careless men. Many being silent
themselves do make their children to give thanks, and to bless their meats.
And indeed it is a commendable thing if it be done sometimes to nourture the
child, but for men to disburden themselves wholly of this duty is a fault. And
it is a shame that that mouth which opens it self to receive the good
creatures of God, should never open it self to bless and praise God for the
same. Therefore in this actio^ of eating and drin^king, let us show our selves
followers of Christ that as by blessing the same he was known from all other;
so we may also hereby distinguish our selves from the profane and wicked of
this world. Otherwise what difference shall there be between us and the very hog
that eats mast on the ground, but never looks up to the tree from whence it
falls. And as Christ revealed himself unto his disciples, at that time when
they caused him to eat meat with the^; so let us suffer Christ to be our
guest, and let us entertain him in his members, and no doubt he will bless us,
and withal reueal himself unto us. The fourth thing is, that having eaten, he
is taken out of their sight. And this came to pass not because the body of
Christ became spiritual, but because either he held their eyes as before, or
he departed with celeritie and speed according to the property of a body
glorified.

The fourth appearance of Christ was to Peter alone, mentioned only by S.
Paul, He was seen of ^ephas.

1. Cor. 15.5.
The fifth appearance was to all the disciples together save Thomas. In it we
must consider three things, which are all effectual arguments to prove
Christ's resurrection. Ioh. 20.19.
The first, that he came and stood in the midst among them the doors being
shut. Now it may be demanded how this could be. Ans. The Papists say, his body
was glorified and so passed through the door, but (as I have said) it is
against the nature of a body, that one should pass through another, as heat
does through a piece of iron, both bodies remaining entire and sound:
therefore we may rather think, that whereas Christ came in when the doors were
shut, it was either because by his mighty power he caused the doors to give
place, the disciples not knowing how: or else because he altered the very
substance of the doors, that his body might pass through, as he thickened the
waters to carry his body when he walked upon the sea. Now if this be true, as
very like it is, that these dumb creatures gave place to Christ, and became
pliable unto his commandment, then much more ought we to carry hearts
comfortable and pliant to the will of our Lord Jesus in all his commandments.
The second point is, that when as the disciples thought Christ to have been a
spirit, he to prove the truth of his manhood, shows unto them his hands and
his feet, and the wound in his side, and calls for meat, and eats it among
them. But it may be asked how this could be, considering that a glorified body
has no blemish, and needs not to eat, but is supported by God without meat:
if this be true in our bodies when they shall be glorified, then much more was
it true in Christ. Ans. True it is, a glorified body has no blemishes, but
our Savior Christ had not yet entered into the fullness of gis glory. If he had
been fully glorified, he could not so sensibly and plainly have made manifest
the truth of his resurrection unto his disciples: and therefore for their
sakes and ours he is content after his entrance into glory still to retain
in his body some remnantes of the ignominies and blemishes, which if it had
pleased him, he might have laid aside: he is also content to eat, not for
need, but to prove that his body was not a body in show but a true body.
This teaches us two lessons: I. If Christ for our good and comfort be content
to retain these ignominious blemishes, then answerably every one of us must as
good followers of Christ refer the works of our callings to the good of
others, as Paul says, He was free from all men, yet he was content to become
all things unto all men, 1. Cor. 9.19.
that by all means he might win the more. Secondly we learn, that for the
good of our neighbor, and for the maintaining of love and charity, we must be
content to yield from our own right, as in this place our Savior Christ
yeeldes of his own glory for the good of his Church.

The third point is, that he then gave the disciples their Apostolical
commissions, saying, Go and teach all nations: of which three points are to
be considered: the first, to whom it is given. Answ. To them all, as well to
one as to another, and not to Peter only. And this overthrows the fond and
forged opinion of the Papists concerning Peter's supremacy. If his calling had
been above the rest, then he should have had a special commission above the
rest: but one and the same commission is given alike to all. The second, that
with the commission he gives his spirit; for whom he appoints to publish his
will and word, them he furnishes with sufficient gifts of his holy spirit to
discharge that great function: and therefore it is a defect that any are set a
part to be ministers of the gospel of Christ, which have not received the
spirit of knowledge, the spirit of wisdom, and the spirit of prophecy in
some measure. The third point is, that in conferring of his spirit he uses an
outward sign, for the text says, He breathed on them, and said, receive the
holy ghost. The reasons hereof may be these. First when God created Adam and
put into him a living soul, it is said, he breathed in his face. And so our
Savior Christ in giving unto his disciples the holy ghost, does the same, to
show unto them, that the same person that gives life gives grace: and also
to signify unto them that being to send them over all the world to preach
his gospel, he was as it were to make a second creation of man, by renewing the
image of God in him which he had lost by the fall of Adam. Again he breathed
on them in giving his spirit, to put them in mind that their preaching of the
gospel could not be effectual in the hearts of their hearers, before the Lord
does breath into them his spirit, and thereby draw them to believe: and therefore
the spouse of Christ desires the Lord to send forth his north and south wind
to blow on her garden, Cant. 4.16.
that the spices thereof may flow out. This garden is the Church of God, which
desires Christ to comfort her, and to pour out the graces of his spirit on
her, that the people of God which are the herbs and trees of righteousness, may
bring forth sweet spices whose fruit may be for meat and their leaves for
medicines.

Thus much for the five appearances of Christ the same day he rose again: Now
follow the rest of his appearances which were in the 40 days following, which
are in number six. The first is mentioned by S. John in these words, Eight
days after when the disciples were within, and Thomas with the^, came Jesus
when the doors were shut, Ioh. 20.16.
and stood in the midst of the^, and said, Peace be unto you. In it we must
consider two things: I. the occasion thereof. II. the dealing of Christ. The
occasion was this: after Christ had appeared unto the other disciples in Thomas
his absence, they told him that they had seen the Lord: but he made answer,
Except I see in his body the print of his nails, and put mine hand into his
side, I will not believe. Now eight days after, our Savior Christ appeared
again unto all the disciples, especially for the curing of Thomas his
unbelief, which was no small sin, considering it contains in it three great
sins. The first is blindness of mind, for he had been a hearer of our Savior
Christ a long time, and had been instructed touching resurrection diverse times:
he was also with Christ and saw him when he raised Lazarus, and had seen, or
at least wise had heard the miracles which he did: and also he had heard all
the disciples say that they had seen the Lord, and yet will it not sink into
his head. The second is deadness of heart. When our Savior Christ went to
raise Lazarus that was dead, Thomas spoke very confidently to him and said,
Let us go, that we may die with him, yet when Christ was crucified he fled
away, Ioh. 11.
and is the longest from Christ after his resurrection, and when he is certainly
told thereof he will not acknowledge it or yield unto it. The third is,
willfulness: for when the disciples told him that they had seen the Lord, he
said flatly, that unless he saw in his hands the print of the nails, he would
not believe, and that which is worse then all this, he continues eight days
in this wilful mind. Now in this exceeding measure of unbeleefe in Thomas,
any man, even he that has the most grace may see what a mass of unbelief is
in himself, and what willfulness and untowardnesse to any good thing, in so
much that we may truly say with David, Lord, what is man, Psalm. 8.
that thou so regardest him. And if such measure of unbelief was in such men,
as the disciples were, then we may assure our selves, that it does much more
exceed in the common professors of religion in these days, let them protest
to the contrary what they will.

Now the cause of his unbelief was this: he makes a law to himself that he
will see and feel or else he will not believe: but this is flat against the
nature of faith which consists neither in seeing nor feeling. Indeed in
things natural a man must first have experience in seeing and feeling, and then
believe: but it is contrary in divinity: a man must first have faith and
believe, and then comes experience afterward. But Thomas having not learned
this, does ouershoote himself: and herein also many deceive themselves, which
think they have no faith because they have no feeling. For the chiefest
feeling that we must have in this life, must be the feeling of our sins and
the miseries of this life: and though we have no other feeling at all, yet we
must not therefore cease to believe.

In Christ's dealing with Thomas we may consider three actions. Ioh. 20.27.
The first, that he speaks to Thomas alone, and answers him according to the
very words which he had spoken of him in his absence, and that word for
word. And by this he labored to overthrow his unbelief, and to convince him,
that being absent he knew what he spoke. And by this we learn, that though we
want the bodily presence of Christ he being now in heaven, yet he knows
well what we say, and if need were could repeat all our sayings word by word:
and if it were not so, how could it be true that we must give an account of
every idle word. Now this must teach us, to look that our speech be gracious
according to the rule of gods holy word. Secondly this must make us willing and
cherefull to direct our prayers to Christ, considering he knows what we pray
for, and hears every word we speak. The second action is, that Christ
condescends to Thomas and gives him liberty to feel the printe of the nails,
and to put his finger into his side. He might have rejected Thomas for his
wilfulness, yet to help his unbelief, he yields unto his weakness. This
shows, that Christ is most compassionate to all those that unfainedly repent
them of their sins and cleave unto him although they do it laden with
manifold wants. David says, that the Lord has compassion on all them that
fear him, Ps. 103.13.
as a father has compassion on his children: and he adds the reason, For he
knows of what we are made. And the Prophet Isai: Isai. 42.3.
He will not break the bruised reed, and smoking flax he will not quench. When
a child is very sick, insomuch that it casts up all the meat which it
takes, the mother will not be offended thereat but rather pity it. Now our
Savior Christ is ten thousand times more merciful to them that believe in
him, then any mother is or can be. The third action is, that when Thomas had
seen and felt the wounds, Christ revived his faith, whereupon he brake forth
and said, Ioh. 20.28.
My Lord and my God. In which words he does most notably bewail his
blindness and unbelief: and as a fire that has been smothered, so does his
faith burst forth and show it self. And in this example of Thomas we may see
the state of Gods people in this life. First, God gives them faith, yet
afterward for a time he does as it were, hide the same in some corner of their
hearts, so as they have no feeling thereof, but think them selves to be void
of all grace: and this he does for no other end but to humble them: and yet
again after all this, the first grace is further renewed and revived. Thus
dealt the Lord with David and Solomon (for whereas he was a penman of
Scripture, and therefore an holy man of God, we may not think that he was
wholly forsaken) with Peter, and in this place with Thomas. And the experience
of this shall every servant of God find in himself.

The second appearance of Christ was to seven of the disciples as they went on
fishing, John. 21.
in which he gives three testimonies of his godheade, and that by death his
power was nothing diminished. The first, that when the disciples had fished all
night and caught nothing, afterward by his direction they catch fish in
abundance, and that presently. This teaches us, that Christ is a sovereign
Lord over all creatures, and has the disposing of them in his own hands:
and that if good success follow not when men are painful in their callings,
it is because God will prepare and make them fit for a further blessing.
Christ comes in the morning and gives his disciples a great draught of fish:
yet before this can be, they must labor all night in vain. Joseph must be
made ruler over all Egypt, but first he must be cast into a dungeon where he
can see no sun nor light, to prepare him to that honor. And David must be
king over Israel, but the Lord will first prepare him hereunto by raising up
Saul to persecute him. Therefore when God sends any hindrances unto us in
our callings, we must not despair nor be discouraged, for they are the means
whereby God makes us fit to receive greater blessings at his hand either in
this life or in the life to come. The second is, that the net was unbroke
though it had in it great fishes to the number of an hundred fifty three. The
third, that when the disciples came to land they saw ^otte coals and fish
laid thereon and bread. Now some may ask, whence was this food. Answer: The
same Lord that was able to provide a Whale to swallow up Jonas, and so to save
him: and he that was able to provide a fish for Peter's angle with a piece of
twenty pence in the mouth: and to make a little bread and a few fishes to
feed so many thousands in the wilderness: the same also does of himself
provide bread and fishes for his disciples. This teaches us, that not only
the blessing, but also the very having of meat, drink, apparel is from
Christ: and hereupon all states of men, even the kings of the earth are taught
to pray that God would give them their daily bread. Again, when we sit down
to eat and drink, this must put us in mind that we are the guests of Christ
himself: our food which we have comes of his mere gift; and he it is that
entertaines us if we could see it. And for this cause we must soberly and with
great reverence in fear and trembling use all Gods creatures as in his
presence. And when we eat and drink, we must always look that all our
speech be such as may beseem the guestes of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Usually the common practice of men is far otherwise, for in feasting many
take liberty to surfette, and to be drunk, to swear, and to blaspheme: but
if we serve the Lord, let us remember whose guestes we are, and who is our
entertainer, and so behave our selves as being in his presence, that all our
actions and words may tend to his glory.

The third appearance was to James, as Saint Paul records, 1. Cor. 15.7.
although the same be not mentioned in any of the Evangelists.

The fourth was to all his disciples in a mountain, whither he had appointed
them to come. Man. 28.16.


The fifth and last appearance was in the mount of Olives, Acts. 5.
when he ascended into heaven. Of these three last appearances because the
holy Ghost has only mentioned them, I omit to speak, and with the repeating
of them I let them pass.

Thus much of the appearances of Christ after his resurrection: the witnesses
thereof are of three sorts: I. angels: II. women that came to the grave to
embalme him: III. Christ's own disciples who did publish and preach the same
again according as they had seen and heard of our Savior Christ: and of
these likewise I omit to speak, because there is not any specia^l thing
mentioned of them by the Evangelistes.

Now follow the uses, which are twofold: some respect Christ, and some respect
ourselves. Uses which concern Christ are three: I. whereas Christ Jesus being
stark dead rose again to life by his own power, it serves to prove unto
us, that he was the son of God. Thus Paul speaking of Christ says, that he
was declared mightily to be the son of God, touching the spirit of
sanctification by the resurrection from the dead. Romans 1.4.
And by the mouth of David God said, Thou art my son, this day I have begot
thee. Which place must be understood not so much of the eternal generation of
Christ before all worlds, Psalm. 2.7.
as of the manifestation thereof in time after this manner. This day, that is, at
the time of thine incarnation, but especially at the day of thy resurrection,
have I begotten thee, that is, I have made manifest that thou art my son: so
is this place expounded by S. Paul in the Acts. Act. 13.32, 33.
Secondly Christ's resurrection by his own power proves unto us evidently, that
he is Lord ouerall things that are: and this use S. Paul makes hereof, for
says he, Christ therefore died that he might be Lord both of the dead and of
the quick. And indeed whereas he rose again thus, Romans 14.9.
he did hereby show himself most plainly to be a mighty prince over the
grave, over death, hell, and condemnation, in that he had power to overcome
them. Thirdly it proves unto us, that he was a perfect priest, and that his
death and passion was a perfect satisfaction to the justice of God for the sins
of mankind. For whereas Christ died, he died for our sins, now if he had not
fully satisfied for them all (though there had remained but one sin for which
he had made no satisfaction) he had not risen again: but death which came into
the world by sin, and is strengthened by it, would have held him in
bondage: and therefore, whereas he rose again, it is more then manifest that
he has made so full a satisfaction so as the merit thereof does and shall
countervaile the justice of God for all our offenses. To this purpose Paul
says, If Christ be not risen again, your faith is vain, and you are yet in
your sins, 1. Cor. 15.6.
that is, Christ had not satisfied for your sins, or at least you could not
possibly have known that he had made satisfaction for any of them, if he had
not risen again.

The uses which concern our selves are of two sorts: comforts to the children
of God, and duties that are to be learned and practiced of us all. The comforts
are especially three: First Christ's resurrrection serves for the justification
of all that believe in him, even before God the father: as Paul says, Christ
was given to death for our sins, and is risen again for our justification:
Romans 4.25.
which words have this meaning: when Christ died, as we have showed before, we
must not consider him as a private man, but as one that stood in the stead and
room of all the elect: in his death he bare our sins and suffered all that
we should have suffered in our own persons for ever, and the guilt of our
offenses was laid upon him: and therefore Esai says: he was nu^bred among the
wicked. Now in his rising again he freed and disburdened himself not from any
sins of his own, because he was without sin, but from the guilt and
punishment of our sins imputed unto him. And hence it comes to pass that all
those which put their trust and affiance in the merit of Christ, at the very
first instant of their believing have their own sins not imputed unto them,
and his righteousness imputed.

Secondly the resurrection of Christ serves as a notable means to work
inward sanctification, as S. Peter says, We are regenerate to a lively hope by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. 1. Pet. 1.3.
And S. Paul, We are then (says he) buried with him by baptism into his
death, Romans 6.3.
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of his father,
so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we be grafted with him
to the similitude of his death, we shall be also to the similitude of his
resurrection. Which words import thus much, that as Christ by the power of his
own godheade, freed his manhood from death and from the guilt of our sins,
so does he free those that are knit unto him by the bond of one spirit, from
the corruption of their natures in which they are dead, that they may live unto
God. In the natural body, the head is the fountain of all the senses and of
motion: and therefore by sundry nerves dispersed through the body, the power of
moving and of sense is derived even to the least parts; so as the hands and
the feet move by means of that power which comes from the head: and so it is
in the spiritual body of Christ, namely the Church: he is the head and the
fountain of life, and therefore he co^veieth spiritual life to every one of his
members: and that very power of his godhead whereby he raised up himself when
he was dead, he conveieth from himself to his members, and thereby raises
them up from the death of sin to newness of life. And look as in a perfect
body, when the head has sense and motion, the hand that is of the same body
has also sense and motion convenient for it: So likewise Christ being the
resurrection and the life, as there is spiritual life in him, so every member
of his shall feel in it self spiritual sense and motion whereby it is raised
up from sin and lives unto God. For the better conceiving of this, we must
consider two things: the outward means of this spiritual life; and the
measure of it. For the means, if we will have common water we must go to the
well: and if we would have water of life, we must go unto Christ, who
says, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. Ioh. 7.37.
Now this well of the water of life is very deep and we have nothing to draw
with, therefore we must have our pipes and conduits to convey the same unto us,
which are the word of God preached, and the administration of the sacraments.
Christ says, The dead shall hear the voice of the son of God, Ioh. 5.25.
and they that hear it shall live: where, by dead is meant, not the dead in
the grave, but those that are dead in sin. And again Christ says, Ioh. 6.63.
the words which I speak are spirit and life, because the word of God is the
pipe whereby he conveieth into our dead hearts spirit and life. As Christ when
he raised up dead men did only speak the word and they were made alive: and
at the day of judgment at his voice when the trump shall blow, all that are
dead shall rise again. So it is in the first resurrection: they that are dead
in their sins, at his voice uttered in the ministry of the word shall rise
again. To go further, Christ raised three from the dead. Iairus daughter
newly dead: the widows son dead and wound up and lying on the hearse:
Lazarus dead and buried and stinking in the grave: and all this he did by his
very voice: so also by the preaching of his word, he raises all sorts of
sinners even such as have lien long in their sins, as rotting and stinking
carrion.

The Sacraments also are the pipes and conduits whereby God conveigheth grace
into the heart if they be rightly used, that is, if they be received in
unfeigned repentance for all our sins, and with a true and lively faith in
Christ for the pardon of the same sins: and so, I take it, they are compared
to flagons of wine, which revive the Church being sick and fallen into a
sownd. Cant. 2.4.


As for the measure of life derived from Christ, it is but small in this life
and given by little and little, as Ose says, The Lord has spoiled us, and
he will heal us, he has wounded us and he will bind us up. Ose. 6.1, 2.
After two days he will revive us, and in the third he will raise us up, and
we shall live in his sight. The Prophet Ezechiel in a vision is carried into the
midst of a field, full of dead bones, and he is caused to Prophecy over
them, and say, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord: Eze. 37.4, 7, 8.
and at the first there was a shaking, and the bones came together bone to
bone, and then sinews and flesh grew upon them, and upon the flesh grew a
skin. Then he prophesied unto the winds the second time, and they lived and
stood upon their feet, for the breath came upon them, and they were an
exceeding great army of men. Hereby is signified not only the state of the
Jews after their captivity, but in them the state of the whole Church of God.
For these temporal deliverances signified further a spiritual deliverance.
And we may here see most plainly, that God works in the hearts of his
children the gifts and graces of regeneration by little and little. First he
gives no more then flesh, sinews, and skin: then after he gives them further
graces of his spirit, which quickens them and makes them alive unto God.
Ezec. 47.3, 4, 5.
The same also we may see in the vision of the waters that ran out of the
Temple: First, a man must wade to the ancles, then after to the knees, and so
to the loins: then after the waters grovve to a river that can not be passed
over: and so the Lord conueieth his graces by little and little, till at the
last men have a full measure thereof.

Thirdly the resurrection of Christ serves as an argument to prove unto us our
resurrection at the day of judgment. Paul says, Romans 8.11.
If the spirit of Christ that raised up Jesus from the dead dvvell in you:
he that raised Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies.
Some will say, that this is no benefit, for all must rise again, as well the
wicked as the godly. Answer: True indeed: but yet the wicked rise not again
by the same cause that the godly do. They rise again by the power of Christ,
not as he is a savior but as he is a judge to condemn them: For God had
said to Adam, that at what time he should eat of the forbidden fruit he
should die the death, meaning a double death, both the first and the second
death. Now then the ungodly rise again that God may inflict upon them the
punishment of the second death, which is the reward of sin, that so Gods
justice may be satisfied: but the godly rise again by the power of Christ
their head and redeemer, who raises them up that they may be partakers of
the benefit of his death, which is to enjoy both in body and soul the
kingdom of heaven, which he ha^h so dearly bought for them.

Thus much for the comfortes: Now follow the duties, and they are also three.
First as Christ Jesus when he was dead rose again from death to life by his
own power, so we by his grace in imitation of Christ must endeavor our selves
to rise up from all our sins both original and actual unto newenesse of
life. This is worthily set down by the Apostle, saying, We are buried by
baptism into his death, Romans 6.4.
that as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the father, so we
also should walk in newness of life: and therefore we must endeavor our
selves to shevve the same power to be in us every day by rising up from ou^
own personal sins to a reformed life. This ought to be remembered of us,
because howsoever many hear and know it* yet very ^ewe do practice the same.
For (to speak plainly) as dead men buried would never hear though a man
should speak neuet so loud: so undoubtedly among us there be also many
living men, which are almost in the same case. The ministers of God may cry
unto them daily, and iterate the same thing a thousand times, and tell them
that they must rise up from their sins and lead a new life, but they hear no
more then the dead carcass that lies in the grave. Indeed men hear with
their outward ears, but they are so far from practicing this duty, that
they judge it to be a matter of reproach and ignominy. And those which make any
conscience of this duty, how they are laden with nicknames and taunts, who
knows not? I need not to rehearse the^: so odious a thing now a days is the
rising from sin to newnes of life. Sound a trumpet in a dead man's ears, he
stirs not: and let us cry for amendment of life till breath go out of our
bodies, no man almost says, what have I done. And for this cause undoubtedly
if it were not for conscience of that duty which men owe unto God, we should
have but few ministers in England. For it is the joy of a minister to see his
people rise from sin and to lead a new life: whereas alas men generally lie
snurting in their corruptions, and rather go forward in them still, then come
to any amendment, such is the wonderful hardness and untovvardnes that has
possessed the hearts of most men. He which has but half an eye may see this
to be true. Oh how exceedes atheism in all places, contempt of Gods worship,
profanation of the Sabbath: the whordomes and fornications, the cruelty and
oppression of this age, it cries even to heaven for vengeance. By these and
such like sins the world crucifies Christ again. For look as Pilates
soldiers with the wicked Jews took Christ and stripped him of his garments,
buffetted him, and slew him; so do ungodly men by their wicked behavior strip
him of all honor, and slay him again. If an infidel should come among us,
and yield himself to be of our religion, after he had seen the behavior of
men, he would peradventure leave all religion: for he might say; surely it
seems this god whom these men worship, is not the true God, but a god of
licentious liberty; and that which is mo^e, whereas at all times we ought to
show our selves new creatures, and to walk worthy of our Savior and
redeemer, and therefore also ought to rise out of our sins, and to live in
righteousness and true holiness, yet we for the most part go on still forward in
sin, and every day go deeper then other to hel-ward. This has been
heretofore the common practice, but let us now learn after the example of
Christ, being quickened and revived by his grace, to endeavor our selves
especially to come out of the grave of sin, and learn to make conscience of
every badde action. True it is, a Christian man may use the creatures of God
for his delight, in a moderate and godly manner, but Christ never gave liberty
to any to live licentiously: 1. Cor. 7.22.
for he that is free, is yet servant unto Christ, as Paul says: and therefore
we must do nothing but that which may be a work of some good duty unto God,
to which end the Apostle says, Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from
the dead, and Christ shall give thee life. If this will not move us, Ephesians.
5.14.
yet let the judgments of God draw us hereunto, Blessed is he (says the holy
Ghost) that has part in the first resurrection: Rev. 20.6.
for on such the second death has no power: where mention is made of a double
death: the first is the separation of soul and body, the second is the
eternal condemnation of soul and body in hell fire. Would we now escape the
second death after this life? we must then labor in this life to be partakers
of the first resurrection, and that on this manner: Look what sins we have
lived in hertofore, we must endeavor to come out of them all, and lead a
better life according to all the commandments of God: but if ye will have no
care of your own souls, go on hardly, and so ye shall be sure to enter into
the second death, which is eternal damnation.

Secondly, we are taught by the example of Saint Paul to labor above all
things, Phil. 3.10.
to know Christ and the virtue of his resurrection. And this we shall do when
we can say by experience, that our hearts are not content with a formal and
drowsy profession of religion, but that we feel the same power of Christ
whereby he raised up himself from death to life, to be effectual and
powerful in us, to work in our hearts a conversion from all our sins,
wherein we have lien dead, to newnes of life, with care to live godly in
Christ Jesus. And that we may further attain to all this, we must come to
hear the word of God preached and taught with fear and trembling; having
heard the word, we must meditate therein, and pray unto God, not only
publicly but privately also, entreating him that he would reach forth his
hand, and pull us out of the grave of sin, wherein we have lien dead so long.
And in so doing the Lord of his mercy, according as he has promised, will
send his spirit of grace into our hearts to work in us an inward sense and
feeling of the virtue of Christ's resurrection. So dealt he with the two
disciples that were going to Emmaus; they were occupied in the meditation of
Christ his death and passion, and whiles they were in hearing of Christ who
conferred with them, he gave them such a measure of his spirit as made their
hearts to burn within them. And Paul prays for the Ephesians, that God would
inlighten their eyes, Ephesians. 1.19.
that they might see and feel in themselves the exceeding greatness of the
power of God, which he wrought in Christ Jesus, when he raised him from the
dead.

Thirdly, as Saint Paul says, If we be risen with Christ, then we must seek
the things that are above. Col. 3.1.
But how and by what means can we rise with Christ, seeing we did not die with
him? Ans. We rise with Christ thus. The burgess of a town in the parliament
house bears the person of the whole town, and whatsoever he says, that the
whole town says, and whatsoever is done to him, is also done to all the town:
so Christ upon the cross stood in our place, and bare our person, and what he
suffered, we suffered, and when he died, all the faithful died in him: and so
likewise as he is risen again, so are all the faithful risen in him. The
consideration whereof does teach us, that we must not have our hearts wedded to
this world. We may use the things of this life, but yet so as though we used
them not. For all our love and care must be for things above, and specially we
must seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, peace of conscience, and
joy in the holy Ghost. We must therefore sue for the pardon of sin, for
reconciliation to God in Christ, and for sanctification. These are the precious
pearls which we must seek, and when we have found them, we must sell all that
we have to buie them, and having bought them, we must lay them up in the secret
corners of our hearts, valuing and esteeming of them as better then all things
in the world beside.

Thus much of Christ's resurrection, containing the first degree of Christ's
exaltation. Now follows the second in these words, He ascended into heaven:
in the handling whereof we are to consider these special points: I. the time of
his ascension. II. the place. III. the manner. IV. the witnesses. V. the uses
thereof. For the first, the time of Christ's ascension was forty days after
his resurrection, when he had taught his disciples the things which appertain
to the kingdom of God. Act. 1.3, 4.
And this shows that he is a most faithful and careful king over his Church,
procuring the good thereof. And therefore Esaias says, The government is on his
shoulder: and the Apostle says, Esa. 9.6* Heb. 3.5, 6.
he was more faithful in all the house of God, then Moses was. Hence we gather
that whereas the Apostles changed the sabbath from the seventh day to the
eight, it was no doubt, by the counsel and direction of Chist before his
ascension: and likewise in that they planted Churches and appointed teachers
and meet overseers for the guiding and instruction hereof, we may resolve our
selves that Christ prescribed the same unto them before his asce^sion: and for
these and such like causes did he ascend no sooner.

Now look what care Christ at his ascensio^ had over his church, the same must
al masters of families have over their household, when God shall call them out
of this world. They must have care not only that their families be well
governed while they live, but also that after their death, peace, love, and
good order may be continued in their posterity. And therefore the Prophet Esaias
is sent to Ezechias king of Judah, to bid him se^ his house in order: for he
must die, Isa. 38.1^
signifying that it is the duty of a good master of a family, not only to
have care for the government of his house whilst he is alive, but also that it
may be well governed when he is dead. The same also must be practiced of Gods
ministers: their fidelity must be seen in this, that they have not only a
care to feed their particular flocks while they are alive, but also they must
further provide for the people after their departure, as much as they can.
Example whereof we have in Peter, who says, I will endeavor always that ye
may be able also to have remembrance of these things after my departure. 2.
Pet. 1.15.


The place of Christ's ascension was, the mount of Olives near Bethanie: Luke
24.50. and 19.29. Act. 1.12.
and it was the same place from whence Christ went to Jerusalem to be
crucified. One place serve to be a passage both to pain and torments, and also
to glory. This shows that the way to the kingdom of heaven is through
afflictions. In all ages there are many which have Gods hand heavy upon them
in lingering sicknesses, as the dead palsy and such like, wherein they are
feign to lie many years without hope of cure, whereupon their beds which
should be unto them places of rest and ease, are but places of woe and misery.
Yet may these men hence have great comfort, if they can make good use of their
sicknesses, for the beds whereon they suffer so much torment, shall be places
from whence they shall pass to joy and happiness. Again, there be many that
for the testimony of the truth, and for religions sake suffer imprisonment,
with many afflictions; now if they can use their afflictions well, their
prisons shall be Bethanies unto them: although they be places of bondage, yet God
will at length make it a place of entrance to liberty. Many a man for the
maintaining of faith and good conscience, is banished out of his country, and
is feign to live in a strange place among a people to whom he is unknown:
but let him use it well: for though it be a place of grief for a time, as
Bethanie was to Christ when he went to suffer, yet God will make it one day to
be his passage into heaven.

Thus much of the place of his ascending. The third thing to be considered, is
the manner of Christ's ascension: and it contains three points. The first,
that Christ being now to ascend, lifts up his hands and blessed his disciples.
In the Scripture are mentioned diverse kinds of blessings. Luke 24.50.
The first when one man prays to God for a blessing upon an other: and this
blessing do kings and princes bestow upon their subjects, and parents on their
children: and for this cause children are taught to ask their fathers and
mothers blessing, that they may pray to God to bless them. There is another
kind of blessing, when a man does not only pray for a blessing, but also
pronounces it. This did the priests in the old Testament: and thus
Melchisedeck when he met Abraham blessed him, saying, Blessed art thou Abraham
of God, the most high possessour of heaven and earth. Genesis 14.19.
And this was the ordinary duty of the Priests, prescribed by God himself:
and therefore the very form of words which they used is set down after this
manner, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make his face to shine
upon thee, Number. 6.22.
etc. The third kind of blessing is, when a man does not only pray to God,
and pronounce blessing, but by the spirit of prophecy does foretell a
particular blessing upon any. Thus Isaac blessed Iaacob and Esau, particularly
foretelling both their estates. And Iaacob blessed the twelve Patriarks by the
same spirit, Genesis 49.
foretelling them what should befall them many hundred years after. Now our
Savior Christ did not bless his disciples any of these three ways: and
therefore there remains a fourth kind of blessing which he used, and that
was after this manner: Christ in blessing his disciples did not only pronounce
or foretell a blessing that should come to his disciples, but did confer and
give the same unto them. For he is the fountain and author of all blessings.
And therefore Paul says, Ephesians. 1.3.
that God the father has blessed us in all spiritual blessings in Christ.
Hence we learn, first that al those which deny themselves and fly to Christ,
and put their affiance in him, shall be freeed from the curse of the law, and
from the wrath of God, due unto them for their sins, whatsoever they are.
Secondly, that the curses of men must not discourage us from doing well. For
though men curse, yet Christ blesses: and for this cause he says, Woe be unto
you, when all men speak well of you: Luke 6.26.
as if he should say, then you want the blessing of God. And we must remember,
that when men shall curse us for doing our duty, even then the blessing of God
shall be upon us; and the curse causeless shall not hurt. And God says to
Abraham, Genesis 12.3.
he will curse them that curse him. Thirdly, we learn that no witchcraft, nor
sorcerie, (which often are done with cursing) shall be able to hurt us. For
look where Christ will bless, there all the devils in hell can never fasten a
curse. This is found true by experience. For when Balaam the wizzard should
have cursed the people of Israel, and had assaied to do it many ways, but
could not, at length he said, Number. 23.23
there is no sorcerie The english translation being otherwise here seems to
fail.
against Jacob, nor soothsaying against Israel. This is a notable comfort to
the people of God, that witches and sorcerers, do what they can, shall never be
able to hurt them. It may be, that their badde practices may annoy men's bodies
and goods, yet the Lord will turn all to a blessing upon his servants either in
this life or the life to come.

The second point is, that Christ went apart from his disciples, and ascended
upward toward heaven in their sight. For the right understanding of this,
sundry special points must be observed. The first, that the lifting up of his
body was principally by the mighty power of his Godhead, and partly by the
supernatural property of a glorified body, which is to move as well upward
as downward, without constraint or violence. The second, that Christ did go
from earth to heaven really and actually, and not in appearance only. The
third, that he went visibly in the sight of his disciples. The fourth that he
went locally, by changing his place and going from earth to heaven, so as he
is no more on earth bodily, as we are now on earth. It may be objected, that
Christ made a promise that he would be with his Church to the end of the
world. Answer. Mat* 28.20.
That promise is to be understood of the presence of his spirit, or Godheade,
not of the presence of his manhood. Again it may further be alleged, that
if the Godheade be on earth, then must the manhood be there also, because they
are both united together. Answer. It is not true, that of two things conjoined,
where the one is, there must the other be also. For the sun it self, and the
sunne-beames are both joined together, yet they are not both in all places
together. For the body of the sun is only in the heavens, but the
sunne-beames are also upon the earth. The argument therefore follows not:
Christ's manhood subsibsts in that person which is every where: ergo his
manhood is every where. And the reason is, because the Son of God subsists
not only in his divine nature, Vide Them. contra Gent. lib. 4. c. 49.
but also by it: whereas he does not subsist at al by the manhood, but only in
it: for he subsisted before all eternity, when the manhood was not. Nay
rather because the manhood does subsist by the person of the Son, therefore
the person extendes it self further then the manhood which is assumed and
sustained by it; and has his existing thence. For that very thing whereby any
other thing either essentially or accidentally is, extends it self further
then the thing whereby it is. As the humane nature whereby Peter is a man,
extendes it self further then to Peter, namely to all other men: and the
whiteness whereby the snow is white, extendes it self further then to that
snow which a man holds in his hand.

The third point is, that in the ascension a cloud took Christ from the sight
of his Disciples. Act. 1.9.
And whereas he* caused a cloud to come between their sight and himself, it
signified unto them that they must now be contented with that which they had
seen, and not seek to know further what became of him afterward: and the same
thing is taught unto us also: we must content our selves with that which God
has revealed in his word, and seek no further specially in things which
concern God. For the like end in the giving of the law in Sinai, God appeared
in a cloud: Exodus 19.9.
and when he did manifest his glory in the temple which Solomon made, a thick
cloud filled the same.

The fourth point to be considered, is concerning the witnesses of his
ascension, which were his own disciples in the mount of olives at Bethanie,
Luke 24.50. Act. 1.9.
and none but them. Now it may be demanded, why he would not have all the
whole nation of the Jews to see him ascend, that so they might know that he
was risen again, and believe in him. Answ. The reason may be this: ^t was his
good pleasure that the points of faith and religion, whereof this article is
one, should rather be learned by hearing, then by seeing. Indeed Christ's own
disciples were taught the same by sight, that they might the better teach
others which should not see: whereas now the ordinary means to come by
faith, is hearing.

The uses to be made of Christ's ascension, are of two sorts: some are comforts
to Gods Church and people, and some are duties. The co^forts are especially
four. The first is this: Christ Jesus did asce^d up into heaven, to lead
captivity captive, Ephesians. 4.8.
a most worthy benefit. By captivity is meant* 1. sin and satan, which did
and do lead men captive into perdition: 2. death and the grave, which held him
captive and in bondage for the space of three days. And he leads them all
captive two ways. First in himself; in that he began his triumph upon the
cross, as I have showed and continued the same till his very ascension:
secondly in all his members, because by his mighty power being now ascended,
he does subdue and weaken the power of sin and satan, which he manifests
every day by killing the corruption of their natures, Romans 16.20
and the rebellion of their flesh. But it may be demanded, how Christ does
lead his enemies captive, considering the devil reigns every where, and the
world, and death, and hell. Answer. Christ's victory over his and our enemies
has five degrees. First, it is ordained by God, secondly it is foretold,
thirdly it is wrought, fourthly it is applied, lastly it is accomplished. The
ordaining of it was before all worlds; the foretelling of it was in all the
ages of the old testament: the working of it was upon the cross, and
afterward; the applying has bin since the beginning of the world more or
less: and it is only in part in this life, that while Christ is in bruising
of the head of satan, he again may bruise his heel: the accomplishment shall
not be before the last judgment. From this great benefit bestowed on Gods
Church, there are many duties to be learned. First here is an instruction for
all ignorant persons and impenitent sinners, which abound among us in every
place. Whosoever they be that live in the blindness of their minds, and hardness
of their hearts, they must know this, that they are captives and bondeslaues
of sin and Satan, of hell, death, and condemnation: and let no man flatter
himself of what state or degree soever he be (for it is Gods truth) if he have
not repented of all his sins, he as yet is no better then a captive and
vassal, yea a very drudge of the devil. Now then, what will thou do in this
case? the best thing is, to lay to thy heart this benefit of Christ. He is
ascended up to heaven to lead captive and to vanquish the devil and all his
angels, under whom thou lie bound, and that not only in himself, but in
his members. Now then if thou will become a true member of Christ, he will free
thee from this bondage. Therefore take heed how thou continuest longer in thy
old sins, and in thy gross ignorance: and seeing Christ has made a way to
liberty, let us come out of this spiritual bondage: he is ascended for this
end and purpose to free us from it; therefore if we refuse this benefit, our
state will be the more damnable. Any man that lies bound hand and foot in a
dark dungeon, and the keeper comes and sets open the prison door, and takes
off his boults, and biddes him come out; if he refuse and say that he is well;
will not all men think that he is a mad man, and will any be sorry for his
case? No surely. Well, this is the state of all impenitent sinners. They lie
fast fettered and bound under the power of sin and satan. And Christ it is
who is ascended into heaven to unloose them of this bondage: he has set open
the prison door, and has unlocked our fetters: if we refuse to come out, and
lie still in our sins, there remains nothing for us but everlasting
thraldom. Let us therefore in the fear of God, if we have a care of our own
souls, receive and embrace this benefit which redoundes unto us by Christ's
ascension.

Secondly, in that Christ is ascended to heaven to lead captive sin and
satan, here is a good consolation for all those that are afflicted in
conscience for their sins. There is no man in this case but he has great
cause to fear, yet must he not be discouraged. For Christ by his ascension
like a noble captain has taken sin and satan prisoners, and has pinnioned
them fast, so as all the power that they have is in Christ's hand: and therefore
though they do exercise and afflict us, yet by his grace they shall never be
able to prevail against us. Therefore we may safely cast our care upon God, and
not fear overmuch. Hence also we may learn a third duty. There is no man
that knows what sin means, and what the blood of Christ means, but in
regard of the corruption of his own nature, he will say with Paul that he is
sold under sin, and in regard thereof will cry out with him also, O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? yea it will make
his heart to bleed within him. Now what shall he do in this case? Surely let
him remember the end of Christ's ascension, which is to vanquish and subdue the
rebellion of his nature, and labor to feel the benefit thereof: and then he
shall no doubt find that Christ will dissolve in him the works of the devil,
as Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 3.8. Romans 16.20.
and tread satan under his feet. And thus all those that feel in themselves
the law of the members rebelling against the law of the mind, must come to
Christ and he will help and free them.

The second benefit of Christ's ascension is, that he ascended up to heaven to
bestow gifts upon his Church, as it is said in the place before mentioned, He
ascended up on high, etc. he gave gifts unto men, that is, Ephesians. 4.8.
the gift of the knowledge of Gods word, the gift of preaching, and prophecy,
and all other gifts needful for the good of his Church. The consideration of
this, that Christ who is the fountain of grace, and in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, should be mindful of us and vouchsafe
such special favor to his Church, must cause every one of us who have
received any gift of God (as there is no man but he has received his portion)
to be humbled in his own eyes for the same. There is no cause why we should be
proud of our gifts, seeing we have nothing but that which we have received.
For to this end Christ ascended, to give gifts unto men, and therefore our
gifts whatsoever they be, are not our own, but we had them from Christ, and
we are stewards of them a while for the good of others. The more the Lord
gives to a man, the more he requires at his hands, and therefore those
which have good gifts and do abuse the same, their sin is the more
grievous, and their danger the greater. Men of great gifts unless they use
them aright with humbled hearts, shall want Gods blessing upon theirs. For he
gives grace to the humble. The high hills after much tillage are often barren,
whereas the low valleis by the streams of waters passing through them are
very fruitful: and the gifts of God joined with a swelling heart are
fruitelesse; but joined with love and the grace of humility, they edify.

Secondly, if Christ ascend up to heaven to give gifts unto men; here we may
see how many a man and woman in these our days are ouerseene, in that they
plead ignorance, and say that they hope God will have them excused for it,
seeing they are not learned; they have dull wits, and it is not possible to
teach them now, they are past learning; and hereupon they presume they may
live in gross ignorance, as blind almost in religion as when they were first
borne. But mark, I pray you, who it is that is ascended up to heaven, namely
Christ Jesus our Lord, who made thee of nothing. Now was he able to give thee a
being, when thou was not, and is he not likewise able to put knowledge into
thy soul, if so be thou will use the means which he has appointed? and the
rather, seeing he is ascended for that end: but if thou will not use the
means to come to knowledge, thy case is desperate, and thou art the cause of
thine own condemnation, and thou bring confusion upon thine own head.
Therefore let ignorant men labor for knowledge of Gods word. Ignorance shall
excuse none: it will not stand for payment at the day of judgment. Christ is
ascended to this end to teach the ignorant, to give knowledge and wisdom
unto the simple, and to give gifts of prophecy unto his ministers, that they
may teach his people. Therefore, I say again, let such as be ignorant use the
means diligently, and God will give the blessing. Thirdly, whereas it is
thought to be a thing not possible, to furnish a whole Church with preaching
ministers, it seems to be otherwise. For wherefore did Christ ascend to
heaven? was it not to give gifts unto his Church? what, is Christ's hand now
shortened? undoubtedly we may resolve our selves, that Christ bestowed gifts
sufficient upon men in the Church: but it is for our sins that they are not
employed. The fountains of learning the Universities, though they are not
dammed up, yet they stream not abroad as they might. Many there be in them
indewed with worthy gifts for the building of the Church, but the covetousness
of men hinders the comfortable entrance which otherwise might be. Lastly,
seeing Christ ascended to give gifts needful for his Church, as the gift of
teaching, the gift of prophecy, the gift of tongues, of wisdom, and
knowledge: the duty of every man is, especially of those which live in the
schools of learning, to labor by all means to increase, cherish, and
preserve their gifts, and as Paul exhorts Timothy, 2. Tim. 1.6. (...).
to stir up the gift of God. As men preserve the fire by blowing it; so by
our diligence we must kindle and revive the gifts of God bestowed on us. Christ
has done his part, and there is nothing required but our pains and fidelity.

The third benefit that comes by Christ's ascension is, that he ascended to
prepare a place for all that should believe in him: In my fathers house (says
Christ) are many dwelling places, if it were not so, I would have told you. J
go to prepare a place for you. Ioh. 14.2.
For by the sin of Adam our entrance into heaven was taken away. If Adam by
his fall did exclude himself from the earthly paradise, Genesis 3.24.
then how much more did he exclude himself from heaven? And therefore all
mankind sinning in him, was likewise deprived of heaven. The people of Israel
being in woe and misery, cried out that they had sinned, Lam. 3.44.
and therefore the Lord had covered himself with a cloud, that their prayers
could not pass through. And Esaias says, that our sins are a wall betwixt God
and us, that we cannot enter into heaven. And Saint John, that no unclean
thing must enter into the heavenly Jerusalem. Rev. 21.27
Now seeing we have shut our selves out of heaven by our sins, it was
requisite that Christ Jesus our Savior should go before us to prepare a
place, and to make ready a way for us. For he is king ouerall, he has the
keys of heaven, he opens and no man shuts: and therefore it is in his
power to let us in, though we have shut our selves out. But some may say, if
this be the end of his ascension to prepare a place in heaven; then belike such
as died before the coming of Christ were not in heaven. Answer. As there are
two degrees of glory, one incomplete and the other complete or perfect, (for
the faithful departed are in glory but in part, and there remains fulness of
glory for them at the day of judgment, when soul and body shall be both
glorified together:) so answearably there are two degrees of preparation of
places in heaven. The places of glory were in part prepared for the faithful
from the beginning of the world, but the full preparation is made by Christ's
ascension. And of this last preparation is the place of John to be understood.

The use of this doctrine is very profitable. First it overthrows the fond
doctrine of the Church of Rome, which teaches that Christ by his death did
merit our justification, and that we being once justified do further merit
salvation, and purchase for our selves a place in heaven. But this is as it
were to make a partition between Christ and us in the work of our redemption,
whereas in truth not only the beginning and continuance of our salvation, but
also the accomplishment thereof in our vocation, justification, sanctification,
glorification, is wholly and only to be ascribed to the mere merit of Christ:
and therefore having redeemed us on earth, he also ascends to prepare a place
in heaven for us. Secondly, this serves to condemn the fearful, lamentable,
and desperate security of these our days. Great is the love of Christ in that
he was content to suffer the pangs of hell to bring us out of hell* and withal
to go to heaven to prepare a place for us there: and yet who is it, that
cares for this place, or makes any account thereof? who forsakes this world,
and seeks unto Christ for it? Now, least any man should say* alas, I know
not the way: therefore Christ before he ascended, made a new and living way
with his own blood, as the Apostle speaks. Heb. 10.20.
And to take away all excuses from men, he has set marks and bounds in this
way, and has placed guides in it, namely his ministers* to show all the
passengers a straight and ready course into the kingdom of heaven. And though
Christ have done all this for us, yet the blindness and security of men is
such, that none almost walks in this way, nor cares to come to this mansion
place; but in stead of this, they walk in by-waies, according to the lusts of
their own flesh. When they are commanded to go eastward to Jerusalem, they
turn westward an other way: when they are commanded to go on forward to
heaven, they turn again backward, and go straight to hell. Men run on all
the days of their lives in the broad way that leads to destruction, and
never so much as once make inquiry for a resting place in heaven; but when the
hour of death comes, then they call for the guide, whereas all their lives
before they have run out of the way many thousand miles: but then, alas, it is
too late, unless it be the unspeakable mercy of God. For they have wandered
so far astray, that in so short a space they cannot be able to come into the
right way again. Yet generally this is the state of most among us, whose
security is so much the more grievous and fearful, because Christ has done
all that heart can wish. There is nothing else required, but only that by his
grace we should walk in the way. There was never any that knew the state of the
people in these days, but he will say, that this is most true which I say.
Besides, as by this we are brought to a sight of the desperate security of
this age: so we may further learn our own duties. Is Christ gone to heaven
beforehand to prepare a place for thee, the^ practice that which Paul teaches:
Have thy (...).
conversation in heaven. Phil. 3.10.
The words which he uses are very significant, and the meaning of them is
this: Ye are free denizens of the city of God, and therefore as freemen in
Gods house, let all your cares and studies, all your affairs and doings be in
heaven. In the world if a man make purchase of an house, his heart is always
there, there he pulls down and builds again: there he makes him orchards and
gardens, there he means to live and die. Christ Jesus has bought the
kingdom of heaven for us (the most blessed purchase that ever was) and has
paid the dearest price for it that ever was paid, even his own precious blood:
and in this city he has prepared for us a dwelling place, and made us free
denizens of it: therefore all our joy, and all our affairs ought to be there.
But how shall a man upon earth, have his conversation in heaven. Answ. We must
converse in heaven, not in body but in heart: and therefore though our bodies
be on earth, yet our hearts joy, and comfort, and all our meditation must be in
heaven. Thus must we behave our selves, like good freemen in Gods house. It
must be far from us, to have our joy and our hearts set on the things of this
world.

Thirdly, the consideration of this, that Christ Jesus has prepared a place
for us in heaven, and also has trained the way with his own blood, must make
every one of us to strive to enter in at the straight gate, as our Savior
Christ counsels us: Luke 13.24.
and that as wrastlers do, which strive for life and death. Within this gate
is a dwelling place of happiness ready for us. If a man were assured that there
were made for him a great purchase in Spain or Turkey, so as if he would but
come thither, he might enjoy it; would he not adventure the dangers of the
sea, and of his enemies also, if need were, that he might come to his own?
Well, behold Christ Jesus has made a purchase for us in heaven, and there is
nothing required of us, but that we will come and enjoy it. Why then should men
refuse any pains or fear in the way? nay, we must strive to get in. It may
be, we shall be pinched in the entrance, for the gate is both straight and low,
and we must be feign to leave our wealth behind us, and the pleasures of this
life; and enter we must, though we should be constrained to leave our flesh
behind us. For the purchase that is made is worth ten thousand worlds. And
besides, if we loose it by fainting in the way, our purchase shall be the
blacknes of darkness for ever with the devil and all his angels: who therefore
would not strive, though he lost his life in the gate? The urging of this point
is needful in these days. There is striving enough for worldly preferment,
but a man almost may go alone in the straight way that leads to heaven, he
shall have none to bear him company. And where are they, that strive to enter
in? where is the violence offered to the kingdom of heaven? where be the
violent which should take it to themselves as in the days of John Baptist.

Fourthly, if Christ have prepared a place for us in heaven, then we are in
this world as pilgrims and strangers, and therefore must learn the counsel
of Saint Peter: As strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, which
fight against the soul. He that does esteem him self as a pilgrim, is not to
entangle himself with the affairs of this world, nor put in practice the
behavior thereof, but to behave himself as a freeman of heaven, as strangers
use to live in foreign countries, according to the fashion of their own. And
therefore in thought, word, and deed, in life and conversation, he must so
carry himself, as thereby he may appear to all the world of what cuntry he
is. An ancient divine speaking of such as had curled and embrodered hair,
bids them consider, Tertull. lib. de habi^. mul*
whether they must go to heaven with such hair or no: and whereas they adorned
themselves with winkles made of other women's hair, he asks them whether it may
not be the hair of a damned person or no. If it may be, he further demands
how it may beseem them to wear it which profess themselves to be the sons
and daughters of God. The like may be said of all other sins: they that be
of gods house must behave themselves as free men there. And when god has made
us free, it does not beseem us to make our selves bondmen of sin and satan and
of this world.

Fifthly, seeing Christ went to heaven to prepare a place for all that believe
in him, here is a good duty for parents. Many of them are very careful to
prefer their children to great places and noble men's houses, and they are not
to be blamed therefore: but if they would indeed be good parents to their
children, they should first endeavor themselves to get rooms for them in
heaven: they that do this are good parents indeed. Some will say, how shall
we get this preferrement for them? Answer: God has two houses, his Church,
and the kingdom of heaven. The Church is his house of grace, heaven is his
house of glory. Now if thou would have thy child to have a place in the
house of glory, then thou art first of all to get him a place in the house of
grace: bringing him up so in the fear of God, that both in life and
conversation he may show himself to be a member of the Church: and then
assure thy self, that after this life, he shall be removed to the second
house of God, which is the house of glory, and there be freeman for ever in
the kingdom of heaven. Add if thou shall thus provide for thy child, thou
shall not leave him as an orphan, but he shall have God for his father and
Christ for his brother, and the holy ghost his comforter. And therefore first
of all and above all remember to make thy child a member of Gods Church. Let
the example of David excite all parents hereunto: I had rather (says he) be
a door keeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the tabernacles of
wickedness. Psalm. 84.10.
For a day in thy courts is better then a thousand else where.

Lastly, hence we may find remedy against the tediousness of sickness and
the fear of death. Thou which fear death, remember that Christ is gone to
heaven to prepare a place for thy body, where it must be glorified and live
for ever with the blessed trinity and all the saints and angels, though for a
while it lie dead and rotte in the grave. Remember this also, thou which
continuest in any lingering sickness Christ Jesus has prepared a place for thee,
wherein thou shall rest in joy and bliss without all pain or faintnes.

The fourth benefi^e is, that Christ ascended up to heaven to send the
comforter unto his Church. This was a special end of his ascension, as
appears by Christ's own words: It is (says he) expedient that I go away, for
if I go not, the comforter will not come, Ioh. 16.7.
but if I depart I will send him unto you. And again, I will pray unto the
father, and he shall give you another comforter, Ioh. 14.16.
which shall abide with you for ever, even the spirit of truth. But some will
say, how can Christ send his spirit unto his Church, for the person sending and
the person sent are unequal; whereas all three persons in trinity are equal,
none greater or lesser then another, none inferior or superior to other. Ans.
It is true indeed* but we must know, that the action of sending in the trinity
makes not the persons unequal, but only shows distinction and order among
equals. The father sendes the son, the father and the son both send the
holy ghost: yet the father is not above the son, neither the father or the
son above the holy ghost, but all are equal in degree, though in regard of
order one is before another: and it stands with reason. For two men that are
equal in degree may upon mutual consent one send another. But it may be
further demanded, how the holy ghost can be sent which is every where? Ans. The
holy ghost indeed is every where, therefore he is sent not so much in regard of
the presence of his essence or substance, as of his operation whereby he
renueth and guides the members of Christ. Now here first we have occasion to
consider the misery of the world. When a man is troubled in his mind (as no
ungodly man, but sometime he feels the terror of conscience for his sins)
then he labors to remove it by merry company and pleasant books, whereas
Christ at his ascension sent his holy spirit to be the comforter of his
Church: and therefore when we are troubled in conscience for our sins, we
should not seek ease by such slender means, but rather seek for the help and
comfort of the holy ghost, and labor to have our sins washed away and our
hearts purified and cleansed by the bl^od of Christ. As for wine and mirth and
such like means of comfort, neither at the day of death nor at the day of
judgment shall they stand us in stead, or be able to comfort us. Again, when
crosses and calamities fall, the counsel of the minister is not sought for,
but the help of such as are called cunning men and cunning women is, that is,
of charmers, inchanters, and figure casters: a bad practice. Christ at his
ascensio^ sent his holy spirit unto his Church and people, to be their guide
and comforter in their calamities and miseries: and therefore when any man is
in distress, he should have recourse to the right means of comfort, namely
the word and sacraments, and there he shall find the assistance of the holy
ghost. Thus the prophet Isai informs the Jews when they shall say unto you:
inquire at them which have a spirit of divination, and at the soothsayers which
whisper and murmr. Esai. 8.19.
Should not a people inquire at their God, from the living to the dead? to the
law and to the testimony. Rebecca, when the two twins strove in her womb,
what did she? the text says she sent to ask the Lord. Yet commonly the men
of these days leave God and seek to the instruments of the devil. To go yet
further, Genesis 25.22.
God uses for sundry causes most of all to afflict his dearest children.
Judgment, says Peter, begins at Gods house. S. Luke says, 1. Pet. 4.17.
Luke 13.16.
that a certain woman was bound of satan eighteen years, but what was she?
a daughter of Abraham, that is, a child of God. When the like condition shall
befall any of us, let us remember the end why Christ ascended up to heaven: and
pray unto God that he will give us his spirit, that thereby we may be eased and
delivered, or else enabled to persevere and continue in patience: and this is
the true way and means to lighten and ease the burden of all afflictions. And
for this cause Paul prays that the Colossians might be strengthened with all
might, Col* 1.10.
through his glorious power unto all patience and long suffering with
ioyfulnesse. For to whomsoever God gives grace to believe, to them also he
gives power to suffer affliction by the inward work of his spirit. Secondly
if Christ have sent unto his church the holy spirit to be our comforter, our
duty is, to prepare our bodies and souls to be fit temples and houses for so
worthy a guest. If a man were certified that a prince would come to his house,
he would dress it up and have all things in as good order as might be: and
shall not we much more endeavor to purify and cleanse our souls and bodies
from all sin, that they may be fit temples for the entertainment of the
holy ghost, whom Christ Jesus has sent to be our comforter. The Shunamite was
careful to entertain the man of God Elisha, for she said to her husband,
Let us make him a little chamber, I pray thee, with wales, and let us set him
there a bed and a stool, 2. Kin. 4.10.
a table and a candlestick. Now how much more careful ought we be to
entertain God himself, who is content to come and dwell with us: and
therefore we must adorn our bodies and souls with grace, that he may lodge,
and suppe, and dine with us, as he has promised: but on the contrary, if we
defile our bodies with sin, we banish the holy ghost out of our hearts, and
suffer the devil to dwell in us. For the more a man defiles his body, the
fitter and cleaner it is for him. And to conclude this point, let us remember
that saying, which is used of some, that Christ when he went hence gave us his
pawn, namely his spirit, to assure us, that he would come to us again, and
also he took with him our pawn, namely his flesh, to assure us further, that
we should ascend up to him.

Thus much for the benefits of Christ's ascension; Now follow the duties
whereunto we are moved, and they are two. First, we must be here admonished,
to renounce the ubiquitie and the error of the real and essential presence
of the body of Christ in the Sacrament of the Lords supper: as flatly
oppugning this article of Christ's ascension into heaven. For it is flat against
the nature of a true body to subsist in many places at once. Secondly, as the
Apostles then did, when they saw Christ ascending up into heaven, so must we do
also: while he was present with them, they gave him honor, but when they saw
him ascending, Luke 24.52.
they adored him with far greater reverence: and so must we now for the same
cause bow the knees of our hearts unto him.

Thus much of the second degree of the exaltation of Christ: Now follow the
third in these words: And sits at the right hand of God the father
almighty. In the handling whereof, we are first to show the meaning of the
words: secondly the comforts and benefits that redound to Gods Church:
thirdly, the duties that we are moved unto. For the meaning of the words: if
we speak properly, God has neither right hand nor left, neither can he be
said to sit or stand, for God is not a body, but a spirit: the words
therefore contain a borrowed speech from earthly kings and potentates, whose
manner and custom has been to place such persons at their right hands, whom
they purposed to advance to any special office or dignity. So king Solomon
when his mother came to speak with him, 1. King. 2.19.
rose up from his throne, and met her, and caused a seat to be set at his
own right hand, and set her upon it; in token, no doubt, of honor which he
gave unto her. To the same purpose David says, Psalm. 45.9.
Upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in a vesture of gold. And the sons
of Zebedeus made suit to Christ, that one of them might sit at his right hand,
Mat. 20.
and the other at his left in his kingdom. Now their request was to have the
two special and principal dignities of his kingdom. Thus we see it is
manifest, that the sitting at the right hand of an earthly prince signifies
advancement into authority and honor: and therefore the same phrase of speech
applied to Christ signifies two things. First, his full and manifest
exaltation in dignity, honor, and glory: and in this sense it is said, that
to him is given a name that is above all names, that at the name of Jesus every
knee should bow. Phil. 2.9.
Secondly it signifies his full and manifest exaltation into the authority
and government of his kingdom, which spreads it self over heaven and earth:
So David says, The Lord said unto my Lord, Psalm. 110.1.
Sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Which
place being alleged by Saint Paul repeating the words but changing the
phrase, 1. Cor. 15.25.
is thus set down, He shall reign till he have put all his enemies under his
feet. And to speak in brief, the scope of the words is to show, that
Christ God and man after his ascension is advanced to such an estate in which
he has fullness of glory, power, majesty, and authority in the presence of
his father and all the saints and holy angels. Furthermore in the words three
circumstances must be observed. The first is the place where Christ is thus
adua^ced, noted in the former article, he ascended into heaven, and sittes
(namely in heaven) at the right hand of God. The place then where Christ Jesus
in both his natures, as he is God and also man does rule in full glory, power,
and majesty, is heaven it self. To which effect Paul says, God raised Christ
from the dead, Ephesians. 1.20.
and put him at his right hand in the heavenly places. And in the Epistle to
the Hebrews it is said, He sits at the right hand of the majesty in
highest places. Heb. 1.3.
This point well considered serves to discover the oversight of sundry
Divines, which hold and teach, that to sit at the right hand of God, is to be
every where in all places, and not in heaven only, that they might hereby lay
a foundation for the ubiquitie of Christ's manhood: which nevertheless the
heavens must contain till the time that all things be restored. The second
circumstance, is the time when Christ began to sit at the right hand of God the
father, which is to be gathered by the order of the articles. For first Christ
died and was buried, then he rose again and ascended into heaven, and after
his ascension he is said to sit at the right hand of his father. This order is
also noted unto us by S. Paul: Who shall condemn (says he) it is Christ which
is dead, yea or rather which is risen again, Romans 8.24.
who is also at the right hand of God. And S. Mark says, when Christ was
risen again he appeared to his disciples, and after he had spoken unto them
he was received into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God. Mar. 16.19.
But it may be demanded how this can stand with truth, that Christ should not
begin to sit at the right hand of his father before the ascension considering
he is one God with the father, and therefore an absolute and sovereign king
from all eternity. Answer. As Christ is God or the word of the father, he is
coequall and coeternall with him in the regiment of his kingdom: and has
neither beginning, middle, or ending thereof; yet as Christ is God incarnate,
and in one person God-man or Man-god he began after his ascension and not
before to sit at the right hand of his father: and as S. Peter says, was made
Lord; Act. 2.36.
partly because as he was God he did then manifest himself to be that which
indeed he was before, namely God and Lord of heaven and earth: and partly
because as he was man he received dominion or Lordship from the father which he
had not before, and thereby was even in his manhood exalted to be king of
heaven and earth: and in this sense Christ says of himself, all power is
given to me in heaven and earth. The third circumstance is concerning the
person, Math. 28.19.
at whose right hand Christ sits, noted in the words of the article of God the
father almighty; whereby is signified, that he receives all the honor, power,
and glory of his kingdom from his father: as he that is set at the right hand
of a prince receives the honor and authority which he has from the prince.
Now if it be alleged, that by this means Christ shall be inferior to his
father, because he which receives honor of another is inferior to him of
whom he receives it: the answer is, that in Christ we must consider his
person and his office: in respect of his person as he is the eternal son of
God he is equal to the father, and is not here said to sit at his right hand:
yet in respect of the office which he bears, namely as he is mediator, and
as he is man, he is inferior to the father, and receives his kingdom from him.
As he is god, he is our king and head, and has no head more then the father:
as he is mediator, he is also our head, yet so as he is under the father as
being his head. 1. Cor. 11.3.
And we must not think it strange that one and the same thing should be both
equal and inferior to another, diverse respects considered.

Now in that Christ's placing at the right hand of his father argues
inferioritie between the father and him, M. Kemnit.
hence we learn that they are deceived which from this article gather, that
in the glorification of Christ there is a transfusion of the proprieties of the
godhead, as omnipotency, omniscience, omnipresence, etc. into his manhood.
For this is to abolish all inferioritie and to make an equality between the
creature and the creator.

And whereas again the word Almighty is repeated, it is done upon special
reason: because Christ's sitting at the right hand of God does presuppose
omnipotency. For in vain were all power in heaven and earth given to him,
unless he were omnipotent as the father to execute the same. And therefore the
song of the Elders was on this manner, Worthy is the lamb that was killed to
receive power and riches, Rev. 5.12.
and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise.

The benefits which redounde unto us by Christ's sitting at the right hand of
God are two, one concerns his priesthood, the other his kingly office. The
benefit rising from his priesthood is his Intercession for us: for this is one
of the ends why Christ is now exalted in glory and sittes at the right hand
of his father, namely to make request in the behalf of all, that come unto
him, as Paul says, Christ is risen again, Romans 8.34.
and sits at the right hand of God, and makes request for us. Now that we
may rightly understand what his intercession is, we are to consider these
points. First to whom it is made: secondly, in what manner: thirdly, whether
it be made by Christ alone or no: fourthly, what be the fruits and benefits
thereof: fifthly, the duties whereunto we are moved thereby. For the first,
Intertercession is, to make suite, request, or entreaty in some ones behalf
to another: and this is done by Christ for us unto God, as Paul says, There is
one God, and one mediator between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus.
Here at the very first arises a difficulty: 1. Tim. 2.5.
for in every intercession there be three parties; the person offended; the
person offending; the intercessour, distinct from them both. Now if Christ the
son of God make intercession to God for man, then he makes intercession to
himself because he is true God which ca^ not be: how then shall Christ be
mediator? Ans. This point has so troubled the Church of Rome that for the
resolving of it they have devised an error avouching that Christ is mediator
only as he is man, not as he is God, which is untrue. For as both natures
did concur in the work of satisfaction, so likewise they do both concur
in the work of intercession: and therefore a more meet and convenient answer
is this: Christ Jesus God-man in both natures is directly our mediator to the
first person the father, as S. John says, If any man sin, 1. Ioh. 2.1.
we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the just. And thus we have
three persons in the work of intercession really distinguished. The party
offended is God the father: the party offending is man: and thirdly the
intercessour distinct from them both is Christ the second person in trinity.
For howsoever in Godhead he and the father be one, yet in person they are
really distinguished, and he is as it were in the middle between the father
and us: for the father is God and not man: we that believe in Christ are men
not God: Christ himself both man and God. It may be further replied that this
answer will not stand, because not only the father is offended, but also the
son and the H. ghost: and therefore there must be a mediator to them also.
Ans. The intercession of Christ is directed to the father the first person
immediately: now the father, the son, and the H. ghost have all one in
diuisible essence, and by consequent one and the same will: whereupon the father
being appeased by Christ's intercession, the son and the holy ghost are also
appeased in him. Thus then intercession is made to the whole trinity, but yet
immediately and directly to the first person and in him to the rest.

The second point to be considered is the manner of his intercession unto his
father. We must not imagine, that Christ now in heaven kneeles down on his
knees and vtters words and puts up a supplication for all the faithful to God
the father: for that is not beseeming the majesty of him that sits at the right
hand of God. But the manner of his intercession is thus to be conceived. When
one is to speak to an earthly prince in the behalf of another; first of all he
must come into the presence of the king, and secondly make his request: and
both these, Christ perfourmeth for us unto god. For the first, after his
ascension he entered into heaven, where he did present unto his father, first of
all his own person in two natures, and secondly the invaluable merits of his
death and passion, in which he is well pleased. And we must further understand,
that as on the cross he stood in our room, so in heaven he now appears as
a public person in our stead, representing all the elect that shall believe
in him, as the holy ghost says, Christ Jesus ascended up into heaven to
appear in the sight of God for us. And for the second, Christ makes request
for us; Heb. 9.24.
in that he wills according to both his natures, and desires as he is man,
that the father would accept his satisfaction in the behalf of all that are
given unto him. And that he makes request on this manner I prove it thus. Look
what was his request in our behalf when he was here upon earth, the same for
substance it co^tinues still in heaven: but here on earth the substance of his
requests was that he willed and desired that his father would be well pleased
with us for his merits, as appears by his prayer in S. John. Father, I will
that those which thou have given me be with me even where I am, Cap. 17.24.
that they may behold my glory which thou have given me: for thou lovedst me
before the foundation of the world. Therefore he still continues to make
request for us by willing and desiring that his father would accept his
merits in our behalf. If it be alleged that Christ in this solemn prayer
used speech and prostration of his body, the answer is, that these actions
were no essential parts of his prayer. The prostrating of his body served
only as a token of his submission to God, as he was a creature: and the
speech which he used, served only to utter and express his request.
Furthermore, a difference here must be marked between Christ's passion and his
intercession. The passion serves for the working and causing of a satisfaction
to Gods justice for us; and it is as it were the tempering of the plaster: the
intercession goes further: for it applies the satisfaction made, and lays the
salve to the very sore. And therefore Christ makes request not only for the
elect generally, but for particular men, as Paul, James, John, and that
particularly, as he testifies of himself, saying, I have prayed for thee
Peter that thy faith fail not. If any shall say, that Christ's vvilling and
desiring of a thing can not be a request or intercession, the answer is, that
in virtue and efficacy it countervailes all the prayers in the world. For
whatsoever Christ wills, the same also the father being well pleased with
him, wills: and therefore whatsoever Christ as Mediator wills for us at
the hands of his father, in effect or substance is a request or prayer.

The third point is, that Christ alone and none with him makes intercession for
us. And this I prove by induction of particulars. First of all this office
appertains not to the angels. They are indeed ministering spirits for the good
of gods chosen: they rejoice when a sinner is converted, and when he dies,
they are ready to carry his soul into Abraham's bosom: and God otherwhiles
uses them as messengers to reveal his will: thus the angel Gabriel brings a
message to Zachary the priest, that God had heard his prayer: but it is not
once said in all the scriptures that they make intercession to God for us. As
for the saints departed, Luke 1.13.
they can not make intercession for us, because they know not our particular
estates here on earth, neither ca^ they hear our requests: And therefore if we
should pray to them to pray for us, we should substitute them into the room
of God, because we ascribe that to them which is proper to him, namely, the
searching of the heart, and the knowledge of all things done upon earth, though
withal we should say, that they do this not by themselves but of God. As for
the faithful hear on earth, indeed they have warrant, yea commandment to
pray one for another: yet ca^ they not make intercession for us. For first, he
that makes intercession must bring something of his own that may be of value and
price with God to procure the grant of his request: secondly, he must do it in
his own name: but the faithful on earth make request to god one for another
not in their own names, nor for their own merits, but in the name and for the
merits of Christ. It is a prerogative belonging to Christ alone to make a
request in his own name, and for his own merits: we therefore conclude that
the work of intercession is the sole work of Christ God and man not belonging
to any creature beside in heaven or in earth. And whereas the papists can not
content themselves with his intercession alone, as being most sufficient; it
argues plainly, that they doubt either of his power or of his will: whereupon
their prayers turn to sin. Iam. 1.6.


The fruits and benefits of Christ's intercession are these. First by means
of it we are assured, that those which are repentant sinners shall stand and
appear righteous before God for ever: at what time soever Christ, being now in
heaven, and there presenting himself and his merits before his father, shows
himself desirous and willing, that they whosoever they are being sinners
should be accepted of God for the same, even then immediately at that very
instant this his will is done, and they are accepted as righteous before God
indeed. When a man looks upon things directly through the air, they appear
in their proper forms and colors as they are: but if they be looked upon
through a green glass, they all appear green: so likewise if God behold us
as we are in our selves, we appear as vile and damnable sinners: but if he
look upon us as we are presented before his throne in heaven, in the person of
our mediator Christ Jesus, willing that we should be approved for his
merits, then we appear without all spot and wrinkle before him. And this is
the use Paul makes hereof: It is god (says he) that justifies: and the reason
is rendered: For it is Christ that is dead, Romans 8.34.
yea or rather which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and
makes request for us.

Secondly Christ's intercession serves to preserve all repentant sinners in the
estate of grace: that being once justified and sanctified, they may so
continue to the end. For when any servant of God is overtaken by the
corruption of his own nature, and falls into any particular sin, then
Christ's intercession is made as a blessed hand to apply the salve of his death
to that particular sore. For he continually appears before God, and shows
himself to be willing that God the father should accept his one only
sacrifice for the daily and particular sins of this or that particular man:
and this is done, that a man being justified before God may not fall away quite
from grace, but for every particular sin may be humbled and receive pardon.
If this were not so, our estate should be most miserable, considering that for
every sin committed by us after our repentance, we deserve to be cast out of
the favor of God.

Thirdly Christ's intercession serves to make our good works acceptable to
God. For even in the best works that a man can do, there are two wants. First
they are good only in part: secondly they are mingled with sin. For as a man
is partly grace and partly flesh: so are his works partly gracious and partly
fleshly. And because grace is only begun in this life, therefore all the works
of grace in this life are sinful and imperfit. Now by Christ's intercession
his satisfaction is applied to our persons, and by consequent the defect of our
works is covered and removed, and they are approved of God the father. In a
vision S. John saw an angel, Rev. 8.3.
standing before the altar with a golden censure full of sweet odours to offer
up with the prayers of the saints upon the same. And this signifies, that
Christ presents our works before the throne of God, and by his intercession
sanctifies them, that they may be acceptable to God. And therefore we must
remember that when we do any thing that is accepted of God, it is not for our
sakes, but by reason of the value and vigor of Christ his merit.

Fourthly the intercession of Christ made in heaven breeds and causes in the
hearts of men upon earth that believe another intercession of the spirit, as
Paul says* He gives us his spirit, which helps our infirmities and makes
request for us with sighs which can not be expressed, Romans 8.26.
but he which searches the hearts knows what is the meaning of the spirit,
for he makes request for the saints according to the will of god. Now the
spirit is said to make request, in that it stirs and mooues every contrite
heart to pray with sighs and groans unspeakable to God for things needful:
and this grace is a fruit derived from the intercession of Christ in heaven by
the operation of the spirit. For as the Sun though the body of it abide in
the heavens, yet the beams of it descend to us that are on earth. So the
intercession of Christ made in heaven is tied as it were to his person alone*
yet the groans and desires of the touched heart, as the beams thereof, are
here on earth among the faithful. And therefore if we desire to know whether
Christ make intercession for us or no, we need not to ascend up into the
heavens to learn the truth, but we must descend into our own hearts and look
whether Christ have given us his spirit, which makes us cry unto God and make
request to him with groans and sighs that can not be expressed: and if we find
this in our hearts, it is an evident and infallible sign that Christ
continually makes intercession for us in heaven. He that would know whether the
Sun shine in the firmament* must not clime up into the clouds to look, but
search for the beams thereof upon the earth: which when he sees, he may
conclude, that the Sun shines in the firmament: and if we would know whether
Christ in heaven makes intercession for us, let us ransack our own
consciences, and there make search whether we feel the spirit of Christ crying
in us, Abba, Father. As for those that never feel this work of Gods spirit in
them, their case is miserable, whatsoever they be. For Christ as yet makes no
intercession for them, considering these two always go together; his
intercession in heaven, and the work of his spirit in the hearts of men,
moving them to bewail their own sins with sighs and groans that can not
be expressed, and to cry and pray unto God for grace: and therefore all such,
whether they be young or old, that never could pray but mu^ble up a few words
for fashion sake, can not assure themselves to have any part in Christ's
intercession in heaven.

The duties to be learned hence are these. First, whereas Christ makes
intercession for us, it teaches all men to be most careful to love and like
this blessed mediator, and to be ready and willing to become his servants and
disciples, and that not for form and fashion sake only, but in all truth and
sincerity of heart. For he is ascended to heaven, and there sits at the right
hand of his father to make request for us, that we might be delivered from hell
and come to eternal life. Wicked Haman procured letters from the king
Ahashuerosh, for the destruction of all the Jews, men, women, and children in
his dominions: this done, Hester the Queen makes request to the king that her
people might be saved, and the letters of Haman revoked; she obtaines her
request and freedom was given, and contrary letters of joyful deliverance were
sent in post have to al provinces where the Jews were. Whereupon arose a
wonderful joy and gladness among the Jews, Hest. 8.17.
and it is said, that thereupon many of the people of the land became Jews.
Well now, behold there is a greater matter among us then this: for there is the
handwriting of comdemnation, the law; and therein the sentence of a double
death, of body and soul, and satan as wicked Haman accuses us, and seeks by
all means our conde^natio^: but yet behold not any earthly Hester, but Christ
Jesus the son of God is come down from heaven, and has taken away this
handwriting of condemnation, and ca^celled it upon the cross, and is now
ascended into heaven, and their sits at the right hand of his father, and makes
request for us: and in him his father is well pleased, and yeeldes to his
request in our behalf. Now then what must we do in this case? Surely, look
as the Persians became Jews when they heard of their safety, so we in life and
conversation must become Christians, turn to Christ, embrace his doctrine, and
practice the same unfainedly. And we must not content our selves with a formal
profession of religion, but search into our own hearts, and fly unto Christ for
the pardon of our sins, and that earnestly as for life and death as the thief
does at the bar, when the judge is giving sentence against him. When we shall
thus humble our selves, the^ Christ Jesus that sits at the right hand of god
will plead our cause, and be our atturny unto his father, and his father again
will accept of his request in our behalf. The^ shall we of Persians become
Jews, and of the children of this world become the sons of god. Secondly,
when we pray to God, we must not do as the blind world does, as it were rush
upon God in praying to him without consideration had to the Mediator between
us and him, but we always must direct our prayers to God in the name of
Christ, for he is advanced to power and glory in heaven, that he might be a
fit patron for us who might prefer and present our prayers to God the
father, Ioh. 16.26.
that thereby they might be accepted and we might obtain our request. So
likewise we must give thanks to God in the name of Christ: for in him and for
his sake God does bestow on us his blessings.

Thus much of Christ's intercession: the other benefit which concerns Christ's
kingly office is, that he sitts at the right hand of his father for the
administration of that special kingdom which is committed to him. I say
special, because he is our king not only by the right of creation governing
all things created together with the father and the holy ghost, but also more
specially by the right of redemption in respect of another kingdom, not of
this world, but eternal and spiritual respecting the very conscience of man.
In the administration whereof he has absolute power to command and forbid, to
condemn and absolve, and therefore has the keys of heaven and hell to open
and shutt: which power no creature beside no not the angels in heaven can have.
For the better understanding of this which I say, we are to consider, first
the dealing of Christ toward his own Church; secondly his dealing in respect of
his enemies. And his dealing toward his own church stands in 4. things: The
first is the collecting or gathering of it: and this is a special end of his
sitting at the right hand of his father. Christ said to his disciples, I have
chosen you out of this world: and the same may truly be said of all the elect,
that Christ in his good time will gather them all to himself that they may be
a peculiar people to God. And this action of his in collecting the Church, is
nothing else but a translation of those whom he has ordained to life
everlasting out of the kingdom of darkness in which they have served sin and
satan, into his own kingdom of grace, that they may be ruled and guided by
him eternally. And this he does two ways: first by the preaching of the word,
for it is a powerful outward means, whereby he singleth and sorteth his
own servants from the blind and wicked world, as Paul says, He gave some
to be Apostles, and some Prophets, Ephesians. 4.11.
and some Evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, for the gathering
together of Saints. And hence we learn two things. The first, that every
minister of Gods word, and every one that intends to take upon him that
calling, must propound unto himself principally this end, to single out man
from man, and gather out of this world such as belong to the Church of Christ:
and as Jeremy says, to separate the precious from the vile. The second, Ier.
15.19.
that all those which will be good hearers of Gods word, must show themselves
so far forth conformable unto it, that it may gather them out of the world
and that it may work a change in them, and make them the servants of Christ:
and if the preaching of the word do not work this good work in our hearts,
then the end will be a separation from the presence of God. Christ when he came
near Jerusalem, and considered their rebellion whereby they refused to be
gathered unto him, wept over it, and said, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Math. 23.37.
thou which stonest the Prophets, and killest them that are sent unto thee, how
often would I have gathered thy children together, as the hen gathers her
chickins under her wings, and thou would not. And by this he teaches, that
if the preaching of the word turn not us to Christ, it turns to our
destruction.

The other means of gathering the Church, and that the more principal is, the
inward operation of the spirit, whereby the mind is enlightened, the heart is
mollified, and the whole man is converted to God. And this ordinarily is joined
with the ministry or preaching of the word, as appears by the example of
Lydia. Saint Luke says, God opened her heart to be attentive to the doctrine
of the Apostle. Act. 16.
And by the example of Paul, when Christ says, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? at this very speech he is converted, Act. 9.6.
and said, Who art thou, Lord: what will thou that I do? And this is manifest
also by experience. There is nothing in the world more contrary to the nature
of man, then the preaching of the word: for it is the wisdom of God, to which
the flesh is enimitie. Here then it may be demanded, how it can be in force to
turn any man to God. Answer. The word preached is the scepter of Christ's
kingdom, which against the nature of man by the operation of the H. Ghost
joined therewith, does bend and bow the heart, will, and affections of man to
the will of Christ.

The second work of Christ is, after the Church is gathered, to guide it in
the way to life everlasting. He is the shepherd of his Church, which guides
his flock in and out, and therefore Paul says, They that are Christ's, are
guided by his spirit. Romans 8.14.
And by Esaias the Lord says, those his servants which are turned from
idolatry, he will guide in the way, and their ears shall hear a voice
behind them, saying, This is the way, Esa. 30.20.
walk in it, when thou turnest to the right hand and to the left. Which voice
is nothing else but the voice of the H. Ghost in the mouth of the ministers,
directing them in the ways of God. The children of Israel were travailing from
Egypt to the land of Canaan full forty years, whereas they might have gone
the journey in forty days. Their way was through the wilderness of Arabia,
their guides were a pillar of cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night: the
manner of their journey was this; when the pillars moved, they moved; when
the pillars stood still, they stood still: and so long as the pillars either
moved or stood still, they likewise moved or stood still. And by all this a
further matter, namly the regiment of Christ over his church, was signified.
Every one of us are as passengers and trauailers, not to any earthly Canaan,
but to the heavenly Jerusalem; and in this journey we are to pass through the
wide and desert wilderness of this world: our guide is Christ himself, Esa. 4.5.
figured by the pillar of fire and the cloud: because by his word and spirit he
shows us how far we may go in every action, and where we must stand, and he
goes before us as our guide to life everlasting.

The third work of Christ is, to exercise his Church unto spiritual obedience
by manifold troubles, crosses, temptations, and afflictions in this world, as
earthly kings use to train and exercise their subjects. When our Savior
Christ was with his disciples in a ship, Matt. 8.24.
there arose a great tempest upon the sea, so as the ship was almost covered
with waves; but he was asleep: and his disciples came and awoke him, saying,
Save us master, we perish. Behold here a lively picture of the dealing of
Christ with his servants in this life. His manner is to place them upon the sea
of this world, and to raise up against them bleake storms and flaes of
contrary winds by their enemies, the flesh, the devil, the world. And
further in the midst of all these dangers he for his own part makes as
though he lay asleep for a time, that he may the better make trial of their
patience, faith, and obedience. And the ends for which he uses this
spiritual exercise are these. The first to make all his subjects to humble
themselves, and as it were to go crooked and buckle under their offenses
committed against his majesty in time past. Thus Job after the Lord had long
afflicted him, and laid his hand sore upon him, says, Behold I am vile: and
again, I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes. Job 39.37. and 42.6.
In the same manner we being his subjects and people, must look to be
exercised with temptations and afflictions which shall make us bend and bow
for our sins past, as the old man goes crooked and doubles to the earth by
reason of age. The second, is to prevent sins in the time to come. A father
when he sees his child too bold and venterous about fire and water, takes it
and holds it over the fire or over the water, as though he would burn or
drown it, whereas his purpose indeed is nothing else but to prevent danger for
the time to come: In like manner Christ's subjects are bold to sin by nature,
and therefore to prevent a mischief, he does exercise them with affliction,
and seems for a season as though he would quite forsake his Church, but his
meaning is only to prevent offenses in times to come. The third end is, to
continue his subjects in obedience unto his co^mandeme^ts: so the Lord says*
when he would bring his Church from idolatry: Hosea 2.6.
Behold I will stop thy way with thorns, and make an hedge, that she shall not
find her paths. The H. Ghost here borrows a comparison from beasts, which going
in the way see green pastures, and desire to enter in and therefore go to the
hedge, but feeling the sharpnes of the thorns dare not adventure to go in. So
Gods people like unto wild beasts in respect of sin, vewing the green
pastures of this world, which are the pleasures thereof, are greatly affected
there with: and if it were not for the sharpnes of crosses and temptations,
which are Gods spiritual hedge by which he keeps them in, they would range
out of the way, and rush into sin as the horse into the battle.

The fourth and last work of Christ in respect of his Church is, that he sits
at the right hand of his father to defend the same against the rage of all
enemies whatsoever they are: and this he does two ways. First by giving to his
servants sufficient strength to bear all the assaults of their enemies, the
world, the flesh, and the devil. For Paul says, those to whom the Lord has
given the gift of faith, to them he has also given this gift to suffer
afflictions. Phil. 1.29.
And the same Apostle also prays for the Colossians, that they may be
strengthened with all might through his glorious power unto all patience and
long suffering with ioyfulnes. Col. 1.11.
The evidence hereof we may most plainly see in the most constant deaths of the
martyrs of Christ, recorded both in the word of God, and in the Church
histories. It is wonderful to see their courage and constancy. For at such
times as they have been brought to exequution, they refused to be bound or
chained, willingly suffering most cruel torments, without shrinking or fear;
such courage and strength the Lord gave them to withstand the violent rage of
all their adversaries.

Secondly, he defends his Church by limiting the power and rage of all enemies.
And hence it is, that although the power of the Church of God on earth be weak
and slender in it self, and contrariwise the power of the devil exceeding
great, yet can he not so much as touch the people of God. And he more preuailes
by inward suggestions and temptations, then by outward violence. And if it were
not the power of Christ that does bridle his rage, there were no abode for the
Church of Christ in this world.

Thus we have seen what are the works of Christ in governing his Church: and
we that profess our selves to be members thereof, must show our selves to be
so indeed, by an experience of these works of his in our own hearts. And we
must suffer him to gather us under his own wing, and to guide us by his word
and spirit, and we are to acquaint our selves with those spiritual exercises,
whereby his good pleasure is to nurture us to all obedience. Lastly, we must
depend on his aid and protection in all estates. And seeing we in this land
have had peace and rest with the Gospel of Christ among us a long time, by
Gods especial goodness, we must now after these days of peace look for days
of tribulation: we must not imagine that our ease and liberty will continue
always. For look as the day and night do one follow another; so likewise in
the administration of the Church here upon earth, Christ suffers a continual
intercourse between peace and persecution. Thus he has done from the
beginning hitherto, and we may resolve our selves that so it will continue till
the end: and therefore it shall be good for us in these days of our peace, to
prepare our selves for troubles and afflictions: and when troubles come, we
must still remember the fourth work of Christ in the government of his Church,
namely that in all dangers he will defend us against the ^age of our enemies,
as well by giving us power and strength to bear with patience and joy
whatsoever shall be laid upon us, as also bridle the rage of the world, the
flesh, and the devil, so as they shall not be able to exercise their power and
malice to the full against us.

Thus much of the dealing of Christ toward his own Church and people. Now
follows the second point, namely his dealing toward his enemies; and here by
enemies I vndera^std al creatures, but especially me^ that as they are by
nature enemies to Christ and his kingdom, so they persevere in the same
enimitie unto the end. Now his dealing toward them is in his good time to work
their confusion, as he himself says, Those mine enemies that would not that I
should reign over them, Luke 19.27.
bring them hither and slay them before me. And David says, The Lord will
bruise his enemies with a rod of iron, Psalm. 2.9. and 110.1.
and break them in pieces like a potters ve^sell. And again, I will make
thine enemies thy footestoole. As Iosuah dealt with the five kings that were
hid in the cave, Iosu. 10.24.
he first makes a slaughter of their armies, then he brings them forth and
makes the people to set their feet on their necks, and to hang them on five
trees. So Christ deals with his enemies: he treads them under his feet, and
makes a slaughter not so much of their bodies as of their souls. And this the
Church of God finds to be true by experience, as well as it finds the love of
Christ toward it self. Now he confounds his enemies two ways. The first is
by hardness of heart, which arises when God withdraws his grace from man, and
leaves him to himself, so as he goes on forward from sin to sin, and
never repents to the last gasp. And we must esteem of it as a most
fearful and terrible judgment of God, for when the heart is possessed there
with, it becomes so flintie and rebellious, that a man will never relent and
turn to God. This is manifest in Pharao, for though god sent most grievous
plagues both upon him and all the land of Egypt, yet would he not submit
himself, save only for a fit, while the hand of God was upon him: but after he
returned to the former obstinacy in which he continued till he was drowned in
the sea. And this judgment of God is the more fearful, because when a man is
in the midst of all his misery, he feels no misery. And as in some kind
of sickness a man may die languishing; so where hardness of heart reigns wholly
and finally, a man may descend to the pit of hell triumphing and rejoicing. And
to come near to our selves, it is to be feared least this judgment of all
judgments be among us in these our days. For where is any turning to God by
repentance. Still men go forward in sin without remorse. We have had the
word preached among us a long time, but it takes no place in men's hearts. They
are not softened with the hammer of Gods word: nay they are like the smithes
stithie or anvil; which the more it is beat with the hammer, the harder it is.
But in the fear of God, let us seek to be changed, and take heed: the
deceitfulnes of sin is wonderful. Let us not be carried away with an
ouerweening of our selves; a man may have good gifts of God, as the gift of
knowledge, the gift of prophecy, the gift of conceiving a prayer (I say not of
praying truly:) and hereupon think himself in good case; and yet for all this
have nothing but an impenitent and flintie heart. For this cause it stands
every man upon to look unto it, least this judgment of God take hold on him.
And that we may avoid the same, we must labor for two things: I. to feel the
heavy burden of our sins, and be touched in conscience for them, even as we
are troubled in our bodies with the aches and pains thereof: this is a token
of grace. II. We must labor to feel in our own souls the want of Christ: we
say indeed that we feel it, but it is a very great matter to have an heart
that does open it self, and as it were gape after Christ, as the dry and
thirsty land where no water is. Though we have knowledge and learning never
so much, and many other gifts of God, yet if we have not broken hearts that
feel the burden of our sins, and the want of Christ, and that we stand in
need of every drop of his blood for the washing away of all these our
sins, our case is miserable. And the rather we must prevent this hardness of
heart, because Christ Jesus in heaven sits at the right hand of his father in
full power and authority, to kill and confound all those that be his enemies,
and will not submit themselves to bear his yoke.

The second way is, by final desperation; I say final, because all kind of
desperation is not evil. For when a man despaireth of himself and of his own
power in the matter of his salvation, it tends to his eternal comfort. But
final desperation is, when a man utterly despaires of the pardon of his own
sins, and of life everlasting. Examples hereof we have in Saul that slew
himself, and in Achitophel and Judas, that hanged themselves. This sin is
caused thus: So many sins as a man commits without repentance, so many
most bloody wounds he gives unto his own soul: and either in death or life
God makes him feel the smart, and the huge weight of them all: whereby the
soul sinkes down into the gulf of despair withou recovery. God said to
Caine, If thou do amiss, sin lies at thy door. Where he uses a borrowed
speech from wild beasts, who so long as they are sleeping, stir not, but
being awaked, they fly in a man's face, and rend out his throat. In like
manner the sins which thou committest, lie at the door of thine heart, though
thou feel them not, and if thou do not prevent the danger by speedy
repentance, God will make thee to feel them once before thou die, and raise up
such terrors in thy conscience, that thou shall think thy self to be in hell
before thou art in hell: and therefore it is good for every man to take heed
how he continues an enemy to Christ. The best course is to turn betime from
our sins, and become the friends of Christ, that so we may escape these
fearful judgments.

And whereas Christ in this manner gouernes all things in heaven and earth, we
are bound to perform unto him three duties, reverence, obedience, thankfulness.
For the first, Paul says: God has exalted him and given him a name above all
names, Phil. 2.10.
that at the name of Jesus (which name is his exaltation in heaven in full
power and glory) should every knee bow. We dare not so much as speak of an
earthly king irreverently, what reverence then do we owe unto Christ the king
of heaven and earth? David's heart was touched in that he had cut off but the
lap of Saul's garment, when he might have slain him, because he was the Lords
anointed. 1. Sam. 24.6.
Oh then, how much more ought our hearts to be touched, if we shall in the
least measure dishonor Christ Jesus our Lord and king. Secondly, we are here
taught to perform obedience to him, and to do him all the homage we can. The
master of the family in all his lawful commandments must be obeyed: now the
Church of Christ is a family: therefore we must yield obedience to him in all
things: for all his co^mandeme^ts are just. When Saul was chosen king over
Israel, certain men which feared God, 1. Sam. 10.26.
whose hearts God had touched, followed him to Gibea and brought him presents,
but the wicked despised him: the same is much more to be verified in us toward
Christ our Lord. We must have our hearts touched with desire to perform
obedience unto him: if not, we are men of Belial that despise him, and refuse
to bring our presents unto him. If this obedience were put in practice, the
Gospel would have better success in the hearts of the people, and the Lords
sabbath would be better kept, and men would bear greater love both to God and
to their neighbors then now they do. The third duty which we owe unto him is
thankfulness, for the endless care which he shows in the governing and
preserving of us. When David waxed old, and had made Solomon his son king in
his stead, all the people shouted and cried, God save king Solomon: God save
king Solomon, so as the earth rang again. 1. King. 1.34.
Shall the people of Israel thus rejoice at the crowning of Solomon, and shall
not we much more rejoice when as Christ Jesus is placed in heaven at the right
hand of his father, and has the everlasting scepter of his kingdom put into
his hand? And we are to show this thankfulness unto him by doing any thing in
this world that may tend to his honor and glory, though it be with the
adventure of our lives. When David desired to drink of the water of the well
of Bethlem, 1. Sam. 28.16.
three of his mighty men went and brake into the host of the Philistims, and
brought him water. Thus they ventured their lives for David's sake: and shall
not we much more willingly venture our lives to do Christ service in token of
thankfulness for his continual preserving of us?

Thus much of the highest degree of Christ's exaltation in his kingdom: now
follows the last point to be believed concerning Christ, in these words, From
then^e he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. And they contain a
proof or a particular declaration of the former article. For as on earth those
that are set at the right hand of kings do execute justice in courts or
assizes for the maintenance of the state and peace of the kingdom: so Christ
Jesus sitting at the right hand of his father, that is, being made sovereign
Lord of all things both in heaven and earth, is to hold a court or assise, in
which he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead. Now in handling the
last judgment, we are to consider these points: I. whether there shall be a
judgment or not? II. the time of it. III. the signs thereof. IV. the manner of
it. V. the use which is to be made thereof. Of these in order. For the first
point, whether there shall be a judgment or not? the question is needful:
for as Saint Peter says, There shall come in the last days mockers, which
shall walk after their lusts, and say, Where is the promise of his coming?
Pet. 3.3.
which days are now. The answer is set down in this article, in which we
profess that the coming of Christ to the last judgment, is a point of
religion specially to be held and avouched. The reasons to prove it are
principally two: first the testimony of God himself in the books of the old
and new testament, which affoard unto us plentiful testimonies touching the
last judgment, so as he which will but lightly read the same, shall not need
to doubt thereof. The second reason is taken from the justice and goodness of
God, the property whereof is, to punish wicked and ungodly men, and to honor
and reward the godly: but in this world the godly man is most of al in misery,
(for judgment begins at Gods house) and the ungodly have their hearts ease.
Wicked Dives has the world at will, but pore Lazarus is hunger bitten, full of
soars, and miserable every way. This being so, it remains that after this
life, there must needs be a judgment and a second coming of Christ, when the
godly must receive fulness of joy and glory, and the ungodly fulness of woe and
misery. This second reason may stop the mouths of all gainesayers in the
world whatsoever. But it may be objected, that the whole world stands either
of believers or unbelievers, and that there is no last judgment for either of
these; for the believer, Ioh. 5.24.
as Christ says, has everlasting life, and shall not come into judgment; and
the unbeliever is condemned already, and therefore needs no further
judgment. Ioh. 3.18.
Answ. Where it is said, he that believes shall not come into judgment, it
must be understood of the judgment of condemnation, and not the judgment of
absolution: and he that believes not is condemned already in effect and
substance three ways: I. in the counsel of God, who did foresee and appoint
his condemnation, as it is a punishment of sin, and an execution of his
justice. II. in the word of God, where he has his condemnation set down. III.
he is condemned in his own conscience: for every ungodly man's conscience is a
judge unto himself, which does every hour condemn him, and it is a
forerunner of the last judgment. And notwithstanding all this, there may
remain a second judgment, which is a manifestatio^ and finishing of that which
was begu^ in this world: and therefore the meaning of that place is this; he
that believes not is already judged in part, but so as the full manifestation
thereof, shall be at the second coming of Christ.

The second circumstance, is the time of his judgment: in handling whereof I.
we will see what is the judgment of men: II. what is the truth. For the first,
two opinions touching this time take place. The first is, that the second
coming of Christ shall be about six thousand years from the beginning of the
world, and that for the elects sake some of these days must be shortened: and
now since the beginning of the world, are passed five thousand and almost six
hundred years, so as there remain but four hundreds. The grounds of this
opinion are these. First the testimony of Elias, two thousand years before
the law: two thousand years under the law: and two thousand years under
Christ. And for the elects sake some of these years shall be shortened. Answ.
This was not the sentence of Elias the Thisbite, but of another Elias which was
a Jew, no Prophet. And whereas he says two thousand years before the law: and
two thousand years under the law, he fails. From the giving of the law to the
coming of Christ, was about one thousand and five hundred years: and from the
law to the creation above two thousand. Now if Elias can not set down a just
number for the time past* which a mean man may do, what shall we think that
he can do for the time to come? And if he deceive us in that which is more
easy to find, how shall we trust him in things that be harder? The second
reason is this: how long God was in creating the world, so long he shall be
in governing the same; but he was six days in creating the world, and in the
seventh he rested, and so proportionally he shall be six thousand years in
governing the world; every day answearing to a thousand years, as Peter says:
A thousand years are but as one day with God, and then shall the end be.
Answer. This reason likewise has no ground in Gods word: as for that place of
Peter, the meaning is, that innumerable years are but as a short time with
God: ^ certain ^umber for (...) vncerte^.
and we may as well say, two thousand or ten thousand years are but as one
day with God. For Peter meant not to speak any thing distinctly of a thousand
years, but of a long time. Thirdly it is alleged, that within six thousand
years from the creation of the world, shall appear in the heavens strange
conjunctions, and positions of the stars, which signify nothing else but the
subversion of the state of the world: nay, some have noted that the end
thereof should have been in the year of our Lord, a thousand five hundred
eighty eight: their writings are manifest: but we find by experience that
this opinion is false and frivolous, and their grounds be as frivolous. For no
man can gather by the ordinary course of the heavens the extraordinary change
of the whole world.

The second is, that the end of the world shall be three years and an half
after the revealing of Antichrist. And it is gathered out of places in Daniel
and the Revelation, abused. Where a time and times and half^ a time signify
not three years and an half, but a short time. And therefore to take the
words properly, is far from the meaning of the holy Ghost. For mark, if the
end shall be three years and an half after the revealing of Antichrist, then
may any man know before hand the particular month wherein the end of the
world should be, which is not possibl^.

Now the truth which is to be avouched against all is this, that no man can
know or set down or conjecture the day, the week, the month, the year or
the age, wherein the second coming of Christ and the last day of judgment
shall be. For Christ himself says, of that day and hour knows no man, no
not the angels in heaven, but God only: nay Christ himself as he is man,
Matt. 24.36
knows it not. And when the disciples asked Christ at his ascensio^, whether
he would restore the kingdom unto Israel, he answered, It is not for you to
know the times and seasons, Act. 1.7.
which the father has put in his own power. And Paul says, Of the times and
seasons, brethren, you have no need that I write unto you. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.
For you your selves kn^w perfectly that the day of the Lord shall come, even
as a thief in the night. Now we know tha^ a man that keeps his house, can
not conjecture or imagine when a thief will come: and therefore no man can set
down the particular time or age, when Christ shall come to judgment. This must
we hold steadfastly, and if we read the contrary in the writings of men, we
are not to believe their sayings, but account of them as of the devices of me^,
which have no ground in Gods word.

To come to the third point, namely the signs of the last judgment, they are
of two sorts: some go before the coming of Christ, and some are joined with
it. The signs that go before, are in number seven, recorded distinctly by the
holy Ghost. The first, is the preaching of the Gospel through the whole
world. So our Savior Christ says, This Gospel of the kingdom must be
preached through the whole world for a witness unto all nations, Math. 24.14.
and then shall the end come. Which place must thus be understood; not that
the Gospel must be preached to the whole world at any one time, for that (as I
take it) was never yet seen, neither shall be; but that it shall be published
distinctly and successively at several times: and thus understanding the words
of Christ, if we consider the time since the Apostles days, we shall find
this to be true, that the Gospel has bin preached to all the world: and
therefore this first sign of Christ's coming is already past and accomplished.

The second sign of his coming, is the revealing of Antichrist, as Paul
says, The day of Christ shall not come before there be a departure first, and
that man of sin be disclosed, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
even the son of perdition, which is Antichrist. Concerning this sign, in
the year of our Lord 602. Gregory the eight Pope of Rome, avouched this
solemnly as a manifest (...), that whosoever did take to him self the name of
Universal Bishop, the same was Antichrist. Now five years after, Boniface
succeeding him, was by P^ocas the Emperor entitled, Universal Bishop, pastor
of the Catholic Church, in the year of our Lord 607. and of all Popes he was
the first known Antichrist, and since him all his successors have taken unto
them the same title of Universal and Catholic Bishop, whereby it does plainly
appear, that at Rome has bin and is the Antichrist. And this sign is also
past.

The third is, a general departing of most men from the faith. For it is said
in the place before named, Let no man deceive you: 2. These. 2.3.
for the day of Christ shall not come, except there come a departing first.
General departure has bin in former ages. When Arius spied his heresy, it
took such place that the whole world became an Arian. And during the space of
900 years from the time of Boniface, the popish heresy spread it self over
the whole earth, and the faithful servants of God were but as an handful of
wheat in a mountain of chafe, which can scarce be discerned. This sign is in
part already past, nevertheless it shall continue to the end, because men
shall continually depart from the faith. And the nearer the end of the world
is, the more satan rages and seeks to bring men into his kingdom. Therefore
it stands us in hand to labor for the knowledge of true religion, and having
learned it, most heartily to love the same.

The fourth sign is, a general corruption in manners. This point the Apostle
sets down at large, saying, Toward the latter days shall come perilous times,
wherein men shall be lovers of themselves, 2. Tim. 3.1.
covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, and without natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of them which are good, traitors,
headie, high minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, etc. This
general corruption in the manners of men, is noted by our Savior Christ, when
he says, When he comes he shall scarce find faith upon the earth. This
sign has bin in former ages, and is no doubt at this day in the world. For it
is hard to find a man that walks justly, soberly, and faithfully, doing the
duties of his calling to God and man.

The fifth sign of Christ's coming stands in terrible and grievous calamities.
For Christ's disciples asking him a sign of his coming, and of the end of the
world, he says, There shall be wars and rumors of wars, nation shall rise
against nation, Math. 24.6.16.
and realm against realm: and there shall be p^stilence and famine and
earthquakes in diverse places, and me^ shall be at their wits ends. These have bin
in former ages. In the first 3. hundred years after Christ, were ten most
fearful persecutions: and since in Europe the Church of God has bin
wonderfully persecuted by the Antichrist of Rome in the hundred years last past.

The sixth sign is, an exceeding deadnes of heart, so as neither judgments
from heaven, nor the preaching of the word shall move the hearts of men. So
Christ says, Luke 17.26.
It shall be in the coming of the son of man, as it was in the days of Noe,
and in the days of Sodo^: they knew nothing til the flood came, and fire from
heaven destroyed the^ all. This sign undoubtedly is manifest in these our
days, howsoever it has bin also in former times. For where are any almost
that are moved with Gods judgments, or touched at the preaching of the word;
nay rather men harde^ their hearts, and become secure and careless. The small
fruit that the word of God brings forth in the lives of men, shows this to
be most true.

The seventh and last sign, set down by the Apostle Paul is, that there shall
be a calling of the Jews before the Lord come to judgment: but of the time
when this calling shall be, Romans 11.25.
of the manner how, or the number of them that shall be called, there is no
mention made in the word of God. Now it is likely that this sign is yet to
come.

These are the signs that go before the coming of Christ, all which are
almost past, and therefore the end can not be far off. Now follows the sign
that is joined with the coming of Christ, called the sign of the son of
man. What this sign is, we find not in the Scriptures. Some think it to be
the sign of the cross; but that is frivolous: some, the glory and majesty
of Christ, which shall be made manifest in his appearance: which seems to be
otherwise by the very words of Christ. Then (says he) shall appear the sign
of the son of man, Math. 24.30.
etc. and then they shall see him come in the clouds of heaven with power
and great glory; distinguishing the one from the other. But I rather
conjecture it to be the burning of heaven and earth with fire, at the very
instant of Christ's coming, mentioned by Peter. We must not here dispute
whence this fire shall come, or how it shall be kindled, for that the word of
God has concealed: and where God has not a mouth to speak, there we must not
have an ear to hear.

The uses to be made hereof, are these. When S. Peter had set down the change
that shall be at the coming of Christ, and that heaven and earth must be
purged with fire, he makes this use thereof. Seeing all things must be
dissolved, what manner of men ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness?
2. Pet. 2.11.
and the reason is good. For if heaven and earth must be changed and purged at
Christ's coming, then much more ought we to be changed, and to put off the old
man of sin, and to become new creatures created after the image of God in
righteousness and true holiness. If the bruit creatures must be renewed by fire,
then much more are we to labor that the fire of Gods spirit may burn up
sin and corruption in us, and so change us that we may be ready for him
against his coming: else heaven and earth it self shall stand up in judgment
against us to our condemnation. Secondly the consideration of this, that the
world shall be consumed with fire, teaches us moderation and sobriety in the
use of Gods creatures, as in costly buildings, gorgeous attire, and such like.
What madness is this, to bestow all that we have on such things, as at the day
of judgment shall be consumed with fire. For look whatsoever abuse shall come
to Gods creatures by our folly, the same shall then be abolished. Thirdly we
must consider that the cause why heaven and earth must be consumed with fire,
is man's sin by means whereof they are made subject to vanity and corruption.
Here the^ we have just occasion to acknowledge the greatness and wretchedness of
our sins. If any of us had but seen the Jews leprosy, it would have made
us to wonder: for the contagion thereof did infect not only the whole man, but
his garments also that were about him, and sometime the walls of his house: but
howsoever we cannot now see that leprosy among us, yet we may see a worse. For
the leprosy of our sins does not only infect our garments, and the things
about us, with our bodies, but even the high heavens and the earth are slained
with the contagion thereof, and are made subject to vanity and corruption: yea
by sin in us the most glorious creatures in them, as the Sun, Moon, and
Stars are become subject to vanity. Oh then, how wretched is the heart of
man, that makes no bones of sin, which is the most noisome thing in all the
world, the stink whereof has infected both heaven and earth. If we could
consider this, we would not be so slack in humbling our selves for the same as
we are. We can not abide to look on a poor lazar full of blanes and sores,
but if we could see our sins in their right colors, they would make us seem
unto our selves ten thousand times more ougly then any lazar man can be, the
contagio^ thereof is so great and noisome, that the very heavens which are
many thousand miles distant from us, are infected therewith. Yet here we are to
know, that this fire shall not consume the substance of heaven and earth, but
only change the quality, and abolish the corruption which our sins have
brought upon them.

The fourth point to be considered, is the manner of the last judgment, in
which we may observe two things: I. who shall be judge: II. the proceeding of
this judge. The first is expressed in this article; From thence he shall come
to judge* He, that is* Christ Jesus the second person in trinity: For the
father has committed all judgment unto him. It is indeed an action common to
all the three persons in trinity, but yet the execution thereof appertains
unto the son. The father indeed does judge the world, but yet by the son.
But some may object, Mar. 19.28.
that the Apostles shall sit on ^velve thrones and judge the twelve tribes of
Israel. And S. Paul says, The saints shall judge the world. 1. Cor. 6.2.
How then is this true, that Christ is the only judge of the world. Answer.
The authority of judgment and giving sentence at the last day is proper to
Christ alone, and does not belong either to the Apostles, or to the saints: and
they shall judge at the last day only as witnesses and apprpouers of Christ's
judgment: at the great day of assise beside the judge the justices on the
bench are also in a manner judges, not that they give sentence, but because by
their presence they approve and witness the equity of the sentence of the
judge: so the definitive sentence does belong to Christ: and the Apostles and
saints do nothing but approve his righteous sentence.

The whole proceeding of the last judgment may be reduced to seven points or
heads. The first is the coming of the judge in the clouds. Here at the first
it may be demanded why Christ holds the last judgment rather on earth then
in heaven. Answer. He does it for two causes. One, the creature to be judged
has sinned here upon earth: and he proceeds after the manner of earthly judges,
who hold their sessions and assizes there where trespasses are commonly
committed. The second, because the devil and his angels are to be judged, and
it is a part of their punishment to be cast out of heaven. For no unclean
thing may come into this heavenly Jerusalem, and therefore they now remain in
the lower parts of the world, and there must be judged. Furthermore the second
coming of Christ is sudden as the coming of a thief in the night. He will
come when the world thinks not of him as the snare does on the bird. Luke
21.35.
The consideration whereof must teach us the same duties which our Savior
Christ taught the men of his time. First he teaches them what they must not
do: For he knowing all things knew also the disposition of man's heart, and
therefore says, Take heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be
oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life; least
that day come upon you unavvares. For these sins benumme the heart, and
steal away all grace. This exhortation in these our days is most needful.
For men's hearts are like the smithes sti^hie, the more they are beaten with
the hammer of Gods word, the harder they are. Secondly he teaches them what
they must do: Watch therefore (says he) and pray continually: That ye may
be counted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and that
ye may stand before the son of man. But you will say: how may we be found
worthy to stand before Christ at that day? Answer. Do but this one thing:
for your lives past be humbled before God, and come unto him by true, hearty,
and unfeigned repentance, be changed and become new creatures: pray unto him
earnestly for the pardon of your sins in Christ, and pray continually that
God will turn your hearts from your old sins every day more and more: and
then come the last judgment when it will, ye shall be found worthy to stand
before Christ at his coming. The repentant sinner is he, that shall find
favor in the sight of God at that day. The consideration hereof may move us
to change our lives. Those which were never yet humbled for their sins, let
them now begin: and those which have already begone, let them go forward and
continue. But the devil will cry in the hearts of some men, that this
exhortation is as yet needelesse: for the day of judgment is not near,
because all the signs thereof are not yet passed. Answer. Suppose the day of
judgment be far off, yet the day of thy death can not be so: for the common
saying is true, to day a man, to morrow none. Now look as death leaves thee,
so shall the day of judgment find thee. Impenitent Cain died long since, and
yet the day of judgment when it comes, shall find him impenitent still. The
same thing may be said of Saul, Achitophel, and Judas. They died desperately
and impenitent, and the Lord shall find them so at his coming. So it will be
with thee, whatsoever thou art that repentest not. Death may come upon thee the
next day or the next hour, therefore watch and pray. Prepare thy self against
the day of death, that at the day of judgment thou may be ^ounde worthy to
obtain favor in the sight of the Lord. Security does ouerwhelme the
world, but let us for our parts learn to prepare our selves daily: For if
the day of death do leave thee unworthy, then the Lord Jesus at his coming
shall find thee unworthy: and the devil shall stand before thee and accuse
thee, thy conscience shall condemn thee, and hell shall be ready to swallow thee
up. If this admonition take no place in thy heart, then at the day of judgment
it shall stand against thee, and be a bill of indictment to thy further
condemnation.

The second point follows, that Christ after that he is come in the clouds
shall sit in a throne of glory as the sovereign judge of heaven and earth,
Mat. 25.31.
after the manner of earthly kings, who when they will show themselves unto
their subjects in majesty, power, and glory, use to ascend into the thrones
of their kingdoms, and there to show themselves and appear in state unto all
the people. Now what this throne is* and how Christ sittes in the same, the
scripture has not revealed, and therefore I will not stand to search. Yet here
must we further mark, that this appearance of his in endless glory and
majesty shall be most terrible and dreadful to the ungodly, Dan. 7.9.
and therefore in Daniel his throne is said to be like a flame of fire, and at
the very sight hereof men shall desire the mountains to fall upon them and
the hills to cover them.

The third point is the citing of all men and of the angels before his majesty
in that day, there to answer for themselves. This citing shall be done by the
voice of Christ, as he himself says: Ioh. 5.28.
In that day all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and they shall
come forth. And here we are to consider two things: I. the power of this voice:
II. the ministry whereby it shall be uttered. For the first, No doubt the
power of this voice shall be unspeakable, and therefore it is compared to a
trumpet, Mat. 24.31. 1. These. 4.6.
the loudest and shrillest of all musical instruments; and to the cry of the
mariners, whose manner has been in the doing of any business with all their
strength at one instant to make a common shout. And sensible experience shall
manifest the force thereof. For it shall cause all the dead even from the
beginning of the world to rise again, though they have lien rotten in the
earth many thousand years: and all unclean spirits shall be forced and
compelled will they nill they to come before Christ, who shall be unto them a
most fearful and terrible judge, neither man nor angel shall be able to
absent or hide himself: all without exception must appear as well high as
low, rich as poor: none shall be able to withdraw themselves, no not the mighty
Monarchs of the earth.

Furthermore this voice shall be uttered by angels. As in the Church Christ
uses men as his ministers by whom he speaks unto his people: Mat. 24.31.
so at the last day he shall use the ministry of angels, whom he shall
send forth into the four winds to gather his elect together: and therefore
it is likely that this voice shall be uttered by them. And by this which has
been said, we must be moved to make conscience of all sin. For there is no
avoiding of this judgment, we can not absent our selves, no excuse will serve
the turn: even the most rebellious of all creatures whether man or angel
shall be forced to appear: and therefore it stands us in hand, while we have
time in this life, to look unto our estates, and to practice the duties of
Christianity, that when we shall be cited before his glorious majesty at the
last day, we may be cleared and absolved.

The fourth point is the separation of the sheep from the goats, the good
from the bad; for when all the kinreds of the earth, and all unclean spirits
shall stand before Christ, Mat. 25 32.
sitting in the throne of his glory: then as a good shepherd he shall
separate them one from another, the righteous from the wicked, and the elect
from the reprobate. He which knows the hearts of all men, knows also how
to do this, and he will do it. This full and final separation is reserved to
Christ, and shall not be accomplished till the last day. For so it is in the
parable, that the tares must grow with the wheat till harvest, Mat. 13.30.
and then the reapers must separate them, and gather the wheat into the barn,
but the tares must be burned with unquenchable fire. By the consideration of
this one point, we learn diverse things: I. that in the Church of God in this
world good and badde are mingled together, elect and reprobate: and we are not
to imagine any perfection of the Church of God upon earth, as many have
dreamed, which when they could not find, they have therefore forsaken all
assemblies. I confess indeed that the preaching of the word is the Lords
fan, whereby he cleanses his Church in part, but yet the finishing of this
work shall not be before the last judgment. For when the ministers of God
have done all that they can, yet shall the wicked be mingled with the godly.
Therefore the Church is compared to a barn store, where is both wheat and
chafe: and a corn field where there is both tares and good corn: and a draw
net, wherein is both good fish and bad. Secondly, whereas this separation must
not be before the end of the world, hence we learn the state of Gods church in
this life. It is like a flock of sheep mingled with goats, and therefore the
condition of Gods people in this world is to be troubled many ways by those
with whom they live. For goats use to strike the sheep, to annoy their
pasture, and to make their water muddie that they can not drink of it: Eze.
34.18*
therefore we must prepare our selves to bear all annoiances, crosses, and
calamities that shall befall us in this world by the wicked ones, among whom
we live. Thirdly we are taught, that howsoever the goats and the sheep be
very like, and feed in one pasture, and lie in one fold all their life time:
yet Christ can and will sever them asunder at the last day. Therefore
considering as we are borne of Adam we have the nature of the goat, yea of
the wild beast, and not of the sheep, it stands us in hand to lay aside our
goatish conditions, and to take unto us the properties of the sheep of Christ
which he expresses in these words, My sheep (says he) hear my voice, I
know them, and they follow me. And the properties are three; Ioh. 10.27.
to know him, to be known of him, and to follow him, namely in obedience: and
he that finds them all in himself, wears the brand and mark of the true
sheep of Christ: but contrariwise they that make profession of Christ, and yet
therewithal join not obedience, howsoever the world may account of them,
they are but goats and no sheep. Let us therefore with the knowledge of Christ
join obedience to his word, that when the day shall come that the goats must
be separated from the sheep, we may be found to be in the number of the true
sheep of Christ. We may deceive men both in life and death, and bear them in
hand that we are sheep, but when the judgment shall come, we can not deceive
Christ: he it is that formed us, he knows our hearts, and therefore ca^ easily
discern what we are.

The fifth thing is the trial of every man's particular cause, a point
especially to be considered. For as at the bar of an earthly judge, the
malefactor is brought out of prison and set before the judge and there
examined: even so in that great day shall every man without exception be
brought before the Lord to be tried. But how shall this trial be made. Ans. By
works: as the Apostle says, We must all appear before the judgment seat
of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.10.
that every man may receive the things which are done in his body according
to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. And the reason is, because
works are the outward signs of inward grace and godliness. And though we be
justified by faith alone without works, yet may we be judged both by faith and
works. For the last judgment does not serve to make men just that are not,
but only to manifest them to be just indeed, which were just before and in
this life truly justified. The consideration of this very point should move us
all to repent us of our sins past and to reform our selves throughout, and to
be plentiful in all good works. And undoubtedly if we seriously think upon
it, it will hold us more straightly to all good duties, then if with the
Papists we held justification by works.

Furthermore in this trial two things must be skanned: I. how all men's works
shall be made manifest. II. by what means they shall be examined. Of the
manifestation of every man's work S. John speaks, Rev. 20.12.
And I saw (says he) the dead both great and small stand before God, and the
books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life,
and the dead were judged of these things which were written in the books
according to their works. God is said to have books not properly, but because
al things are as certain and manifest to him, as if he had his Registers in
heaven to keep rolls and records of them. His books are three; the book of
Providence, the book of Judgment, the book of Life. The book of his providence
is the knowledge of all particular things past, present, to come. Of this the
Psalmist speaks, Thine eyes did see me when I was without form: for in thy
book were all things written which in continuance were fashioned, Psa.
159.16.
when there was none of them before. The book of judgment is that whereby he
gives judgment: and it is two-folde. The first is Gods knowledge or
prescience, in which all the affairs of men, their thoughts, words, and
deeds are as certainly known and set down, as if they were put in books of
record. We may forget our sins, but God keeps them in a register; he
knovves them every one. The second book is every man's particular conscience,
which also brings to remembrence and testifies what men have done and what they
have not done. The book of life is nothing else but the decree of Gods
election, Isa^. 4.3.
in which God has set down who be ordained to life eternal.

Now the opening of these books is a thing wherein the endless power of God
shall most notably show it self. For when we shall stand before the judgment
seat of Christ, he then knowing all things in his eternal counsel, shall
reveal unto every man his own particular sins, whether they were in
thought, word, or deed, and then also by his mighty power he shall so touch
men's consciences, that they shall a fresh remember what they have done. Now
indeed the wicked man's conscience is shut up as a closed book, but then it
shall be so touched, and as it were, opened, that he shall plainly see and
remember all the particular offenses which at any time he has committed; and
his very conscience shall be as good as a thousand witnesses; whereupon he
shall accuse and utterly condemn himself. The consideration of this ought to
terrify all those that live in their sins: For howsoever they may hide them
from the world, yet at the last day God will be sure to reveal them all.

Now after that men's works are made manifest, they must further be tried
whether they be good or evil. And that shall be done on this manner. They that
never heard of Christ must be tried by the law of nature, which serves to make
them inexcusable before God. As for those that live in the Church they shall be
tried by the Law and the Gospel, as Paul says, As many as have lived in the
law, shall be judged by the law. And again, Romans 2.12* verse. 16.
At the day of judgment God shall judge the secrets of our hearts according to
his gospel. And By faith Noah builded an arc, Heb. 11.7.
whereby he condemned the old world. If this be true, then we must in the
fear of God hear his word preached and taught with all reverence and make
conscience to profit by it. For otherwise in the day of judgment when all our
works shall be tried by it, the same word of God shall be a bill of indi^ement,
and the fearful sentence of condemnation against us. Therefore let us be
humbled by the doctrine of the law, and willingly embrace the sweet promises
of the gospel: considering it is the only touchstone, whereby all our words,
thoughts and works must be examined.

The sixth point in the proceeding of the last judgment, is the giving of
sentence, which is twofolde: the sentence of absolution, and the sentence of
condemnation, both which are to be observed diligently, that we may receive
profit thereby. And first of al Christ shall begin his judgment with the
se^te^ce of absolutio^, which shows, that he is ready to show mercy and slow to
wrath. In this sentence we are to consider four points: I. a calling of the
elect to the kingdom of heaven: II. the reason thereof: III. a reply of the
elect: IV. the answer of Christ to them again. The calling of the elect is
set down in these words, Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world. And the words are to be observed one by one. Come ye
blessed] Though Christ now sit in glory and majesty in judgment, yet he
cease not to show his tender affection of love unto his chosen. And this
overthrows the opinion of the Church of Rome, which would have us rather to
come unto Christ by the intercession of saints, then by our selves immediately,
because he is now exalted in glory and majesty. But mark, when he was hear
on earth, he said, Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden and I will ease
you. And when he shall be most glorious in majesty and power at the day of
judgment, he will then also say, Come ye blessed of my father: and therefore
we may resolve our selves, that it is his will now, that we should come unto
him without any intercession of saints. Ye blessed of my father] The elect are
here called the blessed of God, because their righteousness, salvation, and all
that they have springs of the mere blessing of God. Nothing therefore must be
ascribed to the works of man. Inherit] that is, receive as your inheritance:
therefore the kingdom of heaven is Gods mere gift. A father gives no
inheritance unto his son of merit, but of his free gift: whereupon it
follows, that no man can merit the kingdom of heaven by his works. The
kingdome] that is, the eternal estate of glory and happiness in heaven:
therefore in this life we must so use this world, as though we used it not: all
that we have here is but vain and transitory: and all our study and
endeavor must be to come to the kingdom of heaven. Prepared) Here note the
unspeakeable care of God for the faithful. Had he such care to provide a
kingdom for his children before they were? then we may assure our selves, he
will have greater care over them now when they have a being. For you) that is,
for the elect and faithful. Hence it appears that there is no uniuersall
election whereby God decrees that all and every man shall be saved. Indeed if he
had said, Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for all
but received of you, it had been something, but he says only, Prepared for
you: and therefore all were not chosen to salvation.

The reason of this calling, is taken from works as from signs, in these
words, For I was hungry and ye gave me meat, etc. When he says, for I was
hungry, he means his poor members upon earth: and thereby he signifies unto
us that the miseries of his members are his own miseries. Thus the Lord says
in Zachary, Zach. 2.8.
He which touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. And when Saul was going
to persecute them that called on the name of Christ in Damascus, Act. 9.4.
he cried from heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And this is a
notable comfort to Gods Church and people, Heb. 4.15.
that they have an high priest that is touched with the feeling of our
infirmities: and if he account our miseries his own miseries, then no doubt
he will pity our estate and make us able to bear the worst. And ye gave me
meat) Here we note, that the principal works of men are those which are
done to the poor members of Christ: we are indeed to help all in as much as
they are our very flesh and the creatures of God; the rule of S. Paul being
remembered, Do good to all, but especially to those that are of the household of
faith. Gal. 6.10.
Many are of mind that the best works are to build Churches and Monasteries,
but Christ tells us here, that the best work of all is to relieve those that be
the living members of his mystical body.

The third point is the reply of the saints to Christ again in these words,
Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? etc. They do not deny that
which Christ avouched, but do, as I take it, standing before the tribunal
seat of God, humble themselves, having still an after consideration of the
infirmities and offenses of their lives past. Here note then, that it is a
Satanicall practice for a man to brag of works and to stand upon them in the
matter of justification before God. And we must rather do as the saints of
God do, abase our selves in regard of our sins past.

The last point is the answer of Christ to them again, in these words,
Verily, I say unto you, in as much as ye did it to the least of these my
breethren, you did it to me. A most notable sentence: and it serves to teach
us, how we should and ought to behave our selves in doing works of mercy,
which are duties to be performed in this life. We are not to do them of any
sinister respect, as for praise of men or commodity, but we must propound unto
our selves the party to whom we do any good, and in him look on Christ, and
so do it, as unto Christ and for Christ's sake only; and this is a good work
indeed. Christ says, Whosoever shall give a cup of cold water to a disciple
in the name of a disciple, shall not loose his reward. It is but a small gift,
but yet the manner of doing it, Mar. 10.42*
namely in the name of a disciple, that is, in respect that he is a member of
Christ, does make it an excellent work of mercy. It is a special mark of a
child of God to show mercy on a christian because he is a christian. If any
would know whether he be a christian or no, let him search himself, whether he
love a man, and can do good unto him, because he is a child of God, and a
member of Christ: For this is a plain argument, that he also is the child of
God. Many can love, because they are loved again, but to love for Christ his
sake, is a work of Christ in us and a special gift of God.

The sentence of condemnation follows in the second place: and it contains
four points: I. the reiection of the ungooly: II. the reason of their
reiection: III. the defense which the wicked make for themselves: lastly, the
answer of Christ to them again. The reiection of the wicked is uttered by a
terrible sentence, Away from me ye cursed into hell fire. The use hereof in
general is twofold. First it serves to awake and excite all men and women in
the world whosoever they be that shall hear it, to look unto their own
estates. It is wonderful to see what great security reigns every where in
these our days. Men go on in sin from day to day and from year to year
without repentance, nothing at all fearing the sentence of condemnation at the
last day; like unto many which for the obtaining of other men's goods are
neither by the fear of arraignment or imprisonment kept in good order. The
occasions of security are twofolde: I. the prosperity of the wicked who of
all men live most at ease without trouble, either in body or in mind. II. Gods
patience and long suffering, as Solomon says, Because sentence against an
evil work is not executed speedily, Eccles. 8.9.
therefore the hearts of the children of men is fully set in them to do evil.
But to awake all those which live in this security, they must remember that
howsoever the Lord God does now defer his judgment, yet there is a day
wherein he will no way show mercy and long suffering, when they shall hear this
fearful sentence of comdemnation pronounced against them, Away from me ye^
cursed. The second use is to the godly: It serves to nurture them and to keep
the^ in awe before god: and no doubt, this was a principal cause why this
sentence* was here penned by the holy ghost. A wise master of a family will
check his servant, and if the cause require, correct him in his childs
presence, that the child it self may learn thereby to fear and stand in awe
of his father: so Christ the most careful and wise governor of his Church
has set down this sentence of condemnation against the wicked, that the
children of God in this world whenever they shall hear or read the same,
might be moved thereby to stand in great fear of God, and more dutifully
perform obedience to his commandments. Away from me] Here we may learn,
what a blessed thing it is for a man to have true fellowship with Christ in
this world. For in the day of judgment the punishment of the wicked is to be
cut off from him, and driven away from his presence. Now he that would have
fellowship with God after this life, and escape that punishment, must seek to
have it in this life: and he that will not seek to have fellowship with him
in this life, shall never have it after in the day of judgment. Again, let us
mark that it is nothing to draw nere unto Christ with our lips, if the heart
be not with him: for such as come nere with the lip and have kept aloof in
the heart, shall hear the sentence pronounced* Away from me ye cursed* and
shall be severed as far from Christ as hell from heaven. Therefore let us not
content our selves with formal profession, but open the doors of our hearts
that the king of glory may come in. Ye cursed.] They are cursed who are borne
in sin and live in their sins, and all the days of their lives so
persevere to the last gasp without seeking recovery. Whosoever he be that is
in this estate, the curse of God hangs over his head, and will so do till he
get reconciliation with God in Christ. This being so, above all things in this
world we must labor to be at peace with God, and never cease nor be quiet with
our selves till we have the same wrought and sealed in our hearts. For before
such time as we be in Gods favor, his fearful curse hangs over our heads, and
if we so persevere without repentance, the day will come when we shall hear
this fearful sentence pronounced against us: Away from me ye cursed into hell
fire. What hell fire is, we must not curiously search, but rather give our
whole endeavor to learn how we may avoid it: as when a man's house is on fire,
his care must be, not to search how it came, but rather how to quench it: yet
we are to know thus much, that by hell fire is not meant any bodily flame, but
it signifies the seazing of the fearful and terrible wrath of God both on body
and soul for ever. For howsoever the body be subject to burning with fire, yet
the soul being spiritual can not burn; and therefore hell fire is not a
material fire, but a grievous torment fit resembled thereby. Prepared for the
devil and his angels.) There is in every ma^s heart by nature this corruption:
whereby when he sins, he thinks that there is no danger but all is well,
having as Esai says, made a covenat with hell. But here consider, that
although the devil was once an angel of light, yet when he had sinned, he
could not escape hell: it was prepared even for him. Now then shall ungodly men
which are not half so wily think to escape?

Now follows the reason of their reiection in these words: For I was an
hungered and ye gave me no meat, etc. Hence we learn these two points: I. that
all man's religion and serving of God is in vain, if so be we show no
compassion toward the poor members of Christ, in feeding, clothing, lodging,
and visiting of them. For we must think, that many of those against whom this
reason shall be brought, did know religion and profess the same, yea they
prophesied in the name of Christ, and called on him, saying, Lord, Lord: and
yet the sentence of condemnation goes against them, because they showed no
compassion toward the members of Christ, and therefore it is a principal
virtue, and a special note of a christian, to show the bowels of compassion
toward his needy breethren. Here again we note, that it is not sufficient
for us to abstain from evil, but we must also do good. For it is not said, I
was an hungered and ye took meat from me, but, When I was hu^gry ye gave me no
meat. They are not charged with doing evil, Mat. 3.
but, for not doing good. S. John says, The axe is laid to the root of the
tree, and the reason follows, not because the tree bare evil fruit, but
because it bare not good fruit: therefore it must be cast into the fire. This
condemns a bad opinion of all worldly men, who think that all is well, and
that God will be merciful unto them, because they do no man harm. Thus we see
how the devil blindes the eyes of men* for it will not stand for payment at
the day of judgment to say, I have hurt no man, unless we further do all the
good we can.

The third point is the defense which impenitent sinners make for themselves in
these words, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or thirsty, or naked, or in
prison, or sick, and did not minister unto thee? Thus in their own defense,
that which Christ says they gainsay, and justify themselves. Here mark the
nature of all impenitent sinners, which is to sooth and flatter themselves in
sin, and to maintain their own righteousness, like to the proud Pharisie in
his prayer, who bragged of his goodness and said, Lord, I thank thee, Luke
1^.10.
that I am not as other men are, extortioners, etc. and in the very same manner
ignorant persons of all sorts among us, justify themselves in their strong
faith, and brag of their zeal of gods glory, and of their love to their
brethren, and yet indeed show no signs thereof. And truly we are not to
marvel when we se such persons to justify themselves before men, whereas they
shall not be ashamed to do it at the day of judgment before the Lord Jesus
himself.

The last point, is Christ's answer to them again in these words: Verily, I
say unto you, in as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye
did it not to me. This sentence being repeated again, does teach us the
lesson which we learned before, that when we are to show compassion to any
man, especially if he be a member of Gods Church, we must not consider his
outward estate or his baseness, in that he wants food or raiment, but
behold Christ in him, not respecting him as a man, but as a member of Christ.
This it is that must move us to compassion, and cause us to make a supply of
his wants more the^ any respect in the world besides. And surely when Christ
in his members comes to our do^es and complains that he is hungry and sick,
and naked, if our bowels came not toward him, there is not so much as a
dramine of the love of God in us.

The seventh point in the proceeding of the last judgment is, the retribution
or reward in these words: and they shall go into everlasting pain, and the
righteous into life eternal. How do the wicked enter into hell and the godly
into heaven? Answ. By the powerful and commanding voice of Christ, which is
of that force, that neither the greatest rebel that ever was among men, nor
all the devils in hell shall be able to withstand it. And seeing that after the
day of judgment we must remain for ever either in heaven or in hell, we are
to look about us, and to take heed unto our hearts. Indeed if the time were
but a thousand or two thousand years, then with more reason men might take
liberty to themselves: but seeing it is without end we must be most careful
through the whole course of our lives so to live and behave our selves, that
when the day of judgment shall come, we may avoid that fearful sentence of
everlasting woe and comdemnation, which shall be pronounced against the wicked.
And whereas all wicked men shall go to hell at Christ's commandment, it teaches
us, willingly to obey the voice of Christ in the ministry of the word. For
if we rebel against his voice in this world, when in the day of judgment
sentence shall be pronounced against us, we shall hear another voice, at the
giving whereof, we must obey whether we will or no, and thereupon go to
everlasting pain, whither we would not. Let us therefore in time deny our
selves for our sins past, and only rely upon Christ Jesus for the free
remission of them all, and for the time to come lead a new reformed life.

Thus much of the order of Christ his proceeding at the day of judgment. Now
follovv the uses thereof, which are either comforts to gods church or duties
for all me^. The first comfort or benefit is this, that the same person
which died for us upon the cross to work ou^ redemption, must also be our
judge. And hence we reap two special comfortes. I. The people of God shall
hereby enjoy full redemption from all miseries and calamities which they had in
this life. So Christ himself speaking of the signs of the end of the world
says to his disciples: When you see th^se things, lift up your heads for your
redemption draws nere. Luk 21.18.
The^ he shall wipe all tears from their eyes. Secondly, we shall hereby have
a final deliverance from all sin. Now what a joyful thing it is to be freed
from sin, may plainly appear by the cry of Saint Paul: Oh wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? And certain i^ is, that he
which knows what sin is, and seriously repents him of the same, would wish
with all his heart to be ou^ of this world, that he might leave off to sin,
and thereby to displease God.

The second comfort is this: the godly in this world have many enemies: they
are reviled, slaundred, and oftentimes put to death: well, Christ Jesus at the
day of judgment will take every man's case into his own hand: he will then
hear the complaint of the godly, howsoever in this world they found no
remedy: and then he will revenge their blood that is shed upon the earth,
Apoc. 6.10.
according to their prayer. This comfort is to be considered especially of all
those that are any way persecuted or molested by the wicked of this world.

Now follow the duties to be learned of every one of us, and they are diverse.
First, the consideration of the last judgment serves to teach all ignorant
persons and impenitent sinners, repentance and humiliation for their sins,
and to move them with all speed to seek unto Christ for the pardon of the
same. When Paul preached to the Athenians, he willed them to repent upon this
ground and reason, because the Lord has appointed a day wherein he will judge
the world in righteousness. To speak plainly; Act. 17.31*
we can be content to hear the word, and to honor him with our lips, yet
for the most part all is done but for fashions sake: for still we live in our
old sins: our hearts are not turned: but in the fear of God let us bethink
our selves of the time, when we shall come before the judge of heaven and
earth, and have all our sins laid open, and we must answer for them all.
This is the point which the holy Ghost uses as a reason to move men unto
repentance: and assuredly if this will not move us, there is nothing in the
world will. Secondly, to this purpose Paul says, If we would judge our selves,
we should not be judged. Would thou then escape the judgment of Christ at
the last day? 1. Cor. 11.31
then in this life judge thy self. Now a man in judging of himself, must
perform four things: I. he must examine himself of his own sins: II. he
must confess them before the Lord. III. he must condemn himself, and as a
judge upon the bench give sentence against himself. Lastly, he must plead
pardon, and cry unto God as for life and death, for the remission of all his
sins: and he that does this unfeignedly shall never be judged of the Lord at
the last day: but if we slack and neglect this duty in this life, then
undoubtedly there remains nothing but eternal woe in the world to come.

Thirdly, by this we may learn one not to judge or condemn another, as Paul
says, Judge nothing before the time until the Lord come, 1. Cor. 4.3.
who lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the
hearts manifest. And Christ says, Judgment is mine: and, Judge not, and ye
shall not be judged. And again Paul says to the Romans, Why do thou judge
thy brother? Romans 14.10.
for we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ: but some will
ask, how does one judge another? Answer. Thus: I. when a man does well, to say
of him that he does evil: II. when a man does evil, then to make it worse:
III. when a thing is doubtful, to take it in the worst part. And by any of
these three ways we are not to judge either of men's persons, or of their
actions.

Fourthly, we must endeavor our selves to keep a good conscience before God
and before all men. This is the practice of Saint Paul, who in consideration
and hope of a resurrection unto judgment as well of the just as of the unjust,
Act. 24.15.
endeavored himself to have always a clear conscience both toward God and
toward men. His example is worthy our marking and imitation; for few there
be that upon this occasion make any conscience either of duty to God or to
their brethren.

Fifthly, the last judgment must stir us up to a reverend fear of God, and
cause us to glorify him: as the angel says in the Revelation, Fear God and
give glory to him: for the hour of his judgment is come. Rev. 14.17.
And doubtless if any thing in the world will move a man to fear the Lord it
is this, to remember the fearful and terrible day of judgment.

Now having spoken hitherto of the first person the father, and also of the
son, it follows in the next place to speak of the third person, in these
words, J believe in the holy Ghost. In which we may consider two things, the
title of the person, and the action of faith repeated from the beginning. The
title is, holy Ghost, or Spirit. It may here be demanded, how this title can
be fit to express the third person, which seems to be common to the rest: for
the father is holy, and the son is holy: again the father is a spirit, and
the son is a spirit. Answer. Indeed the father and the Son are as well to
be termed holy in respect of their natures, as the third person: for all three
subsisting in one and the same Godhead, are consequently holy by one and the
same holiness: but the third person is called holy, because beside the holiness
of natures, his office is to sanctify the Church of God. Now if it be said
that sanctification is a work of the whole Trinity, the answer is, that
although it be so, yet the work of sanctification agrees to the holy Ghost in
special manner. The father sanctifies by the Son and by the holy Ghost: the
Son sanctifies from the father and by the holy Ghost: the holy Ghost
sanctifies from the father and from the son by himself immediately: and in
this respect is the third person termed holy. Again the third person is
termed a Spirit, not only because his nature is spiritual (for in that
respect the father is a spirit and the son is a spirit;) but because he is
spired or breathed from the father and from the son, in that he proceeds from
the^ both. Thus we see there is special cause why the third person is called
the holy Ghost.

Now the action of faith which concerns the third person, is to believe in
him. Which is, I. to acknowledge the H. Ghost as he has revealed himself in
the word. II. In special to believe that he is my sanctifier and comforter.
III. To put all the confidence of my heart in him, for that cause. In these
words are comprised four points of doctrine, which are to be believed
concerning the H. Ghost. The first, that he is very God. For we are not to put
our affiance or confidence in any but in God alone. And no doubt the pennars of
the Creed in that they prefixed these words, I believe in, before the article
of the third person, meant thereby to signify that he is true God, equal with
the father and the son, according to the tenor of the Scriptures themselves.
Peter says to Ananias: Why has satan filled thine heart, Act. 5.3.4.
that thou should lie unto the holy Ghost? and continuing the same speech,
he changes the term only, and says, Thou have not lied unto men, but unto
God. Whereby he insinuates that the holy Ghost is very God. In the vision of
the Prophet Isai, the words by him set down are thus: I heard the voice of
Iehoua, saying, whom shall I send, Isa. 6.9.
etc. and he said, go and say to this people: Ye shall hear in deed, but ye
shall not understand. But Paul quoting the same place, spoke on this manner:
Well spoke the H. Ghost by Esaias the Prophet, Act. 28.15.
saying, go unto this people and say unto them. Now these places being
compared together make it plain, that the title of Jehovah, agrees to the
holy Ghost. But yet the enemies of this truth which think, that the holy Ghost
is nothing else but the action or operation of God, object out of the
Scriptures to the contrary: I. God knows the Son: the holy Ghost knows
not the Son: for none knows the son but the father: Mat. 11.27.
ergo the holy Ghost is not God. Answer. That place excludes no person in
Trinity, but only creatures, and false gods, and the meaning is this: None,
that is, no creature, or idol god, knows the son of God, but the father.
And the opposition is made to exclude creatures, not to exclude the holy Ghost.
Again they object, that the holy Ghost makes request for us with groans and
sighs that cannot be uttered: Romans 8.26.
ergo the holy Ghost is not God, but rather a gift of God. For he that is true
God can not pray, groan, or sigh. Answer. Paul's meaning is thereby to signify
that the holy Ghost causes us to make requests, and stirs up our hearts to
groan and sigh to God: for he said before, we have received the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, father. Romans 8.15.
Yet further, they object the words of the angel Gabriel to the virgin Marie,
saying, Luke 1.3^.
The virtue of the most high has ouershadowed thee: and hence they gather,
that if the holy Ghost be the virtue of God, then he is not God indeed. Answ.
As Christ is called the word of God, not a word made of letters or syllables,
but a substantial word, that is, being for ever of the same substance with
the father: so in this place the holy Ghost is called the virtue of the most
highest, not because he is a created quality, but because he is the
substantial virtue of the Father and the son: and therefore God equal with
them both. Furthermore they allege, that neither the Scriptures nor the
practice of the Primitive Church does warrant us to pray to the holy Ghost.
Ans. It is not true. For whenever we direct our prayer to any one of the
three persons, in him we pray to them all. Besides, we have example of prayer
made to the holy Ghost in the word of God. For Paul says to the Corinthians,
2. Cor. 13.13.
The grace of our Lord Jesus, the love of God the father, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with you all. And the words are as if Paul had said thus; O
father, let thy love, O son, let thy grace, O holy Ghost, let thy fellowship
be with them all. And therefore this first doctrine is true, and as well to be
believed as any other, that the holy Ghost is God.

The second point is, that the holy Ghost is a distinct person from the father
and the son. Hereupon the articles touching the three persons are thus
distinguished, I believe in the father, I believe in the son, I believe in the
H. Ghost. This point also is consonant to the Scriptures which make the same
distinction. In the baptism of Christ, the father utters a voice from
heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: and not
the Son, Math. 15.16.
or the holy Ghost. Secondly the Son stood in the water, and was baptized by
John, and not the Father, or the holy Ghost. Thirdly, the holy Ghost descended
from heaven upon Christ in the form of a dove; and not the father, or the
son, but the holy Ghost alone. Christ in his commission unto his disciples,
says, Go teach all nations, baptizing them into the name of the father, Matt.
28.19.
the son, and the holy Ghost. Now if the holy Ghost had been the same person
either with the father, or with the son, then it had been sufficient to have
named the father and the son only. And the distinction of the third person
from the rest, may be conceived by this, that the holy Ghost is the holy Ghost,
and not the father or the son.

The third point to be believed is, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the
father and the son. For a further proof hereof, consider these places. Paul
says, Ye are not in the flesh but in the spirit: Romans 8.9.
for the spirit of God dwells in you. But if any man have not the spirit of
Christ, he is not his, and again, Gal. 4.6.
Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of the son into your
hearts: where we may observe that the holy Ghost is the spirit both of the
father and of the son. Now the holy Ghost is called the spirit of the father,
not only because he is sent of him, but because he proceeds from the
father; as Christ says to his disciples: When the comforter will come, whom I
shall send unto you from the father, Ioh. 15.26.
even the spirit of truth, which proceeds of the father, he shall testify of
me. And therefore likewise he is the spirit of the son, not only because he
is sent of the son, but also because he proceeds from him. Again, in the
trinity the person sending does communicate his whole essence and substance to
the person sent. As the father sending the son does communicate his essence
and substance to the son. For sending does presuppose a communication of
essence. Now the father and the son send the holy Ghost: therefore both of
them communicate their substance and essence unto the same person. Thirdly
Christ says, The holy Ghost has received of mine, Ioh. 14.16.
which he shall show unto you, namely knowledge and truth, to be revealed unto
his Church. Whence we may reason thus: the person receiving knowledge from an
other, receives essence also: the H. Ghost receives truth and knowledge from
Christ to be revealed unto the Church: and therefore first of all he has
received substance and essence from the son. But some peradventure will say,
where is it written in all the Bible in express words, that the holy Ghost
proceeds from the son as he proceeds from the father. Ans. The Scripture
says not so much in plain terms; yet we must know that that which is
gathered forth of the^ by just co^seque^t, is no less the truth of God, then
that which is expressed in words. Hereupon all Churches, save those in Greece,
with one consent acknowledge the truth of this point.

The fourth and last point is, that the holy Ghost is equal to the father and
the son. And this we are taught to acknowledge in the Creed, in that we do
as well believe in the holy Ghost as in the father and the son. And though
the holy Ghost be sent of the father and the son, yet (as I have said before)
that argues no inequality (for one equal may send an other by consent) but
order only, whereby the Holy Ghost is last of all the three persons. Again in
that the H. Ghost receives from the son, it proves no inferioritie. Because
he receives from the son whatsoever he receives by nature, and not by grace.
And he receives not a part, but all that the son has, saving the propriety
of his person.

Now follow the benefits which are given by th H. ghost, and they are of 2.
sorts: some are common to all creatures, and some are proper to men. The
benefit of the H. Ghost common to all creatures, is the work of creation and
preservation* For all things were created and made, and afterward preserved by
the H. Ghost. So Elihu says, The spirit of God has made me. And Moses says,
Job 33.4. Genesis 1*2*
In the beginning the spirit moved upon the waters. The phrase is borrowed
from a bird, who in hatching of her young ones sits upon the eggs, mooues her
self upon them, and heates them. And so likewise the holy Ghost in the
beginning did by his own power cherish and preserve the mass or lump whereof
all things were made, and caused it to bring forth the creatures. This being
evident that the holy Ghost has a stroke in the work of creation and
preservation, we must unfeignedly acknowledge that we were first created, and
since that time continually preserved by the benefit even of the third person.

The benefits proper unto men, are of two sorts: some are common to all men
both good and badde, and some proper to the elect and faithful. The benefits
common to all men are diverse: I. the gift of practicing a particular calling.
As in the body several members have several uses; so in every society
several men have several offices and callings, and the gifts whereby they are
enabled to perform the duties thereof, are from the holy Ghost. When Gedeon
became a valiant captain to deliver the Israelites, it is said he was clothed
with the spirit. Iud. 6.34.
Bezaleel and Aholiab being set apart to build the tabernacle, were filled
with the spirit of God in wisdom and in understanding, Exodus 31.3.
and in all workmanship, to find out curious works, to work in gold and in
silver and in brass; also in the art to set stones, and to carue in timber,
etc. By this it is manifest, that the skill of any handicraft is not in the
power of man, but comes by the holy Ghost. And by this we are taught to use all
those gifts well, whereby we are enabled to discharge our particular callings,
that they may serve for the glory of God, and the good of his Church: and
those that in their callings use fraud and deceit, or else live inordinately,
do most unthankfully abuse the gifts of the holy Ghost, which one day they
must answer for.

The second gift common to all, is Illumination, whereby a man is enabled to
understand the will of God in his word. Heb. 6.4.
The Jews in the reading of the old testament had a veil over their hearts:
and the like have all men by nature, to whom the word of God is foolishnes.
Paul at his conversion was smitten blind, and skales were upon his eyes: the
like also be over the eyes of our minds; and they must fall away before we can
understand the will of God. Now it is the work of the holy Ghost to remove
these skales and filmes from our eyes. And for this very cause he is called
the anointing and eyesalue: for as it does clear the eyes, 1. Ioh. 2.20.
Apoc. 3*18.
and take away dimnesse from them; so does the holy Ghost take away blindness
from our minds, that we may see into the truth of Gods word. This being a
common gift, and received both of good and badde, it stands us in hand not to
content our selves with the bare knowledge of the word, but therewithal we
must join obedience, and make conscience thereof, or else that will befall us
which Christ foretold, Luke 12.4^*
that he which knows his masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with
many stripes.

The third gift of the holy Ghost, is the gift of prophecy, 1. Cor. 12.1^*
whereby a man is made able to interpret and expound the Scriptures. Now albeit
this gift be very excellent and not given to every man, yet is it common both
to good and badde. For in the day of judgment when men shall come to Christ
and say, Master we have prophesied in thy name, he shall answer again, I never
knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Hereupon those that are in
the calling of the ministry, and have received the gift of prophecy, must
not herewithall be puffed up. For if they be not as well doers of Gods will, as
teachers, their gifts will turn to their further condemnation. As the
carpenters that built Noah's arc when the floode came were drowned, because
they would not obey Noah's preaching: so those that have the gifts of prophecy,
and are builders in Gods house, if they build not themselves as well as others,
for all their preaching at the day of judgment, they shall be condemned* and
therefore it stands them in hand, not to content themselves with this, that
they know and teach others Gods will, but they themselves must be the first
doers of the same.

The fourth common gift of the holy Ghost, is Ability to bridle and restrain
some affections, so as they shall not break out into outrageous behavior.
Haman a wicked man, and an enemy to Gods Church, when he saw Mordecai the Jew
sitting in the kings gate, and that he would not stand up nor move for him, he
was full of indignation, nevertheless the text says, that he refrained
himself. And when Abimelech an heathen king had taken Sara Abraham's wife,
Hest. 5.10*
God said unto him: I know that thou did this with an upright heart: and
the text adds further, I have kept thee, Genesis 20.6.
that thou should not sin against me. And thus the Lord gives to men, as
yet without the spirit of sanctification, this gift to bridle them selves, so
as in outward action they shall not practice this or that sin. For why did
not Abimelech commit adultery? surely because God kept him from it. Again, in
the histories of the heathen we may read of many that were just, liberal,
meek, continent, etc. and that by a general operation of the holy Ghost that
represseth the corruption of nature for the common good. Here then if any man
ask, how it comes to pass that some men are more modest and civil then
others, seeing all men by nature are equally wicked, the answer may be* not
as the common saying is, because some are of better nature then others (for all
the sons of Adam are equal in regard of nature: the child newborn in that
respect is as wicked as the eldest man that ever lived) but the reason is,
because God gives this common gift of restraining the affections more to some
then to others. This must be considered of us all. For a man may have the
spirit of God to bridle many sins, and yet never have the spirit to mortify
the same, and to make him a new creature. And this being so, we must take
heed that we deceive not our selves. For it is not sufficient for a man to
live in outward civility, and to keep in some of his affections upon some
occasion (for that a wicked man may do) but we must further labor to feel in
our selves the spirit of God, not only bridling sin in us, but al^o
mortifying and killing the same. In deed both of them are the good gifts of
Gods spirit, but yet the mortification of sin is the chiefest, being an
effectual sign of grace, and proper to the elect.

The fifth grace and gift of the holy Ghost is, to hear and receive the word
of God with joy. In the parable of the sower, one kind of badde ground are
they, which when they have heard, Luke 8.13.
receive the word with joy. And this is that which the author of the Hebrews
calls the tasting of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to
come. We know that there is great difference between tasting of meat and
eating of it. They that sit down at the table do both taste and eat, but they
that dress the meat do only see and taste thereof: so it is at the Lords
table. Many there be that have this gift, truly both to taste and eat of the
body and blood of Christ offered in the word and sacraments: and some again
do only taste and feel the sweetness of them and rejoice therein, but yet
are not indeed partakers thereof. Now if this be so, then all those which
hear the word of God must take heed how they hear, and labor to find
these two things in themselves by hearing: I. that in heart and conscience they
be thoroughly touched and humbled for their sins: II. that they be certe^ly
assured of the favor and love of God in Christ, and that the sweet promises
of the Gospel do belong to them: and in consideration hereof they must make
conscience of all sin both in thought word and deed, through the whole
course of their lives. And this kind of hearing brings that joy which
vanishes not away.

Thus much of the benefits of the holy Ghost common to all men both good and
bad: now follow such as are proper to the Elect* all which may be reduced unto
one* namely the Inhabitation of the spirit, whereby the elect are the temples
of the H. Ghost: who is said to dwell in men, not in respect of substance (for
the whole nature of the H. Ghost cannot be comprised in the body or soul of
man) but in respect of a particular operation: and this dwelling stands in two
things. The first that the holy Ghost does abide in them, not for a time only,
but for ever: for the word, dwelling, notes perpetuity. Secondly, that the
holy Ghost has the full disposition of the heart, as when a man comes to
dwell in an house, whereof he is lord, he has liberty to govern it after his
own will: now this disposition of the hearts of the faithful by the holy
Ghost, stands in five special and notable gifts, every one worth our
observation.

The first is a certain knowledge of a man's own reconciliation to God in
Christ. As it is said in Isai, By his knowledge my righteous servant shall
justify many. Esa. 53.11.
And Christ says, This is life eternal that they know thee to be the only
very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Ioh. 17.3.
This knowledge is not general, for then the devils might be saved; but it is
particular, whereby a man knows God the father to be his father, and Christ
the redeemer, to be his redeemer, and the holy Ghost to be his sanctifier and
comforter. And it is from the special work of the H. Ghost, as Paul says,
Romans 8.16.
The spirit of God bears witness to our spirits, that we are the children of
God. And, we have received the spirit which is of God, 1. Cor. 2.12.
that we might know the things that are given unto us of God.

The second gift is regeneration, whereby a man of a limme of the devil is
made a member of Christ, and of a child of satan (whom every one of us by
nature do as lively resemble as any man does his own parent) is made the child
of God. Except a man (says our Savior Christ) be born again by water and the
spirit, Ioh. 3.5. Math. 3.11.
he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. John Baptist in saying that
Christ baptized with the H. Ghost and fire, compares the spirit of God to fire
and water. To fire for two causes: I. as it is the nature of fire to warm the
body that is benumbed and frozen with cold: so when a man is benumbed and
frozen in sin, yea when he is even stark dead in sin, it is the property
of the holy Ghost to warm and quicken his heart, and to revive him. II. Fire
does purge and eat out the dross from the good metal: now there is no
dross nor canker that has so deeply eaten into any metal as sin into the
nature of man, and therefore the holy Ghost is as fire to purge and eat out
the hidden corruptions of sin out of the rebellious heart of man. Again the
holy Ghost is compared to clear water for two causes: I. man by nature is as
dry wood without sap, and the property of the holy Ghost is as water to
supple and to put sap of grace into the dead and rotten heart of man. II. the
property of water is to cleanse and purify the filth of the body: even so the
holy Ghost does spiritually wash away our sins, which are the filth of our
nature; and this is the second benefit of the H. Ghost. By this we are taught
that he which would enter into the kingdom of God, and have the H. Ghost to
dwell in him, must labor to feel the work of regeneration by the same holy
spirit: and if a man would know whether he have this work wrought in him or
no, let him mark what S. Paul says, They that are of the spirit, savor the
things that are of the spirit: but they that live after the flesh, Romans 8.5.
savor the things of the flesh. If therefore a man have his heart continually
affected with that which is truly good, either more or less; it is a certain
token that his wicked nature is changed, and he regenerate: but contrariwise if
his heart be always set on the pleasures of sin, and the things of this
world, he may justly suspect himself that he is not regenerated. As for
example: if a man have all his mind set upon drinking and gulling in of wine
and strong drink, having little delight nor pleasure in any thing else, it argues
a carnal mind and vngerenerate, because it affects the things of the flesh; and
so of the rest. And on the contrary, he that has his mind affected with a
desire to do the will of God, in practicing the works of charity and religion,
he I say, has a spiritual and a renewed heart, and is regenerate by the holy
Ghost.

The third work of the holy Ghost is, to govern the hearts of the elect: this
may be called spiritual regiment. A man that dwells in a house of his own,
orders and gouerns it according to his own will: even so the holy Ghost
gouerns all the^ in who^ he dwells, as Paul says, they that are the sons
of God are led by his spirit, Romans 8.14.
a most notable benefit: for look where the holy Ghost dwells, there he will
be Lord, governing both heart, mind, will, and affections; and that two ways:
I. by repressing all badde motions unto sin, arising either from the
corruption of man's nature, from the world, or from the devil. II. by stirring
up good affections and motions upon every occasion: so it is said, The flesh
(that is, the corruption of man's nature) lusts against the spirit: Gal. 5.17.
and the spirit (that is, grace in the heart) lusts against the flesh; and
that after a double sort: first by laboring to ouermaster and keep down the
motions thereof: secondly by stirring up good motions and inclinations to
piety and religion. In Esaias the holy Ghost has most excellent titles: The
spirit of the Lord: the spirit of wisdom and understanding: the spirit of
counsel, and of strength: Esa. 11*2.
the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. Now he is so called,
because he stirs up good motions in the godly, of wisdom, of knowledge, of
strength, of understanding, of counsel, and of the fear of the Lord. And
Saint Paul says, that the fruits of the spirit are joy, peace, love, long
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekenes, temperance, etc. all which are
so termed, Gal. ^.22.
because where the H. Ghost rules, there he ingendreth these good gifts and
motions of grace: but among all the inward motions of the spirit, the most
principal are these: I. an utter disliking of sin, because it is sin. And
that is, when a man has an eye not so much to another man's sins, as to his
own, and seeing them* is truly sorrowful for them, and disliketh them, and
himself for them, not so much because there is a place of torment, or a day of
judgment to come, wherein he must answer to God for them all: but as if there
were no hell or judgment, because God is displeased by them, who has been
unto him a most loving and merciful father in redeeming him by Christ. The
second is an hungring desire above all things in this world, to be at unity
with God in Christ for the same sins. This is a motion of the H. Ghost, which
no man can have but he in whom the H. Ghost does dwell. The third, the gift of
hearty prayer. For this cause the H. Ghost is called the spirit of
supplications, because it stirs up the heart, ^ach. 12.10.
and makes it fit to pray: and therefore Paul says, that the spirit of God
helps our infirmities: for we know not what to pray as we ought, Romans 8.26.
but the spirit it self makes request for us with sighs which cannot be
expressed. This is an ordinary work of the holy Ghost in all that believe:
and he that would know whether he have the spirit dwelling truly in his heart,
shall know it by this: A mother carries her child in her arms, if it cry for
the dugge and suckes the same, it is alive: being observed many days together
if it neither cry nor stir, it is dead. In like manner it is an infallible
note of a true child of God to cry to his father in heaven by prayer, but he
that never cries nor feels himself stirred up to make his moan to God, is
in a miserable case, and he may well be thought to be but a dead child: and
therefore let us learn in prayer unfeignedly to power out our souls before
God, considering it is a special gift of the holy Ghost bestowed on the
children of God.

The fourth work of the holy Ghost in the heart of the elect is, comfort in
distress, and therefore our Savior Christ calls him the comforter whom he
w^ll send: and in the Psalm he is called the oil of gladness, Ioh. 15.26.
Psalm. 45.9.
because he makes glad the heart of man in trouble and distress. There be two
things that fill the heart full of endless grief: I. outward calamities, as
when a man is in any danger of death, when he loses his goods, his good
name, his friends, and such like. The second thing is, a troubled conscience,
whereof Solomon says, A troubled spirit, who can bear it? and of all other it
is the most heavy and grievous cross that can be. When as the hand of God was
heavy upon Job, this was the soarest of all his affliction, and therefore he
cries out that the arrows of the almighty did stick in his soul. Now what
is the comfort in this case? Answer. In the midst of all our distresses the
holy Ghost is present with us, to make us rejoice and to fill us with comforts
that no tongue can express. And hereupon, the ungodly man when afflictions
befall him, is ready to make away himself, because he wants the comfort of
the holy Ghost.

The last benefit wrought in the hearts of the elect is, the strengthening of
them to do the weightiest duties of their callings: and hence the holy Ghost
is called the spirit of strength. Esa. 11.2.
There be diverse things to be done of a Christian man that are far beyond
the reach of his power; as first, when he sees his own sins and is truly
humbled for them, then to lift up the hand of faith to heaven, and thereby to
catch hold on the mercy of God in Christ, is the hardest thing in the whole
world: and this do all those know to be true in some part, which know what it
is to believe. Secondly it is as hard a thing in the time of temptation to
resist temptation, as for dry wood to resist the fire when it begins to burn.
Thirdly, when a man is put to his choice, either to loose his life, goods,
friends, and all that he has, or else to forsake religion; even then to
forsake all and to stick unto Christ, is a matter of as great difficulty as
any of the former. Fourthly, when a man wants the ordinary means of Gods
providence, as meat, drink, and clothing, then at the very same instant to
acknowledge Gods providence, to rejoice in it, and to rely thereon, is as much
as if a man should shake the whole earth. It is against our wicked nature to
trust God, unless he first lay down some pawn of his love and mercy toward
us. How then, will some say, shall any one be able to do these things? Answer.
The holy Ghost is the spirit of strength, and by him we do al things, as Paul
says, J am able to do all things through the help of Christ which
strengthens me. ^hil. 4.12.


Concerning these gifts of the holy Ghost, two questions may be moved. First,
what is the measure of grace in this life. Answer. Small in respect. In this
world, we receive, as Paul says, but the first fruits of Gods spirit: and the
earnest of the spirit. ^om. 8.23. ^. Cor. 1.22.
Now the first fruits properly are but as an handful or twain of corn, to a
whole corn field, containing many acres and furlongs of ground. And the
earnest in a bargain it may be is but a penny laid down for the paying of
twenty thousand pound. The second question is, whether the graces of the H.
Ghost may be wholly lost or not. Answer. The common gifts of the spirit may be
lost and extinquished: But the gifts proper to the Elect can not. Indeed they
may be diminished and covered as coals under ashes, and as the sap in the
root of the tree in the winter season, not appearing at all in the branches;
and the feeling of them may be lost: but they cannot either finally or totally
be abolished. It is true that God does forsake his children; but that is only
in part, as he left Ezechias to prove and try what was in his heart. A mother
that loves her child most tenderly, ^. Chr. 32.31
sets it down in the flore, lets it stand and fall and break the face, and all
this while she hides her self, not because her purpose is to leave her child
quite, or to make it hurt it self; but that when she takes it up again, it
may love her the better. So deals the Holy Ghost with men to make them see
their own weakness and frailty: he hides himself as it were in some corner
of the heart for a season, that they may the more earnestly hunger after grace,
the want whereof they felt.

The use of this article whereby we confess that we believe in the Holy Ghost
is manifold. First, considering that all the gifts which any man has, whether
they be gifts of knowledge in the word of God, or of humane learning, or
again gifts whereby men are enabled to practice their trades or handicraftes,
do come not from our selves but from the holy ghost, we are taught this duty.
Look what gifts soever we for our parts have received of the spirit of God,
we must use them so, as they may ever serve for the glory of God and good of
our brethren, and not to the practicing and setting forth of any manner of
sin, and by consequent to the service of the devil. For that is as if a man
receiving riches and revenues of his prince should straight way go to the
princes enemy and employ them for his benefit; which were a point of
exceeding treachery.

Furthermore in every place the greater part of men are blind and ignorant
persons both young and old: and aged folks as they are ignorant themselves,
so they nuzzle up their youth in ignorance. Confer with them, you shall find
that they can say nothing but that which may be learned by common talk, as
that there is a God, and that this God must be worshipped: but ask them
further of the means of their salvation, and of their duties to God and man,
and they will answer you that they are not booke-learned: tell them further
that the ordinary means to bring men to knowledge is the preaching of the
word, which if they will not use, they shall be inexcusable; they will say, alas,
we are dull of memory and can not learn. Well, for all this, thou say thou
beleeuest in the holy ghost, and he is thy schoolmasters to teach thee:
though thy capacity be dull, yet he is able to open thine understa^ding: for
as there is outward teaching by the minister, so the work of the holy ghost
is joined withal to enlighten the conceit of the mind, that they which hear
the word with reverence may profit thereby and get knowledge. But if for all
this men will not learn, but remain ignorant still, then let them mark the
example of the sons of Eli: he in some part did rebuke them for their
wickedness, but yet they would not obey; and the reason is there set down,
because the Lord would destroy them. In the same manner howsoever we may not
judge of any man's person, 1. Sam. 2.25.
yet this may be said, that if men refuse to hear the word of God when they
may, or if in hearing they will not obey, it is a fearful sign that God will
at length destroy them. When a trumpet is sounded in a man's ear, and he lies
still, not stirring at all, he is certainly dead. And surely when the trumpet
of the gospel is sounded in the ears of our hearts, if we awake not out of
our sins to newness of life, we are no better then dead men before God.
Wherefore the case being thus dangerous and the punishment so great, let us
labor in time for the knowledge of Gods will, and prevent Gods judgments
before they light upon us.

Thirdly, as the Apostle says, If we live in the spirit, we must walk in
the spirit, Gal. 5.25.
that is, if we be dead unto sin by the power of the holy ghost, and be
raised up to newness of life, then we must walk in the spirit. Now to walk
in the spirit, is to lead our lives in showing forth the fruits of the
spirit. Esa. 44.3, 4.
In Esai the holy ghost is compared unto water powered forth on the dry land,
which makes the willowes to blossom and to bear fruit: wherefore those that
have the gifts of the spirit must be trees of righteousness bringing forth the
fruits of the spirit, which (as they are set down by Paul) are principally
nine.

The first fruit is love, which respects both God and man. Love unto God is an
inward and spiritual motion in the heart, whereby God is loved absolutely for
himself. This love shows it self in two things. I. when a man's heart is set
and disposed to seek the honor and glory of God in all things. II. when a
man by all means strives and endeauours himself to please God in every thing,
counting it a most miserable estate to live in the displeasure of God: and the
heart that is thus affected, can have no greater torment then to fall into
sin, whereby God is offended and his displeasure provoked. By these two
signs a man may know whether he love God or no, and by them also must he
testify his love. Now our love to man is a fruit of this love of God: for God
is to be loved for himself: man is loved for God. This love must not be in
show only, but in deed and action. Saint John bids us not to love in word
and tongue only, 1. Ioh. 3.18.
but in deed and truth. Brotherly love does not always lie hid, but when an
occasion is offered, it does break forth into action; it is like fire, which
though for a time it be smothered, yet at length it breaks forth into a flame.
And so much love a man shows to his neighbor as he has, and where none is
showed, none is.

The second fruit is Joy, when a man is as glad at the good of his neighbor as
at his own good: and this is a special work of the holy ghost. For the nature
of man is to pine away and to grieve at the good of another; and it is a work
of grace to rejoice thereat. Paul says, Rejoice with them that rejoice. Romans
12.15.
And this was the holy practice of the friends and neighbors of Zacharias and
Elizabeth, when John Baptist was borne, Luke 1.58.
They came and rejoiced with them.

The third fruit of the spirit is Peace. Of this Paul speaks most
excellently, saying, If it be possible, as much as in you is have peace with
all men. It is nothing else, but concord which must be kept in an holy manner,
with all men, Romans 12.18.
both good and bad so far forth as can be. Isai the Prophet speaking of the
fruits of the gospel says, The woolfe shall dwell with the lamb, and the
leopard with the kid, etc. Where note* Esai. 11.6.
that in the kingdom of Christ, when a man is called into the state of grace,
howsoever by nature he be as a wolf, as a leopard, as a lion, or as a bear,
yet he shall then lay away his cruel nature, and become gentle and live
peaceably with all men. Now for the practicing of this peace, there are three
duties especially to be learned and performed: I. rather then peace should be
broken, a man must yield of his own right. When Publicanes came to our Savior
Christ for tribute, he had a lawful excuse: for howsoever he lived in low
estate among them, yet he was the right heir to the kingdom, and therefore
was free: nevertheless he stood not on his privilege, but calls Peter,
saying, Least we offend them, go to the sea and cast in an angle, and take
the first fish that c^mmeth up: Mat. 17.26, 27.
and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece of twenty
pence: take it, and give it to them for thee and me. Here we see that our
Savior Christ, rather then he would break the common peace, yeeldes of his
own right: and so we must do if we will be good followers of him. Secondly
when any man shall sin either in word or in deed, specially if it be upon
infirmity, we must avoid bitter invectiues and mildely tell him of his
fault, and in all meekness and love labor for his amendment. Gal. 6.1.
So Paul teaches us, saying, If any man be fallen into any fault by occasion,
restore such an one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self,
least thou be also tempted, etc. Bear ye one another burden. Thirdly every
man within the compass of his calling, must be a peacemaker between them
that are at variance. This is a special duty of godliness and christianity,
and therefore our Savior Christ does highly commend such, and pronounces
this blessing upon them, Mat. 5.9.
that they shall be called the children of God.

The fourth fruit of the spirit is long suffering: and it stands in two
points: I. when a man deferreth his anger and is hardly brought to it: II.
being angry does yet moderate the same, and stay the hotnesse of that
affection. For the first, to bridle anger, it is a special work of the H.
ghost, and the means to attain unto it are these: I. not to take notice of
the injuries and wrongs done unto us, if they be not of great moment, but to
let them pass, as not knowing them. Solomon says, It is a man's discretion to
defer his anger. Prove. 19.11.
Now how is that done? It is added in the next words: It is the glory of a man
to pass by infirmity: that is, when a man shall ouershoote himself, either
in word or in deed, to let it pass either wholly, or till a time convenient,
as though we knew not of it. The second way to defer and bridle anger is,
when a man has iniuried us either in word or deed, to think with our selves
that we have injured others in the same manner: and for this cause Solomon
says, Give not thine heart^ to all the words that men speak, Eccles. 7.23.
least thou do hear thy servant cursing thee: For oftentimes thine heart also
knows that thou have cursed others. A man must not listen to every man's
words at all times: but he is to think that he has spoken or done the same
to other men, and that now the Lord meets with him by the like, as it is
said, With what measure ye meet, Mat. 7.2.
it shall be measured to you again. This is a thing which few consider. Evil
men desire good report and would have all men speak well of them, whereas
they can speak well of none: but indeed they must begin to speak well of
others before others shall speak well of them. Thirdly, a man must consider
how God deals with him. For so often as he sins he provoke god to cast
him away and to confound him eternally, yet the Lord is merciful and long
suffering. Even so when men do offend and injury us, we must do as God does:
not be angry but fight against our affections, endeavoring to become patient
and long suffering as God is with us. The second property of long suffering is
to keep the affection of anger in moderation and compass. It is not always a
sin to be angry, and therefore it is said of Christ (in whom was no blemish
of sin) that he was angry: Mar. 3.5.
yet we must look that our anger be moderate and not overlong, as Paul says,
Let not the son go down upon your wrath.

The fifth fruit of the spirit is gentleness, whereby a man behaueth and
shows himself friendly and courteous to every man, as Paul says to Titus,
Put them in remembrance that they speak evil of no man, that they be no
fighters but soft, Tit. 3.^.
shevving all meekness unto all men, whether they be good or badde. This
gentleness stands in these points: First to speak to every man friendly
and lovingly. II. to salute friendly and courteously. III. to be ready upon
every occasion to give reverence and honor to every man in his place. It is
made a question of some whether a man is to salute and speak unto them that are
known to be lewd and wicked men: but here we see what our duty is in that we
are taught to be courteous to all men both good and badde, yet so as we
approve not of their sins: as for that which S. John says of false
Prophets, Receive them not, neither bid them God speed, 2. John. 10.
it is to be understood of giving an outward approbation to false teachers.

The sixth fruit is goodness, which is, when a man is ready to do good and
become serviceable in his calling to all men at all times upon all occasions.
This was to be seen in that holy man Job* he says, that he was eyes to the
blind, and feet to the lame, Job. 36.15.
a father unto the poor, and when he kn^w not the cause, he sought it out. And
S. Paul showed this fruit most notably after his conversion, for he says,
that he was made all things to all men that he might save some. 1. Cor. 9.22.
He was content to undergo any thing for the good of any man. And as we have
heard, the godly are trees of righteousness bearing fruit not for themselves but
for others, and therefore Paul in the Epistle to the Galatians gives this rule,
Gal. 5.13.
Do service one to another in love. In these days it is hard to find these
duties performed in any place. For both practice and proverb is commonly
this, Every man for himself, and God for us all: but it is a graceless
saying, and the contrary must be practiced of all that desire to be guided by
the spirit.

The seventh fruit is faith: Faith or fidelity stands in these two duties.
One to make conscience of a lie, and to speak every thing whereof we speak,
as we think it is, and not to speak one thing and think another. A rare
thing it is to find this virtue in the world now a days: who is he that makes
conscience of a lie? and is not truth banished out of our coasts, considering
that for gains and outward commodities men make no bones of glosing and
dissembling? but alas, the practice is damnable, and the contrary is the
fruit of the Holy Ghost, namely to speak the truth from the heart: and he
that can do this by the ^estimonie of God himself shall rest in the mountain
of his holiness, Psalm. 15.
even in the kingdom of heaven. The second point wherein fidelity consists
is, when a man has made a promise that is lawful and good, to keep and
perform the same. Some think it is a small matter to break promise, but
indeed it is a fruit of the flesh; and contra^^wise a fruit of the spirit to
perform a lawful promise: and a man's word should be as sure as an
obligation: and in conscience a man is bound to keep promise so far forth
as he will, to whom the promise is made. Indeed if a man be released of his
promise, he is then free: otherwise if we promise and do not perform, we
do not only crack our credit before men, but also sin before God.

The eighth fruit of the spirit is meekness, which is a notable grace of
God, when a man provoked by injuries does neither intend nor enterprise the
requital of the same. And it stands in three duties. The first is to
interpret the sayings and doings of other men in better part as much as
possibly may be. The second when men mistake and misconstrue our sayings and
doings, if the matter be of smaller moment, to be silent and patient as Christ
was when he was accused before the high priests and Pharisees: this being
withal remembered, that if the matter be of weight and moment, we may defend
our selves by soft and mild answers. The third is not to contend in word or
deed with any man, but when we are to deal with others to speak our
mind and so an end.

The last fruit of the spirit is temperance, whereby a man bridleth his
appetite or lust in meat, drink, and apparel. In bridling the lust, these
rules must be observed. I. Eating and drinking must be joined with continual
fasting, after this manner. We must not glutt our selves, but rather abstain
from that which nature desires, and as some use to speak, leave our
stomachs craving. II. A man must so eat and drink, as afterward he may the
better be enabled for Gods worship. Creatures are abused when they make us
unfitte to serve God. The common fault is; on the sabbath day men so pamper
themselves, as that they are made unfitte both to hear and learn Gods word,
and fit for nothing but to slumber and sleep: but following this rule of
temperance these faults shall be amended. III. This must be a caveat in our
apparel, that we be attired according to our callings in holy comeliness. The
Lord has threatened to visit all those that are clothed in strange
apparel. Tit. 2.3.
And holy comeliness is this, when the apparel is both for fashion and matter
so made and worn, that it may express and show forth the graces of God in the
heart, as sobriety, temperaunce, gravity, etc. and the beholder may take
occasion by the apparel, to acknowledge and commend these virtues. But
lamentable is the time, look on men and women in these days, and you may see
and read their sins written in great letters on their apparel, as
intemperance, pride, and wantonness. Every day new fashions please the world,
but indeed that holy comeliness which the Holy Ghost does commend to us is
the right fashion when all is done. And these are the nine fruits of the
spirit, which we must put in practice in our lives and conuersations.

Fourthly if we believe in the holy ghost, and thereupon do persuade our
selves, that he will dwell in us: we must daily labor as we are commanded
to keep our vess^ls in holiness and honor unto the Lord: 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
and the reason is good. If a man be to entertain but an earthly prince or
some man of state, he would be sure to have his house in a readiness, and all
matters in order against his coming, so as every thing might be pleasing unto
so worthy a guest: well now, behold, we put our confidence and affiance in the
holy ghost, and do believe that he will come unto us, and sanctify us, and
lodge in our hearts. He is higher then all states in the world whatsoever, and
therefore we must look that our bodies and souls be kept in an honorable and
holy manner, so as they may be fit temples for him to dwell in. S. Paul
bids us not to grieve the holy spirit, Ephesians. 4*30.
where the holy ghost is compared to a guest, and our bodies and souls unto
Innes: and as men use their guestes friendly and courteously, showing unto them
all service and duty: so must we do to gods spirit which is come to dwell
and abide in us, doing nothing in any case, which may disquiet or molest him.
Now there is nothing so grievous unto him as our sins, and therefore we must
make conscience of all manner of sin, least by abusing of our selves, we do
cause the holy ghost as it were with grief to depart from us. When the arc of
the covenant which was a sign of the presence of God, was in the house of Obed
Edom, the text says, that the Lord blessed him and all his house: 2. Sam.
6.11.
but when the holy ghost dwelles in a man's heart, there is more then the ark of the Lord present, even God him self: and therefore may we look for a
greater blessing. Now then shall we grieve the holy ghost by sinning, seeing we
reap such benefit by his abode? It is said, that our Savior Christ was
angry when he came into the temple at Jerusalem, and saw the abuses therein.
Now shall he be angry for the abuses that are done in a temple of stone, and
seeing the temples of our bodies which are not made of stone, but are
spiritual, figured by that earthly temple, seeing them (I say) abused by
sin, will he not be much more angry? Yea we may assure our selves, he can not
abide that. And therefore if we believe in the holy ghost, we must hereupon
be moved to keep our bodies and souls pure and clean. And further to
persuade us hereunto, we must remember this, that when we pollute our souls
and bodies with any manner of sin, we make them even stables and styes for
our wretched enemy the devil to harbor in. For when Satan is once cast out,
if afterward we fall again to our old sins and looseness of life, and so
defile our bodies, they are then most clean and neat for him to dwell in:
whereupon he will come and bring seven other devils worse then himself, and so
a man's last end shall be worse then his beginning. Now what a fearful thing
is this, that the body which should be a temple for the holy ghost, by our
sins should be made a stable for the devil. Further S. Paul bids us, not
to quench the spirit. The graces of the holy spirit in this life are like
sparks of fire, 1. These. 5.1*
which may soon be quenched with a little water. Now so often as we sin, we
cast water upon the grace of God, and as much as we can put out the same:
therefore it stands us in hand to make conscience of every thing wherein we
may offend and displease God. And we may assure our selves, that so long as
we live and lie in our corruptions and sins, the Holy Ghost will never come
and dwell with us. He is a pure spirit, and therefore must have an undefiled
temple to dwell in.

Thus we have heard what is to be believed concerning the father, son, and
holy ghost: now look as we believe in God distinguished into ^. persons: so we
must remember that when we perform divine worship to him, we may
distinguish the persons, but we are not to sever them: when we pray to the
father, we must not omit the son or the Holy Ghost, but make our prayers to
them all: for as in nature they are one, and in person not divided but
distinguished: so in all worship we must never confound or sever the
persons, but distinguish them, and worship the trinity in unity and untie in
trinity: one God in three persons, and three persons in one God.

Hitherto we have entreated of the first part of the Creed concerning God: now
follows the second part thereof concerning the Church: and it was added to
the former upon special consideration. For August. in enchir. c. 56.
the right order of a confession did require, that after the Trinity the
Church should be mentioned, as the house after the owner, the temple after God,
and the city after the builder. Again the Creed is concluded with points of
doctrine concerning the Church, because whosoever is out of it is also forth of
the number of Gods children: Idem lib. 4. cap. 10. de symb. ad Catech.
and he cannot have God for his father, which has not the Church for his
mother.

Question is made what the words are which are to be supplied in this article,
the holy Catholic Church, whether, I believe, or, I believe in: and ancient
expositours have sufficiently determined the matter. One Ruffin. in symb.
says, In these words in which is set forth our faith of the godhead, it is
said, In God the father, in the son, and in the holy ghost: but in the rest
where the speech is not of the godhead but of creatures and mysteries, the
preposition In is not added that it should be, in the holy Church, but, that we
should believe there is an an holy Church not as God, but as a company
gathered to God. And men should believe that there is remission of sins, not,
in the remission of sins: and they should believe the resurrection of the
body, not, in the resurrection of the body: therefore by this preposition the
Creator is distinguished from the creatures, and things pertaining to God
from things pertaining to men. Another upon these words, Aug. tract. 29. in
Ioh.
This is the work of God that ye believe in him, says, If ye believe in
him, ye believe him; not if ye believe him, ye believe in him, for the devils
believed God, but did not believe in him. Again of the Apostles, we may say,
we believe Paul, but we do not believe in Paul: we believe Peter, but we
believe not in Peter. For his faith that believes in him which justifies the
ungodly, is imputed to him for righteousness. What is it therefore to believe
in him? by believing to love and like, and as it were to pass into him, and
to be incorporated into his members. Now the reasons which some Papists bring
to the contrary to prove that we may believe in the creatures, and in the
Church, are of no moment. First they allege the phrase of scripture, Exodus
14.31. They believed in God, and in Moses. 1. Sam. 27.12. And Achis believed in
David. 2. Chron. 20.20. Believe in the Prophets and prosper. Answer. The
Hebrewe phrase in which the servile letter Beth is used, must not be translated
with a preposition that rules an accuses or ablative case, but with a dative
case on this manner, Believe Moses, David, the Prophets: and it does not
import any affiance in the creature, but only a giving of credence by one man
to another. Secondly they allege, that ancient fathers read the article on
this manner, I believe in the holy Catholic Church. Answer. Epiphan. in
Anchor.
Indeed some have done so: but by this kind of speech they signified no more
but thus much, that they believed that there was a Catholic Church.

Thus having found what words are to be supplied, let us come to the meaning of
the article. And that we may proceed in order, let us first of all see what
the Church is. The Church is a peculiar company of men, predestinate to life
everlasting and made one in Christ. First I say, it is a peculiar company of
men, for Saint Peter says, Ye are a chosen generation, 1. Pet. 2.9.
a royal priesthood, an holy nation, and a peculiar people. He speaks indeed
of the Church of God on earth, but his saying may be also extended to the whole
Church of God, as well in heaven as in earth. Now because there can be no
company unless it have a beginning and a cause whereby it is gathered:
therefore I add further in the definition, predestinate to life everlasting.
Noting thereby the ground and cause of the Catholic Church, namely Gods
e^ernall predestination to life everlasting: and to this purpose our Savior
Christ says, Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers will to give you
the kingdom: Luke 12.32.
signifying thereby, that the first and principal cause of the Church, is the
good pleasure of God whereby he has before all works purposed to advance his
elect to eternal salvation. Therefore one says well, Bernard. in Cant.
only the elect are the Church of God. And further, because no company can
continue and abide for ever, unless the members thereof be joined and coupled
together by some bond, therefore I add in the last place, made one with
Christ. This union makes the Church to be the Church: and by it the members
thereof, whether they be in heaven or in earth, are distinguished from all
other companies whatsoever. Now this conjunction between Christ and the Church
is avouched by Saint Paul when he says, Christ is the head to his body,
which is his Church: Col. 1.18.
and when he ascribes the name of Christ not only to the person of the son
but to the Church it self, as in the Epistle to the Galatians. To Abraham and
his seed were the promises made: Gal. 16.
he says not, and to his seeds, as speaking of many, but, and unto his
seed, as speaking of one, which is Christ: that is, not the redeemer alone,
but also the Church redeemed. For Christ as he is man is not the only seed
of Abraham. And this definition of the Church is almost in so many words set
down in the Scriptures in that it is called the Family of God, partly in
heaven, and partly in earth, named of Christ: Ephesians. 3.15.
and it is also called the heavenly Jerusalem, the mother of us all: and, the
celestial Jerusalem: and, Gal. 4.26. Heb. 12.22*
the congregation of the first borne. Now for the better understanding of the
nature, estate, and parts of the Church, two points among the rest must be
considered; the efficient cause thereof, Gods predestination; and the form,
the mystical Union.

In handling the doctrine of Predestination, my meaning is, only to stand on
such points as are revealed in the word and necessary, tending to
edification. And first I will show what is the truth, and secondly the
contrary falsehood. In the truth I consider four things: I. what
Predestination is: II. what is the order of it: III. what be the parts of it:
IIII. what is the use.

Predestination may thus be defined: It is a part of the counsel of God,
whereby he has before all times purposed in him self to shevve mercy on
some men, and to pass by others, shevving his justice on them for the
manifestation of the glory of his own name. First, I say, it is a part of
his counsel, because the counsel or decree of God, universally extends it
self to all things that are: and Predestination is Gods decree so far forth
as it concerns the reasonable creatures, especially man. Now in every purpose
or decree of God, three things must be considered; the beginning, the matter,
the end. The beginning is the will of God whereby he wills and appoints
the estate of his creatures: and it is the most absolute, supreme, and
sovereign cause of all things that are, so far forth as they are: having
nothing either above it self or out of it self, to be an impulsive cause to
move or incline it; and to say otherwise, is to make the will of God to be no
will. Indeed men's wills are moved and disposed by external causes, out of
themselves borrowed from the things whereof deliberation is made, because they
are to be ruled by equity and reason: and a man's bare will without reason is
nothing. Now Gods will is not ruled by any other rule of reason or justice, but
it self is an absolute rule both of justice and reason. A thing is not first
of al reasonable and just, and the^ afterward willed by god: bu^ it is first of
all willed by God and thereupon it becom^s reasonable and just. The manner of
his purpose is a decreed manifestation of two of the most principal attributes
of the godhead, mercy and justice: and that with a limitation or restraint of
mercy to some of the creatures, and justice to some others, because it was his
good will and pleasure. And we are not to imagine that this is a point of
cruelty in God: for his very essence or nature is not justice alone, or
mercy alone, but justice and mercy both together: and therefore to purpose the
declaration of them both upon his creatures over whom he is a sovereign
Lord; and that without other respects, upon his very will and pleasure is no
point of injustice. The supreme end of the counsel of God is the manifestatio^
of his own glory partly in his mercy, and partly in his justice. For in common
equity, the end which he propou^ds unto him self of al his doings must be
answerable to his nature, which is majesty and glory, and (as I have said)
justice and mercy it self.

And because Paul's disputation in the 9. to the Romans gives light and
sufficient confirmation to this which I now teach, I will stand a little in
opening and resolving of the same. From the 1. verse to the 6. he sets down
his grief conceived for his brethren the Jews, and therwithall* that it might
not be thought that he spoke of malice, he does only in close and obscure
manner insinuate the Reiection of that nation. This done, in the 6. verse he
answers a secret objection which might be made on this manner. If the Jews
be rejected then the word of God is of none effect: that is, then the covenant
made with the forefathers is void, but the covenant can not be void, therefore
the Jews are not rejected. The assumption he takes for granted, and denies
the consequence of the proposition. And the ground of his denial is, because
there is a distinction between man and man even among the Jews, whereby some
are indeed in the covenant, some not. And this distinction is proved by 3.
examples: the first in this ver. that of the children of Jacob the common
parent of all the Jews, some are Israel, that is, truly in the covenant as
Jacob was: and some are not Israel. Now it might be further objected that the
Jews are not only the posterity of Jacob, but the seed of Abraham in whom all
nations of the earth are blessed: and therefore not to be rejected. And to this
Paul answers verse. 7. alleging a second example of the distinction between
man and man out of the family of Abraham in which some were indeed sons*
some were not. For the proof of this, first he settes down the words of the
text in Moses, In Isaac shall thy seed be called: and secondly makes an
exposition of them with a collection on this manner. All they which are the sons
of the promise are the seed of Abraham or the sons of god: but Isaac is a son
of promise and not Ismael: therefore Isaac is the seed of Abraham and heir of
the blessing, and not Ismael. The proposition is in the 8. ver. the assumpt^o^
in the 9. ver. the conclusion in the 7. ver. Here mark, I. how he makes a
double seed, one according to the flesh, the other spiritual: and two kind of
sons, one of the flesh, the other the son of the promise or the son of
God: for he puts the one for the other. II. that the distinction between Isaac
and Ismael whereby one is in the covenant of grace, the other not; stands not in
their foreseen faith and unbelief, and the fruits of the^: but in the purpose
and will of God it self. For Isaac is called the child of promise, because by
the virtue of it he was borne and believed and was adopted the child of God,
and made heir of the covenant given to Abraham: and therefore consequently the
right of adoption befell him by the mere good pleasure of God which is the
first cause of our salvation, without respect of any thing in the person of
Isaac. For what God by his promise brings to pass in time, that he most freely
decreed before all times. Now considering the Jews might say, that Ismael was
rejected because he was born of the handmaid Hagar, whereas they, for their
parts descend of Abraham and Sara by Isaac the lawful son, Paul adds a
third example of the distinction between man and man out of the family of Isaac
in which Jacob was a true son and heir of the promise, and Esau was not. Now
the distinction of these two persons is propounded in the 10. ver. and
confirmed v. 11* 12, 13. In which are set down 3. things. I. the time of this
distinction* yer the chil^re^ were born, and therefore when they had neither don
good nor evil. And this circumstance is noted to show, that God was not
moved by any prevision or preconsideratio^ of Jacobs godliness and Esaus
profaneness to prefer the one before the other. II. The end why the
distinction was made at this time and not afterward when they were borne is,
that the purpose of God which is according to his election might remain sure,
not of works but by him that calls: that is, that by this means it might
appear, that when God receives any man into the covenant of eternal life, it
proceeds not of any dignity in the man whom God calls, but from his mercy
and alone good pleasure, that his decree of saving the elect might remain
firm and sure for ever. Hence it is manifest that there is an unchangeable
decree of election of some men (for he that takes all and excepts none can not
be said to choose) to salvation, depending upon the alone will of God: and
therefore necessarily by the law of contraries, there is an opposite decree of
reprobation: for in that God ordains some to eternal salvation, he testifies
thereby, that his purpose is to pass by some without showing of mercy. III. The
author of this distinction, God himself by his purpose before all times,
which purpose he made manifest by testimony given to Rebecca, saying, The
greater shall serve the younger: that is, the first borne and more excellent
according to the flesh, shall loose his birthright and the blessing of his
father, and in respect of title to the covenant, be subject to the younger. And
because this testimony concerning the freedom and servitude of Jacob and Esau
might seem insufficient to prove the election of the first and the reiectio^
of the second, therefore Paul adds a second testimony out of Malachi, I have
loved Jacob and hated Esau: that is, I have purposed to love Jacob and to hate
Esau. And these words no doubt, are alleged to expound the former place out
of Moses, and show that the bondage of Esau was joined with the hatred of God,
and the freedom of Jacob with the love of God as tokens thereof.

Against this received exposition of the former words which I have now
propounded, sundry exceptions are made. First, that the prerogative of Isaac
above Ismael, and Jacob above Esau, was only in temporary blessings in that
God vouchsafed unto the^ the right of the la^d of Canaan. Ans. If these places
are to be understood of te^porall blessings and not spiritual, then the Apostle
has not fitly alleged the former examples, to prove the reiectio^ of the
Jews from the Covenant. For though it be granted there be a difference
between man and man, in respect of earthly blessings, yet does it not follow
that there shall be the same difference in things concerning the kingdom of
heaven. If a father for some cause disinherite one or two of his children, it
were absurd thereupon to conclude that he might therefore kill any of the rest.
Again, the land of Canaan was not only an earthly inheritance, but also a
pledge and figure unto our forefathers of a better inheritance in heaven: and
therefore the excluding of Ismael and Esau from the land of Canaan was a sign
that they were excluded from the covenant of grace, and the right of eternal
life. Some others say, that by Jacob and Esau are not meant two persons, but
the two nations of the Idumeans and the Israelites. Answer* It is a manifest
untruth. For it was not possible for two nations to strive in the womb of
Rebecca, unless we consider them as they were comprehended under there two
heads, to wit, the very persons of Jacob and Esau. And whereas they say that
Esau in person never served Jacob, but only in his posterity, the answer is,
that Jacobs freedom and prerogatives were spiritual, and not temporal which
by faith he saw a far off, but inioyed not: Heb. 11.13.
and therefore proportionally Esau was debased to the condition of a servant in
respect of his younger brother; not so much in respect of his outward estate
and condition, as in regard of the covenant made with his auncetours from which
he was barred. And though it be granted that by Jacob and Esau two nations and
not two persons are to be understood, yet all comes to one head, for the
recei^ing of the nation of the Israelites into the covenant, and the excluding
of the nation of the Edomites both descending of Jacob and ^sau, serve as well
to prove Gods eternal election and reprobation, as the receiving and
rejecting of one man. Others say that these words, I have hated Esau, are thus
to be understood; I have less loved Esau then Jacob. But how then shall we say
that Paul has fitly alleged this text to prove the reiection of the Jew
from the favor of God and the Covenant of grace, considering that of men,
whereof one is loved more of God, the other less; both may still remain in
the Covenant. Lastly, it is alleged that the former exposition makes Ismael
and Esau damned persons. Answer. We must leave unto God all secret judgment
of particular persons, and yet nevertheless Paul does very fitly in there two
persons, both descending of Abraham, and both circumcised; set forth examples
of such as for all their outward prerogatives, are indeed barred from the
covenant of life everlasting before God. And again the opposition made by Paul
requires that the contrary to that which is spoken of Isaac and Jacob, should
be said of Ismael and Esau. And there is nothing spoken of either of them in
the Scriptures which argues the disposition of men ordained to eternal life.
Ismael is noted with the brande of a mocker, and Esau of a profane man.

To proceed in the text, because the doctrine of Paul delivered in the former
verses might seem strange unto the Romans, therefore in the 14. verse he
lays down an objection, and answeares the same. The objection is this: If God
put distinction between man and man, without respect had to their persons,
upon his own will and pleasure, then he is unjust: but he is not unjust:
therefore he makes no such distinction. The answer is, God forbid. Whereby
he denies the consequence of the proposition, on this manner, Though God should
elect some to salvation, and reject some others and that upon his will, yet
were there no injustice with God. The reason of this answer follows in the
18. verse. God has absolute power of will, whereby without being bound to any
creature, he may and can first of all have mercy on whom he will, and
secondly harden whom he will. For the proof of the first, that God has mercy
on whom he will, he lays down the testimony of Moses verse. 15. I will have
mercy on him on whom J will show mercy, and I will have compassion on him on
whom I will have compassion. And in verse. 16. makes his collection thence,
that it [namly the purpose of God according to election v. 11.] is not in him
that wills or in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Whereby
he teaches that the free election of God in order goes before all things that
may in time befall man: and that therefore neither the intentions and
endeavors of the mind, nor the works of our life, which are the effects of
election, can be the impulsive causes to move God to choose us to salvation.
The second, that God hardens whom he will, is confirmed and made plain by the
testimony of Scripture concerning Pharao, verse. 17.

In the 19. verse. there follows an other objection, arising out of the
answer to the former, on this manner: If God will have some to be hardened
and rejected, and his will can not be resisted, then with no justice can he
punish them that are necessarily subject to his decree: but God will have some
to be hardened and rejected, and his will can not be resisted: therefore (says
the adversary) with no justice can he punish man that is necessarily subject
to his decree. Here mark, that if there had been an universal election of
all men, and if men had been elected or rejected according as God did foresee
that they would believe or not believe, the occasion of this objection had
been cut off. But let us come to Paul's answer. In the 20. verse he takes the
assumption for granted, that some are rejected because God will: and that the
will, that is, the decree of God can not be resisted: A child might answer
this objection, if men were elect and refused for their foreseen faith and
unbelief.
and only denies the coherence of the preposition, checking the malipert pride
of the adversary, and showing that the making of this wicked and blasphemous
collection against the will of God, is as if a man should sue God at the law,
and bring him as it were to the bar, and plead against him as his equal,
whereas indeed the creature is nothing to the creator, and is absolutely to
submit it self to his will in all things. In verse. 21. he proceeds to a second
answer, showing that Gods will is not to be blamed, because by his absolute
soueraignitie and the right of creation he has power to chose men, or to
reject and harden them. And where there is right and power to do a thing, the
will of the doer is not to be blamed. Now that God has this right and power
over his creature, it is proved by a comparison from the less to the greater,
on this manner. The potter has power over the clay to make of the same lump
one vessel to honor, and an other to dishonor: therefore may God much more
make some vessels of mercy and some vessels of wrath prepared to
destruction. The first part of the comparison is verse. 21. the second part
verse. 22, 23. And least any man should think that God makes vessels of honor
and dishonor without sufficient and just cause in himself, as the potter may
do: therefore he sets down ends of the will of God: he makes vessels of
dishonor to show his wrath, and to make manifest his power: and again he
condemns no man till he have suffered him with long patience. And he makes
vessels of honor that he might declare the riches of his glory upon them.
Hence it is manifest, first that the end of predestination is the glory of
God, which is to be made manifest partly in his justice and partly in his
mercy: secondly that men are not elected or refused of God, for their
foreseen corruptions or virtues: for then Paul would not have said that God
made vessels of dishonor, but that being so already, he left them in their
dishonor.

Thus from the 6. verse of this chapter to the 24. Paul has described unto us
the doctrine of Gods eternal predestination, and that by the judgment August.
Beda. Tho. Aquinas on this place.
of Divines in all ages.

The order of Gods predestination is this. It is the property of the
reasonable creature to conceive one thing after an other, whereas God conceiues
all things at once with one act of understanding, and all things both past and
to come are present with him; and therefore in his eternal counsel he decrees
not one thing after an other, but all things at once. Nevertheless for our
understandings sake, we may distinguish the counsel of God concerning man into
two acts or degrees: the first is, the purpose of God in him self, in which he
determines what he will do, and the end of all his doings: and that is to
create all things, specially man for his own glory, partly by showing on some
men his mercy, and upon others his justice. The second is an other purpose
whereby he decrees the exequution of the former, and lays down means of
accomplishing the end thereof. These two acts of the counsel of God, are not
to be severed in any wise, nor confounded, but distinctly considered with some
difference. For in the first God decrees some men to honor, and some to
dishonor, and this man more then that, upon his will and pleasure, and there
is no other cause hereof known to us. In the second, known and manifest
causes are set down of the exequution of the former decree. For no man is
actually condemned but for their sins, and no man is actually saved but for
the merit of Christ. Furthermore this latter act of the counsel of God, must
be conceived of us in the second place and not in the first. For evermore the
first thing to be intended is the end it self, and then afterward the
subordinate means and causes whereby the end is accomplished. Again the
second act of Gods counsel contains two other; one which sets down the
preparation of the means whereby Gods Predestination begins to come in
exequution; and they are two, the creation of man righteous after the image of
God, the voluntary fall of Adam and withal the shutting up of all men under
damnation: the other appoints the applying of the several means to the
persons of men, that Gods decree which was set down before all times, may in
time be fully accomplished; as shall afterward in particular appear.

Predestination has two parts, the Decree of Election, the Decree of
Reprobation or No-election. This division is plain by that which has been
said out of the 9. cap. to the Romans and it may be further confirmed by other
testimonies. Of some it is said, that the Lord knows who are his: and of some
others, 2. Tim. 2.19.
Christ shall say in the day of judgment, J never knew you. Math. 7.23. Act.
13.48.
In the Acts it is said, that as many of the Gentiles as were ord^ined to life
everlasting believed. And Jude says of false prophets, that they were ordained
to condemnation. Iud. 4.


In handling the decree of Election, I will consider three things: I. what
Election is: II. the exequution thereof: III. the knowledge of particular
Election. For the first, Gods Election is a decree in which according to the
good pleasure of his will, he has certainly chosen some me^ to life eternal in
Christ for the praise of the glory of his grace. This is the same which Paul
says to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
God has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world, that we
should be holy and without blame before him in love: who has predestinate us
to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will. Now that we may the better conceive this doctrine, let
us come to a consideration of the several points thereof. First of all I say
Election is Gods decree. For there is nothing in the world that comes to pas^e
either universally or particularly, without the eternal and unchangeable
decree of God. And therefore whereas men are actually chosen, and brought to
life everlasting, it is because God did purpose with himself and decree the
same before all worlds. Now touching the decree it self, six things are to be
observed. The first, what was the motive or impulsive cause that moved God to
decree the salvation of any man. Answer. The good pleasure of God. For Paul
says, he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy: Romans 8.18. Ephesians. 1.5.
and, he has predestinate us according to the good pleasure of God. As for the
opinion of them that say, that foreseen faith and good works are the cause
that moved God to choose men to salvation, it is frivolous. For faith and good
works are the fruits and effects of Gods election. Paul says, he has chosen
us, not because he did foresee that we would become holy, Ephesians. 1.4.
but that we might be holy. And, he has predestinate us to adoption. Which is
all one as if he had said, Ioh. 1.12.
he has predestinate us to believe, because adoption comes by believing. Now
if men are elected that they might believe, then are they not elected because
they would believe. For it can not be that one thing should be both the cause
and the effect of another.

The second point is, that Gods Election is unchangeable; so as they which are
indeed chosen to salvation can not perish, but shall without fail attain to
life everlasting. Romans 9.11.
Paul takes it for a conclusion, that the purpose of God according to Election
must remain firm and sure; and again, that the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance. and 11.29.
And Samuel says, The strength of Israel will not lie or repent. For he is not
a man that he should repent. 1. Sam. 15.29.
Such as Gods nature is, such is his will and counsel: but his nature is
unchangeable, I am Jehovah, says he, and I change not: therefore his will
likewise and his counsels be unchangeable. Mal. 3.6.
And therefore whenever the spirit of God shall testify unto our spirits,
that we are justified in Christ, and chosen to salvation, it must be a means
to comfort us, and to stablish our hearts in the love of God. As for the
opinion of them that say, the Elect may fall from grace and be damned, it is
full of hellish discomfort, and no doubt from the devil. And the reasons
commonly alleged for this purpose, are of no moment, as may appear by the
skanning of them. First they object that the Churches of the Ephesians,
Thessalonians, Ephesians. 1.4. 1. These. 1.4. 1. Pet. 1.^.
and the dispersed Jews are all called Elect by the Apostles themselves, yet
sundry of them afterward fell away. Answ. I. There are two kinds of judgment
to be given of men, the judgment of certentie, and the judgment of charity.
By the first indeed is given an infallible determination of any man's Election;
but it belongs unto God principally and properly* and to men but in part,
namely so farforth as God shall reveal the estate of one man unto an other. Now
the judgment of charity belongs unto all men; and by it, leaving all secret
judgments unto God, we are charitably to think that al those that live in the
Church of God, professing themselves to be members of Christ, are indeed elect
to salvation, till God make manifest otherwise. And on this manner, and not
otherwise do the Apostles call whole churches elect. II. they are called elect
of the principal part, and not because every member thereof was indeed elect;
as it called an heap of corn though the bigger part be chafe. Secondly it is
alleged, that David prays that his enemies may be blotted out of the book
of life, which is the Election of God, Psalm. 69.28. Exodus 32.32 Romans 9.3.
and that Moses and Paul did the like against themselves. Answer. David's
enemies had not their names written in the book of life, but only in the
judgment of men. Thus Judas so long as he was one of the disciples of Christ,
was accounted as one having his name written in heaven. Now hence it follows,
that men's names are blotted out of Gods book, when it is made clear and
manifest unto the world, that they were never indeed written there. And where
Moses says, forgive them this sin: if not, blotte me out of thy book: and
Paul, I could wish to be accursed, etc. there meaning was, not to signify that
men elected to salvation may become reprobates: only they testify their
zealous affections, that they could be content to be deprived of their own
salvation, rather then the whole body of the people should perish, and God
loose his glory. As for that which Christ says, Have I not chosen you twelve,
and one of you is a devil, is to be understood not of election to salvation,
Ioh. 6.70.
but of election to office of an Apostle; which is temporary and changeable.

The third point is, that there is an actual election made in time, being
indeed a fruit of Gods decree, and answearable unto it, and therefore I added
in the description these words, whereby he has chosen some men. All men by
nature are sinners, and children of wrath, shut up under one and the same
estate of condemnation. And actual election is, when it pleases God to ^euer
and single out some men above the rest, out of this wretched estate of the
wicked world, and to bring them to the kingdom of his own son. Thus Christ
says of his own disciples, I have chosen you out of the world. Ioh. 15.19.


The fourth point is, the actual or real foundation of Gods Election, and
that is Christ: and therefore we are said to be chosen to salvation in Christ.
He must be considered two ways: Ephesians. 1.4.
as he is God, we are predestinate of him, even as we are predestinate of the
father and the H. Ghost. As he is our Mediator, we are predestinate in him.
For when God with himself had decreed to manifest his glory in saving some
men by his mercy, he ordained further the creation of man in his own image,
yet so as by his own fall he should infold himself and all his posterity
under damnation: this done, he also decreed that the Word should be incarnate
actually, to redeem those out of the former misery, whom he had ordained to
salvation. Christ therefore himself was first of all predestinate as he was to
be our head, and as Peter says, 1. Pet. 1.20. August. de praedest. sanct. c.
15.
ordained before all worlds; and we secondly predestinate in him, because God
ordained that the Exequution of man's Election should be in him. Here if any
demand, how we may be assured that Christ in his Passion stood in our room
and stead, the resolution will be easy, if we consider that he was
ordained in the eternal counsel of God, to be our surety and pledge, and to
be a public person to represent all the Elect in his obedience and sufferings:
and therefore it is that Peter says, that he was delivered by the
foreknovvledge and determinate counsel of God. And Paul, Act. 2.23. 2. Tim.
1.9.
that grace was given unto us through Christ Jesus before the world was.

The fifth point is, concerning the number of the Elect. And that I expressed
in these words, has chosen some men to salvation. If God should decree to
communicate his glory and his mercy to all and every man, there could be no
Election. For he that takes all, can not be said to choose. Therefore Christ
says, Many are called, but few are chosen. Some make this question, how great
the number of the Elect is, and the answer may be this, that the Elect
considered in themselves be innumerable, but considered in comparison to the
whole world, they are but few. Hence it follows necessarily, that saving grace
is not universal, but indefinite or particular, unless we will against common
reason make the streams more large and plentiful then the very fountain it
self. And this must excite us above all things in the world to labor to have
fellowship with Christ, and to be partakers of the special mercy of God in
him, yea to have the same sealed up in our hearts. Benefits common to all, as
the light of the sun, etc. are not regarded of any. Things common to few,
though they be but temporal blessings, are sought for of all. God gives not
riches to all men, but to some more, to some less, to some none. And hereupon
how do men like drudges toil in the world from day to day, and from year to
year, to enrich themselves. Therefore much more ought men to seek for grace
in Christ, considering it is not common to all. We must not content our selves
to say, God is merciful, but we must go further, and labor for a certificate
in the conscience, that we may be able to say that God is indeed merciful to
us. When the Disciples would have known how many should be saved, he omitting
the question, answeares thus, Strive to enter in at the straight gate.

The last point is, the end of Gods Election, and that is the manifesting of
the praise and excellency of the glorious grace of God. Ephesians. 1.5.


Thus having seen what Election is, let us now come to the Exequution
thereof. Of which remember this rule, Men predestinate to the end, that is,
eternal life, are also predestinate to the subordinate means, whereby they
come to eternal life: and these are vocation, justification, sanctification,
glorification. For the first, he that is predestinate to salvation, is also
predestinate to be called, as Paul says, Whom he has predestinate, them also
he calls. Secondly, Romans 8.30.
whom God calls, they also were predestinate to believe; therefore saving
faith is called the faith of the elect. Tit. 1.1. Act. 13.48.
And in the Acts, as many as were ordained to life everlasting believed.
Thirdly, whom God has predestinate to life, them he justifies, as Paul
says, whom he has predestinate, Romans 8.30.
them he calls, and whom he calls, them he justifies. Fourthly, whom he
has predestinate to life, them he has predestinate to sanctification and
holiness of life, ^. Pet. 2.2*
as Peter says, that the Jews were Elect according to the foreknowledge of
God the father unto sanctification of the spirit. Lastly, they that are
predestinate to life, are also predestinate to obedience, as Paul says to the
Ephesians, Ye are the workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, Ephesians. 2.10*
which God has ordained that we should walk in them.

This rule being the truth of God must be observed: for it has special use.
First of all it serves to stop the mouths of ungodly and profane men. They
use to bolster up them selves in their sins by reasoning on this manner: If I
be predestinate to eternal life, I shall be saved whatsoever come of it, and
how wickedly and leudly soever I live: I will therefore live as I list, and
follow the swinge of mine own will. But, alas, like blind biards they think
they are in the way, but they rush their heads against the wall, and far
deceive them selves. For the case stands thus: all men that are ordained to
salvation, are likewise ordained in the counsel of God to use all the good
means whereby they may come to salvation. And therefore all the Elect that
live in this world shall be called, justified, sanctified, and lead their
lives in all good conscience before God and men: and they that live and
continue in their own wicked ways disputing on this manner, If I be ordained
to salvation, I shall not be damned, ouershut themselves, and as much as they
can plunge them selves headlong into the very pit of hell. And for a man to
live and die in his sins, let the world dispute as they will, it is an
infallible sign of one ordained to damnation. Secondly, there be others that
think that the preaching of the word, the administration of the Sacraments,
admonitions, exhortations, laws, good orders, and all such good means are
needelesse, because Gods counsels be unchangeable: if a man shall be
condemned, nothing shall help: if a man be saved, nothing shall hinder. But we
must still for our part remember that God does not only ordain the end, but
also the means whereby the end is compassed: and therefore the very use of all
prescribed means is necessary. And for this cause we must be admonished with
diligence to labor and use all good means, that we may be called by the
ministry of the Gospel, and justified, and sanctified, and at length
glorified. If a king should give unto one of his subjects a princely palace,
upon condition that he shall go unto it in the way which he shall prescribe,
oh what pains would the man take to know the way, and afterward to keep and
continue in it: but behold, the kingdom of heaven is the most glorious and
royal palace that ever was; and God has bestowed the same on his Elect: and
he requires nothing at their hands but that they would turn their faces from
this world, and walk unto it in the way which he has chalked forth unto them
in his word. Therefore if we would have life everlasting, we must come forth
of the broad way that leads to destruction, and enter into the straight way
that leads to eternal life. We must acquaint our selves with the guides which
are the ministers of the word, that will cry unto us, here is the way walk ye
in it, when we go to the right hand or to the left. Vocation, justification,
sanctification, repentance, new-obedience, are the marks of the way, and we
must pass by them all: and thus our weary souls weltring a while in this
world, shall at length be received into everlasting happiness.

Touching the knowledge of particular Election, two special points are to be
skanned: I. whether a man may know his Election: II. how it may be known. For
the first, Papists are of mind that no man can certainly know his own Election
unless he be certified thereof by some special revelation from God: but the
thing is false and erroneous which they say. When the Disciples of our Savior
Christ returned from preaching, and showed what wonders they had done, and how
devils were subject unto them, the text says they rejoiced greatly. But
Christ answered them again, saying, In this rejoice not, Luke 10.20.
but rather rejoice that your names are written in heaven. Whereby he
signifies that men may attain to a certain knowledge of their own Election.
For we can not, neither do we rejoice in things either unknown or uncertain.
Saint Peter says, Give all diligence to make your election sure. 2. Pet. ^.10.
Now in vain were it to use diligence if the assurance of Election could not
be compassed without an extraordinary revelation. And Paul says to the
Corinthians, Prove your selves whether ye be in the faith or not. Where he
takes it for granted, 2. Cor. 13.5.
that he which has faith may know that he has faith, and therefore may also
know his Election: because saving faith is an infallible mark of Election.

The second point is, how any man may come to know his own Election. And there
be two ways of knowing it. The one is by ascending up as it were into heaven,
there to search the counsel of God, and afterward to come down to our
selves. The second by descending into our own hearts to go up from our
selves, as it were by Jacobs ladder, to Gods eternal counsel. The first way
is dangerous, and not to be attempted. For the ways of God are unsearchable
and past finding out. The second way alone is to be followed, which teaches us
by signs and testimonies in our selves, to gather what was the eternal counsel
of God concerning our salvation. And these testimonies are two: the testimony
of Gods spirit, and the testimony of our spirits, as Paul says, the spirit of
God bears witness together with our spirits, that we are the sons of God.
Romans 8.16.


Touching the testimony of Gods spirit, two questions may be demanded. The
first is, by what means the spirit of God gives a particular testimony in a
man's conscience of his adoption. Answer. It is not done by any extraordinary
revelation, or enthusiasme, that is, an ordinary revelation without the word;
but by an application of the promises of the Gospel in the form of a
practical syllogism, on this manner: Whosoever believes in Christ, is chosen
to life everlasting. This proposition is set down in the word of God, and it
is further propounded, opened, and applied to all that be in the Church of God
by the ministers of the Gospel set apart for this end. Now while the hearers
of Gods word give themselves to meditate and consider of the same promise,
comes the spirit of God and inlightens the eyes, and opens the heart, and gives
them power both to will to believe, and to believe indeed: so as a man shall
with freedom of spirit, make an assumption and say, but I believe in Christ, I
renounce my self, all my joy and comfort is in him. Flesh and blood cannot say
this, it is the operation of the holy Ghost. And hence arises the blessed
conclusion which is the testimony of the spirit, therefore I am the child of
God.

The second question is, how a man may discern between the illusion of the
devil, and the testimony of the spirit. For as there is a certain persuasion
of Gods favor from Gods spirit; so there be sleights and frauds of the devil,
whereby he flatters and soothes men in their sins: and there is in all men
natural presumption in show like faith, indeed no faith. And this counterfeit
mocke-faith is far more common in the world then true faith is. Take a view
hereof in our ignorant and careless people; ask any of them whether he be
certain of his salvation or no, he will without any bones making protest that he
is fully persuaded and assured of his salvation in Christ: that if there be but
one man in a country to be saved, it is he: that he has served God always,
and done no man hurt: that he has evermore believed, and that he would not for
all the world so much as doubt of his salvation. These and such like
presumptious conceits in blind and ignorant persons, run for current faith
in the world. Now the true testimony of the spirit is discerned from
natural presumption, and all illusions of the devil by two effects and fruits
thereof, noted by Paul in that he says, that the spirit makes us cry Abba,
that is father. The first is, to pray so earnestly with groans and sighs, as
though a man would even fill heaven and earth with the cry not of his lips,
but of his heart, touched with sense and feeling of his manifold sins and
offenses. And this indeed is a special and principal note of the spirit of
adoption. Now look upon the loose and careless man, that thinks himself so
filled with the persuasion of the love and favor of God, ye shall find that
he very seldom or never prays: and when he does, it is nothing else but a
mumbling over the Lords prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments for
fashions sake. Which argues plainly that the persuasion which he has of Gods
mercy, is of the flesh and not of the spirit. The second fruit is, the
affection of a duetifull child to God a most loving father: and this affection
makes a man stand in fear of the majesty of God wheresoever he is, and to
make conscience of every evil way. Now those that are carried away with
presumption, so soon as any occasion is given, they fall straight into sin
without mislike or stay, as fire burns with speed when dry wood is laid
unto it. In a word, where the testimony of the spirit is truly wrought, there
be many other graces of the spirit joined therewith, as when one branch in a
tree buddeth the rest budde also.

The testimony of our spirit is the testimony of the heart and conscience,
purified and sanctified in the blood of Christ. And it testifies two ways,
by inward tokens in it self, by outward fruits. Inward tokens are certain
special graces of God imprinted in the spirit, whereby a man may certainly be
assured of his adoption. These tokens are of two sorts, they either respect our
sins, or Gods mercy in Christ. The first are in respect of sins past,
present, or to come. The sign in the spirit which concerns sins past, is
godly sorrow, which I may term a beginning and mother grace of many other
gifts and graces of God. 2. Cor. 7.10.
It is a kind of grief conceived in heart in respect of God. And the nature
of it may the better be conceived, if we compare it with the contrary. Worldly
sorrow springs of sin, and it is nothing else but the horror of conscience,
and the apprehension of the wrath of God for the same: now godly sorrow, it may
indeed be occasioned by our sins, but it springs properly of the
apprehension of the grace and goodness of God. Worldly sorrow is a grief for
sin only in respect of the punishment: godly sorrow is a lively touch and
grief of heart for sin because it is sin, though there were no punishment
for it. Now that no man may deceive himself in iudgeing of this sorrow, the
holy Ghost has set down seven fruits or signs thereof whereby it may be
discerned. The first is Care to leave all our sins past: the second is
Apology whereby a man is moved and carried to accuse and condemn himself
for his sins past, both before God and men. The third is indignation, whereby
a man is exceedingly angry with himself for his offenses. The fourth is
fear, least he fall into his former sins again. The 5. is desire, whereby he
craves strength and assistance, that his sins take not hold on him as
before. The sixth is zeal, in the performance of all good duties contrary to
his special sins. The seventh is revenge, whereby he subdues his body least
it should hereafter be an instrument of sin as it has been in former time.
Now when any man shall feel these fruits in himself, he has no doubt the
godly sorrow which here we speak of.

The token which is in regard of sins present, is the combat between the
flesh and the spirit, Gal 5.17.
proper to them that are regenerate, who are partly flesh and partly spirit. It
is not the check of conscience which all men find in themselves both good and
badde, so often as they offend God: but it is a fighting and striving of the
mind, will, and affections with themselves, whereby so farreforth as they are
renewed, they carry the man one way, and as they still remain corrupt, they
carry him flat contrary. Men having the disease called Ephialies, when they
are half asleep feel as it were some weighty thing lying upon their
breasts, and holding them down: now lying in this case, they strive with
their hands and feet and with all the might they have to raise up themselves,
and to remove the weight* and cannot. Behold here a lively resemblance of this
combat. The flesh which is the inborne corruption of man's nature, lies upon
the hearts of the children of God, and presses them down as if it were the
very weight of a mountain: now they, according to the measure of grace
received, strive to raise up themselves from under this burden, and to do such
things as are acceptable to God; but can not as they would.

The token that respects sin to come is Care to prevent it. That this is the
mark of Gods children, appears by the saying of John, He that is borne of
God sins not, 1. Ioh. 5.1^.
but keeps himself that the wicked one touch him not. And this care shows
it self not only in ordering the outward actions, but even in the very
thoughts of the heart. For where the Gospel is of force it brings every
thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ: and the Apostles rule is
followed, 2. Cor. 10.5.
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, Philip. 4.8.
etc. think on these things.

The tokens which concern Gods mercy are especially two. The first is, when a
man feels him self distressed with the burden of his sins, or when he
apprehends the heavy displeasure of God in his conscience for them: then
further to feel how he stands in need of Christ, and withal heartily to
desire, yea to hunger and thirst after reconciliation with God in the merit of
Christ, and that above all other things in the world. To all such Christ has
made most sweet and comfortable promises, which can appertain to none but to
the elect. Ioh. 7.37. If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink: he
that believes in me, as says the scripture, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of water of life. Rev. 21.6. I will give unto him which is a thirst of
the well of the water of life freely. Now if he that thirsts drink of
these waters, mark what follows, Ioh. 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water
that I shall give him, shall never be more a thirst: but the water that I shall
give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up unto everlasting life.

The second is a strange affection wrought in the heart by the spirit of God,
whereby a man does so esteem and value, and as it were, set so high a price on
Christ and his righteousness, that he accounts even the most precious things
that are* to be but as dung in regard thereof. This affection was in Paul,
Phil. 3.8. Mat. 13.4^.
and it is expressed in the parable in which after a man has found a treasure,
he first hides it, and the selles all he has and makes a purchase of the
field where it is. Now every man will say of himself, that he is thus
affected to Christ, and that he more highly esteems the least drop of his
blood, then all things in the world beside: whereas indeed most men are of Esaus
mind, rather desiring the red broth then Isaaks blessing, and of the same
affection with the Israelites which liked better the onyons and flesh pots of
Egypt, then the blessings of God in the land of promise. Therefore that no man
may deceive him self, this affection may be discerned by two signs. The
first is to love and like a christian man because he is a Christian. For he
that does aright esteem of Christ, does in like manner esteem of the members
of Christ. And of this very thing our Savior Christ says, He that receives a
Prophet in the name of a prophet, Mat. 10.41.
shall receive a prophets reward, and he that receives a righteous man in the
name of a righteous man, shall receive the reward of a righteous man. And
Saint John says, Hereby we know that we are translated from death to
life, because we love the breethren: that is, such as are members because
they are so. The second sign of this affection is a love and desire to the
coming of Christ, whether it be by death unto any man particularly, or by the
last judgment universally, and that for this end that there may be a full
participation of fellowship with Christ. And that this very love is a note of
adoption, it appears by that which S. Paul says, that the crown of
righteousness is laid up for all them that love the appearing of Christ. 2. Tim.
4.8.


The outward token of adoption is New-obedience, whereby a man endeauours to
obey Gods commandments in his life and conversation: 1. Ioh. 2.3.
as S. John says, Hereby we are sure that we know him, if we keep his
commandments. Now this obedience must not be judged by the rigor of the
moral law, for then it should be no token of grace, but rather a means of
damnation: but it must be esteemed and considered as it is in the acceptance
of God, who spares them that fear him as a father spares an obedient son,
Mal. 3.17. Si quod vis no^ potes deus factu^ compu^at. August.
esteeming things done not by the effect and absolute doing of them, but by the
affection of the doer. And yet least any man should hear be deceived, we must
know that the obedience, which is an infallible mark of the child of god,
must be thus qualified. First of all it must not be done unto some few of Gods
commandments, but unto them all without exception. Herod heard John Baptist
willingly, and did many things: and Judas had excellent things in him, as
appears by this, that he was content to leave all and to follow Christ, and
he preached the Gospel of the kingdom in Jury as well as the rest: yet
alas, all this was nothing: for the one could not abide to become obedient to
the 7. commandment in leaving his brother Philips wife; and the other would
not leave his covetousness to die for it. Upright and sincere obedience does
enlarge it self to all the commandments, as David says, I shall not be
confounded, when I have respect to all thy commandments. Psalm. 119.^* Iam.
2.10.
And S. James says, he which fails in one law is guilty of all: that is,
the obedience to many commandments is indeed before god no obedience, but a
flat sin if a man wittingly and willingly fail in any one thing. He that
repents of one sin truly, does repent of all: and he that lives but in one
known sin without repentance, though he pretend never so much reformation of
life, indeed repents of no sin. Secondly this obedience must extend it self
to the whole course of a man's life after his conversion and repentance. We must
not judge of a man by an action or two, but by the tenor of his life. Such as
the course of a man's life is, such is the man: though he, through the
corruption of his nature fail in this or that particular action, yet does it
not prejudice his estate before God, so be it he renew his repentance for his
several slippes and falls, not lying in any sin; and withal from year to
year walk unblameable before God and men. S. Paul says, The foundation of God
remains sure: the Lord knows who are his. Now some might hereupon say, it
is true indeed, 2. Tim. 2.19.
god knows who are his, but how may I be assured in my self that I am his? to
this demand as I take it, Paul answers in the next words, Let every one that
calls on the name of the Lord depart from iniquity: that is, let men invocate
the name of God, praying seriously for things whereof they stand in need,
withal giving thanks, and departing from all their former sins, and this
shall be unto them an infallible token that they are in the election of God.
Thirdly in outward obedience it is required that it proceed from the whole
man: 1 Thessalonians. 3.23.
as regeneration which is the cause of it, is thorough the whole man in body,
soul, and spirit. Again, obedience is the fruit of love, and love is from
the pure heart, the good conscience, and faith unfeigned.

Thus we have heard the testimonies and tokens whereby a man may be certified in
his conscience that be was chosen to salvation before all worlds: If any
desire further resolution in this point, let them meditate upon the 15. Psalm.
and the first Epistle of Saint John, being parcels of scripture penned by the
holy ghost for this end.

Here some will demand how a man may be assured of his adoption if he want the
testimony of the spirit to certify him thereof. Answer. Fire is known to be
no painted but a true fire by two notes; by heat, and by the flame: now if the
case fall out that the fire want a flame, it is still known to be fire by the
heat. In like manner, as I have said, there be two witnesses of our adoption,
Gods spirit, and our spirit: now if it fall out that a man want the principal,
which is the spirit of adoption, he must then have recourse to the second
witness, and search out in himself the signs and tokens of the
sanctification of his own spirit, by which he may certainly assure him self of
his adoption, as we know fire to be fire by the heat though it want a flame.

Again it may be demanded on this manner: how if it come to pass that after
inquiry, we find but few signs of sanctification in our selves. Answer. In
this case we are to have recourse to the least measure of grace, less then
which, there is no saving grace, and it stands in two things: an hearty
disliking of our sins because they are sins, and a desire of reconciliation
with God in Christ for them all: and these are tokens of adoption, if they be
soundly wrought in the heart, though all other tokens for the present seem to
be wanting. If any shall say, that a wicked man may have this desire, as
Balaam, who desired to die the death of the righteous: the answer is, that
Balaam indeed desired to die as the righteous man does, but he could not
abide to live as the righteous: he desired the end, but not the proper
subordinate means which tend unto the end; as vocation, justification,
sanctification, repentance, Bernard. Look page 12.
etc. the first is the work of nature, the second is the work of grace. Now I
speak not this to make men secure and to content them selves with these small
beginnings of grace, but only to show how any may assure themselves that they
are at the least babes in Christ: adding this withal, that they which have no
more but these small beginnings must be careful to increase them, because he
which goes not forward goes backwarde.

Lastly, it may be demanded what a man should do if he want both the
testimony of Gods spirit and his own spirit, and have no means in the world
of assurance. Answer. He must not utterly despair, but be resolved of this,
that though he want assurance now, yet he may obtain the same hereafter. And
such must be advertised to hear the word of God preached: and being outwardly
of the Church, to receive the sacraments. When we have care to come into the
Lords vineyard and to converse about the wine press, we shall find the
sweet juice of heavenly grace pressed forth unto us plentifully by the word
and sacraments, to the comfort of our consciences concerning Gods election.
This one mercy that God by these means in some part reveals his mercy, is
unspeakeable. When sickness or the day of death comes, the dearest servants
of God, it may be must encounter with the temptations of the devil, and
wrestle in conscience with the wrath and displeasure of God, as for life and
death: and no man knows how terrible these things are but those which have
felt them. Now when men walk thus through the valley of the shadow of death,
unless God should as it were, open heaven, and stream down unto us in this
world some lightsome beams of his love in Christ by the operation of his
spirit, miserable were the case even of the righteous.

Thus much of Election: now follows Reprobation; in handling whereof we are to
observe three things. I. what it is. II. how God does execute this decree. III.
how a man may judge of the same.

For the first, Reprobation is Gods decree, in which because it so pleased him,
he has purposed to refuse some men by means of Adams fall and their own
corruptions, for the manifestation of his justice. First I say, it is a decree,
and that is evident thus. If there be an eternal decree of God, whereby he
chooses some men, then there must needs be another decree whereby he does pass
by others and refuse the^. For election always implies a refusal. Again what
God does in time, that he decreed to do before time: as the case falls out
even with men of mean wisdom, who first of all intend with themselves the
things to be done and after do them. But God in time refuses some men as the
scripture testifies, and it appears to be true by the event. Therefore God
before all worlds decreed the rejecting of some men.

Now in this decree 4. points are to be considered. The first is the matter or
object thereof, which is the thing decreed, namely the reiection of some men or
the manifestatio^ of his justice upon them. This may seem strange to man's
reason, but here we must with all submission strike our topsailes, for the
word of God says as much in plain terms. The Apostle Jude speaking of false
Prophets says, that they were of old ordained to this damnation. Iud. 4. Romans
9.22. 2. Cor. 4.3. 2. Th. 2.9, 13
And Paul says in emphaticall terms, that God makes vessels of wrath prepared
to destruction: and that some are rejected, whom he opposes to them which are
elected to salvation.

The second point is the impulsive cause that moved God to set down this
decree concerning his creature, and that was nothing out of himself, but his
very will and pleasure. He hardened Pharaoh with final hardness of heart
because he would: and therefore he decreed to do so because he would. And our
Savior Christ says, I thank thee, O father, Lord of heaven and earth,
because thou have hid these things from the wise and men of understanding, Mat.
11.25.
and have opened them unto babes. Verse. 26.
But upon what cause did God so? It follows in the next words, It is so, O
father, because thy good pleasure is such. And if it be in the power and
liberty of a man to kill an ox or a sheep for his use, to hunt and kill the
hare and partridge for his pleasure: then much more without injustice may it be
in the will and liberty of the creator ^o refuse and forsake his creature for
his glory. Nay it stands more with equity a thousand fold that all the
creatures in heaven and earth should jointly serve to set forth the glory and
majesty of God the creator in their eternal destruction, then the striking
of a fly or the killing of a flea should serve for the dignity of all men in
the world. For all this, it is thought by very many to be very hard to ascribe
unto God that is full of bounty and mercy such a decree, and that upon his
very will: but let us se their reasons. First of all they say it is a point of
cruelty for God to purpose to create a great part of the world to damnation in
hell fire: the answer is, that by the virtue of this decree God can not be
said to create any man to damnation, but to the manifestation of his justice
and glory in his due and deserved damnation: and the doing of this is absolute
justice. Secondly it is alleged that by this means God shall hate his own
creature, and that before it is: but it is an untruth. We must distinguish
between Gods purpose to hate and actual hating. Now indeed God before all
worlds did purpose to hate some creatures: and that justly so far forth as
his hating of them will serve for the manifestation of his justice: but he
neither hates them indeed nor loves the^ before they are: and therefore actual
hatred comes not in till after the creation. Who^ God has decreed to love,
the^ when they are once created, he begins to love in Christ with actual love:
and whom he has decreed to hate, them being once created, he hates in Ada^
with actual hatred. Thirdly it is objected, that by this doctrine god shall be
the author of sin, for he which ordaines to the end ordaines to the means of
the end* but God ordaines men to the end that is the damnation: therefore he
ordaines them to the means thereof, that is, sin. Ans. The proposition being
thus understood, he which ordains a man to an end, in the same order and manner
ordaines him to the means, is false. For one may be ordained to the end
simply, the end being simply good: and yet not be simply ordained to the
means, because they may be evil in them selves, and only good in part,
namely so far forth as they have respect of goodness in the mind of the
ordainer. Secondly, the assumption is false: for the supreme end of Gods
counsel is not damnation, but the declaration of his justice in the just
destruction of the creature: neither does God decree man's damnation as it is
damnation, that is, the ruin of man and the putting of him forth to
perishment, but as it is a real execution of justice. Thirdly we must make
distinction between sin it self and the permissio^ thereof, and between the
Decree of reiection, and Actual damnation: now the permission of sin and not
sin it self properly is the subordinate means of the decree of Reiection.
For when God had decreed to refuse some men, he withal decreed the permission
of sin, to which permission men were ordained: and sin it self is no
effect, but only the consequent of the decree: yet so, as it is not only the
antecedent, but also the efficient and meritorious cause of actual damnation.

The third point is the real foundation of the execution of this decree, which
is condemnation; and that is the voluntary fall of Adam and of all his
posterity in him with the fruit thereof, the general corruption of man's
nature. For howsoever God has purposed to refuse men because it so pleased
him, yet when his purpose comes to execution he condemns no man but for his
sins: and sin though it were not in the counsel of God an impulsive cause
that moved him to purpose a refusal, yet was it a subordinate means of
damnation: God in wonderful wisdom ordering and disposing the execution of
this decree, so as the whole blame and fault of man's destruction should be in
him self. And therefore the Lord in the Prophet Ose says, One has destroyed
thee, but I will help thee: that is, salvation is of God, Hos. 13.9.
and the condemnation of men is from them selves. Now whereas many deprauing
our doctrine say, that we ascribe unto God an absolute decree in which he does
absolutely ordain men to damnation, they may here be answered. If by absolute,
they understand that, which is opposed to conditional, then we hold and
avouch, that all the eternal decrees of God are simple or absolute, and not
limited or restrained to this or that condition or respect. If by absolute,
they understand a bare and naked decre without reason or cause, then we deny
Gods decrees to be absolute. For though the causes thereof be not known to us,
yet causes there be, known to him, and just they are: yea the very will of
God it self is cause sufficient, it being the absolute rule of justice. And
though men in reason can not discern the equity and justice of Gods will in
this point, yet may we not thereupon conclude that therefore it is unjust. The
Sun may shine clearly though the blind man see it not. And it is a flat
mistaking to imagine that a thing must first of all be just in it self, and
then afterward be willed of God. Whereas contrariwise, God must first will a
thing before it can be just. The will of God does not depend upon the quality
and nature of the thing, but the qualities of things in order of causes follow
the will of God. For every thing is as God wills it. Lastly if it be called
an absolute decree, because it is done without all respect to man's sin: then
we still deny it to be absolute. For as God condemns man for sin: so he
decreed to condemn him for and by his sin: yet so, as if the question be
made, what is the cause why he decrees rather in his justice to condemn this
man then that man, no other reason can be rendered, but his will.

The last point is the end of Gods decree, namely the manifestation of his
justice, as Solomon says, Prove. 16.4.
The Lord has made all things for his own sake, and the wicked for the day
of evil. Romans 9.22.
And Paul says that God made vessels of wrath, to shevve his wrath and to
make his power known.

Thus we have seen what Reprobation is: Now follows the execution thereof,
for that which God decrees before time, in time he executes. And here a
special rule to be remembered is this* Those which are ordained to just
damnation, are likewise ordained to be left to them selves in this world in
blindness of mind and hardness of heart, so as they neither shall nor will
repent of their sins. The truth of this we may see in Gods word. For S.
Peter speaking of the Priests and doctors, and chief of the people among the
Jews, says plainly, They stumbled at the word, and are disobedient. Why so?
1. Pet. 2.8.
The reason is there set down: because they were ordained unto it of old. And
so Paul says to the Corinthians, that he handled not the word of God
deceitfully, but in the declaration of the truth he approoved himself to
every man's conscience in the sight of God. Now hereupon it might be said, how
then comes it to pass that all receive not the gospel in Corinth, and to this
he answers with a terrible sentence, 2. Cor. 4.3.
If (says he) our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish: giving us
to understand, that god leaves them to themselves in this world, whom he
purposes to refuse. And the Lord by the prophet Esai says of the Jews. By
hearing they shall hear and not understand, and by seeing they shall see and
not perceive, Esai. 6.9.
least they should hear with their ears, and see with their eyes, and
understand with their hearts, and so turn and be saved.

The use of this rule is manifold: first it serves to overthrow the opinion
of carnal men which reason thus: If I be ordained to damnation, let me live
never so godly and well, I am sure to be damned, therefore I will live as I
list: for it is not possible for me to alter Gods decree. Blasphemous mouths
of men make nothing of this and like speeches, and yet they speak flatt
contraries. For whom God has purposed in his eternal counsel to refuse, them
also he has purposed for their sins to leave to the blindness of their
minds and hardness of their hearts, so as they neither will nor can live a
godly life.

Secondly, this rule does as it were, lead us by the hand, to the
consideration of the fearful estate of many people among us. We have had for
the space of thirty years and more the preaching of the Gospel of Christ,
and the more plentifully by reason of the schools of learning. But what has
been the issue of it, I doubt not but in many it has been the means of
their conversion and salvation: but to speak generally of the greater part
there is little or no fruit to be seen. The most after this long preaching
remain as blind, as impenitent, as hard hearted, and as unreformed in their
lives as ever they were, though they have heard the Lord calling them to
repentance from day to day, and from year to year. Well, if this rule be the
truth of God, as no doubt it is, then I say plainly that there is a most
fearful judgment of God amongst us. My meaning is not to determine or give
sentence of any man's person, of any town or people, nevertheless this may be
avouched, that it is a terrible and dangerous sign of the wrath of God, that
after this long and daily preaching, there is still remaining a general
hardenesse of heart, impenitencie, and want of reformation in the lives of men.
The smithes stithie, the more it is beaten the harder it is made: and commonly
the hearts of men, the more they are beaten with the hammer of Gods word, the
more dull, secure, and senseless they are. This being so, it stands every man
in hand to look to his own estate. We are careful to fly the infection of
the bodily plague: oh then how careful should we be to fly the common
blindness of mind and hardness of heart, which is the very plague of all
plauges a thousand fold worse then all the plagues of Egypt. And it is so
much the more fearful, because the more it takes place, the less it is
perceived. When a malefactor on the day of assise is brought forth of the
iayle, with great boltes and fetters to come before the judge, as he is going
all men pity him and speak comfortably unto him: But why so? because he is
now to be arraigned at the bar of an earthly Judge. Now the case of all
impenitent sinners is far more miserable then the case of this man: for they
lie fettred in bondage under sin and satan, and this short life is the way in
which they are going every hour to the bar of Gods justice, who is the King
of kings and Lord of lords, there to be arraigned and to have sentence of
condemnation given against them. Now can thou pity a man that is before an
earthly judge, and will thou not be touched with the misery of thine own
estate who go every day forward to the bar of Gods justice; whether thou
be sleeping or waking, sitting or standing, as a man on the sea in a ship goes
continually toward the haven, though he himself stir not his foot. Begin
now at length to lay this point to your hearts, that, so long as ye run on in
your blind ways without repentance, as much as ye can, ye make post have to
hell-warde: and so long as you continue in this miserable condition, as Peter
says, Your judgment is not far off, and your damnation sleeps not.
Thirdly seeing those whom God has purposed to refuse shall be left unto
themselves, and never come to repentance, we are to love and embrace the word
of God preached and taught unto us by the ministers of the gospel: withal
submitting our selves unto it, and suffering the Lord to humble us thereby,
that we may come at length out of the broad way of blindness of mind and
hardness of heart leading to destruction, into the straight way of true
repentance and reformation of life, which leads to salvation. For so long as
a man lives in this world after the lusts of his own heart, he goes on walking
in the very same broad way to hell, in which all that are ordained to
condemnation walk: and what a fearful thing is it but for a little while to
be a companion in the way of destruction with them that perish: and therefore I
say once again, let us all in the fear of God lay his word unto our hearts,
and hear it with such reverence, as that it may be in us the sword of the
spirit to cut down the sins and corruptions of our natures and work in us
a reformation of life and true repentance.

The third point concerning the decree of Reprobation, is the Judgment to be
given of it. This judgment belongs to God principally and properly, because
he knows best what he has determined concerning the estate of every man,
and none but he knows who they be which are ordained to due and deserved
damnation. And again, he only knows the hearts and wills of men, and what
grace he has given them, what they are, and what all their sins be, and so
does no angel nor creature in the world beside. As for men, it belongs not to
them to give judgment of reprobation in themselves or in others, unless God
reveal his will unto them and give them a gift of discerning. This gift was
bestowed on sundry of the Prophets in the old Testament, and in the new
Testament on the Apostles. Ps. 69. and 109.
David in many Psalms makes request for the confusion of his enemies, not
praying only against their sins which we may do, but even against their
persons, which we may not do. No doubt he was guided by gods spirit, and
received thence an extraordinary gift to judge of the obstinate malice of his
adversaries. And Paul prays against the person of Demetrius, saying, 2. Tim.
4.14.
The Lord reward him according to his doings. And such kind of prayers were
lawful in them, because they were carried with pure and upright zeal, and had
no doubt a special gift whereby they were able to discern of the final
estate of their enemies. Again, God sometimes gives this gift of discerning of
some men's final impenitencie to the Church upon earth, I say not, to this or
that private person, but to the body of the Church or greater part thereof. S.
John writing unto the Churches says, There is a sin unto death (that is, 1.
Ioh. 5.16.
against the H. ghost) I say not that thou should pray for it: in which
words he takes it for granted, that the sin might be discerned by the Church
in those days. And Paul says, If any man believe not the Lord Jesus, let him
be had in execration, Mara-natha, that is, pronounced accursed to everlasting
destruction. 1. Cor. 16.22.
Whence it appears that the Church has power to pronounce men rejected to
everlasting damnation, upon some special occasions, though I dare not say
ordinarily and usually. The primitive Church with one consent prayed against
Julian the Apostata, and the prayers made were not in vain as appeared by his
fearful end. As for private and ordinary men for the tempering and rectifying
of their judgments, in this case they must follow two rules. The one is, that
every member of the Church is bound to believe his own election. It is the
commandment of God binding the very conscience, 1. Ioh. 3.
that we should believe in Christ: Now to believe in Christ is not only to put
our affiance in him, and to be resolved that we are justified and sanctified
and shall be glorified by him, but also that we were elect to saluatioa in him
before the beginning of the world, which is the foundation of the rest. Again,
if of things that have necessary dependence one upon another, we are to
believe the one, then we are to believe the other. Now election and adoption
are things conjoined; and the one necessarily dependes upon the other. For all
the elect (as Paul says) are predestinate to adoption: and we are to believe
our own adoption: and therefore also our election. The second rule is, that
concerning the persons of those that be of the Church, we must put in practice
the judgment of charity, and that is to esteem of them as of the elect of
God till God make manifest otherwise. By virtue of this rule the ministers of
Gods word are to publish and preach the Gospel to all without exception. It is
true indeed there is both wheat and darnell in Gods field, chafe and corn in
Gods barn, fish and dross in Gods net, sheep and goats in Christ's fold: but
secret judgments belong unto God, and the rule of love which is to think and
wish the best of others is to be followed of us that profess faith working by
love.

It may be demanded what we are to judge of them that as yet are enemies of
Christ. Ans. Our duty is to suspe^d our judgments concerning their final
estate: for we know not whether God will call them or no: and therefore we must
rather pray for their conversion then for their confusion.

Again it may be demanded what is to be thought of all our ancetours and
forefathers that lived and died in the times when Popery took place. Ans. We
may well hope the best and think that they were saved: for though the Papacy
be not the Church of God, and though the doctrine of popery race the
foundation, yet nevertheless in the very midst of the Roman papacy God has
always had a remnant which have in some measure truly served him. In the old
Testament when open idolatry took place in all Israel, God says to Eliah, I
have reserved 7. thousand to my self that never bowed knee to Baal: and the
like is and has bin in the general apostasy under Antichrist. S. John says,
See Illyr. C^tal. test. veritatis. Rev. 12.17.
that when the woman fled into the wilderness for a time, even then there was a
remnant of her seed which kept the commandments of God, and have testimony of
Jesus Christ. And again when ordinary means of salvation fail, then God can
and does make a supply by means extraordinary, and therefore there is no cause
why we should say that they were condemned.

Thirdly it may be demanded whether the common judgment given of F. Spira that
he is a reprobate be good or no? Ans. we may with better warrant say no; then
any man say, yea. For what gifts of discerning had they which came to visit him
in his extremity? and what reasons induced them to give this peremptory
judgment. He said himself that he was a reprobate: that is nothing; a sick
man's judgment of himself is not to be regarded. Yea but he despaired; a
senseless reason: for so does many a man year by year, and that very often as
deeply as ever Spira did, and yet by the good help of the ministry of the
word both are and may be recovered. And they which will avouch Spira to be a
reprobate, must go further and prove 2. things, that he despaired both wholly
and finally: which if they can not prove, we for our parts must suspende our
judgments, and they were much to blame that first published the book.

Lastly it may be dema^dend what is to be thought of the^ that make very
fearful ends in rauing and blaspheming. Ans. Such strange behauiours are
oftentimes the fruits of violent diseases which torment the body and bereave
the mind of sense and reason: and therefore if the persons lived well, we must
think the best: for we are not by outward things to judge of the estate of any
man. Solomon says, that all things come alike to all and the same condition to
the just and to the wicked.

Thus much of the parts of predestination. Now follows the use thereof: and it
concerns partly our judgments, partly our affections, and partly our lives.
The uses which concern judgment are 3. And first by the doctrine of
predestination we learn, that there ca^ not be any justification of a sinner
before God by his works. For Gods election is the cause of justification,
because whom God electeth to salvation after this life, them he electeth to be
justified in this life. Now election it self is of grace and of grace alone,
as Paul says, Election is by grace, and if it be of grace, it is no more of
works: Romans 11.5.
or else were grace no grace: therefore justification is of grace and of grace
alone. And I reason thus. The cause of a cause is the cause of all things
caused: but grace alone is the cause of predestination, which is the cause of
our vocation, justification, sanctification, etc. Grace therefore is also the
alone cause of all these. Therefore the scriptures ascribe not only the
beginning, but also the continuance and accomplishment of all our happiness to
grace. For first as election, so vocation is of grace. Paul says, God has
called us not according to our works, 2. Tim. 1.9.
but according to his purpose and grace. Again, faith in Christ is of grace.
So it is said, Phil. 1.29.
To you it is given to believe in Christ. Also the justification of a sinner is
of grace. So Paul says plainly to the Romans: Romans 3.24.
you are justified freely by his grace. Again, sanctification and the doing of
good works is of grace: So it is said, We are his vvorkemanshippe created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10.
which God has ordained that we should walk in them. Also perseverance
in good works and godliness is of grace: So the Lord says, I will make an
everlasting covenant with them, that I will never turn away from them to do
them good, Ier. 32.40.
but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.
Lastly, life everlasting is of grace: So Paul says, Life everlasting is the
gift of God through Jesus Christ: Now they of the Church of Rome teach the
flat contrary: Romans 6.26.
they make two iustifications; the first whereby a man of an evil man is made
a good man: the second, whereby of a good man he is made better. The first
they ascribe to grace, but so, as the second is by works. Secondly, hence we
learn, that the art of Judicial astrology is vain and frivolous. They that
practice it, do profess themselves to tell of things to come almost
whatsoever, and this they do by casting of figures: and the special point of
their art is to judge of men's nativities. For if they may know but the time of
a man's birth, they take upon them to tell the whole course of his life from
year to year, from week to week, and from day to day, from the day of his
birth to the hour of his death: yea that which is more, they profess
themselves to tell all things that shall befall men either in body, goods, or
good name, and what kind of death they shall die. But that this their practice
is not of God, but indeed unlawful, it may appear by this, because it stands
not with the doctrine of Gods predestination. Two twins begotten of the same
parents, and borne both at one and the same time, by the judgment of
Astrologians must have both the same life, and the same death, and be every way
alike both in goods and in good name, yet we see the contrary to be true in
Jacob and Esau, who were borne both at one time of the same parents. For Jacob
took Esau by the heel, so as there could not be much difference between them
in time, yet for all this Esau was a fierce man and wild given to hunting, but
Iaacob was mild of nature, and lived at home: the one had favor at Gods hand
and was in the covenant, but God kept back that mercy from the other. Again,
in a pitched field are slain a thousand men at one and the same time: now if we
consider the time of their births, it may be, they were borne at a thousand
sundry times, and therefore under so many diverse positions of the heavens,
and so by the judgment of all Astrologers should have all diverse and sundry
lives and ends: but we see according to the determination of the counsel of
God, they have all one and the same end: and therefore this must admonish all
those that are brought up in schools of learning, to have care to spend there
times in better studies: and it teaches those that are fallen into any manner
of distress, not to have recourse to these fond figure-casters. For their
astrologicall judgments are false and foolish, as we may see by the two former
examples. Thirdly, the knowledge of God is one of the most special points in
Christian religion, and therefore the Lord says, Let him that rejoice, rejoice
in this, Ier. 9.24.
that he understands and knows me. For I am the Lord which show mercy and
judgment in the earth. And our Savior Christ says, This is life eternal to
know thee, the only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Ioh. 17.3.
Now Gods predestination is a glass wherein we may behold his majesty. For
first by it we see the wonderful wisdom of God, who in his eternal counsel
did foresee and most wisely set down the state of every man: secondly his
omnipotency, in that he has power to save and power to refuse whom he will:
thirdly his justice and mercy hoth joined together in the exequution of
election; his mercy in that he saves those which were utterly lost; his
justice in that he ordained Christ to be a mediator to suffer the curse of the
law, and to satisfy his justice for the Elect. Fourthly his justice in the
exequution of the decree of Reprobation: for though he decreed to hold back his
mercy from some men, because it so pleased him, yet he condemns no man but
for his sins. Now the consideration of these and the like points, bring us to
the knowledge of the true God.

The uses which concern our affections are these. First the doctrine of
predestination ministers to all the people of God matter of endless
consolation. For because Gods election in unchangeable, therefore they which
are predestinate to salvation can not perish, though the gates of hell prevail
against them so as they be hardly saved, yet shall they certainly be saved:
therefore our Savior Christ says, that in the latter days shall arise false
Christ's and false prophets, which shall show great signs and wonders, so that
if it were possible they should deceive the very elect. Mat. 24.24.
In which words he takes it for granted, that the elect of God can never
finally fall away. And hereupon he says to his disciples when they rejoiced
that the devils were subject to them, rather rejoice that your names are
written in heaven. And S. Paul speaking of Hymeneus and Alexander, Luke 10.20.
which had fallen away from the faith, least the Church would be discouraged by
their fall, because they were thought to be worthy men and pillars of the
Church; he does comfort the^ from the very ground of election, saying, The
foundation of God remains sure and has this seal: The Lord knows who are
his. 2. Tim. 2.19.
Where Gods election is compared to the foundation of an house, the building
whereof may be shaken, but the groundwork stands fast: and therefore Paul
says further, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect. Romans 8.33.
Now then that we may have comfort in distress, and some thing to stay upon
in all our troubles: we in this world are as strangers in a far country: our
passage homeward is over the sea of this world: the ship wherein we sail is the
Church: and satan stirs up many blasts of troubles and temptations, and his
purpose is to sink the ship, or to drive it on the rock; but we must take the
anchor of hope and fasten it in heaven upon the foundation of Gods Election,
which being done we shall pass in safety and rejoice in the midst of all
storms and tempests. Secondly whereas God refuses some men and leaves them to
themselves, it serves to strike a fear into ^uery one of us whatsoever, as
Saint Paul in the like case says, the Jews being the natural branches are
broken off through unbelief, Romans 11.20.
and thou stand by faith: be not high minded but fear. This indeed was
spoken to the Romans, but we must also lay it unto our hearts. For what is the
best of us but a lump of clay? and how soever in Gods counsel we are chosen to
salvation, yet in our selves we are all shut up under unbelief, and are fit to
make vessels of wrath. Our Savior Christ calls Judas a devil, and we know
his lewd life and fearful end: now what are we better then Judas by nature? If
we had bin in his stead, without the special blessing of God, we should have
don as he did: he betrayed Christ, but if God leave us to our selves, we shall
not only betray him, but by our sins even crucify him a thousand ways.
Furthermore let us bethink our selves of this, whether there be not already
condemned in hell, who in their lives were not more grievous offenders then we.
Esaias calls the people of his time a people of Sodom and Gomorrha, Esa. 1.10.
giving the Jews then living to understand, that they were as bad as the
Sodomites, and as the people of Gomorrha, on whom the Lord had showed his
judgments long before. If this be true, then let us with fear and trembling
be tha^kful to his majesty that he has preserved us hitherto from deserved
damnation.

The uses which respects our lives and conuersations are manifold. First,
seeing God has elected some to salvation, and has also laid down the means
in his holy word whereby we may come to the knowledge of our particular
election, we must therefore as Saint Paul counsels us, give all diligence to
make our election sure. 2. Pet. 1.10.
In the world men are careful and painful enough to make assurance of lands
and goods to themselves and their posterity: what a shame is it then for us,
that we should be slack in making sure to our selves the election of God,
which is more worth then all the world beside? and if we shall continue to be
slack herein, the leases of our lands and houses and all other temporal
assurances shall be bills of accusation against us at the day of judgment to
condemn us. Secondly, by this doctrine we are taught to live godly and
righteously in this present world, because all those whom God has chosen to
salvation, he has also appointed to live in newnes of life, as Saint Paul
says, God has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world, Ephesians.
1.4.
that we should be holy and without blame before him. And again, We are
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10.
which God has ordained that we should walk in them. And, God has chosen you
to salvation through sanctification of the spirit and faith of the truth. 2.
Th. 2.13.
The Elect are vessels of honor: Romans 9. 2. Tim. 2.21.
and therefore all those that will be of the number of the Elect, must carry
themselves as vessels of honor. For so long as they lie in their sins they
be like vessels of dishonor, employing themselves to the most base service
that can be, even to the service of the devil. The sun was ordained to shine
in the day, and the moon in the night, and that order they keep, yea every
creature in his kind observes the course appointed unto it by creation, as the
grass to grow, and trees to bring forth fruit: now the elect were ordained to
this end to lead a godly life; and therefore if we would either persuade our
selves or the world, that we are indeed chosen to salvation, we must be
plentiful in all good works, and make conscience of every evil way: and to
do otherwise is as much as to change the order of nature, and as if the sun
should cease to shine by day and the moon by night. Thirdly, when God shall
send upon any of us in this world crosses and afflictions, either in body or
in mind, or any way else (as this life is the veil of misery and tears, and
judgment must begin at Gods house) we must learn to bear them with all
submission and contentation of mind. For whom God knew before, Romans 8.29.
them he has predestinate to be made like unto his son. But wherein is this
likeness? Paul says, in the fellowship of his afflictions, Phil. 3.10.
and in a conformity to his death. And the consideration of this, that
afflictions were ordained for us in the eternal predestination of God, must
comfort our hearts, and restrain our impatience so often as we shall go under
the burden of them. Hence again we learn that they which persuade themselves
that they are in the favor of God, because they live at ease in wealth and
prosperity, are far deceived. For Saint Paul says, God suffers with long
patience the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, Romans 9.22.
to make known his power and to show forth his wrath on them. Which being so,
then no man by outward blessings ought to plead that he has the love of God.
Sheep that go in fat pastures come sooner to the slaughterhouse then those
which are kept upon the bare (...) and they which are pampered with the wealth
of this world, sooner forsake God, and therefore are sooner forsaken of God
then others. Solomon says, Eccles. 9.1.
No man knows love or hatred, that is, by outward things: for all things come
alike to all: the same condition is to the just and to the unjust, to the
wicked and good, to the pure and polluted. Lastly, it may be an offense unto
us, when we consider that the doctrine of the Gospel is either not known, or
else despised and persecuted of the whole world; but we must stay our selves
with this consideration, that nothing comes to pass by chance, that God knows
who are his; and that there must be some in the world, on whom God has in his
eternal counsel purposed to manifest his power and justice. Again Ministers
of the Gospel may be discouraged, when after long preaching they see little or
no fruit of their labors: the people whom they teach remaining as blind,
impenitent, and unreformed as ever they were. But they must also consider, that
it is the purpose of God to chose some to salvation and to refuse others: and
that of the first some are called sooner some later, and that the second being
left to themselves never come to repentance. To this Paul had regard when he
said, If our Gospel be hid it is hid to them that perish. And again, We are
unto God the sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved and in them that
perish.

Hitherto I have delivered the truth of this weighty point of religion, which
also is the doctrine of the Church of England: now it follows that we should
consider the falshoode. Sundry Divines have devised, and in their writings
published a new frame or platform of the doctrine of Predestination: the
effect and substance whereof is this. The nature of God (say they) is infinite
love, goodness, and mercy it self: and therefore he propoundes unto himself
an end answearable thereunto, and that is the communication of his love and
goodness unto all his creatures. Now for the accomplishing of this supreme and
absolute end, he did four things. First he decreed to create man righteous in
his own image: secondly, he foresaw the fall of man after his creation, yet so,
as he neither willed nor decreed it: thirdly, he decreed the universal
Redemption of all and every man effectually by Christ, so be it they will
believe in him: fourthly, he decreed to call all and every man effectually, so
as if they will they may be saved. This being done, he in his eternal counsel
foreseeing who would believe in Christ, did thereupon Elect them to eternal
salvation: and again foreseeing who would not believe but contemn grace
offered, did thereupon also decree to reject them to eternal damnation.

This platform howsoever it may seem plausible to reason, yet indeed it is
nothing else but a Devise of man's brain: as will appear by sundry defects and
errors that be in it. For first whereas it is avouched that Adams fall came by
the bare prescie^ce of God, without any decree or will of his, it is a flat
untruth. The putting of Christ to death was as great a sin as the fall of
Adam, nay in some respects greater. Act. 2.23.
Now that came to pass not only by the foreknowledge of God, but also by his
determinate counsel. And therefore as the Church of Jerusalem says, Herod and
Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and the people of Israel gathered themselves
together to do whatsoever thine hand and thy counsel had determined before to
be done: so may we say, Act. 4.28.
that Adam in his fall did nothing but that which the hand of God and his
counsel had determined before to be done. And considering the will of God
extends it self to the least things that are even to sparrows, whereof none
do light upon the ground without our heavenly father, how can a man in reason
imagine that the fall of one of the most principal creatures that are, shall
fall out altogether without the will and decree of God. And there can be
nothing more absurd then to sever the foreknowledge of God from his counsel or
decree. For by this means, things shall come to pass God nilling, or not
knowing, or not regarding them. Nolenie, nesciente, non curan^e.
Now if any thing come to pass God nilling it, then that is done which God
would not have done; and to say so is to bereave him of his omnipotency. And
if we shall say that things fall out God not knowing of them, we make him to be
imprudent, and deny his omniscience: lastly, if we shall say that a thing is
done God not regarding it, we bring in an idol of our own brains, and
stablish the idle-god of the Epicures. But it is objected to the contrary,
that if God any way decreed and willed the fall of Adam, then he was the author
of sin: which once to say is blasphemy. Answer. The argument follows not.
There be three actions in the will of God; one whereby he does absolutely will
any thing and delight in it: 1. Volendo velle.
and of all such things God himself is the author. The second is, wholly or
absolutely to Nill a thing: 2. Nolendo nolle, or penitus nolle.
and all things thus nilled can not possibly come to pass or have the least
being in nature. 3. Remiss and velle and nolle, or nolendo velle.
There is also a third action which comes as a mean between the two former,
which is remissely or in part both to nill and will a thing; whereby though God
approve not evil as it is evil, and therefore does it not: yet he wills the
permitting of it to be done by others, or the being of it; because in respect
of God that decrees the permitting of evil, it is good that there should be
evil. And on this manner and no otherwise God willed the fall of Adam: and
therefore in the reason of any indifferent man, though he decreed the fall, yet
shall he be free from the blame thereof, which lies wholly upon the doer; these
two caueats always remembered: first that God by his will did not constrain or
force the will of Adam to sin, or infuse into it any corruption; and that
therefore he sinned willingly and freely, only by the Decretum dei non tollit
libertate^ voluntatis sed ordinat.
necessity of immutabilitie, and not by the necessity of coaction: secondly
that God willed the fall for a most worthy end, which was to lay down a way
tending to the manifestation both of his justice and mercy. Again it is
alleged that if God willed Adams fall, then his will is flat contrary to it
self, because he wills that which he had by express commandment forbidden.
Answer. In deed if God should both will and forbid one and the same thing, in
one and the same respect, there should be a contradiction in Gods will: but
that God does not. He forbad Adams fall as it was a sin: for so in every
commandment sin as it is sin is condemned and punished: and yet because
it was in a new respect, a means of manifesting his glory, who is able to
bring light out of darkness, therefore he willingly decreed the permission of
it. Incest as it is a sin, it is condemned in the seventh commandment, and
punished with death: yet as incest was a punishment of David's adultery, God is
said to take his wives and to give them to his son Absalom. 2. Sam. 12.11.


Some again, as it appears by their writings, fear to ascribe unto God so
much as a permission of Adams fall: but no doubt they are deceived. For if
these rules be true; that God is omnipotent: that he works all things that are
by the counsel of his will, and gouernes them: that he has care and regard
over man: that nothing is hid from him: that he is unchangeable, there must
needs be permission of will. If the devil could not enter so much as into an
heard of swine without Christ's permission, Mark. 5.12.
shall we think that he could compass the fall and overthrow of man, without
a permission? Indeed to permit, is not to hinder evil when one may; and with
men this is a fault, but not with God, because he is not bound to hinder the
evil which he permits.

The second fault is, that they make the Prescience of man's faith and
unbelief, to be the impulsive causes of Gods decree. For they say that God
eternally decrees to save or refuse men, because he did foresee that they would
believe or not believe. But indeed it is a manifest untruth. Among the causes
of al things that are, there is an order set down by God himself, in which
order some causes are highest some lowest, some in the midst. Now the highest
cause of all is that, which ouerrules all and is ouerruled of none: and that is
Gods will, beyond which there can be no higher cause: for God is placed above
all, and subject to none. And this very will of his is the cause of all things
that have being: for we must not imagine that a thing first of all existeth,
and then afterward is willed of God; but first of all God wills a thing, and
then afterward it comes to have being. Now to say that foreseen faith or
unbelief are the moving causes whereby God was induced to ordain men either
to salvation or to just damnation, is to undo this divine order of causes, and
to displace the linkes; in that Gods will is made a secondarie or middle cause
subordinate to others causes placed above it: and this is to make the will of
God to depend upon the quality and condition of the creature, whereas all
things depend upon it. Again, Paul says that God has opened the mystery of
his will, according to his good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself:
whereby he makes a distinction between the creature and the Creator. Men,
Ephesians. 1.9.
when they purpose the doing of any thing, borrowe reasons of their purposes
and wills out of themselves from the things to be done; because man's bare will
is no sufficient cause to vvarrant the doing of this or that, in this or that
manner, unless there be just reason. But Gods will is a simple and absolute
rule of righteousness, and a thing is good so far forth as Gods wills it.
Therefore there is no cause, why he should go forth of himself for external
inducements and reasons of his eternal counsel: his very will in himself is
a sufficient reason of all his purposes and decrees. And hereupon Paul says,
that Gods purpose was in himself, to show that there is no dependence of his
will upon the creature, and that in ordering and disposing of his decrees he
had no reference or respective consideration of the qualities and works of
men. Thirdly by this doctrine, there is fastened upon God want of wisdom, who
is wisdom it self: and that is very absurd. A simple man that has in him
but a spark of the wisdom of God, first of all intendes with himself the
end and event of the business to be done, and then afterward the means whereby
the end is accomplished: but in this platform God is brought in, in the first
place to foresee and consider with himself the means which tend to the end,
namely the faith and unbelief of men, and then afterward to determine with
himself what shall be the end and final condition of every man either in
life or death: as if a man should purpose with himself to build an house
without any consideration of the end why; and afterward conceive with
himself the particular uses to which he will apply it. Fourthly, hence it
follows that faith shall not only be an instrument, but also an efficient
cause in the act of justification of a sinner before God. For the cause of a
cause is also the cause of the thing caused; but foreseen faith is an
impulsive cause whereby God was moved to choose some men to salvation (as it
is said:) and therefore it is not only an instrument to apprehende Christ's
righteousness, but also a cause or means to move God to justify a sinner;
because justification proceeds of Election which comes of foreseen faith:
which is erroneous by the doctrine of all Churches, unless they be Popish.
Fifthly, this doctrine takes it for granted, that all both young and old, even
infants that die in there infancy have knowledge of the Gospel, because both
faith and unbelief in Christ presuppose knowledge of our salvation by him:
considering that neither ordinarily, nor extraordinarily men believe or
contemn the thing unknown. But how false this is, even common experience
does show. Lastly, this platform quite overthrows it self. For whereas all
men equally corrupt in Adam are effectually both redeemed and called, the
difference between man and man, stands not in believing or not believing, for
all believe: but in this properly that some are confirmed in faith, some are
not. Now when all without exception are indewed with grace sufficient
salvation, I demand why some men are confirmed in grace, and others not
confirmed, as also of Angels some were confirmed and stand, and some not
confirmed, fell? No other reason can be rendered but the will of God. And to
this must all come, strive as long as they will, that of men being in one and
the same estate some are saved, some justly forsaken, because God would.
Again, as the foreseeing of faith does presuppose Gods giving of faith,
unless men will say it is natural: so the foreseeing of faith in some men
alone, does presuppose the giving of faith to some men alone. But why does not
God confer the grace of constant faith to all? because he will not: so then
those men whose faith was foreseen, are saved, not because their faith was
foreseen, but because God would.

The third fault is, that they ascribe unto God a conditional Purpose or
counsel, whereby he decrees that all men shall be saved, so be it they will
believe. For it is every way as much against common sense, as if it had been
said, that God decreed nothing at all concerning man. A conditional sentence
determines nothing simply but conditionally, and therefore vncertenly: and when
we speak of God, to determine vncertenly, is as much as if he had determined
nothing at all, specially when the thing determined is in the power of man's
will, and in respect of God, the decree may come to pass or not come to pass.
Men, if they might always have their choice, desire to determine of all their
affairs simply without condition: and when they do otherwise it is either
because they know not the event of things, or because things to be done are
not in their power. No reason therefore that we should burden God with that,
whereof we would disburden our selves. Again the Majesty of God is disgraced
in this kind of decree. God for his part would have all men to be saved: why
then are they not? men will not keep the condition and believe. This is flat
to hang Gods will upon man's will, to make every man an Emperor, and God his
underling, and to change the order of nature by subordinating Gods will which
is the first cause to the will of man which is the second cause: whereas by the
very law of nature the first cause should order and dispose the second cause.
But for the justifying of a conditional decree it is alleged, that there is
no eternal and hidden decree of God beside the Gospel, which is Gods
predestination revealed. Answ. It is an untruth. There be two wills in God,
quid vult fieri de nobis, or, in nobis.
one whereby he determines what he will do unto us or in us: the other, quid
vult fieri a nobis.
whereby he determines what we shall do to him. Now Predestination is the
first: whereupon it is commonly defined to be the preparation of the blessings
of God, whereby they are delivered which are delivered, and the Gospel is the
second. Again, Predestination determines who they are, and how many which are
to be saved, and hereupon Christ says, I know whom J have chosen: Ioh. 13.18.
but the Gospel rather determines what kind of ones and how they must be
qualified which are to be saved. Lastly Predestination in Gods decree it self:
and the Gospel is an outward means of the exequution of it: and therefore
though the Gospel be propounded with a condition, yet the decree of God it
self may be simple and absolute.

The fourth defect, is the opinion of Universal saving grace appertaining to
all and every man: which may be fitly termed the Schole of universal Atheism.
For it pulls down the pale of the Church, and lays it wast as every common
field: it breeds a carelessenes in the use of the means of grace, the word
and sacraments; when as men shall be persuaded that grace shall be offered to
every one effectually, whether he be of the Church or not at one time or other,
wheresoever or howsoever he live: as in the like case; if men should be told
that whether they live in the market town or no, there shall be sufficient
provision brought them, if they will but receive it and accept of it, who would
then come to the market?

Universal grace has three parts. Universal Election: universal Redemption:
universal Vocation. Universal Election of all and every man, is a witless
conceit: for if men universally be appointed to grace without exception, then
there is no Electing or choosing of some out of mankind to grace: and if some
alone be appointed to grace, as it must needs be in Election, then is not
grace universal. And it is flat against the word of God. For Christ avouches
plainly that fewer be chosen then called, Math. 22.14.
and (as afterward we shall see) all are not called. And he further says, that
all which are given unto him shall be one with him and have life everlasting:
Ioh. 17.2, 11, 24.
but all men shall not be one with him and have life everlasting: and therefore
all men are not given to Christ of the father, that is, ordained to salvation.
And the Scripture says, that all men's names are not written in the book of
life: Apoc. 17.8. and 20.12. Math. 25.34.
and that the kingdom of heaven was not prepared for all. And whereas men
build this their universal Election upon the largenes of the promise of the
Gospel* upon the like ground they might as well make an universal decree of
Reprobation, whereby God decrees all men to be damned indefinitely upon this
condition, if they do not believe. Now if universal Reprobation be absurd, as
it is indeed, then universal Election must take part therewith.

As for the Universal redemption of all and every man, it is no better then a
forgerie of man's brain. There shall be many in the day of judgment of whom
Christ shall say, that he never knew them. Again he says, Math. 7.23. Ioh.
3.36.
He which believes not is already judged, and the wrath of God abides upon
him. But if all were effectually redeemed, and only condemned for not
believing in Christ, it should have been said that they are already judged,
and that the wrath of God not abides but returns upon them. Christ makes no
intercession for the world: Ioh. 17.9.
and therefore his redemption is not effectual to all men* For the
intercession is the means of applying the satisfaction. If it be said that by
the world is meant only contemners of grace, it appears to be otherwise in
that Christ opposes the world to them which are the fathers, and are gi^en to
Christ by him: thereby signifying that by the world he means all such as are
not the fathers, and were never given to Christ. And he lays down his life
for his sheep: Ioh. 10.27.
now the sheep have all these brands or marks; they hear his voice, they
know him, they follow him, they shall not perish, none shall pluck them out of
Christ's hands: and these are only such of whom Paul says; Romans 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect: it is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? And if this should be true that Christ was
crucified and died no less to make satisfaction for the sins of the damned,
then for the sins of Peter and Paul and the rest of the Saints, it follows
necessarily that all their sins are forgiven: considering that remission of
sin depends inseparably upon satisfaction made to Gods justice for sin: and
satisfaction does necessarily abolish all fault. We grant that Christ's death
is sufficient to save many thousand worlds: we grant again it is every way
most effectual in it self: but that it is effectual in, or unto the person
of every man, that we deny. For if it were thus effectual, then it should be
applied to the person of every man, as to Caine, Judas, Nero, Heliogabalus,
etc. even as the plaster is laid to the sore: being applied, Christ's
righteousness should be imputed for the justification and sanctification of all
and every man: and thus some justified before God and sanctified should after
go to hell and be damned, whereas David never so much as dreaming of this
divinity says, that they are blessed which have the pardon of their sins;
Psalm. 32.1. Romans 5.1.
and Paul, that they which are justified have peace with God. But let us hear
what reasons may be alleged to justify the Universality of redemption: I.
Ezechiel 33. verse. 11. As I live, says the Lord, J will not the death of the
wicked: but, that the wicked return from his wicked way. Answer. The
place is to be understood not simply but in respect; of the twain God rather
wills the repentance of the sinner then his death. Again, he wills not death as
it is the destruction of his creature, and so this place may be understood:
yet nevertheless he will^ the same as it is a means of manifestation of his
justice: and therefore the Prophet Isai says, Isai 45.7.
that God creates evil. II. 1. Tim. 2. God would have all men to be saved
and come to the acknowledgement of the truth. Answer. The place is meant
not of the persons of all particular men, but of the orders and kinds of men.
For in the first verse Paul exhorted Timothy that prayer should be made for
all men: and in the second verse opening his own meaning, he adds these
words, for Kings and all that be in authority: as though he should say, we
must pray not only for private men and for the common people, but also for
public persons, though they persecute the Gospel. But why? because in that
very order God has his Elect which shall be saved. And on this manner Paul
expoundes himself else where. There is neither Jew nor Grecian: Gal. 5.27.
there is neither bond nor free: there is neither male nor female: for ye are
all one in Christ. III. Romans 11. verse. 32. God has shut up all in unbelief
that he might have mercy on all. Answer. The word all, must be understood
of all that are to be saved, both of Jews and Gentiles, as the article added
to all imports, and the meaning is, that God will save all whom he purposes
to save of his mercy, and not of their merit, (...).
because all are sinners as well Jews as Gentiles: thus Paul expoundes
himself Galat. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe. And
if we should expound the word all* for every particular man* as some would have
(...)* Paul must contradict himself, who said before that God would have
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens, and in this
very chapter his drift is to prove the reiection of the Jews, and the calling
of the Gentiles. IV. Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world that he has given his
only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but
have everlasting life. and Ioh. 6.51. I will give my flesh for the life of the
world. Answer. By world, we must no^ understand every particular man in the
world, but the Elect both among the Jews and Gentiles: for in both these
places Christ does overthwart the conceit of the Jews, which thought that they
alone were loved of God, and not the Gentiles. And how this word is to be
understood in the new Testament Paul does fully declare Romans 11. verse* 12. If
(says he) the fall of them, that is, the Jews, be the riches of the world,
and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, etc. and verse. 15. If
the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what shall the
receiving be but life from the dead. Where by the world, he vndersta^ds the
body of the Gentiles in the last age of the world. And thus he fully declares
his own meaning, when he says to the Corinthians God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself. 2. Cor. 5.18.
V. Romans 14. verse. 15. Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died. 2.
Pet. 2.1. Denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift
damnation. Therefore Christ died for them also which are condemned. Answ. The
reason is not good. For in these and such like places the Scripture speaks of
men not as they are indeed before God, but as they are in appearance and
profession, and as they are in the acceptance of men. For so long as a man
holds and embraces the Christian faith, so long in the judgment of charity we
must esteem him to be one that is redeemed by Christ, though in deed he be
not. And this is the meaning of Peter when he says, that false prophets deny
the Lord that bought them. VI. In the preaching of the Gospel grace is freely
offered not only to the Elect, but to all men indifferently: and God in
offering grace deludes no man: and therefore Christ's death appertains and
belongs to all men indifferently. Answer. The preaching of the Gospel is an
ordinance of God appointed for the gathering together and the accomplishment of
the number of the elect: and therefore in the ministry of the word grace and
salvation is offered principally and directly to the elect, and only by
consequent to them which are ordained to just damnation: because they are
mingled with the elect in the same societies: and because the ministers of God
not knowing his secret counsel, in charity think all to be elect. And though
God in offering grace do not confer it to all, yet is there no delusion. For
the offering of grace does not only serve for the conversion of a sinner, but
also to be an occasion by men's fault of blinding the mind and hardening the
heart, and of taking away excuse in the day of judgment.

To conclude this point; Universal redemption of all men, we grant: the
Scripture says so: and there is an universalitie among the elect and
believers: but uniuersall Redemption of all and every man as well the damned
as the elect and that effectually, we renounce as having neither footing in the
scripture, nor in the writings of any ancient and orthodoxe divine, for many
hundred years after Christ, his words not depraved and mistaken.

As for universal vocation, it is of the same kind with the former: because it
is flat against the word of God in which is fully set down a distinction of
the whole world from the creation to the days of Christ, into two parts: one,
the people of God being received into the covenant: the other, being the
greatest part of the world, No-people, and forth of the covenant. From the
beginning of the world to the giving of the law, the Church was shut up in
the families of the Patriarchs: and the covenant in the very family of
Abraham was restrained to Isaak: and the members of these families for this
cause were called the sons of God; the rest of the world beside being termed
as they were indeed, the sons of men. Genesis 6.
From the giving of the law till Christ the nation of the Jews was the Church
of God, and the rest of the world beside, no people of God. Esai. 49.9.
And therefore Esai calls them prisoners and them that are in darkness: and
Ose, Such as are without mercy and no people: and Zachary, Ose* 2.23. and
1.10. Zach. 2.11. Act. 14.16. Ephesians. 2.13.
Such as are not joined to the Lord: and Paul, Such as are set to walk in
their own ways, being without God and without Christ in the world. And this
distinction between Jew and Gentile stood till the very ascension of
Christ. And hereupon when he was to send his disciples to preach, he charged
them not to go into the way of the Gentiles, and not to enter into the cities
of the Samaritanes, but rather to go to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel: Mat. 10.6, 7.
and when the woman of Canaan made request for her daughter, he gives a denial
at the first upon this distinction, saying, It is not meet to take the
childrens bread and give it unto dogs: Mat. 15.22.
and again, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. It
will be said, that this distinction arose of this, that the Gentiles at the
first fell away from the covenant, and contemned the Messiah. It is true
indeed of the first heads of the Gentiles the sons of Noe: but of their
posterity it is false, which in times following did not so much as hear of the
covenant, and the Messiah. The Prophet Esai says of Christ, Esai. 55.5.
A nation that knew not thee shall run unto thee. And Paul speaking to the
Athenians says, that the times of this their ignorance God regarded not: Act.
17.30.
but now admonishes all men every where to repent: and to the Romans he says,
Romans 16.26. 1. Tim. 3.16.
that the mystery touching Christ and his benefits was kept secret since the
world began, and now opened and published among all nations. And if the
Gentiles had but known of the Messiah, why did not their Poets and
Philosophers who in their writings notoriously abuse the Jews with sundry
Apella, Verpus Recutitus, Sabbatarius, Cultor nabium.
nicknames, at the least signify the contempt of the Redeemer. Wherefore to
hold and much more to avouch by writing, that all and every one of the heathen
were called, it is most absurd: and if it were so, the Canibals and the sauadge
nations of America should have known Christ without preaching, which by the
histories of the discovery of those cuntries is known to be false.

Again, if the Vocation of every man be effectual, then faith must be common
to all men either by nature or by grace, or both: now to say the first, namely
that the power of believing is common to all by nature, is the heresy of the
Pelagians, and to say it is common to all by grace, is false. All men have not
faith, says Paul: 2. These. 3.1.
nay many to whom the gospel is preached, do not so much as understand it and
give assent unto it; 2. Cor. 4.4.
Satan blinding their minds that the light of the glorious gospel of Christ
should not shine unto them: and to say that faith is partly by nature and
partly by grace, is the condemned heresy of the semi-Pelagian: for we can not
so much as think a good thought of our selves. 2. Cor. 3.5.


The last defect in the platform is, that they ascribe unto God a wrong end of
his counsels: namely the communication of mercy or goodness in eternal
happiness. For the absolute and sovereign end of all gods doings must be
answerable to his nature, which is not mercy and love alone, but also justice
it self: and that is the manifestation of his glory both in justice and mercy
by the express testimony of scripture. Again, if this were so, all men
without exception should be saved, because God can not be frustrated of his end
and purpose: and if but one man be damned, he is damned, either because God will
not save him, or because he cannot. If they say he will not, then he is
changeable; if he can not, then he is not omnipotent, considering his purpose
was to convey happiness to all creatures.

Thus much of the efficient cause of the Church, namely Gods predestination:
which doctrine could not here be omitted considering no man can believe
himself to be a member of the Church, unless withal he believe that he is
predestinate to life everlasting. Now we come to the second point, namely the
Mystical union, which is the very form of the Church, Gal. 3.2^.
whereby all rhat believe are made one with Christ. To the causing of this
union 2. things are required, a Donation or giving of Christ unto that man
which is to be made one with him: and a Conjunction between them both. Of the
first, the Prophet Esai says, Unto us a child is borne, Esai. 9.16.
and unto us a son is given: and Paul, who spared not his own son, but gave
him for us all: Romans 8.32.
how shall he not with him give us all things also? And touching it sundry
points must be considered. The first is, what is meant by this Giving?
Answer. It is an action or work of God the Father by the holy ghost, whereby
Christ as redeemer in the appointed time is really communicated to all ordained
to salvation in such manner, that they may truly say that Christ himself with
all his benefits is theirs, both in respect of right thereto, and in respect
of all fruit redounding thence, and that as truly as any man may say that
house and land given him of his ancetours is his own both to possess and to
use.

The second point is, what is the very thing given? Answer. Whole Christ God
and man is given, because his humanity without his godhead, or the godhead
without the humanity does not reconcile us to God. Yet in this giving there
must be a diverse consideration had of the two natures of Christ: for the
communication of the godhead is merely energeticall, that is, only in respect
of operation: in that it does make the manhood personally united unto it to be
propitiatory for our sins and meritorious of life eternal. And to avouch
any communication of the godhead in respect of essence, were to bring in the
heresy of the Maniches, and to maintain a composition and a commixtion of our
natures with the nature of God. Again, in the manhood of Christ, we must
distinguish between the subject it self, the substance of body and soul,
and the blessings in the subject which tend to our salvation. And the
communication of the aforesaid manhood is in respect of both without
separation: for no man can receive saving virtue from Christ, unless first of
all he receive Christ himself, as no man can have the treasure hid in the
field, unless first of all he have the field: and no man can be nourished by
meat and drink unless first of all he receive the substance of both. Ioh.
6.53, 54.
And this is the cause why not only in the preaching of the word but also in
the institution of the Lords supper express mention is made, not only of
Christ's merit, but also of his very body and blood, whereby the whole
humanity is signified, as appears by that place where it is said, Ioh. 1.14.
that the Word was made flesh. And though the flesh of it self profit nothing
as S. John says, yet as it is joined to the godhead of the son and does
subsist in his person, it receives thence quickening virtue, to revive and
renew all those to whom it shall be given. Lastly, among the blessings that
are stored up in the manhood of Christ for our salvation, some are given unto
us by imputation, as when we are justified by the righteousness indeed
inherent in his manhood but imputed unto us: some by infusion, as when
holiness is wrought in our hearts by the spirit, as a fruit of that holiness
which is in the manhood of Christ, and derived from it as the light of one
candle from another.

The third point is, in what manner Christ is given unto us. Ansvv. God the
father gives Christ unto his Church not in any earthly or bodily manner, as
when a King bestows a gift with his own hand, and puttes it into the hand
of his subject: but the manner is altogether celestial and spiritual: partly
because it is brought to pass by the mere divine operation of the Holy Ghost:
and partly because in respect of us this gift is received by an instrument
which is supernatural, namely faith, whereby we lay hold of and apply unto our
selves the Evangelical promises. And this manner of giving may be conceived
thus. A man that never stirred foot out of England holds and enioyes land in
Turkey: but how comes it to be his? Thus: the Emperor was willing and content
to bestow it; and the man for his part as willing to accept and receive it: and
by this means that which at the first was the Emperors, by mutual consent
becomes the man's. In the same manner God the Father has made an Evangelicall
covenant with his Church: in which of his mercy he ha^h made a grant of his
own son unto us, with righteousness and life everlasting in him: and we
again by his grace accept of this grant and receive the same by faith: and
thus by mutual consent according to the tenor of the covenant, any repentant
sinner may truly say, though I now have mine abode upon earth, and Christ in
respect of his manhood be locally in heaven; yet is he truly mine to have and
to enjoy, his body is mine, his blood is mine. As for the giving and receiving
of the body and blood of Christ in bodily manner (which the Papists maintain in
auouching the real transubsta^tiatio^ of bread and wine in the sacraments into
the body and blood of Christ, and the Lutheranes also in teaching that his body
and blood is substantially either in, or with, or under the bread and wine) is
an erroneous conceit flat opposite to sundry points of the Christian faith.
For Christ to this very hour retains still the essence and essential
properties of a true body, and we believe that really and visibly he ascended
into heaven, and there abides till his second coming to the last judgment:
who then having but common reason would imagine a communication of the body of
Christ pent up in the element of bread, and conveyed into our bodies by the
mouth and stomach.

The third point is, whether we are not Lords of Christ he being thus given
unto us. Ans. No: for this donation is not single but mutual. As Christ is
given to us so we again are given to Christ, as he himself says, Those
whom thou have given me, Ioh. 17.2
Father, I have kept. And we are given unto him in that our bodies and souls
are made his not only as he is God, but also as he is our redeemer: and our
sins with the guilt thereof are made his by imputation, and the punishment
thereof is wholly laid upon him. This is all the dowry which the Church being
the spouse of Christ has brought unto him.

The fifth point is, how any man in particular may know that Christ is given
unto him of the Father. Ans. When God gives Christ to man, he withal gives man
grace and power to receive Christ, and to apprehend him with all his benefits:
and this we do when we utterly renounce our selves, this world and all things
therein, bewail our sins past, resting on the death of Christ for the pardon
of them all, and as it were with both the arms of faith catching hold upon him
in all esta^es both in life and death. When the heart of any man is truly
disposed and inclined to do these and the like things, we may truly say, that
God has given him grace to receive Christ.

The second thing required to make us one with Christ is, the Mystical union,
which is a Conjunction whereby Christ and his Church are actually coupled into
one whole Mystical body. Now that we may the better conceive the nature of it,
sundry questions are to be moved. The first, what kind of Conjunction this
is. Answer. In the scripture we meet with three kind of Conjunctions. The
first is, conjunction in nature, when sundry things are coupled all by one and
the same nature. As the Father, the Son, and the holy ghost being three
distinct subsistances are all one, and therefore joined in one godhead or
divine nature. Now Christ and the believer are not joined in nature: for then
they twain should have one body and soul. The second conjunction is in
person, when things in nature different, so concur together, that they make
but one person, as body and soul make one man: and the godhead of the son
with his manhood make but one Christ: in whom there is an union of distinct
natures with unity of person. Now Christ and a Christian are not joined in
person: for Christ is one person, Peter a second, and Paul a third distinct
from them both: and so many men as there be, so many several persons. The
third conjunction is in spirit; and this is the conjunction meant in this
place, whereby Christ and his Church are joined together: for the very same
spirit of God that dwells in the manhood of Christ and fills it with all
graces above measure, is derived thence and dwells in all the true members of
the church, and fills them with the like graces in measure, and therefore S.
John says, Hereby we know that we dwell in him and he in us, because he
has given us of his spirit. Hence it follows, that the bond of this
conjunction is one and the same spirit descending from Christ the head to all
his members, creating also in them the instrument of faith whereby they
apprehend Christ and make him their own.

The second is, what are the things united? Ansvv. Not the body of the
believer to the body of Christ, or the soul to his soul, but the whole person
of the man to the whole person of Christ: yet in this order; we are first of
all and immediately joined to the manhood of Christ, and by the manhood to the
godhead.

The third question is, what is the manner of this conjunction. Answ. We must
not think that Christ and his Church are joined by imagination, as the mind of
man and the thing whereof he thinks: or by consent of heart as one friend is
joined with another, and as the Jews converted were all of one heart and
soul: Act. 2.42.
or by any abode in one place, or by touching as sea and land are both joined
together and make one globe: or by any composition or commixtion of substances,
as when many ingredients are put together to make one medecin. But this
conjunction is altogether spiritual as the former giving was, and
incomprehensible to man's reason: and therefore we must rather labor to feel
it by experience in the heart, then to conceive it in the brain. Yet
nevertheless it shall not be amiss to consider a semblance of it in this
comparison. Suppose a man having the parts of his body disioyned far
asunder, his head lying in Italy, one arm in Germany, the other in Spain,
and his legs with us in England: suppose further all these parts or quarters
have all one soul extending it self unto them all and quickening each of them
severally as though they were nearely joined together: and though the parts be
severed many hundred miles asunder, yet the distance of place does not hinder
the conjunction, considering one and the same soul does enlarge it self and
give life unto them all. In the same manner the head of the Mystical body
Christ our Savior is now in heaven, and some of his members in heaven with him
and some in earth: and of these, some in England, some in Germany, some in
Italy, some in Spain, distant many thousand miles asunder: and the spirit of
God is as it were the soul of this body which gives spiritual life to all
the members: distance of place does not hinder this conjunction, because the
Holy ghost which linketh all the parts together, is infinite.

The benefits which we receive by this Mystical union are manifold. For it is
the ground of the conveiance of all grace. The first that by means hereof
every Christian as he is a Christian or a man regenerate has his beginning and
being in Christ, howsoever as he is a man he has his being and subsisting in
himself, 1. Cor. 1.30.
as Paul says, Ye are of God in Christ. And, We are members of his body, of
his flesh, and of his bones. How will some say can this be? After this manner.
Ephesians. 5.30.
The comparison is taken from our first parents. Eve was made of a rib taken
out of Adams side he being cast into a slumber: this being done, Adam awaked
and said, This now is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh. Christ was nailed
on the cross and his most precious blood was shed, and out of it arise and
spring all true Christians, that is, out of the merit of Christ's death and
passion, whereby they become new creatures. Secondly every one that believes
in Christ by reason of this union has an unspeakeable prerogative, for hereby
he is first united to Christ, and by reason thereof is also joined to the whole
trinity, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, and shall have eternal
fellowshippe with them. Thirdly, sundry men specially Papists deride the
doctrine of justification by imputed righteousness; thinking it as absurd that
a man should be just by that righteousness which is inherent in the person of
Christ; as if we should say, that one man may live by the soul of another, or
be learned by the learning of another. But here we may see that it has
sufficient foundation. For there is a most nere and strait union between
Christ and all that believe in him: and in this union Christ with all his
benefits according to the tenor of the covenant of grace, is made ours
really: and therefore we may stand just before God by his righteousness; it
being indeed his, because it is in him as in a subject; yet so, as it is also
ours because it is given unto us of God. Now there is no such union between man
and man, and for that cause one man can not live by the soul of another, or be
learned by the learning of another. Fourthly, from this fountain springs our
sanctification, whereby we die to sin and are renewed in righteousness and
holiness. Worms and flies that have lain dead all winter, if they be laid in
the sun in the spring time, begin to revive by virtue thereof: even so when
we are united to Christ, and are as it were laid in the beams of thi^ blessed
son of righteousness virtue is derived thence which warmeth our benumbed
hearts dead in sin, and reviveth us to newenesse of life: whereby we begin
to affect and like good things, and put in practice all the duties of religion.
Firstly, hence we have the protection of Gods angels: for they always wait and
attend on Christ, and because we are made one with him, they attend upon us
also. Lastly by reason of this union with Christ, every believer comes to
have interest and to recover his title in the creatures of God, and to have the
holy and lawful use of them all. For we must consider, that although Adam
created in the image of God was made Lord over all things in heaven and earth;
yet when he fell by ea^ing the forbidden fruit; he, and in him all mankind
lost the title and use of them all. Now therefore that a man may recover his
interest, he must first of all be united and made one with Christ: and then by
Christ who is Lord and King over all, shall he recover that title in the
creatures of God which he had by creation, and be made Lord over them again.
But some will say, if this be so, then a Christian man may have and enjoy all
creatures at his pleasure, and therefore the goods of other men. Ans. The
reason is not good, for in this life we have no more but Jus ad rem.
right unto the creature, and Jus in re.
right in it, that is, actual possession is reserved for the life to come.
Therefore we content our selves with our allowed portions given unto us by
God, by his grace using them in holy manner, expecting by hope the full
fruition of all things till after this life. Again, if all title to the
creatures be recovered by Christ, it may be demanded, whether infidels have any
interest to their goods or no? Ans. Infidels before men are right lords of all
their lands and possessions which they have obtained by lawful means, and in
the courts of men they are not to be deprived of them: but before God they are
but usurpers because they hold them not in capite, that is, in Christ* neither
have they any holy and right use of them, for to the unclean all things are
unclean. And they must first of all become members of Christ before they can
hold and enjoy them aright, and use them well.

The duties which are to be learned of the doctrine of this union are
manifold. And first of all we are taught to purge our hands and hearts of
all our sins, and especially to avoid all those sins whereby men's bodies
are defiled, as drunkenness, uncleanness, fornication: for they drive away
the spirit of God from his own house, and dissolve the bond of the conjunction
between Christ and us. Secondly we must every one of us, which profess our
selves to be members of Christ, labor to become conformable unto him in
holiness of life, and to become new creatures: for this union requires thus
much. Let a man take the griftes of a crabbe-tree and set them into good
stocks, yet will they not change their sap, but bring forth fruit
according to their own nature even sour crabbes: but it must not be so with
us: we are indeed wild olives, and the branches of wild vines, yet seeing we
are persuaded that we are grafted into Christ and made one with him, we must
lay aside our wild and sour nature, and take upon us the nature of the true
vine, bear good fruit, have good juice in us, and render sweet wine.
Thirdly, we are taught hence to be plentiful in all good works, consideriag
we are joined to him that is the fountain of grace. And therefore Christ
says, I am the true vine, and my Father is the husband man: Ioh. 15.1.
every branch that bears not fruit in me, he takes away; and every one
that bears fruit he purges it that it may bear more fruit. And the
Prophet Esai compares the Church of God to a vineyarde with a tower and a
wine press in it. Esai. 5.7.
And God himself comes often down unto it, to see the fruits of the valley,
to see if the vine budde, Cant. 6.10.
and the Pomegranates flourish. And further we must bring forth fruit with
patience. Luke 8.15.
For the Lord of this vineyarde comes with crosses and afflictions, as with a
pruning knife in his hand to pare and to dress us that we may be fit to bring
forth fruit plentifully in duties of piety to God, and in duties of love to
all men, yea to our enemies. Crhistian men are trees of righteousness growing by
the waters of the sanctuary: but what trees? not like ours: Ezec. 47.12.
for they are rooted upwarde in heaven in Christ, and their grains and
branches grow downward that they may bear fruit among men.

Hitherto we have heard what the Church is: now to believe the Church is
nothing else but to believe that there is a company of the predestinate made
one in Christ, and that withal we are in the number of them.

Before we proceed any further, three rules must be observed touching the
Church in general. The first, that Christ alone is the head of the Catholic
Church, Ephesians. 2.22. Coloss. 2.19.
and that he neither has nor can have any creature in heaven or earth to be
his fellow herein. For the Church is his body, and none but he can perform
the duty of an head unto it: which duty stands in two things; the first is, to
govern the Church by such power and authority whereby he can and does
prescribe laws properly binding the consciences of all his members; the second
is, by grace to quicken and put spiritual life into them, so as they shall be
able to say, that they live not, but Christ in them. As for the Supremacy of
the sea of Rome whereby the Pope will needs stand ministerial head to the
Catholic Church, is a satanicall forgerie. For the headshippe (as I may term
it) of Christ is of that nature or quality, that it can admit no deputy,
whether we respect the commanding or the quickening power of Christ before
nam^d. Nay Christ needs no vicar or deputy; for he is all-sufficient in him
self and always present with his Church, as he him self testifies, saying,
Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
among them. And whereas all commissions cease in the presence of him that gives
the commission: it is as much pride and arrogancy for the Pope to take unto
himself the title of the head and universal Bishop of the Church, as it is
for a subject to keep him self in commission in the presence of his King.

The second rule is, that there is no salvation out of the Church, and that
therefore every one which is to be saved must become a member and a citizen of
the Catholic and Apostolic Church: and such as remain for ever out of the
same perish eternally. Therefore S. John says, They went out of us, they were
not of us, for if they had been of us, 1. Ioh. 2.19.
they would have remained with us: but this comes to pass that it might
appear, that they are not all of us. And again, that such as be holy are in
the city of God, but without, that is, forth of the Church are dogs,
inchaunters, Rev. 22.15.
whoremongers, adulterers, etc. And the Arc out of which all perished, figured
the Church, out of which all are condemned. And for this cause Saint Luke
says, that the Lord added to the Church from day to day such as should be
saved. Act. 2.47.
And the reason hereof is plain: for without Christ there is no salvation, but
out of the militant Church there is no Christ nor faith in Christ: and
therefore no salvation. Again, forth of the militant Church there are no
means of salvation, no preaching of the word, no invocation of Gods name, no
sacraments, and therefore no salvation. For this cause every man must be
admonished evermore to join himself to some particular Church being a sound
member of the Catholic Church.

The third rule is, that the Church which here we believe is only one. As
Christ himself speaks, My dove is alone, Cant. 6.8.
and my undefiled is the only daughter of her mother. And as there is only
one God and one Redeemer, one faith, one baptism, and one way of salvation by
Christ only, so there is but one Church alone.

The Catholic Church has two parts: the Church Triumphant in heaven, and
the Church Militant on earth.

The Triumphant Church may thus be described: It is a company of the spirits
of just men, triumphing over the flesh, the devil, and the world, praising
God. First I say it is a company of the spirits of men as the Holy Ghost
expressly terms it, Heb. 12.23.
because the souls only of the godly departed, as of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
David, etc. are as yet ascended into heaven, and not their bodies. Furthermore
the properties of this company are two. The first is, to make triumph over
their spiritual enemies the flesh, the devil, the world: for the righteous
man so long as he lives in this world is in continual comb^te without truce
with all these enemies of his salvation: and by constant faith obtaining
victory, in the end of his life he is translated in glorious and triumphant
manner into the kingdom of glory. This was signified to John in a vision in
which he saw an innumerable company of all sorts of nations, kinreds, people,
and tongues stand before the lamb clothed in long white robes with palms in
their hands, Rev. 7.10.
in token that they have been warriors, but now by Christ have gotten the
victory and are made conquerours. Their second property is to praise and
magnify the name of god, as it follows in the former place, saying, Amen:
praise and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, honor, power, and might be
unto our God for evermore. Hence it may be demanded whether Angels be of this
triumphant Church or no? Answer. The blessed Angels be in heaven in the
presence of God the father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, but they are not of
the mystical body of Christ, because they are not under him as he is their
Redeemer, considering they can not be redeemed which never fell: and it can not
be proved that they now stand by the virtue of Christ's redemption: but they
are under him as he is their Lord and King, and by the power of Christ as he
is God, and their God, are they confirmed. And therefore as I take it, we can
not say, that angels are members of the mystical body of Christ or of the
triumphant Church.

The Church Militant may be thus described: It is the company of the elect or
faithful, living under the cross, desiring to be remooved and to be with
Christ. I say not that the Militant Church is the whole body of the elect, but
only that part thereof which lives upon earth: and the infallible mark
thereof is that faith in Christ which is taught and delivered in the writings
of the Prophets and Apostles* and this faith again may be discerned by two
marks. The first is, that the members of this company live under the cross,
and profit by it in all spiritual grace. And therefore it is said, that we
must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of heaven. Act. 14.22.
And our Savior Christ says, If any man will come after me, Luke 9.23.
let him deny himself, and take up his cross every day and follow me. The
second mark is a desire to depart hence and to be with Christ, as Paul says,
2. Cor. 5.8.
We love rather to be removed out of this body and to be with Christ. And
again. I desire to be loosed and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.
which is best of all. Where yet we must remember, that the members of Christ
do not desire death simply and absolutely, but in two respects: I. that they
might leave off to sin, and by sinning leave to displease God. II. That they
might come to enjoy happiness in heaven, and to be with Christ.

Touching the general estate of the Militant Church, two questions are to be
considered. The first, how far forth God is present with it assisting it by
his grace. Answer. God gives his spirit unto it in such a measure, that
although the gates of hell cannot prevail against it, yet nevertheless it
remains still subject to error both in doctrine and manners. For that which
is true in every member of the Church is also true in the whole: but every
member of the militant Church is subject to error both in doctrine and
manners: because men in this life are but in part enlightened and sanctified,
and therefore still remain subject to blindness of mind and ignorance, and to
the rebellion of their wills and affections: whereby it comes to pass that
they may easily fail either in judgment or in practice. Again that which may
befall one or two particular Churches may likewise befall all the particular
Churches upon earth, all being in one and the same condition, but this may
befall one or two particular Churches to fail either in doctrine or manners.
The Church of Ephesus failed in leaving her first love, whereupon Christ
threatens to remove from her the candlestick. Rev. 2.4.
And the Church of Galatia was removed to an other Gospel from him that had
called them in the grace of Christ: Gal. 1.6.
now why may not the same things befall twenty yea an hundred Churches which
befell these twain. Lastly experience shows this to be true, in that
general councels have erred. The counce^l of Nicene being to reform sundry
behauiours among the Bishops and Elde^s would with common consent have
forbidden marriage unto them, thinking it profitable to be so; unless
Paphnutius had better informed them out of the scriptures. In the third
council at Carthage certain books Apocrypha, as the book of Syrach, Toby,
and the Macchabees are numbered in the Canon, and yet were excluded by the
council of Laodicea. And the saying of a divine is received, that former
counsels are to be reformed and amended by the latter. August. de Baptis. lib.
2. cap. 3. Ioh. 16.13.
But Papists maintaining that the Church can not err, allege the promise of
Christ: How be it when he is come which is the spirit of truth, he will
lead you into all truth. Answer. The promise is directed to the Apostles, who
with their Apostolical authoririe had this privilege granted them, that in
the teaching and penning of the Gospel they could not err: and therefore in
the council at Jerusalem they conclude thus, It seems good unto us and to the
holy Ghost. And if the promise be further extended to all the Church, it must
be understoode with a limitation: that God will give his spirit unto the
members thereof to lead them into all truth, Ioh. 3.34. Act. 20.20, 27.
so far forth as shall be needful for their salvation.

The second question is, wherein stands the dignity and excellency of the
Church. Answer. It stands in subjection and obedience unto the will and word
of his spouse and head, Christ Jesus. And hence it follows, that the Church
is not to challenge unto her self authority over the scriptures, but only a
ministry or ministerial service whereby she is appointed of God to preserve
and keep, to publish and preach them, and to give testimony of them. And for
this cause, 1. Tim. 3.11.
it is called the pillar and ground of truth. The Church of Rome not content
with this, says further that the authority of the Church in respect of us is
above the authority of the scripture, because (say they) we can not know
scripture to be scripture but by the testimony of the Church. But indeed they
speak an untruth. For the testimony of men that are subject to error can not
be greater and of more force with us then the testimony of God who cannot
err. Again, the Church has her beginning from the word: (for there can not
be a Church without faith, and there is no faith without the word, and there is
no word out of the Scriptures) and therefore the Church in respect of us,
depends on the Scripture, and not the Scripture on the Church. And as the
lawier which has no further power but to expound the law, is under the law: so
the Church which has authority only to publish and expound the Scriptures,
can not authorize them unto us, but must submit her self unto them. And
whereas it is alleged that faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.
and this hearing is in respect of the voice of the Church, and that therefore
faith comes by the voice of the Church: the answer is, that the place must be
understood not of that general faith whereby we are resolved that Scripture is
Scripture, but of justifying faith, whereby we attain unto salvation. And
faith comes by hearing the voice of the Church, not as it is the churches
voice, but as it is a ministry or means to publish the word of God, which is
both the cause and object of our believing. Now on the contrary we must hold,
that as the carpenter knows his rule to be straight, not by any other rule
applied unto it, but by it self: for casting his eye upon it, he presently
discernes whether it be straight or no: so we know and are resolved that
Scripture is Scripture, even by the Scripture it self, though the Church say
nothing; so be it we have the spirit of discerning when we read, hear, and
consider of the Scripture. And yet the testimony of the Church is not to be
despised, for though it breed not a persuasion in us of the certentie of the
Scripture, yet is it a very good inducement thereto.

The militant Church has many parts. For as the Ocean sea which is but one, is
divided into parts according to the regions and countries against which it
lies, as into the English, Spanish, Italian sea, etc. so the Church dispersed
over the face of the whole earth, is divided into other particular Churches
according as the countries are several in which it is seated, as into the
Church of England and Ireland, the Church of France, the Church of Germany,
etc.

Again, particular Churches are in a twofold estate: sometime they lie hid in
persecution, wanting the public preaching of the word, and the administration
of the sacraments: and sometimes again they are visible, carrying before the
eyes of the world an open profession of the name of Christ: as the moon is
sometime eclipsed and sometime shines in the full. In the first estate was the
Church of Israel in the days of Eliah, when he wished to die: because the
people had forsaken the covenant of the Lord, 1 King 19.14, 18.
broken down his altars, slain his Prophets with the sword, and he was left
alone and they sought to take away his life also. Behold a lamentable estate,
when so worthy a Prophet could not find an other beside himself that feared
God: yet mark what the Lord says unto him, I have left seven thousand in
Israel, even all the knees that have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth that
has not kissed him. Again it is said, that Israel had bin a long season
without the true God, without priest to teach, 2. Chron. 15.3.
and without the law. Neither must this trouble any that God should so far
forth forsake his Church: for when ordinary means of salvation fail, he then
gathers his Elect by extraordinary means; as when the children of Israel
wandered in the wilderness wanting both circumcision and the Passover, he
made a supply by Manna and by the pillar of a cloud* Hence we have direction
to answer the Papists, who demand of us where our Church was threescore
years ago before the days of Luther: we say that then for the space of many
hundred years an universal Apostasy ouerspread the face of the whole earth,
and that our Church then was not visible to the world, but lay hid under the
chafe of Popery. And the truth of this, the Records of all ages manifest.

The second estate of the Church is, when it flourishes and is visible, nor
that the faith and secret Election of men can be seen (for no man can discern
these things but by outward signs) but because it is apparent in respect of
the outward assemblies gathered to the preaching of the word and the
administration of the Sacraments, for the praise and glory of God and their
mutual edification. And the visible Church may be thus described: It is a mixed
company of men professing the faith, assembled together by the preaching of
the word. Math. 13.25* 47.
First of all I call it a mixed company, because in it there be true believers
and hypocrites, Elect and Reprobate, good and badde. The Church is the Lords
field in which the enemy sows his tares: it is the corn flore in which
lies wheat and chafe: it is a ba^d of men in which beside those that be of
valor and courage, there be white liuered soldiers. And it is called a
Church of the better part, namely the Elect whereof it consists, though they
be in number few. As for the ungodly, though they be in the Church, yet they
are no more parts of it indeed, the^ the superfluous humors in the vains, are
parts of the body. But to proceed, how are the members of the visible Church
qualified and discerned? the answer follows in the definition, professing
the faith* whereby I mean the profession of that religion which has been
taught from the beginning, and is now recorded in the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles. And this profession is a sign and mark whereby a man is
declared and made manifest to be a member of the Church.

Again, because the profession of the faith is otherwhiles true and sincere,
and otherwhiles only in show: therefore there be also two sorts of members of
the visible Church, members before God and members before men. A member of the
Church before God is he, that beside the outward profession of the faith, has
inwardly a pure heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned, whereby he is
indeed a true member of the Church. Members before men, whom we may call
reputed members, are such as have nothing else but the outward profession
wanting the good conscience and the faith unfeigned. The reason why they are to
be esteemed members of us is, because we are bound by the rule of charity to
think of men as they appear unto us: leaving secret judgments unto God.

I added in the last place, that the Church is gathered by the word preached,
to show that the cause whereby it is begun and continued, is the word: which,
1* Pet. 1.23. Hebr. 5.13. 1. Cor. 3.2.
for that cause is called the immortal seed whereby we are borne anew, and
milk, whereby we are fed and cherished to life everlasting. And hence it
follows necessarily, that the preaching of the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, joined with any measure of faith and obedience, is an infallible
mark of a true Church. Indeed it is true, there be three things required to
the good estate of a Church, the preaching of the Gospel, the administration
of the Sacraments, and due exequution of Discipline according to the word: yet
if the two latter be wanting, if there be preaching of the word with obedience
in the people, there is for substance a true Church of God. For it is the
banner of Christ displaied, under which all that war against the flesh, the
devil, the world, must range themselves. As the Lord says by the Prophet
Isai, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard unto the
people, Isai 49.22.
and they shall bring their sons in their arms, and their daughters shall be
carried upon their shoulders. Hence it follows that men which want the
preaching of the Gospel, must either procure the same unto themselves, or if
that cannot be, because they live in the midst of idolatrous nations, as in
Spain and Italy, it is requisite that they should join themselves to those
places where with liberty of conscience they may enjoy this happy blessing.
Men are not to have their hearts glued to the honors and riches of this
world, but they should be of David's mind, and rather desire to be dorekeepers
in the house of God, then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness. In the
Canticles, the spouse of Christ says, Show mercy, O thou whom my soul
loves, Cant. 1.6.
where thou feedest, where thou lie at noone: for why should I be as she
that turns aside to the flocks of thy companions. To whom he answeareth
thus: If thou know not, O thou the fairest among women, get thee forth by the
steps of the flock, verse. 7.
and feed thy kiddes by the tents of the shepherds: that is, in those places
where the doctrine of righteousness and life everlasting by the Messiah is
published. When the Shunamites child was dead, she told her husband that she
would go to the man of God, to whom he answered thus; Why will thou go to
him to day, it is neither nevve moon nor sabbath day: 2. Kin. 4.23.
whereby is signified that when teaching was skarse in Israel, the people did
resort to the Prophets for instruction and consolation. And David says, that
the people wheresoever their abode was, went from strength to strength till
they appeared before God in Sion. And oftentimes, they being Proselytes, Psalm.
84.7.
there abode must needs be out of the precincts of Iewrie.

Thus we see what the visible Church is: now further concerning it, three
questions are to be ska^ned. The first is, how we may discern whether
particular men and particular Churches holding errors, be sound members of the
Catholic Church or no. For the answearing of this, we must make a double
distinction, one of errors, the other of persons that err. Of errors, some
are destroyers of the faith, some only weakners of it. A destroier is that, 2.
Tim. 2.12.
which ouerturneth any fundamental point of religion; which is of that nature,
that if it be denied, religion it self is ouerturned; as the denial of the
death of Christ, and the immortality of the soul, justification by works.
and such like: and the sum of these fundamental points is comprised in the
Creed of the Apostles and the Decalogue. A weakening error is that, the
holding whereof does not ouerturne any point in the foundation of salvation; as
the error of free will, and sundry such like. This distinction is made by the
holy Ghost, who says expressly that the doctrines of repentance, and faith,
Gal. 5.2, 3. Hebr. 6.1. 1. Cor. 3.10.
and baptismes, and laying on of hands, and the resurrection, and the last
judgment, are the foundation, namely of religion: and again, that Christ is
the foundation, and that other doctrines consonant to the word, are as gold and
silver laid thereupon. Secondly persons erring* are of two sorts: some err of
weakness, being carried away by others; or of simple ignorance, not yet being
convicted and informed concerning the truth. Some again err of obstinacy, or
affected ignorance, which having bin admonished and convicted, still persevere
in their forged opinions. This being said, we now come to the point. If any
man or Church, shall hold an error of the lighter kind, he still remains a
member of the Church of God, and so must be reputed of us. As when a Lutherane
shall hold, that images are still to be retained in the Church; that there is
an Universal Election of all men, etc. for these and such like opinions may be
maintained, the foundation of salvation vnraced. This which I say is flatly
avouched by Paul, If any man (says he) build on this foundation gold, silver,
precious stones; timber, hay, or stubble, his work shall be made manifest by
the fire, etc. and if any man's work burn, he shall loose, but yet he shall be
safe himself. 1. Cor. 3*15.
And therefore the hay and stubble of men's errors beside the foundation on
which they are laid, do not debar them from being Christians or members of
the Church. A man breaks down the windows of his house; the house stands:
he breaks down the roof or the walls; the house yet stands, though
deformed: he pulls up the foundation; the house it self falls and cease to
be an house. Now religion which we profess is like an house or building: and
some points thereof are like windows, doors, walls, roofes, and some are the
foundation: and the former may be battered, the foundation standing. Again, if
the error be directly or by necessary consequent, even in common sense
against the foundation, consideration must be had whether the Church or party
erreth of weakness or malice* if of weakness, the party is to be esteemed as a
member of the Catholic Church. And thus Paul writes unto the Church of
Galatia, as to a Church of God, though by false teachers it had bin turned a
way to another Gospel, and embraced the fundamental error of justification by
works. But when any man or Church shall hold fundamental errors in obstinacy
or affected ignorance, we are then not bound to repute them any longer as
Churches or Christians, but as such to whom condemnation belongs, as Paul
shows by the example of Iannes and Iambres. And as Ia^nes and Iambres, says
he, withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth, 2. Tim. 3.8.
men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. Yet withal this caveat
must ever be remembered, that we rather condemn the error then the person that
erreth, because Gods mercy is like a bottomless sea, whereby he works what
he will and when he will in the hearts of miserable sinners.

The second question is, where at this day we may find such visible Churches
as are indeed sound members of the Catholic Church. And for the resolving of
it, we are to go through all countries and religions in the world. And first to
begin with Turks and Jews, we are not in any wise to acknowledge their
assemblies for Churches, because they worship not God in Christ who is the
head of the Church.

As for the Assemblies of Papists which have bin a great part of the world, if
thereby we understand companies of men holding the Pope for their head, and
believing the doctrine established in the council of Trent; in name they are
called churches, but indeed they are no true or sound members of the Catholic
Church. For both in their doctrine and in the worship of God they race the very
foundation of religion, which will appear by these three points. First of all
they hold justification by works of grace: auouching that they are not only
justified before god by the merit of Christ, but also by their own doings.
Which opinion flatly ouer^urneth justification by Christ. For as Paul says to
the Galatians, If ye be circum^ised Christ profits you nothing, that is, if
ye look to be justified by the works of the ceremonial law, ye are fallen
from Christ: Gal. 5.2.
join Circumcision and Christ together in the matter of justification, and ye
do quite overthrow justification by Christ. Now if this be true, which is the
word of God that can not lie, then we say to the Papists, If ye will needs be
justified by works of grace, ye are fallen from grace. The second point is,
that they maintain a daily real sacrifice of the body of Christ in the Mass
for the sins of the quick and dead. And this is also a fundamental heresy.
For Christ's sacrifice on the cross must either be a perfect sacrifice or no
sacrifice: and if it be often iterated and repeated by the Mass Priest, it is
not perfect but imperfect. The third point is, that they worship the Images of
the Trinity and of Saints departed, and their Breaden-god, which is as vile an
abomination as ever was among the Gentiles: all being directly against the
true meaning of the second Commandment, and defacing the worship of God in the
very substance thereof. Thus then it appears that the old Church of Rome is
changed, and is now at this day, of a spouse of Christ become an harlot: and
therefore no more a Church of Christ indeed, then the carcass of a dead man
that wears a living man's garment is a living man, though he look never so
like him. And whereas they plead for themselves that they have succession from
the Apostles, the answer is, that succession of person is nothing without
succession of doctrine, which they want: and we see that Heretics have
succeeded lawful Ministers. Secondly, whereas it is alleged that in the
Popish assemblies the Sacrament of Baptism is rightly for substance
administered; and that also it is a note of a Church, three things may be
answered. First, that Baptism severed from the preaching of the Gospel, is no
more a sign of a Church, then the seal severed from the Indenture is of
force; and that is nothing. Circumcision was used in Colchis yet no Church,
Herodot.
and among the Samaritans, and yet no people. Secondly Baptism is in the
assemblies of the Church of Rome, Hos. 1.9.
as the purse of the true man in the hand of the thief: and indeed it does no
more argue them to be churches, then the true man's purse argues the thief to
be a true man. For baptism though it be in their assemblies, yet does it
appertain not unto them, but unto an other hidden Church of God, which he has
in all ages gathered forth of the midst of them. Thirdly, though they have the
outward Baptism, yet they by necessary consequent of doctrine, ouerturne the
inward baptism that stands in justification and sanctification. Moreover,
whereas it is alleged that they maintain the book of the old and new
Testament penned by the Prophets and Apostles; the answer is, that they do it
with adding to the Canon, and by corrupting the native sense of the Scriptures
in the very foundation: and therefore they are but as a lantern that shows
light to others and none to it self. Fourthly, it is further said that they
hold the Creed of the Apostles, and make the same confession of faith that we
do. I answer that in show of words they do so indeed: but by necessary
consequents in the rest of their doctrine they ouerturne one of the natures and
all the offices of Christ, and therewithal most of the articles of the Creed.
And herein they deal as a father, that in outward show tenders the body of
his child, and will not abide the least blemish upon it: and yet by secret
conveiances inwardly annoies the heart, the brain, or the liver, and so in
truth destroies the same. Fifthly it is alleged, that Antichrist must sit in
the Temple of God, that is, the Church: therefore say some that desire an union
between us and the Papists, popish assemblies are true Churches: but the
argument is not good. For it is one thing to be in the Church, an other thing
to be of it. And Antichrist is said to sit in the Church, not as a member
thereof, but as an usurper, or as the pyrate in the ship of the merchant: and
hence it cannot be proved, that assemblies of Papists are Churches, but that
in them and with them there is mingled an other hidden Church in the midst
whereof Antichrist the Pope rules, though himself has no part therein.
Lastly, whereas some, being no Papists, think their Churches to be like a body
diseased and full of soars and wounds from the head to the foot, and the
throat also cut, yet so as life is still remaining; we may better think,
(their foul errors considered and their worship of God, which is nothing else
but a mixture of Iudaisme and Paganism) that it is a rotten and dead corpse
void of spiritual life. And therefore we have severed our selves from the
Church of Rome upon just cause: neither are we schismatics in so doing, but
they rather; because the ground and the proper cause of the schism is in the^.

As for the Assemblies of Anabaptists, Libertines, Antinomies, Trit^eits,
Arrians, Samosa^enia^s, they are no churches of God* but conspiracies of
monstrous heretics iudicially condemned in the primitive Church, and again by
the malice of Satan renewed and revived in this age. The same we are to think
and say of the Family of love.

As for the Churches of Germany commonly called the Churches of the
Lutheranes, they are to be reputed of us as the true Churches of God. Though
their Augustane Confession have not satisfied the expectation of other Reformed
Churches: yet have they all the same enemies in matter of religion, and do
alike confess the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: and of the office of
the Mediator, of faith and good works, of the Word, the Church and the
Magistrate, are all of one judgment. They differ indeed from us in the
question of the Sacrament, but it is no sufficient cause to induce us to hold
the^ as no Church: for that there is a true or real receiving of the body and
blood of Christ in the Lords supper, we all agree; and we jointly confess
that Christ is there present so far forth that he does truly feed us with
his very body and blood to eternal life: and all the controversy lies in the
manner of receiving; we contenting our selves with that spiritual receiving
which is by the hand of faith, they adding thereto the corporal, whereby they
imagine themselves to receive Christ with the hand and mouth of the body. And
though to maintain this their opinion, they be constrained to turn the
ascension of Christ into a dispa^ition, whereby his body being visible becomes
invisible, yet in the maine points we agree: that Christ ascended into heaven:
that he entered into his kingdom in our name and for us: that we are governed
and preserved by his power and might: and that whatsoever good thing we have or
do, proceeds wholly from the grace of his spirit. Indeed the opinion of the
Vbiquitie of the body of Christ reviveth the condemned heresies of Eutiches
and Nestorius, and it ouerturneth by necessary consequent most of the articles
of faith: but that was private to some men, as Brentius and others, and was not
received of whole Churches: and whereas the men were godly and learned, and we
are uncertain with what affection, and how long they held this error, we rest
our selves in condemning it, leaving the persons to God. Again Popish
Transubstantiation, and Lutherian Consubstantiation, are both against the truth
of the manhood of Christ; yet with great difference. Transubstantiation is
flat against an article of faith: for if Christ's body be made of bread, and
his blood of wine (which must needs be if there be a conversion of the one
into the other) then was not he conceived and borne of the Virgin Marie: for it
can not both be made of bakers bread and of the substance of the Virgin.
Again it abolisheth the outward sign in the Lords supper, and the and so
ouerturnes the sacrament.
analogy between the sign and the thing signified: but Consubstantiation
does not so, neither does it ouerturne the substance of any article of
Religion, but only a maine point in Philosophy, which is, that A body does
occupy only one place at once.

Furthermore the Churches of Heluetia, and Savoie, and the free cities of
France, and the low Countries, and Scotland* are to be reuere^ced as the true
churches of God, as their Confessio^s make manifest. And no less must we
think of our own Churches in England and Ireland. For we hold, believe, and
maintain, and preach the true faith, that is, the ancient doctrine of
salvation by Christ, taught and published by the Prophets and Apostles, as the
Book of the articles of faith agreed upon in open Parliament do fully show:
and withal now we are, and have bin ready to testify this our faith, by
venturing our lives even in the cause of religion against foreign power, and
especially the Spainard: and hereupon all the Churches in Europe give unto us
the hand of fellowship. And whereas sundry among us that separate and indeed
excommunicate themselves, give out that there is no Church in England, no
Ministers, no Sacraments: their peremptory asseuerations wanting sufficient
ground, are but as paper-shot. They allege that our assemblies are full of
grievous blottes and enormities. Ansvv. The defects and corruptions of Churches
must be distinguished: and they be either in doctrine, or manners. Again
corruptions in doctrine must be further distinguished: some of them are errors
indeed, but beside the foundation; and some errors directly against the
foundation: and these ouerturne all religion, whereas the former do not. Now it
can not be showed that in our Churches is taught any one error that raceth the
foundation, and consequently annihillateth the truth of Gods Church. Indeed
there is controversy among us touching the point of Ecclesiastical regiment:
but mark in what manner. We all jointly agree in the substance of the
regiment, confessing freely that there must be preaching of the word,
administration of the sacraments according to the institution, and the use of
the Power of the kaies in admonitions, suspencions, excommunications: the
difference between us is only touching the persons, and the manner of putting
this government in exequution: and therefore men on both parts, though both
hold not the truth in this point; yet because both hold Christ the foundation,
they still remain brethren and true members of Christ. As for corruptions in
manners, they make not a Church to be no Church, but a badde Church. When as
the wicked Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses Chair, Math. 23.2.
taught the things which he had written, the people are commanded to hear
them, and to do the things which they say, not doing the things which they
do. And whereas it is said, that we hold Christ in word, and deny him in
deed; that is answered thus: denial of Christ is double, either in
judgment, or in fact: denial in judgment joined with obstinacy, makes a
Christian to be no Christian; denial in fact, the judgment still remaining
sound, makes not a man to be no Christian, but a badde Christian. When the
Jews had crucified the Lord of life, they still remained a Church, if any upon
earth: Romans 9.4. Act. 2.39.
and notwithstanding this their fact, the Apostles acknowledged that the
covenant and the promises still belonged unto them: and they never made any
separation from their Synagogues, till such time as they had bin sufficiently
convicted by the Apostolical ministry, that Jesus Christ was the true
Messiah.

Thus we see where at this day we may find the true Church of God. Now I
come to the third question: and that is, at what time a man may with good
conscience make separation from a Church? Answer. So long as a Church makes
no separation from Christ, we must make no separation from it: and when it
separates from Christ, we may also separate from it: and therefore in two
cases there is vvarrant of separation. The one is, when the vvorshippe of God
is corrupt in substance. And for this we have a commandment, Be not, says
Paul, unequally yoked with infidels: 2. Cor. 6.14.
for what fellowshippe has righteousness with unrighteousness, or what communion
has light with darkness, or what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part
has the believer with the infidel? or what agreement has the temple of God
with idols? wherefore come out from among them and separate your selves, says
the Lord. And we have a practice of this in the old testament. When Jeroboam
had set up idols in Israel, 2. Chr. 11.14.
then the Priests and Levites came to Judah and Jerusalem to serve the Lord.
The second is, when the doctrine of religion is corrupt in substance: as Paul
says, If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Tim. 6.3.
and to the doctrine which is acdording to godliness, he is puffed up; from such
separate your selves. A practice of this we have in the Apostle Paul, who
being in Ephesus in a Synagogue of the Jews, spoke boldly for the space of
three months, disputing and exhorting to the things which concern the
kingdom of God: but when certain men were hardened and disobeied, speaking evil
of the way of God, he departed from them, and separated the disciples of
Ephesus: Act. 19.9. and 28.28.
and the like he did at Rome also. As for the corruptions that be in the
manners of men that be of the Church, they are no sufficient warrant of
separation, unless it be from private company, 1. Cor. 5.11. Psalm. 17.4. 2.
Pet. 2.8.
as we are admonished by the Apostle Paul; and by the examples of David and
Lot. By this which has been said, it appears that the practice of such as
make separation from us, is very badde and scismaticall, considering our
Churches fail not either in the substance of doctrine, or in the substance of
the true worship of God.

Now to proceed in the Creed. The Church is further set forth by certain
properties and prerogatives. The properties or qualities are two, holiness and
largenes. That the Church is holy, it appears by Peter, which calls it an holy
nation, and a chosen people: and by Saint John, 1. Pet. 2.9. Rev. ^.2. and 22
29.
who calls it the holy city. And it is so called, that it may be distinguished
from the false Church, which is termed in Scriptures the Synagogue of Satan,
Rev. 2.9. and 3.9. Psalm. 26.5.
and the malignant Church.

Now this holiness of the Church is nothing else but a created quality in every
true member thereof, whereby the image of God which was lost by the fall of
Adam is again renewed and res^ored. The author of it is God by his word and
spirit, by little and little abolishing the corruption of sin and sanctifying
us throughout, Ioh. 17. verse. 17. Father sanctify them in thy truth, thy word
is truth. And holiness must be conceived to be in the Church on this manner: it
is perfect in the Church Triumphant, and it is only begun in the Church
Militant in this life: and that for special cause, 1. Tim. 1.17. Romans 11.20
Phil. 2.12. Mar. 9.24.
that we might give all glory to God; that we might not be high minded, that
we might work ou^ salvation with fear and trembling; that we might deny our
selves and wholly depend upon God. Hence we learn three things: first that
the Church of Rome erreth in teaching that a wicked man, yea such an one as
shall never be saved, may be a true member of the Catholic Church: for in
reason every man should be answearable to the quality and condition of the
Church whereof he is a member: if it be holy, as it is; he must be holy also.
Secondly we are every one of us, as Paul says to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.7.
to exercise our selves unto godliness, making conscience of all our former
unholy ways, endeavoring our selves to please God in the obedience of all his
commandments. It is a disgrace to the holy Church of God that men professing
themselves to be members of it, should be unholy. Thirdly our duty is, to
eschew the society of Atheists, drunkardes, fornicatours, blasphemers, and
all wicked and ungodly persons, as Paul says, Be no companions of them and
have no fellowship with the unprofitable works of darkness. Ephesians. 3.7.
And he charge the Thessalonians, that if any man among them walk
inordinately they have no company with him that he may be ashamed. 2 Thessalonians.
3.14.


The largenes of the Church is noted in the word Catholic* that is, general
or universal. And it is so called for three causes. For first of all it is
general in respect of time; because the Church has had a being in all times
and ages ever since the giving of the promise to our first parents in Paradise.
Secondly it is general, in respect of the persons of men: for it stands of
all sorts and degrees of men, high and low, rich and pore, learned and
unlearned, etc. Thirdly it is Catholic or universal in respect of place;
because it has been gathered from all the parts of the earth, specially now
in the time of the new Testament; when our Savior Christ says, Math. 26.23.
that the Gospel shall be preached in the whole world. To this purpose John
says in the Revelation, Rev. 7.9. Catholica. i. per totum orbe^ diffusa,
August. epist. 170.
I beheld and lo a great multitude which no man could number of all nations
and kinreds, and peoples and tongues, stood before the throne and before the
lamb, clothed with long white robes and palms in their hands.

And the Church which we here profess to believe, is called Catholic, that
we may distinguish it from particular Churches, which are not believed, but
seen with eye, whereof mention is made often in the Scriptures. Romans 16.5. 1.
Cor. 16.19. the Church in their house: and the Churches of Asia. Coloss. 4.15.
Salute Nymphas and the Church in his house. Act. 11.22. the Church of
Jerusalem. Act. 13.1. the Church at Antioche, etc.

That the Church is Catholic in respect of time, place, person, it ministers
matter of endelesse comfort unto us. For hereby we see that no order, degree,
or state of men are excluded from grace in Christ, unless they will exclude
themselves. Saint John says, If any man sin, we have an advocate with the
father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Ioh. 2.1, 2.
Now it might be answered, it is true indeed Christ is an advocate to some
men, but he is no advocate to me: Saint John therefore says further, and he is
the reconciliation for our sins, and not for our sins only, but for the
whole world, that is, for all believers of what condition or degree soever.

Thus much of the properties of the Church: now follow the prerogatives or
benefits which God bestows on it, which are in number four. The first is
expressed in these words, The communion of Saints. Where communion signifies
that fellowshippe or society that one has with an other: and by Saints we
understand not dead men enrolled in the Popes Calender, but all that are
sanctified by the blood of Christ, whether they be living or dead: as Paul
says, unto the Church of God which is at Corinthus, to the^ that are
sanctified in Jesus Christ Saints by calling. And God is the God of peace in
all the Churches of the Saints. 1. Cor. 1.2. and 14.33.
Now if we add the clause I believe, unto these words, the meaning is this;
I confess and acknowledge that there is a spiritual fellowshippe and society
among all the members of Christ, being the faithful servants and children of
God: and withal I believe that I am partaker of the same with the rest.

This communion has two parts, fellowship of the members with the head, and of
the members with themselves. The communion of the members with their head is
not outward, but altogether spiritual in the conscience: and for the opening
of it we must consider what the Church receives of Christ, and what he
receives of it. The Church receives of Christ four most worthy benefits. The
first, that Christ our Mediator, God and man, has truly given himself unto
us, and is become our lot and portion, and withal God the father, and the holy
Spirit in him, as David says, Iehova is the portion of mine inheritance, and
of my cup: Psalm. 16.5.
thou shall maintain my lotte: the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant
places: yea J have a fair heritage. And, My flesh fails and my heart also:
Psalm. 73.26.
but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. The second is,
the Right of adoption, whereby all the faithful whether in heaven or earth are
actually made the children of God. The benefit is wonderful, howsoever carnal
men esteem not of it. If a man should either by election or birth, or any way
else be made the son and heir of an earthly prince, he would think himself
highly advanced: how highly then are they extolled which are made the sons of
God himself. The third benefit is a title and right to the righteousness of
Christ in his sufferings, and his fulfilling of the law. The excellency of it
is unspeakable, because it serves to award the greatest temptations of the
devil* when the devil replieth thus, thou art a transgressour of the law of
God, therefore thou shall be damned; by means of that communion which we have
with Christ we answer again: that Christ suffered the curse of the law to
free us from due and deserved damnation: and when he further replies, that
seeing we never fulfilled the law, we can not therefore enter into heaven: we
answer again, that Christ's obedience is a fulfilling of the law for us and
his whole righteousness is ours to make us stand righteous before God. The
fourth benefit is a right to the kingdom of heaven, as Christ comforting his
disciples says, Fear not little flock it is your fathers pleasure to give
you a kingdom: and hence it is sundry times called Act. 26.18. Coloss. 1.12.
Ephesians. 1.18.
the inheritance and the lot of the saints.

Furthermore for the conu^iance of these benefits unto us, God has ordained
the preaching of the word and the administration of the sacraments, specially
the Lords supper: and has commanded the solemn and ordinary use of them in
the Church. And hereupon the Lords supper is called the Communion. The cup of
blessing (says Paul) which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ: and the bread which we break, 1. Cor. 10.16.
is it not the communion of the body of Christ: that is, a sign and seal of
the communion.

Again the things which Christ receives of us are two: our sins with the
punishment thereof made his by application or imputation: and our afflictions
with all the miseries of this life which he accountes his own, and therefore
does as it were put under his shoulder to bear the burden of them. And this
communion between Christ and us is expressed in the scriptures by that blessed
and heavenly bargain in which their is mutual exchange between Christ and
us: he imparts unto us milk and wine without silver or money to refresh us,
Isa. 55.1.
and gold tried by the fire that we may become rich, and white raiment that we
may be clothed, and eye-s^lve, to anoint our eyes that we may see: Rev. 3.18.
and we for our parts return unto him nothing but blindness and nakedness,
and poverty, and the loathsome burden of our filthy sins.

The second part of the communion is that which the saints have one with
another. And it is either of the living with the living, or of the living with
the dead. Now the communion of the living stands in three things: I. in like
affection: II. in the gifts of the spirit: III. in the use of temporal
riches. For the first, communion in affection is, whereby all the servants of
God are like affected to God, to Christ, to their own sins, and each to
other. They are all of one nature and heart alike disposed though they be not
acquainted nor have any external fellowshippe in the flesh. As in a family
children are for the most part one like another and brought up alike: even so
it is in Gods family which is his Church: the members thereof are all alike in
heart and affection: and the reason is, because they have one spirit to guide
them all: and therefore S. Peter says, The multitude of them that believed
were of one heart and of one soul, Act. 4.32.
neither any of them said that any thing of that which he possessed was his
own, but they had all things common. And the Prophet Esai foretelling the
unity which should be in the kingdom of Christ, says, The wolf shall dwell
with the lamb, Esa. 11.6, 7.
and the leopard shall lie with the kidde, and the calfe and the lion, and the
fat beast together, and a little child shall lead them. The covve and the
bear shall feed, and their young ones shall lie together: and the lion shall
eat straw like the bullock. The sucking child shall play upon the hole of
the aspe, and the wayned child shall put his hand into the cockatrice hole. By
these beasts are signified, men that be of a wicked and brutish nature: which,
when they shall be brought into the kingdom of Christ, shall lay aside the
same and become loving, gentle, courteous, and all of one mind. And S. Peter
requires of the Church the practice of brotherly love, and that is to carry a
tender affection to men, 2. Pet. 1.7.
not because they are of the same flesh, but because they are joined in the
bond of one spirit with us. Furthermore, by reason of this that all the
children of God are of one heart, there follows another duty of this
communion, Gal. 6.2.
whereby they bear one the burdens of another, and when one member of the
Church is grieved all are grieved, when one rejoices all rejoice; as in the
body when one member suffers all suffer.

The second branch of their communion is in the gifts of Gods spirit, as
love, hope, fear, etc. And this is showed, when one man does employ the graces
of God bestowed on him, for the good and salvation of another. As a candle
spends it self to give light to others: so must Gods people spend those
gifts which God has given them for the benefit of their brethren. A christian
man howsoever he be the freest man upon earth, yet is he servant to all men,
especially to the Church of God to do service unto the members of it by love
for the good of all. Gal. 5.13.
And this good is procured, when we convey the graces of God bestowed on us
to our breethren: and that is done five ways. I. by example: II. by
admonition: III. by exhortation: IIII. by consolation: V. by prayer. The first
which is, good example, we are enjoined by Christ saying, Let your light so
shine before men, Mat. 5.
that they may see your good works and glorify your Father which is in
heaven. And that our hearts might be touched with special care of this duty,
the Lord settes before us his own blessed example, saying, Leuit. 11*44. Mat.
11.28. 1. Cor. 11.1.
Be ye holy as I am holy: and, Learn of me that I am meek and lowly. And
Paul says, Be ye followers of me as I follovv Christ: and the higher men are
exalted, the more careful ought they to be in giving good example. For let a
man of note or estimation do evil, and he shall presently have many
followers. Evil example runs from one to another like a leprosy or
infection: and this Christ signified when he said that the fig tree planted
in the vineyarde If it bear no fruit makes all the ground barren. Luk 13.18.
The second means of communication of the gifts of God unto others, is
admonition, which is an ordinance of God whereby Christian men are to recover
their breethren from their sins. A man by occasion fallen into the water is
in danger of his life* and the reaching of the hand by another is the means
to save him. Now every man when he sins does, as much as in him lies,
cast his soul into the very pit of hell: and wholesome admonitions are as the
reaching out of the hand to recover him again. But it will peradventure be
said, how must we proceed in admonishing of others? Answer. We are to
observe three things. The first is, to search whether we that are to reprove
be faulty our selves in the same thing or no: first we must take ou^ the beam
that is in our own eye, Mat. 7.5.
and so we shall see clearly to put out the mote in our brothers eye. II.
before we reprove, we must be sure that the fault is committed: we must not
go upon hearsay or likelihoods: and therefore the Holy ghost says, Let us
consider or observe one another to provoke unto love or good works. Heb. 10.24^
III. before we reproove, we must in Christian wisdom make choice of time and
place: for all times and places serve not to this purpose. And therefore
Solomon says, It is the glory of a man to pass by an offense. Furthermore in
the act of admonishing, two things are to be observed. I. a man must deliver
the words of his admonition (so far forth as he can) out of the word of
God, so as the party which is admonished, may in the person of man see God
himself to reprove him. II. his reproof must be made with as much compassion
and fellow-feeling of other men's wants as may be. Gal 6.1.
As Paul says, If any man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are
spiritual As Chirurgians te^derly set arms and legs in joint.
restore such an one with the spirit of meekenes. The third way of
communicating good things to others is exhortation: and it is a means to
excite and stir them on forward which do already walk in the way of
godliness. Therefore the Holy Ghost says, Exhort one another daily, least any
of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. But alas, the practice
of this duty, as also of the former is hard to be found among men; for it is
usual in families that masters and fathers in stead of admonishing their
servants and children, teach them the practice of sin in swearing,
blaspheming, slaundering, etc. and as for exhortation, it is not used. Let a
man that has the fear of God offend never so little, in stead of brotherly
exhortation he shall hear his profession cast in his teeth, and his hearing
of Sermons: this practice is so general, that many beginning newly to tread in
the steps of godliness are hereby daunted, and quite driven back. The
fourth way is consolation, which is a means appointed by God whereby one man
should with words of heavenly comfort refresh the souls of others
afflicted with sickness or any other way feeling the hand of God either in
body or in mind* And this duty is as little regarded as any of the former. In
time of men's sickness neighbors come in, but what say they? I am sorry to see
you in this case, I hope to see you well again, I would be sorry else, etc. Not
one of an hundred can speak a word of comfort to the weary: but we are
faulty herein. For with what affection do we believe the communion of Saints,
when we our selves are as dry fountains that do scarce convey a drop of
refreshing to others. The last means is prayer, whereby Gods Church procures
Gods blessings for the several members thereof, and they again for the whole.
And herein lies a principal point of the communion of Saints; which ministers
notable comfort to every Christian heart. For hence we may reason thus: I am
indeed a member of the Catholic Church of God, and therefore though my own
prayers be weak, yet my comfort is this, I know that I am partaker of all the
good prayers of all the people of God dispersed over the face of the whole
earth my fellow members, and of all the blessings which God bestows on them.
This will make us in all our troubles to say with Elisha, Fear not, for they
that be with us are more then they that be with them. 2. Kin. 6.^6*
When the people of Israel had sinned in worshipping the golden calfe, the
wrath of the Lord was kindled and made a breach into them, as canon shot
against a wall: but Moses the servant of God stood in the breach before the
Lord to turn away his wrath, least he should destroy them. Psa. 106.2^.
And the prayer of Moses was so effectual that the Lord said, Exodus 32.1^.
Let me alone, as though Moses by prayer had held the hand of God that he could
not punish the people. And some think that Stevens prayer for his enemies when
he was stoned was a means of Paul's conversion. And surely though the^e were no
other reason, yet this were sufficient to move a man to embrace Christian
religion, considering that being a member of the Church he has part in all
the prayers of the saints through the world, and of the blessings of God that
come thereby.

The third part of this communion is in temporal things, as goods and riches:
whereby I mean no Spiritual communion does not bar a division of temporal
goods* Act. 2.21. 2. Cor. 8.1.
anabaptisticall communion, but that which was used in the primitive Church,
when they had all things common in respect of use: and some sold their goods
and possessions and parted them to all men, as every one had need. And by
their example we are taught to be content to employ those goods which God has
bestowed on us for the good of our fellow members within the compass of our
callings, and to our ability and beyond our ability if need require. Paul
says, Do good to all but specially to the^ which are of the household of faith.
Gal. 6.10.


The communion of the living with the dead stands in two things: the one is,
that the saints departed in the Church Triumphant do in general pray for the
Church Militant upon earth, de^iring the final deliverance of all their fellow
members from all their miseries. And therefore in the Apocalypse they cry on
this manner, How long Lord holy and true! do not thou judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth. Rev. 6.10.
I say in general, because they pray not for the particular conditions and
persons of men upon earth, considering they neither know, nor se, nor hear us:
neither can they tell what things are done upon earth. The second is, that the
godly on earth do in heart and affection converse with them in heaven desiring
continually to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Now whereas the Papists do
further enlarge this communion, auouching that the Saints in heaven make
intercession to Christ for us, and impart their merits unto us; and that we
again for that cause are to invocate them, and to do unto them religious
worship, we dissent from, being resolved that these things are but inventions
of man's brain wanting warrant of the word.

Lastly, to conclude, a question may be demanded, how any one of us may
particularly know and be assured in our selves, that we have part in this
communion of Saints. Ans. S. John opens this point to the full when he says,
If we say that we have fellowship with him, 1. Ioh. 1^6.
and yet walk in darkness, we lie: but if we walk in the light, as he
is light, then we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Christ
purges us from all our sins. In which words he makes knowledge of Gods
will joined with obedience to be an infallible mark of one that is in the
communion: as on the contrary, ignorance of Gods will, or disobedience, or
both to be tokens of one that has neither fellowship with Christ, or with the
true members of Christ. And therefore to end this point, if we would have
fellowship with Christ, let us learn to know what sin is and to fli^ from the
same as from the bane of our souls, and to make conscience of every evil way.

The duties to be learned by the communion of the saints are manifold. And
first of all if we do believe the fellowship which all the faithful have with
Christ and with themselves, and be resolved that we have part therein, then
must we separate and withdraw our selves from all ungodly and unlawful
societies of men in the world whatsoever they be. Unlawful societies are
manifold, but I will only touch one, which every where annoieth religion, and
hinders greatly this communion of saints, and that is when men join them
selves in company to pass away the time in drinking, gaming, etc. Behold a
large fellowship which bears sway in all places; there is almost no town but
there is at the least one knot of such companions: and he that will not be
combined with such loose mates, he is thought to be a man of no good nature:
he is foisted forth of every company; he is no body: and if a man will yield to
run riot with them in the mispending of his time and goods, he is thought to be
the best fellow in the world. But what is done in this society? and how do
these cupcompanions spend their time? surely the greatest part of day and night
is usually spent in swearing, gaming, drinking, surfeiting, revelling, and
railing on the ministers of the word, and such as profess religion, to omit
the enormities which they procure unto themselves hereby: and this behavior
spreads it self like a canker over every place, and it defiles both town and
cuntry. But we that look for comfort by the communion of saints, must not
cast in our lotte with such a wicked generation, but separate our selves from
them. For undoubtedly their society is not of God but of the devil: and they
that are of this society, can not be of the holy communion of saints: and
surely except the Magistrate by the sword, or the Church by the power of the
kaies do pull down such fellowship, the holy society of Gods Church and
people must needs decay. Excommunication is a censure ordained of God for this
end, to banish them from this heavenly communion of the members of Christ that
live inordinately and have communion with men in the works of darkness.

Secondly by this we are taught that men professing the same religion, must be
linked in society and converse together in Christian love, meekness,
gentleness, and patience: as S. Paul taught the Philippians, If there be any
fellowship of the spirit, Phil. 2.1.
if there be any compassion and mercy, fulfill my joy, that we may be like
minded, having the same love, being of one accord and of like judgment. And
again, Keep (says he) the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Why?
Mark how his reason is fe^ched from this communion: Because there is one body,
Ephesians. 4.3.
one spirit, even as you are called into the hope of your vocation, one Lord,
one faith, one hope, one baptism, one God and father of all, which is above
all and in all. And no doubt the same reason made David say, All my delight is
in the saints which be upon earth. Psalm. 16.3.


Thirdly every christian man that acknowledges* this communion must carry
about with him a fellow^feeling, that is, an heart touched with compassion in
regard of all the miseries that befall either the whole Church or any member
thereof, as Christ our head teaches us by his own example, when he called to
Saul, and said Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? giving him to understand,
that he is touched with the abuses done to his Church as if they had directly
been done to his own person. The Prophet Amos reproves the people, because
they drank wine in bowls, and anointed themselves with the chief ointments:
but why? was it not lawful for them to do so? yes: but the cause for which
they are reprooved follows: No man (says he) is sorry for the affliction of
Joseph. Amos. 6.6.
In the midst of their delights and pleasures they had no regard or
compassion of the miseries of the poor Church and servants of God elsewhere in
affliction, which every man ought to show ^orth in the practice of all duties
of love: and therefore Paul says, Pray always with all manner of prayers and
supplications in the spirit, Ephesians. 6.18.
and watch thereunto with all perseverance and supplications for the saints.
And he highly commends the Philippians for communicating to his afflictions.
Phil. 4.14.
And further he bids Philemon to comfort Onesimus his bowels in the Lord.
And S. John says, If a man's life would save his neighbors soul, he must
lay it down for him, if need require. 1. Ioh. 3.16.
We have all of us daily occasion to practice this duty toward the afflicted
members of Gods Church in other cuntries. For howsoever we enjoy the gospel
with peace, yet they are under persecution for the same: and so often as we
hear report of this, we should suffer our hearts to be grieved with them, and
pray to God for them.

We must he^e be admonished not to seek our own things, but to refer the
labors of our callings to the common good especially of the Church whereof we
are members. As for them that seek for nothing but to maintain their own
estate and wealth, and therefore in their trades use false weights and
measures; the engrossing, corrupting, mingling of wares; glosing, lying,
smoothing, swearing, forswearing, dissembling, griping, oppressing of the
poor, etc. they may plead for themselves what they will, but in truth they
never yet knew what the communion of Saints meant.

Lastly, considering we are all knitte into one mystical body, and have
mutual fellowship in the same, our duty is both to redress the faults of
our breethren and to cover them, as the hand in the body lays the plaster
upon the sore in the foot or in the leg, and withal couers it. Love couers
the multitude of sins. And when men disgrace their brethren for their wants,
and blase them to the world, they do not the duty of fellow members.

Thus much for the first benefit bestowed on the Church: the second is,
Forgiveness of sins: which may be thus described, Forgiveness of sins is a
blessing of God upon his Church procured by the death and passion of Christ,
whereby God esteems of sin as no sin, or, as not committed. In this
description I have couched five points, which we are severally to consider. The
first, who is the author of forgiveness of sins? Ansvv. God, whose blessing
it is: for sin is only committed against God, and the violating of his laws
and commandments are properly sins. And the offense done to any man or
creature is no more in it self but an offense or injury: yea the breach of
man's commandment is no sin, unless it do imply withal the breach of Gods
commandment. Therefore it is a prerogative belonging to God alone to pardon
sin: and when we are taught to say* Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive
them that trespass against us, the meaning is not, that we forgive sins as
they are sins, but only as trespasses, that is, losses, hurtes, and damages
done unto us by men. It may be further said, God has given this power and
commandment to his ministers to forgive sins, saying, Whose sins ye
remitte, they are remitted. Ioh. 20.23.
Answer. Gods ministers do not properly forgive sins, but only in the
name of God according to his word pronounce to a penitent sinner that his
sins are pardoned and forgiven of God: and therefore it is a most certaen
truth that none can forgive sins but God only: Mar. 2.7.
it was avouched by the Pharisees and not denied by Christ. Hence it follows,
that remission of sin being once granted remains for ever, because Gods love
unto the elect is unchangeable, and his decree concerning their salvation can
not be altered. The second point is, to whom remission of sins is given?
Answer. To the Catholic Church, that is, to the whole company of men
predestinate to salvation: as Esai says, The people that dvvell therein (that
is, Esa. 33.24.
in the Church) shall have their sins forgiven. And, they shall call them the
holy people, the redeemed of the Lord: Esa. 62.12.
and thou shall be named, a city sought out and not forsaken. And if there had
been an uniuersall remission of sins to all men as some do dream, it should
not here have bin made a peculiar prerogative of the Church. The third point
is, what is the means whereby pardon of sin is procured at Gods hand? ^om. 4.25.
Ans. The death and passion of Christ: so Paul says, Christ dyed for our
sins: that is, Christ died to be a payment and satisfaction to Gods justice
for our sins. And S. John says, 1. Ioh. 1.7.
The blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin. And Peter
says, Knowing that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, 1. Pet. 1.18.
as silver and gold from your vain conversation, etc. but with the precious
blood of Christ as of a lamb undefiled and without spot. The fourth point is,
after what manner sin is forgiven? Answ. By an action of God, whereby for the
merit of Christ, he esteems and accountes sin as no sin, or, as if it
had never been committed. Therefore David says, Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. And in Esai the Lord
says, I have put away thy transgressions like a cloud, Esa. 44.22.
and thy sins as a mist. Now we know that clouds and mystes which appear
for a time are afterward by the sun utterly dispersed. And king Hezekias
when he would show that the Lord had forgiven him his sins, says, God has
cast them behind his back, alluding to the manner of men, Esa. 38.17.
who when they will not remember or regard a thing, do turn their backs upon
it. And Micheas says, that God does cast all the sins of his people into
the bottom of the sea, Mich. 7.19.
alluding to Pharao, whom the Lord drowned in the bottom of the red sea. And
Christ has taught us to pray thus: Forgive us our debtes, as we forgive our
debtors: in which words is an allusion to creditours, who then forgive debts,
when they account that which is debt as no debt, and cross the book. Hence it
appears, that damnable and vile is the opinion of the Church of Rome which
holds that there is a remission of the fault without a remission of the
punishment: and withal, the doctrines of humane satisfactions, and
indulgencies, and purgatory, and prayer for the dead, built upon this
foundation, are of the same kind.

Moreover, we must remember to add too this clause, I believe, and then the
meaning is this. I do not only believe that god does give pardon of sin to
his church and people (for that the very devils believe) but withal I believe
the forgiveness of mine own particular sins. Hence it appears that it was the
judgment of the Primitive Church that men should believe the forgiveness of
their own sins.

By this prerogative we reap endless comfort: for the pardon of sin is a
most wonderful blessing, and without it every man is more miserable and
wretched then the most vile creature that ever was. We loathe the serpent or
the toade; but if a man have not the pardon of his sins procured by the death
and passion of Christ, he is a thousand fold worse then they. For when they
die, there is the end of their woe and misery: but when man dies without this
benefit, there is the beginning of his. For first in soul till the day of
judgment, and then both in body and soul for evermore he shall enter into the
endless pains and torments of hell; in which if one should continue so many
thousand years as there are drops in the Ocean sea, and then be delivered, it
were some ^ase: but having continued so long (which is an unspeakeable length
of time) he must remain there as long again, and after that for ever and ever
without release: and therefore among all the benefits that ever were or can be
thought of, this is the greatest and most precious. Among all the burdens that
can befall a man, what is the greatest? Some will say, sickness, some
ignominy, some poverty, some contempt: but indeed among all, the heauiest and
the greatest is the burden of a man's own sins, lying upon the conscience and
pressing it down, without any assurance of pardon. David being a King had no
doubt all that heart could wish; and yet he, laying aside all the roialties
and pleasures of his kingdom, says this one thing above all, that he is a
blessed man that is eased of the burden of his sins. Psalm. 32.1.
A lazar man full of sores is ugly to the sight, and we can not abide to look
upon him: but no lazar is so loathsome to us, as all sinners are in the sight of
God: and therefore David counted him blessed, whose sins were c^vered. It may
be some will say, there is no cause why a man should thus magnify the pardon
of sin, considering it is but a common benefit. Thus indeed men may imagine
which never knew what sin meant: but let a man only as it were, but with
the tippe of his finger have a little feeling of the smarte of his sins, he
shall find his estate so fearful, that if the whole world were set before
him on the one side, and the pardon of sins on the other, he would choose the
pardon of his sin before ten thousand worlds. Though many drowsy
protestants esteem nothing of it, yet to the touched conscience it is a
treasure, which when a man finds, he hides it, and goes home and selles all
that he has and buys it. Therefore this benefit is most excellent, and for
it the members of Gods Church have great cause to give God thanks without
ceasing.

The duties to be learned hence are these. And first of all here comes a common
fault of men to be rebuked. Every one will say, that he believes the remission
of sins, yet no man almost labors for a true and certain persvvasion hereof
in his own conscience: and for proof hereof, propound this question to the
common Christian; Do thou persuade thy self that God gives remission of
sins unto his Church? The answer will be, I know and believe it. But ask him
further: Do thou believe the pardon of thine own sins? and then comes in
a blind answer, I have a good hope to God ward, but I can not tell; I think
no man can say so much: for God says to no man, thy sins are pardoned. But
this is to speak flat contraries, to say they believe, and they can not tell:
and it bewraies exceeding negligence in matters of salvation. But let them that
fear God, or love their own souls health, give all diligence to make sure
the remission of their own sins: withal, avoiding hardness of heart and
drowsinesse of spirit, the most fearful judgments of God which every where
take place. The foolish virgins went forth to meet the bridegroom with
lamps in their hands as well as the wise, but they never so much as dreamed
of the horn of oil, till the coming of the bridegroom. So many men live in
the Church of God as members thereof, holding up the lamp of glorious
profession: but in the mean season they seek only for the things of this
life, never casting how they may assure them selves in conscience touching
their reconciliation with God, till the day of death come.

Secondly, if we be here bound to believe the pardon of all our sins, then
we must every day humble our selves before God, and seek pardon for our
daily offenses: for he gives grace to the humble or contrite; he f^^les the
hungry with good things when the rich are sent empty away. When Benhadad the
king of Syria was discomfited and overcome by the king of Israel, 1. Kin. 20.32
by the counsel of his servants, who told him that the kings of Israel were
merciful men, he sent them clothed in sackcloath with ropes about their
necks to entreat for peace and favor. Now when the king saw their
submission, he made covenant of peace with him. We by our sins must justly
deserve hell, death, and condemnation every day, and therefore it stands us
in hand to come into the presence of God and to humble our selves before him in
sackcloath and ashes, craving and entreating for nothing in the world so much
as for pardon of our sins, and that day by day without ceasing till the Lord
give this blessed answer to our consciences, that all our sins are put out
of his remembrance. We must not think that God puts grace into men's hearts
when they lie snurting upon their elbowes, and either not use or despise the
means: but we must first use the means partly by making confession of our
sins to God, and partly by crying to heaven for pardon: and then when by his
grace we begin to desire grace, he gives further grace.

Lastly, if we believe the pardon of our sins, then we must change the
tenor and course of our lives, and take heed of breaking Gods commandments
by doing any of those things, whereof our consciences do accuse us, and tell
us, that by them we have displeased God heretofore. A man that for some
misdemeanour has been cast into prison and lain there many years winter and
summer in cold irons: when he obtaines liberty, he will often bethink
himself of his old misery* and take heed for eue^ least he fall into the
same offense again: and he which has seen his own sins and felt the
smart of them, and withal by Gods goodness obtained assurance touching the
pardon of them, will never wittingly and willingly commit the like sins any
more, but in all things change the course of his life. As for such as say,
that they have the pardon of their sins and yet live in them still, they
deceive themselves and have no faith at all.

Thus much for the second benefit which God bestows on his Church, namely
remission of sins: now follows the third in these words: The resurrection
of the body. In the handling whereof sundry points must be considered. The
first, whether there be a resurrection or no? This question must needs be
handled, because Epicures and Atheists in all ages, and at this day some do
call this article in question. Now that there is a resurrection of the body
after death, it may be proved by many arguments, whereof I will only touch
the principal. The first is taken from the work of redemption. Saint John
writes, that Christ came to dissolve the works of the devil: which are
sin, and by sin, death: 1. Ioh. 3.8.
and hence I reason thus: If sin and death are to be dissolved utterly, then
the bodies of the faithful which are dead in the grave, must needs be made
alive: otherwise death is not abolished: but sin and death must be utterly
abolished, therefore there shall be a resurrection. Secondly, God had made a
covenant with his church, the tenor whereof is this, I will be thy God and thou
shall be my people. This covenant is not for a day or an age, or for a
thousand years or ages, but it is everlasting and without end, so as Gods
people may say of God for ever, God is our God: and likewise God will say of
his Church for evermore, this people is my people* Now if Gods covenant be
everlasting, then all the faithful departed from the beginning of the world
must be raised again to life. And if god should leave his people in the grave
under death for ever, how could they be called the people of God? for he is a
God of mercy and of life it self: and therefore though they abide long in the
earth, yet they must at length be revived again. This argument Christ uses
against the Sadduces, which denied the resurrection: Mat. 22.32.
God is not the god of the dead but of the living, but god is the god of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, which are dead, and therefore they must rise again.
The third argument may be taken from the tenor and order of Gods justice. It
is an especial part of Gods glory to show forth his mercy on the godly* and
his justice upon the wicked in rewarding them according to their works, as the
Apostle says, Romans 2.6.
God will reward every man according to his works: to them that by continuance
in well doing, seek glory, and honor, and immortality, life eternal: but
unto them that disobey the truth, that be contentious and obey
unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath. But in this life God
rewards not men according to their doings: and therefore Solomon speaking of
the estate of all men in this world says, All things come alike to all, and
the same condition is to the just and unjust, Eccles. 9.2.
to the good and bad, to the pure and polluted, to him that offers s^crifice,
and to him that offreth none. Nay, which is more, here the wicked flourish, and
the godly are afflicted. The ungodly have hearts ease and all things at will,
whereas the godly are oppressed and overwhelmed with all kind of miseries, and
are as sheep appointed for the slaughter. It remains therefore that there
must needs be a general resurrection of all men after this life, that the
righteous may obtain a reward of Gods free mercy, and the wicked utter shame
and confusion. But some will say, It is sufficient that God do this to the
soul of every man, the body needs not to rise again. I answer, that the
ungodly man does not work wickedness only in his soul, but his body also is
an instrument thereof: and the godly do not only practice righteousness in
their souls, but in their bodies also. The bodies of the wicked are the
instruments of sin, and the bodies of the righteous are the weapons of
righteousness: and therefore their bodies must rise again, that both in body
and soul they may receive a reward according to that which they have wrought
in them. The fourth argument, which is also used by Paul is this: Christ
himself is risen, and therefore all the faithful shall rise again: ^. Cor.
25.
for he rose not for himself as a private man, but in our room and stead and
for us. If the head be risen, then the members also shall rise again: for by
the same power whereby Christ raised himself, he both can and will raise all
those that be of his mystical body, he being the first fruits of them that
sleep. The fifth argument is taken from express testimony of Scripture. Job
has an excellent place for this purpose, I am sure (says he) that my Redeemer
lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth, Job 19.25.
and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet J shall see God in
my flesh, whom I my self shall see and mine eyes shall behold, and none other
for me. And Saint Paul to the Corinthians avouches and proves this point at
large, by sundry arguments which I will not stand to repeat; this one
remembered: If (says he) the dead rise not again, then your faith is vain,
our preaching is in vain, and the godly departed are perished. verse. 14. and
18.
The sixth argument may be taken from the order of nature, which ministers
certain resemblances of the resurrection; which though they be no sufficient
proofs, yet may they be inducements to the truth. Both Philosophers and also
Divines have written of the Phoenix, that first she is consumed to ashes by
the heat of the sun, and that afterward of her ashes rises a young one: and
on this manner is her kind preserved. Again swallows, worms, and flies,
which have lien dead in the winter season, in the spring, by virtue of the
suns heat, revive again: so likewise men fall in sounes and traunses, being
for a time without breath or show of life, and yet afterward come again: and
(to use Paul's example) before the corn can grow and bear fruit it must first
be cast into the ground and there rotte. And if this were not seen by
experience, men would not believe it. Again every present day is as it were
dead and buried in the night following, and yet afterward it returns again the
next morning. Lastly we read how the old Prophet^ raised some from death: and
our Savior Christ raised Lazarus among the rest, that had lien four days in
the grave and stanke: why then should any think it impossible for God to raise
all men to life?

But let us see what reasons may be alleged to the contrary. First it is
alleged that the resurrection of bodies resolved to dust and ashes, is
against common sense and reason. Answer. It is above reason, but not against
reason. For if impotent and miserable men, as experience shows, can by art
even of ashes make the most curious workmanship of glass, why may we not in
reason think that the omnipotent and everliving God is able to raise men's
bodies out of the dust. Secondly it is said, that men's bodies being dead, are
turned into dust, and so are mingled with the bodies of beasts and other
creatures, and one man's body with another, and that by reason of this
confusion men cannot possibly rise with their own bodies. Answ. Howsoever this
is impossible with men, yet it is possible with God. For he that in the
beginning was able to create all things of nothing, is much more able to make
every man's body at the resurrection of his own matter, and to distinguish the
dust of men's bodies from the dust of beasts, and the dust of one man's body
from another. The goldsmith by his art ca^ sunder diverse metells one from
another: and some men out of one metell can draw another, why then should we
think it impossible for the almighty God to do the like? It may be further
objected thus: A man is eaten by a wolf, the wolf is eaten by a lion, the
lion by the fowls of the air, and the fowls of the air eaten again by men:
again one man is eaten of another, as it is usual among the Canibals. Now
the body of that man which is turned into so many substa^ces, especially into
the body of another man, cannot rise again: and if the one does the other
does not. Ans. This reason is but a cavil of man's brain: for we must not
think that whatsoever enters into the body, and is turned into the substance
thereof, must rise again, and become a part of the body at the day of
judgment; but every man shall then have so much substance of his own as shall
make his body to be entire and perfect; though another man's flesh once eaten
be no part thereof. Again it is urged, that because flesh and blood cannot
enter into the kingdom of God: therefore the bodies of men shall not rise
again. Answ. By flesh and blood, is not meant the bodies of men simple, 1.
Cor. 15.50.
but the bodies of men as they are in weakness, without glory, subject to
corruption. For flesh and blood in scripture, signifies sometime the original
sin and corruption of nature, and sometime man's nature subject to miseries
and infirmities, or the body in corruption before it be glorified, and so it
must be understood in this place. Lastly it is objected, that Solomon says,
The condition of the children of men, Eccles. 3.19.
and the condition of beasts are even as one condition. Now beasts rise not
again after this life: and therefore there is no resurrection of men. Answer.
In that place Solomon expounds himself: They are like in dying: for so he
says, as the one dies, so dies the other: he speaks not of their estate
after death.

The second point to be considered, is the cause of the resurrection. In
mankind we must consider two parts, the Elect and the Reprobate; and they both
shall rise again at the day of judgment, but by diverse causes. The godly have
one cause of their resurrection, and the ungodly another. The cause why the
godly rise again, is the Resurrection of Christ, yea it is the proper cause
which procures and effects their resurrection. In the Scripture Adam and
Christ are compared together, and Christ is called the second Adam: these were
two roots. The first Adam was the root of all mankind, and he conuaieth sin,
and by sin death to all that sprang of him, Christ only excepted: the second
Adam which is the root of all the Elect, co^uaieth life both in body and soul
to all that are united to him: and by the virtue of his resurrection they shall
rise again after this life. For look as the power of the Godhead of Christ
when he was dead in the grave, raised his body the third day: so shall the
same power of Christ his Godhead, conuaie it self unto all the faithful,
which eue^ in death remain united unto him, and raise the^ up at the last day.
And for this cause Christ is called a quickening spirit. Now the cause why the
wicked rise again, is not the virtue of Christ's resurrection, but the virtue
of Gods curse, set down in his word: In the day that thou shall eat of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall die the death, that is, a
double death both of body and soul. And therefore they arise only by the
power of Christ as he is a judge, that this sentence may be verified on them;
and that they may suffer both in body and soul eternal punishment in hell
fire.

Furthermore, Saint John sets down the outward means whereby the dead
shall be raised, namely the voice of Christ: The hour shall come (says he) in
which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, Ioh. 5.28.
and they shall come forth. For as he created all things by his word, so at the
day of judgment by the same voice all shall be raised again. This may be a good
reason to move us to hear the ministers of God reverently: for that which
they teach is the very word of God: and therefore we are to pray that it may be
as effectual in raising us up from the grave of sin in this life, as it
shall be after this life in raising us up from the grave of death unto judgment.

Thirdly, we are to consider what manner of bodies shall rise at the last day.
Answer. The same bodies for substance: this Job knew well, when he said: I
shall see him at the last day in my flesh, whom I my self shall see and none
other for me, Job 19.25.
with these same eyes. Nevertheless the bodies of the Elect shall be altered in
quality, being made incorruptible and filled with glory. 1. Cor. 15.43.


The last point to be considered, is the end why these bodies shall rise
again. The principal end which God intends is his own glory, in the
manifestation of his justice and mercy. Now at the last day when all men shall
be raised to judgment by the voice of Christ, the godly to life, and the
wicked to condemnation; there shall be a full manifestation both of his mercy
and justice: and therefore by consequent a full manifestation of his glory.

Thus much for the doctrines touching the Resurrection: now follow the uses.
First it serves wonderfully for the comfort of all Christian hearts. David
speaking not only of Christ, but also of himself, says most notably: Mine
heart is glad, my tongue rejoices, and my flesh also does rest in hope. Psalm.
16.9.
Why so? For (says he) thou shall not leave my soul in grave, neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Though the days of this life be
days of woe and misery, yet the day of the resurrection shall be unto all the
children of God a time of rejoicing and felicity, and as Peter says, Act.
3.19.
it is the time of refreshing. Whosoever is now an hungered, shall then eat and
be filled with the fruit of the tree of life: and whosoever is now naked,
shall be then clothed with the white garments dipped in the blood of the lamb:
and August. in Enchir. cap. 91.
whosoever is now lame, shall have all his members restored perfectly. And as
this day is joyful to the godly, so on the contrary it is a day of woe and
misery to the ungodly: as Saint John says, Ioh. 5.29.
they that have done evil shall come forth to the resurrection of
condemnation. If they might cease to live after this life, and die as the beast
does, O then it would be well with them, for then they might have an end of
their misery: but the wicked must after this life rise again to condemnation,
which is the accomplishment of their eternal woe and wretchedness; a rufull and
doleful case to consider, and yet is it the state of all unbelieving and
unrepentant sinners. If a man were bidden to go to bed, that after he had
slept and was risen again he might go to execution, it would make his heart
to ache within him: yet this, yea a thousand fold worse is the state of all
impenitent sinners: they must sleep in the grave for a while, and then rise
again, that a second death may be inflicted upon them in body and soul,
which is the suffering of the full wrath of God both in body and soul
eternally. This being so, let us embrace the good counsel of Saint Peter, who
says, Amend your lives and turn, that your sins may be done away, Act.
3.19.
when the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. If a man
die repentant for his sins, it is a day of refreshing; but if he die in his
sins, impenitent and hard hearted, it is a day of eternal horror,
desperation, and confusion.

Again, if we believe that our bodies shall rise again after this life, and
stand before God at the last day of judgment, we must daily enter into a
serious consideration of this time, and have in mind that one day we must
meet the Lord face to face. A trauailer comes into an Inn having but a penny
in his purse, he sits down and call for all store of provision and dainties:
now what is to be thought of him? surely in the judgment of all men his
behavior bekens folly, or rather madness. But why? because he spends freely
and has not regard to the reckoning which must follow: how foolish then and
mad is the practice of every man that lives in his sins, and bathing
himself in his pleasures in this world, never bethinking how he shall meet
God at the last day of judgment, and there make reckoning for all his doings.
An ancient Divine writes of himself that this saying ran in his mind,
Hierome.
and sounded always in his ears: Arise ye dead and come unto judgment. And
this ought always to be sou^ding in our ears, that while we have time we
should prepare our selves to meet God at the last day.

Thirdly, if we believe the resurrection of the body, we are not to weep and
mourn immoderately for our friends deceased. Our Savior Christ did weep for
Lazarus: and when Stephen was stoned to death, certain men that feared God
buried him, and made great lamentation for him: and therefore mourning is not
condemned: and we must not be as stocks, that are bereft of all compassion: yet
remember we must what Saint Paul says to the Thessalonians: I would not, 1.
Th. 4.13.
brethren, have you ignorant concerning those which are asleep, that ye sorrow
not, as others which have no hope. For the godly man properly dies not, but
lays himself down to take a sleep after his manifold labors in this life;
which being ended he must rise again to joys everlasting: and therefore we
must moderate and mingle our mourning for the deceased with this and such like
comforts.

Fourthly, we are taught hence to labor and strive against the natural fear
of death: for if there be a resurrection of our bodies after this life, then
death is but a passage or middle way from this life to eternal life. If a
beggar should be commanded to put off his old rags, that he might be clo^hed
with rich and costly garments, would he be sorry because he should stand naked
a while till he were wholly bestripped of his rags? No surely; well, thus
does God when he calls a man to death: he bids him put off his old rags of
sin and corruption, and be clothed with the glorious robe of Christ's
righteousness: and our abode in the grave is but for a space, while corruption
be put off. This is Paul's argument, saying, We know that when our earthly house
of this tabernacle shall be dissolved, we have a building given of God, which is
an house, not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.

Fifthly, whereas the godly are subject to manifold afflictions and miseries,
both in body and mind in this life, here they shall find a sufficient stay to
quiet and calm their minds, if they consider that after this short life is
ended, there will ensue a joyful resurrection. Job 19.25.
Job in the extremity of all his temptations, made this the comfort to his
soul, that one day he should rise again, in which he should enjoy the glorious
presence of his Creator. And the H. Ghost says, Hebr. 11.35.
that the servants of God in the days of Antiochus were racked and tormented,
and would not be delivered: why so? because they looked for a better
resurrection.

Lastly, the consideration of this point serves to be a bridle to restrain a
man from sin, and a spur to make him go forward in all godliness of life and
conversation. S. Paul had hope toward God, that the resurrection of the dead
should be both of the just and unjust. Now what did this move him unto? Act.
24.16.
Mark: herein (says he, that is, in this respect) I endeavor my self to have
always a clear conscience toward God and toward man. And let us for our
parts likewise remember the last judgment, that it may be a means to move us
so to behave our selves in all our actions, that we may keep a good conscience
before God and before men: and let it also be a bridle unto us to keep us
back from all manner of sin. For what is the cause why men daily defile
their bodies and souls with so many damnable practices, without any remorse of
conscience? Surely they never seriously remember the day of the resurrection
after this life, wherein they must stand before Christ to give an account of
that which they have done in this life, whether it be good or badde.

Thus much of the duties: now mark it is further said, The resurrection of the
body. If the body rise, it must first fall. Here then this point is wrapped up
as a confessed truth, that all men must die the first death. And yet
considering that the members of the Church have the pardon of their sins
which are the cause of death, it may be demanded, why they must die?
Ansvve^re. We are to know that when they die, death does not seize upon the^,
as it is in his own nature, a curse: for in that respect it was borne of Christ
upon the cross, and that for us: but for two other causes, which we must
think upon, as being special means to make a man willing to die. I. They
must die that original corruption may be utterly abolished: for no man living
on earth is perfectly sanctified; and original sin is remaining for special
causes to the last moment of this life, and then it is abolished, and not
before. II. The godly die that by death as by a straight gate they may pass
from this vale of misery to eternal life. And thus Christ by his death makes
death to be no death, and turns a curse into a blessing.

And to proceed: It is not here said, the resurrection of the soul, but of
the body only; what then (will some say) becomes of the soul? Diverse have
thought, that the souls then, though they do not die, yet are still kept
within the body (being as it were a sleep) till the last day. But Gods word
says to the contrary. For in the Revelation it is said, The souls of the
godly lie under the altar, and cry, Rev. 6.9.
How long Lord Jesus? And in the Gospel of Luke, Dives in soul did suffer woe
and torments in hell: Luke 16.23.
and Lazarus had joy in Abraha^s bosom. Again some others think* that men's
souls after this life do pass from one man's body to another: and Herod may
seem to have been of this opinion: Math. 14.2.
for when news was brought him of Christ, he said, that John Baptist being
beheaded was risen again, thinking that the soul of John Baptist was put into
the body of some other man. And for proof hereof, some allege the example of
Nebuchadnezzar, who forsaking the society of man, lived as a beast, and did
eat grass like a beast: and they imagine that his own soul went out of him,
and that the soul of a beast entered in the room thereof. But this indeed is
a fond conceit: for even then he had the soul of a man when he lived as a
beast, being only stricke^ by the hand of God with an exceeding madness, whereby
he was bereft of common reason; as does appear by that clause in the text,
Dan. 4.33.
where it is said, that his understanding or knowledge returned to him again.
Again, some other think, that the soul neither dies nor sleeps, nor
passes out of one body into an other, but wandereth here on earth among men,
and oftentimes appears to this or that man: and this is the opinion of some
heretics, and of the common people, which think that dead men walk: and for
proof hereof some allege the practice of the witch of Endor, who is said to
make Samuel to appear before Saul: but the truth is, it was not Samuel in
deed, but only a counterfeit of him. For not all the witches in the world,
nor all the devils in hell are able to disquiet the souls of the faithful
departed, which are in the keeping of the Lord without wandering from place to
place. For when men die in the faith, their souls are immediately translated
into heaven, and there abide till the last judgment: and contrariwise if men
die in their sins, their souls go straight to the place of eternal
condemnation, and there abide as in a prison, as Peter says. In a word, when
the breath goes out of the body, the soul of every man goes straight either
to heaven or hell; and there is no third place of abode mentioned in scripture.

To conclude, the resurrection of the body is expressly mentioned in the
Creed, to show that there is no resurrection of the soul, which neither
dies, nor sleeps, but is a spiritual and invisible substance, living and
abiding for ever as well forth of the body as in the same.

Thus much of the third prerogative or benefit: now follows the fourth and
last, in these words, And life everlasting. To handle this point to the full,
and to open the nature of it as it deserves, is not in the power of man. For
both the Prophet Esai and Saint Paul say, that the eye has not seen, and the
ear has not heard, Isa. 64.4. 1. Cor. 2.9.
neither came it into man's heart to think of those things which God has
prepared for those that love him. Again Paul when he was wrapped into the third
heaven says, that he saw things not to be uttered. 2. Cor. 12.4.
Nevertheless we may in some part describe the same, so far forth as God in
this case has revealed his will unto us. Wherefore in this last prerogative, I
consider two things; the first is life it self, the second is the continuance
of life, noted in the word everlasting. Life it self is that whereby any thing
acts, lives, and moves it self: and it is twofold, uncreated or created.
Uncreated life is the very godhead it self, whereby God lives absolutely in
himself, from himself, and by himself, giving life and being to all things
that live and have being: and this life is not meant here; because it is not
communicable to any creature. Created life is a quality in the creature; and
its again twofold: natural, spiritual. Natural life is that whereby men in this
world live by meat and drink, and al such means as are ministered by Gods
providence. Spiritual life is that most blessed and happy estate, in which
all the Elect shall reign with Christ their head in the heavens after this
life, and after the day of judgment for ever and ever. And this alone is the
life which in the Creed we confess and believe: and it consists in an
immediate coniunctio^ and communion or fellowship with God himself: as Christ
in his solemn prayer to his father a little before his death signifies: I pray
not for these alone, Ioh. 17.21.
but for them also which shall believe in me through thy word, that they all
may be one as thou O father art in me and I in thee, even that they may be one
also in us. And when Saint John in the Revelation says, Rev. 21.3.
Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, he will dwell with them, and they
shall be his people, and God himself shall be there God with them: he shows
that the very foundation of that happiness which God has prepared for his
servants stands in a society between God and the^, whereby God shall dwell
with them in heaven, and they again shall there enjoy his glorious presence.

Touching this Communion three points must be considered. The first is, in what
order men shall have fellowship with God? Ans. This communion shall be first of
al with Christ as he is man; and by reason that the manhood of Christ is
personally united to the Godhead of the son, it shall also be with Christ as
he is God; and consequently with the father and the H. Ghost. The reason of
this order is, because Christ, though he be the author and the fountain of
eternal life as he is God, yet he conuaies the same unto us only in and by
his flesh or manhood. Yet must we not here think that life proceeds from the
manhood it self, as from a cause efficient: for the flesh quickneth not by any
virtue from it self, but by the Word to which it is personally united; it
being as it were a pipe eternally to convaie life from the the Godhead unto us.

The second point is, in what thing this communion consists? Ans. S. Paul
opens this point to the very full, when he says, that after Christ has
subdued all things unto him, then God shall be all in all, that is, 1. Cor.
15.28*
God himself immediately shall be all good things that heart can wish to all the
Elect. But some men may say, What? is not God all in all unto us even in this
life? for whatsoever good things we have, they are all from him. Answ. It is
true indeed, God is all in all even in this life: but how? not immediately but
by outward means; and that also in small measure. For he conuaies his goodness
and mercy unto us so long as we live on earth, partly by his creatures and
partly by his word and sacraments: but after this life is ended, all helps and
outward means shall cease: Christ shall give up his kingdom, and as he is
Mediator shall cease to put in exequution the office of a Priest, a Prophet, or
a King: all authority and power shall be abolished: and therefore all callings
in the three maine estates of the Church, the Commonwealth, the family shall
have an end; there shall be no more Magistrate and subject, Pastor and people,
Master and servant, father and son, husband and wife: there shall be no more
use of meat, drink, clothing, respiration, physic, sleep: and yet for all
this, the condition of men shall be many thousand fold more blessed then ever it
was. For the Godhead in the Trinity immediately without all means shall be all
things to all the chosen people of God in the kingdom of heaven, world without
end. This may seem strange to man's reason, but it is the very flat truth of
the word of God. Saint John in the description of the heavenly Jerusalem,
says that there shall be no Temple in it. Why, how then shall God be
worshipped? mark what follows, the Lord God almighty and the Lamb are the
temple of it. Rev. 21.22.
Whereby is signified that although now we use the preaching of the word, and
the administration of the sacraments, as means of our fellowship with God: yet
when this life is ended, they must all cease, God and Christ being instead of
all these means unto us. And he adds further, The city has no need of the
sun, neither of the moon to shine in it. What then will some say, must there
be nothing but darkness? Not so. For the glory of God does lighten it, verse. 23.
and the Lamb is the light of it. Again he says, that in the Paradise of
God, there is the river of water of life, and the tree of life bearing fruit
every month, Cap. 22.1.
and that is Christ. And therefore we shall have no need of meat, drink,
apparel, sleep, etc. but Christ himself our head and redeemer shall be in
stead of them all unto us: on whom, all the Elect shall feed, and by whom
both in body and soul they shall be preserved evermore. If a man would have
glory, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost shall be his glory: if a man desire
wealth and pleasure, God himself shall be wealth and pleasure unto him, and
whatsoever else the heart of man can wish. Hence it appears, that this
communion is most admirable, and that no tongue can tell, nor heart conceive
the least part of it.

The third point is, touching the benefits or prerogatives that proceed of
this communion, and they are in number six. The first is, an absolute freedom
from all wants. In the mind there shall be no ignorance, no unbelief, no
distrust in God, no ambition, no envy, anger, nor carnal lust, nor terror in
conscience, or corrupt affection. In the body there shall be no soar, no
sickness, nor pain: for God shall* wipe away all tears from their eyes: Rev.
21.4.
nay then all defects or wants in body or soul or in both shall be supplied,
and the whole man made perfect every way.

The second is perfect knowledge of God. In this life the Church and all the
servants of God know him but in part. Moses would have seen Gods face, but he
was permitted to see only his hinder parts; 1. Cor. 13.12.
and as Paul says, now we know in part, and darkely as through a glass. In
this life* we can ^o otherwise discern but as an old man through spectacles:
and the creatures, but specially the word of God and the sacraments are the
spectacles of our mind, wherein we behold his justice, mercy, love, etc. and
without the^ we can discern little or nothing: yet after this life, when that
which is perfect is come, and that which is imperfect is abolished; we shall
see God as he is to be seen, not as through a glass, but face to face, and we
shall know him as we are known of his majesty, so far forth as possibly a
creature may. God in deed is infinite, and therefore the full knowledge of his
majesty can no more be comprehended by the understanding of a creature, which
is finite, then the sea by a spoone: yet nevertheless God shall be known
every way of man, so far forth as a creature may know the Creator. Now upon
this that the Elect have such fulness of knowledge, it may be demanded, whether
men shall know one an other after this life or no. Answer. This question is
oftener moved by such as are ignorant, then by them that have knowledge: and
oftentimes it is tossed in the mouths of them that have little religion in
their hearts: and therefore I answer first, men should rather have care to
seek how they may come to heaven, then to dispute what they shall do when
they are there: the common proverb is true, it is not good counting of chickins
before they be hatched. Secondly, I say that men in heaven shall know each
other: yea they shall know them which were never known or seen of them before
in this life, which may be gathered by proportion out of Gods word. Adam in his
innocence knew Eve, whom he had never seen before, Genesis 2.23.
and gave her a fit name so soon as she was created. And when our Savior
Christ was transfigured in the mount, Peter knew Moses and Elias, Math. 17.4.
whom before he had never seen: and therefore it is like that the Elect shall
know each other in heaven, where their knowledge and their whole estate shall be
fully perfited. But whither they shall know one an other after an earthly
manner, as to say this man was my father, this was mine uncle, this my teacher,
etc. the word of God says nothing: and therefore I will be silent, and must
be content a while to be ignorant in this point.

The third prerogative of everlasting blessedness is, that the Elect shall love
God with as perfect love as a creature possibly can. The manner of loving God,
is to love him for himself, and the measure is to love him without measure:
and both shall be found in heaven: for the Saints of God shall have an actual
fruition of God himself, and be as it were swallowed up with a sea of his
love, and wholly ravished therewith: for which cause as far as creatures can,
they shall love him again. Again the love of a thing is according to the
knowledge thereof, but in this life God ^s known of man only in part, and
therefore is loved only but in part: but after this life, when the Elect shall
know God fully, they shall love him without measure: and in this respect love
has a prerogative above faith or hope, howsoever in some respects again they
go beyond love.

The fourth prerogative is, that the Saints of God keep a perpetual Sabbath
in heaven. In this life it is kept but every seventh day, and when it is best
of all sanctified, it is done but in part; but in heaven every day is a
Sabbath: as the Lord says by the Prophet Isai, From month to month, and from
sabbath to sabbath, all flesh shall come and worship before me: Isai 66.23.
Hebr. 4.9.
and therefore the life to come shall be spent in the perpetual service of God.

Fifthly, the bodies of all the Elect after this life in the kingdom of heaven
shall be like the glorious body of Christ: so Paul says, Christ Jesus our
Lord shall change our vile bodies that they may be like his glorious body.
Phil. 3.21.
Now the resemblance between Christ's body and ours, stands in these things:
as Christ's body is incorruptible, so shall our bodies be void of all
corruption: as Christ's body is immortal, so ours in the kingdom of heaven
shall never die: as Christ's body is spiritual, so shall ours be made
spiritual, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 15.44.
It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body, not because the
body shall be changed into a spirit, for it shall remain the same in
substance, and that for ever: but because it shall be preserved by a spiritual
and divine manner. For in this life it is preserved by meat, drink, clothing,
sleep, physic, rest, and diet, but afterward without all these means the
life of the body shall be continued, and body and soul keep together by the
immediate power of Gods spirit for ever and ever: thus the body of Christ is
now preserved in heaven, and so shall the bodies of all the Elect be after the
day of judgment. Furthermore as Christ's body is now a shining body, as does
appear by his transfiguration in the mount, so in all likelihood after the
resurrection the bodies of the Elect shall be shining and bright, always
remaining the same for substance. Lastly as Christ's body after it rose again
from the grave, had this property of agilitie beside swiftnes, to pass from
the earth to the third heaven, being in distance many thousand miles from us,
and that without violence: so shall the bodies of the saints. For being
glorified, they shall be able as well to ascend upward, as to go downewarde,
and to move without violence, and that very swiftly.

The sixth and last prerogative, is an unspeakable and eternal joy, as David
says: In thy presence is fulness of joy: Psalm. 16.11.
at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. It is said that when
Solomon was crowned King, 1 King. 1.40.
the people rejoiced exceedingly: if there were such great joy at his
coronation, which was but an earthly prince, what joy then shall there be when
the Elect shall see the true Solomon crowned with glory in the kingdom of
heaven. It is said that the wise men which came from the East to worship
Christ, when they saw the star standing over the place where the babe was,
were exceeding glad: how much more shall the Elect rejoice, when they shall see
Christ, not lying in a manger, but crowned with immortal glory in the
kingdom of heaven? Wherefore this joy of the Elect after this life is most
wonderful, and can not be uttered.

The property of life eternal is to be an inheritance which God bestows on
them which are made his sons in Christ, who is the only begotten son of
the father. Math. 25.34. Romans 8.17.
Hence it follows necessarily, that in the Scriptures it is called a reward,
not because it is deserved by our works, as the Church of Rome erroniously
teaches: but for 2. other causes. First because life eternal is due to all
that believe by virtue of Christ's merit. For as his righteousness is made ours by
imputation, so consequently the merit thereof is also ours: and by it, (all
personal merits in our selves utterly excluded,) we deserve or merit eternal
happiness as a reward; which nevertheless in respect of our selves is the free
and mere gift of God. The second is, because there is a resemblance between
eternal life and a reward. Romans 6.23.
For as a reward is given to a workman after his work is done; so everlasting
life is given unto men after the travails and miseries of this life are ended.

The degrees of life are three. The first is in this life, when men being
justified and sanctified, have peace with God. Many imagine, that there is no
eternal life till after death: but they are deceived, for it begins in this
world: as our Savior Christ testifies, saying, Verily, verily I say unto you,
he that hears my words, and believes him that sent me, Ioh. 5.24^
has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed
from death to life. This being so, we are hence to learn a good lesson.
Considering we look for life everlasting after this life, we must not deceive
our selves, lingering and deferring the time till the last gasp, but we must
lay the foundation of life eternal in our selves in this world, and have the
earnest thereof laid up in our hearts against the day of death. But how is
that done? we must repent us heartily of all our sins, and seek to be
assured in conscience that God the father of Christ is our father, God the
son our redeemer, and God the holy Ghost our comforter. For as Christ says,
this is life eternal to know thee the only God, Ioh. 17.3.
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. And we must go further yet,
endeavoring to say with Paul, that we live not, but that Christ lives in us:
Gal. 2.20.
which when we can say, we have in us the very seed of eternal life. The
second degree is in the end of this life, when the body freed from all
diseases, pains, and miseries, is laid to rest in the earth, and the soul is
received into heaven. The third is aft^r the day of judgment, when body and
soul reunited shall both be advanced to eternal glory.

Again in this third degree of life, there be in all likelihood sundry
degrees of glory. Daniel speaking of the estate of the elect after this life,
says, They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, Dan.
12.3.
and they that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for
evermore. Now we know there is difference between the brightness of the
firmament and the brightness of the stars. Agane there be degrees of
torments in hell, as a^peares by the saying of Christ, Mat. 11.22.
It shall be easier for Tyrus and Sydon in that day then for this generation:
and therefore there be proportional degrees of glory. And Paul says, There
is one glory of the Sun, another glory of the moon, 1. Cor. 15.41.
another glory of the Stars: for one star differs from another in glory: so
is the resurrection of the dead. In which words he applies the differences of
excellency that be in the creatures, to set forth the differences of glory
that shall be in men's bodies after the resurrection. Furthermore, if we may
conjecture; it may be, the degrees of glory shall be answerable to the diverse
measures of gifts and graces bestowed on men in this life, and according to
the imployance of them to the glory of God and edification of the Church. And
therefore the twelve Apostles who were exceedingly enriched with the gifts of
the spirit, and were master builders of the Church of the new Testament, shall
sit on 12. thrones and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. But it may be
objected, that if there be degrees of glory in heaven, some shall want glory.
Answer. Not so: though some have more, and some less, yet all shall have
sufficient. Take sundry vessels whereof some are bigger, and some less, and
cast them all into the sea: some will receive more water and some less, and
yet all shall be full and no want in any: and so likewise among the saints of
God in heaven, some shall have more glory some less, and yet all without
exception full of glory. And whereas it is alleged that all the laborers in
the vineyarde receive each of them a penny equally for their hire; the
answer is, that our Savior Christ in that parable intendes not to set forth
the equality of celestial glory, Mat. 20.9*
and what shall be the estate of the godly after this life: but the very
drifte of the parable is to show, that they which are called first, have no
cause to brag or insulte over others which as yet are uncalled, considering
they may be made equal or be preferred before them.

Thus much of life it self: now follows the continuance thereof, which the
scriptures have noted in calling it eternal or everlasting. And to this end
Paul says, that Christ has abolished death, 2. Tim. 1.10.
and brought not only life, but also immortality to light by the gospel. And
this very circumstance serves greatly to commend the happiness of the godly:
in that, after they have made an entrance into it, they shall never see term of
time or end. Suppose the whole world were a sea, and that every thousand years
expired, a bird must carry away or drink up one only drop of it: in process
of time it will come to pass that this sea though very huge, shall be dried
up: but yet many thousand millions of years must be passed before this can be
done. Now if a man should enjoy happiness in heaven only for the space of
time in which the sea is in drying up, he would think his case most happy
and blessed: but behold the elect shall enjoy the kingdom of heaven not only
for that time, but when it is ended, they shall enjoy it as long again: and
when all is done, they shall be as far from the ending of this their joy, as
they were at the beginning.

Having thus seen what life everlasting is, let us now come to the use of the
article. And first of all, if we believe that there is an eternal happiness,
and that the same belonges unto us, then we must use this present world and
all the things therein as though we used them not: and whatsoever we do in
this world, yet the eyes of our minds must be always cast toward the blessed
estate prepared for us in heaven. As a pilgrim in a strange land has
always his eyes toward his iourneyes end, and is then grieved, when by any
means he is out of the way: so much we always have our minds and hearts
set on everlasting life, and be grieved when we are by any way hindered in the
strait way, that leads thereunto: we have a notable pattern of this duty
set out unto us in the patriarch Abraham, who being called of God obeyed to
go out into a place, which he should afterward receive for inheritance, and
he went out, not knowing whither he went: and by faith aboade in the land of
Canaan, Heb. 11.8.
as in a strange country, and as one that dwelled in tents. Now the cause that
moved him was life everlasting: for the text says, He looked for a city
having a foundation, Verse. 10.
whose builder and maker is God. And we ought every one of us for our parts
to be like affected to all the things of this life, never setting our hearts
upon them, but using them as a pilgrim does his staff in the way: so long as
it is an help and stay for him in his journey, he is content to carry it in
his hand, but so soon as it begins to trouble him, he casts it away.

Secondly all that profess the Gospel of Christ, may hence learn to bear
the crosses and afflictions which God shall lay on them in this world. It is
Gods usual manner to begin corrections in his own family upon his own
children; and as Peter says, Judgment begins at Gods house. Look as a
mother that waines her child, lays wormewoode or some other bitter thing
upon her breast to make the child loathe the milk: so likewise God makes us
often feel the miseries and crosses of this life, that our love and liking
might be turned from this world and fixed in heaven. As raw flesh is loathsome
to the stomach: so is every sinner and unmortified man loathsome unto God,
till the Lord by afflictions mortify in him the corruptions of his nature,
and specially the love of this world. But when a man is afflicted, how shall
he be able to endure the cross? Surely by resolving himself that the Lord
has prepared life everlasting for him. Heb. 11.24.
Thus we read that Moses by faith when he was come to age, refused to be
called the son of Pharaohs' daughter, and choosed rather to suffer adversity
with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season,
esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. But
I pray you, what moved Moses to be of this mind? The reason is added: Because
he had respect to the recompense of reward, that is, he had always a special
regard to life everlasting, and that was it that made him content and willing
to suffer affliction with Gods people in the land of Goshen. Here then behold a
notable president for us to follow. In which we are taught that the best way
to endure afflictions with patience, is to have an eye to the recompense of
reward: this is it that makes the yoke of Christ easy and lightsome. When it
shall please God to bring unto us a cup of affliction and bid us drink a
draught thereof to the very bottom, the meditation of life eternal must be as
sugar in our pockets to sweeten the cup withal.

Lastly, if this be true, that God of his goodness and endless mercy
toward mankind, has prepared life everlasting, yet not for all men, but for
the elect whose names are written in the book of life, we must above all
things in this world seek to be partakers of the same. Let us receive this as
from the Lord, and lay it to our hearts: whatsoever we do evening or morning,
day or night, whether we be young or old, rich or poor; first we must seek
for the kingdom of heaven and his righteousness. If this benefit were common
to all and not proper to the Church, less care might be had: but seeing it is
proper to some alone, for this very cause let all our studies be to obtain
the beginnings of life everlasting even in this life. For if we have it not,
whosoever we be, it had been better for us that we had never been borne, or
that we had been borne dogs and toades then men: for when they die, there is
an end of their misery; but man, if he loose everlasting happiness, has ten
thousand millions of years to live in misery and in the torments of hell: and
when that time is ended, he is as far from the end of his misery as he
was at the beginning. Wherefore, I pray you, let not the devil steal this
meditation out of your hearts, but be careful to repent of all your sins,
and to believe in Christ for the pardon of them all; that by this means ye
may come to have the pawn and earnest of the spirit concerning life
everlasting, even in this world. What a miserable thing is it, that men should
live long in this world, and not so much as dream of another life till the
last gasp. But we must not suffer satan thus to abuse and bewitch us: for if
we have not eternal life in this world, we shall never have it.

Hitherto by Gods goodness I have showed the meaning of the Creed: now to
draw to a conclusion, the general uses which are to be made of it follow. And
first of all we learn by it, that the Church of Rome has no cause to condemn
us for heretics: for we do truly hold and believe the whole Apostolical
Symbol or Creed, which is an epitome of the scriptures and the very keie of
faith. It will be said, that we deny the Popes supremacy, justification by
works, purgatory, the sacrifice of the Mass for the sins of the quick and
the dead, the invocation and intercession of saints, etc. which are the
greatest points of religion. It is true indeed, we deny and renounce them as
doctrines of devils: persuading our selves that if they indeed had been
Apostolical, and the very grounds and pillars of religion, as they are now
avouched to be; they should in no wise have bin left forth of the Creed. For it
is an oversight in making a confession of faith, to omit the principal points
and rules of faith. It will be further said, that in the Creed we believe the
Church, and so consequently are to believe all these former points which are
taught and avouched by the Church: but this defense is foolish. For it takes
this for granted, that the Church of Rome is the Church here meant which we
deny, unless they can prove a particular Church to be universal or
Catholic. Nay, I add further, that the principal grounds of popish faith,
for which they contend with us as for life and death, are not mentioned in any
other Creedes which were made by the Churches and councels for many hundred
years after Christ.

Secondly the Creed serves as a storehouse of remedies against all troubles and
temptations whatsoever. I. If a man be grieved for the loss of earthly riches,
let him consider that he believes God to be his Creator, who will therefore
guide and preserve his own workmanship, and by his providence minister all
things needful unto it. And that he has not lost the principal blessing of
all, in that he has God to be his father, Christ to be his redeemer, and the
H. ghost to be his comforter: and that, considering he looks for life
eternal, he is not to be overmuch careful for this life: and that Christ
being our Lord will not forsake us being the servants in his own house, but
will provide things needful for us. II. If any man be grieved in respect of
outward disgrace and contempt, let him remember that he believes in Christ
crucified, and that therefore he is to rejoice in contempt for righteousness
sake. III. They which are troubled for the decease of friends are to comfort
themselves in the communion of saints, and that they have God the father and
Christ and the holy ghost for their friends. IIII. Against bodily captivity,
let men consider that they believe in Christ their Lord whose service is
perfect liberty. V. Against the fear of bodily diseases, we must remember the
resurrection of the body in which all diseases and infirmities shall be
abolished. VI. If a man fear the death of the body, let him consider that he
believes in Christ which died upon the cross, who by death has vanquished
death. VII. The fear of persecution is restrained, if we call to remembrance
that God is a Father almighty, not only able but also willing to repress the
power of the adversary, so far forth as shall be for the good of his
children. VIII. Terrors arising of the consideration of the last judgment are
delayed by remembrance of this, that Christ shall be our judge who is our
redeemer. IX. Fear of damnation is remedied by consideration that Christ died
to make satisfaction for us, and now sits at the right hand of his father to
make intercession for us: and by the resurrection of the body to life
everlasting. X. Terrors of conscience for sin are repressed, if we consider
that God is a Father, and therefore much in sparing, and that it is a
prerogative of the Church to have remission of sins.

Trin uni Deo gloria.
FAVLTES TO BE AMENDED in the words.
Page Line. Blot out. Put in. 8 25 studies study 9 32 into in 13 24 couse
course 13 37 after about that time 15 2 faint feign 15 36 no nature in nature
16 36 God both God, and do him service both 24 15 First 26 14 and we we 29 32
Mystery Mystery 37 19 which cut which are cut 55 27 bonum and bonum est 66 34
S. Paul S. Peter. 75 1 is the is known the 84 35 at time at some time 95 21 as
by as 103 20 have upon have mercy upon. 104 2 that is bound that is, bound 135
28 that 140 26 doubtings doubting. 148 vlt^ most highest most high 161 30
Mictell. Missell, or Misselto. 166 15 ye he 171 25 comes come 172 7 he man he
is man 175 23 agrees argues 178 12 or are 206 5 many things: I. 263 25 (...)*
(...) 279 26 has have 279 1 second eleventh 290 22 as then 308 31 him his 407
14 ungerenerate unregenerate

Faults of the Cotations in the margin are thus to be mended.
Page 6. Tit. 1.1. p. 7. Act. 19.15. p. 13. Rev. 21. p. 20. Ephesians. 4.6. Ibid.
Ioh. 17.3. p. 21. Marc. 9.24. p. 38. Isai. 52. p. 44. 1. Pet. 5.6. p. 47. 2.
Cor. 9. p. 67. Isai. 45.12, 13. p. 70. 1. Pet. 2.11. p. 71. 1. Ioh. 3.3. p. 77.
Matt. 25. p. 87. 1. Cor. 10. p. 105. Romans 5.12. p. 118. Gal. 3.22. p. 121.
Malac. 3.1. Ibid. Act. 10.43. p. 122. Hebr. 7.25. p. 126. Mat. 15.24. p. 128.
Luke 2.10, 11. p. 129. Dan. 9.25. p. 130. 2. Cor. 2.16. p. 131. Act. 2.17.
Ibid. Psalm. 133.2. p. 132. Heb. 5.12. p. 133. Psalm. 4.5. p. 137. Phil. 2.6.
Ibid. Psalm. 102.25. ibid. and Ioh. 8.58. p. 138. Joh. 5.17. p. 148. lin. ult.
Romans 1.3. p. 156. Heb. 2.17. Ibid. Matthew. 1.20. p. 169. Marc. 3.35. p. 174.
Rev. 15.3. p. 177. and Joh. 15.13. p. 192. Luke 23. p. 196. Mat. 26.51. p. 203.
Mat. 21.13. p. 205. Mar. 14.58. ibid. Ioh. 2.19. p. 207. Matthew. 26.25. p. 212.
Mark. 5.41. p. 215. Luke 23. p. 219. 2. Tim. 2. p. 221. Matthew. 27.19. p. 230.
Lev. 24.14. p. 237. Gal. 5.24. p. 238. 1. Tim. 1.15. p. 240. Mark. 15.24. p.
314. 2. Cor. 5.16. p. 324. Act. 1.12. p. 364. Isai. 30.21. p. 371. 2. Sam.
23.15, 16. p. 378. 2. Pet. 3.11. p. 386. Psalm. 139. p. 390. Eccles. 8..11. p.
395. Luc. 21.28. p. 422. Galat. 3.16. p. 458. Romans 6.23. p. 522. 1. Cor. 15. p.
526. Job. 19.27.


