THE COMBAT BETWEEN CHRIST AND THE Devil displayed: OR A COMMENTARY upon the
Temptations of CHRIST: Preached in Cambridge by that reverend and judicious
Divine M. WILLIAM PERKINS. The second edition much enlarged by a more perfect
copy, at the request of M. Perkins Executors, by Tho. Pierson Preacher of Gods
word. Hereunto is prefixed an Analysis or general view of this Combat: and a
twofolde Table added: one of places of Scripture; the other of special points
to be observed.

ROMANS 16. 20. The God of Peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly.

LVK. 22. 28. 29. You are they which have continued with me in my temptations:
Therefore I appoint unto you a kingdom even as my Father has appointed unto
me.

LONDON Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood for E. E. and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Swan. Anno 1606.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir William Russell, L. Russell, Baron of Thornhaugh;
with the virtuous Lady his wife, Grace and Peace.
Upon that strange Revel, 12. 7.
battle in heaven, between Michael Dan. 12. 1.
the great Prince, and Satan that old Serpent, was heard a loud voice sounding
forth joy and woe: joy to the heavens and to them that dwell therein: because
Revel. 12. 12.
the accuser of the brethren is cast out thence: but woe to the inhabitants of
the earth and of the sea, ( that is, to the sons of men in this vale of
tears) for the Devil is come down unto them with great wrath, knowing that
he has but a short time.

In this voice (right Honorable) are two things affirmed, touching Satan's*
first, that his casting out of heaven is ioifull to the Saints; next that his
coming down on earth is woeful unto men. Is the matter of our woe, joy to the
Saints? Nothing less; but that the Devil might be known to be an evil guest
where ever he comes, the heavens do rejoice for his departure, and sea and
earth ought to mourn for his approaching; so that he is, or at leastwise ought
to be, no where welcome, except it be in hell; and all such persons may well
perceive themselves, not heavenly but plainly hellish minded, as give more
kind welcome unto Satan in their cheerful practice of the works of
darkness, then they do unto Jesus Christ, who Revel. 3. 20.
knockes at the door of their hearts promising to come in and suppe with them,
if they will hear his voice and open unto him.

But what do the heavens gain by Satan's casting down? And how does his
descending to the earth work man such woe? Ans. For heavens gain, Reu. 12. 12.
they are well rid of the malicious accuser of the brethren. Who would know
more, must strive to get to heaven, and if more be needful, there his
information shall be certain. As for man's woe by Satan's company here on earth,
who so doubts heerof, may well suspect himself to have already received of him
that deadly hurt, in blindness of mind and hardness of heart, whereof none
save Jesus Christ the good Physician of our souls, by the Reu. 3. 18.
eie-salue, and ^ Job. 2. 27.
anointing of his spirit, can work the cure. Is it not woeful to the flocks
and to the herds, when ravenous beasts do frequent their pastures? then woe to
man because of Satan: for the peril of the lamb from the woolfe; of the kid
from the leopard; of the fat beast from the Lion; and of the sucking child from
the Aspe, is nothing comparable to the danger of man from this old serpent,
who in craft and cruelty, yea in every hurtful property goes beyond them all.
Other devouring creatures keep their circuites and observe their times; they
are sometime weary, and not always hungry; some are unfit for the dark, and
others afraid of the light, whereby their silly pray gets some respite: but
Satan is a prince Ephesians. 6. 12.
of the darkness of this world, who yet for his advantage 2. Cor. 11. 14.
can transform himself into an Angel of light, so as the day and night are to
him both alike for the working of our woe: he is ever greedy, and never weary,
and therefore always seeking; and if we dream of any restraint to him for
time or place we deceive our selves, for he was a Ioh. 8. 4^.
murderer from the beginning, and so will continue till time shall be no more;
and he Job. 1. 7.
compasses the whole earth walking in it to and fro, even 1. Pet. 5. 8.
like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. With other creatures woe is
ended, when the pray is once devoured; but to Satan's pray it is not so, for
unless his snare be broken and they delivered in this life, their woe
continues easelesse, endless and remediless after natural death. Indeed the
natural man does not perceive that working of Satan which does procure his
woe; it may be he has seen the plaiers and the painters Devils, some black
horned monster with broad eyes, crooked claws or cloven feet; and till some
such thing appear unto him, he never fears hurt by Satan: little does he
think that ignorance in the scriptures, neglect of Gods worship, profaning
Gods sabbaths, with greedy affecting the wealth, pomp, and pleasures of this
world do give advantage unto Satan against his soul; and therefore while the
matters of this life do answer his desire, he can sing to himself this
pleasant requiem; Luc. 12. 19.
soul, soul take thy rest. But our voice from heaven cries woe to all such
inhabitants of the earth because of Satan; for they are of this world, and he
is 2. Cor. 4. 4.
their prince, and their Ioh. 14. 30.
God, who having blinded their minds, Ephesians. 2. 2.
works in their hearts, and so keeps them sure in his possession: Indeed
like a seeming friend he suffers all Luke 11. 21.
things to be in peace; but woeful peace, like to Absalons wine which he gave
to Ammon, that 2. Sam. 13. 28.
when his heart was most merry therewith, his least suspected deadly wound
might light upon him. Every one Ephesians 2. 3.
by nature is the child of wrath, and so of himself full of all misery; but
merciless Satan seeks the increase heerof, by causing the root of man's
corruption to spread forth the branches of all transgressions: indeed he is
not the beginner of every sin, for much impiety flows from man's inbred
impurity; yet so sure a friend is Satan to corruption in the works of
darkness, that if nature do but stretch forth the hand, Satan will thrust
at the elbow: does Caine hate Abel? then will Satan bring this hatred from the
heart to the hand, and cause Gen 4. 8.
Caine to kill Abel: Is Judas covetous? then will Satan for the satisfying of
that desire Ioh. 13. 2.
make him traitorous: let him find but a sparkle, he will soon kindle it to a
flame; so that woeful is his coming to all natural men.

But does the child of God escape his hands? no verily; Satan is a professed
deadly foe to all such, he is their Ren. 12. 10.
adversary and 1. Pet. 5. 8.
accuser: that which should procure them good he seeks to hinder; and what
ever may work them woe, he will be sure to further: if they fall into sin,
he seeks to bring them to despair; and when they endeavor to do good, he
moves them to be proud: they are no sooner converted to the Lord, but he has
some Act. 13. 8.
Elymas to turn them back to the world: and though they stand against that
assault, yet he will pursue them still, by troubles without and terrors
within; by raging foes, and flattering friends; so as in regard of Satan
aduantaged by their flesh and his world, they shall find this to be true, Job.
14. 22.
while their flesh is upon them, they shall be sorrowful; and while their souls
be in them they shall mourn: Satan is a mighty Ioh. 12. 31.
prince, and a wily 2. Co^. 2. 11.
serpent, and if either force or fraud may work them woe, no child of God
shall escape his hands; he spared not the green tree, what then will he do to
the dry?

But is there no remedy to man for all this woe that comes by Satan? Yes,
blessed be our God who has not left us for a pray unto his teeth, but to show
the exceeding riches of his grace and love to the world, Ioh. 3. 16.
has given his only begotten son to be our prince and our deliverer; who in
no sort Heb. 2. 16.
took the Angels, but the seed of Abraham: and because they were Verse. 14.
partakers of flesh and blood, he himself took part with them, that he might
destroy through death him that had the power of death, that is, the devil. For
the evidence and application of which deliverance, he has ordained in his
church an holy ministry, whereby natural men are brought Act. 26. 18.
from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan to himself; and his
own children do Ephesians. 4. 15.
grow up into Christ their head, and be edified Iud. 20.
in their most holy faith, through 1. Pet. 1. 5.
which they are kept by the power of God unto salvation. Yet we must so
conceive of this deliverance, that as Israel being brought out of Egypt, was
not presently settled in the land of Canaan, but for the space of forty years
was exercised with sundry temptations in a barren and dry wilderness, where
they met with Number. 21. 6.
fiery serpents, and were encountered with many and strong enemies, who sought
to debar them from the promised land: so the children of God, though redeemed
by Christ, are not presently translated from the bondage of corruption, to the
full inheritance of perfect glory in the heavens; but must pass through this
vale of tears, and in the wilderness of this world meet with that crooked
serpent the Devil who will seek to stinge their souls to death, and also
stir up many an 1. Sam. 15. 2.
Amelec to entrap them in the way, that either through disobedience or
unbelief they may be deprived of their heavenly Canaan. True it is, this match
is far unequal, for flesh and blood to fight against spiritual powers; yet
here is comfort, that we have him for our Captain who in his Coloss 2 15.
deepest humility spoiled our strongest adversary, Heb 2. 14.
and is now Hebr. 2. 7.
crowned with glory and honor, being highly exalted 1 phes. 1. 20.
far above all might and domination at his fathers right hand, where he 1. Cor.
15. 25.
must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet; yea till he has
Romans 16. 20.
trodden Satan under the feet of all his members: only this he requires that
we should be valiant and Ephesians. 6. 10.
quit our selves like men in the power of his might, knowing that the battle is
the Lords, and so the victory sure before we strike a stroke. Now for the
manner of our fight (a matter indeed of great moment, because a 1. Sam. 17. 49.
smooth stone out of David's sling will foil to the ground great Goliath) we
have in this combat between Christ and the Devil, so pregnant direction set
before us, that unless we do wilfully shut our eyes against the light, in
this behalf we cannot be ignorant of our duty: Romans 15. 4
whatsoever was written aforetime was written for our learning; and therefore
the recording of this combat is as much from Christ to every Christian, as the
speech of Gideon to his soldiers, Judge. 7. 17.
look on me and do likewise; even as Idoe, so do ye; for Christ left
himself an example that we should follow his steps, though not in his
miraculous fast, yet in his courageous fight against sin. The view hereof
has formerly been presented to your Honors, by Master Robert Hill, bachelor
of Divinity, under this title, Satan's Sophistry answered by our Savior Christ.
And now at the entreaty of M. Perkins executors, I have published it again;
yet under a new title, and more large almost by one third part. Mine endeavor
has been that this poor Orphane might imitate his brethren, who were the
messengers of love unto our Church, while their happy father lived among us.
What is wanting herein, or may deserve a just reproof I willingly take to my
self, Aenead. 9.
me me adsum qui feci-etc. What I have been able to do, I humbly commend to
the church of God under your Honorable protection. If herein I seem
presumptuous, because I am unknown unto you, I humbly crave this favorable
construction; that I chose rather by presuming to wrong my self, then to
alienate this book from your Honors, who had right heereto by former
dedication. When your Honorable employments in time past required your
wisdom and courage, for the just defense of our Sovereigns right, I make no
question, but as well the messengers of victory over rebels, as the counselors
of peace, were always welcome to your Honor: why then should I doubt, whether
this ensuing display, being as well a counselor of peace with God, as an
Herald of triumph through Christ over Satan, the Arch-enemy of our souls,
will be grateful unto you, who have learned long since, that whosoever will
keep a good conscience toward God or man must endure many a conflict with
Satan?

Now that God of peace who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that
we can ask or think, grant unto your Honors according to the riches of his
mercy, so to fight the good fight of faith on earth, that you may receive the
crown of glory in heaven. Cambridge, Emmanuel College, 25. of June. 1606.

Your Honors in the Lord to be commanded, THO. PIERSON.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir WILLIAM RVSSELL, Lord Russell, Baron of Thornhaugh,
yoonger son to that most Christian and Honorable Earl, FRAVNCIS Earl of
Bedford; with the virtuous Lady his wife, Grace and Peace.
RIGHT Honorable, Mat. 3.
as John the Baptist was in one desert, so our Savior Christ he was in an
other: Mat. 4. 1.
but as these two differed in their being in the world: so did they not accord
in their being in the wilderness. John was with some men, Christ with none;
John was with wild men, Christ with wild beasts; John was preaching, Christ
praying; John was baptizing, Christ fighting; John was feeding, Christ fasting;
John was encountering with Devils incarnate, Christ did encounter with the
Prince of those Devils. From John preaching in the desert, learn we diligence
in our callings: from Christ tempted in the desert, see we troubles at our
calling: Psa. 34. 19.
Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of
all.

If it please you to give these after-lines the reading, you shall see set
down that monomachie or single combat, which was hand to hand betwixt Christ
and the Devil. And as for Christ Jesus, you shall see him fasting, fighting,
conquering. Fasting and an hungry, to show he was man: fighting and
encountering, to show he was Messiah; and conquering and triumphing, to show he
was God. And as for the devil, you shall see him obiecting, answering, flying.
Obiecting, that Mat. 4. 3.
Christ might despair; Mat. 4. 6.
answering, that he might presume; and Mat. 4. 11.
flying, when he could not overcome.

In Christ's temptations, we see the estate of the 1. Pe. 2. 21.
Church; in Satan's assault, we see his malice to the 1. Pet. 5. 8.
Church, Is Christ tempted? think it not strange if we fall into Ioh. 15. 20
temptations. For the grief of the head, is the grief of the 1. Cor. 12. 26.
members: and the temptations of Christ, show the temptations of Ioh. 15. 20.
Christians. It is true of Christ, that Act. 14. 21
by many tribulations he did enter into the kingdom of God: that Heb. 2. 10
our High Priest was consecrated by afflictions, that so he must suffer and
enter into his Luke 24. 26
glory.

He is no sooner borne into the world, but he is Mat. 2. 14.
hunted by Herod; baptized at Jordan, Mat. 3. 16. 4. 1.
but Satan sets on him; a Preacher for repentance, but the Ioh. 7. 1.
Scribes proscribe him; to Luke 11. 15.
work miracles, but the Pharisees slander him. He is no sooner to suffer, but
Ioh. 12. 27.
the Devil assaults him; apprehended, but the Ioh. 18. 28
Jews deliver him; delivered, but Luke 23. 11.
Herod derides him; derided, but Luke 23. 24.
Pilat condemns him; condemned, but the soldiers Mat. 27. 27.
abuse him. Is he on the cross? the Mat. 27. 39.
people will not pity him: is he risen? the high Priests will Mat. 28. 15.
belie him. In a word, is he upon earth? he is tempted in his Luke 11. 16.
person; is he in heaven? he is Act. 9. 4.
tempted in his members. Thus the life of Christ was a warfare upon earth, and
the life of Christians must be a warfare upon earth. We live here in a sea of
troubles: the sea is the world, the waves are calamities, the Church is the
ship, the anchor is hope, the sails are love, the Saints are passengers, the
haven is heaven, and Christ is our Pilot. When the sea can continue without
waves, the ship without tossings, and passengers not be sick upon the water,
then shall the Church of God be without trials. We begin this voyage so soon
as we are borne, and we must sail on till our dying day.

We do read in Gods word of many kinds of temptations: God, Satan, Man, the
World, and the Flesh, are said to tempt. God tempts man to try his
obedience, Satan tempts man to make him disobedient: man do tempt men to
try what is in them: and man tempts God to try what is in him. The world is
a temper, to keep man from God: and the flesh is a tempter, to bring man to
the Devil: So God tempted Abraham Gen 22. 1.
in the offering of his son: Satan Job. 1. 18.
tempted Job in the loss of his goods: a 1. Kng. 10. 1.
Queen tempted Solomon in trying his wisdom: men Ex. 17. 3.
tempted God by distrust in the desert: the world tempted Domas, 1. Tim. 4. 10.
when he forsook the Apostles: and the flesh tempted David, 2. Sa. 11. 4.
when he fell by adultery. Does God tempt us? take heed of hypocrisy: does
Satan tempt us? take heed of his subtlety: does man tempt man? take heed of
dissembling: does man tempt God? take heed of inquiring: does the world tempt
man? take heed of apostasy: does the flesh tempt man? take heed of carnalitie.
But dowe so? are we wary of these tempers? No, we are not, and therefore we
fall. We fall on the right hand, by temptations in prosperity, and we fall on
the left, by temptations in adversity. Of the one it may be said, it has
slain 1. Sa. 18.
thousands: of the other, that it has slain ten thousands.

When we come and see cities dispeopled, houses defaced, and walls pulled down,
we say, the soldier has been there: and when we see pride in the rich,
discontent in the poor, and sin in all, we may justly say, the Tempter has
been there.

Now of all other temptations, it pleases God to suffer his church to be
tempted with afflictions. It is never free either from the sword of Ishmael;
which is Genesis 21. 9.
a reuiling tongue: or the sword of Esau, a Genesis 27. 41.
persecuting hand. Neither was there yet ever Christian man found, who had not
his part in the cup of affliction. We must drink of the Mat. 20. 23.
same cup our master did: Mat. 10. 24.
the disciple is not above his master.

The reasons why God does visit us thus with afflictions, are: 1. To humble us.
2. To weane us. 3. To winnow us. 4. To prevent us. 5. Reasons why God does
afflict his children.
To teach us. 6. To enlighten us. 7. To honor us. 8. To cure us. 9. To crown
us. 10. To comfort us. 11. To protect us. 12. To adopt us. And last of all, to
teach and comfort others. To Ec. 3. 10.
humble us, that we be not proud: Psalm. 119. 67.
to weane us, that we love not his world: Luke 22. 31.
to winnow us, that we be not chafe: Psalm. 119. 71.
to prevent us, that we do not sin: Psalm. 39 9 40. 1.
to teach us, that we be patient in adversity: to Ge. 42. 21.
enlighten us, that we see our errors: to Lam. 5. 11.
honor us, that our faith may be manifest: to cure us, that we Deu. 32. 15.
surfeit not of security: to 2. Tim. 4. 7.
crown us, that we may live eternally: to Ioh. 6. 33.
comfort us, that he may send his spirit: to Act. 12. 7.
protect us, that he may guide us by his Angels: to He. 12. 7.
adopt us, that we may be his sons: 2. Pet. 2. 5.
and to teach others, that they seeing how sin is punished in us, they may take
heed it be not found in them: that they 2. Cor. 1. 6.
seeing our comforts in troubles, may not be discouraged in the like trials.

Thus a Christian man's diet is more sour then sweet: his physic is more
alces then honey: his life is more a pilgrimage then a progress: and his death
is more despised then honored. This if men would think of before, afflictions
would be as welcome to the soul of man, as Ruth. 2. 8.
afflicted Ruth was to the field of Boaz. But because we look not for them
before they come, think not on Gods doing when they are come, and do desire
to be happy both here and hereafter; therefore we can away with the name of
Naomi, but in no case would we be called Ruth. 1. 20.
Mara. We Ioh. 1. 5.
see the sea, not the whale: the Exodus 14. 11.
Egyptian, not the salvation: the Dan. 6. 16. 22.
Lious mouth, not him that stops the Lions mouth. If we could see God in our
troubles, as 2. King. 6. 16.
Elisha did in his, then would we say: There are more with us, then there are
against us. But because we do not, therefore at every assault of the
Assyrians, we say, as the servant to 2 King. 6. 15.
Elishah did: Alas master, what shall we do? and with the disciples: Carest
thou not Master that we perish? Yet it is good for us to suffer affliction:
Iam. 1. 12. Ioh. 5. 17.
Blessed is the man that endures temptation: for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of life which the Lord has promised to them that love him.
It is Pro. 3. 11.
commanded by God, Mat. 4. 2.
practiced by Christ, 2. Tim. 3. 12.
yielded to by the Saints, Psalm. 119. 71.
assigned by Gods providence, and good for us each way. We are Gods Ps. l. 1. 4.
trees, we shall groe better by pruning: Gods pomander, smell better by
rubbing: Gods spice, he more profitable by bruising: and Gods conduits, we are
the better by running. Let us suffer afflictions, they are 2. Cor. 4. 17.
momentany in respect of time: Phil. 1. 29.
favors, if we respect Gods love, and a means to bring us to the kingdom of
God. If they did consume us, we might wish them an end: but they do purge us,
let us be content. They Act. 14. 21.
are Gods fan, we are Gods wheat: they are Gods boulter, we are Gods meal: they
are Gods Pet. 1. 5.
flame, we are Gods bush: they are Gods Ge. 22. 9.
cords, we are Gods sacrifice: they are Gods furnace, we are Gods gold. The
wheat will not be good without the fan, nor the meal without the boulter, nor
the bush without the flame, nor the sacrifice without the cords, nor the gold
without the furnace: they are trials, not punishments, if we be sons:
punishments, not trials, if we be slaves. Let us then bear them, they Psalm.
37. 37.
will have an end: joy Ps. 126. 5.
will follow: they Isa. 38. 10.
show us our weekenesse: they Hos. 5. 15.
move us to pray: they Luke. 24. 26.
show we are in the path way to heaven: and Ecc. 1. 2.
make us contemn this present world. By them we 2. Sam. 24. 17.
learn to repent us of sin past, Ge. 39. 9.
to take heed of sin present, and to foresee sin to come. By them we Act.
2. 2.
receive Gods spirit: Phi. 3. 10.
are like to Christ: are acquainted Da. 3. 17.
with Godspower: have Exodus 15. 1.
joy in deliverance: know benefit of prosterity: made more hardy to suffer: and
1. Pet. 1.
have cause to practice many excellent virtues. They cause us (as one says) to
seek out Gods promise: the promise to seek faith: faith to seek prayer: and
prayer to find God. Mat. 7. 7.
Seek, and ye shall find: Job. 21. 27.
call, and he will answer: Hab. 2. 3.
wait, and he will come. I am to write an Epistle, I must not be long. Jobs
Job. 2.
messengers came not so fast on him: but Jobs afflictions may come as fast upon
us. Has David slain 1. Sam. 17. 37.
a Bear? he shall encounter with a Lion: has he killed a Lion? 1. Sa. 18. 27.
he must fight with Goliath: has he subdued Goliath? he must make a rode upon
the Philistims: are the Philistims conquered? 1. Sa. 21.
Saul will assault him. Remember David's troubles, and feresee what may be our
troubles. The more righteous we are, the more manifold are our troubles: and he
better we are, the better we may endure them.

But as our troubles are many, so are our deliverances many God will deliver us
out of all. He that delivered Genesis 7.
Noah from the flood, Genesis 19.
Lot from Sodom, Genesis 33.
Jacob from Esau, Genesis 41. 14.
Joseph from Potiphar, Exodus 9.
Moses from Pharaoh, Exodus 12.
Israel from Egypt, 1. Sa. 19.
David from Saul, 1. King. 21
Eliah from Achab, 2. King. 6.
Elisha from the Syrians, 2. King. 5.
Naaman from his leprosy, Isa. 38.
Hezechiah from the plague, Dan. 3.
the three children from the fire, Dan. 6. Saint Andrews in Norwich.
Daniel from the Lions, Mat. 6.
Joseph from Herod, the Apostles Act. 5.
from the Jews, Mat. 4.
and Christ from the Devil: he, even he will either deliver us from trouble,
or comfort us in trouble, or mitigate troubles when they come upon us.

He, To. 4. 21.
he has promised to do it, and he that has promised, is able to do it. And
this he does sometimes by no means, sometimes by small means, sometimes by
ordinary means, sometimes by extraordinary, sometimes contrary to all
means. By no Ioh. 5. 9.
means be cured a creeple at Bethesda: by Ioh. 6. 12.
small means he fed five thousand in the desert: by Mat. 4. 7.
ordinary means he was brought from the pinnacle: Mat. 4. 11.
by means extraordinary he was provided for in hunger: and contrary to all
means were the Dan. 5.
three children preserved in the furnace of fire.

I have good cause to think of Gods gracious deliverance, being my self
delivered from a great trouble. Since the time I was unkindly dismissed from my
poor charge, where I would have continued, if malice had not hindered me, I
have lived in an end of this City: dangerously in respect of the sickness;
poorly in regard of maintenance; and painfully, in respect of my ministry:
yet till this time has the Lord delivered me: and as Paul said, 2. Tim. 1. 18.
he will deliver me, if that he see it be best for me.

Let man therefore 1. Sam. 309.
comfort himself in the Lord: Hos. 6. 2.
after two days he will revive us, and the third day he will raise us up
again: Psalm. 30. 5.
Heauiensse may endure for a night, but joy will come in the morning. Psalm. 58.
11.
Doubtless there is a reward for the righteous: verily, M^ca. 7. 8.
God retains not his wrath for ever. Could he overcome the world, and can he
not overcome many troubles in the world? Yea, let one plague follow another, as
one quail sings to another: yet as the Act. 28. 3.
viper leaped on Paul's hand, and forthwith leaped off again, so one trouble
shall leap upon the righteous, and anon leap off again: Ps. 37. 24.
though he fall, he shall rise again, the righteous shall not be forsaken for
ever.

if he has delivered us from the guilt of our sins, he will deliver us from
the punishment of our sins. Let us then therefore be patient in trouble,
constant in hope, rooted in love: let us wait and he will come, call and he
will hear, believe and he will perform, repent us of our evil committed
against him, and he will repent of his evils intended against us. He is over us
by his providence, about us by his Angels, in us by his spirit, with us by his
word, under us by his power, and upon us by his Son. In him is our help,
from him is our comfort, by him is our victory, and for him is our trouble.
Psalm. 25.
In thee have I trusted, says a king: Job. 5.
who ever was confounded that trusted in the Lord* said a friend? and as
Elkanah was to 1. Sam. 1. 8.
Hannah in stead of many sons, so God is to his in stead of many comforters. Of
other comforters, we may say as Job did of his frinds: Job. 16. 2.
Silly comforters are you all. They will leave us, as mice do a ruinous house*
but the Lord (like Ruth. 1. 16.
Ruthe to Naomi) will never leave us, nor forsake us, Especially in the hour
of death, Ecc. 41. 1.
which is in remembrance bitter to great men: in that hour of death he will be
with us, and command his Luke 16. 26.
Angels to take charge of our souls, the Isa. 37. 2.
earth to be as a bed for our bodies: that so the one Luke 23.
may go into glory, the other reserved in hope of like glory, Phil. 3. 20.
and be made one day like unto the glorious body of Christ Jesus. Thus, right
Honorable, you have seen the righteous in affliction; as P^^l. 137.
Israel was in Babylon: and that the Lord like Zac. 4. 6.
Zorobabel is ready to deliver them. Though in troubles Christ's seems as in
the Mat. 8. 24.
ship to sleep, yet in deliverance he awakes as a man out of sleep, and as a
Giant refreshed with wine. He will rebuke the waves and winds of troubles and
persecution, and they shall fly before him as Sysera did before Iud. 17. 4.
Debora, and the 1. Sam. 14.
Philistims before Jonathan and his servant. And as Christ asking the woman of
her accuser she answered, There was none: so in the end ask a Christian of his
troubles, and he will say, There are none. Ioh. 8.
He is a buckler for our left hand, and a sword in our right: he is an helmet
on our head, and harness for our body. We shall look upon troubles, as Exo.
14.
Israel did on the Egyptians, as the 1. Sam. 17. 52.
Jews did on Goliath, and as the Grecians did on Hector, to triumph over them:
and as the Angel said to Joseph. Mat. 2. 20.
They are dead that sought the child's life; so the Spirit shall say to the
afflicted, They are dead that did seek your life. A day of deliverance, a year
of Iubile will come, and then Genesis 41.
Joseph shall be out of prison, Genesis 31.
Jacob out of servitude, and Job. 41. 12.
Job shall lie no more in the dust of the earth: 1 These. 4. 18.
Let us comfort our selves with these words.

I have exceeded an Epistle, especially to such a small bocke. If the walls
seem too great for this city; abundans cautela non no cet. It is usual for
students not only to present their own labors, but also other men's to great
personages, especially such Works wherein they have been either Translators
or overseers. It were infinite to instance this point. I am bold to do the
like to your Honor at this time. This Copy it was brought unto my hand, I
have conferred it with another, I have persued it at the Press, I heard diverse
of the Sermons, I have added nothing of mine own: and I desire, that of those
John. 22.
many baskets full of most delicate diet, which this worthy man has now left
behind him, there may not so much as any one be lost. If any such come unto my
hand, surely they shall not be lost. By his life had I much comfort, and I will
seek to honor him after he is dead. I was twenty years acquainted with him:
I at his request made the first fruits of his labors to speak English. The
Golden chain.
And now I am bold to present this his posthume to your patronage. The Earl of
Bedford.
Your honorable Nephew, his virtuous Lady, your worthy sister, have heretofore
accepted the labors of this man. If it shall please your good Honor to do the
like, The Countess of Bedford.
this Preface of mine shall remain as a perpetual testimony of my duty to
you: and the book following as fully armed against all such adversaries as
shall speak against it. The God of heaven, The Countess of Cumberland.
who has made you honorable in your most honorable Progenitors, make you
thrice honorable in your future successors: that the memorial of the righteous
may be everlasting, Pro. 10. 7.
when as the name of the wicked shall rot. London, Saint Martins in the fields.
Ian. 12. 1604.

Your Honors at commandment, ROBERT HILL, Fellow of S. John's Coll. in
Cambridge.

A GENERAL VIEW OF the strange Combat between our Savior CHRIST and Satan.
The Description of this Combat between Christ and Satan contains A Preface
or Preparation, consisting of Christ's going forth to the place of combat,
Verse. 1. Christ's abode and conuersing in that place, Verse. 2.
The Combat it self consisting of three great conflicts: First, tending to
bring Christ to unbelief: and it consists of Satan's preparation thereto.
Verse. 3. The temptation in self, Verse. 3.
Christ's repulse thereof, Verse. 4.
Second, tending to bring Christ to presumption: containing Satan's preparation,
Verse. 5. The assault or temptation, Verse. 6. Christ's repulse and answer, Verse.
7.
Third, tending to bring Christ to idolatry: containing Satan's preparation,
Verse. 8. The assault or temptation, Verse. 9. Christ's repulse and answer, Verse.
10.

An happy issue and event thereof, consisting of Satan's departing from Christ,
Verse. 11. The Angels ministering unto Christ, Verse. 11.



Resist the Devil and he will flee: Draw near to God and he will draw near
to you.

Iam. 4. 7. 8. The true grace of faith enables us to both: for 1. Pet. 5. 9.
Whom resist steadfast in the faith.

Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart in assurance of faith.



THE COMBAT BETWEEN CHRIST and the DEVIL expounded.
MAT. 4. 1. Then was Jesus led aside of the spirit into the wilderness to be
tempted of the Devil.
THE eleven first verses of this chapter do contain a brief description of
Christ's temptations, whereof I have chosen to entreat, having formerly handled
the doctrine of Conscience, because all that endeavor either to get or keep a
good conscience, are most of all subject to temptations: Now here we have the
special temptations of the Devil wherewith he assaulted our Savior Christ,
and in Christ's example the best way to avoid the same. This description
consists of three distinct parts: First, A Preface or preparation to a
Combat between Christ and the Devil, verse. 1. 2. Secondly, The combat or
conflict it self, verse. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Thirdly, The issue or event
of this combat, verse. 11.

I. Part. The Preparation to the combat has two parts: First, Christ's going
forth to that place where the combat was to be fought, verse. 1. Secondly, his
abode and conuersing in that place, verse. 2. 1. Christ's going forth to the
place is set out by sundry circumstances of the Evangelists: as, The time when
he went; The author of his going; The manner how he went furnished; the place
whither he went; And the end wherefore.

I. Circumstance. The time when Christ went forth to be tempted is noted in
this word Then: what time this was, we shall see in the end of the former
chapter, where is set down the baptism of our Savior Christ by John in the
river Jordan; as also the great honor and majesty wherewith he was there
renowned: for it pleased Christ for special end and purpose to be baptized,
not as we are, to put off sin, for he had none; but to be ordained a
Mediator for us, that putting on our sin he might bear the burden thereof in
our steed. Again in his baptism he was distinctly proclaimed, The doctor of
his Church: for immediately thereupon, The Holy ghost descended upon him like a
dove, and a voice came from heaven, saying, This is my well-beloved son in whom
I am well pleased. Now so soon as Christ was thus solemnly inaugurated into
his office, and proclaimed from heaven to be the sole Doctor and Prophet of
Gods Church, even then immediately without any delay was he driven forth, as
Mark says, chapt. 1. 12.

The use. Every Christian must look to be tempted.
In that Christ is no sooner baptized, but he is presently tempted, we learn;
that all those who are truly baptized into Christ must make account to be
tempted, and prepare for a combat with the Devil, even through the whole
course of their lives: for if Satan durst be so bold as to encounter with
Christ Jesus the head of the Church after his baptism, then doubtless he will
not spare any of his members who are but weak and sinful men. Again, in
baptism a man gives up his name unto God, promising therein for ever to
renounce all service to the Devil, the flesh and the world; and contrariwise
to believe in God, and to serve him; and this vow being thus made, it is the
will of God he should be tempted, that in the school of temptation he might
learn to practice his baptism. But here most men will say, they never felt by
experience in themselves the truth of this doctrine; for they have not
perceived any such combat in themselves, though they have been baptized many
years agone. Answ. Such men, The state of those that were never tempted.
whatsoever they be, have indeed the outward baptism of water, but they never
yet received the inward baptism of the spirit; they wear Christ's livery, but
as yet they do service unto Satan; And though they have been made partakers of
the seals of the covenant, yet still they abide within the kingdom of
darkness; for Christ here teaches by his own example, that all those who
have received the inward baptism of the spirit, whereby they have effectually
put off sin, and put on the Lord Jesus, are as sure to be tempted by Satan as
himself was: therefore let such persons as never yet felt in themselves this
spiritual conflict, now begin to reform their lives, and to perform their vow
of baptism, and they shall undoubtedly find in themselves the truth of this
doctrine, That all that are baptized into Christ, shall be tempted of the Devil.
So long as the children of Israel continued under Pharaos bondage, they were
not pursued by his army; but when they set their faces toward the land of
Canaan, then presently he makes after them, with all his might and malice; even
so, while men live in sin and submit themselves to Satan's spiritual bondage,
he will suffer all things to be in peace with them; but if once they set their
hearts on the heavenly Canaan, and give themselves syncerely to Gods service,
then will he with all his force pursue them, and meet them with armies of
temptations to turn them back into their old way of sin again. The silly
bird that is in the snare or under the net, so long as she lies still feels
no harm; but when she stirs and offers to get away, then begins her pain, and
the more she strives, the more she finds her self ensnared: So fares it with
silly men, while they live in sin securely, they are not troubled with Satan's
temptations; but when they begin to leave their badde courses, and settle
themselves to serve the Lord, then presently the Devil seeks to spread his net
to entangle them in his snare. The consideration whereof must teach us, to
watch and pray that we enter not into temptation; and (as Paul says) to put on
the whole armor of God, that we may be able to stand against the assaults of
the Devil, Ephesians. 6. 11.

Secondly, in that our Savior Christ after his solemn inauguration into his
mediatorship, was immediately to go to be tempted; we learn, Men set apart for
some special calling must look for temptation.
that all those that are set apart by God to any special calling, even at
their very entrance thereinto must look for temptations. This befell the
head, and therefore all the members must reckon for it. When Moses was first
called to be the guide and conducter of Gods people out of Egypt, Exodus 2. 15.
having slain an Egyptian in defense of one of his brethren, upon knowledge of
the fact he was fain to fly from Pharaos court into the land of Madian, and
there to live a shephers life for many years with his father in law Iethro. And
David was no sooner appointed by God to be king over his people Israel, but 1.
Sam. 18. 9. 11.
Saul began to persecute him, and so continued all his days. And our Savior
Christ, having called his Apostles to their office of preaching his kingdom,
Mat. 8. 23. 24.
took them soon after to the sea, and there falling asleep suffered their
ship to be so tossed with waves in a great tempest, that they looked for
nothing but present drowning, so as they cried out, Master save us, we perish.
And this the Lord does in great wisdom for the good of his children: 1 Reason
why.
first to teach them, that no man is able of himself, to carry himself in any
acceptable course of his calling without Gods special assistance and grace.
Secondly, to love of his majesty, the gifts of prayer, faith, patience, and
many other which he would have tried in the entrance of their callings, and
exercised in the continuance therein unto the end.

Thirdly, seeing Christ begins his prophetical office of treaching his church,
with temptations; This should admonish all Ministers of the word, Ministers
specially must look for temptations.
that howsoever all Gods people must prepare themselves against Satan's
temptations, yet they must do it above the rest; for look as in a pitched
field, the enemy aims principally at the standerd-bearer; even so Satan and
his instruments, do among all Gods people, bend their greatest forces against
the ministers of Christ which hold up his scepter, and display his banner in
the preaching of the Gospel. When Iehoshuah the high priest stood before the
Lord, Satan stood at his right hand to resist him, Zak. 3. 1. And when Ahab
went to fight against the king of Syriah, Satan became a lying spirit in the
mouth of 400. prophets and mo, 1. King. 22. 22. This is that great red dragon,
that with his tail drew down the third part of the stars of heaven, that
is, of the ministers and preachers of the word, and cast them to the earth,
Revel. 12. 13. 4. This is he that desired to winnow the Disciples as wheat,
Luke 22. 31. And as the king of Aram said of Ahab, fight not against small nor
great, but against the king of Israel only, 1. King. 22. 31. So Satan fights
not against any so much as the Prophets of Israel, the ministers of the Church.

Fourthly, It is good for Ministers to be tempted.
in that Christ is tempted before he go to preach, we learn that it is good
and profitable for Gods ministers to be exercised with temptations even of
satan himself, and that for sundry causes; first, that they may know 2. Cor.
2. 11.
what temptations mean; Secondly that they may 2. Cor. 1. 4.
be the more able to minister help and comfort to those that are tempted;
Thirdly to make them understand the word of God aright; for many places of
Scripture can not so well be understood by bare study only, as by temptations
Act. 4. 24. 25.
therewithal; and it is true which one says well, Reading, meditation,
prayer, and temptation, make a divine.

II. Circumstance The author or efficient cause of Christ's going forth; to
wit, the Holy ghost, noted in these words, was led by the spirit: The word led,
in the (...)
original signifies thus much, that Jesus was carried apart by the spirit;
which must not be understood of any local transportation of his body from
the river to the wilderness, as 2. King. 2. 11.
Elias was carried from earth to heaven; or as Act. 8. 39. 40.
Philip was taken away from the Eunuch, and carried to Azotus; but it was a
motion of the Holy ghost, wherewith Christ was filled above measure and made
willing to encounter with Satan in that combat; for so are the words by S.
Luke, Luke 4. 1.
being full of the Holy ghost he returned from Jordan, and was led by the
spirit into the wilderness, that is, by the inward motion and instinct of Gods
spirit; Again, S. Mark saying, Mark. 1. 12.
the Spirit drove him into the wilderness, gives us further to understand,
that this motion in Christ from the spirit, was a peculiar motion, not forced
or constrained, but voluntary, and yet very strong and effectual.

Again, by the spirit here, is not meant the Devil or an evil spirit, but the
Holy spirit of God: he it was that moved Christ to go into the wilderness; so
that the meaning is this; After Christ was baptized in Jordan by John, he
willingly took his journey into the wilderness, being moved thereunto by a
special and strong instinct of Gods holy spirit, wherewith he was filled above
measure. If any ask, how Christ could be led by the spirit, seeing he sends
the spirit: Answ. These two may well stand together: for Christ must be
considered two ways; first as man in the form of a servant; secondly, as God,
even the son of God, yea God himself: Now as Christ was man, he was subject
to Gods providence, and so was led and guided by the Holy ghost: but as he is
God, he is not subject to providence, but is the author thereof, and is not
himself led or sent, but together with the father sends the spirit.

The use. The holiness of Christ's manhood.
In this circumstance we may observe; first the exceeding holiness of Christ's
manhood, in that he moved not from one place to another, without the special
instinct and direction of the spirit of God. By which example we are taught to
suffer our selves to be ordered and guided by the spirit of God in every thing
we take in hand, yea in all our thoughts, words and deeds; for this is the true
note of every child of God to be led by the spirit, Romans 8. 14. where the
Apostle uses the same word that S. Luke does speaking of this leading of our
Savior to be tempted: we must therefore labor to be of David's disposition, to
have our hearts pliable to all Gods testimonies; when God said, Seek ye my face,
David's heart answered, I seek thy face O Lord, Psalm. 27. 8. and thus doing we
shall suffer our selves to be directed and guided by the Holy ghost, for he
teaches and guides men by the word.

Secondly, Temptations come not by chance.
from this that Christ was led unto temptation by the spirit of God; we learn,
That temptations come not by chance, nor yet by the will and pleasure of the
Devil only: for he could not touch Job, or ought he had till God Job. 1. 12.
gave him leave; nor enter into the heard of swine, till Christ said, Mat. 8.
32,
go; but temptations come by Gods most just permission, and not without his
special providence and appointment. This combat of Christ with Satan was
decreed of God by his special appointment in his eternal counsel. And
therefore was Christ led by the spirit to encounter with the Devil, that he
might perform this one work of a mediator, namely in temptation overcome him,
who by temptation overcame all mankind. And as God appointed this combat of
our Savior, so has he also ordained the temptations of every Christian and
the circumstances thereof: The theater or place of this combat is this present
evil world; the actors are Satan and every Christian; the beholders are men
and Angels, 1. Cor. 4. 9. The vmpire and judge is God himself, who ouerruleth
Satan, so as the issue cannot but be happy and blessed to those that fight
manfully; for he casts away none that be mighty and valiant of courage, Job.
36. 1. he will give an issue with the temptations, 1. Cor. 10. 13. from whence
we learn sundry good instructions.

count it exceeding great joy, Iam, 1. 2. because it is Gods blessed will and
ordinance that Satan and every Christian should enter combat and conflict, for
the trial of his graces in them.

Secondly, we are hereby taught to

Thirdly, Christ went not to be tempted Act. 20. 22.
Paul went bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, that is, he willingly followed
the motion of the Holy ghost, which inwardly enforced him to go thither. And
the same may be said of many holy Martyrs, who though they might have escaped
by flight, yet did willingly offer themselves into the hands of their
persecutours, and endured the violence of their torments, which we must think
they did by a special motion of the Holy ghost; otherwise, for a man to offer
himself into danger without all warrant from God, is to swerve from the
practice of Christ in this place.

Fourthly, Christ being led by the Quest. Of abode in places haunted by evil
spirits.
to be haunted with evil spirits? Answ. Some indeed are so venturous and bold
that they fear nothing: yet the truth is, no man ought on his own head abide
or lodge in such places, unless it be within the compass of his calling, or
else have a true extraordinary motion of Gods spirit so to do; we are therefore
rather to avoid them, than wittingly and willingly thrust our selves into the
danger of such places; for if God have given liberty unto Satan to possess
such places as have been consecrated to Idolatry, or defiled by oppression and
blood, or such like abominations, why should we without warrant from God, put
our selves into his hands? This also may serve to reprove those men who
presume so much upon their strong faith, that they never stick to thrust
themselves into most lewd company: but let such persons beware, for places of
bad company are places of danger by reason of that power and liberty which
Satan has among them, for there he has a throne, Revel. 2. 13. How then can
it be, that they should clean escape the infection of sin, who do usually
converse with those that commit it without controlement? Pro. 13. 20.
He that walks with the wise (says Solomon) shall be wise; but a companion
of fools shall be made worse: so the words signify: and therefore his
counsel is, Pro. 1. 10.
not to consent when sinners entise us: nor to Pro. 22. 24.
make friendship with the angry person, nor to go with the furious, lest we
learn their ways and receive destruction to our souls:

Fifthly, in this leading of Christ by the spirit, we learn a further thing: so
long as Christ was a private man he lived with Joseph and Mary a private life;
but being baptized, and thereby installed in his office of Mediator, he
returns not to Bethlem or Nazaret where he was borne and brought up, but gets
him presently into the wilderness, thereto encounter with Satan, and that by
the motion of the spirit; wherein we may see, that all that are appointed and
set apart by God for any special calling, are in some sort changed by his
spirit, and as it were made other men. When Saul was anointed to be king, the
text says, God gave him another heart. 1. Sam. 10. 9. And when David Psalm. 78.
71. 72.
was made of a shepherd a king, he was furnished for that place, as his
behavior showed, which was such as did beseem a king. Thus the Apostles of
our Savior Christ, of poor fishermen, altogether Acts 4. 13.
unlettered, by the gift of Christ's calling, 2. Cor. 3. 6.
were made able ministers of the New testament, and so became indeed fishers of
men, Mark. 1. 17. Use.
Which serves to confute such men as plead extraordinary callings, as many have
done; some saying they were Elias, some John Baptist, etc. For if these were
such men, and had received such extraordinary callings, then should they
withal have been endued with extraordinary gifts fit for those callings; but
no such thing befalls them, nay it is plain, they remain the same men they
were before, without any change at all in respect of gifts fit for such persons
as they pretend themselves to be. And to apply this to our selves; we are all
by nature the children of wrath, and enemies unto God; but by grace we are made
Kings, Priests, and Prophets; Kings to rule over the world and the Devil, in
respect of their prouocations unto sin, as also to subdue in our selves our
own evil lusts and affections; Priests to offer up spiritual sacrifices unto
God, as prayers and praises for his daily blessings; and Prophets to instruct
our selves and others in the ways of God, according to our gifts and calling.
Now then it behooves us all to become new men, and to lead new lives fitting
and suitable to our holy calling, giving our selves wholly to the honor and
service of God, showing hereby, that we are hereunto called by his spirit of
grace and holiness, so shall we Colos. 1. 10.
walk worthy of the Lord, and show forth the virtues of him that has called
us, 1. Pet. 2. 9.

III. Circumstance. How Christ went furnished into this place of combat: which
though our Evangelist Matthew has omitted, yet has S. Luke plainly noted,
saying, He was filled with the Holy ghost. Luke 4. 1. If any shall say, this
seems to import that Christ wanted the the fullness of the spirit all the
former part of his life, if now only after his baptism he were filled
therewith. I answer, This fullness of the spirit is ascribed unto Christ after
his baptism, not as though he formerly sustained any want of the spirit, but
because at his baptism he received a greater measure of the spirit than he had
before: for this we must know, that Christ was always filled with the spirit;
being an infant he had a full measure of gifts fit for his infancy, and still
as his growth in years required more graces of the spirit, he increased therein,
having in his youth and in his riper years full measure of gifts fit for his
estate in those times. And at his baptism being inaugurated into his
Mediatourship, he received such fullness of the spirit as was behoouefull for
so high an office, which because it was far greater than before he needed,
therefore is he now said to be filled with the Holy ghost: so that though
Christ were always full of grace, yet he increased therein as his estate and
calling did require.

The use. This serves to confute the Papists, who teach that Christ had all
fullness of spirit in his infancy, even from his conception and birth; and did
not grow in grace at all, save only experimentally, as he had occasion to
manifest the same more and more in practice. But. S. Luke says plainly, that
Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature, and in favor with God and men, Luke
2. 52. Again, Christ was like unto man in all things, sin only excepted, and
therefore did increase in grace as man does in gifts from time to time.

Further, Christ goes thus furnished to this combat that he might be able to
encounter with Satan hand to hand, and at the end give him the final
overthrow. Thus he furnished Moses Exo. 4. 11. 12
for his embassage unto Pharaoh; and 1. Sam. 17. 45.
David for his combat with Goliath; Aholiab and Exodus 35. 30. 31.
Bezaliel for the work of the Tabernacle; and every one whom God imployeth
about any special work, is furnished and fitted thereto of God with special
gifts: whereby in every age we may see whom God places in any calling, for
they are well qualified for the duties thereof; and therefore those that want
gifts meet for their callings, do thrust in themselves thereto, and are not
placed therein of God.

IV. Circumstance. Whither was Christ led to be tempted? namely, into the
wilderness, that is the place chosen of God for this combat. There be diverse
opinions touching this place; some think it was a little wilderness between
Jerusalem and Jericho; some the desert of Palestina; others, the great desert
of Arabia, where Elias fasted forty days and forty nights; and where the
Israelites wandered forty years. But seeing the Holy Ghost does not define
what wilderness this was, we are not curiously to inquire after it, Why Christ
chose a desert for this combat.
but only know it was a desert and solitary place. Let us rather search into
the reasons wherefore he chose a desert place for this combat; and they are
diverse: First, because he Mark. 5. 5.
in desert and forlorn places, and there he would choose to practice his
temptations, because in such places men want those helps and comforts which in
society they may find: hence Solomon says, Eccles. 4. 10.
Woe be to him that is alone: yea, God himself said of man in the state of his
innocence, Genesis 2. 18.
It is not good for man to be himself alone. And that Satan takes advantage of
such solitariness, appears by his tempting of Eve, when she was apart Ge. 3.
1. Fourthly, the praise and honor of this victory over Satan, was peculiar to
Christ, and not communicable to any creature: and therefore Christ chose a
desert place for this combat apart from all humane society, that no man might
challenge any part of this glory to himself, but that it might be wholly
Christ's, as of

The use. From hence the church of Rome would fetch a ground and warrant for
their monastical life; saying, that as Christ went apart into this desert, so
may men sequester themselves from ordinary societies, and live as Monks and
Heremites in cloisters, woods and deserts. But this collection is absurd, as
may appear by these reasons: first, Christ went not thus apart on his own
head, but by the instinct and motion of the spirit of God: but the Papists
admit and undertake the state of Eremiticall and Monastical life without any
warrant in Gods word. Secondly, Christ did thus sequester himself but once for
a certain time: but with them, an Heremiticall estate is ordinary and
perpetual for their whole life. Thirdly, our Savior Christ fasted truly all
the while he abode in the wilderness: but Papists in their Cloisters and
Hermitages do plentifully enjoy the wealth of the world in great ease and
liberty. And therefore howsoever solitariness for a time may be commendable in
some cases, as to meditate on the works or word of God, as Isaac did, Genesis 24.
63. or for the exercise of Luke 5. 16.
prayer and fasting in more earnest manner; yet the Eremites life being a
perpetual forsaking of humane societies, is neither warrantable by Gods word,
nor commendable in Gods child.

V. Circumstance. The end why Christ went into the desert; namely, to be
tempted of the Devil: wherein observe three points; How he was tempted;
wherefore, and by whom. For the first; To Tempt, in Scripture is ascribed to
God, to man, and to the Devil: God tempts man, when he proves him; that
is, when he makes manifest what is in his heart for sin or grace, which
before were hid to the world: thus God tempted Abraham in the offering up of
his son, Genesis 22. 1. and Christ, the ruler, Luke 18. 22. Man tempts God,
when he proves by unlawful means whether God be so powerful, just and
merciful as the Scriptures do affirm him to be: and thus the Israelites
tempted God, when they required meat for their lust, and said, can God prepare
a table in the wilderness? Psalm. 78. 18. 19. The Devil tempts when he
allureth unto sin, by inward suggestions or outward objects; and hereof must
we understand Christ's tempting in this place; to wit, that he was led into the
wilderness for this end that Satan might assault him, and use what means he
could to bring him unto sin. If any shall think it was too much derogatory
to the dignity of Christ to be thus tempted. I answer* If it had so pleased
him, Christ could have confounded the Devil with the least word of his mouth:
for as he is Creator of heaven and earth, so Satan had no power to tempt him,
for God can not be tempted with evil, Iam. 1. 13. But here Christ stood in our
room and sted (as he did upon the Cross) encountering with Satan for us, as if
we in our own persons had been tempted. This therefore must be understood as a
part of Christ's humiliation in his manhood, whereto he subjected himself for
our sakes, otherwise the Devil could not have tempted him. Object. This stands
not with the holiness of Christ as he is man to be tempted of Satan? Answ.
Yes, he might be tempted of Satan without sin, as our first parents were
before their fall: this will plainly appear by comparing Christ with other men
in their temptations.

The Devil in tempting a man to sin, first conuayes into his mind, either by
inward suggestion, or by outward object, the motion or cogitation of that sin
which he would have him to commit. Thus he tempted Judas, by Ioh. 13. 27.
casting into him this evil thought, Judas betray thy Master. And so deals
he with Christ in this temptation, he conveyed to his mind or apprehension,
the unrighteous cogitations of unbelief, idolatry, and covetousness; yet so
as Christ received them not, but with all power of grace repelled them.
Secondly, as Satan conuayes evil suggestions into men's minds, so the same are
full of trouble, sorrow, and vexation, at least to the godly: for when Satan
presses upon man his temptations, the whole man is disquieted, his thoughts
and affections are troubled, and his heart is vexed. And this also was in
Christ, he felt sorrow and molestation in himself through these temptations,
as appears by his Auant Satan upon his last assault. And thus far was
Christ tempted like unto men. Thirdly, in temptations usually be corrupt
motions; for though a man do not approve, neither enterteine with delight, the
Devils temptations, yet shall he hardly keep himself from the stain and
taint of sin, because the imaginations of his own heart are naturally evil.
Now herein Christ differs from all men in temptation; for being perfectly
holy in his humane nature, he did not in the least measure receive any
corruption into his mind, but by the power of grace did repel them more
strongly than they were offered. Similitude.
Put a burning match to tinder or gunpowder, and it will kindle presently; but
put it into water, and that will quench it straight: so it fares in
temptations; our corrupt hearts like tinder do easily suffer corruption to
kindle in us; but Christ's most holy heart did presently like water quench the
evil of Satan's motions. And thus we see how Christ was tempted, and yet
without sin.

The use. Hence we may observe a good direction for their comfort that are
troubled with blasphemous thoughts. Among other temptations that befall men in
Gods church, the Devil does mightily assault some men by casting into their
minds most fearful motions of blasphemy against God the Father, the Son
and the Holy Ghost, whereby he does greatly astonish them and bring them to
despair. Now the ground of their stay and comfort hence is this: There be
incident to the mind of man two kinds of evil thoughts: First, such as arise
from the flesh, that is, from our corrupt nature; and the very first motions of
these are sins, forbidden in the tenth commandment. Secondly, there be
others that rise not inwardly from the flesh, but are from without conuayed
into the mind by the devil, as these most horrible blasphemies against God,
which would make a godly heart to tremble and quake once to think upon. Now
these are our heavy crosses indeed, when we be assaulted with them, but the
devils sins wholly, and become not ours, till we receive them by some degree
of delight or assent, as may hence appear: for Christ was tempted to
infidelity, covetousness and idolatry, yet his holy heart received them not,
and so they never became his sins.

The second point to be considered in this circumstance is, wherefore Christ
was tempted: for it may seem strange that Jesus Christ the son of God, yea
very God, equal with the Father, should be tempted. Reasons why Christ was
tempted.
The reasons therefore that moved him to be tempted are these: First, that he
might foil the Devil at holy one of God, was tempted of Satan, and that
exceeding sore, having the same troubles and vexations thereby arising in his
mind that we have, insomuch as the Angels came to minister comfort unto him,
verse. 11. Gods dearest children therefore may and must be tempted, for that is
no token of a child of wrath, unless we will say, that Christ Jesus was the
child of wrath, which once to think were most blasphemous. a merciful high
priest, unto them that are tempted, Heb. 2. 17. 18. for himself knowing the
trouble and anguish of temptation, must needs in a more compassionate
fellow-feeling of their miseries be ready to help and comfort his members
when they are tempted.

The third point is, the author of Christ's temptations, to wit, the devil: the
name Devil signifies a cauiller, a slanderer and an accuser: He is an accuser
three ways; he accuses God to man; man to God; and man to man. First God to
man; as when he told Eve, they must not die though they did eat of the
forbidden fruit, Genes. 3. 4. which was as much as if he had said, God does but
deceive you with that threatening, ye shall not die at all. Secondly he
accuses men to God, and therefore is called the accuser Apoc. 12 9.
of the brethren: and our 1. Pet. 5. 8. (...)
adversary who goes about like aroaring lion: which word adversary signifies
one that enters plea or suite against us: thus he dealt against godly Job, by
the Lords own confession Job. 2. 3. Thirdly, he accuses man to man, by
ingendring ungodly and uncharitable surmises and suspicions in one man against
another, and in causing one man to slander and injury another; and for this
cause is he said to work in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. and
their wisdom is said to be devilish, who have bitter envying and strife in
their heart, Iam. 3. 14. 15.

The use. From this very name we are 1. Tim. 3. 6.
that a minister must not be a nouice, lest he be puffed up and fall into the
condemnation of the devil, uses such a word for the devils name as signifies
a false accuser or slanderer, (...).
to show unto us that such a one is a devil incarnate: And yet this is the
common sin of this age, to speak evil and to backbite, when they speak one
of another. Secondly, Act. 13. 10.
calls him, full of all subtilty and mischief, the child of the devil. And
this I do the rather observe, because it is a usual thing to draw others
back from the power of godliness; though not in plain terms, yet partly in
reproaches and partly by bad example of life. Now all such had need to look to
their estate, for the children of the devil are like to have their portion
with the devil and his angels. And thus much for the author of Christ's
temptations; as also for the first part of Christ's preparation to this combat.

VERSE 2. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was
afterward hungry.

HEe^^ is the second part of Christ's preparation to this combat, namely his
abode in the wilderness, which is set out unto us by four arguments: I. by
his fasting forty days and forty nights, noted in the words of this verse.
II. by his abode with wild beasts, noted by S. Mark. chap. 1. 12. III. by his
enduring of temptations within the space of these forty days and forty
nights, Luke 4. 2. though in particular those be not set down by any
Evangelist. IV. by his hunger after forty days fasting, in the end of this
verse. Of these in order.

I. Circumstance. Christ's fasting forty days and forty nights: Three kinds of
fasts.
There be three kinds of fasts, if we take the word in a general sense: first
the daily fast of temperance and sobriety, whereby we use Gods creatures for
our sustenance with that moderation and abstinence, that we rather give less
to natures appetite, then that which it desires: This Christ inioineth to
every Christian, Luke 21. 34.
take heed lest at any time your hearts be oppressed The second kind of fast
is, the religious abstinence of Gods church from all meats and drinks for a
time, for the furtherance of their prayers, when they humble themselves unto
God for the preventing or remoouing of some heavy judgment: thus the Jews
fasted, Judge. 20 26. 1. Sam. 7. 6.
sometime for one day, sometime for three days and three nights, Hester 4. 16.
yea sometime for 1. Sam. 31. 13. 1. Chro. 10. 12.
seven days together; but then it is like they received some sustenance in the
evening: for so Daniel fasted for three weeks of days, eating no pleasant 10.
2. 3. but of neither of these must Christ's fasts here be understood. The third
kind of fast is miraculous, done by the power of God restraining the appetite
for many days together without meat or drink, beyond the power of nature:
Thus Exodus 34. 28.
Moses fasted forty days and forty nights in mount Sina, where he enioied
the presence of God so long. And so did Elias 1. King. 19. 8.
fast in mount Horeb; and our Savior Christ in this wilderness. We read
indeed that Paul in his conversion fasted three days and three nights eating
nothing, Act. 9. 9. So did the Jews with Hester and her maids, Hest. 4. 16.
And experience teaches that a sick man may live seven or nine days together
without meat or drink, yea (as some learned Physicians write) fourteen
days: And Paul's companions in his journey to Rome, are very little or nothing
at all, for fourteen days* for the words are plain, Act. 27. 33.
eating nothing: And it may be so, since the like has been found true by
experience in our age. And this is the longest that a man can fast and live, to
wit fourteen, or fifteen, or seventeen days; for so much is recorded of
some, that after so long abstinence have lived, though with some weakness of
nature: but for a man ordinarily, being of good constitution of body to fast
forty days and forty nights together, is impossible. Indeed it has been
avouched Iubart. Parad. 2. decad. 1.
that a man might fast months, yea a whole year together without meat or
drink and yet live; but we may persuade our selves it is not true. Now our
Savior Christ (which is yet more) during this fast felt no faintness nor
weaking of his body, as we ordinarily do with a little abstinence, so that his
fast was not ordinary but miraculous altogether.

The reasons why Christ fasted thus long in the wilderness may be these;
Reasons why Christ fasted forty days.
First that he might perform his ministry, which now he was to begin, with
more reverence and authority: for this Moses to fast forty days and forty
nights before he delivered the law written in two tables of stone unto the
people; and so must Elias do, before he did restore religion in his days:
Secondly, that it might appear Quest. Seeing Christ did far excel Moses and
Elias, why did he not exceed them in the length of his fast, for threescore
days or a whole year? Answ. He did it not through want of power to have
fasted longer, but because he would not give occasion thereupon that any should
call into question the truth of his manhood, which might easily have happened,
if he had fasted a whole year together.

The use. Heereon the Church of Rome would build their Lent fast; but very
fondly; for first Christ did not thus fast to give us example to follow him
herein, but to prepare himself to the great work of his ministry; secondly,
there is great difference between Christ's fast and theirs; Christ fasted thus
but once, and that by the instinct of the Holy Ghost; they keep their fast
yearly, and that on their own heads: Christ's was a true fast, without all
meat or drink; but theirs is a mocke-fast, for they eat the finest fishes and
other dainties, and drink wines, wherein is as much nourishment to the body,
and as good as in flesh; neither can they justly build it on the practice of
the primitive Church, for they used to fast (at least in some places) but two
or three days before Easter: and their Lent fast was not ordained Antepaschale
Ieiunium.
nor imposed til many years after Christ; Zanch, deredempt. l. 1. cap. 19. in
the side quadrag. Ieiunio.
so as every one might choose whether he would fast, or not.

II. Circumstance. S. Mark does further set out Christ's abode in the
wilderness by his being and conuersing with wild beasts, Mark. 1. 13. which
some think Christ did for this end, that wild beasts might come to him and do
him homage due to their Creator and Governor: but this is a device of man
without likelihood of truth; for howsoever Christ in himself deserved all
homage and reverence of all his creatures; yet because he abode among wild
beasts to be abased and humbled in the low estate of a servant, therefore it is
not like he went to receive homage from them. The true cause rather is this: we
find in Scripture that among the Jews were two sorts of deserts; one, in part
peopled and inhabited, having here and there cities and villages; in such a
desert was John Baptist borne, and did baptize and preach; that the prophecy
of Isay 40. 3.
Isay might be fulfilled, The voice of a crier in the wilderness, make straight
the way of the Lord. The other, not inhabited at all by men, being a place of
abode only for wild beasts, as Lions, Bears, Tigers, Woolues, etc. which lived
therein continually: Now into such a desert as this, was our savior Christ led
by the spirit, and made his abode among such wild beasts; which circumstance is
therefore noted to give us to understand that in this combat, our Savior
Christ had no aid, protection, succor, help, or comfort from any man or other
creature whatsoever; for by nature his companions were so far from being an
help and comfort unto him, that they would rather seek to devour him.
Whereby we plainly see that the praise of victory in this combat, is proper to
Christ alone, and not communicable to any creature whatsoever.

The use. In this estate of Christ in this wilderness, we may behold the
condition of Christ's militant church; to wit, that it is in this world as in a
wilderness and desert of wild beasts; for during their abode on earth, Gods
children live with men, who in disposition and affection are like Woolues,
Bears, Tigers, Lions and Cockatrices, until such time as the Holy Ghost by
grace shall turn their hearts, as we may plainly see, Isay 11. 6. 7. 8. in
regard whereof they must arm themselves with patience against manifold
assaults and vexations, comforting their hearts with this consideration, that
Christ their head has undergone this estate before them.

III. Circumstance. S. Luke Luke 4. 2. 3.
observes, that while Christ abode in the wilderness, within the space of
those forty days and forty nights, he was tempted of the Devil, before the
three great temptations: the words are plain: And was there forty days
tempted of the devil: And when they were ended, then the devil said, etc.
what these temptations were, either for matter or form, the holy Ghost has
not set down; and yet we may probably think they were more mild and gentle
temptations then those three which are set down; the devil making them as it
were an entrance to his strongest and most dangerous temptations; for his manner
is, when it makes for his advantage, not to show his violence and extremity
at the first, but to proceed by degrees, and by little and little to insinuate
himself till he have gotten his best advantage, and then will he show the
strength of his malice. Thus he dealt with Cain, first he prouokes him to anger
and malice against his brother, because his brothers sacrifice was accepted,
and his rejected; then having settled hatred in his heart, he never leaves till
he had caused him in his rage to slay his brother; and yet he stays not there,
but after bring him to despair of Gods mercy, in so much as he cried out, Genesis
4. 13.
my sin is greater then I can bear. Thus also he dealt with Judas; first he
cast this evil thought into his heart, Judas betraie thy master, and when he
had gotten entertainment for that (for doubtless Judas would not yield to so
vile a thought at the first motion) then he caused him to put it in execution,
whereupon in fearful despair he brought him to hang himself. This is the
subtlety of the old serpent; first he conuaies one claw or talant into a man's
heart, and then another; after that he gets in his head, and so at length
winds in all his body: Thus he assaied to do with Christ, and so will he
continue toward all Gods children. Which should teach us to labor to be
strong in the Lord, and wise in his word, that so we may stand against all his
assaults: Yea, this must move us to a special watch through the whole course
of our lives against the occasions of sins, that we may cut off temptations
in the beginning, because it is Satan's craft, not to spit his venom at the
first, but to sugar his temptations at the beginning that no danger may appear
till he have conueled into us the bane and poison of our souls.

IV. Circumstance. Christ's abode in the wilderness is further set out by his
hunger, in the end of this verse; He was afterward hungry: that is, after he
had fasted forty days and forty nights by the power of his Godhead, then he
began to wax hungry. But some will say, this stands not with the glory and
majesty of the son of God to be hungry, for his flesh is meat indeed, Ioh.
6. 53.
and his blood is drink indeed. Answer. Christ was content to lay aside his
glory and majesty, and to take upon him our base and frail nature, becoming
like unto us in all things save sin; now in this his abasement and humility
he had not only a true soul and body, but the true faculties thereof, as
understanding, will, memory, etc. and though his body was free from personal
infirmities, as palsy, gout, dropsy, or such like, yet he was subject to such
infirmities as agree to the nature of man, as hunger, thirst, weariness, etc.
Yea this was one part of his humiliation to become not only man, but man with
infirmities: and therefore though he could by the power of his Godhead have
preserved himself forty years without meat or drink as well as forty
days; yet that he might abase himself to the lowest degree of a servant, he
was content to sustain the infirmite of his humane nature in being an hungered:
And that for these causes.

First, Reasons why Christ was an hungered.
to confirm unto us the truth of his manhood; for some man might say, it was
an easy thing for him to fast forty days and forty nights, seeing he had
not a true body, but only the show and shadow of a body: therefore to show
that he was true man, and had a true natural body as we have, he was content
to sustain hunger, as we do, and that truly. Secondly, that hereby he might
cast an object before the devil, to cause him to be the more eager and violent
in his temptations, and to show his malice in full measure against him; for by
virtue of his office whereto he was now called, Christ was to encounter with
Satan our common enemy, and therefore gives him not only the advantage of the
place, but also the opportunity of estate, that Satan perceiving his infirmity
of bodily hunger, might thereby be emboldened to give the more violent assault
upon him. And thus much of the second part of Christ's preparation to his combat.

VERSE 3. Then came to him the Tempter, and said, If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones may be made bread.

Here begins this strange combat between our Savior Christ and the devil,
consisting of three great conflicts: The first whereof is contained in this
verse and the next, being indeed the greatest of them al, as after shall
appear. In this temptation observe these three things: first satan's
preparation to this conflict: secondly the temptation it self: thirdly,
Christ's answer and repulse made thereunto.

I. Point: Satan's preparation.
The devils preparation is in these words: Then came to him the Tempter, and
said: herein observe four things; first, the title given to Satan the author
of this temptation, the Tempter; so Paul calls him, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. I sent to
know of your faith, left the Tempter had tempted you in any sort: And satan is
called the Tempter, because his continual study and practice has been and
is, by all means to tempt all men; he omits no times, neither spares any
pains day or night, but by all means seeks to draw men from God, and to
bring them to destruction: the consideration whereof should move us to the
practice of these duties.

First, Use 1.
to be watchful in all manner of prayers and supplication against Satan, for
the gracious protection of God against his assaults: If any of us had our
dwelling among Lions, Bears, or Tigers, which were hungerbit, and therefore
would seek greedily for their pray, we would be sure never to go out of our
dwelling houses, without preparation for rescue and defense, whereby we might
avoid their danger. Well, though we have no such wild beasts to endanger our
bodies; yet our souls are daily assaulted by a more deadly enemy, even the
devil, whose continual study and practice is by temptation to devour us, 1.
Pet. 5. 8. and therefore we must always be watchful against temptations,
putting upon us the whole armor of God, that we may be able to stand against
his assaults.

James 4. 7. 8. Resist the devil and he will fly; draw near to God, and he
will draw near to you: the conjunction of these two duties shows, that the
nearer we come to God, the more we oppose our selves to Satan: now he that
comes unto God must believe, Heb. 11. 6. and therefore by faith must we 1.
Tim. 4. 7.
exercise our selves unto godliness, as Paul exhorts Timothy; and unless
we thus strive to be unlike him, we shall never be able to withstand his
temptations.

lusts of Satan, must needs be his child, Ioh. 8. 44. hence it was, that our
Savior Christ calls Peter Satan, when he went about to dissuade him from that
work for which his Father had sanctified him and sent him into this world,
saying, Get behind me Satan, Matt. 16. 23. And when Elymas sought to turn
away the Deputy from the faith, Paul calls him enemy to all righteousness,
full of all subtlety, and child of the devil, Act. 13. 10.

The second thing in this preparation is, the time when Satan began to tempt
our Savior Christ in a more strong and violent manner, noted in this word Then,
that is, when Christ had now fasted forty days and forty nights, and was an
hungered; when the devil saw Christ not only to be alone in the wilderness,
but also perceived that he was afflicted with hunger, and so the more weak
being in the low estate of a miserable man, Then he prepares to assault Christ
with a most violent temptation.

The use. Satan's policy in tempting.
This discovers unto us the deep policy of Satan in making choice of the
fittest time for his assaults: he will not tempt all men at all times, neither
always with the greatest temptations; but he forecasts for the time of man's
greatest weakness, and thereto he reserueth his strongest assaults: Now
usually a man is most weak, when he is under some grievous affliction; either
in body, mind, or both; or when he lies in the panges of death: these times
does Satan observe; and keep his strongest temptations against they come, as
does notably appear by his dealing with Christ, not only at this time when
he was an hungered, but also and especially at his passion; for the Scripture
says, He Coloss. 2. 14. 15.
spoiled principalities and powers upon the cross: whereby is apparent, that
the Devil with his greatest power did then assault him, thinking either then
or never to give him the foil, when as he did sustain the wrath of God due
unto the sins of man; and so will he handle all the members of Christ; in
their greatest extremities they shall be sure to feel Satan's deepest malice,
unless God restrain his power. Which must teach us in the day of peace and
strength, to prepare against the day of weakness by any affliction or by
death it self, that so we may by Gods grace be able to stand against the rage
of Satan; for then he will be sure most eagerly to seek our ruin, and unless
we prepare before hand, we shall never be able to stand: Now our best
preparation is to come to hear the words of Christ and to do the same, for
then, though the winds blow, the rain fall, the waves beat, and Satan do his
woorst, yet being built upon the rock Christ Jesus, we shall never fall,
Matthew. 7. 24. 25.

The third thing in this preparation, is the occasion of Satan's onset at this
time, namely, Christ's bodily hunger, as the knitting of this verse to the
former will plainly show, for Christ being an hungered, Satan came unto him and
tempted him. He could not find in Christ's most holy manhood any blemish of
sin, or inclination thereto whereon to build his temptation; yet such is his
malice, that rather then Christ should escape his hands, he will take occasion
from the infirmity of his nature in bodily hunger to provoke and allure him
unto sin.

Herein we learn a special point; Satan grounds his temptations on something
in us.
namely, that the devil will have some ground in us for those temptations
wherewith he does assault us; for as we may see by his dealing here with
Christ, he observes not only the inclination of man's heart and soul, but the
state and constitution of the body, that if either body or mind will afford
him the least advantage, thereon he will be sure to take occasion to tempt. If
we regard the seed and root of sin, it is true that every man has all sins
in him, but yet through the work of God, restraining corruption in some, and
renewing grace in others, it comes to pass, that each man is more inclined
naturally to some sins then to others, which thing Satan does observe most
diligently; and as an enemy that besieges a city will go about it and epsy
where the wall is weakest and most fit for his entrance, and there will be sure
to give his strongest onset; and as a man that would strike fire with a flint,
will turn it about in his hand, to see what part is fittest; even so the
devil, he goes about a man, and as it were turns him to and fro, to spy out
his weakness, and to what sins he is most inclined, and there he will, be
sure to try him often, and to assault him with greatest violence. Example: If
a man be impatient of poverty, he will seek to carry him to picking and
stealing: If a man be prove to covetousness, he will provoke him to fraud and
oppression: If he be inclined to ambition, Satan will puff him up with pride
and vainglory: nay, which is far more, Satan will take occasion from the
very constitution of a man's body to draw him unto sin; if choler be
predominant in him, Satan will labor to stir him up to wrath, anger, and
fury, and if he can, to bloodshed and murder: If a man be of a sanguine
complexion, Satan will seek to carry him to immoderate mirth, and to excess
in pastimes, pleasures and delight, that if it be possible he may drown him
therein, whether they be good or bad: If a man be melancholic, Satan will
sometime take occasion by that humor to strike him with exceeding sadness, with
terrors and fears; and otherwhile to intoxicate his brain with strange
fantasies and delusions, causing a man to think himself to be Elias, John
Baptist, Christ, etc. So as it is true which an ancient Divine says of this
humor, that it is the Devils bait wherewith he sports himself. See the
experience hereof in the Mat. 17. 15.
lunatike person, whose disease was, to be exceedingly troubled certain times
of the month, by reason of melancholy oppressing the brain. Now Satan (as it
there appears) took advantage of that humor to abuse him most fearfully,
not only in making him deaf and dumb, but also causing him to cast himself
into fire and water. So that look how many sins and infirmities we have in
us, so many dares we carry about us, wherewith Satan will seek to wound us.
He takes ground or occasion from us, of all the advantage he has against us;
his temptations are like fire and bellows, and our infirmities and corruptions
are wood and fuel.

The use. I. Hence then we may behold our miserable estate by reason of sin;
for thereby it comes to pass that we bear about us those darts, wherewith the
devil does wound us. And since Satan's craft and malice is such to take advantage
from us, for to work our woe, we must labor the more diligently, to be
thoroughly acquainted with our natural dispositions and inclinations, yea with
our bodily infirmities, for the Devil will search us; and when we have truly
found out our own estate, we must set a strong watch and guard about our own
hearts in respect of our infirmities, and so shall we be the better able to
break the neck of Satan's temptations.

The fourth thing in this preparation is, Satan's coming to Christ; The Tempter
came unto him: By which phrase it is probable, though not certain, that the
Devil took upon him the form of some creature, and so appeared unto Christ;
thus he came to Eve in Paradise, abusing the serpent to further his assault
against the first Adam: And it is like, that in his combat with the second
Adam, he came in the shape of some creature, for otherwise he could not
properly be said to come and speak. Some indeed think that these temptations
were inward in mind only, and by vision; others think they were altogether
visible and done actually; but the safest way is to hold that they were in
part actually done in bodily manner, and partly showed in vision. And thus much
for the preparation to the first conflict.

II. Point. The temptation it self: containing matter of great importance,
being indeed the maine temptation of all, in these words: If thou be the Son
of God command that these stones be made bread. The Devil being well provided
for time and place, and aduantaged also by Christ's bodily hunger, does here
assault our Savior Christ like a cunning Sophister, and frame his argument
Syllogistically, thus:

If thou be the son of God, Satan's Sophistry.
thou can make these stones bread.

But thou can not make these stones bread:

Therefore thou art not the son of God. The ground of this temptation is
this: It is no reason that the Son of God should starve for want of food; but
thou must starve unless thou can make these stones bread: and therefore
unless thou can do so, thou may persuade thy self it was but a false
voice which thou heardest from heaven; This is my well-beloved Son, etc.

The scope and drift of Satan in this temptation stands in two things; First
he labors to overthrow the faith of Christ. Secondly, to bring him to a
practice of unbelief. For the first, By faith I mean, a gift or grace in
Christ, whereby as he was man, he believed his Fathers words to be true, which
said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: whereby we may see,
what the Devil aims at principally in his temptations against Gods children;
for these his assaults against our Savior Christ are set down for our
instruction in this behalf. Satan seeks the ruin of our faith.
Satan's maine drift then in temptation is to overthrow our faith, whereby we
believe every part and parcel of Gods word to be true: See this in his
tempting of Eve; first he labors to weaken her faith in the truth of Gods
threatening, which done, he easily brought her to actual disobedience in eating
the forbidden fruit. The same course he holds at this day; first he will
seek to nuzzell men in ignorance, that he may keep them in unbelief: if he
fail that way, then will he endeavor to plunge their souls into some damnable
error and heresy; and by one of these means does he destroy the faith of
many; for while a man remains in ignorance he can have no says; and if he
miss of the truth of God, he wants ground for his faith. Now the reason why
the Devil labors so much against our faith is, because we cannot truly rely
upon Gods mercy, nor depend upon his providence, nor yield any acceptable
obedience to his commandments, unless we believe his word.

More particularly we are to observe that special branch of Gods word which the
Devil would have Christ not to believe; even that voice of his Father, which a
little before Christ heard from heaven at his baptism; This is my well-beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased: And this has the holy Ghost recorded in great
wisdom and mercy to Gods Church; for hereby does appear a main drift of
Satan against Christ's members in his temptations, namely to make them doubt of
their adoption, Satan seeks to deprive us of assurance of adoption.
and to destroy this persuasion in them, that they are the sons and daughters
of God; for if herein he spared not the head, doubtless the members shall not
escape his hands. This appears by his usual assault against them, specially
when God shall lay upon them any lingering cross or affliction, either in mind,
in body, or in goods; then the devil will suggest this into their minds; If
thou werst the child of God, he would never lay his hand upon thee so long a
time and in so grievous manner; never was any child of God in this case that
thou art in: But God lays his hand thus heavy on thee; and therefore thou
may persuade thy self that thou art not the child of God.

The use. The consideration hereof must move us above all things to labor
for assurance of our adoption, even to have our consciences, assured out of
Gods word, that we are the sons and daughters of God in Christ. The devils
drift is to overthrow this persuasion in us, and therefore our endeavor must
be, to confirm and settle our hearts herein. This is the charge of the holy
Ghost upon every child of God; 2. Pet. 1. 10. Give all diligence to make your
calling and election sure, that is, get the assurance thereof sealed up in your
hearts, by the comfortable fruition and practice of the saving graces of Gods
spirit, joining virtue with your faith, and with your virtue knowledge, with
your knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience, and with patience
godliness, and with godliness brotherly kindness, and with brotherly
kindness love, verse. 5. 6. 7. And indeed if we would have true peace and
comfort in every estate whether adversity or prosperity, let us labor for the
knowledge of our adoption: This will be our joy in want, in wealth, in bondage,
in freedom, in sickness, in health, in life and in death. Herein is that joy
of Christ which never can be taken from us, Ioh. 16. 22. We cannot do the
Devil a greater pleasure, then to neglect the getting of this assurance; for
hereupon he will take occasion (specially in time of distress) fearfully and
dangerously to seek to break the neck of our souls; he cares not much
otherways what men profess, and what knowledge and other common gifts of the
spirit they have, so that they want this blessed assurance; and therefore with
the Apostle Paul, we must account all other things to be but dross and dung in
respect of this excellent knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3. 8.
to be our Savior and Redeemer. True it is, that unto many this exhortation
will seem needless; for ignorant persons that have nothing in them but mere
presumption, will brag most of this persuasion; but they that have felt the
smart of temptation, do know what it is that will stand us in stead, even that
assurance only which is rightly founded upon the word of God; and therefore
forsaking the vain conceits of our ignorance, let us with all diligence
unfeignedly endeavor to get this resolution; if we cannot of our selves attain
unto it, we must use the direction and help of Gods faithful Ministers; for
howsoever it pleases some to think otherwise, yet this is the undoubted truth
of God, that a man in this life may ordinarily be resolved and assured of his
salvation.

The second thing which the Devil aimed at in this temptation, Satan would
bring Christ to a practice of unbelief.
was to bring Christ to a practice of unbelief, namely in want of bread to
turn stones into bread, for the present satisfying of his hunger; for the
Devil would needs persuade our Savior. Christ that he must have bread to save
his life, and therefore in the want of bread would have brought him to this
distrustful course, to turn stones into bread.

And as the Devil here deals with Christ, so he assaies to do with all his
members; as he labors to work unbelief in their hearts, so he seeks to bring
them to the practice of unbelief in their lives. See the truth hereof in the
course of the world; Is a man oppressed with outward want and poverty? the
Devil will tell him, he must needs live, and therefore will persuade him to
rob and steal and to filch for his living. If a man be sick, and want
present help in lawful means, or else be afflicted somewhat extraordinarily,
then will the Devil move him to seek to Wizards and Witches, suggesting this
into him by one means or other, that they can do more good in such a case then
all the Physicians in the world. This is a most vile practice of unbelief, and
yet too common in the world, wherein men for the remoouall of some outward
evil, will not stick to hazard the loss of their souls. We therefore must
labor to be acquainted with these wiles of Satan, and by the practice of faith
in our lives, labor to express the power of faith in our hearts, as in all
manner of godly conversation, so especially in using only lawful means for
our relief in the time of misery and distress.

But to come more particularly to the words of this temptation; If thou be the
Son of God command these stones, etc. It may be demanded, why the Devil
should make choice of this question wherewith to tempt our Savior Christ,
rather then any other? Answer. The reasons hereof may be these: First, he knew
well, that if Christ were the true and proper son of God, then he must needs
be the true Messiah; and if he were that anointed of God, then also he it was
that must accomplish that old and ancient promise made to our first Parents
Genesis 3. 15.
for the bruising of the serpents head: This was the thing that of all other,
the Devil was most afraid of, and could not endure to hear; and therefore by
moving this question he intends to infringe, yea and (if he could) quite to
overthrow our Savior Christ in the right of this title. Secondly, The Devil
since his fall, bears an unspeakable deadly hatred against God himself, and
according to his nature, as occasion serves, he cannot but show the same. Now
in this question he does notably bewray his malice and spite against God; for,
whereas in Christ's baptism a little before, God had proclaimed him to be his
beloved son in whom he was well pleased, hereby the Devil goes about to
prove the clean contrary, and so as much as in him lies, seeks to make God a
lier; which, because it fitted his nature so well, he makes choice of at this
time.

The use. I. In this practice of the devil we may learn what to judge of
sundry false teachers; for as well in the Primitive Church as also since that
time, there have been sundry men of great same for wisdom and learning, as
Ebion, Cerinthus, Carpoorates, Samosatenus, and Arrius; who have all labored
severally to prove, that Jesus Christ the Son of Marie was not indeed the
Son of God, very God, but only a worthy Prophet. Now of them we may
safely think with the church of God in former times, that they were false
prophets, heretics and seducers, yea the professed enemies of Christ, guided
by the spirit of Satan, for herein they do directly tread in his steps.

II. In this his practice we may observe the malicious and contradicting spirit
of Satan against God himself, for here he labors to conclude that Christ was
not the Son of God, notwithstanding God himself had a little before avouched
that he was. And this is his continued practice unto this day; for where God in
his church pronounces grace, mercy and love, there on the contrary will the
Devil pronounce a curse, hatred, and damnation. Again, where God denounces
his curse and judgment, there will the devil seek to persuade a conceit of
grace and favor. If a man be the child of God, and have received the seal of
grace for his assurance thereof; the Devil will seek to weaken this
assurance, and persuade him if he can, that he is the child of wrath. And if a
man be void of grace, and so indeed the child of the Devil, then will Satan
suggest into his heart presumptuous thoughts, and make him think he is the
child of God; so that every way he shows himself contrary to God.

Yet mark the devils words a little further; Satan's policy in tempting.
If thou be the son of God, command these stones, etc. that is, do but say
the word, and bid these stones to become bread, and it will be done. And here
in the very propounding of this temptation we may observe the deep policy of
Satan; for in these few words (the better to effect his purpose) he coucheth
three most true and notable points in Divinity: First, that he that is the Son
of God by nature, is also true and very God; for here he ascribes unto the
Son of God the true prerogative of God himself; a point wherein the Pharisees
withstood our Savior Christ, and which many heritikes since have denied.
Secondly, that the true God can without pain or labor, yea without all means
at his very beck do whatsoever he will; and by his word only make stones
become bread. Thirdly, that to work a miracle of himself, is a property and
prerogative of him alone that is true God; as to turn stones into bread in
this place. Now when the Devil acknowledges all this, a man would not think
that herein he should intend any hurt to Christ or to his church; but in very
truth his drift herein is, to destroy the faith of Christ in that word of
his father which spoke from heaven, and to overthrow the foundation of the
church, by proouing that Jesus Christ the Son of Marie, was not true God.

Here then observe a trick of the Devils cunning; Satan speaks some truth
to overthrow another truth thereby.
when he speaks a truth, he does it not to confirm the same as loving it, but
indeed his meaning is to overthrow the truth thereby: which must admonish us,
that when Satan shall any way assault us in temptation, we never give credit
unto him, no not then when he speaks the truth, because therein his purpose
is to deceive us and to destroy the truth: hence it was that Christ forbad the
unclean Mark. 24. 25.
spirits to testify of him, though they acknowledged him to be the holy one of
God: hence also Paul was grieved at the testimony of the foul spirit that was
in the maid, though in it self a most worthy truth, to wit, Act. 16. 17. 18.
that they were the servants of the most high God which showed unto me^ the way
of salvation.

Further, in comparing our Evangelist Matthew with S. Luke, there may seem
some difference between them in propounding this temptation, for in Matthew the
words are thus, command these stones etc. And in Luke Luke 4. 3.
thus, command this stone. But they are reconciled thus, Matthew sets down
this temptation as the Devil first propounded it; and S. Luke shows how the
Devil urged it: for first the devil comes to Christ and bids him, if he be the
son of God, command all the stones which he saw round about him to be made
bread, this S. Matthew sets down: or if that seemed too much, command one
stone to be made bread and it should suffice; and this S. Luke notes.

The use. By this comparing of the Evangelists we may observe; that when the
Devil has once begun to tempt a man, he will not easily leave off, but will
set an edge upon it, and enforce and urge it by all the means he can, that if
it be possible it may prevail. Which should teach us on the other side, to be
most earnest and resolute in resisting Satan's temptations: he will take small
advantage before he leave; we therefore must not Ephesians. 4. 27.
give place, nor yield one jot unto him: Iam. 4. 7.
Resist the Devil and he will fly. This must every member of the Church do;
the Minister by sound and through applying of every part of Gods truth to the
heart, whereby it may be armed against the enemy; and the people by faithful
embracing and obeying of the same, as also by earnest prayer unto God for the
assistance of his grace in all assaults.

VERSE 4. But he answering, said, It is written, Deutr. 8. 3.
Man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God.

THese words contain Christ's gracious answer, whereby he repelled the devils
temptation; and in it we may observe three points; first, that Christ did
Answer: Secondly, whence he borrowed his Answer: Thirdly, the very words of his
Answer.

For the first, that Christ did answer, is noted by the holy Ghost in plain
words, And Jesus answering, said; Whereby he would give us to understand, that
Christ Jesus our Savior being in the wilderness, was not only willing and
ready to encounter with Satan, but also able to withstand him, yea and to
vanquish Satan without receiving any foil at his hands. Which is a point of
singular comfort to Gods Church and children; for was Christ Jesus able in this
low and base estate of a servant, being disaduantaged also by a desert place
and bodily hunger, was he then (I say) able to encounter with Satan and to
overcome him in his most violent and subtle assaults? Then how much more is he
now able even in all his members to give Satan the foil, having spoiled him in
his death? seeing he is advanced to the throne of majesty and glory, and set
at the right hand of his father, having a name above all names given unto him,
at which every knee should bow, both of things in heaven and in the earth and
under the earth? We therefore may now say, with that loud voice; Reu. 12. 10.
Now is salvation in heaven, and strength, and power, and the kingdom of our
God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of the brethren is cast down.

The second point here noted is, whence Christ borrows his answer, namely,
from the Scriptures; It is written: It had been an easy thing for Christ
being the son of God, to have confounded the Tempter with the breath of his
mouth, or to have commanded innumerable legions of holy Angels to have driven
him away; but he betakes himself to the written word for his defense. And this
he did especially for our instruction; namely, that we might know, The written
word our best weapon against Satan.
that the written word of God, rightly welded by the hand of faith, is the most
sufficient weapon for the repelling of Satan and the vanquishing of him in all
his temptations; hence Paul calls it Ephesians. 6. 17.
the sword of the spirit, because it serves not only for our defense, but also
to wound Satan, and to put him to flight.

The use. I. This fact of Christ does discover and condemn the damnable
practice of the Church of Rome, who lock up the word of God from their people
in an unknown tongue, and commend unto them for their defense against
spiritual enemies other devices of their own, as holy water, crossing,
crosses, etc. which they highly commend as means of special strength and
force to vanquish the Devil; when as indeed the word of God is the only true
and trusty weapon, whereof while they deprive their people, they send them
forth naked and unarmed to encounter with Satan.

Secondly, here also behold the miserable estate of all those that either
through covetousness or any other profaneness are drawn to neglect or
contemn the written word of God: their case is most fearful; for they cast
away those weapons whereby they should defend themselves against the Devil,
and quench all his fiery darts, and so betray their own souls into his hands:
And doubtless all contemners and neglecters of the word are guilty of their
own damnation, because God has given us his word for our defense, and for the
confounding of Satan, so as without guilt of wilful murder not of our bodies,
but of our souls, we cannot neglect this heavenly weapon.

Thirdly, heerby we may see the cause why sin so much abounds in all estates
every where, namely, the want of love unto and knowledge in the word of God,
whereupon the most are ignorant of it, or else know not how to handle this
spiritual weapon, whereby Satan is resisted and foiled: Hosea 4. 2. The Lord
complains of lying, swearing, killing, stealing, and whoring yea of blood
touching blood; and the cause is laid down in the first verse, There is no
knowledge of God in the land: This David knew well, and therefore said, He hid
Gods saying in his heart, that he might not sin against him, Psalm. 119. 11.
1. Sam. 26. 7.
For as Saul's spear stood in readiness at his head even when he slept, so
should Gods word, which is the sword of the spirit, be ever in our hearts, as
it were ready drawn, that to what sin soever the Devil allures us, we may
be able to say for our defense, It is written: through want hereof it comes to
pass that the Devil at his pleasure leads men captives into all impieties.

Lastly, this excellent use of the word understood, believed, and obeyed must
move all ignorant persons to labor for knowledge herein, and with all endeavor
after growth in knowledge, by holy obedience, to show forth their faith: If we
had an enemy that had sworn our death and vowed to see our blood, how careful
would we be, for our natural life, both to get us weapons, and also some
knowledge to use the same, not only for our defense, but also for the annoyance
of our deadly foe? Oh then how careful should we be for the safety of our
souls to put upon us the whole armor of God, and to learn to use aright this
sword of the spirit, that when we meet with Satan our irreconciliable enemy, in
the field of temptation, which is this miserable world, we may be able both to
award his blows, and to wound his head! It is lamentable to see how ignorant
people will bless themselves in their ignorance, and say they defy the
Devil, and spit at him in defiance, and yet they know not how they are
entangled in his snares of their own sins: he little regards such defiance
so long as their souls lie naked and bare before his deadly darts: let two men
meet that be at enmity, the one armed the other naked, what will it avail for
the naked man to defy his enemy with big words, while in the mean time his
armed enemy takes away his life? Lo, Satan is this strong man armed, and
ignorant persons are poor naked ca^^ffes, they defy the Devil and spit at
him with their mouth, but in the mean time the devil wounds their souls unto
death. They will say they feel no such wounds, and therefore they fear him
not: but they must know, that the less they feel, the more cause they have to
fear; for Satan's wounds are most deadly when they are least felt.

The third point is, Christ's Answer it self: Man shall not live by bread
only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God: This answer
is borrowed from Deuteron. 8. 3. And it is that lesson which Moses sought to
teach the children of Israel after the Lord had fed them with food from
heaven in that barren wilderness where they were afflicted with hunger. The
words are something hard, and therefore I will show the meaning of them. Man
shall not live; that is, shall not preserve his temporal life in this world;
for of eternal life, neither Moses nor Christ did intend to speak. By bread
only, that is, only by such ordinary means as food and raiment, sleep,
physic etc. which God has appointed in his providence for the ordinary
preservation of natural life. But by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God: Word in scripture notes diverse things.
This title word betokens diverse things in scripture: I. The substantial word
of God, the second person in Trinity, Ioh. 1. 1. In the beginning was the word,
and the word was God. II. It is usually taken for the written word contained in
the books of the old and new Testament, 1. Pet. 1. 25. Thirdly, it is
sometime taken for Gods will and decree, and it is called his good pleasure: so
Heb. 1. 2. Christ sustaineth all things by the word of his power, that is,
according to his will and decree, by his powerful appointment: and by this
word were all things made in the beginning and heerby have they been preserved
ever since: this is that word that melts the Ice, Psalm. 147. 18. And in this
last sense must we understand word in this place; meaning that man does not
preserve this natural life by ordinary means only, but withal, by Gods
good pleasure, will and decree sanctifying the means for his good. Note
further that it is said by every word, and therein lies the substance of this
sentence; for the understanding whereof we must know, that this powerful and
working word of God may be distinguished according to the matter whereabout it
is occupied: Thus, sometime God will have men to live by bread the ordinary
food of natural life; Gods powerful word distinguished.
and this is his ordinary word. Sometime his will and appointment is that man
shall live by extraordinary means; as the Israelites did in the wilderness
while they lived upon Mannah; and this is his extraordinary word: Otherwhiles
he ordaines that man shall live without all means, as Moses did in mount
Sina, Elias in mount Horeb, and our Savior Christ in this wilderness; for the
space of forty days and forty nights together; And lastly he ordains
sometime, that man shall live against means and contrary to the course of
nature; Thus Daniell lived in the Lions den, and the three children in the
fiery furnace; both which last may be called Gods miraculous word: So that we
see good reason of this clause every: for hereby we learn, that man does not
preserve his life only by ordinary means ordained of God; but likewise by
every word proceeding out of the mouth of God, that is, by every appointment
and decree of God, whether extraordinary, above the usual means, or
miraculous without all means, or against the course of nature: this we must
labor to know and be persuaded of. Nature teaches that man lives by Gods
blessing and appointment in ordinary means: But nature knows not this, that
God preserves man's life by his word, above means, without means, yea and
against means. The believing heart will hardly yield to this, which Moses would
teach the Israelites; and therefore we must take the more pains to be
resolved of it. If any shall think hereupon, that a man may live by the
written word without meat and drink, he is deceived; for Christ means not
that every word that God has spoken shall preserve natural life, but that
whatsoever way he has appointed whereby man shall live, whether by ordinary or
extraordinary means, whether, without means or against means, the same shall
be effectual for man's preservation: Thus much for the meaning.

The applying of this testimony to the Devils temptation, is thus to be
conceived: the Devils temptation was this. If thou be the son of God, then
command these stones to be made bread: But thou can not make these stones to
become bread: Therefore thou art not the son of God. To this Christ answers,
by denying the proposition or first part of this argument, the ground whereof
was this, (which the Devil took for granted) that when a man is hungry he
must needs have bread or else he cannot live: and this our Savior Christ does
flatly deny, saying; Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God: And this application is most excellent,
teaching us that thing, for the learning whereof the Israelites were trained up
forty years in the wilderness, and fed with Mannah from heaven, and with
water out of the rock; to wit, that God by his word can preserve the life of
man without ordinary means even what way soever he appoints for that
purpose; and if we should spend our lives in learning heerof, no doubt the
time were not misspent.

The use. First, hereby we are taught to consider aright of all creatures
whereby our life is preserved, as meat, drink, apparel etc. and that is thus,
besides the bodily sustenance of the creature, we must labor to see a further
matter, even the blessing of God in the creature proceeding from his word,
decree and appointment, whereby it is made fit and able to yield sustenance and
nourishment. The Scripture calls this the Leuit. 26. 26.
Staff of bread, and so it is indeed, for as an aged and impotent man falls
to the ground if his staff be plucked from him, so the best creature that
serves for our use, without Gods blessing becomes fruitless unto us. This,
reason may teach us, for how should that thing of it self preserve and further
life, which in it self is void of life? And how should that give heat and
warmness to our bodies, which of it self is void of heat? let us therefore
confess that it is not the substance of food that does refresh us, nor the
matter of our raiment that keeps us warm, but the blessing of him that by his
word has ordained them for these ends, if he withdraw his blessing, the staff
and Isai 3. 1.
stay is gone; men may eat (as Haggai Hag. 1. 6.
says) but they shall not have enough; they may drink, and yet not be filled;
they may cloth themselves, and not be warm; It is Gods blessing that makes
Gods creatures do us good: how else should it come to pass, that the poor
man's child which is barely clad, and homely fed, should be as healthful,
comely, and well liking as the child of a Prince, but that God blesses as well
the homely food of the poor, as the dainty fare of the richest.

Secondly, hereby we must learn Sobriety and Temperance, in the use of all
Gods creatures: when we use our food and raiment it is Gods blessing alone that
makes them do us good, the Lord as it were stands by us to put his blessing
upon every morsel that we eat, and every draught that we drink, and upon our
raiment when we put it on; how then dare we abuse them in surfeiting and
drunkenness, in pride and wantonness? may we not fear in so doing that while
the meat or drink is in our mouths, the wrath of God will fall upon us; as
Psalm. 78. 30. 31.

Thirdly, hence we must learn to sanctify Gods creatures as food and raiment
which we use for our comfort, by invocation on the name of God: for we do not
live by the creatures simply, but by the word and appointment of God blessing
them unto us; and therefore we must not be like unto brute beasts which
receive Gods blessings, but yet never look up to heaven from whence they come;
or like to the swine that gathers up the mast, not looking up to the tree
from which it falls.

Fourthly, heerby we see the common error of the world, who place the staff
and stay of their life in the abundance of outward blessings, whereupon they
labor to enrich themselves heerewith as much as possibly they can; these men
do little consider that man's life stands not in abundance, neither does he
live by bread, but by the blessing of God, which is and may be as well upon a
little, as upon the treasures of a kingdom. This was the practice of the rich
fool, Luc. 12. 19.
who spoke peace to his soul for ease and pastime, because he had much goods
laid up for many years. But since Christ teaches us that man lives not by
bread only, it must needs be a flat note of unbelief, to carke and care
immoderately for the things of this life.

Fifthly, hereby we are also taught, not to entangle our selves overmuch with
the cares of this world, nor to suffer our hearts to be oppressed with desire of
food, raiment, lands or living: because our life and welfare consists not in
these things, but in the blessing of God on whatsoever he sends be it more or
less: the gripple mind after much is a deadly 1. Tim. 6. 9.
snare, wherewith many a soul is entangled to perdition and destruction; This
choakes the heart in such sort as the seed of grace can take no root not bring
forth any saving fruit: this made Paul to lay a charge upon Timothy for rich
men, that they should trust in the living God and not in uncertain riches, 1.
Tim. 6. 17. Let us therefore be content with food and raiment, and rather seek
the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and then all those things whereof
we stand in need shall be given unto us in the moderate use of lawful means.
Indeed the worldlings excuse is, that food and raiment is his living, which he
must needs look unto: but we must still remember, that our life stands not
in these things, for when death comes, these cannot save us from the grave: it
is Gods blessing by which we live, he can preserve us above means, nay
without means, and against means, and therefore we must never give place to
such thoughts and cares as show distrust in God.

Sixthly, hence we must learn contentation and patience in extreme poverty
and in all other miseries of this life; If God should deal with us as he did
with his servant Job: if for our religion he should bring upon us the loss of
goods, of children, of health and all that we have, with banishment also from
our friends and country, yet then must we labor to show the fruit of patience,
and not suffer our hearts to be swallowed up of overmuch grief: because our
life stands by Gods word, and not in any of these things: indeed, if in these
outward miseries a man should be deprived of the comfort of Gods providence,
then might he sorrow without measure: but seeing all such as fear God do
still enjoy the blessing of God in their greatest calamities (for Gods blessing
is not locked up in bread, but above means, without means and against means
can he manifest his power and goodness in their preservation) therefore in the
extremity of evil must we comfort our selves in the Lord our God, as 1. Sam.
30. 6.
David did in great sorrow, having lost his two wives and being in danger to be
stoned of his own followers: and learn to say with Job, Job. 13. 15.
Though the Lord kill me yet will I trust in him. What if the Lord should send
a famine among us, as he may justly do for the sins of this land? should we
then despair or use unlawful means for our relief? nay, then we must learn
Moses lesson, that man lives not by bread only, and labor to depend on him
that can increase 1. King. 17. 14.
the oil in the poor widows cruise and the meal in the barrels, till plenty
come.

Seventhly, this must teach us moderation of our affections in all estates that
do befall us; in health and plenty we must not be puffed up with pride; in
weakness and in want we must not be oppressed with sorrow; for man's life
stands not in these things, neither can we hereby know love or hatred; he
that is in want may have as good a portion in Gods blessing as the wealthiest
in the world, herein Luke 16. 19. 20.
hungry Lazarus full of fores, went far beyond the rich glutton in all his
riot.

Lastly, seeing our life depends upon Gods word, we must hereby learn to
acknowledge Gods providence, and to rely thereupon in all estates. In the days
of peace, wherein (as Job. 29. 6.
Job speaks of himself) men wash their paths in butter, and have the rocks
to power them out rivers of oil, men will soon be brought to say so much; but
we must labor to see and feel the blessing of his providence even then when
we tread (as it were) the winepresse of his wrath: as well in sickness as in
health: in want as in plenty; in the depth of distress as in the height of all
prospetity: this is the counsel of the Holy ghost, Prou. 16. 3.
roll thy works upon the Lord. Cast all your care upon him, for he cares for
you, 1. Pet. 5. 7. It is a brutish property only to look upon the creatures
whereon they feed, and therefore our eyes and our hearts must be fixed on him
who feeds the young ravens that cry unto him; and bears up all things by
his mighty word: we must not content our selves with a bare speculation
hereof in our heads, but labor to feel the comfort of it in our hearts, and
to express the power of it in our lives. And thus much for the first conflict.

VERSE. 5. Then the Devil took him up into the holy city, and set him on a
pinnacle of the Temple.

6. And said unto him, if thou be the son of God cast thy self down a for it
is Ps. 91. 11. 12.
written, that he will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands
they shall lift thee up, lest at any time thou should dash thy foot against a
stone.

7. Jesus said unto him: it is Deuteronomy. 6. 16.
written again, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

THese words contain the second conflict of Satan with our Savior Christ: for
howsoever by Saint Luke this is put in the third place, which Matthew here
places in the second, yet this breeds no difference between the
Evangelists, who tie not themselves to a strict observation of time, place, and
order how every thing was done which they relate; as in the story of this
conflict, Saint Luke respects the substance of it only, but S. Matthew
observes the order of it also. Now in this second conflict we are to observe
three points: I. Satan's preparation thereto: II. The assault it self: III.
Christ's answer and repulse thereof.

I. Point: Satan's preparation to this conflict is contained in the 5. verse:
wherein we are to note, both the time, and the parts thereof; The time in the
first word Then: that is, so soon as the Devil had received a foil of Christ
in his first assault, presently he addresseth himself unto a second.

Herein behold, the exceeding malice of Satan, in that the end of one
temptation with him, is but the beginning of another; he cease not with one
assault, but as he is a deadly foe to the Church of God, so he shows himself
by his continual seeking whom he may devour; he will never make truice with
any child of God, upon any condition less than the hazard of his soul;
neither is he weary of his work; but day and night is either plotting or
performing some mischievous attempt against the child of God. The consideration
whereof must teach us, upon our victory and conquest over one temptation,
presently to prepare for a new. This was the state of the son of God our
head, and we his members may not look for better; our life in this vale of
tears is a continual warfare against the enemies of our souls; we must not
therefore here look for rest and ease, but ever keep watch and ward against
their assaults. If this duty were well learned and put in practice, it would
prevent much impatience and become the ground of much peace in our souls: man's
nature cannot brook the doubling and renewing of sorrows; when one evil
lights in the neck of another, oh then he thinks never any was in his case;
but look unto Jesus the author and finisher of thy faith, he endured no less;
and herein he is an example that thou should follow his steps. If therefore
thou will be his disciple, prepare to take up thy cross Luke 9. 23.
every day and follow him.

The parts of Satan's preparation are two; First, he conuaies Christ from
Jerusalem to the wilderness; Secondly, he places him on a pinnacle of the
temple. For the first, in these words, The devil took him up into the holy
city, that is, into Jerusalem, as Luke expounds it, chap. 4. 9. This the
Devil might do three ways; In vision; or leading him up the ordinary way; or
carrying him through the air. I. It might be in vision; for that was usual
with the Prophets; so Ier. 13. 4.
Jeremy went to the riuen Perath; and Ezekiel was carried from Mesopotamia to
Ezekiel. 8. 3.
Jerusalem: but Christ was not thus transported; for then Satan's persuasion
unto Christ To cast himself down, could have been no temptation. II. Christ
might be led of the Devil the ordinary way from the wilderness to Jerusalem,
so much the words will bear: but (as I take it) he went not so; for if Christ
were led by the Devil, it was either willingly of his own accord, or by the
Devils persuasion; but of his own accord he would not go; for he came into
the wilderness to be tempted, which as yet was not fully accomplished, and
therefore would not willingly depart thence before that work for which he came
were ended, Again, he would not depart thence upon the Devils persuasion; for
Christ would never gratify the Devil so much, as to do ought himself, which
the Devil would have him, as in all his temptations does appear; Rule. Do
nothing Satan persuades thee to in temptation.
for this is a rule to be observed, we must not do any thing which the Devil
persuades us to in his temptations, though in it self the thing be lawful and
good. III. The Devil might carry the body of our Savior Christ through the
air, by his power through Gods permission. This is the most likely way, and so
thought to be of the best divines: and the words following confirm it much,
for it is said, the Devil set him on a pinnacle of the temple: Now if he had
power to set him there, why might he not also carry him thither, God ordaining
this as well as his temptation?

The use. By this we see, that men may be transported by the Devil from place
to place, as the records of all ages do report: this one thing yet observed
(wherein the common opinion fails) that the Devil cannot convey a man alive
so far in a little time, as many men think; as a thousand or two thousand
miles in an hour; for no man is able to endure such violent motion and yet
live, as experience teaches; let a man fall from some high steeple, and his
breath will be gone and he dead before he come at the ground, by reason of the
violence of his motion. Indeed the Devil can carry a man very swiftly, but
yet for the safety of man's life he must prolong his time far more, than
otherwise of himself he needs to do.

Secondly, Satan's power ^uer men's bod^^^ if God permit.
hence we learn that by Gods permission, the Devil may have power over the
bodies of Gods own children which are true believers, to transport them from
place to place; for dealing thus with the head Christ Jesus, why may he not
do so with any of his members? besides, we find (that God permitting him) he
has done more than this to the Saints of God; he may possess their bodies,
as he did the woman of Canaans daughter, Mat. 15. 22. He may torment them long,
as he did exceeding grievously bow the body of a daughter of Abraham eighteen
years, Luke 13, 16. Yea he may kill the body, as he did to Jobs children, who
no doubt were holy persons, Job. 1. 19. And therefore much more may he
transport them from place to place.

Here this question may fitly be answered: whether a true believer may be
bewitched. Answ. He may: there is none upon earth so faithful and holy, but
if God permit, Satan can afflict their bodies grievously, and therefore also
they may be bewitched. It is but the fancy of presumptuous persons, when they
say, their faith is so strong, that all the witches in the world cannot hurt
them: for if God permit, Satan can grievously afflict man's body, as he did the
body of Job. yea he can kill the body, as has been showed. Solomon, speaking of
outward things says truly, Eccles. 9. 2.
All things come alike to all, and the same condition is to the just and to the
wicked: now the wicked man may be bewitched, as al will grant; why then may not
the godly also, seeing it is but an outward evil? This therefore must abate
their pride that stand so much on their strong faith: behold this fact of Satan
to the holy body of Christ, and hereby learn for thy humiliation, that if God
permit, Satan is able to bring upon thy body great affliction.

Further, observe the place whither Satan caries our Savior Christ, into the
holy city, that is, Jerusalem. Quest. Why is it called holy, seeing now it was
a polluted place full of sinful people? Answ. It is called holy for these
causes. 1. because here was the Lords temple the place of his solemn worship,
wherein were the holy rites and ceremonies prescribed for Gods worship.
Secondly, in Jerusalem, as also in all the synagogues of Judea, was Moses
chair, the law and the Prophets were read and expounded. Thirdly, Jerusalem
was the mother City of all the world in respect of religion; here God ordained
that his church should first be planted, and from hence must religion be
derived to other nations.

The use. Hence we may observe, that at this time Jerusalem was the true church
of God: indeed it was very corrupt both for doctrine and manners, as Christ's
severe reproof of both does plainly show, Mat. 5. 21. etc. and Mat. 23. 13.
14. etc. and yet a true Church, else the holy ghost would not have called it
the holy city. Now if Jerusalem at this time were the true church of God then,
then may we well say, that in England God has his true church: for, let the
corruptions of our Church be as they are; yet shall it match Jerusalem in the
prerogatives of Gods church. They had the law and the Prophets read and
expounded; so have we, and the Gospel also which is the power of God to man's
salvation. They had the Sacraments and ceremonies of the Law; answerable
thereto we have the Sacraments of the Gospel, and also a true and holy form
of serving God. Their Jerusalem was a mother city; and though we cannot say so
much in that behalf, yet has our Church been a nurce to neighbor Churches
in Germany, France and other places round about, for many years; in regard
whereof, the Lord, no doubt, has bestowed many blessings upon us. And
therefore though our sins and abuses be many and grievous, yet in regard of
Church prerogatives we may be called a holy nation, and a true member of the
Church of God; so that as our Savior Christ and his Disciples joined
themselves to the congregations of the Jews in their legal service, and
forsook them not till they became no Church; so ought it to be among us, till
we separate from Christ, none should sever themselves from our church ministry
and service of God. Those therefore that make a separation from our Church
because of corruptions in it, are far from the spirit of Christ and his
Apostles. If any shall say, this makes well for the church of Rome, if so corrupt
a place as Jerusalem, in regard of Church prerogatives were an holy city, for
they have as many prerogatives for religion, as the Jews then had, and
therefore are the church of God, and so we do not well to separate from them.
Answ. Some indeed that are no Papists, say the Church of Rome is the Church of
God: but the truth is, the present Church of Rome is spiritual Babylon, Rome
is Spiritual Babylon.
the mother of abominations, no spouse of Christ but a strumpet. But they
plead their prerogatives: as first, their succession from Peter: Secondly, true
baptism for substance according to the first institution: Thirdly, the
Apostles Creed which they hold and believe: Fourthly, the word of God, in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles: And Lastly, that theirs is the mother
church. Answ. All this is nothing when the truth appears; for first,
succession in person without succession in doctrine is no note of a church: now
let them show succession in the Apostles doctrine, and we yield. Secondly,
their baptism alone, though for substance true baptism, cannot prove them a
true Church: Circumcision was the Sacrament of Gods church, yet Samaria and
Colchis were not the Church of God, though they used it: again, the thief may
show the true man's purse, but that proves him not to be true and honest; no
more does baptism justify the church of Rome to be a true church. Lastly,
though they have outward baptism, yet indeed they overthrow inward baptism,
the life of that sacrament, to wit, imputed righteousness and renewed
holiness, which in Gods Church must go together with the outward element,
else it is nothing. Thirdly, for the Apostles Creed, they have it in word, but
they deny it in deed; For though they say, they believe in God the father, and
in Jesus Christ, yet in effect they deny both God and Christ. For the God of
the Papists is an idol God, and the Christ of the Papists a false Christ, as we
have showed in handling of the Creed. Fourthly, for the scripture; we must
know the word of God stands not in bare words and letters, but in the true
sense and meaning of the Holy ghost contained in the scriptures of the Prophets
and Apostles. Now though they have the books of Scripture, yet in sundry main
grounds of religion, they overthrow the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles. Again, they keep the scripture as a lantern holds a candle, not for
it self but for passengers: so is the scripture with them, not for their
synagogue, but for Gods secret ones among them, for even in the midst of
Popery has God ever had some of his elect, who have not embraced their cursed
doctrine. Lastly, for their plea to be the mother Church; we must distinguish
between the ancient Church of Rome, and the strumpet that now is; the ancient
Church of Rome to whom Paul writ, was a true and famous church, and a mother
Church; but she is now dead and buried; and the now Roman Church is no mother
Church, no spouse of Christ, but the whore of Babel the mother of
abominations, from which we are commanded to depart, Reuelat. 18. 4.

Secondly, 2. Use.
in that Christ is brought to Jerusalem, that holy City, there to be tempted,
we learn, that no holiness of place on earth can debar the Devil from his
temptations; he brings Christ from the wilderness to tempt him, in the holy
city even upon the holy temple he will thrust himself Zak. 3. 1.
on Iehoshuahs right hand to resist him, though Iehoshuah stand before the
Angel of the Lord to minister to the Lord. And therefore the folly of Papists
is egregious, that think the sign of the cross, holy water, relics, and
such Massing enchantments have virtue in them to free their houses, or their
bodies from the assaults of Satan.

Lastly, hereby we see that change of place is but a silly cure for a
troubled mind; indeed change of air may much further bodily cures; but a
troubled mind has conflicts with the devil, who will not leave for change of
place, Jerusalem will fit his turn as well as the wilderness.

The second part of the Devils preparation to this conflict is this, and set
him on a pinnacle of the temple: The word translated pinnacle, signifies
properly a wing of the temple; whereby, some take to be meant, the sharp
brouches and spires on the top of the temple; whereof there were diverse; but
these (as I take it) are not here meant; for such a spire cannot well be called
a wing; others take it for some part of the battlement, made on the top of the
Temple, which was flat, as the Jews used to build, to keep men from falling;
others take it for any top corner of the Temples; and whether of these it was
we cannot certainly define; but this we must hold, that it was some dangerous
steep down place on some corner of the Temple, or on the battlements, from
which a man might easily cast himself; whereby we see the Devil will omit no
advantage that may further his temptations; which should make us the more
careful of our standing against him.

VERSE 6. And said unto him, If thou be the son of God cast thy self down:
for it is written, that he will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their
hands they shall lift thee up, lest at any time thou should dash thy foot
against a stone.

THese words contain the second maine point in this conflict, to wit, Satan's
assault upon Christ: wherein we are to observe, first his temptation: then the
reason whereby he does enforce it. His temptation here is framed as the former
was, in a kind of reasoning, thus:

If thou be the son of God, then show the same by casting thy self down
from this pinnacle of the temple:

But as I see thou art certainly persuaded, that thou art the son of God:
Therefore cast thy self down, and thereby declare it.



Seeing this is a distinct temptation from the former, I doubt not but it must
be thus framed with this conclusion: for if it had the same conclusion with the
former it should be the same temptation. Satan's meaning then is this, as if he
had said; I have made trial to see expressly whether thou be the son of God
or not, and it seems thou do undoubtedly believe that voice of thy father
to be true, which said, This is my well-beloved son in whom I am well pleased:
Now if this be so indeed, it is convenient thou should confirm the same by
some miracle, and the fittest place thou can do it in, is this; therefore
cast thy self down headlong from this pinnacle, and yet preserve thy self in
safety without all hurt in the fall.

The drift of Satan in this temptation was, to bring our Savior Christ to a
vain confidence in his Fathers protection, and indeed to flat presumption upon
his extraordinary providence in the neglect of lawful ordinary means, as by
Satan's conclusion, and the answer of Christ will easily appear. Satan seeks to
carry men to presumption.
And hereby we may observe that one maine drift of Satan in his ordinary
temptations in Gods church, is to carry men to presumption, and vain
confidence in the love, favor, and mercy of God: this appears by the strange
reasonings for liberty in sin which many frame to themselves, and some are
not ashamed to utter; as first, God is merciful, and Christ shed his blood
for their redemption, and therefore they will not be so strict and precise in
hearing sermons, and reading and conferring about the word as many are, but
they will take the pleasures and seek the profits of this life. Thus reasoned
some in the Apostles days: Romans 6. 1.
Let us continue in sin that grace may abound: of such Jude complains,
saying, Jude 4.
They turn the grace of God into wantonness. Such there have been ever
since, and at this day they do every where abound. Secondly, some say, they
are either ordained to salvation or damnation; now if to salvation, they are
sure of it how ever they live; and if to damnation, they cannot escape it,
though they live never so holily, for Gods decree is unchangeable; and therefore
they will take their pleasure and live as they list. Thirdly others say they
have ever found Gods goodness toward them, and they are persuaded he will
never see them want, and therefore they will not toil themselves with labor
and care as others do, but take their ease and pleasure while they may have it;
and so neglect their charge and calling, and give themselves wholly to their
sports and pleasures, to company keeping or such like. Yea, by this temptation
to presumption, Satan often preuailes with the better sort; for if a man favor
the truth, and give himself to know religion in any sort, the Devil will
straight way go about to persuade him, that that which he does is sufficient to
his salvation, and thus will keep him from using further means to come by the
certain knowledge of his election, and full affiance in Christ Jesus, to
become a perfect man in Christ, which is the end of Gods holy ministry, Ephesians.
4. 13. whereunto we should give all diligence, 2. Pet. 1. 10. See the truth
hereof in the fine foolish virgins, who carried M^tth. 25. 1. 2. etc.
burning lamps, but took no oil with them, never minding that till it was too
late; and so do most men content themselves with the blazing lamp of an
outward profession, never looking for the oil of grace, till the time of grace
he past.

The use. Hereby then we are all taught, in special manner to beware of
presumption; this is the common snare of the Devil wherein he intangles many a
soul. It is true indeed that he often preuailes by bringing men to desperation,
but a thousand perish through presumption, almost for one by desperation; for
despair is a painful thing to flesh and blood, and as the Devil knows well,
does sometimes turn to a man's more sound conversion; but to presume is sweet
and pleasant to the flesh, and most agreeable to man's corrupt nature: in regard
whereof we ought to keep out heart with all watch and ward, as David prays,
Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, Ps. 19. 13.

Again, observe the order of Satan's temptations by comparing this with the
former. There he sought to overthrow Christ's faith and to bring him to distrust
the truth of Gods word uttered from heaven; but finding he could not that way
prevail, here he takes the clean contrary course, and seeks to bring him to
presume.

This serves to discover unto us, the deep guile and subtilty of the Devil,
Satan's cunning in tempting.
that can so cunningly turn himself from one extreme unto another. And look
as he deals here with Christ the head, so does he continue toward all his
members, if he cannot bring them to one extreme, he will assay them hard in
the other. If he cannot bring a man to covetousness, and keep his heart to
the love of money, then let him beware of riot and prodigality. Is a man given
to pleasures and delight, and an length is deprived of them? then let him
beware; the Devil swallow him not up with overmuch grief, as he sought to do
with the 2. Cor. 2. 7. 11.
incestuous person of Corinth. Does a man come to love religion, that formerly
was given to looseness of life? then if it be possible the Devil will carry
him to schism and heresy. The Devil cannot abide that a man should keep the
mean according to Gods word, Isay 30. 21. He would have our first parents to
be Gods, or no body, Gene. 3. 5. And so still he labors to bring a man to
some extreme. We therefore in all estates during life, must labor to keep
the golden mean, as Christ here did, neither doubting on the one hand nor
presuming on the other, but retaining still that blessed faith, whereby his
blessed heart was firmly settled in these assaults. Thus much for Satan's drift.
Now come to the words of this temptation.

If thou be the son of God, then cast thy self down: that is, show by this
miracle that thou art the son of God. Mark here, the Devil persuades him
not, to show himself to be the son of God by doctrine in the execution of
his ministry; but Cast thy self down, show a miracle: wherein we may
behold the very lively image of that natural disposition which is in all
impenitent persons; they affect Christ's miracles, but they care not for his
doctrine. Herod longed to see Christ, Luk, 23. 8.
and was glad of his coming, when Pilate sent him; yet not to hear his
doctrine, for that he could not endure; else he would not have imprisoned John,
and also put him to death; but he hoped to see a miracle. The wicked Jews
desire a sign, that put Christ to death for his doctrine; yet if be will come
down from the cross, and so miraculously save himself, then they will
believe, Mark. 15. 32. And this venom of the old serpent has poisoned the
hearts of many students in the Scriptures, who care not at all to ground
themselves in the fundamental points of religion, as faith and repentance; and
yet are wonderful eager after quidditles and difficulties, wherein may
appear some outward show of wit and learning; like the hypocritical
Pharisees, that would tithe mint and rue, and yet pass over judgment and the
love of God, Luke 11. 42. And the cause hereof is the want of sound grace, for
natural men indeed can not savor the things of the spirit of God; the
knowledge of Christ crucified seems foolishness unto them.

Secondly, the Devil took occasion of his former temptation from Christ's
infirmity of hunger: but perceiving Christ's sure faith in his fathers word by
his gracious answer to that assault, here he borrowes his temptation from that
profession of his faith; as if he should say, thou seem to be resolved of
the truth of thy fathers word that thou art the son of God; and if that be
true indeed, then show it by this miracle, Cast thy self down.

Here then behold another trick of Satan; if he cannot prevail by assaults
drawn from our infirmities, then will he assay us by temptations drawn from
Gods good gifts and graces in us; If he cannot keep a man in ignorance that
has good gifts of wit and memory, then will he seek from his knowledge to
puff him up with pride, and so mingling his poison with Gods good gifts, does
cause many a one to become a bane to Gods church, that otherwise might have
proved an excellent instrument therein; as might easily be showed in sundry
particulars.

Thirdly, Satan's malice restrained.
here mark how Satan's malice is restrained, and his power limited: By Gods
permission he is able to carry Christ from the wilderness to Jerusalem, and
there to set him in a most dangerous place on a wing of the temple; the thing
he now desires is his destruction by casting down head long, but that he can
not do, and therefore persuades Christ to cast himself down; wherein we see
the special providence of God over Christ Jesus in all these temptations,
restraining his enemy in the thing he most desired. And the same providence
does he still continue over his Church for the effectual preservation of
Christ's members in all their temptations. The Devils unwearied desire and drift
is, to bring contentions, hurliburlies and ruins into all societies in Church
and Commonwealth; therefore the peace and tranquillity of these is, and so must
be acknowledged, a notable fruit of Gods blessed providence restraining the
spite and malice of Satan. Again, hence it is evident, that in temptation
Satan cannot go beyond the permission of God: he can tempt Christ, yea
transport his body, and set him in a dangerous place, for thus far God permits
him to go; but to cast Christ down from the pinnacle he cannot, therein comes
Gods restraint. So it fares with Gods children; for the trial of his graces
in them, and to chastise them for some sins, he suffers Satan to buffet them;
but yet one iotte of his malice beyond Gods permission he cannot show, Job. 1.
12.
as in Jobs affliction by him may notably appear. Which we must carefully
remember for our special comfort in our most grievous assaults; Gods will
permitting Satan so far must make us patient, and yet his power restraining
Satan from doing worse, must give us comfort. Thus much for the temptation
itself.

The reason whereby Satan enforces his temptation is taken from a testimony of
Scripture: For it is written he shall give his Angels charge over thee, etc.
Satan hearing Christ allege scripture for his defense against the first
assault, comes now upon him with his own weapon, that if it were possible he
might foil him, after this sort: Thou show thy self to be the Doctor of
the Church, by thine alleging of Scripture, and that, it seems, thou make
the rule of thine actions: well then thou may well and safely cast thy self
down hence if thou be the Son of God, for it is written, he shall give his
Angels charge over thee, and with their hands they shall lift thee up etc.

From this dealing of Satan, we are taught, not to embrace an opinion in
religion, because a show of proof by testimony of Scripture may be given for
it. But we must try the spirits, that is, the doctrines of men, whether they
be of God, or not, 1. Ioh. 4. 1. For the Devil can allege Scripture to move
Christ unto presumption, and it is his usual practice, when he caries men into
schisms, errors, and heresies. Reason with a man that minds to live in sin,
and tell him of that dangerous state, by reason of the shortness and
uncertainty of this life: will he not tell you straight, he will do as he
does, and repent when he is old? for it is written, Ezekiel. 18. 17.
At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin, I will put all his
wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord: And some think three or
four good words at a man's last end will serve his turn: for the thief on the
cross said no more, but, Luke 23. 42.
Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. And all such as are
trained up in the school of Satan, can easily allege scripture to further
them in evil.

But let us come to the scripture which the Devil does notoriously abuse by his
allegation: it is written in the 91. Ps. v. 11. In the alleging whereof he
would seem very careful and precise, at the first not omitting so much as
this particle [ for] which might have been left out, and yet nothing have been
wanting to the force of his reason: But herein is the deepenesse of his
policy, to cause Christ not to suspect any falsehood afterward; for toward the
end, he leaves out that, on which the promise is grounded of being kept by
the Angel: to wit, to keep thee in all thy ways, that is, in all the good
duties of thy lawful calling wherein thou shall glorify God and do good to
others; to such as so walk in their ways does that promise belong.

Here then behold Satan's notable Satan's mincing of the word of God.
fraud and craft, that can so cunningly leave out that which makes not for his
purpose, and so pervert the true meaning of scripture; this is his usual
practice, in enmity against the word to deprave the true meaning by cutting off
some part, when he cannot utterly overthrow the whole. The like is the dealing
of all heretics, who by cutting off and leaving out, play legerdemaine with
the scripture. The Arrian holds the Bible for the word of God; but such places
as serve to prove the godhead of Christ, he does notably abuse and pervert. The
family of Love also, does hold the bible for the word of God; but come to the
true meaning of it, therein they fail, turning all into Allegories, even most
true histories, as the fall of our first Parents, and such like, which are
maine grounds of religion in their natural sense: and the Apostaticall Church
of Rome, does hold with us the books of the old and new Testament; but yet
they put in and take out at their pleasure, and take from it all sense and
meaning which agrees not with the determination of their holy father the Pope;
and thereby they ouerturne the word of God, and strongly maintain their
mystery of iniquity.

This dealing of Satan and his wicked miscreants with the scripture, must make
all Gods children willing to spend their strength in searching out the
Scripture; for that is the only way to descrie their fraud in deprauing of
it. This caused Christ to bid the people in his time to search the
Scriptures, to learn to know him to be the true Messiah, which the Jewish
teachers did then deny. In regard whereof we must say with Number. 11. 29.
Moses, oh that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put
his spirit upon them! oh that all could read and understand the word of God!
This is it, wherein all that either be, or intend to be ministers must labor
especially, even to get sound knowledge and judgment in the text of Scripture.
The Minister must not only be able to teach the truth, but also to discern, to
discover, and to confure errors and heresies, which he can never foundly do
without good understanding in the text it self. The Devil knows the whole
Scripture, and he will spare no text therein it he can corrupt it; therefore to
resoue Gods truth out of his hands who is the father of lies, the Minister must
show himself a good soldier of Jesus Christ, as Paul exhorts Timothy,
giving such attendance to the word that all men may see his profitting therein;
yea with Jeremy, the Minister must eat the books of God, and digest them in
his understanding, and rejoice therein, laboring to feel them the joy of his
heart. The Devil knows that Scripture truly understood and well applied, is
the only engine for the battery of his kingdom; and therefore, even from the
beginning, but specially since the coming of Christ he has labored by all
means to keep men from the knowledge and true understanding of them: he it
is that has brought men from the reading of the Scriptures, to betake
themselves to the writings of men, as schoolmen, fathers, and such; by this
means he has for many years even to this day in the Church of Rome, locked
up the Scripture in an unknown tongue: yea even in Gods church the Devil works
mightily this way, by stealing away the affections of young students from the
Bible, and rauishing them with delight in the writings of men; for thus he
keeps them from the fountain of truth, that they either fall into error
themselves, or be less able to discern and confute it in others. And hence
come dissentions and errors into the schools of the Prophets, which cannot be
avoided while men leave the text of scripture and addict themselves so much to
the writings of men, for thereby he can more cunningly convey strange conceits
into men's minds: and therefore every one that would maintain the truth in purity
and syncerity must labor painfully in the text.

Secondly, Gods ministers must hereby be admonished, to be careful in
alleging any text of Scripture, that the same be fit and pertinent: for to
wrest the same from the proper meaning of the holy Ghost to serve their own
conceit, is the practice of Satan, which every servant of God must be far
from, and therefore must not do it hand over head. Which also may serve for a
good advertisement to those that use to heap up manifold allegations of
Scriptures in the doctrine of a sermon, for as Prou. 10. 19.
in many words there cannot want iniquity, as Salomo^ says; so in affected
multiplicity of quotations can the abuse of Scripture be hardly escaped. If we
deliver but a man's testimony, honesty will compel us as near as we can to
keep both his words and his meaning; much more should conscience move us in
alleging the testimony of the Lord, to have careful respect to the evidence
of truth: and therefore that sparing course is very commendable, whereby in
quoting of Scripture men make sure to keep themselves to the Lords true
meaning, lest by deprauing his word they become followers of Satan: And thus
much for the manner of Satan's allegation.

The true and proper meaning of that text is now briefly to be discussed. The
ninety-one Psalm, from whence it is alleged, is a most heavenly part of
scripture, penned for the comfort of Gods people in the time of some grievous
plague or sickness; and it contains a notable preservative against the
plague, and by consequent against any judgment of God, to wit, true affiance
and confidence in the Lord, that is the ground of all comfortable safety;
thereto, among many other, is Verse. 11.
this gracious promise made of the protection of Gods holy Angels, (which the
Devil does here allege) who shall be as careful for the safety of Gods
children in common calamities of famine, plague, pestilence etc. as the nurce
is over her tender child to hold it in her hands, and bear it up in her arms,
lest it should fall and hurt it self; always provided that the child of God
keep himself in his ways, that is, in obedience to Gods commandments and in
the duties of his lawful calling. It is true indeed, that judgment begins at
1. Pet. 4. 17.
the house of God, and the righteous are taken away from the evil to come, yea
many times the same outward judgment lights upon the good, that does upon the
bad: yet this takes not from Gods child the comfort of this protection in
common calamities, for all promises of temporal blessings must be understood
with the exception of the cross: as here, Gods Angels shall guard his
children in time of plague, famine and pestilence, unless it please God
heerewith to chasten them for some sin past, or to prevent some sin, or
greater evil to come, or to make trial of their faith and patience: in which
cases also the child of God does greatly differ from the wicked; for through
the fruition of Gods love in Christ the evil of the punishment is taken away,
and the outward smart thereof See Job. 23. 10. Ps. 119. 71.
sanctified to the greater good of his soul: but out of this case their
protection is certain: see Exodus 12. 23. Psalm. 105. 16. 17. and Ezekiel. 9. 4. 6.

The use. The consideration of this gracious protection of Gods Angels over
such as keep themselves in their ways, must move every one to labor to know
and practice the duties of his calling both general of Christianity, and
particular for the state of his life, in all good conscience; so doing, let
come what will, in all dangers he shall have safety; for Gods angels pitch
their tents about him, they are as watchful over him as a nurce over her
child; but if we forsake our ways we lose the comfort of their protection,
and expose our selves to all Gods judgments.

VERSE 7. Jesus said unto him, Again it is written, Thou shall not tempt the
Lord thy God.

Here is the third general point in this conflict: to wit, Christ's answer and
repulse made to Satan's assault, taken, as the Devils temptation was, from a
text of scripture; for he says, Again it is written; where yet he means
not to oppose scripture to scripture, but to confute the abuse of scripture by
scripture; after this sort, as if he had said to Satan, It is true indeed that
God has made many worthy promises of aid and protection to his children in his
word, yet they shall not be performed to those that presume to tempt God, as
thou would have me to do.

From this dealing of Christ with Satan Scriptures are sufficient to expound
themselves.
we may observe; that the scriptures of God are sufficient in themselves,
truly to interpret and expound themselves. The Devil alleging scripture did
wrest it from the true sense; this our Savior Christ shows by alleging
another text out of Deuteronomy. 6. 16.
Moses, which being applied to the place which the Devil abused, does show the
true meaning thereof. So Ezra, expou^ding the law unto the Jews, read
distinctly in the law of God, and (as the words do signify) Ezra. 8. 8.
gave the sense by scripture, and caused the people to understand: much more
then at this day may the scriptures be thought sufficient for the expounding of
themselves, since to the Canon there of since Ezra his time there is added the
whole new Testament by the hand of God, wherein the deep things of God are
plainly revealed.

The Church of Rome cannot away with this, that Scripture should be sufficient
to expound it self. And therefore against it they reason thus: That which must
expound Scripture, must have judicial power to determine of the sense thereof:
but the scriptures have no such ludiciall power; for they are but a dumb
letter, and therefore no sufficient judge to determine of their own sense and
meaning. Answ. The Scriptures have judicial power to determine of their own
true sense and meaning, for they speak evidently, to all that are enlightened
by Gods spirit, and thereby made able to know what the Scripture says: we know
a man may speak to his friend not only by word of mouth but also by letter,
and thereby express his meaning sufficiently; even so, though God speak not
now unto his Church by created voice, yet by his written word he speaks
sufficiently for the clear manifestation of his will and pleasure concerning
them; and therefore it is a shameful slander and blasphemy against the
Scriptures to call them an inkie letter and dumb judge. And let them show, if
the Scripture be not, where is that speaking judge who has power judicial to
expound the scripture. Indeed their answer is, that the Church is this Judge,
and that we must consult at her mouth for the true meaning of the Scripture.
Answ. The church has a ministry and dispensation committed unto her, in the
execution whereof she delivers the meaning of the Scripture unto Gods people,
but that is not from any judicial authority committed unto her, to determine
of the sense of Scripture of her self; but only by comparing scripture with
scripture, and expounding one place out of another; even as the Lawyer gives
the sense of the law, not from any judicial power given unto him above the law,
but by observing the words with the scope and circumstances of the law. But
here I would know, if the Church must needs be judge, by what means must she
determine? They answer, by the rule of faith; the consent of Councels and
Fathers; and if these fail, then by the Pope; Answ. By their rule of faith,
they understand, unwritten traditions, that is, such truth beside Scripture, as
has been kept by tradition from hand to hand since the primitive Church. But
these are mere forgeries, and shame it were to subject the truth of God to the
device of man; if these be made judge of Scripture, then shall the faith of
the church depend upon the wisdom of man, and not upon the power of God, a
thing abhorred of the Apostle 1. Cor. 2. 5. The only rule of faith is the
Scripture, and true faith will admit no other judge beside the Scripture to
determine of that whereon it must depend. Secondly, for their consent of
Fathers and Councels, that is no sufficient means to determine of the true
sense of Scripture; for their several errors and contradictions one to
another, and many times to themselves, show, that they wanted the immediate
assistance of the Spirit. And the same is true of the Pope, as might easily be
proved at large, by their gross ignorance and errors. And therefore it remains
that the true judge and expounder of Scripture, is Scripture it self, as
Christ himself by his practice shows in this place.

The place alleged by Christ, is this commandment of God unto his people,
Deuteronomy. 6. 16.
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. For the understanding whereof we must
search out three things, first what the tempting of God signifies: secondly,
the manner how God is tempted: and thirdly, To tempt God.
the cause and root thereof. For the first, to tempt God signifies, to make
trial and experience of God, and to prove whether he be so true, just,
merciful, provident and powerful as his word reports him to be. Thus did
the Israelites often tempt God, as the Lord says, Psalm. 95. 9.
When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works; which latter words
show what it is to tempt God, even to seek to have proof by his works whether
he be such a one as his word says he is. If any shall say we are commanded, to
taste and see how gracious the Lord is, Ps. 34. 8. yea the Lord bids his people
prove him, Malach. 3. 10. Answ. Those places do sufficiently expound
themselves, for David's taste and sight is by the grace of true faith and
affiance, for in the same verse he pronounces such blessed; and in Malachie
the Lord bids them prove him, but yet in their way of obedience in providing
for his Sanctuary according to his ordinances. Therefore we must know for the
second point, that every trial of God is not simply evil, but that which is
needless, when without warrant from his word we presume upon him beyond the
means of his ordinary providence. Thirdly, the root of this sin, is an
unbelieving heart, whereby a man doubts of the truth of Gods word, of his
power, presence and providence. Ps. 78. 18. The Israelites tempted God in their
hearts; there is this sin: the manner how follows, in requiring meat for
their lusts etc. not contenting themselves with Gods present providence; the
root and ground whereof is set down, verse. 22. because they believed not in
God and trusted not in his help. When a man doubts of the fidelity of his
servant he will lay something in his way, as a piece of silver, his purse etc.
to try him withal; so when a man begins to doubt of Gods goodness and
fidelity toward him, he will easily be brought to make needless trial of
him by some work of God beside his ordinary providence. The meaning then is
this, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, that is, thou shall not make any
needless trial of Gods goodness, mercy, power or providence, from a
distrustful heart in the truth of his word.

Here yet further for our instruction we are to know that God is tempted five
ways, as the word of God does manifest: God is tempted five ways.
first, when a man shall appoint unto God, either the time when, the place
where, or the manner how God shall help him, and perform his word unto him;
herein he seeks experience of the truth and power of God. Thus the Israelites
tempted God in the wilderness when they wanted water; saying, Exodus 17. 7.
Is God among us or no? God had promised to be with them in all their journey
to Canaan, but that they will not now believe unless he will show his presence
by giving them water in that place. And so likewise they tempted him in the
want of foood, Ps. 78. 19. Can God prepare a table in the wilderness. The
consideration whereof must teach us in all our petitions which we make unto God
for the accomplishment of his promises unto us, to beware of Psalm. 78. 41.
limiting God, as the Jews did, by prescribing unto him time, place and manner
for the accomplishment thereof; but wait with patience his good leisure. For
he that believes will not make haste, but will commit his way to the Lord: Ps.
37. 5.

Master we would see a sign of thee: meaning thereby to be certified whether
he were the Messiah, and Luke says, they tempted him, Luke 11. 16. And thus
do all those tempt God, which refuse to embrace the doctrine of the Gospel,
because they cannot see the ministers thereof to confirm the same by miracles.
Thus do many Papists plead against our religion, embracing rather the mystery
of iniquity, because: it is confirmed unto them by lying wonders; not
considering that the truth which we profess was once sufficiently confirmed
to be the truth of God, by his own testimony thereunto in signs and wonders
through the hands of his Apostles. Quest. Is every asking of a sign a tempting
of God? for Gedion asked a sign when he was to be a Judge and deliverer of
gods people, Judge. 6. 17. And so did Hezekiah to be assured of the lengthning
of his days, 2. King. 20. 8. And yet we read not that God charged them with
tempring him, but did condescend to their requests. Answ. There be two causes
in which we may require a sign of God and not tempt him: first, when God
commands a man to ask a sign at his hands: so might Azah have asked a sign of
God, for his assurance of victory according to Gods promise, yea he is Isai.
7. 11. 12. 13.
blamed for not asking it when the Lord commanded him. Secondly, a man may ask
a sign of God, when it serves for the necessary confirmation of an
extraordinary calling, or of some special promise of God made to man: in this
case did Gedion ask a sign of God for the further confirmation of his
extraordinary calling to be a Deliverer unto Gods people. And so did Hezekiah
for his further assurance in the lengthning of his life, by an extraordinary
promise, fifteen years. But out of these cases to ask a sign of God is to
tempt him; as the Pharisees did, who would prescribe unto God what kind of
miracle they would have, even a sign from heaven, not contenting themselves
with those miracles which Christ did ordinarily work among them.

Thirdly, a man tempts God, when he they Number. 14. 22.
tempted him ten times, and have not obeyed his voice: Mal. 3. 15. The people
murmuringly say, they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt
God are delivered; where working wickedness and tempting of God are al one.
Which serves to admonish us, that with all speed we break off the course of our
sins by repentance, for while we continue in sin we tempt God, and so lie
open to all his judgments, depriving our selves of the guard and protection of
Gods holy Angels, nay they will become our enemies, and instead of protection,
execute gods heavy vengeance upon us.

Fourthly, they tempt God, that impose Act. 15. 10. Why tempt ye God (says
Peter) to lay a yoke on the Disciples necks, which neither our Fathers nor we
were able to bear? This is to make trial of Gods power in the saving of his
people. Whereby we may see how wicked and damnable the Romish religion is,
which wholly stands in the observation of ceremonies, partly heathenish, and
partly Iudaical, whereto when men submit themselves, they do nothing else but
tempt God.

Fifthly, they tempt God, that refuse or dangerously through the water: for
herein he seeks a needless experience of Gods power: so do they also that
neglect or contemn Gods holy ordinance for the saving of men's souls in the
ministry of the word. Now to this kind of tempting God does Christ apply this
commandment in this place; as if he should say, when God has affoorded unto
men an ordinary means for their help and safety, they are not to refuse the
same, and seek for safety from God extraordinarily. I am now in a dangerous
place I confess, upon this pinnacle, yet there is some ordinary way to get
down as stairs or ladder; and therefore unless I would tempt the Lord my God,
I may not cast my self down and thereby seek for extraordinary
preseruaiton, as thou perswadest me. Thus also they sin that go into places
of great danger without a calling: so Peter sinned in thrusting himself into
Caiphas hal, a place of temptation, as by lamentable experience he found too
true. Thus David's three Worthies sinned in aduenturing upon their enemies host,
for the fetching of a little water out of the well of Bethlehem; and therefore
when it was brought unto him, David would not drink thereof, but powered it out
for a sacrifice unto the Lord, 2. Sam. 23. 16.

Here some may ask, whether they do not tempt God, that adventure to clime on
high places, to stand on spire steeples, to run on the ridge of high houses,
and to go on ropes a great height from the ground. Answ. Men may do such
things in a twofold estate, either having a lawful calling thereto, as
Carpenters and Masons, who are to work upon high buildings; now they without
tempting of God may clime and stand on high and dangerous places: or else
having no lawful calling thereto, as they who use to do such things to make
known their actiuity, or only to afford delight and admiration unto others
for their private gain and advantage; and such tempt God fearfully; for
Christ was better able to have cast himself down from this pinnacle, and have
preserved himself without hurt, then these men are to save themselves in their
adventures, and yet he refused so to do, because he would not tempt the Lord
his God. Thus much for the meaning of this commandment.

The doctrine for instruction hence, is to be gathered from this command
applied to the text which the Devil alleges; and it is this: whosoever
looks for the accomplishment of Gods promises unto him, must be careful to
walk before God in the ways of his commandments, and in the works of his
calling with all good conscience. God indeed has made many gracious promises
in his word, of blessings temporal and eternal, but they that tempt God shall
not find the comfort of them; men's sins hinder these things from them; Gods
goodness is to be seen and tasted in the ways of faith and obedience. God
has promised the guard of his Angels to his children while they keep
themselves in their ways: if therefore thou would have this protection thou
must keep thy self in those ways that God would have thee to walk in. Also
in theri hesse of his love God has made a promise of everlasting life with
freedom from eternal perdition, to those that believe in Christ, John 3. 16.
Thou therefore that would enjoy the comfort of this promise to thine
immortality and life, must get true faith into thy heart and thereby live all
the days of thy life. The same may be said of every promise of God pertaining
either to soul or body, the fruition of them does depend upon the practice of
some part of obedience; which if thou do neglect thou do but presume in
making title to the promise: Peter tells Simon Magus plainly, he had no part
with them in the gifts of the spirit, while his heart retained a purpose to
live in sin, Act. 8. 21. Break off therefore the course of sin, and inure
thy self to the practice of obedience, so shall Gods promises be sweet unto
thine heart; and the more thou proceedest in obedience, the more comfort thou
shall find in Gods gracious promises: but if thou do lay hold on sin, the
comfort of the word will depart from thee. And thus much for the second
temptation.

VERSE 8. Again the Devil took him up into an exceeding high mountain, and
showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them;

9. And said unto him, all these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me:

10. Then said Jesus un so him, avoid Satan, for it is written, thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

THese words contain the third conflict between our Savior Christ and Satan;
wherein consider three points; I. Satan's preparation: v. 8. II. Satan's assault
upon Christ: v. 9. III. Christ's answer thereto: v. 10. For the first, before
we come to the handling of it in particular, we are to consider that unto
every assault the Devil prepares himself afresh: which should teach us to
labor to furnish our hearts every day afresh to be able to repulse his new
assaults. Now particularly; this preparation has two parts: first, Satan takes
Christ into an exceeding high mountain: secondly, he shows him all the
kingdoms of the world and the glory of them all. For the first, it may be
demanded what way Satan took up Christ into this high mountain? Answ. He
might do it two ways; either by vision, or by real and local transportation
of his body from the temple to some high mountain. Some think this was done
by vision only in Christ's mind, as Ezekiel. 40. 2.
Ezekiel was carried by the Lord from Babylon to an exceeding high mountain in
the land of Israel. But I rather think that Christ was really and locally
transported by the Devil in body from the temple to some high mountain; for
Christ's temptations were not imaginary, but true and real. Again, the words
import a true and real transportation without any mention of a vision.

The reasons why the Devil carries Christ to an high mountain may be these:
first, the Devil has a great desire to imitate God in his glorious works,
that so he may disgrace the works of God, yea and God himself as much as he
can. Now we read Deuteronomy. 34. 1. 2. etc.
that God took up Moses into mount Nebo, from whence he showed him all the
land of Canaan; so Satan, that he might seem to go beyond God, takes up Christ
into an exceeding high mountain to show him all the kingdoms of the world and
the glory of them. Secondly, he did it for the furtherance of this last assault
wherewith he tempted Christ, for he meant to entice Christ with the glory of
the world, and therefore brings him where he might take the fairest view
thereof.

Now in that Satan transports the body of our Savior Christ this second time,
Satan may have power over the bodies of Gods children.
we see that by Gods permission, Satan may have power over the bodies of Gods
children, to transport the same from place to place, or otherwise to vex them,
and that not once only, but sundry times. This we must observe, and remember
carefully as a stay and prop against distrust and despair, if God should
suffer Satan to vex us, by such transporting of our bodies from place to place,
or by any outward calamity; and that not once or twice but diverse times; for
that which befell the head Christ Jesus, may well befall any of his members.

The second part of the Devils preparation is this: he shows unto Christ all
the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them. This he could not do
actually, for there is no mountain so high in all the world, whereon if a man
were placed, he could see one half or one quarter of the kingdoms of the
world, as they are seated and placed upon the face of the earth; nay if a man
were set in the sun, and from thence could look unto the earth, yet he
could not see past the half thereof. And therefore we must know that the Devil
did this in a counterfeit vision, for herein he can frame an imitation of God.

Now the Devils visions be of two sorts; Of Diabolical visious.
either in the outward senses, or in the mind and understanding. His visions in
the outward senses be delusions, whereby he makes men be leeue they see that,
which indeed they do not see; this might easily be proved by manifold examples
recorded in the histories of all times, but that one shall suffice, of his
counterfeit resemblance of Sam. 28.
Samuels form and attire to the witch of Endor for the deluding of Saul; when
as indeed Samuels true body was in the grave, and his soul with the Lord.

Secondly the diue has visions wherbv he deludes the understanding. Zak. 13.
4. The Lord says hereof, the Prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision.
These visions the Devil shows to men sometime sleeping, and sometime waking;
even as the Lord does show his visions to his own servants. The visions of
Satan showed to men sleeping are called dreams; Deuteronomy. 13. 1. the false Prophet
has his dream. His visions showed to men waking, are to such as have crazed
brame, whom he persuades strange things of themselves, as some, that they are
kings or princes; others, that they are Christ, John Baptist, and such like;
examples hereof in all ages are many. Now touching this vision of Satan to
Christ; some think it was inward in Christ's mind; but I rather take it to
have been in his outward senses only, as the words of the text do import; the
Devil by his art did cunningly set forth and represent unto the eyes of Christ
a notable show and representation of all the kingdoms of the earth, and the
glory of them.

Herein the Devil shows great power and skill in that he can represent unto
the eye in his counterfeit visions such strange and admirable sights. And it
teaches us, that the practices of forcerers and magicians, undertaking to
represent unto the eye, partly in the air, and partly in glasses, either the
persons of men that lived long since, or actions done in far countries, or
long before, are not mere fancies as some think, who deny altogether that
such things can be showed: for the Devil can resemble things done long since
and a far off; for if he could set such a sight before the eye of our Savior
Christ in vision, as the view of the whole world, and the glory thereof, then
much more can he represent unto the eye of man strange and marvelous things.

The Devils drift in this resemblance unto Christ is this; hereby he intended
most cunningly to insinuat himself into the heart of our Savior Christ: for
before he propounds this third assault, he shows unto Christ all the kingdoms
of the world and the glory of them, that Christ might take a liking of them,
and so desire them, and at length accept of them upon Satan's offer. Thus he
dealt with our first parents; Genesis 3. 6.
upon their first communication he shows unto Eve the outward beauty of the
forbidden fruit, that it was fair to lock upon, and tells her of the good
estate they should attain unto by eating of it, and so at length brings her to
yield to his temptation.

Hence we must learn to have special Look well to seeing and hearing.
care in the good ordering of all the outward senses of our bodies, specially
the two senses of learning, seeing and hearing; for by them the Devil can
cunningly convey his temptations into our hearts: the senses (specially these
two) are the windows of the heart and soul, and if we keep them not well,
Satan will be sure to convey some evil into us. We must therefore obey
Salomons counsel, Prou. 4. 23.
keep thy heart above all watch and ward; this we cannot do, unless we look
well to our outward senses, for they are the doors of the heart. This made
David to pray, Psa. 119. 37.
Lord turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity: and Job Job. 31. 1.
to make a covenant with his eyes. And so must we make conscience of hearing
and looking, lest thereby we give advantage to the Tempter.

Further, in this sight observe the deep policy of the Devil; there are in the
kingdoms of the world besides glory and dignity, many troubles, hurliburlies
and vexations; now these the Devil conceales from Christ, and shows him only
the glory, pomp, wealth and dignity of the world, that so he might the more
easily wind his temptation into the heart of our Savior Christ. And this same
course he still observes in tempting men to sin; he hides from their eyes all
the miseries, plagues and punishments which are due to sin and that will follow
upon it; and shows them only all the profits and delights that they may reap
thereby: thus he sugars over the poison of his temptations, that men never
feel the bitterness of them till their souls be thereby deadly infected: but
then he takes a clean contrary course, and shows to the wounded soul all the
woes and terrors of Gods wrath, that if it be possible he may bring a man to
despair. And therefore we must be most watchful of being insnated with the
deceitfulness of sin in the false show of profit and pleasure.

Secondly, the devils policy does notably appear in reserving this temptation
for the last place; for he knows full well how forcible with man be the
temptations of profits, Temptations from the right hand most dangerous.
pleasures and honors. From whence we may also learn, that temptations fetched
on the right hand from honor, pleasure and commodity, are the most dangerous
and do soonest creep into the heart of man, prevailing far more then
temptations on the left hand, which are taken from adversity. The Devil foiled
2. Sam. 11. 2.
David worse in the time of peace and ease, then ever he could do during the
time of Saul's grievous persecution against him. And he prevailed more against
the Church by errors and heresies under Constantine and other christian
Emperors, then he could do by most bloody persecution for the space of three
hundred years before. Yea in these our days wordly hopes have drawn those from
the syncerity of religion, whom outward violence could not move: prosperity is
a slippery path wherein a man does soon catch a fall, and therefore we must
learn to be most watchful over our own hearts when we have fairest weather
with the world.

Lastly, S. Luke Luk 45.
adds this circumstance of time, that the Devil showed all these things unto
Christ in as short a time as might be, even in a moment or point of time:
whereby we may perceive the Devils great celerity and speed in doing any thing
he takes in hand, herein he goes beyond all men in the world: for being a
spirit he is able to work wonders, and though he cannot go beyond the
strength and compass of nature, because his power is finite, yet by reason of
his agility and speed he can go beyond the ordinary course of nature in the
manner of working the things he takes in hand. And this exceeding quick speed
the Devil here uses, to stir up in Christ a more eager desire after those
strange and goodly things whereof he had but as it were a glimple, that so by
degrees he might work in Christ a liking of them; for the nature of man does
more eagerly affect strange things when they be sudden, and the eye of man does
more wistly behold them. And this also, as the former, must make us watchful
against all Satan's crafty wiles, that we be not beguised by him. Thus much for
Satan's preparation.

The second point in this conflict, is the temptation it self, in these words;
verse. 9. And said unto him, Satan (...) bring (...) to idolatry.
all these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. The drift
of Satan in this assault (which we must carefully observe) is to draw Christ to
commit idolatry by the hope of wordly kingdoms and the glory of them: heerwith
he proves him when he could neither weaken his faith by his first temptation,
nor work presumption in him by his second. And look how he deals here with
Christ, so does he commonly in the world; many a ones conscience and religion
does he quite overthrow by wordly hopes of riches, pleasures and preserments:
heerby not only ordinary professors, but ministers and preachers of the
Gospel have been drawn to absure and renounce that truth which formerlie
they have taught, and to betake themselves as the Popes vassals to profess and
maintain his blasphemous idolatries: heerby also Protestant merchants, are
drawn to become very serviceable to the Popish Churches, by transporting among
them wax and such like merchandise, which serve as necessary helps and
furtherances to their idolatrous service. And what else is it that makes the
people generally to change religion with the times and states, but because they
would still enjoy their wordly commodities? And the more men do possess in
the world, ordinarily the less courage and resolution they have for the
religion of God, as experience in Queen Mary's days has showed; which in
general may admonish us how dangerous an enemy the world is to the power of
true religion.

This temptation has two parts: A promise made to Christ; and the condition
thereof. The promise in these words, All these will I give thee: he says not,
I will procure God to give them unto thee, but I will give thee them: where we
may see, that Satan's drift is to cause Christ to take him for his Lord, to
depend and wait on him for his kingdom, and to acknowledge him to be the giver
thereof: which notably bewraies his egregious boldness, that dares thus
challenge to himself the Lords own right, even in the presence of him who was
true Lord and King of heaven and earth. Let no man therefore think, that Satan
will lose ought for want of adventure; but in regard thereof be better armed
against him.

Now that which the Devil aimed at in Christ does he commonly effect in the
world, he makes men believe that he is the giver of all things and so brings
many a one to rely upon him. Indeed with their lips men will confess that God
gives them their daily bread, even all things they have; but their dealings and
practices speak aloud that the devil is gouerner and giver of all; for how do
many men get their livings? Is it not by lying, fraud, and oppressio? Do not
most men hereby seek to enrich themselves? Well, the just Lord never approves
such means: the devil sets such courses a flote, and him they serve, and on
him they rely that walk therein.

Secondly, Satan enmity against Christ's spiritual kingdom.
note a further reach of Satan in this promise of these earthly kingdoms, even
to overthrow Christ's spiritual kingdom. Satan knew well that if Christ were
the true Messiah he should be a King, and have a kingdom, though not earthly,
yet spiritual in the hearts and consciences of men, which should be the ruin
of his kingdom; and therefore he labors with Christ to entertain an earthly
kingdom, that so his spiritual kingdom might not be looked after. And look
as he seeks to deal with Christ the head, so he perseueres against the
church which is his body; for Gods Church has it ministry, which in it nature
is a sovereignty, to be exercised in the dispensation of the word: now the
Devil has labored by all means to bring this ministry wherein the
Churches spiritual sovereignty does consist, to become an earthly lordship and
dominion, that by this means he might ouerturne it, and make it fruitless in
the building and upholding of Christ's spiritual kingdom: and how he has
prevailed this way the Church of Rome does show to all the world.

Thirdly, observe the largeness of the Devils promise: he will give to Christ,
all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them: but this is more then he
meant to our Savior Christ, at leastwise more then he could perform, for all
these were not in his power. Now because in all things we must be as unlike the
Devil as may be, hence we must learn to be wary and watchful to our promises,
that therein we be not like unto Satan, promising that which we never mean to
perform, or never can perform though we meant it. In all our promises
therefore we must look to two things; First, whether the thing we promise be
in our power; Secondly, whether it be lawful and meet for us to perform: And
thus making promises we must endeavor always to make good the same. This
fidelity in keeping promise is a fruit of the spirit, called by the Apostle,
faith, Gal. 5. 25. and a property of him that must rest in Gods holy
mountain, Psalm. 15. 4. not to change from a man's lawful oath or promise,
though the performance of it tend to his great hinderance.

Fourthly, in this promise of Satan we may observe, that he knows all the
kingdoms of the world, else he could not have showed them to him which here
he offers to give: yea his offering of them, with the glory of them al, which
he could so speedily represent, does show unto us that he is most expert in
the policies and regiments of states and kingdoms; he goes not to and fro for
naught compassing the earth, Job. 1. 7. And his promise of them to Christ, was
made to inflame his heart with ambition after those kingdoms and glories, that
he might enjoy some of them at the least. Wherein we may note that one special
practice of the Devil is to ouerturne states and kingdoms, by putting
ambition into men's hearts after earthly kingdoms, and glories: his study is to
do mischief, and in the ruin of kingdoms he overthrows many, and therefore
heereunto he endeavors himself with might and maine. Hence come insurrections
and rebellions in kingdoms, which no time nor age could ever escape: look as
he stirred up the Chaldeans and Sabeans to enrich themselves by the spoiling of
Job, so deals he by ambitious and covetous persons in all estates, as true
records of times do fully testify. We may see the truth hereof in our own
land, in the manifold complots and treasons both at home and abroad that have
been conspired and attempted against our Queen Elizabeth and it may fitly be
applied to our present State.
Prince and State, by profane men stirred up by the devil through ambition and
discontent: howsoever by Gods mercy themselves have been taken in the snare
that they laid for others. In regard whereof we are all bound to yield all
praise and glory to God for his gracious preservation and defense both of our
prince and state; and to show forth our thankfulness by all holy obedience
unto that God who has brought to naught the devilish conspiracies and
treacheries of the ambitious instruments of Satan. Secondly, we must pray unto
God continually for the preservation of our Prince and State; crying aloud unto
God as the people did at the coronation 1. King. 1. 39.
of Solomon, for the safety of our Prince: yea we must daily entreat the Lord
to bring to naught the counsel of Achitophels, and of all that think evil
against the Lords anointed among us. Quest. But how comes it to pass that any
Prince or State can stand, if the Devil have such malice against them? Answ.
Through the good providence of God, who gives his good Angels charge to guard
and defend, not only his children in particular, but also whole Kingdoms and
States. And one part of their office is for the good of Gods Church to repel
the rage of Satan and his instruments, yea to stand with Gods church in the
execution of judgments upon the enemies thereof. In the siege of Jericho an
heavenly Josh. 5. 14.
captain of the Lord of hosts came to help Ioshuah: and when the king of
Syria sent a mighty host to take the Prophet Elisha that was in Dothan, the
Lord sent for his defense 2. King. 6. 17.
horses and chariots of fire which filled the mountains. And in the days of
Hezekia, for his comfort, and the joy of Gods people, an Angel of the Lord slew
in the host of Zenacherib, that came against Jerusalem, Isai. 37. 36.
an hundred fourscore and five thousand in one night. And we want not sure
testimony of this good providence of God, in the strange discoueries of many
devilish conspiracies.

Fifthly, Satan says, all these will I give thee. This is the voice of the
great red Dragon: and the same is the voice of the Pope of Rome, both registered
in their canons and daily attempted in practice, to dispose of all the
kingdoms of the earth; whereby he shows evidently, that he is that Reu. 13.
11.
beast coming out of the earth having two horns like the Lamb, but he spoke
like the Dragon. For the Lambs horns he shows in calling himself the servant
of sernants; and the voice of the Dragon, that is, of the Devil, in taking upon
him to dispose of the soueraignties of these earthly kingdoms.

Lastly, Saint Luke records a reason, which the Devil adds to his promise,
to prevent all conceit of impossibility in him to perform the same; to wit,
for that Luke 4. 6.
the power and glory of all the kingdoms of the world is delivered to him, and
to whomsoever he will be gives it. Wherein observe in Satan two notorious
sins: first, a gross lie; for Daniel says, Dan. 4. 22.
that it is Jehovah, the most high God, who bears rule over all the kingdoms
of men, and gives them to whomsoever he will. Secondly, arrogant and shameless
boasting, to vaunt himself even to the Lords own face, as though he were
sovereign lord of that which belongs to God alone. The consideration whereof
must move us, who in all godly conversation must be contrary to Satan, to
renounce all lying, and to make conscience to speak the truth from our hearts.
And also to abandon all vain boasting of our selves what we are, or what we
can do, yea rather to speak basely of our selves that so God in all good
things we do may have the glory. Lying and bragging are the properties of
Satan, and therefore can not beseem the tongue and heart of the children of
God.

The second point in this temptation, is the hard condition which satan would
have Christ to yield unto for this gift; If thou will fall down and worship me:
even to commit most abominable idolatry in worshipping the Devil himself.
Herein we may observe sundry things:

First, that it is a principal part of the Devils endeavors against Gods
church, to seek the overthrow of true religion, and the pure worship of God,
by sowing therein the seeds of heresies and idolatries; for if he dares be thus
bold with Christ the head, as to seek to draw him from the worship of his
Father to such abominable idolatry, what will he not attempt with silly and
sinful men? The Scriptures are plentiful in showing his endeavors this way.
Michaiah saw in vision 1. Kin. 22. 22.
an evil spirit offering himself unto God, to become a lying spirit in the
mouth of all Ahabs prophets, even four hundred at one time. When Iehoshuah
Zak. 3. 1.
the high Priest stood before the Lord, Satan stood at his right hand to resist
him, he sought to hinder the building and worship of the material temple;
much more therefore will he seek to hinder the building of the spiritual
temple, even the work of the ministry in conversion of souls whereby they
are pulled out of Satan's kingdom, and made pillars in the temple of the living
God. Satan is that Matthew. 13. 39.
envious man that sows tares of errors and heresies in the church of God
which is the field of the good husbandman. He hindered 1. These. 2. 18.
Paul from coming to the Thessalonians, whereby it appears, that he did his
endeavor to hinder the course of the Apostolical ministry. In the church of
Smyrna, Reu. 2. 10.
he cast some into prison, stirring up wicked men so to do, thereby to hinder
the embracing of the Gospel. Reu. 16. 13. 14.
John saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the
dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false
Prophet. These are spirits of Devils, working miracles, and going to the kings
of the earth: thither they go for the stoppage of the Gospel; for if kings
oppose themselves they become greatest hinderers to the Gospel of all other.
And these frogs, by the common consent of Catholic expositors, are the
rabble of Popish Friars, Priests, and Jesuits, who seek the infection of
States through all the world. By all which, the Devils enmity against the
Church is most apparent.

The use. I. This shows what care and diligence Gods Ministers should show for
the building of Gods Church and the furtherance of the Gospel: for they should
seek to the uttermost of their power to counteruaile the envious practice of
satan against the Church.

II. Every Christian must hence learn, to pray not only for their own good
estate, but also for the welfare of Gods Church every where, in the free
passage of the Gospel, in the establishing of true doctrine, and in the
continuance of constant obedience thereunto. For Satan's endeavor is to subvert
and corrupt the truth, and to draw men from obedience; and unto him Gods
children must ever oppose themselves, the rather because their welfare stands
in the good of Gods Church.

Secondly, in this condition of Satan's offer to Christ we may observe that
his endeavor is to bring men to worship him: for if he durst attempt a demand
heerof at the hands of Christ, who shall think to escape this assault when
opportunity serves him? And howsoever men think it impossible, that Satan
should thus far prevail with any, as to bring them to worship him; yet
doubtless (though he could not prevail with Christ) herein he attaines his
purpose in the world, and that with the greatest part thereof: for the three
religions of the Jew, Turk, and Papist, do at this day ouerspread the
greatest part of the face of the earth; and in them all, such a worship of God
is propounded unto men, Two rules for trial of religions.
wherein God is not worshipped but the Devil. For the evidence whereof mark
these two rules; First, that all 4. 1. 3. Doctrines repugnant to the word,
touching marriage, and meares, are doctrines of Devils; and so by proportion are
all all devised worship of God by man, against Gods word, is no worship of God,
but of the Devil: 1. Cor. 10. 20. The things which the Gentiles sacrifice,
they sacrifice unto Devils and not unto God. Doubtless, the Gentiles intended
to worship God in their images, but because that worship was not according to
Gods will, the Apostle respects not their intent, as a thing that could nothing
avail in this case, but says peremptorily, their worship was done unto the
Devil. And in reason it must be so, for why should we think, that God
should accept that for his worship which is not agreeable to his will, but
denised by man according to the will of the Devil?

From these two rules it will follow, that the best of the three forenamed
religions, is no worship of God, but of the Devil: for all of them have such
worship as is devised by man, and not of God; The Jew worships God out of
Christ; and so does the Turk: yea and the Papists worship God, but yet out of
the true Christ; for (as has been showed elsewhere) the Christ of the Papists
is a counterfeit Christ. And in many other points of their religion, there is
apparent repugnancy to the word of God: yea of their sacrifice of the Mass,
we may as truly say as the Apostle did of heathen idol worship, that they
sacrifice not unto God, but to the Devil; for therein is as vile, accursed and
abominable idolatry, as ever was devised by man. So that it is plain the
Devil does mightily prevail in causing men to worship him. Yea he prevails
thus not only in the world, but in Gods Church; for all such as
(notwithstanding their outward profession) have their hearts set upon the
world, more eagerly affecting the honors, profits and pleasures thereof then
God and his word, do in deed and truth worship the Devil; for he is the 2.
Cor. 4. 4.
God of this world, ruling in the heart of the children of disobedience, by the
baits of honor, profit and pleasure he steals men's hearts from God, and so
herein they doing the will of the Devil, must needs worship him; for look
whereon a man seteth his heart, that he makes his God.

Thirdly, here observe that the Devil would feign make a covenant with
Christ; for worship at Christ's hands, he will give Christ the glory and riches
of the world; heereto is nothing wanting but Christ's consent. Whereby we see
that it may be true which sundry times we hear of, and many histories do
record, to wit, that some persons do make a league with the Devil, Some
make a league with the Devil.
wherein the Devil couenanteth to be serviceable unto them in procuring them
honor, riches, pleasures, or great renown for some strange actiuities, whereto
he will enable them, upon condition that they for their parts give unto him,
their bodies, their souls, or their blood. Some indeed are of mind, that such
things are mere forgeries and delusions of the Devil, and that no league can
be made between him and man; but they are deceived, for he attempted in
effect such a thing with Christ, what will he not therefore do with silly and
sinful men, especially when he finds them cast down with discontents? And
thus much for the Devils assault.

The third point in this conflict is Christ answer. verse. 10. Then Jesus said
unto him, Avoid Satan; for it is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God
and him only shall thou serve. This I will handle as the words do lie in order.

Before his answer he propounds a speech of indignation and detestation both
of the Devil and his offer, avoid Satan, as if he should say, I have heard
thee Satan to speak imuriously against my fathers word, and against my self;
and now again, thou vtterest blasphemy against my father, wherein thou go
about to dishonor him greatly; but I abhorte thee Satan, and these thy
temptations, therefore hence, avoid, and have no more to do with me.

In this detestation of Christ toward Satan, for uttering blasphmie against
his father, How to be have our selves toward blasphemers.
in his challenge to have power to dispose of all the kingdoms of the world as
being his own; we are taught, not only to grieve at such blasphemies as we
shall hear uttered against God, but to testify our detestation and
indignation toward them. The world is full of black mouthed Rabshekaes, who
will not spare to blaspheme the glorious name of our God, and to scoff and
deride his sacred word: now when we meet with such, we must not be like Stoics
without affection, but in Christian wisdom from bleeding hearts for the reproach
of God, show forth godly zeal and indignation for the rescue of his glory.
The Hypocritical practice of wicked Iezabel 1. King. 21. 9. 10.
in proclaming a fast upon the false accusation of Nabothes blasphemy against
God and the king, may teach Gods Church to be zealous indeed aagainst all
blasphemers. When Rabiheka railed on the God of Israel, 2. King. 19. 1.
good king Hezekiahrent his clothes, and humbled himself in great measure for
that reproach against his God. Tears Ps. 42. 3.
were David's meat day and night, while the heathen among whom he was
constrained to live, said unto him where is thy God? And just Lot 2. Pet. 2. 8.
vexed his righteous soul from day to day with the unlawful deeds of the
filthy Sodomites, living among them. The practice of these godly men must be a
president for us to follow, that we hear no blasphemy against God without
detestation. And as all Gods children must practice this duty, so especially
Masters of families: David Ps. 101. 7.
would not suffer a lier or a slanderer to come in his sight, or to abide in his
house; much less would he have endured a blasphemer of God, or a slanderer of
his word. The law commanded that the Leuit. 24. 14.
blasphemer should he stoned to death, who wittinglie and willingly spoke a
word against God; and no doubt this law is perpetual. Let a man but speak a
word of disgrace against an earthly prince, and it costs him his life, and
that justly: how much more then should he die the death though he had a
thousand lives, that shall blaspheme the king of kings? Shall one that has been
baptized into the name of Christ, say there is no God, and that the Scriptures
are but a device of man, and yet live? God forbid, for this hellish sin
defiles a kingdom. And therefore the Magistrate with the sword of justice must
cry out against such wretches, Away from us blasphemers.

Secondly, in this Auant of Christ given to Satan, we learn how to behave our
selves against entisers from religion and the obedience of God; we must hold
them as limbs of the Devil, and in that regard have nothing to do with them,
but with Christ bid them avoid from us. The Deutr. 13. 6. 9.
Lord commanded that in this case, Parents should not spare their own
children; nor children spare their Parents, if they were enticers to idolatry,
but their own hands must be first upon them to put them to death: Our Savior
Christ would not spare Peter when he gave him bad counsel, to spare himself
from suffering that which God has ordained for him, but says unto him, Math.
16. 23.
get behind me Satan. So that we are without excuse if we shall reject this
counsel of Salomo^, Prou. 19. 27.
Hear no more the instruction, that causes to err from the words of
knowledge.

Thirdly, here by we also learn how to behave our selves toward satan when he
is violent and importunate in his temptations, to wit, that howsoever we may
reply to them out of Gods word when they are more mild, yet when Satan begins
therein to show his force and violence we must not reason with him; for Christ
would not endure his blasphemy, though he answered his temptations. In
schools of learning it is counted a simple part to hold always to the
conclusion; but in the schole of Christ when the conscience is to deal with
Satan, the safest way is by both hands of faith to lay fast hold of the
conclusion; cleause fast to Christ, let the Devil say what he will, be not
drawn thence one jot.

After Christ has showed his detestation to Satan's blasphemy he answers his
temptation; saying, It is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, etc.
And whereas he says the third time, it is written, taking his answer from the
Scripture; it teaches us that Scripture of it self is of power sufficient to
vanquish the Devil. This the Church of Rome will not admit; for they make
Scripture to be of two kinds; inward and outward; By inward Scripture they
mean, the universal consent of all Catholics in all ages. And by outward
Scripture, they understand the written word contained in the Bible. Now they
say, inward Scripture is the more excellent; for the outward Scripture they
call a dead letter, of little or no power; and they make general councels
equal with them for substance of doctrine. If this were true, Christ would not
have alleged outward Scripture, as they call it; but he knew the written word
was the powerful weapon, sufficient to vanquish the Devil. And therefore
herein they do shamefully blaspheme the truth of God, and so God himself.

Secondly, this allegation of Christ teaches us, how to behave our selves
against all enemies to the truth, that would allure us to heresy, as to
Popery, Anabaptisme or such like; namely to stick fast to the text of
Scripture, and not to suffer our selves by any means to be drawn from it. It
may be thou art unlearned and thine enemy both learned and eloquent; yet
here is thy refuge, cleave the faster to this written word, and if thou have
one text for thy truth, make more account thereof, then of all the restimonies
of councels, fathers, or men whatsoever. This instruction is needful, for it
may be God will suffer seducers to try his children, and then, unless they
keep sure this ground of faith, they shall surely be seduced.

The text which Christ alleges for his answer, is taken out of Deutr. 6. 13.
where the words are thus read; Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve
him. At the first, it may seem that Christ misalledgeth that text, and
corrupts it: for where Moses says, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God; Christ
says, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God: and to the latter part Christ
adds the word only; saying, him only shall thou serve, for that which Moses
says, and serve him. But the truth is, here is no corruption, but a most
worthy allegation, as we shall plainly see, if we consider two things: first,
that Christ and his Apostles in alleging the Scriptures of the old Testament,
did not so much respect the words as the true and proper meaning of the place.
Secondly, that they often expound the places which they allege, and thereupon do
sometimes vary in word, but still retain the true sense and meaning. So it is
in this text alleged: Moses says, thou shall fear the Lord thy God,
understanding by fear, religious awe and reneronce: And Christ saying, thou
shall worship or adore the Lord thy God, understands by worship, outward
adoration in bowing of the body, whereby we testify the inward awe and
reverence of the heart, as when we humble our selves to call upon God by
prayer. And this change of words by Christ, serves for excellent use in this
place, to wit, to let us more clearly see what this fear of God is. To fear
God in that place is from a reverent awe of the heart toward God to humble a
man's self in prostrating his body before the Lord, either to praise God for
benefits received, or to pray unto him for gifts and graces needful. Again,
for the word which he adds, therein is no fault at all, for the full sense and
true meaning of Moses text must needs include so much, as the prohibition
annexed in the verse following does plainly show: for saying thou shall fear
the Lord thy God and serve him: and adding, Verse. 13.
Thou shall not walk after other Gods, verse. 14. is it not all one, as if he
had said, thou shall serve him only? so that we have inst cause to bless God
for the true and plain explaning of the words, and not to surmise the least
corruption in the alleging of them.

Now then for our further instruction in this text alleged, consider two
points: first, what worship and service is: secondly, to whom it belongs.
First, Worship in general.
worship in general betokens, the exhibiting and giving of reverence and
honor to another. This worship is twofold; Civil, Civil worship
or Divine; Civil worship is that outward reverence and honor which one man
gives to another, as by prostrating the body, bowing the knee etc. The end of
Civil worship is, to testify and acknowledge superiority and pre-eminence in
another, either for authority and office, as the subject worships his king and
governor; or for gifts and graces, or for old age; as inferiors in gifts and
younger in age by due reverence must acknowledge. In this Civil manner did Jacob
bow himself even times to his brother Esau, thereby acknowledging him for his
superior and better, Genesis 33. 3. Thus also did Abraham bow himself before the
Hittites, Genesis 23. 7. And Lot unto the Angels that came into Sodom, taking
them to be but men, Genesis 19. 1. And in this civil manner it is lawful to
kneel before Kings and Princes, to testify our subjection unto them, and
loyal acknowledgement of their pre-eminence over us under God.

Divine worship is the ascribing of Divinity to the thing we honor, Divine
worship
whereby we make it unto us some divine thing above the order of any creature. A
man may ascribe Divinity unto a thing four ways: first, by attributing the
Godhead unto it, or giving unto it such honor whereby he acknowledges the
same to be God. Secondly, by ascribing unto it the attributes of God, as
omnipresence, omnipotency, to be most just, to know all things etc. Thirdly,
by accepting and acknowledging it to be the Creator and Governor of all
things. Fourthly, by acknowledging it to be the giver of all good things, the
defender and deliverer from all evil. And to whatsoever thing in worship a man
ascribes any of these, to the same does he ascribe Divinity. This divine
worship does principally consist in religion and piety; for by religion, which
indeed is Gods worship, and by piety, do men ascribe unto a thing divine and
religious honor.

Divine worship is two fold: Inward in the mind; or outward in the body. Inward
divine worship is, when a man gives his heart and soul to any thing, deuoting
thereto the affections of his heart, as love, fear, joy, hope, faith and
confidence, and that because he conceiueth it to be God, having divine
properties, as omnipotency, infinite wisdom, justice, mercy, etc. or being
the Creator and Governor of all; or the giver of all good things unto him, and
his preserver from all evil. This deuoting of the heart and soul unto God
with the faculties and affections thereof, is the ground and substance of all
divine worship, and indeed can be given to nothing but to that which is God, or
conceived of as God. Outward divine worship is, when a man shall any way bow,
prostrate, or cast down his body to any thing, thereby to testify, that his
mind and heart are devoted to it: as that he holds it to be God, to be
omnipotent, etc. Creator and governor, and his preserver, and therefore he
does repose his trust and affiance therein, set his love, joy, and fear
thereon above all other things. Difference between civil worship and divine.
And here we may observe a difference between Civil worship and Divine. By
outward civil worship we only acknowledge pre-eminence and superiority in
another, in regard of authority, of gifts, age or such like. But by outward
divine worship we acknowledge divinity to be in the thing whereto we bow or
prostrate our selves. Again, we must here also remember, that outward divine
worship serves only to restifie the inward, even to make known what thing it
is which we conceive to be God, and whereto we have devoted the affections of
our hearts.

Thus we see what worship is, and the kinds thereof. And here we must
understand our Savior Christ to mean, outward divine worship, as if he
should say, Thou shall religiously submit, bow or prostrate thy body unto God
in prayer or thanksgiving, thereby testifying that thou have devoted thy heart
and soul unto him, not only conceiving him to be the divine essence,
omnipotent, infinite etc. but also that thou do rest and rely on him as on
thy Creator, who does bless thee with all good things and preserve thee from
all evil.

Besides this worship, Christ does mention a serving of God, which being
distinguished from worship must needs import some other thing. Service.
Service in general, is nothing else but the giving and performing of
obedience to the commandment of another. This service is twofold; Absolute.
absolute, or in part. Absolute service is, when a man obeies the commandment
of another without any condition or exception, and that not only in body
outwardly, but in soul and conscience, in thought, will and affection. And
this absolute service is proper to God alone, for we must never call his
commandments into question, but look what God commands and as he commands
it, so must we simply and absolutely yield obedience thereto, not only
outwardly in body, but inwardly in soul and spirit with the powers and
faculties thereof, and in all the affections of our heart. In part.
Service in part, is that which is due to governors and superiors from their
inferiors in the Lord: for God has given power to magistrates here on earth
to make laws for the good of civil estates, in yielding obedience whereunto,
their inferiors must do them service; yet not absolutely, but with restraint,
to wit, in the Lord, so far forth as their commands agree with the will of God,
and cross not his command. Again our obedience unto them is in body and
outward conversation: indeed we must from the heart yield service and obedience
unto them: but yet the conscience properly cannot be bound by men's laws, they
only concern the outward man in speech, gesture and behavior. Now of these
two kinds of service, our Savior Christ speaks here, of simple and absolute
service, whereby both soul and body with all the powers and parts thereof
yield absolute obedience and subjection to the will and commandment of God.

We see what worship and service is here required: Now we must observe the
person to whom the same is to be given, in these words: The Lord thy God:
Divine worship whether inward or outward, and absolute service of the whole
man, must be given to no creature, Angel or man, be they never so excellent,
but to the true God alone. The scope and drift of the first and second
commandments, is to bind every man to give so much to his God, and to beware
of giving the same to any other besides the Lord. And the practice of the good
Angel that talked with Reu. 19. 10.
John, does show the same thing, for when John fell before his feet to worship
him, the Angel said, see thou do it not: -- worship God. Where we see the good
angels do strive for the furtherance of Gods right in these duties, howsoever
this wicked spirit tempting Christ, does herein seek Gods great disgrace. And
thus we may perceive that Christ's applying of this text against Satan's
temptation is most pregnant; for Satan requiring of Christ the prostrating of
his body before the Devil, in token that he did worship him as the giver of
those kingdoms which he offered unto Christ, is justly repulsed by this text,
which binds every man to give outward divine worship, whereby the inward
worship of the heart is signified, to God alone and not to any creature.

Here then we may learn, Use.
that it is not lawful to give to Saint or Angel, No creature must have divine
worship.
or any creature whatsoever, outward divine worship or adoration, whereby the
inward devotion of the heart is testified. This text is plain to the contrary,
and the reason we have heard, because divine prostrating of the body to any
thing, is a testification that we ascribe divinity unto it some way; which
without the guilt of idolatry cannot be done to any creature: for let a man
worship Saint or Angel by prayer or thanksgiving, and therein he does ascribe
unto them some propriety of the divine nature, as, to know the heart, to be
able to hear, to help or such like. The Papists here say, they do not
think the Saints to whom they pray, to be God, neither do they worship them as
God. But this will help them little: for the Devil moving Christ to yield
unto him outward divine worship, never meant, that Christ should adore him for
God, but only desired, that by this outward adoration of prostrating his body
before him, Christ would acknowledge him to be the giver of those kingdoms,
(for he durst not be so bold as absolutely to desire to be worshipped for God)
and yet Christ tells him, that outward divine worship even in respect of the
acknowledgement of such a gift is proper to God alone. And yet the church of
Rome do give unto Saints, that which the Devil demands and Christ denies by
appropriating it unto God: for they make several saints deliuerers and
protectors from several diseases and dangers: as the Virgin Mary Breuiat, in
missa quotid. de B. Maria.
from shipwreck; S. Roch Missale and Breuiar. Sarisbut, in missa de Sancto
Rocho.
from the pestilence; Raphael Alan. Cop. dial. 3. 29.
from sore aies; Kem. exam. council. Trid. part. 3. cap. de inuo sanct.
Apollonia from the toothache; And Iac. de Vorag. ^ur. leg. c. 167.
Catharine for all manner of afflictions. Yea they make them patrons and
protectours of whole countries and kingdoms, as Saint James for Spain; Saint
Denis for France; Saint Patricke for Ireland, etc. Now since many a one may give
a kingdom that cannot defend it let all men judge whether they do not give
more unto Saints, than Satan demanded to be acknowledged unto him by our
Savior Christ: yea they make them intercessours for the procuring of the
savor of God and life everlasting: they call the Virgin Mary, the Queen of
Heaven, and pray to her, that by the authority of a mother, she would command
her son to hear their prayers; which is to make Christ a punie and underling
unto her; which are greater matters then the disposing of earthly kingdoms.
Here they say, that they may do that to the glorious saints in heaven, which
is done to earthly Princes; for men adore them and in their absence fall down
before their chair of estate. Answ. The adoration given to Princes, is but a
civil acknowledgement of their pre-eminence: and kneeling before their chair
of estate, is only a civil testimony of loyalty and subjection; it is not
directed to the Princes person being absent, but only serves to testify his
subjection to that authority and power which is set over him in the Lord;
there is no divine propriety ascribed by either of these unto the person or
authority of the Prince. But now in bowing down to pray to Saints, there is
religious adoration given them, for therein be ascribed unto them these divine
properties, that they can know the heart, hear and help afar off, pray for
them in particular, and such like; by all which God is robbed of his honor.

And though we condemn the Papists for giving to Saints divine worship, yet
we must beware of despising the Saints of God in Heaven: for there is due unto
them a threefold honor: first thanksgiving to God for them, who enabled them
by his gifts and graces, to be in their times, special instruments of good
unto Gods church. Secondly, we are to carry a reverent estimation of them
being now in heaven, as of the friends of God and temples of his holy spirit.
Thirdly, we are to follow the example of their godly conuersatio^s in the
duties of godliness: But from giving unto them divine worship we must
carefully abstain.

Again, Worship of relics unlawful.
if the divine worship of saints be here condemned, then much more is the
worshipping of their relics: then also is their instituting and observing
fasting days and holy days unto their saints here justly reproved. Neither
can our Church herein be condemned with them, though we retain the names of
such days among us, because it is for another end; out fasts are merely
civil on such days; and our holy days turned from the adoration of saints to
the service of God, whereon also our conscience knows her liberty given of
God for honest labor in a lawful calling as need requires.

Further, observe how Christ here ioines the worship of God and the service of
God together: teaching us not to content our selves with doing the duties of
Gods worship, but withal we must yield unto him absolute service and
obedience. Men commonly think they have done enough, if on days appointed
they come to the Church and there perform outward worship unto God in hearing
the word, in prayer, and receiving the Sacraments; these, I confess be worthy
works if they be well performed: but herein is the common error, that when
they have performed this outward worship they make no conscience of absolute
service, the thing which Christ here ioines to worship; they think that in
their callings they may live as they list, either idly or unjustly, by fraud
and dissembling: but sever not thou service from worship, which Christ has
joined together, lest God say unto thee forthy worship as he did once to the
Jews Isay. 1. 14. 15.
My soul hates your new moons and your appointed feasts, they are a burden
unto me, etc. What, does God hate that worship himself appointed? no, but he
hares the seuering of it from service and obedience wherein they should show
forth to their brethren, love, justice and mercy: he reiects all service at
their hands, because their hands were full of blood, v. 15. Read Micha. 6. v.
6. 7. 8. The offering of sacrifice was a special part of worship under the
Law, and yet though a man should bring for his sacrifice thousands of Rams,
or ten thousand rivers of oil, nay though he brought his first borne, the
fruit of his body for the sin of his soul, yet all is nothing without
justice, mercy, humbling himself and walking with his God, verse. 8. Let us
therefore serve God sincerely in our conuersations, as we seem to honor him
in duties of religion; let us show the fear of God in our lives; for worship
without service, is like the cutting off of a dogs head, or offering swines
flesh etc. as I say 66. 3. which is abomination to the Lord.

Thirdly, observe that Christ adds only to Moses words, for the better
clearing of Moses meaning; which may serve for our just defense against the
Papists; they blame us greatly for teaching that a man is justified by faith
only, saying the word only, is not in any place ascribed to justification by
faith. We answer, in all the old testament this word only is not joined to this
command, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and serve him, and yet Christ
says, it is written, him only shall thou serve, because the restraint and
inhibition annexed, from giving this worship and service to any other, does in
effect include only; even so, though in letters and syllables we do not find
this word only, adjoined to this sentence, man is justified by faith; yet
because of the exclusion of works usually annexed to that phrase, as that, we
are justified by faith without the works of the Law, Romans 3. 28. and are
justified freely by his grace, v. 24. and that a man is not justified by the
works of the Law, but by faith, Gal. 2. 16. hereupon I say we may hold and
teach, and that truly, according to the true sense thereof, following Christ's
example in this place, that the scripture says, a man is justified by faith
only.

Lastly, from this commandment we must learn our duty touching Gods service:
in word we will all acknowledge our selves to be his servants, but if heerin we
will approve our selves to be his servants, we must resolve and labor to yield
unto him absolute obedience, as well in heart, mind, will and affection, as in
outward conversation. The end of the ministry of the word is not only to
reform the outward man, but 2. Cor. 10. 4. 5.
to cast down the inward holds of sin in the Imagination; and to bring into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. And this is done when
after true repentance a man endeavors to yield unto God total obedience, and
that from the whole man in soul and body and spirit, not for a time, but
continually.

VERSE 11. Then the Devil left him, and behold the Angels came and ministered
unto him.

THese words contain the third part Christ's happy issue in these temptations.
of this description of Christ's temptation; to wit, the happy event and issue
thereof, in Christ's glorious victory over the Tempter; which is the principal
part, wherein consists the maine comfort of Gods church; for as in temptation
Christ stood in our room and stead, so is this victory not his a lone, but the
victory of his Church. This issue conteines two parts. First, Satan's departing
from him. Secondly, the ministry of good Angels unto him.

For the first, Then the Devil left him: that is, after that by temptations he
could nothing avail, then he betakes himself to flight. In this appears the
unspeakable mercy of God unto his Church, in mitigating, and in due time
putting an end unto the afflictions and temptations thereof; for the case of
Christ the head in this conflict, is the case and condition of all his members.
Now here we see what a gracious issue, the Lord put to these great assaults of
Satan; in due time his enemy flies: and so will the Lord deal in all the
miseries of his Church, and children: God promises to David concerning
Solomon, 2. Sam. 7. 14.
that if he sin, he will chastise him with the rods of men, and with the
plagues of the children of men: that is, with such punishments as he shall be
able to bear, but his mercy he will not take from him. The Prophet Habacucke
in his complaint against the wrong and violence of the wicked done to the just,
is somewhat impatient toward God for his delay. Hab. 1. 2. 3. Therefore in the
vision afterward showed unto him, he is bid to wait for deliverance, for
though it tarry, yet it shall surely come and shall not stay, Cha. 2. 3. Thus
Paul comfort the Christian Corinthians, God is faithful, and will not
suffer you to be tempted above that which ye are able to bear, but will give
an issue with the temptation that ye may be able to bear it; 1. Cor. 10. 13.
Reu. 11. 8. 9. 10.
The bodies of the two Prophets who were slain for the testimony of the Lord
Jesus, are suffered to lie in the streets unburied, for three days and an
half, that is, for some short time; which being expired, the spirit of life
coming from God shall enter into them and revive them; then fear shall take
their enemies, but they shall ascend up to heaven, and their enemies shall see
it. All these do plainly manifest Gods great mercy in giving a gracious issue
to the troubles of his children, yea by good experience we may see the truth
hereof in the happy issue that the Lord has put to the most fearful
temptations of sundry in our time, who have been exercised therein, some for a
year or two, other for longer time even many years together, and yet in the
end have sung the song of joyful deliverance: it may be some of Gods children
bear the Cross to their dying day, yet the Lord sustains them in it by his
grace, and in the end shows them mercy and peace.

Secondly, in this departure of Satan from Christ, we may observe a notable
difference between the first Adam, and the second. The first Adam was tempted
and overcome therein; Satan prevailed in that conflict, and brings him captive
into his kingdom, having spiritually taken possession of him. The second Adam
is tempted also, but the Devil can find no means whereby to prevail with
him: the prince of this world comes, but has naught in me, says Christ,
John 14. 30. But after his assault is feign to fly away.

Further, in this departure of Christ note two circumstances: when Satan
departed, and for how long a time. First, when he departed is noted in this
word then, that is after the third temptation; when Christ in indignation for
his blasphemy against God had said, Avoid Satan; and withal had answered his
temptation out of the written word, then he departs. Hence we learn:

First, that the best way to vanquish satain is to give him no ground, Give
Satan no ground.
but to withstand him manfully at the first: Iam. 4. 7. resist the Devil and
he will fly. Now Satan is resisted, when from our hearts we cast our souls on
the promises of God contained in his word, and in the whole course of our lives
pray for strength of grace to stand against all his assaults: whereby we may
see the great error and deceit of those, who account of Satan's temptations as
of fits of melancholy, and think they may be removed by music, merry
company and such like; but these are no weapons to drive away the Devil.
Secondly, this also shows their dangerous course who yield to Satan's
temptations for a time, taking their pleasure in their youth, purposing to
resist him when they are old and then to repent: too many take this course,
but it is fearful: for thus doing, they set open all the doors of their heart
to the Devil, and suffer him to take quiet possession, little considering that
it is beyond their power to dispossess him at their pleasure: For indeed
hereby they become like to a man that is sick of the dropsy, who the more he
drinks, the more he desires; so he that willingly gives place to Satan's
temptation, the more he sins, the more he may; for the longer he is tempted,
the more by yielding is he weakened, and the greater is the danger of his
endless confusion: therefore learn of Christ to resist betime.

Secondly, in this circumstance, note that when Christ rebukes Satan and bids
him avoid, he departs and is presently gone. Was this any virtue in satan that
he does thus readily depart at Christ's command? no verily, Satan's obedience is
not commendable.
though he obey, it is not praise worthy: for obedience is two fould,
voluntary, and constrained; voluntary, when the creature does Gods command
without compulsion, thus Adam did before his fail, and all holy ones that are
justified and sanctified do thus in part in this life: Constrained obedience
is, when the creature is made to obey God, will he nil he. This is like to the
obedience of rebels, who being attached and arreigned for their treasons, in
suffering are made to obey the Princes laws. And such was this obedience of
Satan, forced upon him by the powerful command of Christ, who is Prince and
Lord of all creatures. And this is to be marked, that when Christ gives forth
his powerful command, then Satan must obey whether he will or not. This is
evident by his manifold dispossessions of unclean spirits, who came forth at
his command, though they accounted him as their tormenter. Now that which here
befalls the Devil, shall one day be verified of all wicked men; if they will
not now obey God willingly, while in the ministry of the word he bids them
repent, and believe the Gospel; they shall one day be compelled, even at the
dreadful day of Judgment, will they, nil they, to obey that woeful voice of
Christ, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25. 41. In
regard whereof, we must ever be careful, now in the day of grace, to yield
unto Christ voluntary and cheerful obedience, unto all his commandments both
of the Law and Gospel, lest one day we be constrained to obey in going to our
endless woe: Satan who is a thousand-fold stronger then man, could not resist
his power; how then shall we that are but dust and ashes stand before so great
a God?

This circumstance of time is more fully noted by S. Luke, saying, Luc. 4. 13.
and when the Devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him:
whereby thus much is signified, that look what knowledge, craft, or power the
Devil had, that did he employ to the uttermost in these temptations before he
left our Savior Christ. Whereby it appears that Christ was tempted in the
highest degree and measure that Satan possibly could attain unto: herein did
the Devil show the extremity of his fraud and malice against Christ; which
further appears by this, that the Angels of heaven came and ministered unto him
for his comfort; so as though Satan could not taint the sacred heart of our
Savior Christ with the least spot of sin; yet in these temptations Christ was
troubled with the same forrowes, griefs and vexations, which Gods children
usually feel in their temptations: The consideration whereof serves for
special use.

First, to keep all Gods children A good ground against despair
from despair in the greatest extremity of their temptations, even when they
shall feel their conscience (as it were) set on an Iron rack, and the
slashings of hell fire already kindled in their soul: for Christ Jesus the
head of the Church was tempted by Satan in the highest degree, so as the Angels
came to minister comfort unto him, and yet he still remained the well-beloved
son of God; and so may any of Gods children remain Gods dear elect, even
then when the violence of Satan shall seem most to prevail against them.

Secondly, this teaches us to suppress all rash judgment in our selves, of
all such as shall be exercised by Satan in extreme temptations: for often it
will fall out that the conscience of Gods child shall be so exceedingly
tormented in temptation, that he shall cry out, he is forsaken of God, and
shall be damned; when as indeed he still remains the dear child of God, as Christ
our Savior did Gods well-beloved in the deepest assaults of Satan. And therefore
the relation published of Francis Spira his desperation, Francis Spira
does inconsiderately tax him for a castaway; considering that nothing befell
him in the time of his desperation but that which may befall the child of God:
yea our own land can afford many examples which match Francis Spira, whether
we regard the matter of his temptation, or the deepnesse of his desperation,
who yet through the mercy of God have received comfort. And therefore in this
case Christian charity must ever bind us to think and speak the best.

Lastly, Satan's departing upon the ending of these three temptations, gives us
to understand, that howsoever the Devil abound with temptations of all sorts,
yet these three are the ground of all, and the most principal temptations that
Satan has; for in this combat he did his worst, and showed the violence of
his rage and wrath. And therefore it will needful for us to take special notice
of them, as also of Christ's repulses given unto them, that so we may be the
better armed against them and the like. Thus much for the time when Satan
departed.

The second circumstance touching his departure is, for how long the Devil left
him, noted by Saint Luke, not for ever, Luke 4. 13.
but for a season. Some may say, we do not find that Satan tempted Christ ever
after this, save only upon the cross, where he spotled principalities and
powers, Coloss. 2. 15. Answ. The Devil tempts men two ways: sometime by
himself, as he did our Savior Christ in this place and upon the cross, and
our first mother Eve in the garden, Genesis 3. 1. sometime by men whom he uses
as his instruments; thus he tempted Adam by Eve; and Job, by the Chaldeans and
Sabeans that robbed him, and by his friends who sought to draw him from his
integrity, Job. 27. 5. now though Christ were not often after this tempted
immediately by the Devil, yet by Satan's instruments he was many times sore
assaulted to the grief of his heart, as by the Jews, the Scribes, and
Pharisees, Herod, and Pontius Pilate, who required signs of him, mocked and
persecuted him.

Here we may see a notable pattern The state of Gods Church on earth.
of the state of Gods Church and children in this world, for look as Christ
their head is sore tempted, and then let alone, and yet but for a season, being
tempted again by Satan's Instruments; so fares it with them, one while they
are exercised with outward temptations, and another while with inward assaults;
then through Gods mercy they have freedom for a season; but afterward Satan
comes upon them again, either by himself or by his instruments: which must
teach us wisdom in regard of the state of our own Church in particular, town,
that we must not dream of a perpetual freedom from trials and temptations,
howsoever through Gods mercy we have inioyed admirable peace and tranquillity
for many years together; for being a part of Christ's mystical body we must
look for the same condition with our head Christ Jesus, who being sore tempted
of Satan was left but for a season, and after tempted again: and therefore we
must resolve our selves undoubtedly that trials will come; what way, God only
knows; but the winter of affliction will follow our harvest of joy and peace:
and the yearly visitations, by plagues and famine, are symptoms, that is,
signs and foretunners of more heavy judgments, unless we prepare to meet our
God in the practice of speedy and unfeigned repentance. And as this is the state
of our Church in general, so is it the particular condition of every
Christian, whose life is a continual intercourse of trouble and peace, and
therefore every child of God must be watchful against security, and with the
end of one assault, join his preparation for a new: This was the state of
Christ, and the servant must not look to be above his master. And thus much for
the Devils departure.

The second part of the Issue of this conflict is the ministry of the angels
unto Christ; And behold the Angels come and ministered unto him. In saying
Behold, the Evangelist commends to our consideration the view of a great
wonder, to wit, that that person whom the Devil would have had to have
worshipped him, is here worshipped and served of the holy Angels of God. Let no
man therefore judge of himself, by that which Satan would persuade him to in
temptation; Christ's estate does now appear far different from that which
Satan would have brought him to, and so shall all Gods children find it to be
with them after temptation, if therein they fight manfully after the example of
Christ.

Touching the ministry of these Angels, here observe three points. First, the
bond that causes the good Angels to minister unto Christ. Secondly, their
number. And thirdly, the time of their ministry.

I. Point. The bond of their Ministry, is Christ's soueraignety over the
Angels, not only as he is God their Creator, but as he is mediator God and
man, even the man Christ, (I say not the manhood of Christ) but Christ (as I
may say) the man-God, is Lord of all Angels, and they do him homage and
service. And though the manhood of Christ be not Lord of Angels, yet being
received into the unity of his Godhead, it is thereby exalted above all Angels
by many degrees. Wherein we may behold the endless goodness of God, in
advancing our nature, which by sin was made more vile then al earthly
creatures, far above the Angels in degree, by reason of this conjunction which
it has with the nature of God in the person of Christ.

Now as by this bond the Angels are made ministers unto Christ, so by virtue of
the same, they become ministers to all his true members. Jacobs ladder is thus
expounded by our Savior Christ: verily, Ioh. 1. 51.
verily, I say unto you, hereafter shall ye see heaven open, and the Angels of
God ascending and descending upon the son of man. This son of man is Christ,
who being God and man reaches from heaven to earth, and from earth to heaven;
to him the Angels minister, and by him they descend to minister to all the
saints of God here on earth.

The use. 1. This teaches us to admire the endless goodness of God unto his
Church and children, not only in bestowing heaven and earth upon them, but
even giving his glorious Angels to become ministering spirits for their
protection, defense, and comfort. II. This their ministry, must admonish us to
carry our selves reverently and holily in all manner of conversation. If we were
in the presence of an earthly Prince, oh how careful would we be to our
behavior both for words and actions? Much more then should the presence and
attendance of Gods glorious angels, who pitch their tents about us if we be
Gods children, make us circumspect to all our ways; and the rather, because
their ministry is for our comfort and protection, while we keep our selves
in the straight ways of God.

II. point. Their number. It is not said one Angel, but angels came and
ministered unto him. Indeed when he was in his Agony in the garden a little
before his passion, Luc. 22. 4^.
one Angel came and ministered comfort unto him: so that sometime one, sometime
more attended on him; even as the evil spirits come to tempt, sometime one
alone, as Satan did here to Christ, and sometimes more, as they did when he was
upon the Cross. And as it befell Christ, so does it to Gods children, they
have sometime one good Angel to attend upon them, and sometime many: so
likewise have they sometime one evil spirit to assault them, and sometimes
many, as the man in whom the legion was. And hereby falls to the ground this
common opinion, that every man has one good Angel and one bad attending upon
him, the one to protect him, the other to tempt him. But this opinion does not
well stand with the tenor of the scripture, which thus sets out the state of
men in regard of his attendance by Angels, that there are sometimes more about
him, and sometime fewer; whether we speak of good Angels, or of evil spirits.

III Point. The time when these good Angels came and ministered unto Christ, is
noted in this word Then; that is, when the Devil had done all he could against
our Savior Christ: they came not in the time of his assaults, but when Satan
had ended his temptations and was gone. There is no doubt, but the good Angels
were always about our Savior Christ attending on his blessed person, but at
this time it is like they took upon them some visible shape, that so their
ministry might be the more comfortable unto him; as it is like, the devil
appeared in some shape for Christ's greater terror in his temptations.

In this circumstance of time, God will sometime hide his mercy from his
children.
we may observe a work of Gods providence which he pleases to exercise in the
time of temptation upon his own children; to wit, for a time to hide his mercy
from them, withdrawing the sensible feeling of his favor. Thus he dealt with
his beloved some Christ Jesus, during the time of Satan's violent temptations he
concealed from him the sensible assistance of the ministry of his Angels,
they show not themselves till Satan is departed. And so fares it many times
with Gods dear children upon whom he bestows the good graces of his spirit,
as a nourcing-mother to try the affection of her child, will sometime hid her
self from it, leave it alone, and suffer it to take a knock or a fall; so will
the Lord leave his children to themselves and conceal from them the signs of
his favor, suffering them to be buffered in temptation for a time, that they
may find thereby what they are in themselves without Gods grace, and by feeling
the bitterness of that estate, the more to hunger and thirst after his grace
and favor, the more ioifully and thankfully to embrace it when it is renewed,
and the more carefully to keep it all the days of their life. What made David
to account so highly of the courts of Gods house, as that he esteemed the silly
Psalm. 84. 1. 2. 3.
birds happy that might build their nests by Gods altar, but his banishment
thence, by the persecution of Saul wherein he was constrained to remain in
Psalm. 120. 5.
Meshech, and to dwell in the tents of Kedar? And so when the people of God
were in Babell, remembering Zion they wept; oh then, Ps. 137. 1. 5. 6.
let my right hand forget to play, if I forget thee O serusalem; let my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth if I prefer not Jerusalem to my chief joy.

But unto many this doctrine of temptations will seem to small purpose, nay
altogether needless, for that they never felt any such conflicts with the
Devil, they defy him from their hearts, and they trust to God never to be
troubled with him: this is the common estate of most men (those only excepted
who have felt how hard a thing it is truly to repent and believe) thus to
bless themselves in a carnal peace; but silly souls, they know not their
own hearts nor the fearful case in which they stand; for all the true members
of Christ must be made conformable unto their head; now he was consecrated the
prince of their salvation through afflictions, Heb. 2. 10: his soul was heavy
unto the death, before he could finish the work of our life: yea he is tempted
by Satan before he is comforted by the Angels; those therefore that were never
tempted have yet no fellowship in his afflictions, they have not begun any
conformity with Christ, so as it is like they are still bondslaues unto Satan,
for if they had escaped out of his snare, they should feel his assaults to get
them in again: in regard hereof the child of God is constrained to buckle
hard with Satan in temptation, and to pray many a time to be delivered from his
buffeting. And indeed howsoever for the present this be not joyous, yet they
may count it exceeding great gladness, as the Iam. 1. 2.
Apostle says, not only for this trial of their faith which brings forth
patience, but also because herein they become like unto Christ in his
humiliation, which may give them assurance that they shall be like him in
glory: 2. Tim. 2. 11. 12.
for if we be dead with Christ we shall also live with him, and if we suffer we
shall also reign with him. Add further that these men that never felt the
assault of Satan, are as yet under a most fearful judgment of God in hardness
of heart. When Christ sedde five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes,
Mark. 6. 41.
he distributed it by the hands of his disciples; But after it is said, they
perceived not this matter of the loaves, and this reason is rendered, because
their hearts were hardened, verse. 52. And so it is with them that never feel the
temptations of Satan, for he goes about continually like a roaring Lion
seeking whom he may devour, as they whose hearts are not hardened do well
perceive. To conclude therefore, let these men who yet never felt in themselves
these assaults of Satan, unfeignedly endeavor to change the course of their
lives by the practice of true repentance in eschewing evil and doing good; let
them give themselves sincerely to the exercise of prayer for the remouall of
their stony hearts, and the renewing unto them hearts of flesh, let them hear
the word and do the same; and then they will shortly sing another song, to
wit, that whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer temptations and
be assaulted by the Devil; and then will they find that this doctrine is
needful, yea they will bless God for this work of his spirit that caused
these temptations of Christ's to be so particularly recorded, with his happy
issue and victory over them all, not only for himself but for all his members,
that in their temptations they may look unto Jesus, lest they should faint in
their minds, for in that he suffered and was tempted he is able to succor them
that are tempted, Heb. 2. 18.

ROMANS 16. 20. The God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.
ERRATA.
Page 4. c. 1. ^ read, Job. 36. 5. page 18 col. 1. marg. read, Mark. 1. 24.
25. page 21. c. 2. lin. 15. read, bodily substance of. page 25. the number is
19. for 25. page 30. c. 1. marg. read, Ezekiel. 18. 27. page 32. c. 1. marg.
read, Nehem. 8. 8. page 43. in the title, read, Mat. 4. 10. page 47. c. 1. l.
50. read, despising.

A Table of the places of Scripture here cited: The first number notes the
Chapter, the second the verse, the third the Page: the letter (c) the Column.
Genesis. Chap. Verse. Page. 2 18 6. c. 2. 3 1 7. c. 1. and 51. c. 1. 4 9. c.
1. 5 28. c. 2. 6 37. c. 2. 15 17. c. 1. 4 13 11. c. 2. 19 1 45. c. 1. 22 1 7.
c. 2. 23 7 45. c. 1. 24 63 7. c. 1. 33 3 45. c. 1. Exodus. 2 15 2. c. 2. 4 11.
12. 6. c. 1. 12 23 31. c. 2. 17 7 33. c. 2. 34 28 10. c. 1. 35 30. 31. 6. c. 1.
Leuit. 24 14 43. c. 1. 26 26 21. c. 2. Numbers. 11 29 3^ c 2. 14 22 34. c. 2.
Deuteronomy. 6 13 44 c. 1. 14 44. c. 2. 16 32. c. 1. and 33. c. 1. 8 3 20. c. 1. 13 1
37. c. 1. 6-9. 43. c. 2. 34 1. 2. 36. c. 1. Joshua. 5 14 40. c. 1. Judges. 6 17
34. c. 1. 20 26 10. c. 1. 1. Samuel. 7 6. 10. c. 1. 10 9. 5. c. 1. 17 45. 6. c.
1. 18 9. 11. 2. c. 2. 26 7 19. c. 2. 28. 14 37. c. 1. 30 6 22. c. 2. 31 13 10.
c. 1. 2. Samuel. 7 14 48. c. 2. 11. 2 38. c. 1. 23. 16 35. c. 1. 1. Kings. 1 39
40. c. 1. 17 14 23. c. 1. 19 8 10. c. 1. 21 9. 10 43. c. 1. 22 22. 3. c. 1. and
41. c. 1. 31. 3. c. 1. 2. Kings. 2 11 3. c. 2. 6 17 40. c. 2. 19 1 43. c. 1. 20
8 34. c. 1. 1. Chron. 10 12 10. c. 1. Nehem. 8 8 32. c. 1. Hester. 4 16 10. c.
1. Job. 1 7 39. c. 2. 12 4. c. 1. and 29. c. 2. 19 25. c. 1. 2 3 9. c. 1. 13 15
23. c. 1. 23 10 31. c. 2. 27 5 51. c. 1. 29 6 23. c. 1. 31 1 37. c. 2. 36 5 4.
c. 1. Psalm. 15 4^ 39. c. 2. 19 13 28. c. 1. 27 8 4. c. 1. 34 8 34. c. 1. 37 5
34. c. 1. 42 3 43. c. 1. 78 18. 19. 7. c. 2. and 33. c. 2. and 34. c. 1. 22.
33. c. 2. 30. 31. 22. c. 1. 41. 34. c. 1. 71. 72. 5. c. 1. 84 1. 2. 3. 53. c.
1. 91 11 30. c. 1. and 31. c. 2. 95 9 33. c. 1. 101 7 43. c. 1. 105 16. 17. 31.
c. 2. 119 11 19. c. 2. 37 37. c. 2. 71 31. c. 2. 120 5 53. c. 1. 137 1. 5. 6.
53. c. 1. 147 18. 20. c. 2. Prou. 1 10 5. c. 1. 4 23 37. c. 2. 10 19 31. c. 1.
13 20 5. c. 1. 16 3 23. c. 1. 19 27 43. c. 2. 22 24 5. c. 1. Eccles. 4. 10 6.
c. 2. 9. 2 25. c. 1. Isai. 1 14. 15. 47. c. 2. 3 1. 21. c. 2. 7 11. 12. 13. 34.
c. 1. 11 6. 7. 8. 11. c. 1. 30 21 28. c. 2. 37 36 40. c. 2. 40 3 11. c. 1. 66 3
^8. c. 1. Ierem. 13 4 24. c. 1. Ezekiel. 8 3 24. c. 1. 9 4. 6. 31. c. 2. 18 27 30.
c. 1. 40 2 36. c. 1. Daniel. 4 22 40. c. 2. 10 2. 3. 10. c. 1. Hosea. 4 1. 2.
19. c. 2. Micha. 6 6. 7. 8. 48. c. 1. Habacuck. 1 2. 3. 49. c. 1. 2 3 49. c. 1.
Haggai. 1 6 21. c. 2. Zachary. 3 1 3. c. 1. and 26. c. 2. and 41. c. 1. 13 4
37. c. 1. Malac. 3 10 33. c. 1. 15 34. c. 2. Matthew. 5 21 25. c. 2. 7 24. 25.
14. c. 1. 8 23. 24. 2. c. 2. 32 4. c. 1. 12 38 34. c. 1. 13 39 41. c. 1. 15 22
24. c. 2. 16 23 13. c. 2. and 43. c. 2. 17 15 14. c. 2. 23 13. 14. 25. c. 2. 25
1. 2. 28. c. 1. 41 50. c. 1. Mark. 1 12 3. c. 2. 17 5. c. 2. 24. 25. 18. c. 1.
5 5 6. c. 2. 6 41. 52. 53. c. 2. 15 32. 28. c. 2. Luke. 2 52 6. c. 1. 4 1 3. c.
1. and 5. 2. 3 11. c. 2. and 18. c. 1. 5 38. c. 1. 13 50. c. 1. and 51. c. 1. 5
16 7. c. 1. 9 23 24. c. 1. 11 16 34 c. 1. 42 28. c. 2. 12 19 22. c. 1. 13 16
24. c. 2. 16 19. 20. 23. c. 1. 18 22 7. c. 2. 21 34 10. c. 1. 22 31 3. c. 1. 43
52. c. 2. 23 8 28. c. 2. 42 30. c. 1. John. 1 1 20. c. 2. 51 52. c. 1. 3 16 35.
c. 2. 4 44 52. c. 1. 6 53 12. c. 1. 8 44 13. c. 1. 13 27 8. c. 1. 14 30 49. c.
1. 16 22 16. c. 1. Acts. 4 13 5. c. 1. 24. 25. 3. c. 2. 8 21. 35. c. 2. 39. 40.
3. c. 2. 9 9 10. c. 1. 13 10 9. c. 2. 13. c. 2. 15 10 34. c. 1. 16 17. 18. 18.
c. 1. 20 22. 4. c. 2. 27 33 10. c. 1. Romans 3 24 48. c. 1. 28 48. c. 1. 6 1 27.
c. 2. 8 14 4. c. 1. 1. Cor. 2 5 33. c. 1. 4 9 4. c. 1. 10 13 4. c. 1. and 49.
c. 1. 20 42. c. 1. 2. Cor. 1 4 3. c. 1. 2 7. 11. 28. c. 2. 11 31. c. 1. 3 6 5.
c. 1. 4 4 42. c. 1. 10 4. 5. 48. c. 2. Galat. 2 16 48. c. 1. 5 25 39. c. 2.
Ephesians. 2 2 9. c. 1. 4 13 28. c. 1. 27 18. c. 2. 6 11 2. c. 2. 17 19. c. 1.
Philip. 3 8 16. c. 2. Coloss. 1 10 5. c. 2. 2 14. 15. 13. c 2. and 51. c. 1. 1.
Thessal. 2 18 41. c. 1. 3 5 12. c. 2. 1. Tim. 3 6 9. c. 1. 4 1. 3. 41. c. 2. 7
13. c. 1. 6 9 22. c. 1. 17 22. c. 2. 2. Tim. 2 11. 12. 53. c. 2. Hebr. 1 2 20.
c. 2. 2 10 53. c. 1. 17. 18. 9. c. 1. and 54. c. 1. 11 6 13. c. 1. James. 1 2
4. c. 2. and 53. c. 2. 13 7. c. 2. 3 14. 15. 9. c. 1. 4 7. 13. c. 1. and 18. c.
2. and 49. c. 2. 1. Pet. 1 25 20. c. 2. 2 9 5. c. 2. 4 17 31. c. 2. 5 7 23. c.
1. 8 9. c. 1. 13. c 1. 2. Pet. 1 5. 16. c. 1. 10 16. c. 1. and 28. c. 1. 2 8
43. c. 1. 1. John. 4 1 29. c. 2. Jude. 0 4 27. c. 2. Reuela. 2 10 41. c. 1. 13
5. c. 1. 11 8. 9. 10. 49. c. 1. 12 3. 4. 3. c. 1. 9 9. c. 1. 10 19. c. 1. 13 11
40. c. 2. 16 13. 14. 41. c. 1. 18 4 26 c. 2. 19 10 46 c. 1.

A Table of the special points to be observed in this Exposition: The first
number notes the Page, the second the Column: (b) notes the beginning of the
column, (m) the middle, and (e) the end.
A
ADoption, Satan would drive us from assurance of our Adoption. 16. 1. b. We
must specially labor for assurance of our adoption. ibid. m. Affections: how
to moderate them in all estates. 23. 1. b. Alleging of Scripture; Christ and
his Apostles therein respected the true meaning thereof. 44. 2. e. In alleging
scripture they expound it. 44. 2. b. Ministers should be careful not to wrest
it in their allegations. 31. 1. m. Ambition, a bait for Satan in the subversion
of kingdoms. 40. 1. b. Angels: The bond their ministry unto Christ and his
children. 51. 2. e. Their number that do minister unto men. 52. 2. b. Each one
has not a good Angel and a bad. 52. 2. m.
B
Baptism: why Christ was baptized. 1. 2. m. Blasphemers: how we should behave
our selves toward them. 42. 2. e. Blasphemers of God ought to die. 43. 1. e.
Boasting: vain boasting ought to be avoided. 40. 2. e.
C
Calamity: Gods children have specaill protection in common calamities. 31. 2.
m. Callings A man must not leave his calling for the trouble thereof. 4. 2. e.
Men set apart for special callings are other men. 5. 1. e. Christians should
walk worthy their calling of grace. 5. 2. m. Whom God calls he fitteth
thereto. 6. 1. m. Carking care, how avoided. 22. 1. e. Carry: Satan may carry
men in the air. 24. 2. m. Yea God children. 36. 2. m. Christstemptation: The
time when 1. 1. e. He was led by the spirit to be tempted. 3. 2. b. How he went
furnished to be tempted. 3. 2. e. Christ was tempted in the highest degree that
Satan could. 50. 1. e. Church: no judge of scripture. 32. 2. e. Every one ought
to seek the good of Gods church. 41. 2. b. Church militant in this world, as
in a wilderness. 11. 1. e. It has intercourse of temptations. 51. 1. e.
Comforts to Gods church: Christ's power in subduing Satan, in his humility. 19.
1. b. Christ moderates their afflictions and temptations. 48. 2. e. Company:
none ought to thrust himself into bad company. 5. 1. b. Contentation in
extreme misery; how gotten. 22. 2. m.
D
Danger: no man must run into danger without a calling. 4. 2. b. Deferring of
resistance to Satan very dangerous. 49. 2. m. Desert: see wilderness.
Desertion: of Spiritual desertion. 52. 2. e. Despair: how Satan works it in a
guilty conscience. 38. 1. b. Comfort against despair. 50. 2. b. Devil, see
Satan. Diligence in our calling has special prerogative. 32. 2. b. Divinity,
ascribed to a thing four ways. 45. 1. m. Doctrine: Carnal men neglect
Christ's doctrine, but affectmiracles. 28. 2. m.
E
England Gods true church. 25. 2. b. Enticers to idolatry: how to be
respected. 43. 2. b. How to be avoided. 44. 1. m.
F
Faith: Satan seeks especially the ruin of our faith. 15. 2. m. Fasting:
three kinds of fasts. 9. 2. e. How long a man may fast, and yet live. 10. 1. e.
Why Christ fasted forty days. 10. 2. b. Lent-fast misfounded on Christ's fast.
10. 2. e. Filled: Christ was always filled with the Spirit. 5. 2. e. yet he
increased therein. 6. 1. b. Food and raiment: How to Consider rightly thereof.
21. 2. b. We ought to sanctify it unto us by prayer. 22. 1. b. Francis Spira
too rashly judged a castaway. 50. 2. e.
G
Gainsaying of Gods truth a property of Satan. 17. 2. m. Godhead of Christ
infringed by satan. 17. 1. e. And by his followers. ibid. 2. b. Guide: Gods
spirit must guide us in every thing. 4. 1. b.
H
Holy days observed to the honor of Saints unlawful. 47. 2. m. Holiness of
Christ's humane nature. 3. 2. e. No holiness of place on earth can debar
Satan from tempting. 26. 2. m. Hunger: Christ was an hungered. 12. 1. m. and
why. ibid. e.
I
Idolatry: Satan seeks to bring Christ to commit it. 38. 2. m. Hereby he
seeks the ruin of religion. 41. 1. m. Jerusalem, why called the holy city.
25. 1. e. Ignorant persons should labor for knowledge in Gods word, 19. 2. e.
Judgment: Rash judgment against men that are tempted by Satan vnlawfulll. 50.
2. m. and deceitful. 51. 2. e. Justification by faith only. 48. 1. m.
K
Kingdoms: Satan's enmity to Christ's kingdom. 39. 1. e. Satan knows all
worldly kingdoms and the policies thereof. 39. 2. e. How he seeks the ruin
of worldly kingdoms. 40. 1. b. Earthly kingdoms are preserved from Satan's
malice by Gods providence. 40. 1. e. Kneeling before a chair of estate 47. 1.
m.
L
League; some do make a league with Satan. 42. 2. b. Led: how Christ was led
to be tempted. 3. 2. b. Life of a Christian a continual intercourse of
temptations. 51. 2. b. Limite not God in thy prayers. 34. 1. b. Lying; Satan's
sin. 40. 2. e.
M
Magicians may show strange representations. 37. 1. e. Masters of families
should be especially zealous against blasphemers. 43. 1. e. Means neglected, a
tempting of God. 34. 2. e. Melancholy Satan's bait. 14. 2. m. Ministers
especially must look for temptations. 3. 1. b. It is good for them to be
tempted; and why. ibid. e. They ought to get sound knowledge in the text of
Scripture. 30. 2. m. And be wary of wresting any text. 31. 1. m. Monastical
life not warrantable by Gods word. 7. 1. m.
O
Obedience absolute must be given to God. 48. 2. b. And voluntary. 50. 1. m.
Occasions of sin must be watched against. 12. 1. b.
P
Papists are Idolaters. 46. 2. e. And 47. 1. b. Papists tempt God in looking
now for miracles. 34. 1. m. They sacrifice to Satan in their Mass. 42. 1. m.
Pope of Rome that beast coming out of the sea. 40. 2. m. Presumption: Satan
seeks to carry men thereto. 27. 2. b. Promises; who may wait for Gods
promises. 35. 2. b. Men lavish in promising are like to Satan. 39. 2. m. Two
rules to be observed in promising. ibid. Providence; how to acknowledge Gods
providence aright. 23. 1. m.
R
Religion: two rules for the trial of religion. 41. 2. e. Religion of Jew,
Turk and Papists are worships of Satan. 42. 1. m. Disswaders from religion are
Satan's children. 9. 2. b. and tempters. 13. 1. c. Relics ought not to be
worshipped. 47. 2. b. Rome is spiritual Babylon, and now no church. 25. 2. e.
S
Saints made deliuerers from diseases and dangers, by Papists. 47. 1. b. and
protectors. ibid. Saints must be honored three ways. 47. 1. e. Satan an
accuser three ways. 9. 1. m. his boldness in clayming Gods right. 39. 1. b.
he makes men to rely on him for outward things. 39. 1. m. Satan's sophistry with
Christ. 15. 1. e. His malice is restrained, 29. 1. e. His power over the bodies
of Gods children. 24. 2. e. Satan seeks earnestly to keep men from scripture.
30. 2. e. He seeks to bring men to worship him. 41. 2. e. He tempts by
himself and by his instruments. 51. 1. m. He is vanquished by present
resistance. 49. 2. b. His speed in doing his enterprises. 38. 1. e. Scriptures
sufficient to expound themselves. 32. 1. e. And to vanquish Satan. 43. 2. e. To
mince the scriptures a satanicall property. 30. 1. e. To search them a
christian duty. 30. 2. b. Senses; all our senses ought to be well ordered,
especially seeing and hearing. 37. 2. b. Service generally described. 45. 2. e.
Absolute service due to God only. 46. 1. e. Service in part. 46. 1. b Our
service to God must be joined to his worship 47. 2. m. Sin; why it so
abounds. 19. 2. m. To keep a course in sin is to tempt God. 34. 2. m.
Slandering a satanicall practice. 9. i. e. Spirits; to try the spirits. 29. 2.
e. Of abode in places haunted by evil spirits. 4. 2. e.
T
Temperance needful in the use of Gods creatures. 21. 2. e. Temptation: each
Christian must look for temptation. 1 2. e. The state of those the never felt
temptation 2. 1. m. and 53. 2. b. Each one entering a special calling must look
to be tempted. 2. 2. m. Temptations come not by chance, or by the will of the
Devil, but by Gods especial providence. 4. 1. m. The issue of temptation is
good to Gods children. 4. 1. e. Temptations on the right hand most dangerous.
38. 1. b. Duties of Gods children in respect of Satan's temptations. I. To
prepare for them in the day of peace. 13. 2. e. and that daily. 36. 1. m. II.
To observe our inclinations and bodily infirmities. 15. 1. b. III. Give Satan
no credit though he speak a truth. 18. 1. m. IV. Be resolute the resisting.
18. 2. m. yea, resist presently. 49. 2. b. V. Upon victory in one temptation
prepare for a new. 23. 2. e. and 51. 2. b. VI. Do nothing he persuades thee
unto, though good in it self. 24. 2. b. VII. Reason not with Satan, but hold
fast to Christ. 43. 2. m. VIII. Despair not though Satan tempt never so
violently. 50. 2. b. Tempter: Satan's title and why. 12. 2. e. Tempting: how God
tempts. 7. 2. b. How man tempts God. 7. 2. b. and 33. 1. e. five ways. 33.
2. e. How the Devil tempts man. 7. 2. m. His policy in tempting; he
insinuates himself by degrees. 11. 2. m. He chooses fit time. 13. 2. m. He
grounds his temptation on something in us. 14. 1. m. he speaks some truth to
overthrow another. 18. 1. m. He can cunningly turn himself from one extreme
to another. 28. 1. e. he will mince the scripture for his advantage. 30. 1. m.
he shows the profit and delight of sin. 37. 2. e. and hides the misery
thereof. ibid. 2. e. How Satan tempted Christ. 7. 2. m. in the highest degree
50. 1. e. Wherein Christ differed from man in his temptations. 8. 1 m. Why
Christ was tempted. 8. 2. m. Gods dearest children may be tempted. 9. 1. b.
Thoughts; evil thoughts twofold. 8. 2. b. A ground of comfort against
blasphemous thoughts. 8. 1. e.
V
Visions: Diabolical visions be of two sorts. 36. 2. e. Unbelief: Satan
sought to bring Christ thereto. 16. 2. e. and so endeavors to do with men.
ibid.
W
Watch against temptations and why. 13. 1. b. Wilderness: Why Christ chose a
wilderness to be tempted in. 6. 2. b. Satan delights in deserts. ibid. e. Wild
beasts; why Satan conuersed with them. 11. 1. b. Wisards; seeking to them a
vile practice of unbelief. 17. 1. b. Witchcraft; whether it may be fall a true
believer. 25. 1. b. Word, taken diversely in scripture. 20. 2. b. Gods powerful
word distinguished. 20. 2. e. How man lives by Gods word. 20. 2. m. Gods word
well guided is the best weapon against Satan. 19. 1. m. To deprive Gods people
of his ward a great injury. 19. 1. e. Neglect of the word fearful. 19. 2. b.
World, the hopes hereof are great enemies to religion, 38. 2. m. Worldings
worship the Devil, 42. 1. e. Worship described generally. 44. 2. e. Civil
worship. ibid. Divine worship. 45. 1. m. due only to God. 46. 1. e. Inward
worship. 45. 1 e. outward worship. ibid. 2. b. Difference between civil
worship and divine. 45. 2. b. No creature must have divine worship. 46. 2. m.
Z
Zeal against blasphemers ought to be in all Christians. 43. 1. b.
FINIS.

